R
Radulphus Brito
SANDER DE BOER
Center for the History of Philosophy and Science
Radboud University Nijmegen
Nijmegen
The Netherlands
Abstract
Radulphus Brito (c. 1270–c. 1320) was a famous arts
master in Paris, and is considered to be the most impor-
tant proponent of a particular position in semantics,
whose adherents are now called Modistae. He is best
known, in his own times and ours, for his views on the
semantic and ontological status of second intentions.
Brito distinguishes these intentions in ﬁrst and second as
well as in abstract and concrete, and locates the resulting
fourfold division in each of the three operations of the
intellect (concept formation, judgment, and reasoning).
He defended the uncommon thesis that at least some of
the second intentions can be located in the Aristotelian
categories, because they are caused by the external things
themselves rather than by the intellect reﬂecting upon its
acquired ﬁrst intentions.
Lemma
Radulphus Brito (also called Raoul le Breton or Raoul
Renaud), was a famous master of arts, born c. 1270 in
the northwest of Brittany in the town of Ploudiry, which
lies in the diocese of St-Pol-de-Le´on. In the past, Brito
has often been identiﬁed with the Parisian master of
theology Radulphus de Hotot, but this conﬂation has
now convincingly been proven to be mistaken. Brito
studied at the faculty of arts in Paris and became a
master of arts there no later than 1296. He began study-
ing theology, also at Paris and probably around 1299,
while continuing to teach in the arts faculty. Brito read
Peter Lombard’s Sententiae, in the academic year 1308–
1309 (at least book II and III) and his inception as a master
of theology most likely took place in 1314 (although
1311/12 has also been suggested). Brito also held an
administrative post at the university; he became the
provisor – the administrative head – of the Sorbonne
somewhere between 1312 and 1315 and held this post
until at least 1319. He died c. 1320.
Brito commented extensively on Aristotle, but, unfor-
tunately, most of his works remain either unedited or
merely partially edited. Although he wrote commentaries
on natural philosophy (Physics, On the Soul, Meteorology),
on the ﬁrst two books of the Metaphysics, and on the
Ethics, the bulk of his commentaries concern logic and
grammar: on the Ars vetus (Isagoge, Categories, and On
Interpretation), including Boethius’ De differentiis topicis
(On Topical Differences) and the anonymous De sex
principiis (On Six Principles), as well as on the Prior and
Posterior Analytics, the Topics, and the Sophistical Refuta-
tions. He also wrote a large commentary on Priscianus
Minor en left a collection of mathematical works called
Super parva mathematicalia. Probably best known now are
his Sophismata. In theology Brito seems to have written far
less; all we have are his commentary on Peter Lombard’s
Sententiae I-III, a Quodlibet, and his so-called Quaestiones
in vesperiis (Evening Questions).
Brito’s logical works in particular were very inﬂuential,
and they remained so, at least in Italy, well into the ﬁf-
teenth century. For example, Gennadius Scholarios’ com-
mentary on the Ars vetus, composed c. 1432–1435, is for
a large part merely a translation and adaptation of several
quaestiones written by Brito. After the ﬁfteenth century,
however, Brito fell into obscurity, and only his commen-
taries on the Ars vetus were ever printed.
Brito is considered to be the most important propo-
nent of a particular position in semantics which is found
in the later thirteenth and early fourteenth century, and to
which, for example, also Simon of Faversham and Boe-
thius of Dacia adhered. These philosophers are now
known as the Modistae. What they had in common is
that they paid great attention to the manner in which
terms have different signiﬁcation according to their gram-
matical function in a proposition; hence the name
Modistae, after modus signiﬁcandi, one of their central
concepts. These Modistae were also convinced that there
is a close symmetry between language, thought, and
reality.
Henrik Lagerlund (ed.), Encyclopedia of Medieval Philosophy, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4020-9729-4,
# Springer Science+Business Media B.V., 2011

One of the topics Brito is quite famous for concerns
precisely this relation between thought, language, and
reality, namely, his extensive discussions on the ontologi-
cal and semantic status of ﬁrst and second intentions.
These discussions are quite detailed, but for a large part
they rely on three basic distinctions. (1) First intentions –
second intentions: when we grasp a thing in its proper
being (secundum modum essendi proprium rei), for exam-
ple, if we understand a man as a rational animal, we form
a ﬁrst intention (humanity). A second intention, in con-
trast, is formed when we understand the same thing in its
common features (secundum modum essendi communem
rei). For example, once we understand that humanity is
found in many individuals (ut est in pluribus), we form the
second intentions of universality, genus, species, etc. Brito
shares the common view in his time that these second
intentions are the proper objects of the science of logic
and he emphasizes that we always need to grasp the ﬁrst
intention of a thing prior to being able to grasp a second
intention. However, he also emphasizes that this is not
a causal priority (causaliter et effective). (2) Abstract inten-
tions – concrete intentions: an abstract intention is
deﬁned by Brito as the ‘‘being informed’’ of the intellect,
which enables it to tend toward something. This simply
means that the abstract intention is a particular abstract
concept in the mind of the knowing subject. A concrete
intention, on the other hand, is something more than just
the concept; it is composed of both the thing understood
and the particular manner (ratio) of its being understood.
More precisely, it is the object that is understood, exactly
as being understood, and the concrete intention thus
constitutes a ﬁrm connection between concepts and
things. Both ﬁrst and second intentions can be either
abstract or concrete. (3) The three operations of the intel-
lect: Brito takes over the common distinction between the
ﬁrst operation of the intellect which is forming concepts,
the second operation of the intellect which is making
a judgement, and its third operation which is reasoning.
All three operations have their own sets of intentions. An
example of a ﬁrst intention of the second operation would
be ‘‘Socrates is sitting,’’ whereas an example of a second
intention would be ‘‘‘Socrates is sitting’ is a proposition.’’
One of the questions that is of special interest to Brito
is whether second intentions fall under one of the Aristo-
telian categories, which means roughly: whether they refer
to some mind-independent reality. He attempts to answer
this question by looking at the causes of the various
intentions. According to Brito, both the ﬁrst and the
second intentions of the ﬁrst operation of the intellect
are primarily caused by the thing understood (although,
of course, the agent intellect also plays a causal role, as it
does in any concept formation, since it abstracts our
concepts from our phantasms). All intentions of the sec-
ond and third operation of the intellect, on the other hand,
are solely caused by the intellect. Brito’s view on the causal
connection of second intentions with the things them-
selves is distinctive, for many philosophers before him
had instead argued that these second intentions are caused
by the intellect when it reﬂects upon its own acquired ﬁrst
intentions. Since the main cause in forming a second
intention is the external thing, Brito consequently con-
cludes that these second intentions of the ﬁrst act of the
intellect must fall under the categories and have just as
much reality (entitas) in this respect as the ﬁrst intentions.
As for the intentions of the other operations of
the intellect, we can either claim that they do not fall
under the categories because they are caused by the intel-
lect alone and not by the thing understood, or we can
claim that they also fall under the categories because they
are caused by something – the intellect – that is just as real
a thing as the causes of the intentions of the ﬁrst opera-
tion. If we choose the latter option, however, we have to at
least concede that the second intentions of the second and
third operations have less being than those of the ﬁrst
operation. Otherwise logic would turn into a science that
studies things that are just as real as, for example, the
objects of physics, which seems absurd. Brito was heavily
criticized for his views on intentions by, among others,
Hervaeus Natalis, Peter Auriol, and John of Jandun.
Brito’s natural philosophy and metaphysics have still
not been studied closely. His commentary on Aristotle’s
On the Soul is quite interesting and seems to anticipate
some important discussions in the fourteenth century on,
for example, the particular difﬁculty that pertains to the
science of the soul. Just like Thomas Aquinas, Brito holds
that there is but one substantial form in man, which is the
intellect. However, Aquinas’ emphasis on the consequence
of this position that the separated soul must be essentially
incomplete without the body seems to be lacking in Brito.
See also: ▶Boethius of Dacia ▶Hervaeus Natalis ▶Inten-
tion, Primary and Secondary ▶John of Jandun ▶Peter
Auriol ▶Simon of Faversham ▶Thomas Aquinas
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Brito Radulphus (1974) Quaestiones in Aristotelis librum tertium De
anima, ed. Fauser W. In: Der Kommentar des Radulphus Brito zu
Buch III De anima. Aschendorf, Mu¨nster
Brito Radulphus (1975) Sophisma ‘‘Aliquis homo est species,’’ ed.
Pinborg J. In: Radulphus Brito’s sophism on second intentions.
Vivarium 13(2):119–152
1100 R
Radulphus Brito

Brito Radulphus (1978a) Sophisma ‘‘Rationale est animal,’’ ed. Ebbesen S.
In: The sophism ‘Rationale est animal.’ Cahiers de l’Institut du
Moyen-Aˆ ge Grec et Latin 24:85–120
Brito Radulphus (1978b) Sophisma ‘‘Omnis homo est omnis homo,’’
ed. Green-Pedersen NJ, Pinborg J. In: Radulphus Brito: Commentary
on Boethius’ De differentiis topicis and the sophism Omnis homo
est omnis homo. Cahiers de l’Institut du Moyen-Aˆge Grec et Latin
26:1–92
Brito Radulphus (1978c) Quaestiones super De differentiis topicis
Boethii, ed. Green-Pedersen NJ, Pinborg J. In: Radulphus Brito:
commentary on Boethius’ De differentiis topicis and the sophism
Omnis homo est omnis homo. Cahiers de l’Institut du Moyen-Aˆ ge
Grec et Latin 26:1–92
Brito Radulphus (1980a) Quaestiones in Aristotelis libros De anima,
q. 1.6, ed. Pinborg J. In: Radulphus Brito on Universals. Cahiers de
l’Institut du Moyen-Aˆ ge Grec et Latin 35:56–142
Brito Radulphus (1980b) Quaestiones super librum Porphyrii, qq. 5–8,
ed. Pinborg J. In: Radulphus Brito on Universals. Cahiers de l’Institut
du Moyen-Aˆ ge Grec et Latin 35:56–142
Brito Radulphus (1980c) Quaestiones super Priscianum minorem, ed.
Enders HW, Pinborg J. Grammatica speculativa 3/1–2. Frommann-
Holzboog, Stuttgart-Bad Cannstatt
Brito Radulphus (1998) Quaestiones super Sophistocos elenchos, qq. I.10–
19, ed. Ebbesen S. In: Texts on equivocation. Part II. Ca. 1250–1310.
Cahiers de l’Institut du Moyen-Aˆge Grec et Latin 68:99–307
Brito Radulphus (2008) Quaestiones in Aristotelis libros ethicorum, ed.
Costa I. Le questiones di Radulfo Brito sull’ ‘‘Etica Nicomachea.’’
Introduzione e testo critico. Studia artistarum 16. Brepols, Turnhout
For a full list of individually edited questions as well as a list of most of the
questions contained in Brito’s works, consult the article by Jean-Luc
Deufﬁc (2002).
Secondary Sources
Courtenay WJ (2005) Radulphus Brito, master of arts and theology.
Cahiers de l’Institut du Moyen-Aˆ ge Grec et Latin 76:131–158
Deufﬁc J (2002) Un logicien renomme´ proviseur de Sorbonne au XIVe` s.
Raoul le Breton de Ploudiry. Notes bio-bibliographiques. Pecia
1:45–154
Dijs J (2003) Radulphus Brito’s use of intentio in quaestio 9 of his In Peri
Hermeneias. In: Braakhuis HAG, Kneepkens CH (eds) Aristotle’s
Peri Hermeneias in the Latin Middle Ages. Essays on the commentary
tradition, Ingenium, Groningen [etc.], pp 235–256
Ebbesen S (1979) The dead man is alive. Synthese 40(1):43–70
Ebbesen S (2000) Radulphus Brito. The last of the great arts masters. Or:
Philosophy and freedom. In: Aertsen JA, Speer A (ed) Geistesleben
im 13. Jahrhundert. Miscellanea mediaevalia 27. Walter de Gruyter,
Berlin [etc.], pp 231–251
Ebbesen S (2001) Radulphus Brito on the Metaphysics. In: Aertsen JA,
Emery K, Speer A (ed) Nach der Verurteilung von 1277. Philosophie
und Theologie an der Universita¨t von Paris im lezten Viertel des 13.
Jahrhunderts. Miscellanea mediaevalia 28. Walter de Gruyter, Berlin
[etc.], pp 456–492
Ebbesen S, Pinborg J (1981–1982) Gennadios and western scholasticism:
Radulphus Brito’s Ars vetus in Greek translation. Classica et
Mediaevalia 33:263–319
Hentschel F, Pickave´
M (2001) Questiones mathematicales. Eine
Textgattung der Pariser Artistenfakulta¨t im fru¨hen 14. Jahrhundert.
In: Aertsen JA, Emery K, Speer A (eds) Nach der Verurteilung von
1277. Philosophie und Theologie an der Universita¨t von Paris im
lezten Viertel des 13. Jahrhunderts. Miscellanea mediaevalia 28.
Walter de Gruyter, Berlin [etc.], pp 618–634
McMahon WE (1981) Radulphus Brito on the sufﬁciency of the
categories. Cahiers de l’Institut du Moyen-Aˆ ge Grec et Latin
39:81–96
Pinborg J (1967) Die Entwicklung der Sprachtheorie im Mittelalter,
Beitra¨ge zur Geschichte der Philosophie und Theologie des
Mittelalters. Beitra¨ge zur Geschichte der Philosophie und Theologie
des Mittelalters 42/2. Aschendorff, Mu¨nster [etc.]
Pinborg J (1974) Zum Begriff der intentio secunda. Radulphus Brito,
Hervaeus Natalis und Petrus Aureoli in Diskussion. Cahiers de
l’Institut du Moyen-Aˆ ge Grec et Latin 13:49–59
Pinborg J (1975a) Radulphus Brito’s sophism on second intentions.
Vivarium 13(2):119–152
Pinborg J (1975b) Die Logik der Modistae. Studia Mediewistyczne
16:39–97 (repr. Pinborg J, Medieval semantics. Selected studies on
logic and grammar. Ebbesen S (ed) Variorum Reprints, London)
Roos H (1975) Die Kontroverse zwischen Bartholomaeus von Bru¨gge und
Radulphus Brito u¨ber die Frage: Utrum genus possit salvari in unica
specie. In: Sapientiae procerum amore. Me´langes me´die´vistes offerts
a` Dom Jean-Pierre Mu¨ller OSB. Editrice Anselmiana, Roma,
pp 323–342
Ralph Strode
ALFONSO MAIERU`
Department of Philosophy
Sapienza University of Rome
Rome
Italy
Abstract
Ralph Strode was an English logician (ﬂ. second half of the
fourteenth century), a Master of Arts (Oxon.), and an
author of a Logica in six treatises, whose manuscripts
were soon dispersed, surviving with varying degrees of
success. The treatise on Consequentie became a textbook
at Padua University in the late ﬁfteenth century and was
published various times, sometimes with the one on
Obligationes, and often with some commentaries by Italian
logicians.
The logical doctrines dealt with in the Logica (the title
is in manuscript Canon. misc. 219, which presents the
complete six-part series: Maieru` 1982:100) can be intro-
duced by presenting the ﬁrst two treatises. The ﬁrst, open-
ing with a hymn to the seven arts, is a summula that
supplies an introduction to terminist semantics with
a synthesis of the doctrine of the proposition, followed
by
short
syntheses
of
predicables,
categories,
and
syllogism.
The second, De principiis logicalibus, devised as an
introduction to the later more difﬁcult treatises, starts
from the Aristotelian distinction between reality, thought,
Ralph Strode R
1101
R

and language (res, intellectus, vox) and insists on signiﬁca-
tion (natural, ad placitum), on the distinction between
signiﬁcation and supposition, and on the various types
of propositions. There follows the doctrine of the probatio
propositionis: after distinguishing the terms, making up
the proposition into immediate and mediate, the propo-
sition consisting of mediate terms is proved by expositio,
given by a conjunction of propositions equivalent to the
original proposition, illustrated mainly with reference to
the universal afﬁrmative proposition (while the negative is
proved by the disjunction of propositions, a procedure
known as probatio per causas veritatis); in turn, the proof
of a particular proposition is given by resolutio, that is,
replacing the common term with the corresponding
immediate term (the demonstrative pronoun) in the
premises of an expository syllogism, which has singular
premises and the original proposition as conclusion; the
procedure known as ofﬁciatio, used for modal terms and
verbs involving mental acts that condition the rest of the
proposition, is also mentioned in this context (see the
entry on Richard Billingham in this volume). The treatise
concludes with two series of rules, on consequences or
logical inferences, on syllogism, and a ﬁrst account of the
doctrine of obligations.
The four most important treatises are Suppositiones,
Consequentie, Obligationes, and Insolubilia, dealing with
topics concerning logical discussion of the time.
Biographical Information
Fellow of Merton College, Oxford (documented in 1359
and 1360), he has been identiﬁed with the ‘‘philosophical
Strode’’ to whom (along with ‘‘moral Gower’’) Chaucer
dedicated his Troylus (but two manuscripts of the poem
have ‘‘sophistical’’ instead of ‘‘philosophical’’: Reichl
1989:134) and with Ralph Strode, Common Serjeant or
Pleador of the city of London from 1374 and Standing
Counsel for the city from 1386. Sir I. Gollancz, who
suggested and defended this identiﬁcation, tells us that
the London Strode died in 1387, when his (lost) will was
proved in the archdeaconry court of London and duly
indexed in the archives of the archdeaconry. Furthermore,
the logician of Merton has been identiﬁed with the Strode
subject to a friendly challenge in two doctrinal responses
by John Wyclif (fellow of Merton in 1356). Strode has also
been suggested as the author of the poem Pearl. If this last
attribution now seems unlikely, the other identiﬁcations
proposed, and accepted by scholars such as Emden and
Bennett, require further conﬁrmation: recent historiogra-
phy tends to separate and distinguish rather than accu-
mulate multiple activities and expertise in one individual.
Doctrines
The most important part of Ralph’s legacy is to be found
in the four major treatises. The treatise on supposition
actually deals with two doctrines, set out at the start:
supposition and exponible terms. Supposition, or the
reference of a term, is the function of representation that
the term performs in a proposition: when it stands for
itself or for another similar term, Ralph says that it has
material or simple supposition (like Buridan before him,
discarding the traditional distinction of the two functions;
there may be a reference to Ralph in the ‘‘Rudolfus
Anglicus’’ who is associated with Buridan in identifying
a simple with a material supposition, as indicated in an
unpublished text quoted in Maieru` 1982:97n.); when the
term stands for something other than itself, Ralph attri-
butes personal supposition to it. Then, he illustrates how
to distinguish the various forms of personal supposition
and how they function. He goes on to treat the various
exponible terms (exclusive and exceptive, incipit and
desinit; differt; positive and comparative degree, superla-
tive, with maximum et minimum, and reduplicative) and
the propositions they give rise to, including the universal
proposition. The use of exponible terms is particularly
important in dealing with themes of natural philosophy:
since the medieval masters made little effort to seek tools
for measuring and evaluating natural phenomena, but
concentrated rather on seeking adequate linguistic formu-
lae, with the result of creating a highly technical language,
governed by precise rules.
The treatise on consequences undertakes the distinc-
tion between formal and material consequence. For Ralph,
any valid material consequence is an inference from the
antecedent to the consequent, while a formal consequence
also implies a connection of signiﬁcation between ante-
cedent and consequent: anyone who understands that you
are a man, understands that you are an animal, because
animal follows from the formal intellection (de formali
intellectu) of man (Kneales and Kneales 1962:292, refer
to Abelard in this connection). It hence follows that any
formal consequence is material, but not vice versa. An
example of a material consequence is a man is a donkey,
so the stick is in the corner. Ralph supplies an extensive
review of general and special rules, with a list of the
various rules introduced into mediaeval tradition on the
basis of Prior Analytics and Topics.
The treatise on Obligationes concerns the procedures
for developing a scholastic dispute for two actors: the
arguens or opponens is the one who starts the dispute and
proposes the difﬁculties, and the respondens is the one who
sustains the dispute, trying to avoid the difﬁculties,
1102 R
Ralph Strode

compared by Ralph to two combatants; according to
Ralph, the aim of the exercise is mainly that of sharpening
the novice’s ability and testing his competence in not
falling into contradiction with the premises accepted. In
fact, the dispute starts from the position of a case and the
corresponding utterance, which the respondent accepts
and which he must not contradict, accepting (conceding)
or denying the steps, later proposed by the other speaker,
as he sees ﬁt. The time of obligation lasts from when the
case is admitted until the challenger gives the signal to
interrupt the game (but everything concerning the dispute
is regarded in relation to the initial moment of it): in the
time of obligation, the respondent has to concede every-
thing possible that is not contrary to what has already been
admitted and conceded; but outside that time, he must
reply truthfully. As the dispute unfolds between two
speakers, Ralph claims that one needs to consider only
what has been explicitly admitted vocally and not what
emerges mentally, which has not come into play as such.
Ralph’s position seems to be in line with the tradition that
regards this exercise as a test for the novice. But there is
another use recognized for this activity, that of exploring
what follows a hypothesis made in any discipline, so as to
know what to do when a situation arises corresponding
to the case examined. This aspect does not seem to be
considered by Ralph (Ashworth 1993).
The ﬁnal lengthy treatise on Insolubilia is divided in
three parts: the ﬁrst discusses the various positions, the
second proposes to bring out the true opinion from them,
while the third illustrates various kinds of insolubles
(insoluble, the author explains, has sense of a logical
difﬁculty that is difﬁcult to solve, but not absolutely insol-
uble). Ralph starts by presenting the opinions of the
ancients and then goes on to examine those of the mod-
erns, starting from Thomas Bradwardine’s treatise, which
he discusses in detail; he then examines the position of
Roger Swyneshed and then two other modern positions
(those of Dumbleton and Kilmington, not attributed, but
identiﬁed by Spade 1975, to whom we also owe the dis-
covery of the Erfurt MS, 4255, conserving much of the
authentic text; for the Oxford MS, Maieru` 1982:103–110).
The ﬁfth opinion is Heytesbury’s and the last that of
Robert Fland, again not attributed. In the second part,
Ralph evaluates the positions of Bradwardine, Swyneshed,
and Heytesbury: he regards Bradwardine’s conclusions
as probable, presents nine conclusions, most of them
drawn from Fland, against Swyneshed, and agrees with
Heytesbury that an insoluble cannot signify as the terms in
which it is formulated precisely demand, but that one
should identify a further signiﬁcation of the insoluble. In
the third part, Ralph applies the results so far to the
various types of insoluble (those that arise from our
external and internal acts; those based on properties of
the voice; and those that occur as simple, or composite
and molecular proposition and in one of the various
propositional forms).
In conclusion, faced with the situation of logic in his
time, Strode sought to provide a doctrinal synthesis, pay-
ing particular attention to the teaching tradition of the
discipline.
See
also:
▶Consequences,
Theory
of
▶Insolubles
▶John
Buridan ▶John
Dumbleton ▶John Wyclif
▶Obligations
Logic
▶Peter
Abelard
▶Richard
Billingham ▶Richard Kilvington ▶Richard Swineshead
▶Supposition Theory ▶Thomas Bradwardine ▶William
Heytesbury
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Logica, unedited apart from Consequentie and Obligationes: (1493)
Consequentie
Strodi
cum
commento
Alexandri
Sermonete,
Declarationes Gaetani in easdem consequentias, Dubia magistri
Pauli Pergulensis, Obligationes eiusdem Strodi. . . ., per Bonetum
Locatellum sumptibus Octauiani Scoti, Venice
(1973) An edition and translation of the Tractatus de consequentiis by
Ralph Strode, fourteenth century logician and friend of Geoffrey
Chaucer, by Wallace Knight Seaton, Ann Arbor (Doctoral disserta-
tion, University of California, Berkeley)
Secondary Sources
Ashworth EJ (1993) Ralph Strode on inconsistency in obligational dispu-
tations. In: Jacobi K (ed) Argumentationstheorie: scholastische
Forschungen zu den logischen und semantischen Regeln korrekten
Folgerns. Brill, Leiden, pp 363–386
Bennett JAW (1974) Chaucer at Oxford and at Cambridge. Clarendon,
Oxford
Emden AB (1957–1959) A biographical register of the University
of Oxford to A. D. 1500, 3 vols. Clarendon, Oxford, vol III,
pp 1807–1808
G.[ollanz] I (1898–09) Strode, Ralph. In: Stephen L (ed) Dictionary of
national biography, XIX. Oxford University Press, London, pp 57–59
(repr. 1949–1950)
Kneale W, Kneale M (1962) The development of logic. Clarendon, Oxford
Maieru` A (1982) Le Ms. Oxford, Canonici misc. 219 et la Logica de
Strode. In: Maieru` A (ed) English logic in Italy in the 14th and 15th
centuries. Bibliopolis, Naples, pp 103–110
Maieru` A (1984) Ralph Strode nel ms. Toledo, Cabildo 94–28. Bull Philos
Me´die´v 26:156–164
Reichl K (1989) Chaucer’s Troilus: philosophy and language. In:
Boitani P (ed) The European tragedy of Troilus. Clarendon, Oxford,
pp 133–152
Spade PV (1975) The mediaeval liar: a catalogue of the insolubilia-
literature. PIMS, Toronto, pp 87–91
Ralph Strode R
1103
R

Ramon Llull
JOSEP MARIA RUIZ SIMON
Departament de Filosoﬁa
Universitat de Girona
Girona
Spain
Abstract
Ramon Llull (c. 1232–1316) is best known for the new
argumentative method he proposed, which he called ‘‘art
of ﬁnding truth,’’ ‘‘demonstrative art’’ or ‘‘general art.’’
This Art, developed in several successive versions, was
conceived as a tool for the conversion of non-Christians
by means of interreligious disputation. However, Llull also
presented his method as a universal science, aimed at
overcoming the shortcomings of scholastic science. This
claim has to be set against the background of a process of
secularization of thought brought on by the Aristote-
lization of university curricula, which Llull strongly
opposed. From this viewpoint, Llull put forward his Art
as an alternative to an Aristotelian science that made
impossible what he considered paramount: the concor-
dance between philosophy and theology and the constitu-
tion of the latter as a truly scientiﬁc discipline, able to
prove the articles of faith.
Biographical Information
Ramon Llull was born in Majorca, c. 1232, during the
reign of King James I of Aragon. Llull’s father was
a bourgeois from Barcelona who had settled in the island,
after having participated in the crusade that took it from
the Almohads
and having received some land as
a consequence. The Majorca where Llull was brought up
was an important enclave for the commerce with North
Africa. Its society was also involved in a process of colo-
nization, divided into three communities: Muslims, still in
substantial numbers and mostly enslaved, Jews, and the
new dominant group, Christians. It was the beginning of
a period of territorial expansion for the Crown of Aragon
in detriment of Islam, thus turning religious minorities
into a chief political issue. The conversion of unbelievers
by persuasion or disputation was one of the available
solutions to this problem. During the Valencia crusade
conversion was also seen as a useful tool to enhance the
penetration of Christian rule in bordering lands, governed
by Muslim rulers who might be willing to be baptized for
political reasons. Llull’s biography is thus inextricably
bound to a set of policies aimed at both territorial
expansion of Christian domains and the Christianization
of religious minorities in Christian lands, by means of
material and intellectual weapons.
The main source for Llull’s biography is the Vita
coetanea, compiled by a monk in the Parisian Chartreuse,
from the autobiographical story Llull had told him before
attending the Council of Vienne. The book begins with
Llull’s conversion to penitence at 30. He had previously
been a married man, with children, who belonged to the
entourage of the future King James II of Majorca. His
conversion involved a three-fold project: (1) to devote
his life to the conversion of unbelievers, particularly Mus-
lims (accepting the possibility of martyrdom), (2) to write
the best book against the errors of unbelievers, and (3) to
try to convince the pope, kings, and princes to found
monasteries for missionary training. During the following
years, Llull endeavored to acquire the knowledge necessary
to fulﬁll these aims: he learnt Arabic, with the aid of
a Muslim slave, and he studied philosophy and theology,
both Christian and Muslim. At the end of this period, he
wrote a monumental work (his ﬁrst extant book among
some 260 works): the Llibre de Contemplacio´ en De´u. Not
until he ﬁnished this work did Llull ﬁnd ‘‘the way to write
the best book against the errors of unbelievers.’’ The Vita
presents this as divine illumination, after which he
proceeded to write the Ars compendiosa inveniendi
veritatem, the ﬁrst version of his famous Art. A couple of
years later, another of his aims become materialized in
a bull by Pope John XXI conﬁrming the foundation of
a monastery in Miramar (in the island of Majorca), paid
by King James II. Thirteen Franciscan friars would be
trained as missionaries there.
The Vita coetanea does not provide any information
about the years 1276 to 1287. Llull probably devoted
himself to teaching and writing, both in the island of
Majorca and in the two continental capitals of the new
kingdom of Majorca (segregated from the Crown of Ara-
gon in King James I’s will): Perpignan and Montpellier
(the latter becoming his main operations center). The new
kingdom was under great political struggles due to the
pressure from the king of Aragon, who demanded feudal
homage, and to the aftermath of the Sicilian Vespers
(1282). In this complex situation, King James II of
Majorca, Llull’s natural lord, entered into an alliance
with the pope and the French king. It was the same
pope, Martin IV, who had called a crusade against James’
brother, King Peter of Aragon. The crusade failed and King
James
was
subsequently
dispossessed
of
his
non-
continental lands by his nephew Alphonse of Aragon in
1285. The Vita records Llull’s irruption in the interna-
tional scene, 2 years later, in order to convince popes,
1104 R
Ramon Llull

kings, and princes to found missionary schools. Shortly
after the death of Pope Honorius IV, he made his ﬁrst visit
to Rome. From that moment on, he traveled a great deal.
He lived in Paris for 2 years (1287–1289), where he had an
interview with King Philip IV, he taught at the university,
and obtained an authorization to teach in several Italian
monasteries from the Franciscan general. He resided and
taught in Paris for two subsequent periods. While there in
1297–1299, he wrote the Declaratio per modum dialogi
edita
contra
aliquorum
philosophorum
opiniones,
a dialogue against the ‘‘errors’’ of university philosophers
(who had already been condemned by the bishop of Paris
in 1277). During his second stay, after obtaining a letter of
recommendation
from
King
Philip
IV as
well
as
a document signed by 40 masters and bachelors of Arts
and Medicine (where they approved his Ars brevis), he
conducted a bitter campaign against the ‘‘Averroists’’ in
the Faculty of Arts.
In 1292, a year after the fall of Saint John of Acre (the
last Christian stronghold in the Holy Land), Llull went
back to Rome, where he dedicated his ﬁrst work about the
crusades to Pope Nicholas IV. From that moment on, his
project to train missionaries in the language of the unbe-
lievers was strongly linked to the promotion of warfare
against Muslims, as attested by his petitions to Pope
Celestinus V and Pope Bonifacius VIII (1294 and 1295),
and by his Liber de ﬁne (1305) and De acquisitione terrae
sanctae (1309). He was thus compelled to act as a crusade
propagandist in Genoa (1293, 1308) and Pisa (1307) and
even to do a reconnaissance trip to Cyprus and Little
Armenia (1301–1302). After the treatises of Anagni
(1295) and Argelers (1298), once the relationship between
Aragon,
Majorca,
Naples,
Sicily,
and
France
was
reestablished, the Balearic Islands had been returned to
King James of Majorca, and his kingdom was acknowl-
edged as vassal to Aragon, Llull transferred to the service
of King Jaume II of Aragon. The inﬂuence of his new
patron’s interests (for whom Llull carried out several dip-
lomatic missions) is evident in his later works on the
crusade: this topic touched on the interests of the Crown
of Aragon as well as those of King Philip IVof France. This
context illuminates the reasons for Llull’s presence in the
Council of Vienne (1311–1312), where two of his propo-
sitions regarding the creation of missionary schools and
the uniﬁcation of military orders were approved. After the
fall of Acre, he was also allowed to debate with Muslims on
the domains of King Charles I of Naples (1294) and to
preach in synagogues and mosques under the jurisdiction
of King James II of Aragon (1299). The attendance at such
sermons was compulsory. Around this date he also
decided to test his Art by undertaking several missionary
trips to North Africa, where he visited lands with close
political and commercial links with the Crown of Aragon.
He went to Tunis (1293), Bugia (1306), and then again
Tunis (after a strategic visit to King Frederic of Sicily). He
dedicated his last works to the Tunisian sultan: as they are
dated in December 1315, he is assumed to have died a few
months later.
Thought
Only by taking into account Llull’s decision to devote his
life and works to the conversion of unbelievers can his
philosophical thought be understood. The problem posed
by the applicability of scholastic logic onto the argumen-
tation and dispute of theological questions is patent from
his earlier works, the Compendium logicae Algazalis, and
the Llibre de contemplacio´ en De´u, both written before his
creation of an Art to ﬁnd truth. The Llibre de contemplacio´
shows in particular Llull’s effort to ﬁnd methods (‘‘arts
e maneres’’) to allow missionaries the efﬁcient fulﬁlment
of their aims. In the third volume this effort is combined
with an intention to organize the conceptual matter by
means of ‘‘ﬁgures,’’ basically trees and symbolic letters,
and occasionally by using the algebraic method of
replacing conceptual elements in the argument by letters.
On the other hand, the last chapters touch upon the
teaching of how to dispute and convert those in error,
one of the self-proclaimed uses of the work, and they
somewhat open the possibility of doing so by means of
a single method, a single Art containing all the principles
and rules.
These
attempts
to
technify
and
systematize
interreligious dispute in the Llibre de contemplacio´ are
somehow incorporated into Llull’s Ars compendiosa
inveniendi veritatem (c. 1274). This Ars, the ﬁrst among
the four great Lullian arts, was conceived as a textbook. Its
title reﬂects its subject matter, as is often the case in such
books, but it deliberately invokes the name of another
discipline: dialectics. This was a well-known discipline in
the medieval arts faculties, where it was traditionally called
ars inveniendi and was studied through Aristotle’s Topics
(a book devoted to the art of disputation in general). The
Aristotelian-scholastic ars inveniendi forms the matrix of
Llull’s Art, as he fashioned it as an art to ﬁnd truth, with
the purpose of solving quaestiones (alternative or yes/no
questions) by forming arguments based on topics or loci.
Llull calls them ‘‘universals,’’ that is, general principles that
would verify or refute the afﬁrmative or negative state-
ments (the ‘‘particulars’’) that could answer those ques-
tions. On the other hand, Llull claimed that his art, despite
having been fashioned speciﬁcally to dispute about faith,
shared two other traits with dialectics: its capacity to
Ramon Llull R
1105
R

argument about any subject and to examine the perti-
nence of the principles of all sciences. These had turned
dialectics into a sort of art of arts.
After the Ars compendiosa inveniendi veritatem, Llull
wrote other versions of his Art. When read sequentially
they make it clear he went to great pains to perfect its
topics and to increase the productivity of its argument
engine. One after the other, Ramon’s Arts propose new
topics and remove or improve existing ones, sometimes by
simplifying them, others by making them more sophisti-
cate. In all versions, the topics par excellence are the ﬁgures,
which can be: (1) basic circular ﬁgures, represented, like in
algebra, by letters (each of these ﬁgures gathers a series of
simple principles or terms relating to a given matter,
which are also represented by letters), (2) complex or
combinatory circular ﬁgures (shaped in concentring cir-
cles, the rotation of which forms several combinations
between simple principles or basic ﬁgures), and (3) tabular
or combinatory ﬁgures (which present, gathered in
‘‘chambers,’’ the binary or ternary relationships to be
obtained from the combinatory mechanism that is
represented in a complex circular ﬁgure). These three
kinds of ﬁgures constitute the arsenal, the store of ‘‘uni-
versals’’ offered by the consecutive versions of Llull’s Art.
From them the user will be able to construct arguments
that should allow him to solve questions. By establishing
a limited number of primary elements easy to remember,
thanks to the use of ﬁgures and letters, together with
a combinatory mechanism to ﬁnd all possible relation-
ships, Llull achieves the ‘‘compendiousness’’ to which the
title of his ﬁrst Art refers. This combinatory mechanism
allows the primary elements, the principles of the Art, to
be at the same time ‘‘minimal in quantity’’ and ‘‘maximal
in power’’ (using an Aristotelian phrase, very suitable for
describing the great power of topical reasoning). In other
words, the principles are few but very powerful at ﬁnding
arguments.
Llull had conceived his Art as a method to dispute
effectively about matters of faith, but he also presented it,
from the beginning, as a science. He was convinced that
nobody would adopt a new belief just because he was
shown dialectically the old one to be false; he would only
convert if the contents of the new faith were proven truth-
ful by ‘‘necessary reasons’’ (that is, scientiﬁcally). The
evolution of Llull’s Art partially springs from his desire
to adapt its principles and mechanics in order to enhance
its scientiﬁcity. While the ﬁrst Art text-book referred to
the scholastic notion of dialectics in its title, the title of
second version (Art demostrativa, c. 1283) coincided, not
by chance, with the part of scholastic logic that offered the
rules of scientiﬁc knowledge: the ars demonstrandi.
Students learnt the principles and rules of this ars by
reading Aristotle’s Analytica posteriora. In his introduction
to the Art demostrativa, Llull accounts for the new name by
justifying the demonstrative nature of his Art, which
taught how to argue on the basis of three kinds of dem-
onstrations. One of them was the propter quid demonstra-
tion, which proves the effect from the cause, another type,
the quia demonstration, proves the cause from the effect:
they were the two types of demonstrations that Aristotle
discussed in the Analytica posteriora, and were considered
by scholastics as adequate to science. Llull added a new
demonstration to these ‘‘ancient’’ types: the demonstra-
tion per equiparantiam (by equivalence or by the estab-
lishment of equality). In his opinion, this third type,
according to a certain interpretation of scholastic princi-
ples on the degree of necessity of proofs, could achieve
a greater degree of certainty than the demonstration
propter quid, which in its turn was considered to be more
demonstrative than the quia demonstration, or even to be
the only demonstration strictu sensu.
By putting forward an Art that was inventive or inves-
tigative as well as demonstrative, Llull was proposing
a method that, at least in theory, overcame the typically
scholastic divorce between demonstration and heuristics.
This was not the only novelty that distinguished his Art
from the system of arts and sciences of the time. As
I mentioned above, Llull’s Art was presented (in the
same fashion as Aristotelian dialectics) as able to deal
with any subject matter and with the principles of all
sciences, and he claimed this was achieved scientiﬁcally
(for it was an ars demonstrandi). Therefore, his Art aimed
at becoming a new science, which, according to the Aris-
totelian Analytica posteriora, were it to exist, would be the
most desirable one: a universal science.
The evolution of Llull’s Art is not only accounted for
by his desire to enhance its efﬁciency as a technique to ﬁnd
arguments and his interest in making these arguments
match (more so as he went along) the characteristics of
demonstration. Llull’s process of reﬂection on the condi-
tions that made it possible for this new science to be
universal and on the nature of the general character of its
principles is also an important factor to understand how
his Art evolved. Current scholarship often distinguishes
two great phases in the evolution of Llull’s Art, named
respectively ‘‘quaternary’’ and ‘‘ternary,’’ according to the
number of principles involved in the main ﬁgures (16, that
is, 4  4, in the earlier Arts; 9: 3  3, in the later). The two
Arts
mentioned
above,
Ars
compendiosa
inveniendi
veritatem (c. 1274) and Art demostrativa (c. 1283), belong
to the ﬁrst phase. In simple terms, it could be said that,
according to Llull’s notions, the universality of the
1106 R
Ramon Llull

principles in his Art is linked to the fact that all afﬁrmative
or negative statements regarding any subject matter are
related to an afﬁrmative or negative statement about God
or about the relationship of the Art’s user with God. The
earliest Arts contain principles that rule afﬁrmative and
negative statements that are pertinent in regards to God or
the way one must relate to him. These principles are
universal in the sense that they make it possible to verify
or refute any afﬁrmative and negative statements,
according to whether these agree or disagree with them.
The second phase begins with the Ars inventiva veritatis
(1290) and culminates with the Ars generalis ultima
(1305–1308), as well as the Ars brevis (1308), a summary
of the previous work. The universality of the principles
contained in this phase is different in its nature. Taking
into account the function attributed by Aristotleto causality
in demonstrations, Llull began to conceive this universality
on the grounds of a Neoplatonic conception of causal
relations that was tacitly legitimized by Proclus’ philosophy
and Pseudo-Dionysius’ theology. Such a conception
allowed him to establish ontologically the generality of the
simple principles of the Art through the afﬁrmation of their
presence in God as the most eminent causes and in their
effects as the likenesses of these causes. In the last works of
the quaternary phase, which were still dependent upon the
Art demostrativa, Llull began to base his reﬂections about
the way in which his Art was demonstrative and general on
this causality theory, which allowed him to afﬁrm that all
created beings are constituted, in one degree or another, by
divine likenesses. In the Ars inventiva veritatis, the earliest
of the ternary Arts, he reduced the number of ﬁgures and
of principles within these ﬁgures, but he also transformed
the artistic mechanisms according to the results of his
process of reﬂection. The Proclian-Dionysian theory of
causality, by means of likeness, allowed him to conceive
the principles of his Art as principles that could be pred-
icated univocally (following the same deﬁnition) about all
beings that are predicable, without erasing the differences
that separate the subjects of which they are predicated.
Likeness made it possible that different beings possessed
the same quality but also that they possessed it in
a different way, in different degrees. And the kind of
generality allowed by this theory offered Llull the possi-
bility to build an Art where the principles of knowledge
and those of being coincided. In his Ars generalis ultima
(where Llull legitimizes the possibility of the new Art on
the grounds of the Aristotelian theory of science) all the
virtualities of this coincidence are put to good use.
Llull could not help seeking legitimization for his
universal science in the theory of Aristotelian science,
since in the thirteenth-century the latter was considered
‘‘the’’ science. However, he maintained that his own Art
overcame many defects that, to his mind, made Aristotle’s
limited. Llull insisted in his works that Aristotelian science
contained anomalies and did not satisfy what we could
anachronistically call the ‘‘scientiﬁc community’’: for
instance, because of the lack of solid foundation for certain
sciences (such as medicine or theology). It is worth
remembering, on the other hand, what the situation was
at the University of Paris (that is, the main university at the
time), when Llull was developing his method. At the time
when he started to elaborate his Art (c. 1274), the bishop
of Paris was issuing his condemnations (in 1270 and 1277)
of a great number of thesis related to the introduction of
some of Aristotle’s works in the curricula of the arts
faculties (after some initial bans in 1210 and 1231).
These books were newly available in the Latin-speaking
Occident, where Aristotle was hitherto known only as the
author of logical treatises. It was at this time, then, when
the crisis of the ecclesiastical project to build a Christian
wisdom in the universities on the basis of Aristotelian
science became apparent. This situation, as Llull was per-
fectly aware of, was parallel to the crisis that, some decades
earlier, had led the Almohad sultan Abu Yusuf to ban the
teaching of Aristotelian logic and philosophy, and also to
the situation behind the controversy regarding philosoph-
ical studies that was confronting Jew scholars in the Med-
iterranean Christian countries. In general terms, we are
talking about the moment when it became patent that
theology and philosophy were offering ‘‘dissonant truths.’’
Despite the fact that Llull’s Art had been conceived as an
art of interreligious disputation, it was also intended to
give an answer to this crisis. It was not only meant to win
over the ‘‘unbelievers’’ but also those who practiced
a philosophy independent from theology and who reached
conclusions impossible to reconcile with faith, such as the
‘‘Averroistes,’’ fought by Llull in many books during his last
stay in Paris (1309–1311).
From this point of view, Llull presented his Art as an
alternative to Aristotelian science, which seemed to make
the agreement between theology and philosophy impossi-
ble. Like the thinkers of the Neoaugustinian School, he
opposed the process of secularization of thought that the
Aristotelization of university curricula was enhancing. The
absolute generality of his Art’s principles (which were thus
general regarding both disciplines) allowed, according to
Llull, not only the concordance between both disciplines
but also, given the contents of the principles, the subordi-
nation of philosophy to theology. And it also made it
possible, according to Ramon, to constitute theology as
a science that was independent epistemologically from
faith. While faith only offered hypotheses to be veriﬁed or
Ramon Llull R
1107
R

refuted, the principles upon which his Art was founded
were self-evident. This was precisely the reason why he
could present his Art as a neutral science, able to turn
interreligious dispute into a scientiﬁc matter: because
he considered his principles as self-evident rather than
speciﬁcally Christian. However, in practice, the conclusions
of his demonstrative arguments did always verify the
hypotheses offered by the Catholic credo and would refute
all others.
In conclusion, Llull’s Art was meant to make every-
thing he considered necessary possible, his main concerns
being the agreement between philosophy and theology,
the subordination of the former to the latter, the consti-
tution of theology as a true science, and, obviously, the
conversion of the Muslims. He never gave up considering
his Art a weapon of massive conversion, aimed at the
elimination of Islam and at the Christianization of
humanity. While the ﬁrst version he wrote was conceived
as a textbook for a missionary school located in an iso-
lated, idyllic place, the Ars generalis ultima and its pocket
version, the Ars brevis, were thought up as spiritual
weapons, indispensable in the hands of crusaders intent
on conquering the countries of unbelievers by means of
material weapons, by land and sea, in the context of
a grand war campaign. In any case, the reception of Llull’s
Art within the history of thought is less inﬂuenced by all
these intended uses than by the fact that this peculiar
epistemological artifact presented the possibility to
decompartmentalize ‘‘old science’’: to break free from the
prejudice that the principles and areas of different sciences
could not communicate and to establish bridges between
scientiﬁc doctrine and the discovery of new knowledge.
See also: ▶Aristotelianism in the Greek, Latin, Syriac,
Arabic, and Hebrew Traditions ▶al-G˙ aza¯lı¯, Abu¯ H˙ a¯mid
Muh:ammad ▶Parisian Condemnation of 1277 ▶Poste-
rior Analytics, Commentaries on Aristotle’s
Bibliography
Primary Sources
(1721–1742) Raymundi Lulli Opera omnia (MOG), ed. Salzinger I. 8 vols.
Mainz, (reimpr., Frankfurt, 1965)
(1906–1950) Obres de Ramon Llull edicio´ original. (ORL), ed. Galme´s S
et al, 21 vols. Comissio´ Editora Lul·liana, Palma de Mallorca
(1959–) [in process of publication] Raimundi Lulli Opera Latina (ROL),
ed. Stegmu¨ller F et al. vols. 1–5 (Palma de Mallorca 1959–1967),
vols. 6– (Turnhout 1969–)
(1985) Selected works of Ramon Llull (SW), ed. Bonner A, 2 vols.
Princeton University Press, Princeton
(1990–) [in process of publication] Nova Edicio´ de les Obres de Ramon
Llull (NEORL), ed. Bonner A et al. Patronat Ramon Llull, Palma de
Mallorca
Secondary Sources
Bonner A (1995) Syllogisms, fallacies and hypotheses: Llull’s new weapons
to combat the Parisian Averroists. In: Domı´nguez F et al (eds)
Aristotelica et Lulliana magistro doctissimo Charles H. Lohr,
septuagesimum annum feliciter agenti dedicata, Martinus Nijhoff,
Steenbrugge-La Haia (Instrumenta Patristica, 26)
Bonner A (2007) The art and logic of Ramon Llull. Brill, Leiden/Boston
Carreras i Artau T, Carreras i Artau J (2001) Histo`ria de la ﬁlosoﬁa
espanyola. Filosoﬁa cristiana del segle XIII al XV, vol 1 edicio´ facsı´mil.
Institut d’Estudis Catalans-Diputacio´ de Girona, Barcelona/Girona
Gaya` J (2002) Raimondo Lullo. Una teologia per la missione, trad.
Domenico Lanfranchi, ‘‘Eredita` Medievale.’’ Jaca Book, Milano
Hillgarth JN (1971) Ramon Lull and Lullism in fourteenth-century
France. Clarendon, Oxford
Imbach R (1987) Lulle face aux Averroı¨stes parisiens. Raymond Lulle et le
Pays d’Oc, Cahiers de Fanjeaux 22. Privat, Toulouse pp 261–282
(Repr. in Quodlibeta. Ausgewa¨hlte Artikel/Articles choises, Fribourg
1996)
Ruiz Simon JM (1999) L’Art de Ramon Llull i la teoria escola`stica de la
cie`ncia. Quaderns Crema, Barcelona
Ruiz Simon JM (2005) La transformacio´ del pensament de Ramon Llull
durant les obres de transicio´ cap a l’etapa terna`ria. In: Ripoll MI (ed)
Actes de les Jornades Internacionals Lul·lianes. Ramon Llull al
segle XXI. Palma, 1, 2 i 3 d’abril de 2004. Col·leccio´ Blaquerna 5,
Palma de Mallorca, Barcelona (Universitat de les Illes Balears/
Universitat de Barcelona) pp 167–196
al-Ra¯zı¯
▶Abu¯ Bakr al-Ra¯zı¯, Muh:ammad ibn Zakarı¯ya¯ʾ (Rhazes)
▶Fakhr al-Dı¯n al-Ra¯zı¯
Realism
CHRISTOPHE ERISMANN
Helsinki Collegium for Advanced Studies
University of Helsinki
Helsinki
Finland
Abstract
Realism is a philosophical position that attributes
extramental existence to certain kinds of entities, for
example, universals, categories, relations, or propositions.
In philosophical language, the word realism is polyse-
mous. One can be a realist, as opposed to an idealist, if
one defends the view that material objects exist externally
to us and independently of our sense experience; one can
1108 R
al-Ra¯zı¯

be a direct realist in the theory of perception if one holds
that perception is a direct awareness of external objects,
a moral realist if one believes that there are objective moral
values, a scientiﬁc realist if one holds that scientiﬁc knowl-
edge is about theory-independent phenomena and that
such knowledge is possible even about nonobservable
entities, a modal realist if one believes that possible worlds
are as real as the actual world. In the history of medieval
philosophy, the term realism is used ﬁrst and foremost in
the ﬁeld of ontology. In this context, it indicates the fact
that one attributes – in ways that vary greatly from case to
case – extramental existence to certain kinds of entities. In
consequence, a philosopher cannot be said to be a realist in
any absolute or general fashion, but only in reference to
universals, categories, relations, propositions, etc. A realist
about Aristotelian categories, such as Duns Scotus for
example, holds that the extramental world is divided
into ten kinds or categories among which none can be
reduced to another. A realist about relations holds that
something more than the terms of the relation corre-
sponds in extramental reality to our relational concepts.
A realist about propositions, such as Walter Burley, holds
that propositions exist in the world. However, realism
about universals is the position that concentrated the
most defenders, and also the most vocal critics. Realism
about universals holds that universals – ﬁrst and foremost
the genera and species of the category of substance, such as
animal, hedgehog, squirrel, or man – are things outside
the mind. The question can be formulated in the following
terms: is universality a mode of being or is it only
a property of language? The realist holds that it is
a mode of being; however, this is about the only thesis
we can attribute to all realists, as there are a number of
different realist theories that cannot be reduced to each
other.
Let us begin by distinguishing the two main families of
realist theories, Platonic realism and Aristotelian realism.
The difference between theses theories is that Aristotelian
realism defends the existence of universals in individuals,
whereas Platonic realism grants them a mode of existence
as separate from individuals.
This distinction of different types of realism draws on
an older distinction, which dates back to middle Plato-
nism, between two types of entities, in Greek idea (idea)
and eidos (form). As noted by HB Gottschalk (1987):
‘‘from the early ﬁrst century AD, it seems, Platonists dis-
tinguished the Platonic Form, ‘eternal pattern of natural
objects’ from a Form immanent in particulars. The second
comes straight from Aristotle and was designated by the
term eidos, which had been used both by Plato and Aris-
totle, while the purely Platonic word idea was reserved for
the ﬁrst’’ (36.2:1144–1145). This distinction was reﬁned
by Neoplatonic authors in the so-called theory of the three
states of the universal. This theory is a doctrinal product of
the Neoplatonic exegesis of Aristotle’s Categories and
Porphyry’s Isagoge and was inspired by the Neoplatonic
project of seeking harmony between the philosophies of
Plato and Aristotle. This theory is present in Ammonius
(In Porphyrii Isagogen, 41:10–20), Elias (In Porphyrii
Isagogen, 49:20–25), and David (In Porphyrii Isagogen,
120:8–14); it is also found in Simplicius (In Aristotelis
Categorias, 82:35, 83:22). It distinguishes: (1) Universals
that are before the multiple (pro toˆn polloˆn) – these are the
ideal models or paradigms, which subsist in the Demi-
urge’s intellect; (2) Universals in the multitude (en tois
pollois): the participated forms, which are inseparable
from matter and immanent to particulars; (3) Universals
that are after the multiple (epi tois pollois): concepts, which
are abstracted from immanent forms. This theory was
transmitted to the Latin world through the intermediary
of the translations of Avicenna’s Logic, Eustratios of
Nicaea’s commentary to the Nicomachean Ethics, and
through Simplicius’ commentary to the Categories. The
Latin version of this theory that distinguishes between
ante rem, in re, and post rem universals was soon to
become a commonplace of scholastic thought on univer-
sals. This theory also involved speaking of the theological
universal, the metaphysical universal (whose characteristic
is esse in multis), and the logical universal (whose charac-
teristic is dici de multis). The nature of the ante rem
universal may be considered in a strong and in a weaker
version: in the strong version, ‘‘ante rem universal’’ refers
to a real entity that is independent from both the human
and divine minds, a pure Platonic form; in the weaker
version – of which a speciﬁcally Christian form was wide-
spread – ‘‘ante rem universal’’ refers to a divine idea (all
these ideas put together are supposed to constitute the
totality of God’s knowledge). This theory allows us to
identify precisely which entities are those whose ontolog-
ical status is discussed; more fundamentally, the relative
importance given to one type of entity with respect to
others provides three types of ontology. Before character-
izing them, let us note that these types of universals are not
mutually exclusive – philosophers are frequently found to
defend several of them in parallel. Note also that two types
of universals are accepted as really existing by almost all
medieval philosophers: the ante rem universals in their
weak version and the post rem universals. The idea of
divine ideas was naturally linked to the Christian belief
of the philosophers in question and was not questioned,
even by strongly antirealist authors such as Peter Abelard.
However, the emphasis put on these moderate ante rem
Realism R
1109
R

universals indicates the importance which a philosopher
gives to exemplarism in his philosophy and shows the level
of Platonism of his thought. Similarly, post rem universals
were universally accepted. No one thought of doing with-
out concepts. The mode in which we grasp them – theory
of abstraction versus illumination – may, indeed, be
debated, but not their existence.
So we have three possible combinations: (1) Platonic
ontology: defense of strong ante rem universals (this
form is hardly found at all until the end of the Middle
Ages). (2) Aristotelian realist ontology: rejection of
strong ante rem universals, defense of in re universals.
This theory is frequently encountered: it reﬂects Aristotle’s
frame of mind, rejects separated universals, and states
their existence as being only in individuals. (3) Aristotelian
particularist or nominalist ontology: everything that
exists is particular; both strong ante rem universals and
in re universals are rejected. Universality is a property
of terms only. This illustrates the fact that the main
debate that took place in the framework of Aristotelianism
was that of accepting or rejecting in re universals.
Authorities that can be called upon in defense of the ﬁrst
solution include Augustine and Priscian; upholders of
both (2) and (3) can call upon passages from Aristotle’s
texts.
A passage from Priscian’s Institutiones grammaticae
(XVII, 44; GL3, 135: 1–10) in which he speaks of the
‘‘generic and speciﬁc forms of things, which exist in an
intelligible way in the divine mind before they come forth
in bodies’’ played an important role in establishing this
theory, just as did Augustine’s question De ideis (De
diversis quaestionibus 46), which transmitted the theory
of Platonic universals as divine ideas. Augustine says that
these ideas are in God’s mind (in ipsa mente Creatoris) and
nowhere else, thus conﬁrming the Middle- and Neoplato-
nist understanding of ideas as the Demiurge’s thoughts.
Conversely, the rediscovery of Aristotle’s Metaphysics
played against strong ante rem universals. Aristotle’s crit-
icism of Platonic ideas clearly provoked scholastic mis-
trust of separate universals. The Organon, through three
fundamental texts – Chap. 5 of the Categories, Chap. 7 of
the Peri hermeneias, and a passage from the Posterior
Analytics – provides most of the arguments in favor of in
re universals. Chapter 5 of the Categories is central on three
theses: genera and species are substances, genera and spe-
cies are beings (onta in Greek), and genera and species
exist thanks to primary substances. Chapter 7 of the Peri
hermeneias shows the same way by stating that among
things (toˆn pragmatoˆn), some are universal and others
are particular. The third text, which was unknown to
early medieval realists, is Posterior Analytics II, 19 which
was interpreted as describing the universal to be both an
abstract concept, ‘‘the one apart from the many’’ (para` ta`
polla`, unum praeter multa) and an immanent form which
‘‘is identically present in them all.’’ On the other hand,
a philosopher who only believed in the existence of post
rem universals could refer to the well-known passage from
the De anima in which Aristotle states that the universal
animal is either nothing or is posterior (I, 1 402 b720).
The medieval debate mainly focused on the admission
or rejection of in re universals, and it did so within the
framework of the exegesis of Porphyry’s Isagoge. In the
Isagoge (ed. Busse, 1:10–15), Porphyry states – without
giving his own answer – three questions on the ontological
status of universals: do genera and species exist or are they
only concepts? Are they bodies or incorporeals? Are they
separated from the sensibles [i.e., the individuals] or do
they exist in them? In this passage, Porphyry codiﬁes the
alternatives and possible answers to the question of the
ontological status of universals (it is with this passage in
mind that the theory of the three states of the universal was
elaborated).
The history of medieval realism had ups and downs,
quiet periods during which realism was an implicitly
accepted doctrine that ended in crisis when virulent crit-
icism cast strong doubts on the soundness of the theory.
Roughly, we can identify three stages in the medieval
history of realism. A ﬁrst phase began with John Scottus
Eriugena and lasted until the beginning of the twelfth
century and William of Champeaux; this period ended
abruptly with the powerful criticism of immanent realism
by Peter Abelard. The second phase of development, that
of the so-called moderate realism of the Doctors of Scho-
lasticism, began at the University of Paris and included, in
different ways, Robert Kilwardby, Thomas Aquinas, Duns
Scotus, and the ﬁrst Walter Burley; it was deeply shaken by
William of Ockham’s questioning of the soundness of
realism in any form whatsoever (Sent. I, dist. II, q. 3–7,
pp. 74–266). However, realists were not led by Ockham’s
criticism to abandon their theory, but proposed new ver-
sions of it – this is the third phase, illustrated by the late
Burley, Wyclif, and their followers.
During the early Middle Ages, realism was mainly
defended by four thinkers: John Scottus Eriugena, Odo
of Cambrai, Anselm of Canterbury, and William of
Champeaux, in his ﬁrst theory of universals, the so-called
material essence realism. There was no proper dispute
about universals during the early Middle Ages until Peter
Abelard; realism developed without being argued against
a rival theory. However, early medieval realism does
1110 R
Realism

constitute a determinate metaphysical theory, which can
be summarized in six theses. The theory states (1) the real
existence of universals, that is, of the natural kinds to
which particulars belong; (2) that universals do not exist
separately from particulars; (3) that they constitute the
substantial being of the particulars which are subordinate
to them; (4) that a genus or species is entirely and simul-
taneously present in each of its subdivisions; (5) that the
speciﬁc substance is common to all members of a species;
and (6) that individuals of the same species are individu-
ated by a unique bundle of accidents. In this theory, the
universal man is taken to exist simultaneously in each of
its particulars and to be fully realized in them. Socrates is
composed of the universal man – which constitutes his
essence, common to all the members of the species – and
of a bundle of accidents, the collectio proprietatum in
Anselm’s words. There is no essential individuation of
particulars. An individual does not have its own essence –
essential being is provided by the speciﬁc universal. From
the point of view of substance, Socrates is no different
from man. The thesis of the complete realization of the
universal in each individual follows Aristotle’s statement
that substances do not admit of more or less. The theory
also follows Aristotle’s immanentism since universals have
no existence separate from individuals. In the case of
Eriugena (Periphyseon 463A; ed. Jeauneau, vol. I, 32:887–
893) and in that of William, according to Abelard’s testi-
mony (Logica ingredientibus, ed. Geyer 12:27–32), this
realism goes with realism about the categories that are
described as being the ten highest genera of being, decem
genera rerum in Eriugena’s words.
In the thirteenth century, a different kind of realist
theory appeared. The intellectual background of this
period was very different from that of the early Middle
Ages. The thirteenth century is characterized by the
rediscovery of the entire corpus of Aristotle’s writings
and the beginning of the practice of quaestio in the recently
founded universities. This in turn implies organizing
arguments into pro and contra, and leads to an increased
determination of positions, and through more explicit
distinctions, to a higher degree of technicality of positions.
The discovery of Avicenna’s writings provided two central
new doctrinal elements: the theory of the three states of
the universal and Avicenna’s distinction between a nature
as such and the universality that a nature can have in the
mind. Animal in itself is taken to be neither universal nor
particular – to quote a famous saying: ‘‘Horseness
(equinitas) is only horseness’’; the nature is neutral to
either extramental or intramental existence. However, if
to this nature are added spatiotemporal accidents, one
obtains an individual substance, but if the mind’s univer-
sality is added to it, one obtains the universal notion. Also,
developments in philosophy of language mean that realist
doctrines from that time also involved a semantic theory
(from the twelfth century and Peter Abelard onward, to
give a theory of universals is also, perhaps even primarily,
to answer the problem of the reference of common
names). Besides some ‘‘generous’’ ontologies, such as
that of Robert Grosseteste, who posits among universals
creative ideas in his commentary to the Posterior Analytics,
and Albert the Great who, in his commentary to the
Isagoge, explored in detail the theoretical possibilities of
the Avicennian doctrine of the three states of the universal,
the constitution of the so-called moderate realism can be
observed. Although each philosopher who defends this
type of theory does so through his own particular varia-
tion of it, a number of common points can be noted
between the various representatives of what historians
have taken the habit of calling the moderate realist view.
This view has some features that can be found in various
authors. First, the acceptance of the framework provided
by the doctrine of the three states of the universal. Uni-
versals are clearly not self-subsistent entities, but exist only
in particulars as their main metaphysical components.
Disagreements persist as to their mode of being outside
the mind. The most common opinion is that universals
exist potentially (in potentia) outside the mind, and actu-
ally (in actu) within the mind.
Although it touches the borders of what may still be
considered as a realist theory, Duns Scotus’ theory of
common natures (Ordinatio 2 d. 3 p. 1 qq. 1–6) deserves
particular mention, partly in reason of the historical role it
was to hold. His theory is based on two elements: the
‘‘common nature’’ (natura communis) and the principle
of individuation, the ‘‘haecceity’’ (haecceitas) or individ-
ual differentia. Following Avicenna, Scotus holds that the
common nature is ‘‘indifferent’’ to existing in any number
of individuals, and in that way it is common; it is also prior
to being universal or particular. But it has extramental
existence only in the particular things in which it exists,
and in them it is always ‘‘contracted’’ by the haecceity (the
individual differentia, which is also called a ‘‘contracting
differentia’’). So the common nature humanity exists in
both Socrates and Plato, although in Socrates it is made
individual (or contracted) by Socrates haecceity and in
Plato by Plato’s haecceity. When the haecceity is combined
with the common nature, the result is a concrete individ-
ual, like Socrates, that differs from everything else. The
humanity of Socrates is particular and nonrepeatable, as is
the humanity of Plato; yet, humanity itself is common and
Realism R
1111
R

repeatable, and it is ontologically prior to any particular
humanity.
The
mode
of
unity
of
the
common
uncontracted nature is a real unity that is ‘‘less than
numerical unity.’’ However, common humanity does not
exist in individuals. It has been suggested that the reason
for which we can state that Socrates’ contracted nature is,
in a way, ‘‘the same’’ as Plato’s contracted nature, despite
the fact that contracted natures are completely individu-
alized by the individual differentiae, is the following: Soc-
rates’ contracted human nature retains a real potency to be
the contracted nature of Plato, and vice versa, while this
does not hold in the case of the contracted cat-nature of
Felix.
The fourteenth century was a new golden age for
realism, despite Ockham’s criticism. Burley, whose ﬁrst
theories had been criticized by Ockham, gave a new ver-
sion of his theory, and Wyclif defended a realism that later
inspired the movement of the Oxford realists and, in the
ﬁfteenth century, of the Prague realists. Burley holds that
a universal actually exists in an individual, not as
a singular, but as a universal. The universal exists wholly
as one and the same in each individual belonging to it.
(Burley describes as follows the position he upholds: ‘‘Alia
est opinio, que ponit universale habere esse solum in suis
singularibus et quod universale secundum se totum est in
quolibet suo singulari,’’ Tractatus de universalibus, ed.
Wo¨hler, 20:16–17.) According to Burley, the universal is
one, not in the way in which an individual is one, but in
a way that is peculiar to it. He distinguishes ‘‘numerical
identity in the strict sense’’ and ‘‘speciﬁc or generic iden-
tity’’ which denotes a genuine identity relation, the rela-
tion which a universal bears to itself. He states that
universals exist outside the mind and that they are really
distinct in the individual, but rejects the thesis according
to which the universal has separate existence. Wyclif holds
that the universal really exists in the particulars and that it
is identical to them (De ente in communi, Chap. 5, p. 58).
There is a real identity between the universal and the
individual, since they share the same empirical reality
(that of individuals). Only reason allows us to distinguish
in an entity that which is universal from that which is
particular; this distinction is only formal. Universals are
really (realiter) identical to, but formally (formaliter) dis-
tinct from their individuals. Universals and individuals are
the same identical things if conceived as ﬁrst intentions,
and differ from each other if conceived as second inten-
tions (i.e., considered as universals and individuals, in this
case they have opposite constituent principles: communic-
abilitas,
i.e.,
the
disposition
to
be
common,
and
incommunicabilitas, the impossibility of being common,
respectively). Wyclif’s theory involves a revised version of
the three states of the universal: he states that a universal
may be (1) universal by causality, (2) universal by com-
munity (‘‘a thing shared by many supposits [individuals
understood as bearer of universals and of accidents] such
as human nature’’), or (3) universal by representation
(De univ. i, 6–22). Wyclif’s thought was continued by the
‘‘Oxford Realists’’ – the Englishmen Robert Alyngton,
William Milverley, William Penbygull, Roger Whelpdale
and John Tarteys, the German Johannes Sharpe, and the
Italian Paul of Venice.
See also: ▶Albert the Great ▶Anselm of Canterbury
▶Augustine ▶Categories ▶Eustratios of Nicaea ▶Ibn
Sı¯na¯, Abu¯ ʿAlı¯ (Avicenna) ▶John Duns Scotus ▶John
Scottus Eriugena ▶John Wyclif ▶Peter Abelard ▶Plato-
nism ▶Robert Grosseteste ▶Schools in the Twelfth
Century ▶Universals ▶Walter Burley ▶William of
Champeaux ▶William of Ockham
Bibliography
Secondary Sources
Cesalli L (2007) Le re´alisme propositionnel. Se´mantique et ontologie des
propositions chez Jean Duns Scot, Gauthier Burley, Richard Brinkley
et Jean Wyclif. Vrin, Paris
Conti AD (1990) Ontology in Walter Burley’s last commentary on the Ars
Vetus. Francisc Stud 50:121–176
Conti AD (2008) Categories and universals in the later Middle Ages.
In: Newton L (ed) Medieval commentaries on Aristotle’s Categories.
Brill, Leiden, pp 369–409
de Libera A (1996) La Querelle des universaux. De Platon a` la ﬁn du
Moyen aˆge. Seuil, Paris
Erismann C (2007a) The logic of being. Eriugena’s dialectical ontology.
Vivarium 45:203–218
Erismann C (2007b) Immanent realism. A reconstruction of an early
medieval solution to the problem of universals. Documenti e studi
sulla tradizione ﬁlosoﬁca medievale 18:211–229
Gottschalk HB (1987) Aristotelian philosophy in the Roman world from
the time of Cicero to the end of the second century AD. In: Haase W
(ed) Aufstieg und Niedergang der Ro¨mischen Welt. De Gruyter,
Berlin, pp 1079–1174
Gracia JJE (1984) Introduction to the problem of individuation in the
early Middle Ages. Philosophia Verlag, Munich/Vienna
Karger E (1999) Walter Burley’s realism. Vivarium 37:24–40
King P (1992) Duns Scotus on the common nature and the individual
differentia. Philos Top 20:50–76
Marenbon J (1981) From the circle of Alcuin to the school of Auxerre.
Logic, theology and philosophy in the early Middle Ages. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge
Piche´ D (2005) Le proble`me des universaux a` la Faculte´ des arts de Paris
entre 1230 et 1260. Vrin, Paris
Pini G (2005) Scotus’s realist conception of the categories: his legacy to
late medieval debates. Vivarium 43:63–110
Spade PV (2005) The problem of universals and Wyclif’s alleged
‘ultrarealism’. Vivarium 43:111–123
1112 R
Realism

Reason of State
HARRO HO¨ PFL
Essex Business School
University of Essex
Colchester
UK
Abstract
A term of art, originally Italian, becoming common usage
in other European vernaculars in the late sixteenth cen-
tury. It meant practical reﬂection, albeit in writing and
general in form, about all aspects of statecraft (reason =
reasoning, discussing, considering, but also a ground or
justiﬁcation for acting; state = government, the prince’s
position, the institutional order of a ‘‘commonwealth’’ or
‘‘principality’’). It claimed practical usefulness in virtue of
its grounding in experience and history, contrasting itself
with ‘‘mirrors of princes,’’ which were supposedly ignorant
of the realities of politics. More narrowly, reason of state
meant a ‘‘Machiavellian’’ disregard for legal, moral, and
religious considerations when the ‘‘interests of the state’’
or ‘‘necessity’’ required it. Particularly contentious were
the justiﬁability of dishonesty, duplicity, breach of faith
and even treaty obligations, violence against opponents
and competitors, illegal taxation, disregard of the claims of
traditional institutions and ofﬁceholders, and the practice
of religious toleration. Opponents of ‘‘reason of state’’
attempted to demonstrate that, on the contrary, adherence
to religion, morality, and legality was the best policy,
in that it earned providential rewards, but also that in
strictly pragmatic terms it was most likely to bring polit-
ical success. However, these proponents of ‘‘true reason of
state’’ acknowledged that strict adherence to these norms
was sometimes impossible, and when it was, statesmen
must attempt to avoid the greater evil. Having become the
subject of a vast literature and even a standard university
topic, reason of state faded as an issue in the later seven-
teenth century. Realpolitik from the nineteenth century
onwards
resembles
it,
with
the
state
representing
a morality superior to the norms of legality and private
morality, a view in turn contested by advocates of human
rights and international morality.
Reason of state is often identiﬁed with the contention that
the state and its agents are not bound by some of the rules
of ordinary morality; more theoretically, that the well-
being of the state is the ultimate value, which overrides,
or is autonomous of, the demands of morality or religion
(e.g., Meinecke). But no early modern author explicitly
endorsed the latter contention, whereas no one who
acknowledged political authority as legitimate could
deny the former (private persons were not, for example,
morally entitled to ennoble, expropriate, imprison, inter-
rogate, execute, ﬁght wars, etc). The distinctive identity of
early modern reason of state is better understood in terms
of its speciﬁc linguistic and historical context.
The adoption of the term presupposes that stato, state,
e´tat, etc. were already familiar in the sixteenth century,
usually to designate princely regimes. Reason of state
became common usage among political cognoscenti
in Italian in the 1540s (it does not occur in Machiavelli),
in other European languages from the 1580s, but in
German only in the early seventeenth century; the Latin-
ization ‘‘ratio status’’ is also relatively late. This was a time
of unparalleled religio-political conﬂict and belligerence.
Botero’s Della ragion di stato (1589) was the ﬁrst book
to use the term in its title. Like most authors, both Cath-
olics and Protestants, who articulated the concept, he
explained it as meaning discussion of the ‘‘means for
preserving stable rule over a people’’ to which his book
was devoted, the ars gubernandi as it came to be called.
Botero noted, however, that reason of state was used in
a more restricted sense to refer to extraordinary actions
required by emergencies, and also to the noxious attitudes
and policies prescribed by Machiavelli, and all too com-
monly practiced. Machiavelli was already a byword for
contempt for morality, legality, and religion. Gentillet
(1576) had blamed the St Bartholomew’s Day Massacre
of Huguenots on the ‘‘Machiavellian philosophy’’ of Cath-
erine de’ Medici and her court. ‘‘Machiavellians,’’ ‘‘athe-
ists,’’
and
‘‘politicians’’
(a
word
already
acquiring
pejorative connotations) were commonly linked. ‘‘True
reason of state’’ (e.g., Ribadeneira), ‘‘prudence,’’ civilis
prudentia or civilis doctrina (Lipsius, Mariana), or arcana
(Clapmarius, Besold) was presented as in part a critique of
Machiavelli’s ‘‘false and impious’’ reason of state. Its
authors nevertheless made signiﬁcant concessions to it,
although their endorsement of Machiavellian proposi-
tions was equivocal and circumspect (e.g., Boccalini,
Mariana). Most of them were fully conversant with The
Prince and other works of Machiavelli, which became
increasingly available in Italian and in translation in the
latter years of the century. His thought was often
misrepresented (he did not, for example, actually say
that ‘‘the end justiﬁes the means,’’ the epitome of Machi-
avellianism). But he invited such misinterpretation by his
delight in shocking, his incomplete trains of thought,
Reason of State R
1113
R

extravagant generalizations, limited political experience
and knowledge of history, which Bodin, Possevino, and
Fitzherbert, for example, pointedly criticized, and what to
Anti-Machiavellians seemed parodies of Christian religion
and moral philosophy.
Reason of state thus presented itself as practical reﬂec-
tion about politica, intended for princes and their advisers,
and based on the twin teachers of prudence: experience
and history. These were summarized in maxims which,
with the aid of new or newly fashionable concepts, served
to express a cynical and pessimistic view of politics and
human nature. The disorder of the time evidently made
such a view particularly plausible. Fashionable concepts
included ‘‘interest’’ as the summary term for motives,
usually selﬁsh ones, the terminological family politics,
police, policy, politica, politique(s), Polizey, etc., and new
coinages like ‘‘statecraft.’’ Maxims passed from book to
book included: a state cannot be governed with rosaries;
a man who does not know how to dissemble does not
know anything about ruling; oderint dum metuant (it
does not matter if they [i.e., the subjects] hate, so long as
they fear); ‘‘dead men don’t bite’’ etc. Tacitus became
fashionable as an appropriately excoriating political com-
mentator on arcana imperii (the secrets of ruling). Lipsius
and Ammirato set out their reason of state in the form of
commentaries on his work, and even Botero, who paired
him with Machiavelli as authorities for those who pre-
ferred reason of state to conscience, evidently found him
highly instructive.
Reason of state was premised on pessimistic ‘‘descrip-
tions’’ of politics and human nature. These were, however,
neither new nor heterodox: Aristotle and Augustine could
be cited in support. But it also offered prescriptions pre-
mised on these descriptions. Mirrors for princes and
moral philosophy instructed rulers to advance the well-
being and safety of their subjects and also their virtue and
their pietas, by defending and upholding true religion.
They moreover required princes to respect moral, legal,
and religious norms and obligations, not least in order
to set a good example to their subjects. The premise
was that they could do all this without endangering
themselves or their state. The reason of state literature
could not base itself on this premise, because it envisaged
princes whose positions and states were vulnerable to
competing factions and allegiances, civil war, and foreign
enemies, who often joined forces with domestic dissidents
and rebels. In these conﬂicts religion, relied on by all
known peoples as the principal social cement, was itself
the foremost cause or justiﬁcation of division and
insubordination.
Reason of state thinkers, therefore, argued for the
restoration of religious uniformity and the suppression
of religious dissent (‘‘heresy’’), by whatever means might
prove effective. Religious toleration of dissenting politi-
cally organized communities was decried as ‘‘false reason
of state,’’ a subordination of the religious obligations of
rulers to ‘‘policy’’ which was both impious and contrary to
political prudence, since religion was the indispensable
underpinning for political obedience, and ‘‘heretics’’
were by nature insubmissive. Bodin and the French
politiques were counted atheists and Machiavellians for
advocating it. However, where the enforcement of reli-
gious uniformity demonstrably endangered the prince,
the state, or favored minorities, Catholic as well as Prot-
estant reason of state was perfectly prepared to endorse
religious toleration. The justiﬁcations were political
‘‘necessity,’’ which ‘‘has no law,’’ as another maxim said,
and the orthodox moral principle of choosing the lesser
evil (ad maiora mala vitanda), the greater evil being the
weakening or even elimination of a prince or regime.
‘‘Necessity’’ thus licensed departures from strict rules of
religion and morality. It was a concept with a respectable
pedigree in moral philosophy and casuistry, which recog-
nized that there can be no moral duty to do what is
morally impossible.
Again, partly but not only in the same context of
religio-political conﬂict, reason of state licensed extralegal,
duplicitous, or possibly violent measures against domestic
political competitors, conspirators, and factions, and in
the conduct of foreign affairs generally. With respect to
‘‘heretics,’’ especially Calvinists, Botero argued for divide
and rule, depriving them of public ofﬁce, arms, and
resources (even by extralegal taxation), destroying their
morale by fomenting suspicions among them, eliminating
ringleaders, and operating swiftly and in secrecy to stamp
out rebellion and conspiracy at birth. Reason of state
endorsed the expulsion or forcible conversion of the
moriscos in Spain. In short, prudent and religious ends
evidently licensed efﬁcacious means, however morally
suspect. Even assassination might be justiﬁable, as when
the Emperor Ferdinand II authorized Wallenstein’s assas-
sination in 1634. Overriding legal and moral duties was a
fortiori permissible in diplomacy and in war, in which
morality was always at a discount (inter arma silent
leges), despite natural law and ius gentium. Reason of
state could even justify alliances with heretics and Turks
against coreligionists.
Not only adherence to legality, but all the traditional
princely virtues must be tempered by ‘‘prudence.’’ Thus
clemency might need to be overridden by the demands of
1114 R
Reason of State

exemplary justice. Liberality, again, must not be confused
with proﬂigacy, and husbanding and increasing public
resources was the prince’s duty (Contzen). This meant
increasing taxation. Political resistance to increased taxa-
tion was justiﬁed by appeals to traditional legal rights
and ‘‘fundamental laws.’’ Bodin’s theory of sovereignty
could be used to neutralize such ‘‘legal’’ justiﬁcations for
political resistance (even if he himself had not done so in
the case of taxation). But reason of state was not princi-
pally juridical in character: it was always (in its most
favorite term) ‘‘political,’’ that is concerned with interests,
ways, and means, and what worked, and it was the require-
ments of ruling, irrespective of legal ‘‘niceties’’ that
counted.
Duties of veracity and keeping promises presented
special difﬁculties, given the absolute theological prohibi-
tion of lying as in all circumstances evil; moreover treaties,
contracts and promises were manifestly indispensable for
civil and diplomatic relations, which depended on consis-
tent adherence to the natural law principle pacta sunt
servanda (promises/treaties must be kept). Machiavelli
had notoriously argued that princes might need to break
their word, on the grounds that in a wicked world, inﬂex-
ible ﬁdelity merely made them vulnerable. Reason of state
here maintained a strictly anti-Machiavellian position,
even insisting on keeping faith with heretics. All the
same, duplicity might be indispensable, and various dis-
tinctions needed to be made. Secretiveness was a positive
virtue in princes and counsellors, and essential for suc-
cessful implementation of policy. But it was morally
unproblematic since it violated no other duty. Again,
amphibology (ambiguous speech) relied on the gullibility
of others, and was therefore their problem. Simulation
and dissimulation (pretending not to know or want or
be what one does know or want, or vice versa) seem to fall
into the same category, even though Aquinas had
condemned them as lying. The Jesuit theologian Lessius
straightforwardly allowed even outright lies as the lesser
evil in very serious matters, such as defending the inno-
cent. His friend Lipsius more cautiously distinguished
three degrees of duplicity: he allowed dissimulation and
secrecy (distrust) as ‘‘slight’’ and morally inconsiderable,
bribery (of counsellors of foreign princes) and deception
more reluctantly as ‘‘moderate,’’ but condemned viola-
tions of faith, removal of privileges and open aggression
against foreign countries as unjustiﬁable. The heading for
his discussion was ‘‘mixed prudence’’: that is, mixing
honestas, prudence, and deception.
Reason of state in the narrower sense became
a standard topos in German Protestant Universities in the
seventeenth century, as well as in manuals of statecraft
such
as
Contzen’s,
and then
fell
out
of
fashion.
Nineteenth-century proponents of Realpolitik may be
regarded as continuators of the tradition.
See also: ▶Mirrors for Princes ▶Natural Law ▶Natural
Rights ▶Political Philosophy
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Besold Christoph (1618) Politicorum libri duo. Cellius, Frankfurt
Boccalini Trajano (1612) Ragguagli di Parnaso. Available online http://
www.bibliotecaitaliana.it/xtf/view?docId = bibit001251/bibit001251.
xml&doc.view = print&chunk.id=0&toc.depth=1&toc.id=0
Botero Giovanni (1948) Della ragion di stato, ed. Firpo L. U.T.E.T, Turin
(trans: Waley PJ, Waley DP (1956) The reason of state. Routledge and
Keegan Paul, London)
Clapmarius Arnold (1605) De arcanis rerum publicarum libri VI.
Wessellius, Bremen
Contzen Adam (1621) Politicorum libri decem. J. Kinckius, Mainz
de Ribadeneira Pedro (1595) Tratado de la Religion y Virtudes que deve
tener el Principe cristiano, para gobernar y conservar sus Estados.
Contro lo que N. Maquiavelo y los Politicos deste tiempo ensenan
(2nd edn, Plantin-Moreto, Antwerp 1597)
Fitzherbert Thomas (1610–1612/1615) The ﬁrst and second part of
a treatise concerning policy and religion, 1st edn (1610–1612); 2nd
edn (1615). Douai (repr. Scholar, Menston, 1974)
Gentillet Innocent (1576) Discours contre Machiavel. Casalini libri, Florence
Lipsius Justus (1589) Politicorum sive civilis doctrinae libri sex. Leiden
(translated as Six Bookes of Politickes or Civil Doctrine, London
1594. Da Capo, Amsterdam/New York, 1970)
Mariana Juan (1605) De rege et regis institutione (ﬁrst publ. 1599), ed.
Lippius B, Wechel A. Balthasar, Mainz
Possevino Antonio (1592) Iudicium: De Nouae. . ., De Ioanis Bodini
Methodo historiae, Libris de Republica et Demonomaniae. De Phil.
Mornei. . ., De Nicolao Machiavello. Vatican Press, Rome
Secondary Sources
Ho¨pﬂH (2002) Orthodoxy and reason of state. Hist Polit Thought
XXIII:2
Meinecke F (1962) Machiavellism. The doctrine of raison d’etat and its
place in modern history (original Die Idee der Staatsraison, 1924).
(trans: Scott D, intro. Stark W, Routledge and Keegan Paul, London)
Mu¨nkler H (1987) Im Namen des Staates. Die Begru¨ndung der
Staatsraison in der Fru¨hen Neuzeit. Fischer, Frankfurt a.M
Schnur R (ed) (1975) Staatsra¨son. Studien zur Geschichte eines
politischen Begriffs. Duncker und Humblot, Berlin
Stolleis M (1990) Staat und Staatsra¨son in der fru¨hen Neuzeit. Suhrkamp,
Frankfurt
Viroli M (1992) From politics to reason of state. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge
Weber W (1992) Prudentia Gubernatoria: Studien zur Herrschaftslehre in
der deutschen politischen Wissenschaft des 17ten Jahrhunderts.
Nimeyer, Tu¨bingen
Zarka YC (ed) (1994) Raison et De´raison d’e´tat. Presses Universitaires de
France, Paris
Reason of State R
1115
R

Remigio dei Girolami
TERESA RUPP
Department of History
Mount Saint Mary’s University
Emmitsburg, MD
USA
Abstract
Remigio
dei
Girolami,
O.P.
(c.
1245–1319)
was
a Florentine Dominican preacher, teacher, and theologian.
He studied with Thomas Aquinas at the University of
Paris. Remigio spent most of his career as lector of theol-
ogy at Santa Maria Novella, the Dominican house in
Florence. Dante may have been one of his students, but
the evidence for this is inconclusive. Through his numer-
ous sermons and treatises, he transmitted scholastic ideas
to his fellow Dominicans and the people of Florence, as
well as applying them to the local situation. Contra falsos
ecclesie professores (before 1298), Remigio’s treatise on
the church, shows him to have been a moderate papal
hierocrat. His political treatises, De bono communi
(1302) and De bono pacis (1304), were written in response
to the 1301–1302 factional crisis in Florence between black
and white Guelfs. Often considered to be extreme exam-
ples of medieval anti-individualism, they are an interest-
ing adaptation of the theory of wholes and parts and of the
theological concept of the order of charity to a speciﬁc
political situation. In De bono communi, Remigio argues
that the common good (which he identiﬁes with the good
of the commune) ought to come before particular good by
inserting the commune into the traditional order of char-
ity (God, self, neighbor, body), either before or after the
self depending on whether the commune is considered to
be an integral or a universal whole.
Remigio dei Girolami was a Florentine Dominican
teacher,
preacher,
and
theologian.
His
family,
the
Girolami, were wool merchants active in Florentine poli-
tics; his father, brother, and nephews served as priors, the
executive body in the Florentine commune, multiple times
in the second half of the thirteenth century. Remigio
studied the liberal arts at the University of Paris, then
joined the Dominican order there, probably in 1268, and
studied with Thomas Aquinas (he refers to Thomas in one
of his sermons as magister meus). He returned to Paris,
probably in 1298–1300, as bachelor of the Sentences,
receiving his magisterium in theology in 1304 from Pope
Benedict
XI.
Remigio
held
several
ofﬁces
in
the
Dominican order; for example, he attended general chap-
ters in 1292 and 1301 and he served as prior of the Roman
province from 1309–1311. Remigio spent most of his
career as lector of theology at Santa Maria Novella, the
Dominican house in Florence. His prologues, or introduc-
tory lectures to his courses, show that he must have taught
the Bible, the Sentences, and Aristotle’s Ethics, which were
the standard texts at Dominican theological studia.
Remigio is signiﬁcant as a transmitter of scholastic ideas
through his teaching and preaching and for his applica-
tion of those ideas to real-life situations in the commune.
Some scholars think Remigio’s students may have
included Dante. In the Convivio, Dante states that after the
death of Beatrice in 1290, he sought consolation ne le scuole
de li religiosi e a le disputazioni de li ﬁlosofanti (‘‘in the
schools of the religious and the disputations of the philos-
ophers’’; Conv. 2.12.7.). It has long been assumed that Dante
was referring to the Franciscan school at Santa Croce and the
Dominican school at Santa Maria Novella, whose lector in
the 1290s and for much of Dante’s lifetime was Remigio.
There is no direct evidence for this connection, however,
and neither ﬁgure ever mentions the other. Dominican
statutes forbade outsiders from attending lectures in philos-
ophy (which Santa Maria Novella, as a studium in theology,
did not offer anyway), but disputations were more public. It
is possible that Dante attended either Remigio’s theology
lectures or his disputations, perhaps thereby learning his
Aristotelianism, but the question remains open.
Dante may or may not have heard Remigio teach, but
he deﬁnitely could have heard him preach. Remigio’s
sermons are collected into three manuscript volumes pre-
served in the Biblioteca Nazionale in Florence. They are
arranged into Lenten sermons and sermons De tempore,
De sanctis, and De diversis materiis. This last category
includes several sermons preached on communal occa-
sions, such as sermons on peacemaking, a group of ser-
mons to the Florentine priors, and reception sermons for
various
visiting
dignitaries.
For
example,
Remigio
preached at the ofﬁcial reception of Charles of Valois,
brother of King Philip IVof France, who as ‘‘peacemaker’’
presided over the black Guelf takeover of Florence and the
exile of the whites, including Dante and Remigio’s
nephews, in 1301–1302.
Another codex in the Biblioteca Nazionale contains
Remigio’s treatises on a variety of subjects, such as Contra
falsos ecclesie professores, De bono communi, De bono pacis,
De peccato usure, De subiecto theologie, and Divisio scientie.
Other works include quodlibets, a commentary on
the Song of Songs, a set of biblical distinctions, and
a
theological
encyclopedia,
Extractio
ordinata
per
alphabetum. Remigio spent his ﬁnal years annotating and
1116 R
Remigio dei Girolami

cross-referencing his works in his own hand to facilitate
their use as preaching aids for his fellow Dominicans.
The thesis of Remigio’s treatise on the church, the
Contra falsos ecclesie professores (probably written before
1298), is ‘‘how the catholic church knows all things.’’ In 99
chapters, Remigio proves how the church ‘‘knows’’ the
liberal arts, the natural sciences, medicine, ethics, meta-
physics, the mechanical arts, and theology. Chapters 6–37
of Contra falsos, on how the church ‘‘knows’’ geometry, are
usually read as the equivalent of a treatise on ecclesiology.
Geometry measures greatness, and the church is great in
size, strength, and authority. Remigio’s views on papal
power place him as a moderate hierocrat who believes in
the ultimate superiority of spiritual power but grants
considerable autonomy and value to temporal power.
In Remigio’s political treatises De bono communi
(1302) and De bono pacis (1304), written in response to
events in Florence, he applied the theory he had learned at
the university to the factional conﬂicts between the black
and white parties, identifying the common good (bonum
commune) with the good of the commune (bonum
communis). De bono communi was probably composed to
be a source for sermons; it demonstrates its thesis, that the
common good ought to be preferred to particular good,
with proofs by authority, examples, and reason (followed
by a set of objections and replies), which were the three
methods of developing a medieval sermon. De bono pacis
has a narrower, more legalistic focus; it argues that prop-
erty losses sustained in the factional conﬂicts ought to be
forgiven for the good of peace.
Remigio’s political philosophy is usually considered to
be an extreme example of medieval anti-individualism. In
an oft-quoted phrase, Ernst Kantorowicz termed him
‘‘that curious thomistic proto-Hegelian’’ (Kantorowicz
1957). Scholars cite such passages from De bono communi
as Qui non est civis non est homo (‘‘he who is not a citizen is
not a man’’) and his supposed statement that a citizen
ought to be willing to go to hell in place of his commune as
evidence of Remigio’s extreme exaltation of the common
good at the expense of individual worth.
Remigio expresses his most extreme statements aboutthe
community’s superiority over the individual in terms of the
whole’s priority over the part. These extreme statements,
however, are reserved for when he considers the community
as an integral whole – Florence – whose parts cannot even
exist outside the whole. Usually ignored, however, is that
Remigio is well aware that a city is also a universal whole –
the Florentines – whose parts are simultaneously wholes in
themselves and a part of a larger whole.
The double nature of the whole inﬂuences Remigio’s
use of the ordo caritatis, or order of charity, a key concept
for understanding his political philosophy. Based on the
Gospel commandment to love God and your neighbor as
yourself, the order of charity was developed in the context
of commentary on Song of Songs 2:4, Ordinavit in me
caritatem, ‘‘He ordered charity in me.’’ The standard
order, as given by Augustine in De doctrina Christiana
(1.23) and quoted in Peter Lombard’s Sentences (3.28.1),
is God, self, neighbor, body. To argue that the common
good takes preference over individual good, Remigio places
the commune into the traditional order, as one of the
objects of love required of a Christian. Where it goes in
the sequence, however, depends on whether he is thinking
of the commune as a universal whole or an integral whole.
When the commune is considered as an integral
whole, then it is to be loved immediately after God and
before the self. When it is thought of as a universal whole,
then, as a collection of neighbors, it is placed after love of
self. Faced with a situation in which parts (in Latin, partes,
the same word as ‘‘parties’’) were destroying the whole,
Remigio emphasized the city’s integral unity and the
obligations of the parts to love it more than themselves.
But he did not forget the existence of individual citizens
who must love both themselves and their neighbors.
The view of Remigio as an extreme anti-individualist over-
simpliﬁes and obscures the distinctiveness of his political
thought.
See also: ▶Aristotelianism in the Greek, Latin, Syriac,
Arabic, and Hebrew Traditions ▶Corporation Theory
▶Dante
Alighieri
▶Mereology
▶Thomas Aquinas,
Political Thought ▶Thomism
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Remigio dei Girolami (1965) De peccato usure, ed. Capitani O. Il De
peccato usure di Remigio de’ Girolami. Studi Medievali ser.
3 6(2):611–662
Remigio dei Girolami (1981a) Contra falsos ecclesie professores, ed.
Tamburini F. Utrumque ius. Collectio Pontiﬁciae Universitatis
Lateranensis 6, Rome
Remigio dei Girolami (1981b) Divisio scientie, ed. Panella E. O.P.,
Un’introduzione alla ﬁlosoﬁa in uno ‘Studium’ dei frati Predicatori
del XIII secolo: ‘Divisio scientie’ di Remigio dei Girolami. Cultura
e istituzioni nell’ordine domenicano tra medioevo e umanesimo:
Studi e testi. Memorie domenicane n.s. 12:82–119
Remigio dei Girolami (1983) Quodlibets, ed. Panella E. O.P., I quodlibeti
di Remigio dei Girolami. Insegnamento e riforma nell’ordine
domenicano. Memorie domenicane n.s. 14:66–146
Remigio dei Girolami (1985) De bono communi and De bono pacis,
ed. Panella E. O.P., Dal bene comune al bene del comune: I trattati
politici di Remigio dei Girolami nella Firenze dei bianchi-neri.
Politica e vita religiosa a Firenze tra ‘300 e ‘500. Memorie
domenicane n.s. 16:1–198
Remigio dei Girolami R
1117
R

Secondary Sources
Davis CT (1984) Dante’s Italy and other essays. University of Pennsylvania
Press, Philadelphia
Egenter R (1934) Gemeinnutz vor Eignennutz: Die soziale Leitidee im
Tractatus de bono communi des Fr. Remigius von Florenz. Scholastik
9:79–92
Gavric´ A O.P. (2006) Une me´taphysique a` l’e´cole de Thomas d’Aquin: Le
‘‘De modis rerum’’de Re´mi de Florence O.P. ({1319). Academic Press
Fribourg, Fribourg
Kantorowicz E (1957) The king’s two bodies: a study in mediaeval polit-
ical theology. Princeton University Press, Princeton
Kempshall MS (1999) The common good in late medieval political
thought. Oxford University Press, Oxford
Mulchahey MM (1998) First the bow is bent in study. . .: Dominican
education before 1350. Pontiﬁcal Institute of Mediaeval Studies,
Toronto
Mulchahey MM (2005) Education in Dante’s Florence revisited: Remigio
de’ Girolami and the schools of Santa Maria Novella. In: Begley R,
Koterski J (eds) Medieval education. Fordham series in medieval
studies. Fordham University Press, New York, pp 143–181
Panella E O.P. (1979) Per lo studio di Fra Remigio dei Girolami ({1319):
‘‘Contra falsos ecclesie professores’’ cc. 5–37. Memorie domenicane
n.s. 10:1–313
Panella E O.P. (1982) Remigiana: Note biograﬁche e ﬁlologiche. In: Libro
e immagine. Memorie domenicane n.s. 13:366–421
Panella E O.P. (1990) Nuova cronologia Remigiana. Archivum Fratrum
Praedicatorum 60:145–311
Rupp T (1993) ‘Common’ = ‘Of the Commune’: Private property and
individualism in Remigio dei Girolami’s De bono pacis. Hist Polit
Thought 14(1):41–56
Rupp T (2000) Damnation, individual and community in Remigio dei
Girolami’s De bono communi. Hist Polit Thought 21(2):217–236
Web Site
Panella E O.P. Remigio di ser Chiaro dei Girolami da Firenze, ({1319)
http://emilioweb.t35.com/remigio/index.htm
(USA)
or
http://
utenti.lycos.it/emilioweb/remigio (Europe) (Includes all Panella’s
published works on Remigio, as well as a continually updated bibli-
ography and additional material, including previously unpublished
editions and Italian translations)
Richard Billingham
EGBERT BOS
Philosophy
University of Leiden
Leiden
The Netherlands
Abstract
Richard Billingham has become famous for his handbook
Speculum puerorum terminus est in quem resolvitur
propositio (Mirror of Youngsters or a Term in Which
a Proposition is Analyzed). The book gained wide
popularity in Europe, especially in eastern Europe and
Italy, as can be gathered from the great number of manu-
scripts and commentaries handed down to us. The tract is
on the analysis of a proposition with the help of an analysis
of an analyzable term used in it. Once such an analysis has
been completed, it is easier to assign the reference
(suppositio) or another property of a term and to establish
the truth of the proposition. The probatio-theory was
especially used in natural science, for example, by William
of Heytesbury (before 1313–1372/3).
Life
We do not know much about Richard Billingham’s life. He
was a fellow of Merton College from 1344 to 1361; in 1357,
he was a subwarden (still in 1361); and in 1349, a regent
Master of Arts. He was also a bachelor in theology.
In Merton the Oxford ‘‘Calculatores’’ were active, of
whom Walter Burley, Thomas Bradwardine, William of
Heytesbury, and Richard Kilvington are well known.
These philosophers applied mathematical and semantical
instruments to natural science.
Thought
In his tract De signiﬁcato propositionis (On the Signiﬁcation
of the Proposition) Billingham asks whether an afﬁrmative
or negative proposition is true on the condition that it
signiﬁes precisely as it is. In his solution of this question he
says that he will reject any form of signiﬁcation of
a proposition that implies the existence of an entity signi-
ﬁed by the complex whole; by this he probably means
a complexe signiﬁcabile, although this expression is not
mentioned here. The theory of the complexe signiﬁcabile
was advocated by a.o. Adam of Wodeham (c. 1298–1358)
and Gregory of Rimini (c. 1300–1358). According to
Richard a proposition like ‘‘Socrates runs’’ means the
contingent reality to which the subject term refers. One
should not imagine, Billingham says, that, when ‘‘Socrates
exists’’ is true, there should be some independent entities
that can be labeled ‘‘that Socrates exists.’’
In his Speculum puerorum Richard presents the theory
of the proof (probatio) of propositions or analysis of
propositions. Probare (‘‘to prove,’’ or, in this context, better
‘‘to analyze’’) refers to the analysis of a proposition with the
help of the analysis of a complex term used in the proposi-
tion. Once such an analysis has been carried out, it is easier
to assign the reference (suppositio), and the truth of the
proposition can be determined. The analysis is the direct
and immediate aim of the theory, whereas the ultimate, but
indirect concern is to determine truth or falsity.
Richard divides terms into immediate and mediate
ones. A term is called ‘‘immediate’’ with respect to
1118 R
Richard Billingham

cognition. In this case there is a relation between the
human mind and the individual thing known, he says.
Examples of immediate terms are nouns such as ‘‘I,’’
‘‘you,’’ ‘‘this,’’ and verbs such as ‘‘is.’’ A pronoun like
‘‘this’’ is immediate; a transcendent term such as ‘‘being’’
is immediate because it refers to an individual reality,
because it is the ﬁrst thing known by the intellect. As to
the question whether Hoc est (‘‘this is’’) is immediate,
Billingham answers in the afﬁrmative. ‘‘This is’’ is directly
immediate, he says, while ‘‘this was’’ (past tense) and ‘‘this
will be’’ (future tense) are indirectly immediate.
Billingham does not explicitly deﬁne ‘‘mediate terms.’’
Mediate terms are those that are not immediate, and
therefore they can be analyzed. In this analysis, one should
pay attention to the ﬁrst analyzable term, that is, the
common, or mediate term, in contradistinction to an
immediate term.
There are three kinds of mediate terms:
(1) Termini resolubiles (‘‘resoluble terms’’) such as
‘‘man,’’ which is a common term and has inferior
things under it. The analysis of ‘‘a man runs’’ (homo
currit) is as follows: ‘‘this runs, this is a man, there-
fore a man runs.’’
In a joint article Ashworth and Spade note that ‘‘this is
a man’’ should, according to Billingham’s theory, be
a ‘‘mediate’’ proposition. This is hard to understand,
they feel, for it seems to be a basic proposition.
(2) Termini exponibiles (‘‘exponible terms’’), such as
incipit (‘‘begins’’), which can be explained by two
or more propositions; for instance ‘‘this begins to
exist’’ is explained by ‘‘this exists now and not imme-
diately before it was such that it existed.’’ Thus the
exponible term is analyzed.
(3) Termini ofﬁciabiles (‘‘functionalizable terms’’); these
precede a proposition, such as ‘‘it is contingent’’; for
example, ‘‘it is contingent that you exist’’ is analyzed
into the proposition ‘‘you exist is contingent which
precisely signiﬁes that you exist, therefore it is con-
tingent that you exist.’’ Functionalizable verbs
denote not only an act of knowledge (for instance
‘‘to know,’’ in ‘‘you know a man to exist’’ is analyzed
into: ‘‘you know such a proposition ‘a man exists,’
which precisely signiﬁes that a man exists, therefore
you know a man to exist’’), but also modalities (for
example, ‘‘potentiality,’’ ‘‘necessity’’).
Richard pays special attention to the ‘‘expository syllo-
gism,’’ that is, a syllogism with a middle term which twice
is singular, referring to individual things. The notion of
expository syllogism goes back to Aristotle. The example
Richard gives is the one given above to illustrate the
analysis by resolution: ‘‘this runs, this is a man, therefore
a
man
runs.’’
Having
established
this
analysis
of
a proposition by way of resoluble terms, he claims to
have arrived at the basis of the so-called expository syllo-
gism. One should realize that a proposition on account of
its resolvable term could be proven on account of a lower
term, hence the rule: ab inferiori ad superius distributive et
sine dictione habente vim distributionis vel negationis valet
consequentia (‘‘the inference from an inferior to a superior
in a distributive way and without a word having the power
of distribution or negation is valid’’). Billigham notes that
it is upon this rule that the expository syllogism is built.
This syllogism is the basis of all other syllogisms.
According to Richard, the expository syllogism obtains
in syllogisms of all ﬁgures. In the third ﬁgure it is most
evident, however.
The tract in which we ﬁnd Richard’s theory on infer-
ences (consequentiae) is perhaps not the most important
one on this subject in medieval logic; it seems to be
a compilation. He deﬁnes consequentia as an aggregate
made up of an antecedent and a consequent together
with an inferential sign and interprets the inference with
the help of the expression ‘‘it is understood in’’ (intelligitur
in), saying, for instance, a formal inference is the case
when a consequent is understood in the antecedent, like
in ‘‘Peter is a man, therefore Peter is an animal.’’
Billingham understands it to be an act of knowledge, not
a kind of objective understanding.
In natural theology, Billingham holds radical views, at
least according to an anonymous contemporary author of
a tract preserved in the Vatican. According to this author,
Billingham says that it is not the task of a philosopher
to state that there is only one inﬁnite ﬁrst being.
For a philosopher is limited to conclude that this ﬁrst
being is either a substance or an accident. One cannot
say that the ﬁrst being is a substance, for a man does not
possess a concept of substance. Billingham argues that
during the Eucharist one never knows whether or not
under the accidental property a substance is present or
not. Neither can the ﬁrst being be an accident, for in that
case God would be less perfect than a substance.
Secondly, according to the anonymous, Billingham
said that it is not evident to us, mortals, that substances
are different from accidents (here Billingham comes close
to Nicholas of Autrecourt, Michalski notes).
Thirdly, all philosophical propositions are based on
faith and things believed, which could be labeled – some-
what anachronistically – a ﬁdeist position.
In his commentary to the De anima, Nicholas Oresme
notes (if one follows Michalski) that according to
Richard Billingham R
1119
R

Billingham, man only perceives accidents and that a sub-
stance is as hidden as the ﬁrst mover of the heavens.
See
also:
▶Oxford
Calculators
▶Peter
of
Spain
▶Supposition Theory ▶Syllogism, Theories of ▶Terms,
Properties
of
▶William
Heytesbury
▶William
of
Ockham
Bibliography
Primary Sources
de Rijk LM (1982) Some 14th century tracts on the Probationes
terminorum. Martin of Alnwick O.F.M., Richard Billingham,
Edward Upton and others. An edition of four current textbooks
with an introduction and indexes. Ingenium, Nijmegen
Fitzgerald MJ (1987) Richard Brinkley’s theory of sentential reference, ed.
and trans. with introduction and notes. Brill, Leiden
Hispanus Petrus (1977) Tractatus, ed. de Rijk LM. Van Gorcum, Assen
Maieru` A (1969) Lo Speculum Puerorum sive Terminus est in quem di
Riccardo Billingham. Studi Medievali X/3:297–397
Michalski K (1969) La philosophie au XIVe sie`cle. Six e´tudes. Flasch
K (ed). Minerva, Frankfurt (Main)
Weber S (2003) Richard Billingham ‘De consequentiis’ mit Toledo-
Kommentar. Kritisch herausgegeben, eingeleitet und kommentiert.
Gru¨ner, Amsterdam/Philadelphia
Secondary Sources
Bos EP (2007) Richard Billingham’s Speculum puerorum. Some medieval
commentaries and Aristotle. Vivarium 45:360–373 (special issue,
edited by John Marenbon)
Nuchelmans G (1973) Theories of the proposition. Ancient and medieval
conceptions of the bearers of truth and falsity. North Holland,
Amsterdam
Spade PV, Ashworth EJ (1992) Logic in late medieval Oxford. In: Catto JI,
Evans R (eds) The history of the University of Oxford, vol II. Late
medieval Oxford. Clarendon, Oxford
Richard Brinkley
LAURENT CESALLI
Department of Philosophy
University of Geneva
Geneva
Switzerland
Abstract
Richard Brinkley, OFM (ﬂ. c. 1350) was an English logi-
cian and theologian of the middle of the fourteenth cen-
tury. Among his works, only a Summa logicae and some
fragments of theological works are known to us. Brinkley is
a realist philosopher (he acknowledges real universals and
genuine propositional signiﬁcates) although his position
is much more moderate than that of Burley or Wyclif,
for example. Most of his criticisms in the Summa are
directed against Ockham, although he agrees with him
on some doctrinal issues, like for example the thesis of
semantic subordination of written and spoken language to
mental language. Brinkley’s philosophical orientation is
characterized by the tension between the explicitly formu-
lated methodological aim of segregating logic and meta-
physics, and the philosophical necessity of considering
them both.
Life, Works, and Philosophical Orientation
Richard Brinkley was a Franciscan friar active in Oxford in
the middle of the fourteenth century (Ga´l and Wood
1980:73–77). His theological work was known in Paris
from 1362 onward and inﬂuenced bachelor theologians
like, for example, Denis de Montina, Henricus Totting de
Oyta, and Petrus de Candia (Kaluza 1990:188–191). The
only extant work among Brinkley’s writings is an exten-
sive, anti-nominalist logic handbook (Summa logicae).
Fragments and abbreviations of his theological works
(a commentary on the Sentences and three sets of theolog-
ical questions respectively referred to as Questiones super
Sententias, Quaestiones breves, and Quaestiones magnae,
Kaluza 1990:172–174) have been edited. Furthermore,
Brinkley is known to be the author of (lost) Distinctiones
scholasticae and Determinationes (Ashworth and Spade
1992:49). In at least two places in the Summa logicae
(part II, De universalibus:333 and at the beginning of
part III, De praedicamentis, Ga´l and Wood 1908:69),
Brinkley alludes to a planned work on metaphysics, but,
if such a work was written at all, nothing more is known of
such a tract. As for his philosophical orientation, Brinkley
is a realist and is often engaged in polemics against Ock-
ham. His theory of the signiﬁcate of propositions bears
afﬁnities with the ones of Walter Burley and John Wyclif
although Brinkley’s position is much more moderate than
that of his realist fellows (Cesalli 2007:301–309).
The Summa logicae
Brinkley’s Summa is conserved completely in two manu-
scripts (Prague, Sta´tnı´ knihovna Cˇ SR, MS 396 8 (III. A.
11), f 31ra–140ra; Leipzig, Universita¨tsbibliothek, Nr.
1360, f 1ra–105vb) and only partially (part VII, De
obligationibus) in another manuscript (British Library,
Harley 3243, f 47ra–56rb). The work is divided into
seven parts (an announced eighth part on sophisms is
missing):
1. De terminis
2. De universalibus
1120 R
Richard Brinkley

3. De praedicamentis
4. De suppositionibus
5. De propositione
6. De insolubilibus
7. De obligationibus
There is no doubt about the authenticity of the work. Its
date of composition is difﬁcult to determine, but there are
good reasons to think that it was composed as early as
1345–1350: Brinkley’s theological work was inﬂuential in
Paris in 1362 and the standard cursus of a theologian
would require that he ﬁrst writes on logic and only later
on theology (Kaluza 1990:169). The Summa is also of
some doxographic signiﬁcance since it is the only text
through which the opinions of William Birmingham
and Richard Billingham about the signiﬁcate of the
proposition are known (M.J. Fitzgerald, introduction to
Brinkley’s De signiﬁcato propositionis:3–4).
Logic and Metaphysics in the Summa logicae
In the prologue of the Summa, Brinkley makes it clear that
his main motivation for writing is the consideration of
logic in itself and in contradistinction to metaphysics (ut
logica in se consideretur et a metaphysica distinguatur, see
Ga´l and Wood 1980:79). Such a segregation has to be, he
goes on, because some of the moderns neglect logic for
metaphysics and vice versa. This sheds some light on
Brinkley’s philosophical stance: both logic and metaphys-
ics have to be considered, but the only way to achieve this
consists in holding the two disciplines strictly apart. To
some extent, Brinkley sticks to this programmatic line
(and he possibly wrote a metaphysical tract as well), but
as we will see on the base of the three cases presented
below, his logic is not always free of metaphysical
considerations.
Universals
The structure of Brinkley’s De universalibus is symptom-
atic for the tension between the methodological aim of
segregating logic and metaphysics, and the philosophical
necessity of considering them both. Before commenting
on the ﬁve porphyrian praedicabilia (genus, species, differ-
entia, proprium, accidens), Brinkley begins by distin-
guishing
different
senses
of
the
word
universale
according
to
logic,
physics,
and
metaphysics
(De
universalibus:299–300): the logician conceives of it as
a common term predicable of several things; for the
philosopher of nature, it is the indeterminate character
of the ﬁrst cause as far as its possible effects are concerned;
according
to
the
metaphysician,
it
is
an
essence
(quidditas), which is ‘‘communicable’’ to many different
individuals. Accordingly, when a logician says homo est
species (= S), he is speaking of a term only, to the effect that
homo (= t) in S is taken in material supposition
(ibid.:306). If Brinkley’s position is compared to the ones
of Burley and Ockham, we obtain the following picture:
on the one hand, he disagrees with Ockham and Burley
who both think that t has simple supposition in S; on the
other, he agrees with Ockham that t in S is taken non-
signiﬁcatively (because homo was not imposed to signify
a term, but human beings) and disagrees with Burley who
maintains that t in S is taken signiﬁcatively. Since Brinkley
acknowledges a kind of metaphysical universal, he clearly
is a realist. But what exactly is the ontological status of
such real universals? The discussion of the personal and
simple supposition (see below, point 2) provides some
hints: the essence of a given thing (e.g., the humanity of
a human being) is a metaphysical part present in any
member of the species: ‘‘Just as the line which is in Socrates
can be understood without Socrates but cannot exist
without him, the humanity which is in Socrates can be
understood without Socrates although it cannot exist
without Socrates’’ (ibid.:303). This allows to qualify
Brinkley’s position as a medieval form of immanent
realism.
Signification and Supposition
Like most of the medieval logicians, Brinkley acknowl-
edges three ontological types of terms: inscriptions, vocal
sounds, and concepts (mental terms), and just like Ock-
ham – the target of most of his criticisms otherwise –, he
defends the thesis of semantic subordination of the two
conventional types of terms (written and spoken) to the
natural signs constituting mental language: a sign S1 is
semantically subordinated to a sign S2 iff S1 and S2 signify
the same thing x and S2 can signify x without S1 but not
vice versa (Cesalli 2004:460). The impositio nominum
relates a vocal sound to a thing and not to a concept,
although the relation to a thing depends on a concept of
that thing: the imposition presupposes the cognition of
the thing to be named. As far as extra-mental terms are
concerned, the difference between signiﬁcation and sup-
position is twofold: on the one hand, the former is con-
ventional whereas the latter ‘‘arises from the nature of the
thing’’ (‘‘suppositio non oritur ex principio voluntatis, sed ex
natura rei,’’ De suppositionibus, 1): once a vocal sound has
been imposed, its actual use within a proposition casts it
into formal, objective relations, which do not depend on
any convention: as Brinkley puts it, the validity of the
inference ‘‘a man is running, therefore Socrates, or Plato,
or. . . is running’’ is objectively secured. On the other
hand, signiﬁcation is a dyadic notion, and supposition is
Richard Brinkley R
1121
R

a triadic one: to signify, for a term, means to be related to
an intellect (namely to the intellect of the hearer) and to
a thing; to supposit, for a term, means to signify and to be
related to another categorematic constituent (subject or
predicate) of a proposition. Brinkley’s idea that signiﬁca-
tion involves a relation to the intellect of the hearer (‘‘ter-
minus autem signiﬁcans necessario includit duos respectus:
unum ad intellectum sui signiﬁcat, et alium ad rem quam
signiﬁcat,’’ De terminis, 1, Ga´l and Wood 1980:80) is close
to the one found in the ﬁrst lines of Roger Bacon’s De signis
(‘‘signum
est
in
praedicamento
relationis
et
dicitur
essentialiter ad illud cui signiﬁcat’’). As for Brinkley’s typol-
ogy of supposition, the cases of material and simple sup-
position have to be brieﬂy addressed. We saw in the
previous section that in the De universalibus, Brinkley
considers that homo in homo est species has material
supposition, whereas this sentence is a classical example
for simple supposition. In his tract on supposition,
Brinkley says that simple supposition is the case when
a ‘‘common term stands for a thing as non-restricted, i.e.
for a thing really communicable to many’’ (‘‘suppositio
simplex est quando terminus communis supponit pro re ut
non contracta sive pro re pluribus communicabili ex parte
rei,’’ De suppositionibus, 3) and gives the example homo est
primo risibilis. Therefore, Brinkley considers the term spe-
cies as strictly metalinguistic although he acknowledges
real universal things. Finally, Brinkley criticizes the notion
of material supposition because if a term would really
stand for himself, then supposition would not be rela-
tional anymore; but according to its deﬁnition, it has to
be relational (De suppositionibus, 2; on Brinkley’s theory of
signiﬁcation and supposition, see Cesalli and Lonfat,
forthcoming).
Propositions and Truth
Richard Brinkley’s theory of the proposition is a case of
‘‘propositional realism’’ in the sense that the author of the
Summa acknowledges speciﬁc signiﬁcates for proposi-
tions, which are not reducible to the signiﬁcates of the
constituent parts of the propositions (Cesalli 2007:241–
309). Contrary to Burley and Wyclif who speak of propo-
sitions which are not signs but signiﬁcates (propositio in re
for the former, propositio realis for the latter), Brinkley
only uses the term propositio for complexes of signs (writ-
ten, spoken, and mental). The principle of semantic sub-
ordination (see above, point 2) holds for propositions as it
does for their constituents: every non-mental proposition
is a sign in virtue of a mental proposition (De propositione
in genere, }54). But this does not mean that a non-mental
proposition signiﬁes a mental proposition (rather, as
we shall see, every proposition, mental or not, has a
signiﬁcate, which is not a proposition). In spite of subor-
dination, the three types of propositions are functionally
equivalent: any proposition, be it mental or not, is the
vehicle of a complex cognitive content (ibid., }49). When
addressing the question of the formation of a mental
proposition, Brinkley insists, that when the intellect pro-
duces a mental proposition, it does not combine concepts,
but it exerts its combining and dividing activity on the
very things of which concepts are natural signs (ibid., }48).
Brinkley answers the question of the nature of the propo-
sitional signiﬁcates as follows:
"
one has to know that one calls ‘significate of the
proposition’ this thing or these things which is or are
signified through a proposition, so that the significate of
this proposition ‘Socrates sees Plato’ is this thing Socrates,
and this thing Plato, and the vision through which Socra-
tes sees. Therefore, from these, as combined and inte-
grated with each other in a correct order results the
whole, adequate and primary significate of this proposi-
tion (Unde primo sciendum quod signiﬁcatum propositionis
vocantur illud vel illa, quod vel quae per propositionem
signiﬁcatur, ut signiﬁcatum istius propositionis ‘Sortes
videt Platonem’ est haec res Sortes, et haec res Plato, et
visio qua Sortes videt. Et hae res sunt omnia signiﬁcata per
istam propositionem. Et ideo, ex istis debite ad invicem
ordinatis resultat et integratur totale, et adaequatum,
et primum signiﬁcatum illius propositionis, De signiﬁcato
propositionis:34).
For Brinkley, then, the propositional signiﬁcate is some-
thing like an ordained complex of things. In his tract on
the signiﬁcate of the proposition, Brinkley extensively
criticizes the opinions of Richard Billingham (modus
rei), William Birmingham (compositio mentis), and Rich-
ard Ferrybridge (the propositional signiﬁcate is nothing be
the signiﬁcate of its subject term, ibid.:52–99). At the
beginning of his tract on sentential reference, Brinkley
announces that he will address the question whether the
‘‘truth of a proposition arises from its signiﬁcates as from
its cause’’ (‘‘si ex illo <signiﬁcato> tamquam ex causa in
propositione veritas oriatur,’’ ibid.:34). Although this point
is not discussed as such in the Summa, the element of
response that can be gathered converges toward a positive
answer to that question: the ordained complex of things –
one would want to say, the state of affairs – signiﬁed
by a proposition is also its truth-maker (Cesalli 2007:
297–299).
See also: ▶John Wyclif ▶Logic ▶Obligations Logic
▶Realism ▶Supposition Theory ▶Truth, Theories of
▶Universals ▶Walter Burley ▶William of Ockham
1122 R
Richard Brinkley

Bibliography
Primary Sources
Edited Sections of Brinkley’s Works
Theological Works
(1990) Quaeritur utrum potentia volitiva hic in via eodem actu quo utitur
creatura libere fruatur trinitate benedicta (= Commentum super
Sententias, quaestio 3), ed. Kaluza Z. L’œuvre the´ologique de Richard
Brinkley, O.F.M. Archives d’Histoire Doctrinale et Litte´raire du
Moyen Age 64:169–273, 214–222
(1990) Utrum Deus praecise eodem modo principiet ad extra sicut
principiat ad intra (= short version of the ﬁrst of the so-called
Quaestiones magnae), ed. Kaluza Z. L’œuvre the´ologique de Richard
Brinkley, O.F.M. Archives d’Histoire Doctrinale et Litte´raire du
Moyen Age 64:169–273, 223–224; Two short versions (by Stephanus
Galdetus) of that same question, as well as of two further Quaestiones
magnae (namely: Utrum simpliciter primum productum ad extra sit
alicuius creaturae actualis existentia and Utrum cum omni modo
agendi dei ad extra stet quod voluntas creata sit in agendo
contradictione libera) are also edited by Kaluza (ibid., 240–252,
resp. 240–242, 243–245, and 246–252)
(1990) Commentum super Sententias (= Abbreviatio Stephani Galdeti),
ed. Kaluza
Z. L’œuvre the´ologique de Richard Brinkley, O.F.M.
Archives d’Histoire Doctrinale et Litte´raire du Moyen Age 64:169–
273, 226–239
Logical Works
(1969) De insolubilibus (= Summa logicae VI), ed. Spade VP. An anon-
ymous fourteenth century treatise on insolubles. Text and study.
Pontiﬁcal Institute of Mediaeval Studies, Toronto
(1987) De signiﬁcato propositionis (= Summa logicae, V.2), ed. and trans.
Fitzgerald MJ. Richard Brinkley’s theory of sentential reference. Brill,
Leiden
(1995) De obligationibus (= Summa logicae VII), ed. Spade VP. Wilson
GA. Richard Brinkley’s obligationes. A late fourteenth century trea-
tise on the logic of disputation. Aschendorff, Mu¨nster
(2004) De propositione in genere (= Summa logicae, V.1), ed. Cesalli
L. Richard Brinkley O.F.M. De propositione (Summa logicae V.1, 1–
5). Archives d’Histoire Doctrinale et Litte´raire du Moyen Age
71:203–254
(2008) De universalibus (= Summa logicae II), ed. Cesalli L. Richard
Brinkley contra dialecticae haereticos (Summa logicae, II). Une con-
ception me´taphysico-logique de l’universel. Documenti e studi sulla
tradizione ﬁlosoﬁca medievale 19:277–333
(A complete edition of the Summa logicae is prepared by Cesalli L and
Lonfat J.)
Secondary Sources
Ashworth EJ (1989) La se´mantique du XIVe sie`cle vue a` travers cinq traite´s
oxoniens sur les obligationes. Cahiers d’e´piste´mologie n 8915
Ashworth EJ, Spade PV (1992) Logic in late medieval Oxford. In: Catto JI,
Evans R (eds) The history of the university of oxford, vol II.
Clarendon, Oxford, pp 35–63, esp. 49
Cesalli L (2002) Some 14th-century realist theories of the proposition. In:
Gill HS (ed) Signiﬁcation in language and culture. Indian Institute of
Advanced Study, Shimla, pp 83–118
Cesalli L (2003) La se´mantique des syncate´gore`mes chez Walter Burley
(1275–1344) et Richard Brinkley (ﬂ. 1365). Histoire, Episte´mologie,
Langage 25/II, pp 115–144
Cesalli L (2004) Ubi est propositio? Richard Brinkley sur les lieux de la
proposition (Summa logicae V.1). In: Maieru` A, Valente L (eds)
Medieval theories on assertive and non assertive language. Acts of
the 14th European symposium on medieval logic and semantics,
Rome, 11–15 June 2002. Olschki, Firenze, pp 445–471
Cesalli L (2007) Le re´alisme propositionnel. Se´mantique et ontologie des
propositions chez Jean Duns Scot, Gauthier Burley, Richard Brinkley
et Jean Wyclif. Vrin, Paris, pp 241–309
Courtenay W (1987) Schools and scholars in fourteenth-century England.
Princeton University Press, Princeton, pp 333–335
de Libera A (2002) La reference vide. The´ories de la proposition. Presses
Universitaires de France, Paris pp 317–335
Ga´l G and Wood R (1980) Richard Brinkley and his Summa logicae.
Francisc Stud 40:79–101
Gaskin R (1997) Russell and Richard Brinkley on the unity of the prop-
osition. Hist Philos Logic 18:139–150
Georfedes K (2003) Richard Brinkley. In: Gracia JJE, Noone TB (eds)
A companion to philosophy in the Middle Ages. Blackwell, Oxford,
pp 559–560
Kaluza Z (1990) L’œuvre the´ologique de Richard Brinkley, O.F.M.
Archives d’Histoire Doctrinale et Litte´raire du Moyen Age 64:169–
273
Kaluza Z (1992) Richard Brinkley. In: Jacob A (dir.), L’encyclope´die
philosophique universelle. Presses Universitaires de France, Paris,
pp 804–805
Perler D (1992) Der propositionale Wahrheitsbegriff im 14. Jahrhundert.
W. De Gruyter, Berlin/New York, pp 313–315
Spade PV (1993) Opposing and responding, a new look at position.
Medioevo XIX:233–270
Spade PV (1994) The logic of sit verum in Richard Brinkley and William
of Ockham. Francisc Stud 54:227–250
Spade PV, Wilson GA (1991) Richard Brinkley’s De insolubilibus:
a preliminary assessment. Rivista di storia della ﬁlosoﬁa 46:245–256
Richard Fishacre
R. JAMES LONG
Department of Philosophy
Fairﬁeld University
Fairﬁeld, CT
USA
Abstract
Richard Fishacre (c. 1208–1248), the author of the ﬁrst
Sentences-Commentary composed at Oxford, distin-
guishes in the prologue to that work between moral (bib-
lical) theology and speculative (philosophical) theology.
Focusing in his Commentary on the latter, he famously
viewed philosophy as propaedeutic to theology much like
Abraham’s relations with Hagar was a necessary prelude to
Sarah’s fruitfulness. One of the earliest members of the
Grosseteste school, he inﬂuenced a generation of Oxford
Dominicans to follow and provoked the opposition of
the Franciscan master, Richard Rufus. His greatest
Richard Fishacre R
1123
R

contributions lay in the area of natural philosophy, espe-
cially his speculations on the nature of light, the nature of
the heavens, the eternity of the world, and the division of
the waters in the Genesis text; he also has interesting things
to say about the absolute power of God. Of the divine
attributes, he considered inﬁnity to be the most signiﬁ-
cant. He quotes Aristotle with approval, though his direct
acquaintance with the Aristotelian corpus was limited. As
was the case with most of his contemporaries, both his
metaphysics and his philosophy of human nature were
rooted in what historians have labeled Augustinianism.
He was, for example, a proponent of a plurality of forms
in material substances and spiritual matter. His view of the
free choice issue is also noteworthy and inﬂuenced
Bonaventure’s thought on the subject.
Biographical Information
Richard Fishacre was born in the diocese of Exeter, in the
south of England, of Norman ancestry. As a young man, he
went to the schools at Oxford, where he entered the Order
of Preachers. Subsequently, he came under the tutelage of
Friar Robert Bacon, the ﬁrst Dominican master in
theology at the ﬂedgling university. We have no record of
when Fishacre incepted in theology, but the best estimate
is about 1240. There is persuasive evidence that his major
work, a commentary on Peter Lombard’s Books of
Sentences, the ﬁrst such work composed at Oxford, was
the work of a master. Though commenting on Lombard’s
Sentences eventually was set as a requirement for the
degree and hence the exclusive province of bachelors,
Fishacre’s Commentary is the work of a mature scholar
and was composed between the years 1241 and 1245
(Long and O’Carroll 1999:15–26).
Nicolas Trivet, writing two decades later, testiﬁes that
Fishacre lectured in theology along with Bacon, but it is
not clear which of the two was magister regens, a term not
in use among the Dominicans. Whatever the case, death
came for Fishacre in 1248, when he was approximately 40
years of age (Long and O’Carroll 1999: 26–29).
His rather brief life did not afford Fishacre the time to
write much. In addition to his Sentences Commentary,
comparable in size and scope to the one being composed
during the same decade at Paris by Albert the Great, he is
credited with a commentary or postillae on the Psalms, but
if this work survived the dissolution, it has not been
identiﬁed. However, we do have in addition to several
sermons a single copy of a treatise on heresies and also
on the Ascension of Christ, both of which have been edited
(see Long 1978, 1993). Lastly, we possess four quaestiones
disputatae (on the subject of light, the nature of the
heavens, the eternal duration of the world, and the waters
above the ﬁrmament), written after the completion of his
Commentary and inserted into later copies of that work
(see Long 2010:315–63).
Philosophy
Fishacre’s metaphysics can be located comfortably within
the Christian Neoplatonic tradition: being is essence. The
divine being is completely what it is, simple and immuta-
ble; the metaphysical scandal is change, and to the extent
that creatures change, they are shot through with
nonbeing. Given his metaphysics, it is not surprising to
ﬁnd Fishacre an enthusiastic champion of Anselm’s
Proslogion argument. His list of ten arguments for God’s
existence, all but one the kind Aquinas would label a
priori, includes three that are patently variations on the
Anselmian argument (see Long 1988).
Of the divine attributes, it is God’s inﬁnity that is the
focus of Fishacre’s attention. It has been argued, in fact,
that Fishacre is the ﬁrst western thinker to attach such
importance to the issue (Sweeney and Ermatinger
1958:191–192). He takes up the doctrine condemned at
Paris in 1241, namely, that neither men nor angels will ever
behold the divine essence. The problem, as he sees, is the
inﬁnite distance between the creature and the Creator. It is
precisely this matter of distance (elongatio) that becomes
Fishacre’s most telling argument for God’s inﬁnite power:
there is an inﬁnite distance between nothingness and
prime matter (in other words, between nothing and
something); but the greater the distance to be spanned
the greater the power required; therefore, creation
ex nihilo requires inﬁnite power.
Does inﬁnite power, however, imply that there are
no limits? Is God, for example, free to undo the past?
The solution for Fishacre lies in a distinction: power over
the past is of two kinds. There is ﬁrst the power to recon-
stitute in being something that had ceased to be; the other
is to cause that which in fact had been not to have been, to
make it such, for example, that Caesar, having crossed the
Rubicon, did not cross the Rubicon. The latter according
to Fishacre is not within God’s power (see Long 2007).
With respect to his philosophy of knowledge we ﬁnd
ourselves in a world which Aristotle would not have rec-
ognized. The species of the thing, which Fishacre calls the
‘‘word by which the exterior thing speaks to me,’’ reaches
as far as my innermost sentient power (the common
sense) – but no farther. It is axiomatic that the inferior
cannot act on the superior, and thus the word cannot
beget itself in the mind. Rather, Fishacre invokes the
authority of Augustine: the soul in marvelous fashion
and with equally marvelous speed produces in itself
a similitude of that species which is in the common
1124 R
Richard Fishacre

sense – that is, it makes itself like and conforms itself to
that received species, just as light conforms itself to the
water with which it comes into contact (In 2 Sent. 1:228).
The soul, says Fishacre, is like a tabula, but not a tabula
rasa. In fact, on the canvas which is the soul are to be
found the likenesses of things, like pictures, which are
illuminated by the divine Light. In this life, however,
the soul focuses on the pictures, not on the canvas, much
less the light itself: the soul knows neither itself nor God
directly. It is, however, owing to the presence in the soul of
all forms that Aristotle can say ‘‘the soul is in a way all
existing things.’’
This noetic is rooted in a philosophy of human nature
for which Fishacre is remotely indebted to Saint Augus-
tine, but more proximately to Robert Grosseteste. Typi-
cally, soul and body are in his view separate substances;
however, it is not the case that a human being is essentially
a soul and the ﬂesh merely a garment, notwithstanding the
opinion of Avicenna and ‘‘certain theologians’’ – among
whom he numbers Hugh of St. Victor.
In deﬁning the soul, however, Fishacre resorts to
a stratagem ﬁrst attempted by Avicenna and in his own
time by Albert the Great: namely, the soul is a forma
coniuncta according to its being (esse) but a forma separata
according to its essence; put thus, the human form
occupies a middle position between the forma elementaris
and the forma angelica. Although the doctrine is not
developed systematically or in much detail, Fishacre’s
talk of a rational and a sensible form in the human com-
posite cashes out as at least tacit acceptance of a plurality
of forms. He is careful to describe the three contemporary
opinions on the subject, but then hesitates to embrace
any of the three, possibly owing to one of the objections
against pluralism, namely the authority of the De
ecclesiasticis dogmatibus, whose author he presumes to be
Augustine. Reluctant openly to contradict the unambigu-
ous testimony of the bishop of Hippo, Fishacre was
nonetheless in practice a pluralist (see Long 1975).
As to the other half of the binarium famosissimum,
namely universal hylomorphism or the doctrine of spiritual
matter, Fishacre, like the majority of his contemporaries,
was unquestionably a proponent. Composed of matter and
form are the human soul and the angel. But it is in his
teaching concerning the latter that Fishacre works out the
full implications of spiritual matter – almost as if the angels
constituted a kind of metaphysical testing ground.
His discussion of reason and will eventually yields to
the issue of liberum arbitrium, the free choice of the
will. Devoting more pages in his Commentary to this
question than any other, Fishacre’s discussion constitutes
a self-standing treatise on the subject, dependent on
Grosseteste’s treatment, yet displaying a remarkable sub-
tlety and independence of thought. How is this power
which is called liberum arbitrium related to reason and
will? His conclusion is that act of free choice is the turning
back on oneself in the act of willing or, better, on its own
incomplete will and passing judgment on it. Since there-
fore liberum arbitrium is the medium between the
apprehension and incomplete will on the one hand and
the completed will or consent on the other, it is deﬁned by
each of the extremes (see Long 1995).
How does one summarize Fishacre’s philosophical
position? He was not hostile to Aristotle, indeed he was
convinced that Aristotle is in possession of the truth about
the created realm; but aside from the logical and biological
works, he had only a passing and for the most part indirect
acquaintance with the corpus Aristotelicum. Could he fairly
be labeled an Augustinian? In the sense in which Augustine
is obviously his preeminent authority, and from whom he
never explicitly parts company, the answer is a resounding
‘‘yes.’’ Yet Fishacre has positions that are decidedly non-
Augustinian: his teaching on spiritual matter, for example,
or on the plurality of forms, or on the direct knowledge of
the soul (see Long 2006). The safest course ﬁnally is to
avoid labels and to see Richard Fishacre as a venturesome
thinker, deferential to the established authorities, but
showing signs of an emerging independence of mind
in the few works that can be dated toward the end of
his career.
See also: ▶Albert the Great ▶Anselm of Canterbury
▶Arabic Texts: Natural Philosophy, Latin Translations of
▶Aristotelianism in the Greek, Latin, Syriac, Arabic, and
Hebrew Traditions ▶Augustine ▶Being ▶Essence and
Existence ▶Hugh of St. Victor ▶Ibn Sı¯na¯, Abu¯ ʿAlı¯
(Avicenna)
▶Knowledge
▶Mental
World/Concepts
▶Metaphysics ▶Natural Philosophy ▶Peter Lombard
▶Philosophical Psychology ▶Richard Rufus of Cornwall
▶Robert Grosseteste ▶Robert Kilwardby ▶Voluntarism
and Intellectualism ▶Will
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Latin
Fishacre Richard (2003) In tertium librum Sententiarum, pars 2: dist.
23–40, ed. Rodler K. Bayerishe Akademie der Wissenschaften,
Munich
Fishacre Richard (2008) In secundum librum Sententiarum, pars 1: Prol.,
dist. 1–20, ed. Long RJ. Bayerische Akademie der Wissenschaften,
Munich
Fishacre Richard (2010) In secundum librum Sententiarum, pars 2: dist.
21–44, Appendices, Additiones, ed. Long RJ. Bayerische Akademie
der Wissenschaften, Munich
Richard Fishacre R
1125
R

Secondary Sources
Literature Prior to 1995
Goering J, Long RJ (1989) Richard Fishacre’s treatise De ﬁde, spe, et
caritate. Bull Philos Me´die´v 31:103–111
Long RJ (1972) The science of theology according to Richard Fishacre:
edition of the Prologue to his Commentary on the Sentences.
Mediaev Stud 34:71–98.
Long RJ (1975) Richard Fishacre and the problem of the soul. Mod
Schoolman 52:263–270
Long RJ (1978) Richard Fishacre’s Quaestio on the ascension of Christ: an
edition. Mediaev Stud 40:30–55
Long RJ (1982) The virgin as olive-tree: a Marian Sermon of Richard
Fishacre and science at Oxford. Archivum Fratrum Praedicatorum
52:77–87
Long RJ (1988) Richard Fishacre’s way to God. A straight path: studies in
medieval philosophy and culture; essays in honor of Arthur Hyman,
ed. Link-Salinger R et al. The Catholic University of America Press,
Washington, pp 174–182
Long RJ (1990) The moral and spiritual theology of Richard Fishacre:
edition of trinity Coll. MS O.1.30. Archivum Fratrum Praedicatorum
60:5–143
Long RJ (1993) Richard Fishacre’s Super S. Augustini librum de
haeresibus adnotationes: an edition and commentary. Archives
d’histoire doctrinale et litte´raire du moyen aˆge 60:207–279
Pelster F (1930) Das Leben und die Schriften des Oxforder Dominika-
nerlehrers Richard Fishacre ({ 1248). Zeitschrift fu¨r katholische
Theologie 54:518–552
Sharp D (1933) The philosophy of Richard Fishacre. New Scholasticism
7:281–297
Sweeney L, Ermatinger C (1958) Divine inﬁnity according to Richard
Fishacre. Mod Schoolman 35:191–235
Recent Studies and Titles Quoted
Eichinger A (2006) Optics and the knowledge of Christ in Richard
Fishacre. Intellect and imagination in medieval philosophy. Actes
du XIe Congre`s International de Philosophie Me´die´vale de la S.I.E.
P.M., ed. Pacheco MC et al. Recontres de philosophie me´die´vale 11,
Brepols, Turnhout/Belgium, pp 1279–1290
Long RJ (1995) Richard Fishacre’s treatise De libero arbitrio, moral and
political Philosophies in the Middle Ages. Proceedings of the ninth
international congress of medieval philosophy, vol 2, ed. Bazan BC
et al. Legas, Ottawa, pp 879–891
Long RJ (1998a) The role of philosophy in Richard Fishacre’s theology of
creation. Miscellanea Mediaevalia 26:571–578
Long RJ (1998b) The ﬁrst Oxford debate on the eternity of the world.
Rech Philos The´ol Me´die´v 65(1):54–98
Long RJ (2002) The beginning of a tradition: the sentences commentary
of Richard Fishacre, OP. Medieval commentaries on the ‘Sentences’
of Peter Lombard, vol 1. Current research, ed. Evans G. Brill, Leiden,
pp 345–357
Long RJ (2005) The philosophy of Richard Fishacre. Albertus Magnus
und
die
Anfa¨nge
der
Aristoteles-Rezeption
im
lateinischen
Mittelalter von Richardus Rufus bis zu Franciscus de Mayronis.
Subsidia Albertina I, ed. Honnefelder L et al. Aschendorff, Mu¨nster,
pp 189–218
Long RJ (2006) Interiority and self-knowledge according to Richard
Fishacre. Intellect and imagination in medieval philosophy. Actes
du XIe Congre`s International de Philosophie Me´die´vale de la S.I.E.
P.M., ed. Pacheco MC et al. Recontres de philosophie me´die´vale 11,
vol 2. Brepols, Turnhout/Belgium, pp 1269–1277
Long RJ (2007) Undoing the past. Fishacre and Rufus on the limits of
God’s power. Laudemus viros gloriosos. Essays in honor of Armand
Maurer, CSB, ed. Houser RE. University of Notre Dame Press, Notre
Dame, IN, pp 60–74
Long RJ, Noone T (1998) Fishacre and Rufus on the metaphysics of light:
two unedited texts. Roma, magistra mundi. Itineraria culturae
medievalis. Me´langes offerts au Pe`re L.E. Boyle a` l’occasion de son
75e anniversaire. Textes et E´tudes du moyen aˆge, vol 2. Fe´de´ration
Internationale des Instituts d’E´tudes Me´die´vales, Louvain-la-Neuve,
pp 517–548
Long RJ, O’Carroll M (1999) The life and works of Richard Fishacre OP.
Prolegomena to the edition of his commentary on the ‘‘sentences.’’
Bayerische Akademie der Wissenschaften, Munich
Richard Fitzralph
STEPHEN E. LAHEY
Department of Classics and Religious Studies
University of Nebraska
Lincoln, NE
USA
Abstract
Richard Fitzralph, d. 1360, Archbishop of Armagh, com-
pleted Sentence commentary at Oxford in 1328 and was
active at Avignon until 1344. He compiled a critique of the
Franciscan doctrine of usus pauper based in the theory of
grace as foundation for just lordship. His De pauperie
salvatoris would become very inﬂuential in late medieval
antifraternalism, and also inﬂuenced Wyclif’s political
thought. He also was at the forefront of Avignon’s embassy
to the Greek and Armenian churches, and his Summa de
quaestionibus Armenorum gives a record of late medieval
conceptions of the relation of Catholicism to the Ortho-
dox traditions.
Richard Fitzralph (c. 1300–1360) called Armachanus,
Archbishop of Armagh (1346–1360) studied at Oxford
1315–1328, was chancellor of the university 1332–1334,
and became prominent at Avignon after refuting John
XXIII’s controversial position on the beatiﬁc vision. Sub-
sequently he served as papal representative in conferences
held with the Greek and Armenian churches from 1337 to
1344, where he compiled a formulation of the differences
separating the Roman from the Orthodox churches in the
Summa de quaestionibus Armenorum. The Summa, for
which there is no modern edition, served as an important
theological document into the Counter-Reformation, and
provides a valuable window into fourteenth-century
conceptions of the eastern churches and their theologies.
As Archbishop, Fitzralph was active in the reform of
1126 R
Richard Fitzralph

the Irish church, and in doing so, developed a careful and
penetrating critique of the Mendicant Orders in his eight
volume De pauperie salvatoris. His critique of the Mendi-
cants was later associated with Wyclif’s thought, which
detracted from his reputation in the ﬁfteenth century, but
he was counted among the most inﬂuential Oxford theo-
logians by his contemporaries and immediate successors.
Fitzralph’s Sentence Commentary
Fitzralph’s Sentence commentary appears to have been
inﬂuential in staking out a generally mediating position
in Oxford’s ‘‘Golden Age’’ of theology. The Ockhamists,
broadly construed as those inﬂuenced by Ockham’s meta-
physics and epistemology, including Adam Wodeham,
Robert Holcot, and to a lesser extent, Walter Chatton
and William Crathorn, made one camp, and their oppo-
nents, including Walter Burley, Thomas Wilton, and
Thomas Bradwardine, led the other, although the range
of thought of the period deﬁes simple classiﬁcation. Later
theologians came to understand Fitzralph’s position as
incorporating elements of each in the establishment of
a philosophical theology consonant with a traditional
approach, yet sensitive to the complexities of Moderni
thought. A thorough understanding of Fitzralph’s position
will only be possible with the publication of his Sentence
commentary, though, and what follows is a very general
sketch of his position.
Fitzralph was strongly inﬂuenced by Henry of Ghent in
three areas. He supported Henry’s belief that intellect,
memory, and will are distinct within the human mind,
and so serve as an image of the Trinity, his epistemic
account includes species, and he distinguished between
sensory and intelligible knowledge, following Henry in
asserting that the human mind relies upon divine illumi-
nation for understanding. Each of these positions runs
against the Ockhamist position, which has led scholars to
classify Fitzralph as among the traditionally minded critics
of Ockhamism. Presently it seems clear that, while
Fitzralph represents an epistemological approach repre-
sentative of a generally traditional position consistent with
Henry of Ghent, he was by no means the ardent theological
traditionalist that Bradwardine was, as is apparent in his
position regarding God’s knowledge of future contingents.
The need for recognizing a distinction of some sort
between memory, reason, and will is based in the tradi-
tional Augustinian understanding of our capacity to rec-
ognize the Trinity through analogy with our own mental
structure. By the fourteenth century, this position did
more than signify allegiance to an Augustinian view of
the mind’s faculties, though; it indicated a ﬁrm stand on
the question of the compatibility of faith and human
reason. Before Ockham, it had been standard for Thomists
and Scotists to account for the apparent conﬂict between
unaided human reason and the Christian faith by stipu-
lating that properly understood, the truths of the faith
perfect rational understanding. Regarding the analogy of
the human mind to the Trinity, the relation only becomes
comprehensible once the reason makes the appropriate
recognition of the possibility of real distinctions. The
relation of the divine persons is a distinction holding
between three really distinct persons in one divine nature;
this is an element of the faith, which when recognized,
allows the faithful reason to perceive a similar, but by no
means identical, relation holding between the faculties
within the human mind. Ockham’s response was to
argue that certain theological truths, foremost among
them those regarding God’s triune nature, so far exceed
human reason as to preclude the applicability of basic
logical rules. This amounts to the need for recognizing
a difference in kind between faith and reason, rendering
impossible the unaided reason’s recognition of similarity
holding between the threefold structure of the human
mind and the relation of the divine persons. Hence,
Fitzralph’s arguments in favor of the reasonability of rec-
ognizing this similarity represent a determined opposition
to Ockham’s separation of theology and philosophy.
Fitzralph’s defense of a species-based epistemology is
another instance of this opposition to Ockhamism. Roger
Bacon had constructed an epistemic model based on the
apparent functioning of the eye, arguing that the objects
we perceive project their actual appearance by means of
species, or apparent images, that we perceive and that
serve as the basis for our understanding of the world.
Philosophers had followed this species-based epistemic
model, using it as the basis for complex accounts of the
apprehension, perception, conceptualization, and com-
prehension of objects in the world. Ockham’s rejection
of the species account was based in the threat of skepticism
he believed it entailed; if what we perceive of an object are
the species, and not the object itself, what basis is there for
certainty that the species are reliable indicators of the
object and its properties? Ockham rejects the species
account in favor of what philosophers today would call
‘‘direct perception’’; when we perceive an object, we do not
perceive the appearance of the object, but the object itself.
This is not to say that the eyes actively reach out in some
manner to ‘‘touch’’ the object. Instead, Ockham believes
that the object we perceive acts upon our vision, produc-
ing a veridical intuitive cognition of the object. This sim-
pliﬁed model was popular, and led to considerable
discussion regarding the possibility of error; if we directly
perceive the object, how to account for illusions? And
Richard Fitzralph R
1127
R

given that God is sufﬁciently powerful to cause us to
perceive what is not there, how to be certain that this
does not happen with some regularity? Ockham’s rejection
of species was inﬂuential on Wodeham and Auriol, and
those who defended species in epistemology were among
the minority in mid-fourteenth century Oxford. Hence,
Fitzralph’s assertion that the older model, reliant on spe-
cies in accounting for human perception, puts him in the
anti-Ockhamist camp, but this does not mean that his
position is consonant with Aquinas or Scotus. In his
argument in favor of the need for divine illumination for
intellectual cognition of God and eternal truths, he rejects
the Thomist argument that sense-based knowledge can
lead to intellectual understanding of higher truths.
Following Henry of Ghent, he distinguishes between two
kinds of illumination. In one, all human beings capable of
rational understanding are given access to the higher
truths of mathematics, logic, and metaphysics, but in the
other, God provides the elect with an understanding of the
theological truths of the faith.
Fitzralph was also active in the ongoing Oxford
debates regarding motion, time, and eternity, following
the lead of the Mertonian ‘‘Calculators’’ who had revolu-
tionize Aristotelian physics with their attention to
mathematical analysis of problems that had generally
been the province of a more purely philosophical
approach. The Mertonian Bradwardine, whose innova-
tions typify the Calculators’ method, was also notably
Augustinian in his attitude toward Ockham in the ques-
tion of predestination and human free will. Despite
advocating a notably Augustinian epistemology, and
following the Mertonian approach in questions of physics,
Fitzralph was unwilling to endorse Bradwardine’s pro-
foundly deterministic approach in refuting Ockhamist
arguments regarding God’s knowledge of what for us are
future-contingent events. Rather than engage in concen-
trated analysis of questions of kinds of necessity, or
distinguishing between species of grace, as was common
in the ongoing debates that came to deﬁne Oxford theol-
ogy in the mid-fourteenth century, Fitzralph relied on
Scriptural precedent alone to assert the compatibility of
God’s foreknowledge and human free will.
De pauperie salvatoris
By the 1350s, the Franciscan Poverty Controversy had
evolved from its earlier focus on arguments regarding
usus pauper, shifting to the friars doing pastoral work
outside of diocesan supervision. While at Oxford,
Fitzralph’s attitude toward the friars may have been
friendly, but when he became Archbishop of Armagh in
1346 his opinion changed, and he developed a concerted
philosophical criticism of the mendicant ideal into
a collection of seven books entitled De pauperie salvatoris.
While he held respect for their ideals of apostolic poverty
and their commitment to pastoral care, he could not
understand their reasoned refusal to cooperate with the
ecclesiastical hierarchy as they made use of the its prop-
erty. In analyzing their position, he catalogues the species
of private, communal, and corporate property relations
then common in fourteenth-century dialogue regarding
property ownership and authority. At the same time, he
developed the idea that grace alone is the justiﬁcation for
any instance of dominion, or just lordship, which is ulti-
mately directly associated with God’s eternal lordship.
Human lordship was initially shared by all, which entailed
communal use and ownership of property, but the
Fall introduced private property ownership and a
corresponding political authority, which is the hallmark
of the postlapsarian world. God infuses certain instances
of this lordship with grace to facilitate justice in the fallen
world, although Fitzralph is not especially clear regarding
the hallmarks of this grace. This theory of grace-founded
lordship was inﬂuential in later political theory, most
especially in the thought of John Wyclif.
See also: ▶Adam Wodeham ▶John Wyclif ▶Oxford
Calculators ▶Peter Auriol ▶Roger Bacon ▶Thomas
Bradwardine ▶Thomas Wylton ▶Walter Burley ▶Walter
Chatton ▶William Crathorn ▶William of Ockham
Bibliography
Primary Sources
(1511) Summa de quaestionibus Armenorum, ed. Sudoris J. J Sudoris,
Paris
Fitzralph Richard (1890) De pauperie salvatoris, I–IV, ed. Poole RL. In:
John Wyclif, De dominio divino. Wyclif Society, London, pp 257–476
Fitzralph Richard (1954) De pauperie salvatoris, V–VII, ed. Brock RO. In:
An edition of Richard FitzRalph’s ‘De pauperie salvatoris’, books V,
VI, and VII. Ph.D. dissertation, University of Colorado, Boulder
Lectura in Sententias Petri Lombardi, ed. Dunne M. Auctores Britannici
Medii Aevi, in preparation
Secondary Sources
Dawson JD (1983) Ralph and the fourteenth-century poverty controver-
sies. J Eccles Hist 34:315–344
Dipple G (1994) Uthred and the friars: apostolic poverty and clerical
dominion between Fitzralph and Wyclif. Traditio 49:235–258
Genest J-F (1989) The dissemination of manuscripts relating to English
political thought in the fourteenth century. England and her
neighbuors, 1066–1453. London
Genest J-F (1991) Contingence et revelation des futures: la Quaestio
Biblica de Richard FitzRalph. In: Jolivet J, Kaluza Z, de Libera
A (eds) Lectionum varietates: homage a´ Paul Vignaux. Vrin, Paris,
pp 199–246
1128 R
Richard Fitzralph

Hammerich LL (1938) The beginning of the strife between Richard
FitzRalph and the Mendicants, with an edition of his autobiograph-
ical prayer and his proposition Unusquisque. In: Det. Kgl. Danske
Videnskabernes Selskab, vol XXVI 3
Leff G (1963) Richard FitzRalph commentator of the Sentences: a study in
theological orthodoxy. Manchester University Press, Manchester
Salter HE (April 1922) The Stamford schism. Engl Hist Rev 37,
146:249–253
Walsh K (1981) A fourteenth-century scholar and primate: Richard
FitzRalph in Oxford, Avignon, and Armagh. Clarendon, Oxford
Walsh K (1985) Preaching, pastoral care, and Sola Scriptura in later
medieval Ireland: Richard FitzRalph and the use of the Bible. In:
Walsh K, Wood D (eds) The Bible in the medieval world. SCH
Subsidia 4. Basil, Blackwell, Oxford, pp 251–268
Wolfgang B Naturphilosophische Argumente in der Engelslehre. Misc
Mediaevalia 21(1):468–477
Richard Kilvington
ELZBIETA JUNG
Department of Philosophy
University of Ło´dz´
Ło´dz´
Poland
Abstract
Richard Kilvington (c. 1302–1361) (i.e., Covington,
Chilingtonensis, Kaylrygton, Kyluxoton with many spell-
ing variants exist) received his master of arts (1324/1325)
and doctor of theology (c. 1335) in Oxford, where he and
Thomas Bradwardine constituted the ﬁrst academic gen-
eration of the school so-called Oxford Calculators, a group
of philosopher-mathematicians whose discoveries led to
the development of a new mathematical physics. Along
with Richard Fitzralph, Kilvington was involved in the
battle against the mendicant friars’ privileges. Kilvington’s
academic career, a relatively short stint early in his life,
ended when he was about 33, and launched him on the
successful diplomatic and ecclesiastical trajectory. He was
in service of Edward III and took part in diplomatic mis-
sions. His career culminated in his service as a dean of St.
Paul’s Cathedral in London. Although he originated new
ideas and methods in logic, natural philosophy, and the-
ology and inﬂuenced his contemporaries and followers,
he has been little studied until recently.
All of Kilvington’s philosophical works: Sophismata,
Quaestiones super de generatione et corruptione (written
before 1325), Quaestiones super physicam (c. 1326), and
Quaestiones super libros ethicorum (before 1332) as well as
his commentary on Peter Lombard’s Sentences (c. 1334)
stem from his lectures at Oxford. (Only Sophismata has
been edited and translated. All other works are still in man-
uscript.) In accordance with fourteenthcenturyOxford prac-
tice, the number of topics Kilvington discussed was reduced
to a few central and probably most important subjects. The
extensive use of the sophisma scheme, the mathematization
of ethics and theology, and a frequent consideration of
hypothetical
cases
(secundum
imaginationem)
place
Kilvington’s works in the mainstream of fourteenth century
English academic tradition. The application of terminist
logic, and the refutation of the Aristotelian prohibition of
metabasis resulted in Kilvington’s broad use of logic and
mathematics in all branches of scientiﬁc inquiry. Like other
English thinkers, Kilvington focused on three primary dis-
ciplines: logic, mathematical physics, and a new theology
based on methods and insights achieved in the ﬁrst two
areas. Many of the issues, he dealt with, are thus considered
common to the ﬁelds of mathematics, logic, natural philos-
ophy, and theology.
In his Sophismata, Kilvington mostly concentrates on
supposition of terms in propositions about motion and
change (especially instantaneous), increase and decrease,
remission and intension, measurement and time. The ﬁrst
11 sophisms deal with alteration as extrinsically limited,
both at its beginning and at its end. Sophisms 29–44 reveal
Kilvington’s interest in local motion, debated with respect
to causes (i.e., active and passive capacities) and with
respect to effects (i.e., time, distance traversed, and speed
in motion). Thus, he can be placed among the fourteenth
century pioneers who considered separately the problem
of local motion with respect to the causes (tamquam penes
causam), and with respect to the effects (tamquam penes
effectum). He considers both uniform motion, that is,
a motion with equal speed and difform motion, either
with equal or unequal acceleration, caused by voluntary
and natural agents. He sees the possibility of measurement
of instantaneous speed in comparison to speed in uniform
and accelerated motion. The last four sophisms address
epistemology and the logic of knowledge, dealing with the
sentences on knowing and doubting.
In his questions on generation and corruption and in
his Physics, Kilvington works, basically, to establish differ-
ences between generation, alteration, and augmentation; to
determine the rules for action of causes of changes; and to
ﬁnd rules for a division of different types of continua. Like
most medieval natural philosophers, Kilvington accepts
the Aristotelian statements that ‘‘everything which is
moved is moved by something’’ and that ‘‘there cannot
be a motion without an acting capacity (virtus motiva) and
a passive one (virtus resistiva)’’; without resistance, the
Richard Kilvington R
1129
R

motion would not be temporal. Motion occurs whenever
the ratio of an acting capacity (a force) – F to passive
capacity (a resistance) – R is a ratio of maioris inequalitatis,
that is, when the ratio of F to R is greater than 1:1. Thus,
Kilvington afﬁrms that every excess of a force over the
resistance sufﬁces for motion, what means that ever a force
is greater than the resistance there is a motion. This grants
that a force is bounded by a minimum upon which it
cannot act (minimum quod non), that is, by the resistance,
which is equal to a force. Since when a force is equal to the
resistance, the ratio of F to R is 1:1, and in such case there
is no motion. For a passive capacity, Kilvington accepts the
minimum quod sic-limit ‘‘with respect to circumstances.’’
He is in accord with Aristotle and claims that to establish
a limit for Socrates power of vision (a passive one), we
should point to the smallest thing we can see. It happens,
however, that we can see not only a small thing like a grain,
but also a big one, like a cathedral, if we are close to it.
Therefore, not in every case can a passive capacity be
described by a minimum quod non.
The action of an active capacity upon a passive one
that results in motion is already described in Book 7 of
Aristotle’s Physics. A new understanding of the Euclidean
deﬁnition of double proportion, however, stimulated the
most useful innovation of the fourteenth century, making
it possible to reformulate Aristotle’s rules of motion. In
order to produce a mathematically coherent theory,
Kilvington insists that the proper way of measuring
speed of motion is to describe its variations by double
ratio of force and resistance as deﬁned by Euclid, that is, as
a duplication of the proportion itself. Speed thus varies
arithmetically, while the proportions of force to the resis-
tance determining speed vary geometrically. (So, when
proportion of force to resistance is squared, speed will be
doubled.) This new function provides values of the ratio of
F to R greater that 1:1 for any speed down to zero, since
any root of a ratio greater than 1:1 is always itself also
a ratio greater than 1:1. And thus Kilvington avoids
a serious weakness of Aristotle’s theory, which cannot
explain the mathematical relationship of F and R in slow
motion, where speed is less than 1.
In theology, Kilvington applied new methods from logic
and mathematical physics to typical fourteenth-century
problems. He is mostly interested in issues concerning
human and God’s love, fruition, human will and freedom,
God’s absolute and ordained power, and God’s knowledge
of future contingent. All theological problems are analyzed
in ‘‘modern’’ language of terminist logic. None of these
issues is considered separately from the Creator, therefore
Kilvington relates each human action to God. The
established order of nature is a result of God’s ordained
power, but God can act against the established order with
his absolute power. Both God’s powers are absolutely
(simpliciter) inﬁnite, but God’s absolute power is inﬁnitely
greater, that is, more capable to act, since thanks to this
power, says Kilvington, God might undo the past or anni-
hilate the world. But there are also actual, ‘‘dependent’’
(secundum quid) inﬁnities created by God, such as inten-
sively inﬁnite capacity of a human soul to love, to joy, and
to suffer. Like Duns Scotus, Kilvington claims that God’s
knowledge, existence, and will are His essence. Therefore,
with regard to God’s absolute knowledge assertive state-
ments about past and present, and contingent statements
about future has the same value of certitude, since they
have absolute necessity, which refers only to God. With
regard to His ordained knowledge, such statements do not
have the same value of certitude, and they have only
ordained necessity, which refers to the natural, ordained
law. Everything revealed absolutely by God happens with
absolute necessity, because otherwise He could make
Himself incapable to pick up a blade, and this is impossi-
ble, because it is a contradiction. Everything revealed by
God’s ordained power depends on God’s absolute will and
can be changed. But once changed and revealed it would
have ordained necessity forming, thus, a new law.
Kilvington defends the superiority of the will within
moral action, underlining that by free will a human need
not sustain a prior choice, oreven make any choice at all. But
even if an individual makes no choice, this is also a free
choice. The cooperation of will and grace, a gift of the Holy
Spirit, results in meritorious acts. Grace has an inﬁnite
capability to act upon the will, but only in this sense that it
is able to decrease continuously the resistance of the will and
make it more ready to cooperate, and not that grace inﬁ-
nitely increases its own activity. A lack of knowledge or
ignorance does not excuse wrong or sinful choices ofthe will.
Kilvington’s teachings on logic, natural philosophy,
and theology inﬂuenced both English and Continental
thinkers. Richard Bilingham, Roger Roseth, William
Heytesbury, Adam Wodeham, Richard Swineshead, John
Dumbleton, Adam Junior, and Roger Swineshead were
among those English scholars who beneﬁted from
Kilvington’s works. Kilvington’s works also inﬂuenced
Parisians like Nicholas Oresme, John Buridan, John
Mirecourt, Johanes de Burgo, and Thomas of Cracow.
Thomas Bradwardine, however, was the most famous
beneﬁciary of Kilvington’s questions on motion. In his
renowned treatise on the velocities in motion (Tractatus
de proportionibus velocitatum in motibus), Bradwardine
included most of Kilvington’s fundamental arguments
for the new law of motion describing the relation of forces
and resistances.
1130 R
Richard Kilvington

See also: ▶Oxford Calculators ▶Richard Fitzralph
▶Thomas
Bradwardine
▶Walter
Burley
▶William
Heytesbury ▶Wiliam of Ockham
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Kilvington Richard (1990) In: Kretzmann N, Kretzmann BE (eds) The
Sophismata of Richard Kilvington. Oxford, New York
Kretzmann Norman, Ensign Kretzmann Barbara (eds) (1990) The
Sophismata of Richard Kilvington: introduction, translation, and
commentary. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Secondary Sources
Bottin F (1973a) Analisi linguistica e ﬁsica Aristotelica nei ‘Sophysmata’di
Ricardi Kilmyngton. In: Giacon C (ed) Filosoﬁa e Politica, et altri
sagii. Antenore, Padua, pp 125–145
Bottin F (1973b) L’Opinio de Insolubilibus di Richard Kilmyngon. Riv.
critica di storia della Fil. 28:409–422
Bottin F (1974) Un testo fondamentale nell’ambito della ‘nuova ﬁsica’ di
Oxford: I Sophismata di Richard Kilmington. Misc. Med. 9:201–205
D’Ors A (1991) ‘Tu scis regem sedere’ Kilvington S 47, 48. Anu Filosof
24:49–74
Jung-[Palczewska] E (1997) Motion in a vacuum and in a plenum in
Richard Kilvington’s question: Utrum aliquod corpus simplex posset
moveri aeque velociter in vacuo et in pleno from the Commentary on
the Physics. Misc. Med. 25:179–193
Jung-[Palczewska] E (2000a) The concept of time in Richard Kilvington.
In: Cova L, Alliney G (eds) Tempus, aevum, eternity. La Conzettua-
lizzazione del tempo nel Pensiero Tardomiedievale. Wydawnictwo
Uniwersytetu Ło´dzkiego, Firenze, pp 141–167
Jung-[Palczewska] E (2000b) Works by Richard Kilvington. AHDLMA
67:181–223
Jung-[Palczewska] E (2002a) Mie˛dzy ﬁlozoﬁa˛ przyrody i nowoz˙ytnym
przyrodoznawstwem. Ryszard Kilvington i ﬁzyka matematyczna
w s´redniowieczu (Between philosophy of nature and science. Richard
Kilvington and mathematical physics in the Middle Ages). Ło´dz´
University Press, Leo S. Olschki, p 330
Jung-[Palczewska] E (2002b) Richard Kilvington on local motion. In:
Bakker P (ed) Chemins de la pense´e me´die´vale. Etudes offertes
a Ze´non Kaluza. Brepols, pp 113–133
Jung E, Podkon´ski R (2008) Richard Kilvington on proportions. In: Biard
J, Rommevaux S (eds) Mathe´matiques et the´orie du mouvement
XIVe–XVIe sie`cle. Presses Universitaires du Septentrion, Brill, Ville-
neuve d’Ascq, pp 80–101
Jung E, Podkon´ski R (2009a) Richard Kilvington on continuity. In:
Grelard Ch, Robert A (eds) Atomism in late medieval philosophy
and theology. Brill, Leiden/Boston, pp 65–84
Jung E, Podkon´ski R (2009b) The transmission of English ideas in the
fourteenth century – the case of Richard Kilvington. Mediaevalia
Philos Polonorum XXXVII(III):59–69
Katz BD (1996) On a sophisma of Richard Kilvington and a problem of
analysis. Med Philos Theol 5:31–38
Knuutila S, Inkeri Lehtinen A (1979) Plato in inﬁnitum remisse incipit
esse albus: new texts on the late medieval discussion on the concept
of inﬁnity in Sophismata literature. In: Saarinen E, Hilpinen R,
Niiniluoto I, Hintikka MBP (eds) Essays in Honor of Jaakko
Hintikka. Reidel, Dordrecht, pp 309–329
Kretzmann N (1977) Socrates is whiter than Plato begins to be white.
Nous 11:3–15
Kretzmann N (1982) Richard Kilvington and the logic of instantaneous
speed. In: Maieru A, Paravicini-Bagliani A (eds) Studi sul secolo in
memoria di Annelise Maier. Edizioni di Storia e Letteratura, Rome
Kretzmann N (ed) (1988) Tu scis hoc esse omne quod est hoc; Richard
Kilvington and the logic of knowledge. In: Meaning and inference
in medieval philosophy. Kluwer Academic Publisher, Dotrecht,
pp 225–245
Michałowska M (2009) Kilvington’s concept of prudence in questions on
Ethics. MPP XXXVII(III):85–94
Richard of Campsall
HENRIK LAGERLUND
Department of Philosophy
The University of Western Ontario
London, ON
Canada
Abstract
Richard of Campsall (c. 1280–1350) was an English Mas-
ter of Arts and Theology at Oxford. He wrote a very
inﬂuential commentary on Aristotle’s Prior Analytics and
inﬂuenced later English theology. Very few of his works
have survived.
Not much is known about Richard of Campsall and very
little written by him has survived to this day or perhaps
still lies in manuscripts undiscovered in some library.
He was, however, a fellow of Balliol College in Oxford
while studying arts in the very early years of the fourteenth
century. Later, as a Regent Master of Arts, he was a fellow
of Merton College between 1307 and 1308. He seems to
have ﬁnished his question commentary on Aristotle’s Prior
Analytics – his earliest logical work – before his regency. He
lectured on the Sentences of Peter Lombard in 1316–1317,
and was the Regent Master of Theology at Merton College
after 1322. The date of this death is very uncertain, but
some have suggested that he died sometime between 1350
and 1360.
The only surviving complete work, alongside some
minor treatises, is his commentary on the Prior Analytics.
He was, however, very well known in England in the early
fourteenth century and is referred to in many theological
works of the time. He seems also to have inﬂuenced
William of Ockham and a whole range of later English
thinkers on both logic and theology.
One of the major debates in early fourteenth-century
England was about the nature of intuitive and abstractive
Richard of Campsall R
1131
R

cognitions. Campsall played an important role in this
debate. He argued that there is no need to posit a real
distinction between intuitive and abstractive cognitions –
one and the same cognition can fulﬁll both functions. He
argued instead that a cognition is intuitive simply if the
object it is about is present and it is abstractive if the object
is absent. This view was rejected by both Ockham and
Walter Chatton.
Campsall’s commentary on the Prior Analytics is
important primarily because he seems to be the ﬁrst com-
mentator, as far as we know, to systematically apply the
distinction between modal sentences taken in a composite
(in sensu composito) and divided (in sensu diviso) sense to
Aristotle’s modal syllogistics (the distinction roughly cor-
responds to what we now call de dicto and de re modal
sentences). This distinction, which was not used by Aris-
totle himself, was known at least since Abelard, but it had
not been used systematically before Campsall. This is
a very important development in the history of logic,
since applying this distinction to Aristotle’s logic opens
up whole new perspectives and ultimately changes the
original system. Campsall thus stands on the threshold
of a whole new logic, which later fourteenth century
authors like Ockham and John Buridan developed.
See also: ▶Intuitive and Abstractive Cognition ▶Modal
Theories and Modal Logic ▶Walter Chatton ▶William of
Ockham
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Edited Works
Synan Edward A (ed) (1968) The works of Richard of Campsall, vol 1.
Pontiﬁcal Institute of Mediaeval Studies, Toronto. (Contains an
edition of the Prior Analytics commentary)
Synan Edward A (ed) (1982) The works of Richard of Campsall, vol 2.
Pontiﬁcal Institute of Mediaeval Studies, Toronto. (Contains editions
of some smaller works by Campsall and a larger critique of Ockham’s
logic, which has been attributed to Campsall but is not by him)
Secondary Sources
Gelber HG (2004) It could have been otherwise: contingency and neces-
sity in Dominican theology at Oxford. Brill, Leiden (Chapter 5
contains a discussion of Campsall’s views on modality and future
contingency)
Lagerlund H (2000) Modal syllogistics in the Middle Ages. Brill, Leiden
(Chapter 3 contains the most detailed study of Campsall’s logic
so far)
Tachau KH (1987) The inﬂuence of Richard of Campsall on fourteenth-
century Oxford thought. In: Hudson A, Wilks M (eds) From Ock-
ham to Wyclif. Blackwell, London, pp 109–123 (A discussion of
Campsall’s inﬂuence in England)
Tachau KH (1988) Vision and certitude in the age of Ockham. Brill,
Leiden (Campsall’s epistemology is studied on pages 158–166)
Tachau KH (1991) Richard Campsall as a theologian: new evidence. In:
Mojsisch B, Pluta O (eds) Historia Philosophiae Medii Aevi: Studien
zur Geschichte der Philosophie des Mittelalters, vol 2. B. R. Gru¨ner,
Philadelphia, Amsterdam, pp 979–1002 (Contains an edition of
a question from a theological work by Campsall. The question is
whether a human can act against his conscience)
Richard of Middleton
RICHARD CROSS
Department of Philosophy
University of Notre Dame
Notre Dame, IN
USA
Abstract
Richard of Middleton, Franciscan Friar, was born in or
before 1249. He became Master of Theology at Paris in
1284, where he presided over one regular and three
quodlibetal disputations. He edited his Sentence commen-
tary between 1285 and 1295. He probably died in
1307/1308. His thought owes much not only to Bonaven-
ture and the Franciscans of the 1270s and 1280s, but also
to Henry of Ghent and Thomas Aquinas. Richard’s meta-
physics and theory of cognition are largely Aristotelian,
whereas his natural philosophy tends to follow the more
eclectic trends of his Franciscan confre`res. Thus, he afﬁrms
both the plurality of substantial forms in one substance
and universal hylomorphism. His most distinctive doc-
trines are that degrees of a quality can be construed in
quantitative terms, and that substantial forms admit of
degrees, a view that he uses to explain how material sub-
stances are composed of the four elements.
We know very little of the life of the Franciscan Richard of
Middleton (Mediavilla). He became Master (Professor) of
Theology at the University of Paris in 1284. Given that one
canonical requirement for promotion to a professorship
in Theology was to be 35 years old, we can infer that
Richard was born sometime before or during the ﬁrst
8 months of 1249. Traditions dating back to the early
sixteenth century have Richard as an Englishman, possibly
based on the probable misidentiﬁcation of Richard as the
canon lawyer Ricardus Anglicus (a misidentiﬁcation
encouraged by Richard of Middleton’s evident familiarity
with a great deal of canon law). It is possible that he
commenced his studies at Oxford, leaving for Paris in
1278 to begin the statutory 2 years of lectures on
1132 R
Richard of Middleton

Lombard’s Sentences. In 1283, while still Bachelor of The-
ology, the Minister General of the Franciscans, Bonagratia,
appointed him to serve on a commission of seven theolo-
gians whose remit was to examine propositions from the
works of the Spiritual Franciscan Peter John Olivi. The
result – the so-called Rotulus – was the condemnation of
Olivi’s works in 34 propositions on a range of theological
topics. In all probability, Richard produced his set of
45 Quaestiones disputatae in 1284, followed quickly by
three Quodlibeta (1284–1285, 1285–1286, and 1286–1287
respectively). He worked on the revision and publication
of his Sentence commentary between 1285 and 1295 (in
book 4 he mentions a ‘‘recent’’ privilege granted to the
Franciscans – that is, the Bull Ad fructos uberes of Celestine
V, November 27, 1294; but he makes no mention of
Boniface VIII’s important Liber sextus decretalium of
1298). The 1304 stationers’ lists in Paris show that an
exemplar
of
Richard’s
Sentence
commentary
was
published and was available for hire (the standard way
of disseminating and copying university texts in early
fourteenth-century Paris).
In 1288 Richard was required to move to Catalonia to
teach the son of King Charles II of Sicily, a role he contin-
ued until at 1296, when he was with the prince in Naples. It
seems that he left the service of Charles before 1297, but
beyond his editorial work on his Sentence commentary as
late as 1295, we have no further deﬁnite information about
him. The fact that he was still with Charles in 1296 perhaps
makes it unlikely that Richard should be identiﬁed as the
R. de Mediavilla who became Provincial Master of the
French Franciscans on September 20, 1295. An ordered
list of the deaths of Franciscan Masters of Theology places
Richard between Walter, Bishop of Poitiers (who died in
1307), and Duns Scotus (who died in 1308). So it may be
that his death occurred in one or other of these 2 years.
Richard’s thought owes much to his three great pre-
decessors, Bonaventure, Aquinas, and Henry of Ghent, and
he eclectically synthesizes from all three, rejecting where he
sees ﬁt. The result is nevertheless a coherent and impressive
whole, analytically incisive, one that continued to be
regarded as authoritative into the ﬁfteenth century. Richard
was even invoked in interventions at the Council of Trent.
Richard follows Thomas Aquinas in adopting a very
attenuated form of realism on the question of universals:
common natures have no reality independent of their
instantiations, but are nevertheless ‘‘multiplied’’ in the
particulars that instantiate them. Following Henry of
Ghent, Richard explains individuation in terms of
a merely negative feature: the negation of divisibility. But
Richard explicitly rejects what he takes to be Henry’s
teaching on the common nature, namely, that common
natures have some sort of reality independent of their
instantiations, as objects of divine cognition distinct
from the divine essence. Richard posits a merely rational
distinction between a thing’s essence and its existence: to
talk of a thing’s existence is simply a way of drawing
attention to the fact that it has a relation to divine efﬁcient
causality. Richard follows Henry of Ghent in holding that
the various concepts of being (ens, esse) are analogical,
including no common concept. Ens is the ﬁrst object of the
human intellect, but, following Bonaventure, Richard
maintains that the transcendental property of goodness
is prior to that of being.
Richard
agrees
with
Aquinas’
Aristotelianism
in
rejecting a role for divine illumination in all human cogni-
tion, accepting instead that human knowledge derives from
the senses. The universal concept exists potentially in the
phantasm, and is abstracted by the agent intellect. This
abstract mental content is impressed in the possible intellect
and actualized in occurrent cognition – the expressed spe-
cies or mental word. Richard accepts too that our knowledge
of God is derived empirically, on the basis of arguments
from cause and motion, and he rejects Bonaventure’s appro-
priation of Anselm’s ontological argument.
Given that goodness is higher than being, Richard
argues that the will is a higher power than the intellect.
The will is a self-mover, with the liberty of indifference –
granted the condition that the will can only choose when
there are reasons for an action: the will can choose
between different actions given that each of the actions
has some rational motivation. But talk of powers requires
some care here: Richard follows Henry in supposing that
talk of intellect and of will are simply ways of talking about
the fact that the soul can be related to different sorts of
object. (So strictly, the soul is a self-mover with the liberty
of indifference, in relation to the different kinds of things
it can do; and it is a more perfect function of the soul to be
able to choose than it is for the soul to be able to cognize).
There are various novel features of Richard’s natural
philosophy, the area in which he made perhaps his most
signiﬁcant contributions. For example, he proposed a new
account of increase and decrease in the degrees of
a quality. He suggests that we should think of such changes
on the analogy of quantitative changes: each degree of
a quality represents an ‘‘amount’’ of that quality –
a quantitas virtutis, opposed to the extension of the sub-
stance in which the quality inheres: quantitas molis.
Increases and decreases in the intensity of a quality are
understood in terms of changes in the quality’s quantitas
virtutis. As Richard sees it, lower degrees of a quality are in
potency to higher degrees – a position he derived from
Henry of Ghent. Higher degrees actualize this potency,
Richard of Middleton R
1133
R

and this actualization relation is required to explain how it
is that degrees of a quality have some kind of intrinsic
unity, just as the potency-actuality relation between mat-
ter and substantial form explains the unity of a substance
composed of matter and form. Scotus took up Richard’s
quantitative understanding of the degrees of a quality,
though he rejected the potency claim that Richard
borrowed from Henry.
Richard followed the standard Franciscan line, against
Aquinas, in accepting a plurality of substantial forms in
animate substances, something he took to be required to
explain the generation and corruption of such objects. In
addition to this, he posited a novel theory of matter, one
designed to accommodate Aristotelian accounts with more
standard Franciscan ones. According to these latter accounts,
matter must have some actuality all of its own if it is to
persist through substantial change. Richard accepts that
there is such matter, and that it is what enters into compo-
sitionwith substantial forms as the constituents of a material
substance. But he holds that there is a more Aristotelian sort
of matter too: pure potency from which forms are ‘‘educed.’’
This pure potency somehow inchoately contains the forms
which are educed from it, and Richard posits it in order to
circumvent the worry that forms are created ex nihilo when
they begin to enter into composition with matter. Richard
posits too a third kind of matter, proper to angels: incor-
poreal, unextended matter. The idea is that an angel is a self-
mover, and anything that is a self-mover must include active
and passive components (form and matter): the active
component is what moves something, and the passive com-
ponent is what gets to be moved.
A further distinctive feature of Richard’s natural phi-
losophy is his belief that substantial forms, as well as
certain accidental ones, admit of degrees. One standard
problem in Aristotelian physics is to provide an account of
the way in which the four elements exist as components of
material substances. Richard’s solution has two stages.
First, since substantial forms admit of degrees, elements
can be educed to greater or lesser degrees from the potency
of matter. Secondly, although fully blown instances of
the elements are incompatible with each other, lesser
degrees are not: they can interpenetrate and thus compose
different kinds of things. In the background here is
Averroes’ view that nonelemental substances include the
elements and their distinctive qualities in a remitted or
fragmented state.
In addition to this, there is considerable evidence that
Richard paid great attention to empirical experience, and
to inductive arguments made on the basis of such experi-
ence: something which is taken to be evidence of his
having spent some time in Oxford.
See also: ▶Bonaventure ▶Essence and Existence ▶Form
and Matter ▶Henry of Ghent ▶Intension and Remission
of Forms ▶Peter John Olivi ▶Thomas Aquinas
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Richard of Middleton (1591a) Quodlibeta. Brescia (bound in vol 4 of the
next item)
Richard of Middleton (1591b) Super quatuor libros Sententiarum. . .
quaestiones, 4 vols. Brescia
Richard of Middleton (1874) Quaestio disputata 13, ed. Fidelis a Fanna, De
ratione cognoscendi, seu Utrum quidquid certitudinaliter cognoscitur
a nobis cognoscatur in rationibus aeternis. Marietti, Turin
Richard of Middleton (1951) De gradu formarum. In: Zavalloni R (ed)
Richard de Mediavilla et la controverse sur la pluralite´ des formes.
Philosophes me´die´vaux, 2. L’Institut supe´rieur de philosophie,
Louvain, pp 32–180
Secondary Sources
Cunningham FA (1970) Richard of Middleton, O. F. M. on esse and
essence. Francisc Stud 30:49–76
Henninger
MG
(1989)
Relations:
medieval
theories
1250–1325.
Clarendon, Oxford, pp 59–67
Henninger MG (1994) Hervaeus Natalis (b. 1250/60; d. 1323) and
Richard of Mediavilla (b. 1245/49; d. 1302/07). In: Gracia JJE (ed)
Individuation in Scholasticism: the later Middle Ages and the
counter-reformation 1150–1650. SUNY Series in Philosophy. State
University of New York Press, Albany, pp 299–318
Hocedez E (1925) Richard de Middleton: sa vie, ses oeuvres, sa doctrine.
Spicilegium Sacrum Lovaniense. Etudes et documents, 7. Spicilegium
Sacrum Lovaniense Bureaux, Louvain/Honore´ Champion, Paris
Lechner J (1925/1975) Die Sakramentenlehre des Richard von Mediavilla.
Mu¨nchener Studien zur historischen Theologie, 5. Josef Ko¨sel &
Friedrich Pustet, Munich (repr. H. A. Gerstenberg, Hildesheim)
Rucker PP (1934) Der Ursprung unserer Begriffe nach Richard von
Mediavilla: Ein Beitrag zur Erkenntnislehre des Doctor Solidus.
Beitra¨ge zur Geschichte der Philosophie und Theologie des
Mittelalters, 31/1. Aschendorff, Mu¨nster
Zavalloni R (1951) Richard de Mediavilla et la controverse sur la pluralite´
des formes. Philosophes me´die´vaux, 2. L’Institut supe´rieur de
philosophie, Louvain
Richard of St. Victor
JOHN T. SLOTEMAKER
Department of Theology
Boston College
Chestnut Hill, MA
USA
Abstract
The writings of Richard of St. Victor contain exegetical,
mystical, and theological texts. The exegetical writings
1134 R
Richard of St. Victor

of Richard are grounded in the works of Hugh of
St. Victor. These exegetical writings support an ambitious
project of tracing the soul’s spiritual ascent – and its
objects of contemplation – as the soul ascends from imag-
ination to reason and ﬁnally beyond reason. This spiritual
project culminates in Richard’s systematic treatise on the
Trinity, in which he considers the nature of the Triune God
as the highest level of the soul’s spiritual contemplation.
Richard of St. Victor (d. 1173) was a member of the
Augustinian canons regular at the Abbey of St. Victor,
located on the left bank of the Seine just outside the city
walls of twelfth-century Paris. Richard probably arrived at
the Abbey after the death of Hugh (1141) in the 1150s, and
he follows Hugh closely in his exegetical, mystical, and
theological writings. Richard was elected sub-prior of the
abbey in 1159 and prior in 1162, spending much of his
time as prior under the problematic abbacy of Gilduin.
Richard continued the intellectual program begun by
Hugh of Saint Victor, employing a similar exegetical
method and operating within the same intellectual frame-
work as Hugh. This is evident in Richard’s reliance on
Augustine of Hippo, and his own intellectual debt to
Hugh. But, given these similarities, Richard’s own works
are more ‘‘scholastic’’ in nature. The methodological
approach of Richard’s De trinitate and his reliance on
Anselm’s concept of ‘‘necessary reasons’’ anticipate certain
late twelfth- and early thirteenth-century developments
in trinitarian theology. Richard’s works are collected in
Patrologia Latina 196 and are currently being edited in
modern critical editions.
Exegetical and Spiritual Writings
The inﬂuence of Hugh’s Didascalicon on Richard is signif-
icant, as he relies on the division of the sciences and theory
of exegesis that Hugh established. This is evident in
Richard’s Liber exceptionum and De Emmanuele: the for-
mer is an introductory work of Scriptural exegesis, the
latter a signiﬁcant response to the ‘‘Judaizing’’ exegetical
practices of the students of Andrew of St. Victor. Richard’s
theory of exegesis is perhaps best approached through two
of his most inﬂuential tropological and spiritual works: De
duodecim patriarchis (The Twelve Patriarchs/also referred
to as Benjamin minor) and De arca mystica (The Mystical
Ark/also referred to as Benjamin major).
The Twelve Patriarchs is a tropological and spiritual
exegesis of the Genesis account of Jacob, his four wives
(Leah, and her handmaiden Zelpha; Rachel, and her hand-
maiden Baal), and their twelve offspring (patriarchs). The
work is an analysis of the soul’s affective and rational
powers: Jacob representing the rational soul, with Leah
and Rachel symbolizing affection (affectus) and reason
(ratio) respectively. The other aspects of the rational soul
are represented by Zelpha and Baal, who symbolize bodily
sense and imagination. Further, the 12 sons of Jacob
represent various aspects of the above rational powers:
(1) Leah’s six sons represent the virtues that discipline
the will; (2) Zelpha’s two sons represent the governing of
deeds; (3) Rachel’s two sons represent contemplation and
asceticism; (4) and Baal’s two sons represent the governing
of thoughts. For Richard, when the soul’s affective and
rational powers (four wives) are properly governed by
their respective virtues (12 children/patriarchs), the soul
is properly ordered and ﬁt for contemplation.
Richard
develops
in
The
Twelve
Patriarchs
a sophisticated philosophical psychology that is substan-
tially expanded in The Mystical Ark. The latter work,
inﬂuenced by the Pseudo-Dionysius’ Celestial Hierarchy,
lays out six degrees of contemplation; the ﬁrst two degrees
are located in the imagination, the second two in reason,
and the ﬁnal two transcend reason. The work traces the
soul’s spiritual ascent and the various objects of specula-
tion that are present to the soul in its ascent. The result is
an epistemological as well as spiritual analysis of the
human
soul
and
its
objects
of
knowledge
and
contemplation.
Theological Speculation
Richard’s longest and most theologically sophisticated
work is his De trinitate, a book that is best understood as
building on the program of the soul’s ascent described in
the Twelve Patriarchs and The Mystical Ark. Richard’s De
trintiate is known for three aspects: (1) a redeﬁnition of
the Boethian deﬁnition of person; (2) his argument or
‘‘proof’’ of the Trinity from love in book 3; and (3) his
emphasis on a ‘‘social Trinity.’’ These three generalities,
while not entirely misleading, must be considered within
the work as a whole and as part of Richard’s larger mystical
and theological project.
The De trinitate is divided into six books of twelve
chapters each. The prologue and the introductory section
of the work is largely methodological and essential to
locating the work within Richard’s spiritual and epistemo-
logical writings (De trin. Prol.-1.10). Within the schema
laid out in the Mystical Ark, Richard argues in this meth-
odological discussion that the analysis of the Trinity
belongs to the ﬁfth and sixth stages of the soul’s ascent
and therefore transcends reason. The second section of the
work, which concludes book I (De trin. 1.11–1.25), is an
exposition of the divine unity. Richard focuses on the
supremacy and unity of the Divine nature. Book II is an
analysis of the attributes of God: eternal, immutable,
Richard of St. Victor R
1135
R

immeasurable, etc. This discussion also considers the
attributes of power and wisdom (potentia/sapientia),
anticipating the discussion of the personal properties in
chapter V. After considering the divine unity Richard
turns to the plurality of the divine persons in chapter III,
offering an ‘‘argument’’ for the necessity of the divine
persons grounded in the nature of divine love. Richard’s
argument, within the context of the prologue, must be
understood as transcending reason in the soul’s ascent to
God, and not as an Aristotelian demonstration. The
fourth book considers the correlation of the divine unity
and plurality as expounded in the terms person and exis-
tence – offering in conclusion a redeﬁnition of the concept
of person as used in trinitarian discourse (singularem
aliquem
rationalis
existentie,
De
trin.
4.24).
Book
V continues the analysis of the Divine persons and their
personal properties. This discussion is signiﬁcant for
Richard’s reluctance to follow Hugh in appropriating
power,
wisdom,
and
goodness
(potentia,
sapientia,
benignitas) to the Divine persons, given the critique of
Abelard’s use of this triadic structure by theologians like
Gautier of Mortagne (PL 209, col. 573–590; see also
Richard’s De tribus appropriatis personis in trinitate, PL
196, col. 991–994). In the ﬁnal book, Richard considers
the divine processions and locates the distinction of per-
sons in the processions of the Son and the Holy Spirit from
the Father.
Richard’s trinitarian theology is signiﬁcant historically
because of his emphasis on, and divergence from, certain
aspects of the Augustinian tradition. His inﬂuence is evi-
dent in the trinitarian theology of Bonaventure and Henry
of Ghent and their emphasis on the divine processions.
This focus on the divine processions is followed by numer-
ous Franciscan authors in the thirteenth and fourteenth
centuries, including John Duns Scotus who also adopts
Richard’s deﬁnition of person in trinitarian discourse.
See also: ▶Boethius ▶Bonaventure ▶Henry of Ghent
▶Hugh of St. Victor ▶John Duns Scotus ▶Pseudo-
Dionysius, the Areopagite
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Richard of St. Victor (1854) Opera omnia, ed. Migne J-P. Patrologia
Latina cursus completus (PL), vol 196. Vive`s, Paris
Richard of St. Victor (1951) Sermons et opuscules spirituels ine´dits 1:
texte latin, introduction et notes, ed. Chaˆtillon J, Tulloch W-J, trans.
Barthelemy J. Descle´e De Brouwer, Paris
Richard of St. Victor (1955) E´pıˆtre a` Se´verin sur la charite´: le quatre degre´s
de la violente charite´ (De quatuor gradibus violentae caritatis), ed.
and trans. Dumeige G. J. Vrin, Paris
Richard of St. Victor (1958a) De trinitate, ed. Ribaillier J. J. Vrin, Paris
Richard of St. Victor (1958b) Liber exceptionum: texte critique avec
introduction, notes et tables, ed. Chaˆtillon J. J. Vrin, Paris
Richard of St. Victor (1967a) De statu interioris hominis, ed.
Ribaillier J. Archives d’Histoire Doctrinale et Litte´raire du Moyen
Age 34:7–128
Richard of St. Victor (1967b) Opuscules the´ologiques: texte critique avec
notes et tables, ed. Ribaillier J. J. Vrin, Paris
Richard of St. Victor (1979) The twelve patriarchs, the mystical ark, book
three of The Trinity, trans. Zinn GA. Paulist, New York
Richard of St. Victor (1986) Trois opuscules spirituels de Richard de
Saint-Victor: texte ine´dits accompagnes d’e´tudes critiques et de
notes, ed. Chaˆtillon J. E´tudes Augustiniennes, Paris
Richard of St. Victor (1997) Les Douze Patriarches ou Benjamin minor:
texte critique et traduction, ed. and trans. Chaˆtillon J, Duchet-
Suchaux M, intro. Longe`re J. Editions de Cerf, Paris
Secondary Sources
Chase S (1995) Angelic wisdom: the cherubim and the grace of contem-
plation in Richard of St. Victor. University of Notre Dame, Notre
Dame
Chaˆtillon J (1987) Richard de Saint-Victor. Dictionnaire de spiritualite´
asce´tique et mystique, histoire et doctrine, vol 13. G. Beauchesne,
Paris, pp 593–654
Den Bok N (1996) Communicating the most high: a systematic study of
person and trinity in the theology of Richard of St. Victor (1173).
Brepols, Paris
DiLorenzo RD (1982) Imagination as ﬁrst way to contemplation in
Richard of St. Victor’s Benjamin minor. Medievalia et Humanistica
11:77–96
Zinn GA Jr (1977) Personiﬁcation allegory and visions of light in Richard
of St. Victor’s teaching on contemplation. Univ Toronto Quart
46:190–214
Richard Rufus of Cornwall
REGA WOOD
Philosophy Department
Stanford University
Stanford, CA
USA
Abstract
Richard Rufus of Cornwall was a scholastic philosopher-
theologian who ﬂourished between 1231 and 1256. He
lectured at Paris on the newly rediscovered Aristotelian
libri naturales, most importantly on Aristotle’s Metaphys-
ics. Subsequently, as a Franciscan he lectured on theology
at Oxford and at Paris. At the start of his career he was
most inﬂuenced by Averroes, but within a few years he
wrote a treatise disputing many of Averroes’ views,
1136 R
Richard Rufus of Cornwall

particularly on the divine intellect and on individuation.
In theology, Rufus’ dispute with Richard Fishacre set the
stage for generations of controversy between Franciscans
and Dominicans on the nature of the will. Nonetheless, his
works were unremarked and misattributed for centuries
after 1350. But though the rediscovery of his works did not
begin until 1926, Rufus’ inﬂuence on Roger Bacon, Albert
the Great, and John Duns Scotus has already been
documented.
Richard Rufus of Cornwall was a scholastic philosopher-
theologian who ﬂourished between 1231 and 1256. In
1238 he joined the Franciscan Order at Paris, and most
of the information we have about him comes from Fran-
ciscan sources: Adam Marsh, Thomas Eccleston, and
Roger Bacon. Marsh tells us that Rufus was brilliant and
beloved by all. Eccleston lists him as the ﬁfth Franciscan
lector in theology at Oxford. According to Eccleston,
Rufus was a master famous at Oxford and at Paris who
brought acclaim to the Franciscan Order when he joined
the Order at Paris. Roger Bacon agrees that Rufus was
famous, but claims that this was only with the foolish
multitude; the wise considered him insane.
Like Roger Bacon, Rufus lectured at Paris on the newly
introduced libri naturales before becoming a Franciscan:
Rufus in the 1230s and Bacon in the 1240s. Not surpris-
ingly Bacon rejected some of the views Rufus stated,
including his views about the logic of empty classes and
real names, about divine ideas and the agent intellect, and
about projectile motion and place.
Rufus’ earliest known work is a disputed question
on the divine intellect. His best-known philosophical
work is the last lectures he gave as a secular author, his
Scriptum in metaphysicam Aristotelis, which was deeply
inﬂuenced by Robert Grosseteste. Rufus also lectured on
Aristotle’s Physics, De anima, and De generatione et
corruptione, though the attribution of these three com-
mentaries to Rufus has recently been contested. In these
lectures and in his ﬁrst metaphysics commentary, Rufus
was most strongly inﬂuenced by Averroes whose views he
generally adopted. Possibly on account of Grosseteste, late
in his secular career Rufus began to move away from
Averroes. His Contra Averroem was designed to refute
Averroes’
views
on
divine
knowledge
and
on
individuation.
After 1238, Rufus lectured on Peter Lombard’s
Sentences at Oxford around 1250 and subsequently at
Paris. As noted by Franz Pelster, who discovered this
work in 1926, the Lectura Oxoniensis, is not only the
earliest surviving Sentences commentary by an Oxford
bachelor of theology, but an important work that
inﬂuenced John Duns Scotus.
Despite its importance for the Franciscan theological
tradition, Rufus claims here that commenting on Lom-
bard is not doing theology, since Scripture is by itself the
complete and perfect theology and requires no summary.
His lectures are rather an attempt to elucidate some
obscure statements subordinate to theology. This perspec-
tive reﬂects the inﬂuence of Robert Grosseteste. Other
major inﬂuences on this work are Augustine, Anselm of
Canterbury, Bernard of Clairvaux, Hugh of St. Victor, and
Alexander of Hales.
Among
the
more
interesting
questions
Rufus
addresses is the nature of the human will, in which his
reply to Richard Fishacre anticipates the long dispute
between Franciscans and Dominicans about whether the
will should be seen as primarily a volitional or an intellec-
tual faculty. Rufus seeks to minimize philosophical
excurses, in part by referencing his earlier philosophical
works, such as the discussion of individuation from his
Contra Averroem.
Prominently referenced in the prologue to the Oxford
lectures on Lombard is Rufus’ brief epistemological trea-
tise, a work entitled Speculum animae in the manuscript
that preserves it. The Speculum is Rufus’ exposition of
Aristotle’s claim in On the Soul (3.8) that the ‘‘the soul is
in some manner all things.’’ In it Rufus distinguishes
between the proximate and remote objects of apprehen-
sion. The remote objects are nature forms properly classi-
ﬁed in the Aristotelian categories, while the proximate
objects of apprehension are species forms not included
in the Aristotelian categories. It is as it is actualized by
species forms that the soul is all things according to Rufus.
Thus Rufus does not consider Averroes’ version of the
barrenness claim – namely, that the soul cannot receive
a form it already has – a problem for self-understanding,
since the form understood differs ontologically from its
nature form.
Rufus’ last surviving work is his lectures on Peter
Lombard’s Sentences delivered at Paris. The basis for
these lectures was the lectures given shortly before by
Bonaventure. Typically Rufus’ own contribution is briefer
than his presentation of Bonaventure’s views. However,
Rufus’ critical comments on Bonaventure were incisive
and exercised an independent inﬂuence – on Richard
Kilwardby, for example.
As Bacon noted, Rufus was famous not only in his own
lifetime but for about 50 years after the presumed date of
his death in about 1260. Albert the Great cites and adopts
and some of his views, as does John Duns Scotus, whose
Richard Rufus of Cornwall R
1137
R

proof for God’s existence and whose theories of individu-
ation were anticipated by Rufus.
However after 1350, Rufus was no longer cited, and his
works were not rediscovered until the twentieth century.
They exercised only an indirect inﬂuence on later scholas-
ticism not just because their discussions were brief and not
fully adumbrated but also because Rufus’ commitment to
intellectual humility led him not to name his own works
even when quoting from them. Nonetheless, Rufus is an
important ﬁgure in the history of scholasticism both
because of his brilliant arguments and because he played
an important role in setting the agenda for later
scholasticism.
See also: ▶Albert the Great ▶Anselm of Canterbury
▶Aristotelianism in the Greek, Latin, Syriac, Arabic, and
Hebrew Traditions ▶Augustine ▶Bernard of Clairveaux
▶Bonaventure ▶Epistemology ▶Hugh of St. Victor
▶Ibn Rushd, Muh˙ammad ibn Ah˙mad al-H˙ afı¯d (Averroes)
▶John Duns Scotus ▶Metaphysics ▶Natural Philosophy
▶Peter
Lombard
▶Richard
Fishacre
▶Robert
Grosseteste ▶Robert Kilwardby ▶Roger Bacon ▶Sense
Perception,
Theories
of
▶Voluntarism
and
Intellectualism
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Bacon Roger (1988) Compendium of the study of theology, ed. Maloney
TS. EJ Brill, Leiden
de Eccleston Thomas (1951) Tractatus de adventu Fratrum minorum in
Angliam, ed. Little AG. Manchester University Press, Manchester
de
Marisco
Adam
(1858)
Epistolae,
ed.
Brewer
J.
Monumenta
Franciscana. Longman, Brown, Green, Longmans, & Roberts,
London
Grosseteste Robert (1982) Hexaemeron, ed. Dales RC, Gieben S. British
Academy, London
Rufus Richard. Contra Averroem. Erfurt, UB, Dep. Erf. Collectio
Amplonia, Quarto 312, fol. 81va–86ra
Rufus Richard. De intellectu divino. Assisi. Bibl. Sacro convento 138, fol.
262va–263ra
Rufus Richard. In Aristot. De anima. Florence, Bibl. Nazionale. Conv.
soppr. G.iv.853, fol. 193ra–222va
Rufus Richard. In Aristot. De generatione et corruptione. Erfurt, UB, Dep.
Erf. Collectio Amplonia, Quarto 312, fol. 14ra–19ra
Rufus Richard. Lectura Oxoniensis in Sententias Petri Lombardi. Balliol
College Codex 62, Oxford
Rufus Richard. Lectura Parisiensis in Sententias Petri Lombardi. Assisi.
Bibl. Sacro convento 138, fol. 262va–263ra; Vatican, lat. 12993
Rufus Richard. Scriptum in Metaphysicam Aristot. Salamanca, Bibl.
Univ., B. General Historica 2322 fol. 72–132; Vatican, lat. 4538
Rufus Richard. Speculum animae. Erfurt, UB, Dep. Erf. Collectio
Amplonia, Quarto 312, fol. 107va–110rb
Rufus Richard (2003) In Aristot. Physicam, ed. Wood R. British Academy,
Oxford
Secondary Sources
Catto JI (1984) Theology and theologians 1220–1320. The early Oxford
schools. Oxford University Press, Oxford, pp 471–517
Donati S (2005) The anonymous on the physics in Erfurt. Rech The´ol
Philos Me´die´v 72:232–362
Ga´l G (1950) Commentarius in Metaphysicam Aristotelis cod. Vat. lat.
4538, fons doctrinae Richardi Ruﬁ.
Archivum franciscanum
historicum 43:209–242
Ga´l G (1956) Viae ad exsistentiam Dei probandam in doctrina Richardi
Ruﬁ. Franzisk. Stud. 38:177–202
Ga´l G (1975) Opiniones Richardi RuﬁCornubiensis a censore reprobatae.
Francisc Stud 35:136–193
Karger E (1998) Richard Rufus on naming substance. Mediev Philos
Theol 7:51–67
Karger E (2002) Richard Rufus’s account of substantial transmutation.
Medioevo 27:168–191
Karger E (2005) Richard Rufus as a source for Albertus Magnus. In:
Honnefelder L, Wood R, Dreyer M, Aris M (eds) Albertus Magnus
and the beginnings of the medieval reception of Aristotle in the Latin
West: from Richard Rufus to Franiciscus de Mayronis. Aschendorff
Verlag, Mu¨nster, pp 425–453
Little AG (1926) The Franciscan school at Oxford in the thirteenth
century. Archivum franciscanum historicum 19:842–845
Noone T (1987) An edition and study of the Scriptum super
Metaphysicam, bk. 12, dist. 2: a work attributed to Richard Rufus
of Cornwall. PhD dissertation, University of Toronto
Normore C (2007) The matter of thought. In: Lagerlund H (ed) Repre-
sentation and objects of thought in medieval philosophy. Ashgate
Publishing, Aldershot, pp 117–133
Pelster F (1926) Die a¨lteste Sentenzenkommentar aus der Oxforder
Franziskanerschule. Scholastik 1:50–80
Pelster F (1950) Richardus Rufus Anglicus O.F.M. (c. 1250), ein Vorla¨ufer
des Duns Scotus in der Lehre von der Wirkung der priesterlichen
Lossprechung. Scholastik 25:549–552
Plevano R (1993) Richard Rufus of Cornwall and Geoffrey of Aspall: two
questions on the instant of change. Medioevo 19:167–232
Raedts P (1987) Richard Rufus of Cornwall and the tradition of Oxford
theology. Clarendon Press, Oxford
Wood R (1996) Individual forms: Richard Rufus and John Duns Scotus.
In: Honnefelder L, Wood R, Dreyer M (eds) John Duns Scotus:
metaphysics and ethics. EJ Brill, Leiden, pp 251–272
Wood R (1997) Roger Bacon: Richard Rufus’ successor as a Parisian
physics professor. Vivarium 35:222–250
Wood R (1998) The earliest known surviving metaphysics commentary.
Mediev Philos Theol 7:39–49
Wood R (2002) Early Oxford theology. In: Evans GR (ed) Mediaeval
commentaries on the Sentences of Peter Lombard: current research,
vol 1. EJ Brill, Leiden, pp 289–343
Wood R (2009) The works of Richard Rufus of Cornwall: the
state of the question in 2008. Rech The´ol Philos Me´die´v, EJ Brill
76:1–73
Wood
R
(2009)
The
inﬂuence
of
Islamic
Aristotelianism.
In:
Pasnau R (ed) The Cambridge history of medieval philosophy, pp
247–266
Wood R, Weisberg M (2004) Interpreting Aristotle on mixture: problems
about elemental composition from Philoponus to Cooper. Stud Hist
Philos Sci 20:681–706
Zimmermann A (1992) Some aspects of the reception of Aristotle’s
physics and metaphysics in the thirteenth century. In: Jordan M,
Emery K (eds) Ad litteram. Notre Dame University Press, Notre
Dame, Indiana, pp 217–227
1138 R
Richard Rufus of Cornwall

Richard Swineshead
EDITH D. SYLLA
Department of History
North Carolina State University
Raleigh, NC
USA
Abstract
Richard Swineshead (ﬂ. c. 1340–1355, Oxford, England) is
most famous as the author of the Book of Calculations
(Liber calculationum), which treats various topics of nat-
ural philosophy using a mixture of logic and verbal math-
ematics. The book was apparently meant to support
students in the Arts Faculty at Oxford who were taking
part in required disputations.
Biographical Information
‘‘Richard Swineshead’’ is here taken to be the name of the
author of the well-known Book of Calculations (Liber
calculationum), produced at Oxford University probably
in the ﬁfth decade of the fourteenth century. Because of his
identiﬁcation with this book, Swineshead was often called
‘‘Calculator’’ by Continental scholars who used his work in
the later fourteenth and ﬁfteenth centuries. There is some
uncertainty about his ﬁrst name – and there were several
people with the last name Swineshead associated with
Oxford in the fourteenth century who have been confused
with one another – but for purposes of this work, it is
perhaps sufﬁcient to know that Richard Swineshead was
probably not the same person as Roger Swineshead, who
wrote the works De insolubilibus, De obligationibus, and De
motibus naturalibus at Oxford in the 1330s, and who may
have been a Benedictine monk and master of sacred the-
ology. The Richard Swineshead who is the topic of this
article probably also wrote short works, known only in
manuscript, titled De motu, De motu locali, and De caelo.
His name appears in the records of Merton College,
Oxford, possibly in 1340; certainly in 1344; and yet again
in 1355. Otherwise, very little is known of his life.
Thought
In his Book of Calculations (Liber calculationum), Richard
Swineshead provided an introduction to quantiﬁcation
techniques within a number of different natural philo-
sophical categories, such as qualities, illumination, and
local motion. At Oxford University in the fourteenth cen-
tury, students in the Faculty of Arts took part in disputa-
tions testing their ability to detect fallacious reasoning and
to argue for one point of view over another. The core
discipline that they used in their arguments was logic,
particularly the ‘‘new logic,’’ based on the ‘‘supposition’’
of terms within propositions, that is, with the way that
terms in propositions refer to things in the physical world
or to intentions in the mind. After about 1330, however,
disputants used not only logical theory but also other sets
of analytical tools, such as the analysis of ﬁrst and last
instants (or beginning and ceasing), of maxima and min-
ima, and of the intension and remission of forms such as
warmth and coldness or white and black. Swineshead’s
Book of Calculations included 16 treatises, each one dealing
with a different problem area. Swineshead built upon the
work of Thomas Bradwardine On the Proportions of Veloc-
ities in Motions (1328), as well as upon William
Heytesbury’s Rules for Solving Sophisms (1335). It was
probably the perceived achievement of Bradwardine in for-
mulating a mathematical law or function relating forces,
resistances, and velocities in alteration and augmentation
and diminution, as well as in local motion, that encouraged
later fourteenth-century scholastics to intensify their atten-
tion to mathematical or quantitative topics, combining
logical and mathematical techniques and focusing special
attention on inﬁnity and continuity.
One terrestrial subject matter to which calculations had
been applied before the fourteenth century was the matter
of calculating the degrees of compound medicines, on the
Galenic theory that many diseases occur because the person
is too hot, too cold, too wet, or too dry, and that the
fundamental purpose of medications is to bring the state
of the sick person back to the temperate or normal. Usually,
there were supposed to be four degrees in any quality,
ranging from the insensible, to the sensible, the strong,
through to the lethal. The pharmacist might mix medicines
of varying degrees in order to get a compound medicine of
an intermediate degree, strong enough to counteract the
imbalance in the sick person’s body, but not too strong.
The ﬁrst and most famous treatise of the Book of
Calculations, which is sometimes found separately, was
concerned with the ‘‘intension and remission of forms’’
or with how the increase or decrease in the intensity of
a quality should be measured. If the compounding of
medicines had been a primary locus for such concerns
before the fourteenth century, it was the intensiﬁcation
of charity or grace given by God that held the attention of
theologians in the later Middle Ages, a topic always dealt
with in connection with Distinction 17 of Book I of Peter
Lombard’s Book of Sentences, the primary textbook of
systematic theology in medieval theological faculties. The
theory of the intensiﬁcation of grace had many problems
special to it, since it was assumed that God gives grace
Richard Swineshead R
1139
R

freely – how one’s grace may increase over time does not
follow exactly the same pattern as, for instance, the
increase of one’s strength over time as the result of doing
exercises. Nevertheless, it was in commentaries on Book I,
Distinction 17, of the Sentences that discussions of the
intension and remission of forms most often occurred.
In the Book of Calculations, the question of intension
and remission of forms is discussed mainly in terms of
‘‘any quality you please.’’ The ﬁrst subject was whether the
intensity of a quality should be measured by its nearness to
the maximum degree (and remissness by distance from the
maximum degree) or if, instead, intensity should be mea-
sured by distance from zero degree and remissness by
closeness to zero degree. Of course, the practical problem
of the best reference point for measures of quality is
familiar to us because of the difference between the Fahr-
enheit and Celsius temperature scales. For Swineshead, the
problem was more abstract. Measuring from the maxi-
mum degree might not make sense if there was, in fact, no
maximum degree in a given quality. In the case of hot and
cold, familiar at the time because of its importance in
medicine and pharmacy, there was the problem of relating
hot and cold. For instance, is something twice as hot
therefore half as cold? Should a body be considered to be
both hot and cold at the same time, or should the temper-
ature scales be arranged so that heat decreases down to
zero and then cold begins to increase, as do degrees below
zero on modern temperature scales?
After additional treatises on problems of measuring
qualities and alteration, Swineshead turned to problems of
measuring rarity and density, as well as the velocity of
increase or decrease in size. In Treatise VII, he raised the
problem of ‘‘reaction’’ – if body Awarms body B next to it,
will not body B cool body A at the same time? How should
the power of a body to heat another body be measured and
how should the power of resistance of the body acted upon
be measured? After discussing maxima and minima, and
a special problem of what would happen if a thin rod fell
within a channel running through the middle of the earth,
Swineshead came to the problem of speeds of local
motion, where he applied Bradwardine’s theory that
velocity depends upon the ratio of force to resistance in
such a way that a geometric increase in the ratio will lead
to a linear increase in velocity. Later treatises measure the
diffusion of illumination and the gradual increase over
time in the quality of a body that is more affected near
the agent affecting it.
Probably
the
most
impressive
descendant
of
Swineshead’s Book of Calculations was the Book of the
Triple Motion meant as an introduction to Swineshead’s
book, written by the Portuguese scholar Alvarus Thomas
and published at Paris in 1509. Although in the 150 years
between the two books there had been relatively few
scholars capable of mastering Swineshead’s technicalities,
Alvarus Thomas was certainly up to the job.
See also: ▶Oxford Calculators ▶Thomas Bradwardine
▶William Heytesbury
Bibliography
Primary Sources
The short opuscula, De motu, De motu locali, and De caelo, are found in
MS Cambridge, Gonville and Caius College 499/268, ff. 204r–215r
Swineshead Richard (c. 1345) Liber calculationum, is available in many
manuscripts, not all of which are complete. It was published in Padua
c. 1477; Pavia 1498; Venice 1520; Salamanca 1520; and in other edi-
tions. Treatise XI on the rod falling through the earth, was published by
Hoskin M, Molland AG (1966) Swineshead on falling bodies: an
example of fourteenth-century physics. Br J Hist Sci 3:150–182.
There is an outline in Latin of the main points of the Book of calcu-
lations, mostly but not entirely using Swineshead’s words in Edith
Sylla (1970, 1991) The Oxford calculators and the mathematics of
motion, 1320–1350. Physics and measurement by latitudes. Harvard
PhD dissertation (repr. Garland Publishing, pp 648–714)
Secondary Sources
Clagett M (1950) Richard Swineshead and late medieval physics. Osiris
9:131–151
Murdoch JE, Sylla ED (1976) Swineshead (Swyneshed, Suicet, etc.),
Richard. Dictionary of scientiﬁc biography, vol 13. Charles Scribner,
New York, pp 184–213; Sylla E, supplement to this article
(2008) Complete dictionary of scientiﬁc biography, vol 24, pp 562–
563; available online through Gale Virtual Reference Library
Sylla ED (2008) Calculationes de motu locali in Richard Swineshead and
Alvarus Thomas. In: Biard J, Rommevaux S (eds) Mathe´matiques et
the´orie du mouvement XIVe–XVIe sie`cles. Presses Universitaires du
Septentrion, Villeneuve d’Ascq, pp 131–146
Robert Grosseteste
CECILIA PANTI
Dipartimento di Ricerche Filosoﬁche
Facolta` di Lettere e Filosoﬁa
Universita` degli Studi di Roma – Tor Vergata
Rome
Italy
Abstract
Robert Grosseteste (c. 1168–1253) was an outstanding
ﬁgure in thirteenth-century intellectual life. He developed
an original cosmological theory, the so-called metaphysics
of light, based on light as the ﬁrst common form of all
bodies and elaborated a scientiﬁc method based on the
1140 R
Robert Grosseteste

importance of geometry and experience in the explanation
of natural phenomena, which he considered as effects of
the action of luminous rays. He introduced the Aristote-
lian natural philosophy to the western Latin world, pro-
ducing the ﬁrst commentaries on Aristotle’s Physics and
Posterior Analytics and translations of De caelo and
Nicomachean Ethics. As a theologian, Grosseteste enriched
the Augustinian tradition with the doctrines of the Greek
Fathers, mainly Pseudo-Dionysius, whose writings he
translated and commented. His originality also emerges
in his writings on free will, time, and God’s foreknowl-
edge. As bishop of Lincoln, he focused on removing eccle-
siastical abuses and promoting the pastoral care, acting as
a prominent leader in English ecclesiastical and political
life. His intellectual heritage inﬂuenced both scientiﬁc
developments and political movements, mainly in four-
teenth-century England.
Life and Works
Grosseteste was born into a humble Anglo-Norman family
in Suffolk (c. 1168), and was probably educated at the
cathedral school of Lincoln, since he ﬁrst appears with
the title of master in a Lincoln Charter of (c. 1189). A letter
(c. 1192) by Gerard of Wales recommends him for his
excellence in liberal arts, canon law, and medicine to
Bishop William de Vere of Hereford, where Grosseteste
remained until the bishop’s death (1198). The high repu-
tation of Hereford for scientiﬁc learning likely encouraged
Grosseteste to produce his ﬁrst scientiﬁc opuscula On
Liberal Arts and On Sound. The following 25 years are
particularly obscure. According to Callus’ biography (in
Callus ed., 1955) Grosseteste taught the arts at Oxford
until 1209, when the schools closed. He moved then to
Paris to study theology and returned in 1214 to become
the ﬁrst chancellor and to teach theology until 1229/1230.
The
evidence
for
the
chancellorship
comes
from
a controversial anecdote, claiming that he was, in fact,
entitled magister scholarium. Southern (1986) proposed
an alternative biography, which places Grosseteste in the
provincial setting of England. A few legal documents from
c. 1213 to c. 1225 testify to Grosseteste’s administrative
position in Hereford, in association with the Archdeacon,
later Bishop, Hugh Foliot, whom he followed to France
during the papal interdict of England (1209–1213); but,
according to Southern (1986), Grosseteste neither was in
Paris, nor studied theology there. Instead, he occasionally
taught the arts in English schools, while his stable teaching
in Oxford – and possibly his chancellorship – started after
1225, when he received a prebend in Abbotsley, became
a priest and, ﬁnally, began to lecture in theology. Goering
(in McEvoy 1995) rejected Southern’s disagreement
regarding Grosseteste’s familiarity with the Parisian
milieu, which is indirectly testiﬁed by Grosseteste’s friend-
ship with Parisian theologians (mainly Alexander of Hales
and William of Auvergne) and his writings from the 1220s.
A Parisian contact can be inferred also from Grosseteste’s
precocious knowledge of Averroes and from the circula-
tion and sources of his cosmological writings of the years
1220–1225: On the Sphere, On Comets, and On Heavenly
Movements (Panti 2001). Also a controversial charter of
1223
might
corroborate
his
Parisian
connection
(Schulman 1997; against which see McEvoy, in Mackie
and Goering 2003:19–20). Grosseteste’s entire scientiﬁc
and philosophical production belongs to this obscure
period. It comprises his major treatises on Easter compu-
tation (Computus), on light metaphysics (De luce), on
optics and mathematical veriﬁcation of natural phenom-
ena (De lineis, angulis et ﬁguris–De natura locorum and De
iride), and his commentaries on Aristotle’s Posterior Ana-
lytics and Physics. The latter was probably assembled later
from Grosseteste’s glosses, with additions which also cir-
culated independently (De ﬁnitate motus et temporis).
Grosseteste’s last 25 years are well documented. In 1229/
1230 he became the ﬁrst lecturer to the Oxford Franciscans.
His familiarity with the Friars turned into an enduring
friendship and a strong spiritual empathy, particularly with
Adam Marsh (Gieben in McEvoy 1995). As a theologian,
Grosseteste lectured on Scripture, disputed theological ques-
tions, and preached university sermons (Ginther 2004). His
theological writings have noteworthy philosophical impli-
cations and include a brief commentary on Ecclesiasticus
43:1–5, some opuscula on divine causality (De statu
causarum, De subsistentia rei, and De ordine emamandi
causatorum a Deo), on truth (De veritate and De veritate
propositionis), on God’s foreknowledge and free will (De
scientia Dei and De libero arbitrio), on God as ﬁrst form
and the location of angels (De unica forma omnium–De
intelligentiis). In the 1230s Grosseteste also attended to his
major exegetical works: De decem mandatis (with remarks
on ethics), the Hexae¨meron (largely inﬂuenced by Augus-
tine and Basil, with large sections on cosmology and
against the eternity of the world), and De cessatione
legalium (on human happiness and natural law). He also
commented on the Pauline Epistula ad Galatas and wrote
a large collection of sermons, among which were the
Ecclesia sancta celebrat (on human nature), and a huge
variety of theological annotations, the Dicta.
In 1235 Grosseteste was elected Bishop of Lincoln, the
largest diocese of England. He was a compromise candi-
date, but he acted as a powerful and rigorous leader. The
Minors were his assistants in ecclesiastical duties and also
procured him Greek books. In 1239–1241 he began to
Robert Grosseteste R
1141
R

make translations from Greek. His translations include the
works of John Damascene, the entire corpus of Pseudo-
Dionysius, enriched with Grosseteste’s own commentary,
the Testament of the Twelve Patriarchs, the Nicomachean
Ethics
–
with
accompanying
Greek
glosses
and
Grosseteste’s annotations – parts of the Greek lexicon
Suidas, and parts of Aristotle’s De caelo with Simplicius’
commentary. Grosseteste also compiled a Tabula of topical
concordances of his Christian and non-Christian readings,
covering theological and philosophical items, each associ-
ated with a indexing symbol. In addition, he composed
some Anglo–Norman poems, including the allegorical
Chasteau d’amour, on world creation and Christian
redemption, as well as texts on household management
and courtly etiquette. As a bishop, Grosseteste instituted
an innovative program of pastoral care, applying princi-
ples he had previously elaborated in his pastoral works,
including the famous Templum Dei, on confession. Also,
many of his letters are concerned with his innovative
political and pastoral ideas, which drove him to disagree
both with the secular and the ecclesiastical power. The
Lincoln Chapter appealed to the papacy against his inno-
vations, but Grosseteste successfully defended himself in
1245, at the First Council of Lyons, to which he returned in
1250 to criticize the inadequate policy of Pope Innocent
IV. He clashed again with the papacy in 1253, in a vigorous
letter (n. 128) concerning the appointment of an incom-
petent cleric. His rebellion made him a hero of the anti-
papists and his ideas inﬂuenced church reformers, ﬁrst
and foremost John Wyclif. Grosseteste died in October
1253. Three attempts for his canonization failed. His phil-
osophical and theological ideas inﬂuenced thirteenth-cen-
tury Franciscan thinkers (mainly Thomas of York, Richard
Rufus of Cornwall, Roger Bacon, Bonaventure and the
Dominican Richard Fishacre) and fourteenth-century
Oxonian philosophers (Adam Wodeham, William of Ock-
ham, Thomas Bradwardine, and William of Alnwick). His
fame on the continent was mainly due to his commentary
on
Posterior
Analytics
and
his
Greek
translations.
A detailed essay in modern and medieval historiography
on Grosseteste is by McEvoy (in O’Carrol 2003). The
catalogue of Grosseteste’s works by Thomson (1940)
needs an overall updating (partly made by McEvoy 1982).
Thought
Metaphysics and Physics of Light
The notion of light occupies a relevant place in
Grosseteste’s philosophy and theology, as the fundamental
monographs by McEvoy (1982, 2000) clearly show. After
his early scientiﬁc interests in astrological causality,
Grosseteste elaborated his own original doctrine (partly
inﬂuenced by Avicenna and Avicebron) in his most
famous short work, De luce, arguing that light (lux) is
‘‘corporeity,’’ that is, the ﬁrst common form which gives
dimensionality
to the a-dimensional prime matter.
Grosseteste builds his own cosmology according to this
ontological principle, asserting that, at the beginning of
time, ﬁrst light and ﬁrst matter multiplied inﬁnitely pro-
ducing the sphere of the universe, which is structured by
light’s replicability (replicabilitas) into ﬁnite-sized bodies
of inﬁnite ‘‘light-atoms.’’ Therefore light, according to the
Aristotelian concept of entelechy, produces the transition
from physical potentiality to actuality (Gieben 1966). In
addition to light, natural bodies include other substantial
forms, except the outermost heavenly sphere, which is the
simplest body. It emits a luminosity (lumen) which
operates over the lower bodies as an active force, entering
within the elements to cause movement, sound, colours,
and every natural change, including sense perception. This
is the so-called theory of light-incorporation (Panti 1999).
Light also explains some features of the Aristotelian cos-
mos developed in the commentary on Physics. Basically,
Aristotle’s three principles of form, privation, and the
underlying subject, are interpreted as light, the impurity
of light in things, and ﬁrst matter (Lewis 2005).
Thanks to its inﬁnite and indivisible constituents – the
light-atoms – every physical body is ‘‘measured’’ through
an original mathematics of inﬁnities, introduced in De
luce, which aims to connect Aristotelian physics and Pla-
tonic cosmology. Grosseteste’s commentary on Physics
further develops such an idea, asserting that the true
measure of bodies is provided by their different-sized
inﬁnities, which only God can count in deﬁnite mathe-
matical numbers (Lewis 2005). Besides, the very existence
of physical bodies presupposes a Creator of inﬁnite power,
for the passing from nothing to being (i.e., from
a-dimensionality to dimensionality) requires an inﬁnite
efﬁcient power. But in his theological works, such as De
unica forma and De statu causarum, and in the late com-
mentary on Pseudo-Dionysius, Grosseteste develops the
idea that the creature’s being also needs to be constantly
supported by God, who gives it its own form by modeling
it to himself, as a vessel shapes water by adhering to it
(Gieben in O’Carrol 2003). Grosseteste, following Augus-
tine, describes divine creation as the infusion of the ﬁrst
form, which is now considered to be the simple and sepa-
rate exemplar in God’s mind, by virtue of which a thing
exists. In his theological works, Grosseteste also uses his
metaphysics of light to explain the heavenly movements,
associated with angelic operations (McEvoy 1982, part 2),
although in his earlier De motu supercelestium he follows
1142 R
Robert Grosseteste

the Averroistic doctrine that the heavenly movements are
produced by a purely intellectual power (Panti 2001).
In conclusion, Grosseteste develops two complemen-
tary ideas on natural being: as a physical body, everything
is ‘‘made of’’ atoms of light/form and matter; as a creature,
everything is ‘‘shaped’’ from divine light/form, which is its
external and perfect exemplar.
Theory of Science and Optics
Grosseteste’s short works in optics, particularly his De
lineis-De natura locorum and De iride, assign great impor-
tance to mathematics in scientiﬁc explanations of the
physical world. This is because natural agents act upon
the senses or matter through the multiplication of their
‘‘species,’’ or rays, according to the agent’s distance, the
angle of their incidence, and the sphere or cone resulting
from their multiplication, a view later developed by Roger
Bacon (Hackett in McEvoy 1995). The geometrical atti-
tude of Grosseteste’s physics illustrates the basic assump-
tions
of
his
theory
of
science,
developed
in
his
Commentary on Posterior Analytics (Rossi in McEvoy
1995). First, there is a double inquiring path, called ‘‘res-
olution’’ and ‘‘composition.’’ Resolution or analysis starts
with observations to arrive at universal laws, while com-
position or synthesis moves from universal laws to infer
particular facts. Both ways are veriﬁed through experi-
mentation and a clear distinction between why (propter
quid) and how (quia) a fact happens. Scientiﬁc demon-
stration of how a fact happens implies the move from
effects to cause; conversely, the demonstration of why it
happens moves from cause to effects. Secondly, the Aris-
totelian theory of the subalternation of the sciences
implies that the principles of optics are conclusions in
geometry. Thus, mathematics is the highest and propter
quid science, being based ﬁrst on axioms, and every natu-
ral science ultimately depends on it (Laird 1987). This
methodological principle accompanies the theory that
light gives the universe both its physical and its mathe-
matical structure, being its ﬁrst form and acting according
to linear rays and geometrical ﬁgures. Thirdly, although
the human intellect does not rely on the senses in its
proper operation, but contemplates the exemplar forms
through a divine illumination, in the present life repeated
sense experience moves reason to formulate an ‘‘experi-
mental’’ universal principle. The universale complexum
experimentale is a sort of universal proposition which
sets forth the links of causality between two events (Rossi
2008). These three basic principles have nourished
Grosseteste’s modern reputation as the beginner of the
western
experimental
method
(Crombie
1953).
Grosseteste’s claims on controlled experiment have been
more rightly linked to everyday observation (Marrone
1986; Hackett in Mc Evoy 1995), but even in his works on
optics Grosseteste fails to apply them. This is true of his On
the Rainbow, though in this work he is the ﬁrst in medieval
science to introduce the law of refraction as the main cause
of the rainbow (Eastwood 1989). Surely, Grosseteste’s
emphasis on mathematics was his chief legacy to natural
philosophy in fourteenth-century Oxford.
Theological Issues
Grosseteste’s theological doctrines have strong philosoph-
ical implications, mainly on eternity, time, free will, and
divine foreknowledge. Grosseteste’s answers to Aristotle’s
arguments on the eternity of the world (Dales 1986) are
expounded in his Hexae¨meron and in On the Finitude of
Motion and Time and are ﬁnally based on the assumption
that Aristotle, using just his reason (aspectus), could not
achieve the truth, which is understood only when one’s
will (affectus) is directed to the unchanging divine realm.
In his On Truth Grosseteste states that truth is the adequacy
of each thing to its exemplar in God’s mind, and only divine
light can properly illuminate the human mind to grasp it.
Grosseteste also develops a doctrine of time, which is
expounded in his commentary on book 4 of the Physics.
He closely relates time to existence: the latter being the
dependence of every creature on God, which implies its
adherence to the divine ‘‘all at once’’ being. Time is the
thing’s privation of such ‘‘at-onceness’’ of eternity, so that
natural existence is not instantaneous (Marrone 1983).
De libero arbitrio is Grosseteste’s most inﬂuential work
on how to reconcile God’s foreknowledge with free will.
His solution is different from that of Boethius and Anselm,
and implies that there is a family of modal notions
according to which future events and true propositions
about them may be contingent, and that freedom requires
only this kind of contingency (Lewis 1991). Duns Scotus’
accounts of non-temporal modality were perhaps partly
inﬂuenced by this solution; moreover, Grosseteste states
with Eriugena that there is no temporal priority of God’s
power to its act, but just a causal priority. As regards free
will, the novelty of Grosseteste’s account is that freedom is
considered a capacity to will alternatives, since the choice
of good or evil is not intrinsic to reason and will, otherwise
grace would be superﬂuous. Evil comes from nihil, the
essential foundation of creaturly life (Lewis 1996).
Finally, Grosseteste’s psychological doctrine concerning
the naturalness of the union of soul and body to form the
perfect human nature has a strong theological implication
in Grosseteste’s idea that Christ’s highest sacriﬁce for
human redemption was his voluntary submission to the
separation of soul and body (McEvoy 1982, part 4).
Robert Grosseteste R
1143
R

See also: ▶Adam Wodeham ▶Alexander of Hales
▶Anselm of Canterbury ▶Aristotelianism in the Greek,
Latin, Syriac, Arabic, and Hebrew Traditions ▶Atomism
▶Augustine ▶Avicebron ▶Bonaventure ▶Epistemology
▶Form and Matter ▶Future Contingents ▶Ibn Rushd,
Muh˙ammad ibn Ah˙mad al-H˙ afı¯d (Averroes) ▶Ibn Sı¯na¯,
Abu¯ ʿAlı¯ (Avicenna) ▶John Duns Scotus ▶John Scottus
Eriugena ▶John Wyclif ▶Liberal Arts ▶Natural Philos-
ophy ▶Nicholas Oresme ▶Posterior Analytics, Commen-
taries on Aristotle’s ▶Pseudo-Dionysius, the Areopagite
▶Richard
Fishacre
▶Richard
Rufus
of
Cornwall
▶Robert Holcot ▶Roger Bacon ▶Species, Sensible and
Intelligible ▶Thomas Bradwardine ▶Truth, Theories of
▶Will ▶William of Alnwick ▶William of Auvergne
▶William of Ockham
Bibliography
Primary Sources (Latin Editions)
Grosseteste Robert (1861) Roberti Grosseteste Episcopi quondam
Lincolniensis Epistolae, ed. Luard HR. Longman, London
Grosseteste Robert (1912) Die philosophischen Werke des Robert
Grosseteste, Bischofs von Lincoln, ed. Baur L. Aschendorff, Mu¨nster
(standard edition of Grosseteste’s opuscula, http://www.grosseteste.
com)
Grosseteste Robert (1963) Roberti Grosseteste episcopi Lincolniensis
commentarius in viii libros Physicorum Aristotelis, ed. Dales RC.
University of Colorado Press, Boulder
Grosseteste Robert (1974) The Sun as res and signum: Grosseteste’s
commentary on Ecclesiasticus, chap 43, vv. 1–5, ed. McEvoy J.
Recherches de the´ologie ancienne et me´die´vale 41:38–91 (repr. in
McEvoy 1994)
Grosseteste Robert (1980) Robert Grosseteste’s theory of human nature.
With the text of his conference Ecclesia Sancta Celebrat, ed. McEvoy
J. Recherches de the´ologie ancienne et me´die´vale 47:131–187 (repr. in
McEvoy 1994)
Grosseteste Robert (1981) Commentarius in Posteriorum Analyticorum
Libros, ed. Rossi PB. L.S. Olschki, Firenze
Grosseteste Robert (1982) Robertus Grosseteste, Hexaæmeron, ed. Dales
RC, Gieben S. The British Academy, London
Grosseteste Robert (1983) Robert Grosseteste’s question on subsistence:
an echo of the Adamites, ed. Lewry PO. Mediaev Stud 45:1–21
(edition of De subsistentia rei)
Grosseteste Robert (1986) Robertus Grosseteste, De cessatione legalium,
ed. Dales RC, King EB. The British Academy, London
Grosseteste Robert (1987) Robertus Grosseteste, De decem mandatis, ed.
Dales RC, King EB. The British Academy, Oxford
Grosseteste Robert (1995) Robertus Grosseteste, Tabula, ed. Rosemann
PW. In: Corpus Christianorum Continuatio Mediaevalis, vol 130.
Brepols, Turnhout
Grosseteste Robert (2001) Moti, virtu` e motori celesti nella cosmologia di
Roberto Grossatesta. Studio ed edizione dei trattati De sphaera, De
cometis, De motu supercaelestium, ed. Panti C. Sismel-Edizioni del
Galluzzo, Florence
Grosseteste Robert (2003) Robertus Grosseteste, Dicta, ed. Goering J,
Westermann EJ. http://www.grosseteste.com
Lewis N (1991) The ﬁrst recension of Robert Grosseteste’s De libero
arbitrio. Mediaev Stud 53:1–88
Secondary Sources
Callus DA (ed) (1955) Robert Grosseteste scholar and bishop. Essays in
commemoration of the seventh centenary of his death. Clarendon,
Oxford
Crombie AC (1953) Robert Grosseteste and the origins of experimental
science 1100–1700. Clarendon, Oxford
Dales RC (1986) Robert Grosseteste’s place in medieval discussions of the
eternity of the world. Speculum 61:544–563
Dionisotti AC (1988) On the Greek studies of Robert Grosseteste. In:
Dionisotti AC, Grafton A, Kraye J (eds) The uses of Greek and Latin:
historical essays. Warburg, London, pp 19–39
Eastwood BS (1989) Astronomy and optics from Pliny to Descartes.
Variorum, London (large collection of previously edited articles,
many of which concern Grosseteste’s optics)
Gieben S (1962) Bibliographia universa Roberti Grosseteste ab anno 1473
ad annum 1969. Collectanea Franciscana 39:362–418 (for bibliogra-
phy from 1970 to 1991 see Callus in McEvoy (ed) 1995)
Gieben S (1966) Das Licht als entelechie bei Robert Grosseteste. In: La
ﬁlosoﬁa della natura nel Medioevo. Atti del terzo congresso
internazionale di ﬁlosoﬁa medioevale. Vita e Pensiero, Milan, pp
372–378
Ginther J, Goering J (eds.) (forthcoming), Robert Grosseteste: Studies and
Editions, Toronto, Pontiﬁcal Institute of Mediaeval Studies (pro-
ceedings of the International Conference ‘‘Robert Grosseteste and
his intellectual milieu’’, Lincoln, 17–21 July 2003)
Ginther JR (2004) Master of the sacred page: a study of the theology of
Robert Grosseteste, ca. 1229/30–1235. Ashgate, Aldershot
Laird WR (1987) Robert Grosseteste on the subalternate sciences. Traditio
43:147–169
Lewis N (1996) Power and contingency in Robert Grosseteste and Duns
Scotus. In: Honnefelder L, Wood R, Dreyer M (eds) John Duns
Scotus: metaphysics and ethics. Brill, Leiden, pp 205–225
Lewis N (2005) Robert Grosseteste and the continuum. In: Honnefelder L,
Wood R, Dreyer M, Aris M-A (eds) Albertus Magnus and the begin-
nings of the medieval reception of Aristotle in the Latin West.
Aschendorff, Mu¨nster, pp 159–187
Mackie EA, Goering J (eds) (2003) Editing Robert Grosseteste. University
of Toronto Press, Toronto (collective contributions on editorial pro-
jects concerning Grosseteste)
Marrone SP (1983) William of Auvergne and Robert Grosseteste: new
ideas of truth in the early thirteenth century. Princeton University
Press, Princeton
McEvoy J (1982) The philosophy of Robert Grosseteste. Clarendon,
Oxford (corrected reprint, 1986)
McEvoy J (1994) Robert Grosseteste, exegete and philosopher. Variorum,
Aldershot (large collection of McEvoy’s previously published articles)
McEvoy J (ed) (1995) Robert Grosseteste: new perspectives on his thought
and scholarship. Brepols, Turnhout (collective contributions on
Grosseteste’s philosophical doctrines)
McEvoy J (2000) Robert Grosseteste. Oxford University Press, Oxford
O’Carrol M (ed) (2003) Robert Grosseteste and the beginnings of a British
theological tradition. Istituto storico dei Cappuccini, Rome
Oliver S (2004) Robert Grosseteste on light, truth and experimentum.
Vivarium 42:151–180
Panti C (1999) L’incorporazione della luce secondo Roberto Grossatesta.
Medioevo e Rinascimento 13(10):45–102
Rossi PB (2008) Filosoﬁa naturale e scienza del contingente in
Grossatesta. In: Perfetti S (ed) Conoscenza e contingenza nella
tradizione aristotelica medievale. Edizioni ETS, Pisa, pp 51–82
Schulman NM (1997) Husband, father, and bishop? Grosseteste in Paris.
Speculum 72:330–346
1144 R
Robert Grosseteste

Southern R (1986) Robert Grosseteste: the growth of an English mind in
medieval Europe. Clarendon, Oxford (second edition 1992)
Thomson SH (1940) The writings of Robert Grosseteste, Bishop of
Lincoln, 1235–1253. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Van Dyke C (2010), The truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth:
Robert Grosseteste on Universals (and the Posterior analytics), Jour-
nal of the History of Philosophy, 48, Number 2, pp. 153–170
Web Sites
Ginther J. The electronic Grosseteste. http://www.grosseteste.com. It con-
tains all texts by Grosseteste edited in Baur (1912); Dales (1963);
Luard (1861). It also includes a data-base and an extensive searchable
bibliography
Robert Holcot
JOHN T. SLOTEMAKER
Department of Theology
Boston College
Chestnut Hill, MA
USA
Abstract
Robert Holcot was an English Dominican theologian and
philosopher who was philosophically inﬂuenced by the
work of William of Ockham and other English philoso-
phers of the early fourteenth century. He is often consid-
ered a ‘‘skeptic’’ with respect to what human reason can
know about theological truths (Trinity, Incarnation, and
Eucharist), although such an interpretation of Holcot is
misleading. Holcot, because of his patronage to Richard
de Bury and his access to Bury’s library, displays
a remarkable familiarity with classical literature and phi-
losophy. His lectures on Wisdom were widely read in the
late-medieval period.
Robert Holcot (b. c. 1290–d. 1349) was an English theo-
logian, philosopher, and biblical exegete from the village
of Holcot near Northampton. He entered the Dominican
order at Northampton and went to Oxford sometime
around 1326, commenting on Peter Lombard’s Sentences
during the years 1331–1333. After lecturing on the
Sentences, Holcot became a Dominican regent master of
Theology at Oxford – and, according to tradition, at
Cambridge as well – prior to returning to the Dominican
priory at Northampton in 1343. Holcot remained at the
priory until his death of the plague in 1349.
The writings of Robert Holcot are located chronolog-
ically at the apex of English Scholasticism (1330–1340), or
what William Courtenay has called ‘‘New
English
Theology’’ (Courtenay 1987:268–274). A contemporary
of the other great English Scholastics of that decade –
Thomas
Bradwardine,
William
Crathorn,
Thomas
Felthorp, Robert Halifax, Richard Kilvington, Roger
Rosetus, and Adam Wodeham – Holcot’s writings simul-
taneously represent the inﬂuence of logic in England dur-
ing the mid-fourteenth century, and a remarkable
familiarity with classical Latin authors. Beryl Smalley is
correct to note that the result of this diversity is that
scholars know of ‘‘three Holcots’’: (1) the ‘‘Scholastic’’
writer who is often criticized for his intellectual skepti-
cism, and for his ‘‘semi-Pelagianism’’; (2) the assistant of
Richard de Bury, the noted bibliophile, who was well
versed in classical authors; (3) the English preacher, who
had a signiﬁcant impact on preaching in fourteenth-
century England (Smalley, 5–6). Unfortunately, there is
not yet a comprehensive overview of Holcot’s life and
works, and the three perspectives on Holcot noted by
Smalley have yet to be adequately harmonized.
Writings, Texts, and Manuscripts
The writings of Holcot include: a commentary on Peter
Lombard’s Sentences (De stellis, a commentary on
Aristotle’s De caelo that was originally part of his com-
mentary but circulated separately), the Sex articuli, De
imputabilitate peccati, the Sermo ﬁnalis (his concluding
sermon to his lectures on the Sentences), the Quaestiones
quodlibetales, the Moralitates, the Convertimini, Postilla
super librum Sapientiae (lectures on the Book of Wisdom),
lectures on Matthew, lectures on the Book of the Twelve
Prophets, select lectures on Ecclesiastes, and a sermon
collection.
The above works can be divided into ﬁve general
categories. First, Holcot wrote speciﬁcally theological
works: a commentary on each book of the Lombard’s
Sentences (6, 4, 1, and 8 questions on the four books of
the Sentences respectively), and De imputabilitate peccati.
Second, he also was involved in ordinary and quodlibetal
debates, which were often more explicitly philosophical:
the Quaestiones quodlibetales, and his Sex articuli that
discuss questions of epistemology. Third, Holcot lectured
on various books of the Bible, and produced the following
Scriptural commentaries: his lectures on the book of
Wisdom
(Postilla
super
librum
Sapientiae),
a commentary on Ecclesiastes and on the 12 minor Proph-
ets. Fourth, he composed two works for preachers: the
Moralitates and the Convertimini. Finally, there is also
a collection of Sermons preached by Holcot throughout
his career.
The majority of Holcot’s writings are only available in
late
ﬁfteenth-/early
sixteenth-century
editions
and
Robert Holcot R
1145
R

numerous manuscripts. Selected quodlibetal questions
have been edited: the sex articuli, the sermo ﬁnalis, and
the tractatus de stellis. Thus, the more philosophical works
have been edited, but few of his theological works, ser-
mons or commentaries. The best introduction to Holcot’s
theological writings is found in the work of Fritz Hoff-
mann and Heiko Oberman.
Faith and Reason
Robert Holcot’s quodlibetal question, Utrum theologia sit
scientia (Muckle (ed) 1958), is a detailed investigation into
the scientiﬁc nature of theology. The Scholastic authors of
the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries debated the ques-
tion of whether theology is a practical or speculative
science, or whether it was primarily deductive or declara-
tive, but they tended to agree that it was a science. Holcot,
breaking with tradition, concludes that theology is not
a science per se, if scientia is understood strictly as demon-
strable knowledge. That is, theological truths – such as the
existence of God – are not demonstrable by the viator in
this life. Holcot, following William of Ockham, argued
against the traditional proofs for the existence of God as
developed by earlier theologians such as Anselm, Thomas
Aquinas, and John Duns Scotus. Holcot argues that
human reason cannot demonstrate the existence of God;
and while Holcot quickly dismisses arguments based on
empirical premises (i.e., cosmological argument), he
devotes more attention to Anselm’s ontological argument.
Beyond the question of the scientiﬁc nature of theology,
fourteenth-century
theologians
were
increasingly
concerned with the applicability of Aristotelian logic to
certain revealed theological truths (such as the Trinity and
the Incarnation). The medieval Scholastics generally agreed
that
Aristotle’s
logic
was
universally
valid,
and
corresponded to natural reason. But, in certain instances
there was a tension, or conﬂict, between Aristotelian syllo-
gisms and particular doctrines. In Determinatio X Holcot
considers various syllogisms regarding the Trinity that
prove particularly problematic (Gelber 1974:381–443).
There he considers the following expository syllogism (a
third ﬁgure syllogism with a singular middle term):
Essentia est Pater (The Divine Essence is the Father)
Essentia est Filius (The Divine Essence is the Son)
Ergo, Filius est Pater. (Therefore, the Son is the Father)
The problem, of course, is that the individual propositions
are true and the conclusion is false, despite the seemingly
valid syllogistic form. Medieval authors had proposed
various solutions to the problem – that is, Ockham denied
that a term that is simultaneously one thing and many
things (essentia above) is a singular term – but Holcot
rejected such solutions that are grounded in positing
a ‘‘real,’’ ‘‘conceptual,’’ or ‘‘formal’’ distinction between
the Divine Essence and the Persons of the Trinity. Instead,
he followed Richard Campsall in developing a theory of
alternative logic.
Holcot argues in his commentary on the Sentences I.5
and in Determinatio X that there is a twofold logic that
applies to all of reality: the logica naturalis (logic of nature/
natural order) and logica ﬁdei (logic of faith). Because of
this argument, Robert Holcot, along with the author of the
Centiloquium Theologicum and Richard Campsall, are
often considered ‘‘skeptics’’ with respect to the relation-
ship between faith and reason. But, as Fritz Hoffman and
Hester Gelber have argued, the charge of skepticism is
unjustly applied to Holcot.
Holcot did not reject Aristotelian logic (logica
naturalis) or deny that the Trinity can be understood
rationally according to particular logical rules. The prob-
lem, according to Holcot, is that Aristotle’s logic is not
universal; the Divine Trinity and Incarnation are revealed
realities that Aristotle did not know about, and therefore
did not take into account in his logical works. But, from
this it does not follow that the logic of faith is irrational,
and in fact Holcot argues that it is ﬁtting (non est
inconveniens) that natural logic is inapplicable to the Trin-
ity given that faith concerns realities that transcend the
physical world (Sent. I, q. 5, f. 2ra). Instead, Holcot pro-
poses various rules for excluding middle terms that can
stand for one thing and many things simultaneously in an
expository syllogism. These rules of faith (logica ﬁdei) are
logical, grounded on reason, and offer a ‘‘supplemental
logic’’ that is applicable to trinitarian syllogisms.
Covenantal Theology
The theological developments of the early fourteenth cen-
tury, in authors such as John Duns Scotus and William of
Ockham, emphasized the contingency of the world and
God’s sovereignty to have chosen the actual world from
among various possible worlds. Inherent in the discussion
of the contingency of the world was the theological dis-
tinction between God’s absolute power (potentia absoluta)
and his ordained power (potentia ordinata). The absolute
power of God can bring about anything that does not
involve a logical contradiction, but, of all of the
unactualized
possibilities,
God
chooses
or
ordains
according a logically consistent subset of these possibilities
(potentia ordinata). This basic distinction is found
throughout Holcot’s works, and informs his own cove-
nantal theology.
According to Holcot, God de potentia ordinata,
established a covenant or pact with humanity. This is
1146 R
Robert Holcot

developed in Holcot’s Postilla super librum Sapientiae and
Commentary on the Sentences, where he argues that God
freely established a covenant with humanity to give grace
to all who make full use of their natural abilities. Through
this covenant that God enters into freely the human being
who ‘‘does his/her best’’ (facit quod in se est) merits
a reward (meritum de congruo) from God. There are two
points about this general picture that are important: ﬁrst,
Holcot strongly holds that God’s ordained power is radi-
cally free and not bound to anything other than the law of
noncontradiction; second, the semi-Pelagian position
above is contextualized within a broader understanding
of God’s eternal predestination. That is, Holcot holds that
all good works are the effect of God’s predestination in
that God’s prevenient grace provides the possibility for
human good works.
Influence
The works of Robert Holcot were important throughout
the fourteenth, ﬁfteenth, and sixteenth centuries. His lec-
tures on the book of Wisdom have been called a ‘‘medieval
bestseller,’’ and almost every signiﬁcant library in late
medieval Europe is said to have possessed a copy (Smalley,
10). Further, his theological and philosophical works were
widely available, and read seriously, by sixteenth-century
theologians. Thinkers as diverse as Martin Luther and
Michael Servetus engaged Holcot’s trinitarian theology
and soteriology, although much more work on the later
middle ages is necessary before scholars can get a clearer
picture of the inﬂuence of Robert Holcot, and ‘‘New
English Theology,’’ on subsequent thinkers.
See also: ▶Adam Wodeham ▶Anselm of Canterbury
▶John Duns Scotus ▶Richard Campsall ▶Richard
Kilvington ▶Robert Halifax ▶Roger Roseth ▶Thomas
Aquinas ▶Thomas Bradwardine ▶William Crathorn
▶William of Ockham
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Holcot Robert (1494) Super libros Sapientiae. Hagenau, (repr. Minerva G.
M.B.H., Frankfurt, 1974)
Holcot Robert (1518) In quatuor libros sententiarum quaestiones. Lyons,
(repr. Minerva GMBH, Frankfurt, 1967). (Also contains De
imputabilitate peccati, and Determinationes I–XII, the ﬁrst of
which is not by Holkot)
Holcot Robert (1949) Sermo ﬁnalis. In: Wey JC, The Sermo ﬁnalis of
Robert Holcot. Mediaeval Stud 11:219–224
Holcot Robert (1957) Tractatus de stellis. In: Thorndike L, A new work by
Robert Holcot (Corpus Christi College, Oxford, MS 138). Archives
inter d’hist des scien 10:227–235
Holcot Robert (1958) Quaestiones quodlibetales. In: Muckle JT, Utrum
Theologia sit scientia. A quodlibetal question of Robert Holcot, O.P.
Mediaeval Stud 20:127–153
Holcot Robert (1964) Quaestiones quodlibetales. In: Moody EA,
A quodlibetal question of Robert Holcot, O.P. on the problem of
the objects of knowledge and of belief. Speculum 39:53–74
Holcot Robert (1967) Quaestiones quodlibetales. In: Roberto Holcot O.P.:
Dottrina della grazia e della giustiﬁcazione con due questioni
quodlibetali inedite, ed. Molteni P. Editrice Alzani, Pinerolo
Holcot Robert (1971) Quaestiones quodlibetales. In: Courtenay WJ,
A revised text of Robert Holcot’s quodlibetal dispute on whether
God is able to know more than he knows. Archiv fu¨r Gesch der Phil
53:1–21
Holcot Robert (1974) Determinatio X. In: Gelber HG, Logic and the
trinity: a clash of values in Scholastic thought, 1300–1335. Disserta-
tion, University of Wisconsin
Holcot Robert (1981) Super libros Sapientiae, chap. 3, lects. 35 and 52;
chap. 12, lect. 145. Forerunners of the reformation: the shape of late
medieval thought illustrated by key documents, ed. and trans.
Oberman H. Fortress Press, Philadelphia, pp 142–150
Holcot Robert (1983) Quaestiones quodlibetales. Exploring the bound-
aries of reason: three questions on the nature of God by Robert
Holcot, OP, ed. Gelber HG. Pontiﬁcal Institute of Mediaeval Studies,
Toronto
Holcot Robert (1993a) Quaestiones quodlibetales. In: Villads Jensen K,
Robert Holkot’s Questio on killing inﬁdels: a reevaluation and an
edition. Archivum Frat Praed 63:207–228
Holcot Robert (1993b) Sex articuli. Die ‘‘Conferentiae’’ des Robert
Holcot O.P. und die akademischen Auseinandersetzungen an der
Universita¨t Oxford 1330–1332, ed. Hoffmann F. Beitra¨ge zur
Geschichte der Philosophie und Theologie Mittelalters, vol 36.
Mu¨nster, pp 65–127
Holcot Robert (1995) Quaestiones quodlibetales. Seeing the future
clearly: questions on future contingents, ed. Streveler P, Tachau K
with Courtenay WJ, Gelber HG. Pontiﬁcal Institute of Mediaeval
Studies, Toronto
Secondary Sources
Courtenay WJ (1980) The lost Matthew commentary of Robert Holcot, O.
P. Archivum Frat Praed 50:103–112
Courtenay WJ (1987) Schools and scholars in fourteenth-century
England. Princeton University Press, Princeton
Del Pra M (1956) Linguaggio e conoscenza assertiva nel pensiero di
Roberto Holcot. Rivista crit di stor della ﬁloso 11:15–40
Del Pra M (1974) La proposizione come oggetto della conoscenza
scientiﬁca nel pensiero di Roberto Holcot. In: Logica e realta`:
momenti del pensiero medievale. Laterza, Bari, pp 83–119
Gelber HG (1974) Logic and the trinity: a clash of values in Scholastic
thought, 1300–1335. Dissertation, University of Wisconsin
Gelber HG (2004) It could have been otherwise: contingency and neces-
sity in Dominican theology at Oxford, 1300–1350. Brill, Leiden
Gillespie RE (1971) Robert Holcot’s Quodlibeta. Traditio 27:480–490
Hoffman F (1972) Die theologische Methode des Oxforder Dominika-
nerlehrers Robert Holcot. Beitra¨ge zur Geschichte der Philosophie
und Theologie des Mittelalters, vol 5. Aschendorff Verlag, Mu¨nster
Incandela JM (1994) Robert Holcot, O.P., on prophecy, the contingency
of revelation, and the freedom of God. Medieval Philos Theol
4:165–188
Kennedy LA (1993) The philosophy of Robert Holcot, fourteenth-century
skeptic. Stud Hist Philos 27. Lewiston
Robert Holcot R
1147
R

Kirjavainen H (1993) Trinitarian sophisms in Robert Holcot’s theology.
In: Read S (ed) Sophisms in medieval logic and grammar. Acts of the
ninth European symposium for medieval logic and semantics.
Springer, Dordrecht, pp 348–356
Oberman HA (1962) Facientibus quod in se est Deus non denegat
gratiam: Robert Holcot, OP and the beginnings of Luther’s theology.
Harv Theol Rev 55:317–342
Schepers H (1970) Holkot contra dicta Crathorn: I. Quellenkritik und
biographische
Auswertung
der
Bakkalareatsschriften
zweier
Oxforder Dominikaner des XIV Jahrhunderts. Philosophisches Jahr
77:320–354
Smalley B (1955) Robert Holcot, OP. Archivum Frat Praed 26:5–97
Tachau K (1988) Vision and certitude in the age of Ockham: optics,
epistemology and the foundations of semantics 1250–1345. Studien
und Texte zur geistesgeschichte des Mittelalters, vol 22. Brill, Leiden
Tachau K (1996) Logic’s God and the natural order in late medieval
Oxford: the teaching of Robert Holcot. Ann Sci 53:235–267
Robert Kilwardby
JOSE´ FILIPE SILVA
Department of Social Sciences and Philosophy
University of Jyva¨skyla¨
Jyva¨skyla¨
Finland
Abstract
The English Dominican Robert Kilwardby (1215?–1279)
divided his career in between Paris and Oxford. First as
a student and then as a master at the Faculty of Arts in
Paris in the period 1231–1245, he produced the earliest
comprehensive group of commentaries of the arts syllabus
that came down to us, with comments on the subjects of
grammar, logic, and ethics. After 1245, approximately, he
moved back to England where he entered the Dominican
Order, studied and then taught theology at Oxford and
began a promising institutional career. In 1261, he was
elected Provincial of the Order in England and in 1272 was
appointed Archbishop of Canterbury, duty he performed
until his designation as Cardinal of Porto and Santa
Ruﬁna. He died in Viterbo, at the Papal court, in 1279.
After the entrance in the Dominican Order, Kilwardby
devoted himself to the study of theology, namely by writ-
ing a Sentences commentary. During this period, he
attempted to conciliate the philosophy of Augustine with
Aristotle. However, in case of conﬂicting views, as it is the
case of intellectual cognition, Augustine is preferred since
he is more enlightened than Aristotle in spiritual matters
(as Kilwardby himself repeated). Kilwardby is the author
of an encyclopedic work, the De ortu scientiarum, which
constituted one of the most copied introductions to
knowledge in the medieval period. In 1277, he was the
main responsible of the so-called Oxford Condemnations.
This event, identiﬁed as an attack against the philosophy
of Thomas Aquinas, in particular his thesis of the unicity
of substantial form, contributed largely to the negative
way Kilwardby was seen by his and our contemporaries:
as a conservative neo-Augustinian, ﬁghting the progress of
Aristotelianism and Thomism. Whether he ﬁts into this
picture, is a matter open to dispute.
Life
Robert Kilwardby, or Robertus Kilewardbii, Kilvirbi,
Kulverbi, Kalverbi as his name is misspelled in medieval
manuscripts, was an Englishman born either in Leicester-
shire or in Yorkshire (Sommer-Seckendorff 1937). The
date of his birth, unknown, is assumed to have been
between 1200 and 1215, probably the latter. Kilwardby
started his studies at the University of Paris in 1231,
becoming master of Arts around 1237. He taught at the
Faculty of Arts between 1237 and 1245, when he moved
back to England. Around 1245, he entered the Dominican
Order (Sommer-Seckendorff 1937) starting a rather suc-
cessful ecclesiastic career. He taught theology at Oxford
from c. 1254 until 1261, when he was elected Provincial of
the English Dominicans. In 1269, he participated in the
Dominican General Chapter in Paris, where he, together
with Thomas Aquinas (and three other members), was
responsible of analyzing the process of Bartholomew of
Tours. In 1271, the Master General of the Dominicans,
John of Vercelli, sent a questionnaire to three theologians
of the Order, Albert the Great, Thomas Aquinas, and
Robert Kilwardby. The 43 questions, which should be
answered in a forma taxata, deal with a wide range of
theological problems, from the cause of motion of the
celestial bodies to the location and nature of Hell
(Chenu 1930; Silva 2007). Kilwardby was nominated
Archbishop of Canterbury in 1272. Two of his acts as
Archbishop were the coronation of Edward I, at the West-
minster Abbey (August 19, 1274), and the issuing of the
Condemnations of Oxford in 1277. On March 18, 1277,
Kilwardby, at the head of a meeting including all the regent
and non-regent masters of the University of Oxford,
issued a list of 30 propositions on the subjects of grammar
(4), logic (10), and natural philosophy (16). These prop-
ositions were prohibited for being primarily philosophical
mistakes, and only secondarily against Christian faith.
Although close in time to the Condemnations of Paris,
no proof of connection has been presented, nor that
Kilwardby had acted under Papal orders (even if fre-
quently assumed). The direct targets of these propositions
are still to be identiﬁed (Lewry 1981a). Nevertheless, even
1148 R
Robert Kilwardby

in Kilwardby’s time, some of the propositions in
naturalibus were interpreted as aimed at the teaching of
Thomas Aquinas, namely those propositions related with
his unicity of substantial form. The ﬁrst reaction came in
a letter written by Peter of Conﬂans, disciple of Aquinas.
Kilwardby’s answer constitutes the clearest expression of
his theory of the plurality of substantial forms in human
beings. A more institutional reaction took place when the
General Chapter of the Order to which both Aquinas and
Kilwardby belonged, meeting in Milan (1278), decided to
send a commission in order to investigate and punish
those who blackened the writings of Thomas Aquinas in
scandalum ordinis. The results of this commission are not
known. The next Chapter, held in Paris, repeated the
advertence and promoted the praise of Thomas’ works.
Meanwhile, Pope Nicholas III appointed Kilwardby to
Cardinal of Porto and S. Ruﬁna in 1278, which allowed
him to move from England to Italy. This nomination can
be understood either as an attempt to protect Kilwardby
from his own Order or as a way of stopping Kilwardby’s
actions toward Thomas and Thomism. The Oxford Con-
demnations were later interpreted as a campaign against
Thomism (Callus 1955), but this interpretation has been
challenged (Wilshire 1964). A conciliatory approach can
be to argue that Kilwardby was defending an interpreta-
tion of Aristotle that made it compatible with his own
reading of Augustine. Kilwardby died in 1279, soon after
his arrival at the Papal court in Viterbo.
Works
A complete list of works by Kilwardby includes texts on
logic, grammar, theology, and natural philosophy. Among
the works of the Parisian period should be counted the
Course on the Logica vetus (Lewry 1978), which consist of
a set of commentaries on the Isagoge, Praedicamenta,
Perihermeneias,
Liber
sex
principiorum,
and
Liber
divisionum Boethii, the commentaries on the Analytica
priora (c. 1240, Ebbesen 1997; published as Giles of
Rome), on the Analytica posteriora, on the Priscianus
minor, the In librum topycorum, on the Sophistici elenchi.
From the Oxford period are the works De natura
relationis, De ortu scientiarum, De spiritu fantastico, De
tempore, Quaestiones in quattuor libros sententiarum, De
43 questionibus, Epistola ad Petrum de Conﬂeto. From the
same period are also some minor theological works, as the
De confessione, De necessitate incarnationis, De conscientia
et de synderesi, the Tabulae super originalia patrum, the
Arbor consanguinitatis et afﬁnitatis, and some sermons
(the Sermo in capite ieiunii and the Sermo in dominica in
passione). Worth mentioning is a letter expressing some
criticism over Franciscan poverty (Epistola ad novitios de
excellentia ordine praedicatorum), which survives in
Pecham’s answer (Tractatus contra fratrem Robertum
Kilwarby). Considered unauthentic are the commentary
on
the
Priscianus
maior,
and
the
Sophismata
grammaticalia (Rosier 2007). Doubts have also been cast
concerning the authorship of the commentaries In
barbarismum Donati, the De accentu prisciani, and the
Sophismata logicalia. The identiﬁcation (Ga`l 1953) of the
commentaries on the Physics, Metaphysics ascribed to him
by the Catalogus Stamsensis has been questioned (Callus
1963) and is now thought to be the work of Geoffrey of
Aspall.
Thought
As a central ﬁgure of the thirteenth century philosophy
and theology, both in Paris and in Oxford, Kilwardby was
inﬂuenced by, and in some cases in contact with, authors
as Robert Grosseteste, Richard Fishacre, Richard Rufus of
Cornwall, and Bonaventure. The presence of Bonaventure
in Kilwardby’s Sentence commentary seems clear, for
example on the topic of Trinitarian theology, and the
inﬂuence of Rufus has also been noted (Wood 2001), but
further research is needed. On the other hand, researchers
have been stressing the inﬂuence of Kilwardby’s commen-
taries (Categories, Prior and Posterior Analytics) on Albert
the Great (Ebbesen 1981; Cannone 2002; Thom 2007),
and Roger Bacon (de Libera 1987), but also Lambert of
Auxerre, Simon of Faversham, Radulphus Brito, and Rich-
ard of Campsall (Lagerlund 2000). Worth mentioning are
the ontological implications of Kilwardby’s theory, namely
his focus on syllogisms with propositions that express per
se necessities, which implies an essential relation between
subject and predicate (Lagerlund 2000). A proposition
correctly formulated expresses something essential about
the reality, and the way we understand reality (Thom
2007). Logic is the science of reasoning, and knowledge
is acquired through demonstrative syllogism. Matter and
form analysis is employed to syllogisms and propositions
but also to words. Words are made up of utterance (vox),
and act of signifying. Meaning is the relation of a sign to
that of which it is a sign (Lewry 1978, 1981b). Kilwardby’s
grammatical theory was equally inﬂuential. In his com-
mentary on the Priscianus minor, Kilwardby analyzes the
correction (congruitas) and the completeness (perfectio) of
sentences in cases where the rules of construction are not
observed. It is the case of ﬁgurative constructions, which
he considers ungrammatical simpliciter but congruous
secundum quid, with relation to the meaning intended by
the speaker (i.e., a criterion of grammaticality based on the
authorial intent: Sirridge 1990). The sentence is acceptable
because the hearer has the capacity to, from the meaning
Robert Kilwardby R
1149
R

of the ill-formed utterance, to understand what the mean-
ing intended by the speaker was (Rosier 1994). Neverthe-
less, a normal construction represents the intention of the
speaker in correct grammatical terms (Kneepkens 1984).
After 1240–1244, Kilwardby comments on the Ethica
vetus et nova, that is, books I–III of the Ethica Nicomachea
(Lewry 1986). Together with his course on the logica vetus,
it constitutes the most comprehensive set of commentaries
of a master of Arts that has survived. In both cases he
introduces the works according to Aristotelian doctrine of
the four causes: the material cause concerns the subject of
the work in question, the formal cause the mode of pro-
cedure (modus and ordo), the ﬁnal cause the purpose of
the work (utilitas), and the efﬁcient cause the authorship
(Lewry 1978). The importance of Kilwardby’s commen-
tary on the Ethica resides in the ability of the Dominican to
distinguish between the Aristotelian and Christian under-
standing of virtue, as in the analysis of happiness, virtue,
and human goodness in philosophical rather than theo-
logical terms. The philosophical happiness (felicitas) is
taken as not coincident with the theological beatitude
(beatitudo) (Celano 1986, 1999). By holding with Aristotle
that human virtuous actions are the cause of happiness,
and not the union with God that the theological reading
stressed, Kilwardby departs from the positions of his con-
temporaries. Kilwardby explains that, for Aristotle, hap-
piness is attainable by human beings during their life
(Lewry 1986; Celano 1986). In his works, Kilwardby
shows an acquaintance with the works of Aristotle, not
limited either to the works commented or to common-
places (Lewry 1978; Brown 1996; against Long 1996), as
well as an attempt to provide an accurate and systematized
account of Aristotle’s text (Thom 2007).
The inﬂuence of Averroes is felt in Kilwardby’s logic
(Lewry 1978; Lagerlund 2000; Cannone 2002) and natural
philosophy (McAleer 1999). On two topics, however,
Kilwardby criticizes Averroes: on the dependence of the
unity of time on celestial motion in the De tempore, and on
Averroes’ theory of one soul common to all human beings.
About the latter, Kilwardby considers it to be contrary to
philosophical truth, faith, and even Aristotle’s intention.
Kilwardby argues against Averroes, that only with respect
to the different parts of the same body can the soul be one
(and not to different bodies). Moreover, as the soul is the
form of the body (forma corporis est anima), there cannot
be the same form for all men. Finally, if there would be
only one soul to all men, the same soul would know and
ignore, be saved, and damned. Moreover, Kilwardby
claims the intellects of different human beings are distinct
even when they have the same object of thought because
the intelligible is one only in species and not numerically
(simulacrum eiusdem rei sensibilis a diversis intellectum non
est idem numero sed specie solum). Plato’s likeness is the
same only according to the species in the minds of Socra-
tes and Cicero. Universals, which exist in the divine mind
as causal forms or exemplars, exist both in the human
mind and in real things. As the essences of real individual
things, universals are abstracted by the mind from the
species received through the senses. The mind considers
that which is common to the multitude of the images,
therefore the unity of the universal is based ‘‘on agreement
in essence’’ (convenientia essentiae) (Lewry 1981).
Kilwardby is also the author of a widely circulated
introduction to the arts (their classiﬁcatory scheme, the
deﬁnition of their objects and methods), the De ortu
scientiarum, written c. 1250, which has been qualiﬁed as
an optimistic encyclopedia. It is based on the Aristotelian
notion of science and on the model of Hugh of St. Victor’s
Didascalicon de studio legendi, although the inﬂuence of
other classiﬁcatory schemes can be found, for example,
Gundissalinus’ De divisione philosophiae (Alessio 2001).
Philosophy is deﬁned as the study of both divine and
human things, in order to live virtuously. Also in his
commentary on the Ethica vetus et nova, Kilwardby
stresses that knowledge is motivated by a moral end
(Celano 1999), and in the introduction to the Isagoge he
insists in the perfection of the soul by knowledge and
virtue
(Lewry
1978).
Philosophy
(scientia
humana
commendabilis) is divided in speculativa (which is further
divided into naturalis, mathematica, and divina), activa
(which is further divided into mechanica and ethica), and
sermocinalis (which is further divided into grammatica,
logica,
and
rhetorica).
Following
Hugh,
Kilwardby
includes the mechanical arts in the classiﬁcatory scheme,
with some terminological changes in order to approach
them to the social–economical context (Alessio 2001), and
the replacing the theatrica for the architectonica. As in
Hugh, magic (scientia humana vituperabilis) is excluded
from the sciences.
It is in the De ortu as well as in two later works, the De
43 questionibus (from 1271) and the Epistola (from 1277 to
1278), that we ﬁnd Kilwardby’s notion of materia naturalis
or physica. Natural matter is impregnated with active
potencies, which Kilwardby identiﬁes with the Augustin-
ian seminal reasons. Active potencies are potencies
because ordered to actuality, striving for form, and as to
strive (appetere) is some kind of action, it is some kind of
form. Natural matter is impregnated with active potencies,
which correspond to forms in an incomplete state, that is,
the difference between the complete form and the active
potency is their degree of actuality and not a difference of
essence. The active potencies, transmitted with the semen,
1150 R
Robert Kilwardby

are educed from matter, through the action of the corpo-
real spirit, as the vegetative and sensitive forms of the soul.
The being receives the intellective form at a certain stage of
fetal development (Silva 2007). The double origin justiﬁes,
together with the principle that each form is responsible
for certain operations, the composite nature of the human
soul. The vegetative and the sensitive forms are qualiﬁed as
the principle of life because through them the being per-
forms the operations of life, while the intellective form is
created by God, is not act of any part of the body, and does
not operate through bodily organs. The intellective soul is
a hoc aliquid and the perfection of the sensitive body. Once
infused, the intellective potency connects the previous
potencies (vegetative and sensitive), completing and
perfecting them. The three substantial forms constitute
one composite unity due to their natural inclination to
each other and to the body. The relation of the rational
soul with the body is essential and not accidental, being
precisely that which distinguishes the human and angelic
rational soul (both are composed of a material together
with a formal principle, in a declaration of universal
hylemorphism). Also the body is a composite substance
constituted by an ordered series of forms. For all this,
Kilwardby is said to hold a plurality of substantial forms
in human beings.
Kilwardby also wrote a commentary on the Sentences,
in the form of questions (c. 1256). Kilwardby discusses,
especially in questions 35–36 of the ﬁrst book, the prob-
lem of the Trinity. The persons are distinguished in the
following way. God Father begets God Son from His own
substance and the Holy Spirit proceeds from both. The
origin, and the way of being originated, brings about
opposite relations between the persons: generating, being
generated, and proceeding. Divine persons are relations,
not in the sense of inhering (otherwise they would be
accidents), but in the sense of being related to something
extra se (and as such are substances). Moreover, love
comes from knowledge. The Father and the Son know
each other as they are, and the love which arises from
this knowledge is the Holy Spirit. An analogous reasoning
is applied to the human rational soul, as the image of the
divine Trinity.
Although there is a certain continuity of thought
between Kilwardby’s Parisian and Oxford periods, namely
by his use of logical reasoning into theological questions,
at least on two subjects Kilwardby changed his mind. The
ﬁrst concerns the cause of movement of celestial bodies,
and the second the cause of individuation. About the
former, while earlier he holds that celestial bodies are
moved by their intelligence, later Kilwardby prefers the
original solution from John Blund’s Tractatus de anima,
that is, the natural inclination of the celestial bodies’ own
weight (Silva 2007). In both solutions, Kilwardby is argu-
ing for celestial motion to be a natural rather than violent
motion, as in both cases the cause of motion is internal to
the thing moved. About the latter, in his Sentences com-
mentary, Kilwardby argues that both matter and form are
intrinsic causes for individuation: matter as the passive
cause (causa receptiva), form as the active cause. This
particular
individual
actual
being
(ens
actuale
et
individuum) is the actual designation (signatio actualis)
of matter by form. Form designates matter, and designat-
ing matter, designates itself secundum diversas rationes.
The individual property is actual existence. This individ-
ual property, that is, the actual existence of the individual,
is substantial to the individual and accidental to the
species.
A central issue in Kilwardby’s work is the attempt to
conciliate the philosophy of Aristotle and Augustine
(Lewry 1983), and when this proves not to be possible,
he sacriﬁces Aristotle in favor of Augustine. This is partic-
ularly acute in his De spiritu fantastico (1256–1261). The
Aristotelian scent given by the subtitle of the text – de
receptione speciarum – is compensated by the strong
Augustinianism present in the text. Apart from Augustine
and Aristotle, this work also displays the inﬂuence of Jean
de la Rochelle’s Tractatus, Costa ben Luca’s De differentia
spiritus et anima, and Pseudo-Augustine’s De spiritu et
anima (Lewry 1983). For Kilwardby, sensible knowledge
is based on sense experience, that is, the sense object
impresses the sensible species in the sense organ. However,
the passivity of the senses is tempered by the activity of the
sensory soul, the efﬁcient cause per se of the sensible
knowledge. Kilwardby offers two accounts for sense per-
ception, one focusing on the reception of the species and
the activity of the internal spirits (vital and animal)
together with the system of ventricular location of the
powers of the soul; the other focusing on the activity of
the soul, immaterial and dynamic, capable of producing
from and by itself the images of the sensible objects. This
activity of the soul in the process of sense perception
consists of two motions: the sensitive soul reacting (simul-
taneously, due to the spiritual nature of the soul) to the
affection of the body, which results in the soul making an
image from the species impressed in the sense organ; the
second motion consists on the soul, after stopping paying
attention to the exterior object, turning itself and seeing
the image made in itself, through which the object is then
perceived (Silva 2008). The result of this action is then
kept by the power of memory. Kilwardby explicates the
existence of three distinct memories: the lower (brutalis),
which we have in common with animals and that belongs
Robert Kilwardby R
1151
R

to the sensitive part of the soul; the middle memory
(rationalis inferior et exterior), which belongs to the ratio-
nal part of the soul, and is related with sensible knowledge;
and ﬁnally, the higher rational memory (rationalis superior
et interior), which is dedicated to intellectual knowledge.
See also: ▶Albert the Great ▶Augustine ▶Avicebron
▶Bonaventure ▶Categories, Commentaries on Aristotle’s
▶Change
and
Motion
▶Dominicus
Gundissalinus
▶Epistemology ▶Ethics ▶Happiness ▶Hugh of St. Vic-
tor ▶Ibn Rushd, Muh˙ammad ibn Ah˙mad al-H˙ afı¯d
(Averroes) ▶Natural Philosophy ▶Parisian Condemna-
tion of 1277 ▶Philosophical Psychology ▶Posterior
Analytics, Commentaries on Aristotle’s ▶Prior Analytics,
Commentaries
on
Aristotle’s
▶Richard
Fishacre
▶Richard Rufus of Cornwall ▶Robert Grosseteste
▶Sense Perception, Theories of ▶Syllogism, Theories of
▶Thomas Aquinas ▶Trinity ▶Universals
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Deniﬂe Heinrich, Chaˆtelain Emile (eds) (1889–1897) Chartularium
Universitatis Parisiensis. Delalain, Paris, pp I.558–559 (the text of
the 1277’s Oxford condemnations)
Kilwardby Robert (1516) Reverendi Magistri Egidii Romani in libros
Priorum analeticorum Aristotelis expositio et interpretatio sum
perquam diligenter visa recognita erroribus purgata. Et quantum
anniti ars potuit ﬁdeliter impressa cum textu. Venice (repr. Minerva,
Frankfurt, 1968)
Kilwardby Robert (1929) The injunctions of archbishop Kilwardby (on
his visitation of the University of Oxford in 1276), ed. Garrod HW.
University Press, Oxford
Kilwardby
Robert
(1930)
Responsio
de
XLIII
questionibus,
ed.
Chenu M-D. Les re´ponses de S. Thomas et de Kilwardby a` la consul-
tation de Jean de Verceil (1271). Me´langes Mandonnet. Paris, pp
191–222 (partial edition); Complete edition by Dondaine H-F
(1977) Le de 43 questionibus de Robert Kilwardby. Vrin, Archivium
Fratrum Praedicatorum 47:5–50
Kilwardby Robert (1937) Sermo in capite ieiunii, ed. Sommer-
Seckendorff EMF. Studies in the life of Robert Kilwardby, O.P. S.
Sabinae, Roma, pp 163–176
Kilwardby Robert (1970) Epistola Roberti Kilwardby Archiepiscopi
Cantuarensis ad Petrum de Conﬂeto Archiepiscopum Corinthi, ed.
Ehrle FK. Gesammelte Aufsa¨tze zur englischen Scholastik. Edizioni di
Storia e Letteratura, Roma, pp 18–54
Kilwardby Robert (1976) De ortu scientiarum, ed. Judy A. Oxford Uni-
versity Press for the British Academy, Oxford
Kilwardby Robert (1978) Commentaries on the Isagoge, Praedicamenta,
Peri hermeneias, Liber sex principiorum, and Liber divisionum, ed.
Lewry PO. Robert Kilwardby’s writing on the Logica vetus studied
with regard to their teaching and method. Unpublished PhD disser-
tation, University of Oxford
Kilwardby Robert (1980) De natura relationis, ed. Schmu¨cker L. Brixen
(provisory edition Hanagan JJ (1973) The contribution of Robert
Kilwardby to thirteenth century thought on the doctrine of relation.
Unpublished PhD dissertation, A. Weger, University of Toronto)
Kilwardby Robert (1982a) Quaestiones in librum tertium sententiarum,
Teil 1: Christologie, ed. Go¨ssmann E. Verlag der Bayerische Akademie
der Wissenschaften, Munich
Kilwardby Robert (1982b) Sermo in dominica in passione, ed. Lewry PO.
A Passiontide sermon of Robert Kilwardby OP. Archivium Fratrum
Praedicatorum 52:89–113
Kilwardby Robert (1984) In Barbarismum Donati, ed. Schmu¨cker L. In
Donati artem maiorem III. Weger, Brixen
Kilwardby Robert (1985) Quaestiones in librum tertium sententiarum,
Teil 2: Tugendlehre, ed. Leibold Verlag der Bayerische Akademie der
Wissenschaften, Munich
Kilwardby Robert (1986) Quaestiones in librum primum sententiarum,
ed. Schneider J. Verlag der Bayerische Akademie der Wissenschaften,
Munich
Kilwardby Robert (1987a) De tempore, ed. Lewry PO. On time and
imagination: De tempore, De spiritu fantastico. Oxford University
Press for the British Academy, Oxford
Kilwardby Robert (1987b) De spiritu fantastico, ed. Lewry PO. On time
and imagination: De tempore, De spiritu fantastico. Oxford Univer-
sity Press for the British Academy, Oxford
Kilwardby Robert (1988) Notulae libri Prisciani De accentibus, ed.
Lewry PO. Robertus Kilwardby Notulae libri Prisciani De accentibus.
Mediaev Stud 50:96–185
Kilwardby Robert (1992) Quaestiones in librum secundum sententiarum,
ed. Leibold G. Verlag der Bayerische Akademie der Wissenschaften,
Munich
Kilwardby Robert (1993) Quaestiones in librum quartum sententiarum,
ed. Schenk R. Verlag der Bayerische Akademie der Wissenschaften,
Munich
Kilwardby
Robert
(1995)
In
libri
topycorum,
ed.
Weijers
O.
Le commentaire sur les Topiques attribue´ a` Robert Kilwardby.
Documenti e Studi sulla tradizione ﬁlosoﬁca medievale 6:107–143
Kilwardby Robert (2002) Notule libri posteriorum, ed. Cannone D.
Le Notule libri posteriorum di Robert Kilwardby: il commento ad
Analitici posteriori, I, 4, 73a34-b24. Documenti e studi sulla
tradizione ﬁlosoﬁca medievale 13:71–135
Secondary Sources
Alessio GC (2001) Sul De ortu scientiarum di Robert Kilwardby. In:
d’Onofrio G (ed) La divisione della Filosoﬁa e le sue Ragioni.
Avagliano Editore, Roma
Brown SF (1996) The reception and use of Aristotle’s works in the
Commentaries on Book I of the Sentences by the Friar preachers in
the early years of Oxford University. In: Marenbon J (ed) Aristotle in
Britain during the Middle Ages. Brepols, Turnhout, pp 351–369
Callus D-A (1948) The Tabulae super originalia patrum of Robert
Kilwardby O.P. In: Studia mediaevalia in honorem admodum
reverendi patris Raymundi Josephi Martin. De Tempel, Bruges, pp
243–270
Callus D-A (1955) The condemnation of St Thomas at Oxford.
Blackfriars, London
Callus DA (1963) The subject matter of metaphysics according to some
thirteenth-century
Oxford
masters.
In:
Wilpert
P
(ed)
Die
Metaphysik im Mittelalter. Ihr Ursprung und ihre Bedeutung. De
Gruyter, Berlin, pp 393–399
Celano AJ (1986) The understanding of the concept of happiness in the
pre-1250 commentaries on the Ethica Nicomachea. Medioevo
12:29–53
Celano AJ (1999) Robert Kilwardby on the relation of virtue to happiness.
Mediev Philos Theol 8(2):149–162
1152 R
Robert Kilwardby

Chenu M-D (1927) Le De conscientia de Robert Kilwardby. Rev Sci Philos
The´ol 16:318–326
de Libera A (ed) (1987) Les Summulae dialectices de Roger Bacon: III De
argumentatione. Archives d’Histoire doctrinale et litte´raire du
moyen aˆge 62:171–278
Ebbesen S (1981) Albert (the Great?)’s companion to the Organon. In:
Zimmermann A, Vuillemindiem G (eds) Albert der Grosse. Sein Zeit,
sein Werk, seine Wirkung. De Gruyter, Berlin, pp 89–103
Ebbesen S (1997) The Ars nova in the ‘Ripoll Compendium’. In: Laﬂeur C
(ed) L’enseignement de la philosophie au XIIIe sie`cle. Autour du
‘‘Guide de l’e`tudiant’’ du ms. Ripoll 109. Brepols, Turnhout, pp 325–
352
Ga`l G (1953) Robert Kilwardby’s questions on the Metaphysics and
Physics of Aristotle. Francisc Stud 13:7–28
Kneepkens CH (1985) Roger Bacon on the double intellectus: a note on
the development of the theory of Congruitas and Perfectio in the ﬁrst
half of the thirteenth century. In: Lewry PO (ed) The rise of British
logic. Pontiﬁcal Institute, Toronto, pp 115–143
Lagerlund H (2000) Modal syllogistics in the Middle Ages. Brill, Leiden
Lewry PO (1978) Robert Kilwardby’s writings on the Logica vetus studied
with regard to their teaching and method. Unpublished Ph.D. Dis-
sertation, University of Oxford
Lewry PO (1981a) The Oxford condemnations of 1277 in grammar and
logic. In: Braakhuis HAG et al (eds) English logic and semantics from
the end of the twelfth century to the time of Ockham and Burleigh.
Ingenium, Nijmegen, pp 235–278
Lewry PO (1981b) Robert Kilwardby on meaning: a Parisian course on the
Logica vetus. In: Beckmann JP et al (eds) Miscellanea Mediaevalia
13.1. Walter de Gruyter, Berlin/New York, pp 376–384
Lewry PO (1986) Robert Kilwardby’s commentary on the Ethica nova and
vetus. In: Wenin C (ed) L’Homme et son Univers au Moyen Age.
Brepols, Louvain-La-Neuve, pp 799–807
Long RJ (1996) The reception and use of Aristotle by the early English
Dominicans. In: Marenbon J (ed) Aristotle in Britain during the
Middle Ages. Brepols, Turnhout, pp 51–56
McAleer GJ (1999) The presence of Averroes in the natural philosophy of
Robert Kilwardby. Archiv fu¨r Geschichte der Philosophie 81:33–54
Rosier I (1994) La parole comme acte. Sur la grammaire et la se´mantique
au XIIIe sie`cle. Vrin, Paris
Silva JF (2007) Robert Kilwardby on celestial motion. Medievalia
Philosophica Polonorum 36(2):90–119
Silva JF (2008) Robert Kilwardby on sense perception. In: Knuuttila S,
Ka¨rkka¨inen P (eds) Theories of perception in medieval and early
modern philosophy. Springer, Dordrecht, pp 87–99
Sirridge M (1988) ‘Institutiones Grammaticae’ XVII.187: three reactions.
In: Rosier I (ed) L’He´ritage des grammairiens latins de l’antiquite´ aux
Lumie`res. Peeters, Louvain, pp 171–180
Sirridge M (1990) Robert Kilwardby: ﬁgurative constructions and the
limits of grammar. In: Bursill-Hall GL et al (eds) De ortu
grammaticae. Studies in medieval grammar and linguistic theory in
memory of Jan Pinborg. John Benjamins, Amsterdam/Philadelphia,
pp 321–357
Sommer-Seckendorff EMF (1937) Studies in the life of Robert Kilwardby,
O.P. Sabinae, Roma
Thom P (2007) Logic and ontology in the syllogistic of Robert Kilwardby.
Brill, Leiden
Wilshire LE (1964) Where the Oxford condemnations of 1277 directed
against Aquinas? New Scholasticism 48:125–132
Wood R (2002) Early Oxford theology. In: Evans E (ed) Mediaeval
commentaries on the Sentences of Peter Lombard. Brill, Leiden, pp
289–343
Robert of Halifax
KIMBERLY GEORGEDES
Department of History and Anthropology
Franciscan University of Steubenville
Steubenville, OH
USA
Abstract
Robert of Halifax (c. 1300–c. 1350?) was an English Fran-
ciscan theologian active between 1325 and 1350. His only
extant work is his commentary on the Sentences, probably
written c. 1334 at Oxford although the dating is uncertain.
His commentary consists of nine questions, pertaining to
books I and II of the Sentences, and is a good example of
the types of Sentences commentaries produced in this
period, which concentrate on fewer questions than previ-
ously, but in more detail. Although dealing with theolog-
ical questions pertaining, for example, to grace, merit,
enjoyment, and matters of the will, he discusses issues
important for natural philosophy, such as light and vision,
the
continuum,
and
cognition.
He
followed
the
perspectivist tradition concerning vision and espoused
a Neoplatonic metaphysics of light. Regarding cognition,
he proves to be more a Scotist than Ockhamist, and he
argues against Ockham in the question on the ‘‘middle act
of the will,’’ a topic that attracted a great deal of attention
in this period. The date of his death is unknown, but is
thought to be sometime around or after 1350.
Very little is known for certain about Robert of Halifax,
O.F.M., also known as Eliphat, Alifas, Elephas, or Olephad.
The information available places Halifax among the
English Franciscan theologians between 1325 and 1350.
Robert was likely born at or near Halifax in Yorkshire
around 1300, and probably entered the Franciscan order
c. 1318 around the age of 18. It is likely that before being
sent to the university to study theology, he studied phi-
losophy at the custodial school in York. His university
studies began probably around 1324. Based upon the fact
that Halifax cited Wodeham, who lectured at Oxford
between 1331 and 1332, and was in turn cited by Gregory
of Rimini, who read at Paris in 1342–1343, Halifax most
likely read the Sentences at Oxford between 1333 and 1340,
although narrowing that date further is difﬁcult. Halifax
was the ﬁfty-sixth Franciscan lector at Cambridge, the date
for which was calculated to c. 1336, which, if true, would
place his Sentences commentary around 1334. Neverthe-
less, the date of this lectorship is uncertain, and there are
Robert of Halifax R
1153
R

legitimate reasons for dating his commentary between
1336 and 1338 as well. Toward the end of the 1340s,
Halifax returned to Yorkshire where he was licensed to
hear confessions in 1349 and 1350, and resided at the
convent of Doncaster. The date of his death is unknown
(Courtenay 1973).
Although historians have paid relatively little attention
to Halifax, as compared to his contemporaries Fitzralph
(c. 1300–1360), Wodeham (d. 1358), and Holcot (c. 1290–
1349), Halifax nevertheless made a ﬁne reputation for
himself both in England and on the Continent, particu-
larly at Paris, as is demonstrated by the fact that he was
cited and quoted by ﬁgures such as Gregory of Rimini,
John of Mirecourt, and Hugolino of Orvieto. His popu-
larity is also attested to in that his Sentences commentary
had survived in seventeen partial or complete manu-
scripts, all located on the Continent (Courtenay 1973),
although one located in Magdeburg was lost during World
War II (Georgedes 1995).
Halifax’s commentary on the Sentences, his only
known work, is a particularly good example of the type
of commentaries produced in the ﬁrst half of the four-
teenth century. From the late thirteenth century, the writ-
ing of summae theologiae became less important, and in
the fourteenth century, commentaries on Lombard’s
Sentences became the most signiﬁcant source not only of
theology but arguably also of philosophy, and at times the
only source available for a given author, as in the case of
Halifax (Courtenay 1987). Moreover, Halifax’s commen-
tary reﬂects other trends of the period, one of which is
a change in content. The use of new analytical tools
(particularly the new logic), mathematical language (e.g.,
the language of measurement, such as the intention and
remission of forms), as well as interest in aspects of natural
philosophy (physics in particular) were reﬂected in the
concentration more on epistemological and empirical
problems, although discussed in the context of theological
questions, especially questions pertaining to acts of the
will, grace, and merit. Another trend is a change in the
structure of Sentences commentaries. Authors began to
concentrate on fewer questions rather than commenting
on the entire Sentences. Moreover, commentators began to
cite the names of those whose opinions they argued for or
against rather than using the vague ‘‘opinion of others.’’
The English theologians, like Halifax, writing between
1325 and 1350, were foremost in these developments.
These changes allowed commentators to engage in more
speculation, especially via the more extensive use of the
distinction of God’s absolute and ordained powers, as well
as to give more in-depth answers to questions that were of
particular interest to them (Courtenay 1987).
Halifax’s commentary, although short, is not an abbre-
viation. It consists of nine total questions that loosely
follow Lombard’s organization of the Sentences, and
which were designated under two different forms in
the fourteenth century, as ‘‘questions’’ and also as ‘‘Book,
distinction and question.’’ He begins with a ‘‘principium,’’
designated as question 1. Questions 2 and 3 concern the
Prologue; questions 4, 5, and 6 pertain to Book
I distinction 1; question 7 pertains to Book I, distinction
2; and questions 8 and 9 pertain simply to Book II. Ques-
tions 4, 5, 6, and 9 deal with acts of the will, while
questions 1 and 9 deal with aspects of merit and punish-
ment, and question 8 deals in particular whether the
angels advance in merit. Questions 2 and 3 deal with
aspects of the study of theology, knowledge, and founda-
tions of belief (for the list of the complete questions,
see Courtenay 1973).
Within the context of question 2 (question 1 of the
Prologue: Utrum per exercitium studii in veritatibus
theologiae possit theologus ad maiorem notitiam devinire,
quam sit notitia ﬁdei, which deals with acts of believing
and knowing, and the certitude of knowledge), question 5
(Bk. I, dist. 1, q. 2: Utrum aliquis actus voluntatis possit esse
subito productus a voluntate, ‘‘Whether some act of the will
can be suddenly or immediately produced by the will’’),
and question 8 (Bk. II, q. 1: Utrum angeli beati in merito
proﬁciant? ‘‘Whether the blessed angels advance in
merit?’’), Halifax discussed light and the mechanism of
illumination, vision, and cognition. In doing so he proved
to be more of a disciple of Scotus than Ockham, for
example, utilizing Scotus’ deﬁnition of intuitive and
abstractive cognition rather than Ockham’s. Halifax also
used perspectivist arguments regarding vision, meaning
that he argued for species in medio. Interestingly, he refer-
ences both Robert Grosseteste and Pseudo-Dionysius in
his discussions, and thus Neoplatonic light metaphysics
plays an important role in his views, again, very unlike
Ockham (Tachau 1982; cf. Lang’s discussion of q. 2, 1930).
Nevertheless, Halifax is more representative of the
‘‘calculatory tradition’’ (Murdoch 1975, 1978; Meier
1949), rather than the epistemological issues related to
vision and cognition (Tachau 1982). More study is needed
to elucidate his thought on these issues, however, and to
properly place him within the tradition.
The question that drew a great deal of attention from
Halifax’s contemporaries was question 4 (Book 1, d.1,
q.1): Utrum inter frui et uti sit aliquis actus voluntatis
medius qui nec sit fruitio nec usus (‘‘Whether between
enjoyment and use there is some middle act of the will,
which is neither enjoyment nor use’’). Halifax was
responding to Ockham’s assertion that there was such
1154 R
Robert of Halifax

a middle act of the will, which was neither enjoyment of
God nor use of anything else (Ordinatio I, d. 1, q. 1).
Halifax argued that, on the contrary, one may legitimately
enjoy only God, and everything other than God may
only be the object of use. This response places Halifax
squarely in the midst of the Augustinian revival occurring
at Oxford and Paris around the mid-fourteenth century.
He also maintained, this time contrary to Wodeham, that
the viator could not himself actively cause love for God or
enjoy God above all and for his own sake in this life
without grace except according to God’s absolute power
(de potentia absoluta). Nevertheless, this is impossible
according to God’s ordained power (de potentia ordinata)
(Georgedes 1995, 1997; Courtenay 1973).
Further study of Halifax will greatly advance our
knowledge
of
fourteenth-century
scholasticism,
the
calculatory tradition, views of light and light metaphysics
(which are important for the history of science in this
period), cognition, and enjoyment.
See also: ▶Adam Wodeham ▶Gregory of Rimini ▶Intu-
itive and Abstractive Cognition ▶John Duns Scotus
▶Richard Fitzralph ▶William of Ockham
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Robert of Halifax (ca. 1334–1338) Super sententia (For a listing of the
manuscripts, see Courtenay 1973, below.)
Secondary Sources
Courtenay WJ (1973) Some notes on Robert of Halifax, O.F.M. Francisc
Stud 33:133–142
Courtenay WJ (1987) Schools and scholars in fourteenth-century
England. Princeton University Press, Princeton
Georgedes K (1995) The serpent in the tree of knowledge: use and
enjoyment in fourteenth century theology — the breakdown of the
Augustinian consensus? PhD dissertation, University of Wisconsin-
Madison, Madison
Georgedes K (1997) Robert of Halifax and the ethics of enjoyment.
Unpublished paper given at the thirty-second international congress
on medieval studies May 8–11, Kalamazoo, Michigan
Georgedes K (2003) Robert of Halifax. In: Gracia JJE, Noone TB (eds)
A companion to philosophy in the Middle Ages. Blackwell, Malden,
pp 607–608
Lang A (1930) Die Wege der Glaubensbegru¨ndung bei den Scholastikern
des 14. Jahrhunderts, BGPTM 30.4–6. Aschendorff, Munich
Maier A (1949) Die Vorla¨ufer Galileis im 14. Jahrhundert. Edizioni di
Storia e letteratura, Rome
Murdoch J (1975) From social into intellectual factors: an aspect of the
unitary character of late medieval learning. In: Murdoch J, Sylla ED
(eds) The cultural context of medieval learning. Proceedings of the
ﬁrst international colloquium on philosophy, science and theology
in the Middle Ages – September 1973. Reidel, Dordrecht/Boston,
pp 271–348
Murdoch
J
(1978)
Subtilitates
anglicanae
in
fourteenth-century
Paris: John of Mirecourt and Peter Ceffons. In: Cosman M,
Chandler B (eds) Machaut’s world: science and art in the fourteenth
century. The New York Academy of Sciences, New York, pp 51–86
Tachau K (1982) The problem of the species in medio at Oxford in the
generation after Ockham. Mediaev Stud 44:394–443
Roger Bacon
YAEL RAIZMAN-KEDAR
Philosophy Department
University of Haifa
Mount Carmel, Haifa
Israel
Abstract
Roger Bacon was born in Ilchester in either 1214 or 1220.
After his matriculation at Oxford, he was one of the
pioneers to teach Aristotle at the University of Paris. His
return to Oxford in the late 1240s marked a turning point
in his career. He joined the Franciscans in 1257, and in
1267/1268, he sent three works, comprising a plan for
a thorough reorganization of Christian studies, to the
Pope. He was condemned and imprisoned about 1277,
to be set free only a year before his death, in 1293. In his
Parisian phase of career, he developed the idea of the
utmost signiﬁcance of the speaker’s intention, and original
theories of imposition and equivocation. He afﬁrmed that
universals are extramental, believed in innate confused
knowledge
and
held
to
the
theory
of
universal
hylomorphism. Instead of the Aristotelian linear scale of
colors, he posited ﬁve principal colors, from which the
other colors are produced by mixtures. In his mature
phase of thought, he proposed an order of sciences in
which the practical sciences received precedence, advo-
cated the use of experimental method, developed the
theory of the multiplication of species, and combined it
with Alhacen’s ideas on light and vision. He stressed the
importance of mathematics in providing scientiﬁc expla-
nations and drew geometrical diagrams exemplifying
the rules of reﬂection, refraction, and other related phe-
nomena. His view of matter as positive and worthy of
investigation found expression in his strong notion of
representation, arguing for the need to portray not only
formal aspects but material ones as well in both cognitive
contents and language. Bacon described the details of the
workings of the sensitive soul and ascribed complex cog-
nitive capacities to animals. He presented an original
Roger Bacon R
1155
R

classiﬁcation of signs and reversed the linguistic triangle
prescribed by Aristotle and Boethius.
Biographical Information
A cloud of uncertainty envelops many details of Bacon’s
life. He was born in Ilchester, Somerset either in 1214 or
1220, and was probably matriculated ﬁrst at Oxford. The
date of his MA degree would be about 1240, assuming that
he was born in 1220 and that a scholar typically earned the
MA at the age of 20. During the 1240s, Bacon was lecturing
in the faculty of arts at Paris. His lectures covered
Aristotle’s Metaphysics, Physics, De sensu et sensato, prob-
ably De generatione et corruptione, De animalibus, and the
De anima. It thus appears that Bacon was one of the early
lecturers, on Aristotle’s libri naturales in Paris. About
1247, Bacon gave up his membership in the arts faculty
at Paris and returned to Oxford.
The move to Oxford has been assumed to mark the
turning point in his interests. This turn involved a
broadening of his outlook in the direction of Robert
Grosseteste’s (1168–1252) philosophy and the contents
of various Arabic sources.
Bacon joined the Franciscans about 1257, and reports
a series of hardships in the ﬁrst 10 years of his life as
a Franciscan. He accuses his superiors of burdening him
with duties and punishing him with isolation, hunger, and
‘‘unspeakable violence.’’ In those ﬁrst years as a Franciscan
(until 1266), Bacon wrote the De mirabilis potestate artis et
naturae, and the De computo naturali. This was the period
of his most intense occupation with optics, and in the late
1250s or the early 1260s, he wrote the De multiplicatione
specierum and the De speculis comburentibus. Following
a short correspondence with Guy de Foulques (c1195–
1268), who was elected Pope as Clement IV, Bacon sent
him in 1267/1268 the Opus majus, the Opus minus, and the
De multiplicatione specierum. The Pope died in the same
year, and his successor was not elected until 1271, so
Bacon received no answer, and no result had followed
from his writings.
In the late 1260s and early 1270s, Bacon probably
wrote
his
Communia
naturalium
and
Communia
mathematica, mature expressions of many of his theories.
This was also the period of Bacon’s intense occupation
with language. The Greek and Hebrew grammars belong
to the phase immediately following the Opus majus. These
were followed in 1271 or 1272 by the polemical Compen-
dium studii philosophiae, in which Bacon criticized the
Franciscan and Dominican orders for their educational
practices.
A chronicle, from about 1370, reports that Bacon was
condemned and imprisoned by his order for ‘‘certain
suspected novelties.’’ The chronicle further tells us that
Bacon’s works and doctrines were to be avoided by all,
since the order had rejected them. Bacon was supposedly
conﬁned to the Paris convent at about 1277, perhaps until
1292, by Jerome of Ascoli (d. 1292), the Franciscan min-
ister general. The reason for this condemnation is
unknown. Perhaps it had to do with the repercussions
resulting from the Compendium studii philosophiae,
which was likely to give offence both to the more conser-
vative members of his own order and to the Dominicans.
It could also have been connected to Bacon’s leaning
toward the spiritual branch of his order, a branch per-
ceived as a threat by his superiors.
In 1292, at a chapter of the order held in Paris, just
after
Jerome
of
Ascoli’s
death,
certain
prisoners
condemned in 1277 were set free. It is likely that Bacon
may have been one of them. The last evidence of Bacon’s
life is the Compendium studii theologiae, which he left
unﬁnished. This was a grammatical work, repeating
many of the themes and ideas that had appeared long
before in his De signis (a part of the Opus majus). It is
reasonable to assume that he died in 1292 or soon
thereafter.
His Philosophy
The works Bacon produced during the 1240s differ on
several aspects from the works and ideas he developed
after returning to Oxford. In his early period of writing
(1240s), he wrote on grammar (Summa grammatica),
logic (Summa de sophismatibus et distinctionibus and
Sumulae dialectics), and questions on several Aristotelian
and pseudo-Aristotelian texts such as the Physics, Meta-
physics, De causis, and the De sensu et sensato. These were
probably the notes of his lectures, copied down much as he
gave them in Paris.
The Summa grammatica was a systematic exposition
of the principal points of syntax in the tradition of the
Priscian commentaries. Bacon’s idea of the utmost signif-
icance of the speaker’s intention appeared already in this
early text. He claimed that the speaker may distance him-
self from the proper grammatical rules in order to express
some precise idea. In his early works on logic, Bacon
developed his notion of imposition and his theory of
equivocation, according to which a word which is applied
to both an entity and a nonentity is the most extreme case
of equivocation.
In this early period of his thought, Bacon held the
agent intellect to be an inseparable part of the soul. He
endowed it with the function of abstracting the incoming
species from their material conditions, a function he would
abandon later on. In some of his early works, he
1156 R
Roger Bacon

mentioned functioning innate exemplars, providing the
soul with knowledge of universals, while in others, he
referred to innate knowledge as vague and indistinct. In
his mature works, these will be replaced with the talk of an
innate capacity to acquire language, construct arguments,
and recognize logical fallacies. Bacon objects to the idea
that matter is one in number in all things, and holds to
universal hylomorphism, according to which all things
except God are composed of matter and form. Thus,
Bacon will speak of the matter of both corporeal and
spiritual beings, and hence of ‘‘spiritual matter.’’
At this point too, he afﬁrmed that universals are
extramental, and exist within particular, material objects.
The soul does not make universality, so he believed, but
ﬁnds it as a constituent of beings. He denied that the
rational soul was the cause of universality, for even if it
did not apprehend things they would still resemble one
another. The universals in the mind, so he thought, are
likenesses of external things, that is, they are the species
of the ‘‘real’’ universals, those which are in particular,
physical objects. The same position appears in his mature
writings, especially in the Communia naturalium.
In his commentary on the De sensu Bacon suggested an
arrangement of colors which was different from the one
Aristotle proposed. Instead of a linear scale of colors from
white to black, varying according to the amount of trans-
parency in them, Bacon posited ﬁve distinct principal
colors from which the other colors are produced by
mixtures.
In the mature period of his work, Bacon abandoned
the commentary literary style. He composed two general
works, proposing and explaining his vision of the
reform in Christian learning (the Opus majus and its two
abridgements, the Opus minus and Opus tertium, and the
Communia naturalium); two optical treaties (De speculis
comburentibus and the De multiplicatione specierum), of
which the latter presents not only his account of light and
vision but of natural causation in general; one extended
mathematical tract (Communia mathematica); and several
works on language and semiotics (De signis, Grammatica
Graeca, and the Compendium studii theologiae). Some of
his writings (the Opus tertium and the compendium studii
philosophiae) were devoted in part to social and political
criticism. To this are added some small treaties on medi-
cine and alchemy and of course, Bacon’s edition of the
Secretum secretorum.
The Opus majus was to a great extent a plea for the
study of the practical arts and sciences. Practical truth
should prevail, according to Bacon, over theoretical
truth. The end of speculative knowledge lies in its practical
application. Accordingly, for each science he writes about,
Bacon adds a list of its possible uses. Thus, knowledge of
foreign languages can foster the development of com-
merce as well as secure peace between nations and knowl-
edge of alchemy can be used to prolong human lives.
Optics can help shape a mirror in which one group of
soldiers will appear as multiplied and thus terrify the
enemy. Theology and moral philosophy are the most
practical of them all, since they actively contribute to
man’s salvation. These sciences should therefore be con-
sidered the summit of human knowledge and all the other
disciplines considered their aides.
Bacon maintained that a theologian must know the
things of this world if he is to know the sacred text. This
conviction stands at the heart of his proposal for revising
the curriculum in the universities. He explained the cor-
ruption of studies in his time by the practice of young
theologians to preach and teach without ﬁrst undergoing
a full liberal arts training. Bacon wanted theologians to be
versed not only in the liberal arts but also in the seven
practical sciences, including
perspective, astronomy,
the science of weights, medicine, experimental science,
alchemy, and agriculture. Without knowing those sub-
jects, so he argued, the theologians would not be able
to understand the literal meaning of Scripture, and con-
sequently, incapable of understanding their spiritual
meaning as well.
The method of inquiry to be used while pursuing
these sciences should be, according to Bacon, ‘‘experimen-
tal science.’’ Logical arguments alone, so Bacon argues,
cannot provide the certitude our mind requires. If we
wish to attain certitude, we must actively experience the
things of the world with out external senses. He listed three
tasks for experimental science: to investigate the conclu-
sions of the speculative sciences; to construct new instru-
ments and gather new data; and to supply predications.
While some modern scholars have championed Bacon as
an experimentalist in the sense of Francis Bacon (1561–
1626) and as a mind far beyond his era, others saw him as
a pragmatist or at best an empiricist in the Aristotelian
sense. Recently, Jeremiah Hackett arrived at the conclusion
that Bacon’s experimentum was not simply a repetition of
Aristotle’s empiria, but in fact a critique of pure syllogistic
reasoning. Hackett adds that the Opus majus provides
strong evidence for actual experimental work with instru-
ments in which Bacon was involved, and discerns a small
but deﬁnite inﬂuence of Bacon on his namesake, Francis.
A conspicuous feature of Bacon’s advocacy for a new
order of studies has been his praise of mathematics as
essential to the study of all other sciences. Although his
name is not subscribed under any signiﬁcant mathemati-
cal achievement, he grasped better than most of his
Roger Bacon R
1157
R

contemporaries
the
fecundity
of
mathematics
as
a principle of scientiﬁc explanations, and its ability to
provide certainty in science. When combined with exper-
imental science, the science of math guarantees full truth
free from error or doubt.
An instance of how mathematics can be applied to
a natural science discipline is the science of astrology. It
studies the effects of the heavenly bodies on natural events
and human characteristics, and can be used for general
predication concerning human behavior. Bacon thought
that the condemnation of astrology by many Christian
authorities was harmful and impeded the efforts to con-
vert unbelievers, yet qualiﬁed that astrological predica-
tions are not infallible.
Bacon’s major later work on Physics was the De
multiplicatione specierum. In this work, he describes the
most fundamental mechanism of natural causation, namely
the propagation of species. Although the term had a rather
large circulation in the thirteenth-century philosophical
texts, Bacon had given it a systematic treatment to be
found nowhere else. He deﬁned a species as ‘‘the force or
power by which any object acts on its surroundings,’’ and
posited it as efﬁcient not only on the sensory level but
within natural and intellectual processes as well. A species,
Bacon contends, is produced by every active nature; the list
of active natures includes not only color and light, smell and
most sensible accidental qualities, but also universals and
substances. A species resembles its agent in ‘‘nature, speciﬁc
essence and operation’’ and belongs to the same category as
its agent. Thus, the species of substance is substance, the
species of accident is an accident, and the species of
a composite is composite. Bacon established the principle
that a species is brought forth out of the potentiality of the
matter of the recipient and through it an agent renders its
surrounding similar to itself.
The action of species is of a natural character, which is
uniform and necessary. Neither species nor their agents
can exert will or deliberation; neither can designate one
kind of species to inanimate objects, another to senses and
yet a third one to intellects. Therefore, there is always
only one kind of species being produced, and the variety
of effects is due to the variety of recipients. Bacon
emphasized the material and natural existence of species,
in both medium and senses. There is no ‘‘spiritual being’’
in the medium as was taught by other scholastic philoso-
phers. For Bacon, universal causation is corporeal and
material, and matter itself in not just pure potentiality
but is positive in itself.
Bacon was more of a theorist of science than an inven-
tor. His most notable scientiﬁc achievement was the initi-
ation of the tradition of Perspectiva in the Latin world.
He was a very competent reader and transmitter of
the fruits of Arab scholarship, and especially of Alhacen
(935–c.1039). He adopted Alhacen’s principle of emana-
tion from each point on the object’s surface, and argued
that the vision-producing rays are only those that are
perpendicular to the eye. He successfully communicated
the geometrical principles of reﬂection in mirrors; the
precept of equality of the angels in incidence and
reﬂection; and the rules governing the location, size, and
direction of images in different kinds of mirrors. The
phenomena of refraction was dealt with successfully all
the same, and Bacon established the principles of refrac-
tion at interfaces of various shapes and various media, all
accompanied by geometrical diagrams. In the De speculis
comburenibus, he presented a minute treatment of the
phenomena
of
pinhole
images.
He
supplied
a geometrical analysis of the eye, which would become
a central feature of European theories of vision for many
centuries. He then sketched the psychological processes
involved in vision.
According to Bacon, sight can perceive 22 visible qual-
ities among which are light, color, remoteness, position,
corporeity, shape, size, continuity, number, and motion.
Of these, only light and color are perceived directly, since
they alone produce species, while the other visual qualities
are deduced from the way the species of light and color are
arranged on the surface of the eye, an arrangement which
accurately reﬂects the original proportions within the
issuing object. In deducing visual information, both
humans and animals employ a kind of syllogism which
resembles reasoning. Bacon ascribed complex cognitive
capacities to animals; he adduced that spiders spinning
their webs and monkeys taking revenge on people who
have hurt them are examples of animals’ ability to learn
from experience and to plan their actions accordingly.
Bacon describes the brain as divided into three cham-
bers. The ﬁrst chamber he calls phantasia and says it
houses the common sense and imagination. Upon receiv-
ing the species, the common sense ﬁrst makes judgments
concerning each sense separately, discerning the distinc-
tive kind of information supplied by the proper senses.
The species are then retained in the imagination. In the
rear chamber of the brain, the estimative faculty receives
the species of the substantial nature of things, and mem-
ory retains them. The species retained in both phantasia
and memory are multiplied all the way to the highest
faculty of the sensitive soul, located in the middle cell of
the brain: cogitation. The faculty of cogitation is the one
responsible for the syllogistic mode of cognition, and
serves as the link between the sensitive and the rational
soul in men.
1158 R
Roger Bacon

At this point, Bacon detached the agent intellect from
the soul and identiﬁed it with God. He considered that
according to Aristotle the agent had to be substantially
other than the patient and therefore the potential intellect
and the active one must be set apart. He then divided the
rational soul in two: the speculative intellect and the
practical one, which he recognized as the will. He desig-
nated the speculative part to the speculative sciences, yet
ascribed rationality only to the practical intellect, dealing
with the practical sciences, because it alone employs delib-
eration and freedom of choice. In his moral philosophy he
relied heavily on Seneca (c. 4 BCE–CE 65) and strove to
make his ideas known.
No cognitive act, Bacon stipulated, can occur without
a due representation of the matter of the thing cognized.
Bacon held to the view that all aspects of an object must be
a part of its representation – the material properties as well
as the formal ones. Accordingly, he insisted that a species
represents the whole composite of form and matter.
A composite species, according to Bacon, not only
provides the most faithful representation of its agent but
is also more readily and quickly grasped by the intellect. He
expressed the same view in his theory of signs. The word,
so Bacon declares, does not represent only the form or
essence of the named thing; but rather signiﬁes the com-
posite of matter and form as a whole. Against Averroes
(1126–1198), who argued that a word represents the form
alone since the form is more worthy than matter, Bacon
answered that a composite has whatever is of worth in
a form and beyond this the worth of matter. This concep-
tion of representation is tightly linked with his view of
matter as inherently positive and as an important factor in
human life. His stress on the importance of the practical
sciences is but another expression of the same position.
In his mature phase of thought Bacon developed more
fully his ideas on language and the imposition of words. He
presented an original classiﬁcation of signs, in which one
class included natural signs, representing their signiﬁcates
by concomitance, inference, and consequence, by likeness
or in the manner of cause and effect. The other class com-
prised of signs given by a soul, which could be given either
by employing one’s free will or naturally, as if by an instinct.
Words are, according to Bacon, signs given by soul and
more speciﬁcally by the intellective soul acting rationally out
of its own free will. Words differ from natural signs in that
no essential linkage exists between them and their
signiﬁcates; they differ from signs given by soul naturally,
in that they are based upon pure conception and arise from
cognitive and rational processes involving knowledge, reﬂec-
tion, deliberation, and choice. The thing to which a voice is
attached depends entirely on the speaker’s intent. Since in
most acts of speech we intend to name extramental objects
or events, Bacon argues that this external thing is what the
word signiﬁes, and not, as Aristotle and Boethius (c. 480–
524/525) claimed, the image of the thing within the mind.
This point is exempliﬁed in the De signis, where Bacon
argues that, when one says ‘‘Socrates runs’’ one does not
intend to say that the species of Socrates is running.
See also: ▶Boethius ▶Certainty ▶Ibn Rushd, Muh˙am-
mad ibn Ah˙mad al-H˙ afı¯d (Averroes) ▶Internal Senses
▶Liberal Arts ▶Natural Philosophy ▶Robert Grosseteste
▶Sense Perception, Theories of ▶Species, Sensible and
Intelligible ▶Universals
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Bacon Roger (1859) Opera quaedam hactenus inedita (=Opus tertium,
Opus minus, Compendium studii philosophiae, Epistola de secretis
operibus Artis et Naturae, et de nullitate Magiae), ed. Brewer JS.
London (repr. Kraus, Nendeln, Lichtenstein, 1965)
Bacon Roger (1897–1900) Opus majus, ed. Bridges JH. Oxford/
Edinburgh (repr. Minerva, Frankfurt am Main 1964)
Bacon Roger (1902) Grammatica Graeca, ed. Nolan E, Hirsch SA. Cam-
bridge University Press, Cambridge
Bacon Roger (1905–1940) Opera hactenus inedita Rogeri Baconi, 16 fascs,
ed. Steele R, Delorme FM. Clarendon, Oxford
Bacon Roger (1928) De retardatione accidentium senectutis cum aliis
opusculis de rebus medicinalibus, ed. Little AG, Withington E.
Clarendon, Oxford
Bacon Roger (1978) De signis, ed. Fredborg KM, Nielsen L, Pinborg J. An
unedited part of Roger Bacon’s Opus majus: De signis. Traditio
34:75–136
Bacon Roger (1983) De multiplicatione specierum and De speculis
comburentibus, ed. and trans. Lindberg DC. Clarendon, Oxford
Bacon Roger (1988) Compendium studii theologiae, ed. and trans.
Maloney TS. Brill, Leiden
Bacon Roger (1996) Perspectiva, ed. and trans. Lindberg DC. Clarendon,
Oxford
Secondary Sources
Carton R (1923) L’experience physique chez Roger Bacon. J. Vrin, Paris
Cromby AC (1953) Robert Grosseteste and the origins of experimental
science, 1100–1700. Clarendon, Oxford
Crowley T (1950) Roger Bacon: the problem of the soul in his philosoph-
ical commentaries. Editions de l’Institut Supe´rieur de Philosophie,
Louvain/Dublin
Easton SC (1952) Roger Bacon and his search for a universal science:
a reconsideration of the life and work of Roger Bacon in the light of
his own stated purposes. Columbia University Press, New York
Fisher NW, Unguru S (1971) Experimental science and mathematics in
Roger Bacon’s thought. Traditio 27:353–378
Hackett JMG (ed) (1997) Roger Bacon and the sciences: commemorative
essays. Brill, Leiden
Lindberg DC (1982) On the applicability of mathematics to nature: Roger
Bacon and his predecessors. Br J Hist Sci 15:3–25
Lindberg DC (1987) Science as a handmaiden – Roger Bacon and the
patristic tradition. Isis 78:518–536
Roger Bacon R
1159
R

Maloney TS (1983) The semiotics of Roger Bacon. Mediev Stud
65:120–154
Maloney TS (1985) The extreme realism of Roger Bacon. Rev Metaphys
38:807–837
Marmo C (1997) Bacon, Aristotle (and all the others) on natural infer-
ential signs. Vivarium 35(2):136–154
Molland AG (1983) Roger Bacon and the hermetic tradition in medieval
science. Vivarium 31:140–160
Parkhurst C (1990) Roger Bacon on color: sources, theories and inﬂuence,
ed. Selig KL, Sears E. The verbal and the visual: essays in honour of
William Sebastian Hechscher. Italica Press, New York, pp 151–202
Power A (2006) A mirror for every age: the reputation of Roger Bacon.
Engl Historical Rev 121(492):657–692
Raizmam-Kedar Y (2009) The intellect naturalized: Roger Bacon on the
existence of corporeal species within the intellect. Early Sci Med
14:131–157
Rosier I (1994) La parole comme acte: Sur la grammaire et la se´mantique
au xiiie sie`cle. J. Vrin, Paris
Sharp DE (1930) Franciscan philosophy at Oxford in the thirteenth
century. Oxford University Press, London
Thorndike L (1914) Roger Bacon and experimental method in the Middle
Ages. Philos Rev 23:271–298
Whewell W (1858) History of the inductive sciences from the earliest
times to the present times, vol 1. D. Appleton & Company, New York
Williams SJ (1994) Roger Bacon and his edition of the Pseudo-
Aristotelian, Secretum secretorum. Speculum 69:57–73
Wood R (2007) Imagination and experience in the sensory soul and
beyond: Richard Rufus, Roger Bacon & their contemporaries, ed.
Lagerlund H. Forming the mind – essays on the internal senses and
the mind/body problem from Avicenna to the medical enlightment.
Springer, Dordrecht, pp 27–57
Roger Marston
STEPHEN F. BROWN
Institute of Medieval Philosophy and Theology
Boston College
Chestnut Hill, MA
USA
Abstract
Roger Marston (c. 1235–1303) was an English Franciscan
theologian who studied in Paris in the 1270s, when the
challenge coming from Aristotle’s philosophical works was
reaching fever pitch in the university. He returned to
England and became a doctor of theology at Oxford
where he left a signiﬁcant collection of Disputed and
Quodlibetal Questions dealing with the inner operations
of the triune God and with creation, with the fallen nature
of man and the limitations of his natural powers, espe-
cially the will as a remedial agent, and with the nature of
the soul, knowledge and freedom. He is considered
a signiﬁcant voice in the Franciscan school, which pro-
vided him with a strong collection of inﬂuential Francis-
can companions, including St. Bonaventure, Richard of
Mediavilla, William of Ware, Matthew of Aquasparta and
his immediate teacher, John Pecham. This movement
represented in a signiﬁcant way the Augustinian tradition
as it faced the alternative Christian Aristotelian vision of
reality, presented mainly by Thomas Aquinas.
Roger Marston, as witnessed by the manuscripts of his
works, was an English Franciscan. During his lifetime,
more than 32 English parishes, towns and townships car-
ried the name ‘‘Marston,’’ so modern scholars debate the
exact location that bequeathed him his name. The lists of
Franciscan lectors at Oxford and Cambridge and of Fran-
ciscan Provincial Ministers, his own declarations, and his
many references to the writings of other Franciscans estab-
lish his membership in the Order of Friars Minor. It is
quite likely that Roger was born around 1235. After join-
ing the Franciscans and completing his novitiate year, he
studied theology for three or four years at an English
studium before going on to Paris. He was in Paris for the
school year 1269–1270 and spent his years there as
a bachelor of theology, returning to England before the
school year 1276–1277. He incepted at Oxford, and was
known as a doctor of Oxford and Cambridge, not Paris.
Most recent scholarship places him in Cambridge during
the academic years 1276–1278 and ties his inception at
Oxford to the school year 1281–1282. After teaching at
Oxford, he was elected the 13th Provincial Minister of the
English province in 1292, an ofﬁce he held until 1298.
With sparse evidence to support it, he is supposed to
have spent his last years as guardian at Norwich and to
have died there in 1303.
There is also only slight evidence that Roger wrote
a commentary on Peter Lombard’s Sentences before he
became a Master of Theology. However, manuscript ref-
erences to it are vague and no text has been found. All of
Roger’s literary productions are magisterial works: Dis-
puted Questions and Quodlibet Questions. His Disputed
Questions have been gathered and edited under three titles:
De aeterna emanatione, De statu naturae lapsae and De
anima. De aeterna emanatione (On the Eternal Emanation)
is a collection of seven questions, which center on the
inner operations of the divine nature considered in itself
and in comparison to the origin of creation, and also on
the generation of the Son and the production of the
Holy Spirit within the Godhead. De statu naturae lapsae
(On the State of Fallen Nature), limited to two questions,
examines whether man was created with a faulty nature or
1160 R
Roger Marston

whether his present condition is due to an inheritance
derived from a fall from the original state of nature, and
then asks whether man can attain rightness of will on the
basis of his own natural powers. The ten-question treatise,
De anima (On the Soul), treats a wide variety of puzzles
dealing with the nature of the soul and its faculties of
intellect and will, including self-knowledge, the sources
of our knowledge of all things, and the challenges to
human freedom. The De anima questions depend on
Matthew of Aquasparta’s De cognitione (On Knowledge),
disputed in 1278–1279, and on Henry of Ghent’s Quodli-
bet V (1280). The Disputed Questions, then, seem to be the
product of Roger’s work as a Master at Oxford. Henry of
Ghent’s various Quodlibeta, along with other sources, also
provide clues to the dating of Roger’s four Quodlibets. The
latest research places Roger’s Quodlibet I before Easter
1282, Quodlibet II before Easter 1283, Quodlibet III before
Christmas 1283 and Quodlibet IV during Lent 1284. All of
Marston’s surviving works thus fall within the academic
years 1282–1284 when he was teaching at the studium of
St. Anthony in Oxford.
The principal sources outside the Franciscan order
employed by Marston were St. Augustine, St. Anselm,
Richard of St. Victor, Robert Grosseteste, Thomas Aquinas
and Henry of Ghent. Roger borrows abundantly from St.
Augustine for both his theology and philosophy, especially
for his theory of science and his judgments concerning the
insufﬁciency and errors of the philosophers in regard to
the knowledge of God and even of the world. Using the
words of Augustine, Marston praised Plato and Aristotle
‘‘who knew many things concerning the one God.’’ Yet,
echoing Augustine, and in this case Roger Bacon also, he
noted that ‘‘all philosophers erred in something.’’ For
instance, because they had a false view of man’s ultimate
end, they fell short in their view of truth and also in their
way of living. He warned ‘‘philosophizing’’ theologians,
‘‘drunk with philosophic nectar,’’ not to mix the wine of
Sacred Scripture with the water of worldly philosophy.
Speaking of the immortality of the soul, Roger says: ‘‘I
believe ﬁrmly that the arguments of the Saints are much
more efﬁcacious than all philosophic statements, even
though in regard to this matter the same truths are
afﬁrmed by the Fathers and the philosophers.’’ He refers
to St. Anselm and Richard of St. Victor as his teachers and
he follows them as the faithful interpreters of St. Augus-
tine. He considered Robert Grosseteste as the Commenta-
tor of Pseudo-Dionysius and cites in all cases his
translations of the Angelic Hierarchy, the Divine Names
and Mystical Theology. He also employed the Bishop of
Lincoln’s
commentaries
in
disputing
Richard
of
Mediavilla’s interpretation of St. Augustine’s illumination
theory of knowledge. He bears great respect for the sub-
tlety of Thomas Aquinas, but, like many of his contempo-
rary Franciscan colleagues, he judged him to be one of the
‘‘philosophizing’’
theologians
who
abandoned
St.
Augustine’s teachings and dedicated themselves too
much to worldly philosophy. He also criticized Pelagian
leanings he found in Aquinas’ early writings, though he
noted that Thomas either retracted or contextualized his
positions on grace and will in his later works. Marston
praised Henry of Ghent, whose Quodlibet questions served
as a major source for Roger’s four Quodlibeta. He praised
his deep philosophical knowledge, noting that he had been
steeped in it since infancy. He criticized some of his the-
ories concerning human knowledge and the plurality of
forms in man, but these criticisms must be read carefully,
since for the most part, he is criticizing Henry as his
teachings are presented by opponents, such as William of
Ware.
Roger’s main Franciscan sources were Alexander of
Hales, St. Bonaventure, Richard of Mediavilla, William
of Ware, Eustachius of Arras, William de la Mare, Matthew
of Aquasparta, and beyond all, his teacher, John Pecham.
These authors held many positions in common, so that
they have been considered by many historians of medieval
philosophy and theology as a unity, usually described as
‘‘the Franciscan School.’’ Among their common philo-
sophical doctrines are the primacy of the will, the plurality
of forms and the theory of divine illumination. In the sixth
of the Disputed Questions on the ‘‘De anima,’’ Roger
followed Matthew of Aquasparta as he attempted to
show how in contemplation the will added a further
dimension of savoring experience to whatever is attained
by the intellect. The plurality of forms, stressing the
increasing developments of living things, was rooted in
the teachings of Alexander of Hales and St. Bonaventure,
but its explanation was brought to full strength by Mar-
ston in the criticisms of the unity of form position of
Thomas Aquinas as presented by John Pecham and Wil-
liam de la Mare. In the third of his Disputed Questions on
the
‘‘De
anima’’,
Marston,
following
Matthew
of
Acquasparta, acknowledged how the material content of
our knowledge arises from the senses, but that the cer-
tainty of our knowledge needs a different ground, i.e.,
illumination by the eternal reasons, to provide its guaran-
tee. In these matters where the late thirteenth-century
Franciscans share common positions, in whole or in
part, Marston is known for his long citations from fellow
Franciscans, especially John Pecham, and is even accused
by some modern historians of plagiarism. The editors of
Roger Marston R
1161
R

his Disputed Questions admitted that ‘‘not rarely’’ do we
see long citations from St. Bonaventure, Matthew of
Aquasparta and John Pecham in his works. However, the
editors of the Quodlibeta caution us not to read ‘‘not
rarely’’ as identical with ‘‘always,’’ ‘‘on the whole,’’ or
‘‘quasi word for word.’’ To see his originality amid this
commonness, it is necessary to note also the differences
and to read Marston with exceptional care.
See also: ▶Alexander of Hales ▶Anselm of Canterbury
▶Augustine ▶Bonaventure ▶Henry of Ghent ▶John
Pecham ▶Matthew of Aquasparta ▶Richard of Middle-
ton
▶Richard
of
St.
Victor
▶Robert
Grosseteste
▶Thomas Aquinas ▶William of Ware
Bibliography
Primary Sources
MarstonRogerus (1932) In: van de Woestyne Z,Delorme F, Henquinet F-M,
Doucet V (eds) Quaestiones disputatae de emanatione aeterna, de
statu naturae lapsae et de anima. Bibliotheca Franciscana Historica
VII. Typographia Collegii S. Bonaventurae, Quaracchi (Florentiae)
Marston Rogerus (1968) Quodlibeta quatuor. Bibliotheca Franciscana
Historica XXVI. Typographia Collegii S. Bonaventurae, Quaracchi
(Florentiae)
Secondary Sources
Belmond S (1934) La the´orie de la connaissance d’apre`s Roger Marston.
La France Franciscaine 17:153–187
Bonafede G (1939) Il problema del ‘lumen’ in fratre Ruggero di Marston.
Rivista Rosminiana de Filosoﬁa et di Cultura 33:16–30
Cairola J (1951) L’opposizione a S. Tommaso nelle ‘Quaestiones
disputatae’di Ruggero Marston. Scholastica ratione historico-critica
instauranda in Bibliotheca Pontiﬁcii Athenaei Antoniani VII:447–
460
Catto JL (1984) Theology and theologians, 1220–1320. In: History of the
University of Oxford, I: Early Oxford Schools, pp 499–501
Daniels A (1911) Anselmzita¨t bei dem Oxforder Franziskaner R. von
Marston. Theologische Quartelschrift 93:35–59
Etzkorn G (1962) The grades of form according to Roger Marston O.F.M.
Franzisk Stud 44:418–454
Gilson E´ (1933) Roger Marston, un cas d’augustinisme avicennisant.
Archives d’Histoire doctrinale et litte´raire du Moyen Aˆ ge 8:39–42
Gilson E´ (1934) Sur quelques difﬁculte´s de l’illumination Augustinienne.
Revue Ne´oscholastique de Philosophie 36:321–331
Hissette R (1972) Roger Marston, a-t-il professe´ l’hylemorphisme universel.
Recherches de The´ologie ancienne et me´die´vale 29:205–223
Hissette R (1980) Esse-essentia chez Roger Marston. Sapientiae doctrina,
Me´lange de the´ologie et de litte´ature me´die´vales offerts a` Dom
Hildebrand Bascour, O.S.B. 3:110–118
Little AG (1926) The Franciscan school at Oxford in the thirteenth
century. Archivum Franciscanum Historicum 19:855–857
Pelster F (1928) Roger Marston, OFM (d. 1303), ein englischer Vertreter
des Augustinismus. Scholastik 3:526–556
Prezioso F (1950) L’attivita` del soggetto pensante nella gnoseologia
di Matteo d’Acquasparta e di Ruggiero Marston. Antonianum 25:
259–326
Roger Roseth
OLLI HALLAMAA
Department of Systematic Theology
University of Helsinki
Helsinki
Finland
Abstract
Roger
Roseth,
an
English
philosopher–theologian,
belonged to the generation of Franciscan scholars imme-
diately following William of Ockham. Roseth composed
his only surviving work, a Sentences commentary, in the
mid 1330s. Where Roseth received his theological educa-
tion is not known, but his afﬁliation with Oxford authors,
his style, and the content of his book all suggest that he was
trained in England. Although we know little about Roseth,
his work was once rather renowned: at least 17 preserved
manuscripts containing the text or parts of it attest to its
popularity. Roseth displays a strong interest in contempo-
rary logic and natural philosophy; he is considered to be
one of the key witnesses of the signiﬁcance of Oxford
calculators for English theology.
The exiguous biographical facts about Roseth stem from
information in the text itself and in the manuscripts
containing the text. Roseth wrote his single work, Lectura
super Sententias, after 1332 but no later than 1337. The
terminus post quem is based on the reference Roseth makes
to Adam Wodeham’s Oxford lectures, given during the
academic years 1332–1334. The terminus ante quem is the
year when the oldest preserved copy of Roseth’s work was
made at the Franciscan convent in Norwich. Some margi-
nalia indicate that Roseth was an English Franciscan. The
manuscripts spell the author’s name in various ways; the
current spelling is adopted from MS Chigi B. V-66. Modern
scholarly literature also uses the Latin equivalent, Rosetus.
Roseth presumably received his education at Francis-
can schools, and was most likely acquainted with the
intellectual heritage of Duns Scotus and William Ockham.
It is not very clear how deeply these predecessors
inﬂuenced Roseth’s thought since he never reveals his
indebtedness to either of them. Although Roseth does
not explicitly refer to Scotus or Ockham, a careful reader
can ﬁnd passages in Roseth that witness their inﬂuence.
Thus, for example, in his discussion on the question of
whether the will is the cause of its own acts, Roseth seems
to reﬂect some of the themes Scotus had taken up in his
Lectura II, d. 25. Ockham’s inﬂuence can also be seen in
1162 R
Roger Roseth

some of Roseth’s views, such as his claim that the moral
value of an act is based on the agent’s intentions only, and
not on the external act itself.
Such occasional similarities do not, however, indicate
that Ockham’s ideas had a profound inﬂuence on Roseth.
Since he refrains from discussing issues that would reveal
his attitude toward Ockham’s central ideas, such as in
metaphysics, it is difﬁcult to determine how deeply Roseth
had absorbed Ockham’s thought. Roseth’s scattered
remarks show that his views are similar to Ockham’s in
some points, while in others he deviates from Ockham’s
opinions. Roseth’s sketchy description of relation is in
accordance with Ockhams’ nominalistic theory of the
categories, whereas the deﬁnition of fallacia accidentis
omits Ockham’s proposition based on his theory of men-
tal language; and Roseth’s remarks on the theory of cog-
nition seem to presume species in medio, which Ockham
had considered as superﬂuous. But even if Ockham’s
direct impact on Roseth’s thought may have been spo-
radic, the intellectual milieu, which Roseth shared was
markedly shaped by Ockham’s work. This inﬂuence is
one of the reasons Roseth and his Oxford contemporaries
applied so-called metalinguistic analysis in their writing;
that
is,
they
dealt
with
scientiﬁc
questions
in
a propositional context. The extensive use of propositional
analysis may have been motivated by the need to guaran-
tee the certitude of scientiﬁc knowledge in a world that
after the nominalistic turn appeared as radically contin-
gent. Thus, scientiﬁc knowledge was based not on contin-
gent individuals as such, but on the propositional
knowledge about these individuals. In this approach, the
propositions carry the desired certainty. The linguistic
turn in philosophy and theology became one of the hall-
marks of English scholarship in the second quarter of the
fourteenth century.
In fourteenth-century English theology, metalinguistic
analysis appeared in the wide employment of contempo-
rary logic and in the use of analytical languages that
Oxford natural philosophers used to discuss various
topics in physics. Bachelors in theology, when reading
the Sentences, analyzed theological problems by using log-
ical tools such as supposition theory, the doctrine of the
compounded and divided senses of propositions, and the
study of consequences. The analytical languages they
adopted from natural philosophy included rules for
change (intention and remission of forms), limit decision
(de maximo et minimo, incipit, and desinit), continuity,
and inﬁnity. Robert Holcot and Adam Wodeham are well
known among the theologians writing in the new style, but
other representatives of this new English theology, such as
Roseth have only recently invoked scholarly interest.
Although Oxford thought constitutes Roseth’s intel-
lectual background, he appears to be an independent
mind who is reluctant to reveal his indebtedness to any
particular author. It is, however, obvious that Roseth
stands closer to his fellow Franciscan Adam Wodeham
than to the Dominican Robert Holcot. Roseth and Holcot
merely shared a similar style, which may have been the
reason why sections from Roseth’s Lectura were incorpo-
rated into Holcot’s Sentences, printed at Lyon in 1497.
Wodeham had a more profound inﬂuence on Roseth; in
fact, he is the only confre`re Roseth quotes by name.
Roseth’s direct reference to Wodeham’s Oxford lectures is
critical, but Roseth sides with his views in other instances
as well, although he does not mention Wodeham’s name.
Roseth’s discussion on Trinitarian logic, for example, is
strikingly similar to Wodeham’s treatment. The other
Oxford contemporary mentioned by Roseth is Thomas
Bradwardine.
When
apparently
using
Richard
Kilvington’s and Roger Swyneshead’s writings, however,
he does not explicitly refer to his sources.
The single work that has so far been attributed with
certainty to Roseth is a collection of questions that appar-
ently came from a lecture course he prepared on the
Sentences. The work mirrors the changes in the Sentences
commentaries, which emerged, particularly in England,
during the second quarter of the fourteenth-century.
Commentaries written in the new style no longer followed
the structure of Peter Lombard’s work but concentrated
on the topics the author found most interesting. The
Sentences now contained fewer, yet considerably longer,
questions than traditional commentaries. In Roseth’s
Lectura, the text requires 90 manuscript leaves (counted
from MS Bruxelles, Bibliothe`que Royale 1551) but is
divided into a mere ﬁve questions of which only one has
a counterpart in Peter Lombard’s work: the fourth ques-
tion, in which Roseth discusses themes related to the
augmentation of charity. Of the other questions the ﬁrst
deals with conscience, the second focuses on the nature of
the acts of will, the third is divided into an article on
Trinitarian logic and a proof of God’s existence, and the
ﬁfth raises the question of whether some creatures can be
inﬁnite. These topics have, broadly speaking, theological
relevance, but they do not comprise a systematic account
of essential theological questions. In fact, although the
topics give an impression of a theological work, much of
Roseth’s material is not particularly theological but derives
rather from various branches of philosophy. A typical
example of this is the question on conscience, which
begins with an article about the problem of assigning
limits to different capacities such as vision or the power
to lift heavy objects. Despite its theological origin, this
Roger Roseth R
1163
R

chapter was copied and circulated as a separate treatise in
natural philosophy under the title De maximo et minimo.
Roseth’s keen interest in the languages of measurement
and his ample use of propositional analysis characterize
his work. Roseth’s arguments often deal with inﬁnitely
divisible
continua
by
which
he
discusses
theories
pertaining to continuous change and the related question
of the correct understanding of inﬁnity. These arguments
are mostly comprised of thought experiments (secundum
imaginationem) in which inﬁnite divisibility seems to ini-
tiate something that is actually inﬁnite. This result, how-
ever,
is
at
odds
with
the
traditional
Aristotelian
understanding, which allows only potential inﬁnity.
Roseth, who was a ﬁrm adherent of the Aristotelian notion
of the inﬁnite, presents the arguments leading to actual
inﬁnity as counterexamples of his own views. In the dis-
cussion, Roseth eventually disproves the arguments, thus
giving his own position indirect support. Since the argu-
ments involving actual inﬁnity are designed to be refuted,
Roseth’s book is not an enquiry on inﬁnity as such. Rather,
the examples concerning inﬁnity play a methodological
role in his writing. Yet, when the alleged inﬁnite is based
on God’s essence or absolute power, actual inﬁnity seems
to be unavoidable. Roseth resolves such problematic cases
by pointing out that the relation to an inﬁnite God does
not give rise to an actual inﬁnity in the created order and
that God’s absolute power is restricted by general laws
of thought. Thus, for example, it does not follow from
God’s ability to perceive any proportional part of
a proportionally divided continuum that the number of
those proportional parts is actually inﬁnite since the
unending mathematical series are unending even for God.
See also: ▶Intension and Remission of Forms ▶John
Duns Scotus ▶Natural Philosophy ▶Obligations Logic
▶Oxford Calculators ▶Richard Kilvington ▶Robert
Holcot
▶Thomas
Bradwardine
▶Trinitarian
Logic
▶Will ▶William of Ockham
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Roseth Roger (2005) Lectura super Sententias. Quaestiones 3, 4 & 5, ed.
Hallamaa O. Reports from the Department of Systematic Theology,
University of Helsinki 18. Luther-Agricola Society, Helsinki
Secondary Sources
Courtenay WJ (1978) Adam Wodeham: an introduction to his life and
writings. Brill, Leiden
Courtenay WJ (1987) Schools & scholars in fourteenth-century England.
Princeton University Press, Princeton
Hallamaa O (1998) Continuum, inﬁnity and analysis in theology. In:
Aertsen JA, Speer A (eds) Raum und Raumforestellungen im
Mittelalter. Miscellanea Mediaevalia, Band 25. Walter de Gruyter,
Berlin/New York, pp 375–388
Hallamaa O (2000) On the borderline between logic and theology: Roger
Roseth, Sophismata, and augmentation of charity. Documenti e studi
sulla tradizione ﬁlosoﬁca medievale XI:351–374
Hallamaa O (2003) Defending common rationality: Roger Roseth on
Trinitarian paralogisms. Vivarium 41:84–119
Hallamaa O (2005) Science in theology: studies in the interaction between
late medieval natural philosophy, logic, and theology. http://urn.ﬁ/
URN:ISBN:952-10-2463-1
Hallamaa O (2010) On the limits of the genre – Roger Roseth as a reader
of the Sentences. In: Rosemann PW (ed) Mediaeval commentaries on
the Sentences of Peter Lombard, vol 2. Brill, Leiden, 369–404
Murdoch JE (1975) From social to intellectual factors: an aspect of
the unitary character of late medieval learning. In: Murdoch JE,
Sylla ED (eds) The cultural context of medieval learning. Boston
Studies in the Philosophy of Science, vol 26. Reidel, Dortrecht, pp
271–348
Spade PV (1975) The mediaeval liar: a catalogue of the insolubilia-
literature. Pontiﬁcal Institute of Mediaeval Studies, Toronto
Tachau KH (1982) The problem of the species in medio at Oxford in the
generation after Ockham. Mediaev Stud 44:394–443
Roman Empire
KARL UBL
Historisches Seminar
Eberhard-Karls-Universita¨t Tu¨bingen
Tu¨bingen
Germany
Abstract
The Empire and the papacy represented the unity of
Latin Christendom. As temporal head of Christianity,
however, the emperor did not enjoy the same stability in
his position of leadership as the pope. An emperor, for
example, only held ofﬁce for roughly half the years elapsed
between 962 and 1493, as long vacancies interrupted the
chain of emperors. Moreover, the concept of empire was
in constant ﬂux. Contrary to the papacy, which was
deﬁned by a corpus of canonical laws and conciliar
decrees, the Empire was shaped by collective memory
and by individual interpretation. The concept of Empire
varied according to the knowledge held of the Empire of
antiquity. Some authors characterized the ofﬁce of
emperor as an exclusively temporal authority which had
been established by Augustus. Others emphasized the
Christian duties of the emperor, referring to the famous
1164 R
Roman Empire

penance of the emperor Theodosius I in front of
Ambrosius of Milan. In Rome, the concept of the
emperor as head of the city itself had never truly died
out. Equally, a king was also referred to as emperor in
Spain and in England, if he dominated other kings in his
region. Yet, in spite of this erratic concept of empire, it
inspired a philosophic discussion about the necessity of
a political world order. This discussion emerged especially
in the late Middle Ages and anticipated early modern
theories
about
supranational
institutions
and
the
deﬁciency of nation-states.
When Charlemagne received the imperial crown from
Pope Leo III on Christmas Day of the year 800, his domin-
ion over the Frankish kingdom had in fact not been
signiﬁcantly enhanced. Though the new title of emperor
signiﬁed his hegemony over western Europe and his
coequality with the Byzantine emperor in the East, the
political status quo had in essence only changed in one
respect: after 800, Charlemagne claimed authority over the
city of Rome, which had traditionally fallen under the
sovereignty of the Byzantine Empire. This claim, however,
clashed with the aspirations of the pope, who was aiming
at territorial autonomy and political leadership in the
duchy of Rome. The Donation of Constantine, forged
presumably in the decades preceding the imperial corona-
tion, was meant to bolster these aspirations. Therefore, it
was all the more important for the pope that the bestowal
of the title of emperor remained his exclusive right.
Whereas Louis I and Lothar I were crowned emperor by
their predecessors, Pope Leo IV recovered this right in 850
when he bestowed the imperial title to Louis II. From this
point onward, the pope’s right to grant the imperial cor-
onation in St. Peter’s became the norm throughout the
Middle Ages. Consequently, a strong relation between
empire and papacy emerged. In the centuries before the
Gregorian reform, however, this fact had a negative impact
on the papacy. The emperor claimed to have a supervisory
authority over the pope and the papal election. In 963 and
965, Emperor Otto I even removed from ofﬁce a pope who
had not complied with his political intentions. Otto III
continued this precedent by appointing several of his own
advisors to the Apostolic See, thereby disregarding the
traditional procedures of a papal election. This imperial
right was further approved when several candidates
contended for the papal ofﬁce during a schism in 1046,
when Henry III removed three popes who claimed legiti-
macy and appointed a candidate on his own. Even after
the papal election had again been regulated by well-
deﬁned laws, this right of arbitration between contenders
for the papacy persisted until the ﬁfteenth century. During
the Great Schism, the German king and would-be
emperor Sigismund assumed the leadership of the Council
of Constance (1414–1418) in his role as defender and
advocate of the church (defensor et advocatus ecclesiae).
Above all, the medieval emperor was the church’s
advocate and the patron of the Apostolic See, authoritative
roles retained until the end of the Middle Ages. On the
other hand, his competence to crown kings was rather
elusive. Bohemia was part of the German realm, and the
emperor crowned its king in 1085, 1158, and 1198. The
coronation of kings in Cyprus and Armenia by Emperor
Henry VI were, however, isolated cases. During the early
and high Middle Ages, the emperor did not claim
a universal authority or rights of interference in sovereign
states. The concept of the Empire as a universal dominion
over the Christian world emerged, however, only after the
renewal of Roman law in the twelfth century. The Hohen-
staufen emperors sporadically used the concept of
dominus mundi as a propaganda tool, but it did not take
center stage in political discourse. Equally, it was ﬁrst with
Frederick I that an emperor stressed his afﬁliation to the
Roman emperors by adding two laws to the Corpus iuris
civilis of Justinian. This relation to the ancient emperors
had been strengthened by the idea that the Roman Empire
had been succeeded by the German one (translatio
imperii), which gained increasing universal approval
through the twelfth century.
In the academic discussion which emerged in the law
schools of the twelfth century, the concept of a dominus
mundi had several meanings. The jurists at the universities
were forced to adhere to this concept in order to sustain
the ongoing validity of Roman law. But rather than sup-
port the universal aspirations of the reigning German
emperor, they were foremost interested in theoretical
debates on the source of law and the relation of the
princeps to lesser communities. The reality of the German
emperors only rarely impinged on these debates. The
jurists held the view that the world order of Roman law
which centered upon a universal emperor was valid de
iure, even though the emergent nation-states were de
facto independent units. Since Pope Innocent III acknowl-
edged in 1202 that the French king did not recognize any
superior power, this position of de facto independence
deﬁned the common ground for the continuing debate.
Even imperialist thinkers such as Bartolus de Sassoferrato
and Baldus de Ubaldis had to come to terms with this
exemption from imperial authority. The notion of
a universal world order remained the guiding idea how-
ever against which the reality of the later Middle Ages had
Roman Empire R
1165
R

to gain legitimacy. The French jurists in contrast consid-
ered their king as an emperor in his realm (rex imperator in
regno suo) and claimed a de iure autonomy from the
middle of the thirteenth century.
In this debate among jurists, the rights and compe-
tences of the emperor were never precisely outlined. Not
until the longest vacancy of the imperial ofﬁce (from 1250
to 1312) came to an end did philosophers adhering to the
revisionist policy of Henry VII articulate the emperor’s
rights in detail. In a letter addressed to the French king
Philip the Fair, Henry did not shrink from claiming
superiority in temporal matters, an affront unique in
the Middle Ages, which was answered by a ﬁrm and
immediate rebuttal. When the Hohenstaufen dynasty
ended, it was the French king who then obtained the
position of leadership in Christianity and who then con-
sidered himself superior to the German ruler. As becomes
clear, this rebuttal inaugurated a ﬁerce debate between
adherents of the empire and their opponents. The most
distinguished of the followers of Henry VII were Dante
Alighieri and Engelbert of Admont. This debate continued
into the reign of Louis of Bavaria in the writings of Lupold
of Bebenburg, Marsilius of Padua, and William of
Ockham.
Dante Alighieri (d. 1321), the famous Italian poet,
hailed Henry VII as the savior of the infamous state of
Italian politics, and was the ﬁrst philosopher to vindicate
the necessity of a universal world monarchy in the con-
text of Aristotelian political thought. In his Convivio
(1308), he had to overcome several obstacles: the fact
that the Aristotelian framework was neither compatible
with a universal monarchy nor with the idea of
a commonwealth aiming at religious salvation. After
the death of Henry VII, Dante again turned to the
topic of universal monarchy in his famous treatise
Monarchia. The ﬁrst part of this treatise is dedicated to
the question of whether a universal empire is necessary
for the common welfare; the second to the defense of the
right of the Roman people to the imperial ofﬁce; and the
third to the rejection of any notion which implies the
subordination of the emperor to the pope. His main
argument in favor of universal monarchy assumes that
human nature is prone to conﬂict, which can only be
settled by an ultimate authority. Thus, lasting peace is
dependent upon the existence of a universal emperor.
Under this condition of peace, mankind can attain its
ultimate goal, this being the actualization of human
intellect which Dante identiﬁes with the felicity attain-
able in this life. As this ultimate authority, the emperor is
described by Dante as a Platonic philosopher king,
unaffected by passions and base motives. His power,
therefore, would have no constitutional limitations or
checks and balances and would only be ‘‘delimited by
the ocean.’’
In the last year of Henry VII’s reign, the abbot
Engelbert of Admont (d. 1331) composed a treatise justi-
fying the revisionist politics of the emperor in Italy. In his
De ortu et ﬁne Romani imperii (1312), Engelbert combined
the Aristotelian reasoning in favor of a universal monar-
chy with the genuine medieval tradition of a Christian
empire. In contrast to Dante, Engelbert’s emperor derives
his authority not only from philosophical arguments, but
also from his role as advocate and patron of Latin Chris-
tianity. Moreover, he does not recommend unlimited
power for the emperor or a strictly authoritarian universal
order. Instead, as he deﬁnes it, the emperor’s role is merely
to ensure the application of Roman law and to adjudicate
jurisdictional disputes. Peace, stability, and human felicity
would only be guaranteed through a hierarchical political
constitution. Moreover, the argument follows that Chris-
tianity would be in need of temporal leadership in the
organization of crusades and for combating the heathens.
Despite these points, however, Engelbert allowed for sin-
gular exemption from imperial rule in the cases of France
and Spain, but he insisted that Italy should again be
subject to the emperor’s authority, in accordance with
the policy of Henry VII.
In his conﬂict with Pope John XXII, Ludwig of Bavaria
ﬁrmly adhered to the concept of a universal empire.
Ludwig claimed that imperial authority stemmed solely
from the election of the German electoral princes and
rejected the need of papal approval. Lupold of Bebenburg
(d. 1363), a jurist and bishop of Bamberg, gave
a theoretical justiﬁcation of this position. In his Tractatus
de iuribus regni et imperii Romanorum (1338), he attached
to the German kingdom the same formulas of national
sovereignty which had already been developed for the
French monarch during the thirteenth century. The king
of the Germans should thus in the same way be indepen-
dent of papal approval, and his authority should rest
exclusively on the election by the electoral princes.
Concerning universal empire, Lupold was more cautious
than his patron. He did not envisage a hierarchical world
order and did accept the exemption of the French king-
dom from imperial authority. Lupold believed, however,
that the emperor was set apart from the other kings in one
important respect, this being the entitlement to exert
several reserved rights not only in the Empire, but also in
the other nation-states. To an extent, Lupold insisted on
the universal authority of the empire, but this persistence
1166 R
Roman Empire

should not be understood as a reactionary traditionalism.
The imperial tradition was a decisive factor in the emer-
gence of a German identity throughout the high and later
Middle Ages, as the German identity coalesced around the
unique position of the emperor and the succession of the
Empire from the Romans to the Germans. The emperor
was regarded as patron of the church, temporal leader of
Christianity, and as surety in view of the coming of the
Antichrist. This doctrine of a Christian imperial monarchy
continued to command much assent even outside the
Empire.
In contrast to Lupold, Marsilius of Padua and William
of Ockham, both of whom were under the protection
of Ludwig of Bavaria, used the theory of a universal
empire to counter the claims of the papacy regarding
universal rulership as formulated by Boniface VIII and
John XXII. Marsilius had been a defender of popular
sovereignty and democratic government but began to
defend the principle of a universal empire when it
became appropriate to dismiss papal claims to universal
jurisdiction over temporal rulers. The emperor was to
take the place of the pope, even in ecclesiastical matters,
as the ultimate judge of clerics and the head of church
councils. His dedication of his main work, the Defensor
pacis, to Ludwig of Bavaria, which was probably added
later to the original version, underscores his turn to the
imperial idea. After his ﬂight to Ludwig in 1326, this
adherence to the empire grew even stronger. In his later
works (De translatione imperii, Defensor minor), Marsilius
adamantly defended Ludwig’s position, although he never
responded directly to the concrete situation of German
politics.
William of Ockham wrote the most extensive work
on the problem of empire. Part 3.2 of his Dialogus is
exclusively dedicated to this subject. In agreement with
the scholastic tradition, he dealt with the debate on uni-
versal empire in the context of the Aristotelian debate on
the ideal constitution. Like Dante and Engelbert, he
inquired whether imperial authority was necessary for
the common good of humanity. His answer is ambiguous,
although he generally seems to favor imperial rule because
of its possible convenience in resolving disputes among
nation-states. He argues that the leadership of the emperor
should come into force in cases of appeal to him as the
ultimate judge, in cases when the exercise of his reserved
rights is demanded, and in cases where decisions of
general principles need to be made. In most instances,
however, he argues that national kingdoms should be
permitted to maintain their sovereignty. This ideal
constitution would not imply a hierarchical derivation of
jurisdiction
from
the
emperor,
nor
would
it
be
implemented without regard to the historical situation.
If however the nation-states would not tolerate an inter-
vention by the emperor or if no suitable king could be
found to hold the imperial ofﬁce, this ideal constitution
would become inexpedient. Expediency was the principle
and measure by which Ockham dealt with the topic of the
ideal constitution.
During the ﬁfteenth century, the problem of universal
empire again resurfaced in the context of the enduring
schism between the Roman and Avignonese papacy. After
the church proved incapable of resolving the dispute
between three competing popes, the German king and
would-be emperor Sigismund assumed the task of unify-
ing the church. The theorists of the conciliar movement
assigned the emperor a central role in the convocation of
a church council in order to reduce papal authority. When
a schism broke out between Pope Eugene IV and the
Council of Basel, the conciliarists hoped to gain support
from the emperor. It was during this crisis that Nicholas of
Cusa (d. 1464) wrote his treatise De concordantia catholica,
in which he argued for a symmetrical construction of both
temporal and ecclesiastical authority. Pope and emperor
would together fulﬁll the position of leadership among
Christians, whereas church councils and imperial assem-
blies would function as a balance on monarchical power,
as he considered rule without consent to be tyrannical. It is
important to note that this understanding of imperial rule
shows strong inﬂuences from the Christian tradition.
Nicholas then appealed for this reform in the church as
well as in the German empire.
It was also during the ﬁfteenth century that the idea of
unrestricted imperial rule experienced an unexpected
Indian summer. Aeneas Silvius Piccolomini (d. 1464),
later to become Pope Pius II, argued for strict imperial
authority to be accepted among Christian kingdoms in his
treatise De ortu et auctoritate Romani imperii, dedicated to
his
patron,
Emperor
Frederick
III.
Aeneas
Silvius
supported the restoration of the imperial rule of Antiquity
and rejected the medieval idea of national sovereignty.
This view was echoed by jurists like Peter of Andlau (d.
1480) and Antonio Roselli (d. 1466). After the ecclesiasti-
cal schisms had been resolved, the emerging threat from
the Ottoman Empire further encouraged this new debate
concerning the necessity for a universal temporal leader to
rule in western Christendom.
See also: ▶Civil (Roman) Law ▶Dante Alighieri ▶Mar-
silius of Padua ▶Political Philosophy ▶William of
Ockham
Roman Empire R
1167
R

Bibliography
Primary Sources
Dante (1998) Monarchia, ed. Kay R. Studies and texts, 131. Pontiﬁcal
Institute of Mediaeval Studies, Toronto
Engelbert of Admont (2000) De ortu et ﬁne Romani imperii. Three tracts
on empire. Engelbert of Admont, Aeneas Silvius Piccolomini and
Juan de Torquemada, ed. Izbicki ThM, Nederman CJ. Thoemmes,
Bristol/Sterling
Konrad of Megenberg (1914) De translacione Romani imperii. In: Scholz
R, Unbekannte kirchenpolitische Streitschriften aus der Zeit Ludwigs
des Bayern (1327–1354), vol 2. Loescher, Rom, pp 249–345
Lupold of Bebenburg (2004) Politische Schriften des Lupold von
Bebenburg, ed. Miethke J, Flu¨eler C. MGH Staatsschriften, vol 4.
Hahnsche Buchhandlung, Hannover
Marsilius of Padua (1993) Writings on the empire: Defensor minor and
De translatione imperii, ed. Nederman CJ. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge/New York
Nicholas of Cusa (1996) De concordantia catholica, ed. Sigmund PE.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Peter of Andlau (1998) Libellus de caesarea monarchia, ed. Mu¨ller RA.
Insel, Frankfurt
Piccolomini Aeneas Silivus (2000) De ortu et auctoritate Romani imperii.
Three tracts on empire. Engelbert of Admont, Aeneas Silvius
Piccolomini and Juan de Torquemada, ed. Izbicki ThM, Nederman
CJ. Thoemmes, Bristol/Sterling
Roselli Antonio (1612) Monarchia. In: Goldast M, Monarchia S. Romani
imperii, vol 1. Biermann, Hannover, pp 252–556
William of Ockham (1956/1963/1974/1997) Opera politica, vols 1–4, ed.
Ofﬂer HS. Manchester University Press, Manchester (1956/1963/
1974); Oxford University Press, Oxford (1997)
Secondary Sources
Burns JH (1992) Lordship, kingship and empire. The idea of monarchy,
1400–1525. Clarendon, Oxford
Cheneval F (2002) Philosophie in weltbu¨rgerlicher Bedeutung. U¨ ber die
Entstehung
und
die
philosophischen
Grundlagen
des
supranationalen Denkens der Moderne. Schwabe, Basel
Davis CT (1957) Dante and the idea of Rome. Oxford University Press,
Oxford
Hageneder O (1985) Weltherrschaft im Mittelalter. Mitteilungen des
Instituts fu¨r O¨ sterreichische Geschichtsforschung 93:257–278
Jones Ch (2007) Eclipse of empire? Perceptions of the western empire and
its rulers in late-medieval France. Brepols, Turnhout
McCready WD (1974a) The problem of empire in Augustinus
Triumphus and late medieval papal hierocratic theory. Traditio
30:325–349
McGrade AS (1974b) The political thought of William of Ockham.
Personal and institutional principles. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge
Nederman C (1995) From Defensor pacis to Defensor minor: the problem
of empire in Marsiglio of Padua. Hist Polit Thought 16:313–329
Nederman C (2005) Empire and the historiography of European political
thought: Marsiglio of Padua, Nicholas of Cusa, and the medieval/
modern divide. J Hist Ideas 66:1–15
Pennington K (1993) The prince and the law, 1200–1600: sovereignty and
rights in the western legal tradition. University of California Press,
Berkeley/Oxford
Post G (1964) Studies in medieval legal thought. Public law and the state
1100–1323. Princeton University Press, Princeton
Scales L (2001) Monarchy and German identity in the later Middle Ages.
Bull John Rylands Univ Libr Manch 83:167–200
Ubl K (2006) Die Rechte des Kaisers in der Theorie deutscher Gelehrter
des 14. Jahrhunderts (Engelbert von Admont, Lupold von Bebenburg,
Konrad von Megenberg). In: Ma¨rtl C (ed) Konrad von Megenberg
(1309–1374). Das Wissen der Zeit. C.H. Beck, Mu¨nchen, pp 353–387
Walther HG (2003) Das Reich in der politischen Theorie der Legistik
und im Umkreis der pa¨pstlichen Kurie. In: Werner M (ed) Heinrich
Raspe – Landgraf von Thu¨ringen und ro¨mischer Ko¨nig (1227–1247).
Fu¨rsten, Ko¨nig und Reich in spa¨tstauﬁscher Zeit. Lang, Frankfurt,
pp 29–52
Roscelin of Compie`gne
MARGARET CAMERON
Department of Philosophy
University of Victoria
Victoria, BC
Canada
Abstract
Roscelin of Compie`gne’s reputation in the history of phi-
losophy was secured by his critical interaction with the
more famous Anselm of Canterbury and Peter Abelard.
Since no writings in his hand, save for one letter written to
his former student Abelard (Reiners 1910), have been
identiﬁed, and reports of his positions come from critical
or even hostile sources, determining the precise character
of Roscelin’s philosophical and theological views is difﬁ-
cult and controversial. Evidence suggests that he was part
of a group of scholars who advanced a novel and sophis-
ticated approach to the study of logic at the end of the
eleventh century.
Little is known of Roscelin’s biography. He was born
sometime around the middle of the eleventh century.
Roscelin’s letter to Abelard, which criticizes the views
found in Abelard’s Theologia summi boni and for which
Abelard was condemned at the Council of Soissons in
1121, gives us some idea of his life span.
Roscelin reportedly held the view that ‘‘if three persons
are merely one thing and not three individual things like
three angels or three souls in such a way that by will
and power they are entirely the same, then the Father
and the Holy Spirit has become incarnate with the Son’’
(Anselm 1946). Anselm’s reply was this: ‘‘Either he wants
to set up three gods or he does not understand what he is
saying.’’ Several versions of De incarnatione verbi indicate
Anselm’s effort to denounce the view of his former friend;
1168 R
Roscelin of Compie`gne

at the time of its ﬁnal publication, Roscelin had been
denounced at the Council of Soissons (c. 1090–1092) for
commitment to tritheism.
Some scholars claim that Roscelin’s effort to avoid
heresy (that the Father became incarnate with the son
and thus suffered) might have been the motivation for
the allegedly tritheistic Trinitarian thesis (Mews 2002).
Possibly it is explained by the new approach to the study
of dialectic. Roscelin was one of a number of dialecticians
in the late eleventh century who, according to the report of
a later chronicler, ‘‘was the ﬁrst in our time to institute the
doctrine of words (sententia vocum) in logic.’’ What is
meant by ‘‘sententia vocum’’ is debatable. The same
approach to logic is described as ‘‘sophistical,’’ and its
followers were members of a group with many followers,
including Robert of Paris, Arnulfus of Laon, and led by
some unknown ﬁgure named John (Iwakuma 1992).
Anselm also refers to the ‘‘witty little sophisms’’ that
Roscelin engaged in, but it seems that his approach to
dialectic was not all play since, according to Anselm and
Abelard, Roscelin also held strong views on the non-reality
of relations, composition, properties and dispositional
properties, and universals (Kluge 1976; De Libera 1996;
Erismann 2008).
According to Anselm’s characterization of Roscelin’s
view, genera and species are no more than ﬂatus vocis,
breaths of spoken air. This is usually taken to mean that
universals are identiﬁed as words. Peter Abelard’s theory
of universals is described as more advanced than his for-
mer teacher’s: Abelard insists that the universal is more
than mere air (vox) since it is the spoken word insofar as it
is signiﬁcant (sermo). Possibly Roscelin had not worked
out a sufﬁciently robust theory to handle the signiﬁcation
of universal words, although another aspect of his view
(namely, the denial of the distinction between a substance
and its properties, as when he denies that color is some-
thing distinct from the colored body) suggests that he
adhered to the deﬁnition of names given in Priscian’s
Institutiones grammaticae that the name signiﬁes sub-
stance with quality (Mews 2002).
Many of Roscelin’s theses can be grouped together
according to the common goal of denying metaphysical
plurality in reality, that is, that multiple things can in any
way be one. Roscelin denies the unity of universal wholes,
such as several individual humans constituting one species
human, or several species constituting one genus. The
species-name ‘‘human’’ is a mere word; only individually
distinct substances exist. Roscelin also denies the compo-
sition of integral wholes, such as a house composed of
parts. According to Abelard, ‘‘our teacher Roscelin had
a doctrine so crazy that he didn’t allow anything to be
composed of parts; but in the same way he attributed
species to be only words, he did the same for parts’’
(Abelard 1970). ‘‘Part,’’ like ‘‘species’’ and ‘‘genus,’’ is
a mere utterance, devoid of metaphysical import; possibly
Roscelin regarded anything but names for individual sub-
stances to be second-order logical terms, or terms of
second imposition. The position could not have been
worked out with great precision since it was left open for
Abelard to mock. The extent of Abelard’s intellectual debt
to Roscelin is unknown, and little help is given by
Roscelin’s hostile letter to his former student dissociating
his theological views from the controversies surrounding
Abelard’s. Roscelin is not mentioned once in Abelard’s
autobiographical Historia calamitatum.
Some of Anselm’s characterizations of Roscelin’s
beliefs are ambiguous. According to Anselm, Roscelin
does not recognize the distinction between a substance
and its properties, or substances and dispositions, and he
denies the reality of relations. Should these comments be
understood as positive positions put forward by Roscelin
(e.g., ‘‘there is no distinction between a substance and its
properties’’) or as implications of other views he holds?
No answer is clear from Anselm’s text. There have been
several recent attempts to reconstruct Roscelin’s doctrine
(Kluge 1976; Jolivet 1992; De Libera 1996; Mews
2002; Erismann 2008). Another promising avenue for
reconstructing Roscelin’s views is suggested by the
Dialectica by Garlandus (Garlandus 1959; Tweedale 1998;
Martin forthcoming).
See also: ▶Anselm of Canterbury ▶Garlandus the
Computist ▶Heresy ▶Peter Abelard ▶Universals
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Abelard Peter (1970) Dialectica, 2nd edn, ed. De Rijk LM. Van Gorcum,
Assen
Anselm of Canterbury (1946) De incarnatione verbi. Anselmi Opera
omnia, 6 vol 3, ed. Schmitt FS. Thomas Nelson, Rome/Edinburgh
Garlandus (1959) Dialectica: ﬁrst edition of the manuscripts, ed. De Rijk
LM. Van Gorcum, Assen
Reiners J (1910) Der Nominalismus in der Fru¨hscholastik: Ein Beitrag
zur Geschichte der Universalienfrage im Mittelalter. In: Beitra¨ge
zur Geschichte der Philosophie des Mittelalters, vol 8, Heft 5.
Mu¨nster
Secondary Sources
De Libera A (1996) La Querelle des universaux, de Platon a` la ﬁn du
Moyen Age. Seuil, Paris
Erismann C (2008) The trinity, universals and particular substances:
Philoponus and Roscelin. Traditio 63:277–305
Roscelin of Compie`gne R
1169
R

Iwakuma Y (1992) ‘Vocales’, or early nominalists. Traditio 47:37–111
Jolivet J (1992) Trois variations me´die´vales sur l’universel et l’individu:
Roscelin, Abe´lard, Gilbert de la Pore´e. Revue de me´taphysique et de
morale 97:111–155
Kluge E-H (1976) Roscelin and the medieval problem of universals. J Hist
Philos 14:405–414
Martin C (forthcoming) Utrum: Garland, sophisms and the nature of
vocalism
Mews C (2002) Reason and belief in the age of Roscelin and Abelard.
Ashgate, Aldershot
Picavet F (1911) Roscelin, philosophe et the´ologien d’apre`s la le´gende et
d’apre`s l’histoire; sa place dans l’histoire ge´ne´rale et compare´e des
philosophie me´die´vales, 2nd edn. F. Alcan, Paris
Tweedale M (1983) Logic (i): from the late eleventh century to the time of
Abelard. In: Dronke P (ed) A history of twelfth-century western
philosophy. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp 196–226
Tweedale M (1998) Roscelin of Compie`gne. In: Craig E (ed) Routledge
encyclopedia of philosophy, vol 8. Routledge, London and New York,
pp 356–357
Roseth, Roger
▶Roger Roseth
1170 R
Roseth, Roger

