Tunneling
799
T
Tunneling
G¨unter Nimtz and Brian Clegg
Tunneling represents the most fundamental process in physics. According to our
present understanding tunneling started the universe about 13 billions years ago.
Nowadays we know that tunneling is involved in radioactivity and in nuclear fu-
sion – the latter effect is heating the sun. Tunneling is the process of molecular
inversion motion in chemistry and is important in modern microelectronic devices.
Physicists introduced the name tunneling for a classical forbidden process, which
the theory of quantum mechanics explained around 1927: A ball, for instance, can-
not overcome a hill if its kinetic energy is less than the hill’s gravitational potential
energy. In this case the ball rolls back. However, quantum mechanics explained that
the ball has a tiny probability of getting to the other side of the hill. Similarly, an
α-particle leaves the attractive nuclear potential well despite having a small energy,
thereby producing radioactivity. In ﬁgures 1 and 2 an α-particle is illustrated as a
wave packet embedded in a valley between two hills, which represent the attractive
nuclear forces. The energy of the particle is assumed to be too small to overcome the
tops of the hills. However, radioactivity, which was observed a 100 years ago, i.e.,
the decay of an atomic nucleus, is explained by quantum mechanics as a probability
that a low energy particle is observed at the other side of the hill.
The explanation of alpha-decay as quantum mechanic tunneling followed around
1928 by George Gamow and simultaneously, but independently, by Edward U.
Condon and Ronald W. Gurney. Incidentally, in 1927, Friedrich Hund was the ﬁrst
to notice the possibility of the phenomenon of tunneling, which he called barrier
penetration, in a calculation of the ground state in a double-well potential. The phe-
nomenon arises, for example, in the inversion transition of the ammonia molecule.
Radioactivity is accompanied by the release of energy, which is the source of
nuclear power stations. The opposite process takes place in the sun and enabled
nuclear fusion by tunneling of protons, penetrating the repelling Coulomb forces.
This process ends up producing Helium and setting heat free. It provide the heat
source of the sun and produces the terriﬁc power of the atomic hybrid hydrogen
bomb.
In quantum mechanics, see for instance Merzbacher [9] and Gasiorowicz [10],
the one-dimensional stationary  Schr¨odinger equation describes the tunneling
mechanism of  wave packet by the relations
d2
d2x2 + 2m/ℏ2(W −U0) = 0,
(1)
k2 = k2
0 −(2mU0/ℏ2),
(2)
k2
0 = (2mW/ℏ2),
(3)

800
Tunneling
α
?
?
Fig. 1 Illustrating the α-particle decay of a nucleus. The α-particle is embedded between the
‘hills’ of the attractive nuclear forces. However, there is a small probability to leave the well by
tunneling. What happens inside the hill?
Ep
Ekα
E
0
r
Potential
barrier
Energy
level of
α−particle
Nuclear
radius
Nuclear
attraction
Coulomb
repulsion
Fig. 2 Details of the right hand side of ﬁgure 1. The force components of the nuclear valley in
which an α-particle is embedded are given. There is a minuscule probability of tunneling through
the potential barrier
(x)
Ψ
U0
x
0
a
Ψ1
Ψ2
Ψ3
Fig. 3 Illustrating (1) of the wave function (r). Between x = 0 and a is located the potential
barrier and the tunneling region
where  is the wave function of the wave particle in question, W the particle energy,
U0 the barrier height, m the particle mass, ℏthe  Planck’s constant, k and k0 are
the wave numbers (i.e., 2π times the reciprocal wave lengths) in the potential barrier
and in free space, respectively. Figure 3 displays the solution of the wave function
(r). In the case of W < U the wave number k is imaginary. This special solution

Tunneling
801
T
of the Schr¨odinger equation is called tunneling. With k being imaginary, the time
becomes zero or equivalently the wave packet velocity becomes inﬁnite inside a
barrier. The tunneling solution of the Schr¨odinger equation represents an action at a
distance: an incoming signal leaves the barrier at the same instant.
Zero-time tunneling was calculated for  electrons by Hartman, by Low and
Mende, and by Leavens and McKinnon, for instance [1–3]. A critical analysis of the
many tunneling time expressions since 1930 is presented in Ref. [4]. The conclusion
of this theoretical investigation is that the phase time result originally obtained by
Wigner and Hartman are the best expressions to calculate a tunneling time. This
statement was conﬁrmed in photon and phonon experiments and recently by Eckle
et al. in the electron ionization tunneling process in helium [5, 6].
The zero-time behavior in barriers was observed ﬁrst in photonic tunneling ex-
periments by Enders and Nimtz [7]. Such experiments represent the optical analogy
to quantum mechanical tunneling as was discussed by Sommerfeld [11]. The tunnel-
ing process is not completely described by the Maxwell theory for electromagnetic
waves, where the tunneling solutions are called evanescent modes. The more sophis-
ticated  quantum electrodynamics describes photonic tunneling by virtual photons
( light quantum) in agreement with experiments as reported recently [8].
Thus a particle with an energy smaller than that of the surrounding barrier can
penetrate it, i.e., can tunnel through it with a minuscule but ﬁnite probability. Amaz-
ingly, the particle does not spend time inside the barrier, the barrier represents a
zero-time space. The particle enters and leaves the barrier space at the same instant.
The zero-time tunneling is a near ﬁeld effect, which is observable over distances
comparable with the extension of the particle. Tunneling violates the relativistic
(Einstein) causality, which does not allow a signal to travel faster than the velocity
c of light in vacuum and it violates the Einstein relation W 2 = c2 p2, where W is
the energy and p is the photon momentum. However, tunneling does not allow the
construction of time machines. So-called primitive causality is not violated: effect
always follows cause, an ironic result considering the noncausal nature of quantum
mechanics as was proved in Ref. [7].
Primary Literature
1. T. Hartman: Tunneling of a wave packet. J. Appl. Phys. 33, 3427–33 (1962)
2. F. E. Low, P. F. Mende: A note on the tunneling time. Ann. Phys. NY 210, 380–87 (1991)
3. C. R. Leavens, W. R. McKinnon: An exact determination of the mean dwell time based on the
qunatum clock of Salecker and Wigner. Phys. Lett. A 194, 12–20 (1994)
4. S. Collins, D. Lowe and J. R. Barker: The quantum mechanical tunnelling time problem.
J. Phys. C 20, 6213–32 (1987)
5. G. Nimtz and A. A. Stahlhofen: Universal tunneling time for all ﬁelds, Ann. Phys. (Berlin) 17,
374–79 (2008)
6. P. Eckle et al.: Attosecond Ionization and Tunneling Delay Time Measurements in Helium.
SCIENCE 322, 1525–29 (2008)
7. G. Nimtz: Do evanescent modes violate relativistic causality? Lect. Notes Phys. 702,
506–31 (2006)
8. A. A. Stahlhofen, G. Nimtz: Evanescent modes are virtual photons. Europhys. Lett. 76,
189–95 (2006)

802
Two-State Vector Formalism
Secondary Literature
9. E. Merzbacher: Quantum Mechanics, 2nd ed. (Wiley, New York 1970)
10. S. Gasiorowicz: Quantum Physics (Wiley, New York 1996)
11. A. Sommerfeld: Lectures on Theoretical Physics, Optics (Academic, New York 1954, 27–28)
Two-State Vector Formalism
L. Vaidman
The two-state vector formalism (TSVF) [1] is a time-symmetric description of the
standard quantum mechanics originated in Aharonov, Bergmann and Lebowitz [2].
The TSVF describes a quantum system at a particular time by two quantum states:
the usual one, evolving forward in time, deﬁned by the results of a complete
measurement at the earlier time, and by the quantum state evolving backward in
time, deﬁned by the results of a complete measurement at a later time.
According to the standard quantum formalism, an ideal (von Neumann) measure-
ment at time t of a non-degenerate variable A tests for existence at this time of the
forward evolving state |A = a⟩(it yields the outcome A = a with certainty if this
was the state) and creates the state evolving towards the future:
|(t′)⟩= e−i
ℏ

 t′
t Hdt|A = a⟩,
t′ > t.
(1)
(In general, the Hamiltonians H(t) at different times do not commute and a time
ordering has to be performed.)
In the TSVF this ideal measurement also tests for backward evolving state
arriving from the future ⟨A = a| and creates the state evolving towards the past:
⟨(t′′)| = ⟨A = a|e
i
ℏ

 t′′
t
Hdt,
t′′ < t.
(2)
Apart from some differences (discussed below) following from the asymmetry
of the memory arrow of time, one can perform similar manipulations of the forward
and backward evolving states. In particular, neither can be cloned and both can be
teleported.
Given complete measurements, |A = a⟩at t1 and |B = b⟩at t2, the complete
description of a quantum system at time t, t1 < t < t2, is the two-state vector [3]:
⟨| |⟩,
(3)
where the states ⟨| and |⟩are obtained using (1, 2).

