390
Mixing and Oscillations of Particles
single system is actually in one of the states ϕi, which one, however, is not known
to the observer who knows only the probabilities. This very special kind of a mixed
stated is called a “mixture of states” [2], or “real mixture” [3] or a “Gemenge” [4]. A
“Gemenge” S(pk, ϕk) is a classical mixture of states ϕk with weights pk. Formally,
it can be described by the state operator WS = 
k wk P[ϕk], since this mixed state
operator leads to the same statistical predictions as the “Gemenge” S(pk, ϕk).
(b)  Mixed state (in general)
Let S = S1 + S2 be a compound system with  Hilbert space H that consists of
two subsystems S1 and S2 with Hilbert spaces H1 and H2, such that H = H1 ⊗H2
is the tensor product Hilbert space. If S is prepared in a pure state (S), then the
subsystems S1 and S2 are in the reduced mixed states W(S1) = tr2 {P[(S)]} and
W(S2) = tr1{P[(S)]}, where “trk” denotes the partial trace with respect to sys-
tem Sk. To say that the subsystem S1 is in a mixed state W(S1) means, that we
consider only those properties of the total system S that are concerned with the
degrees of freedom of system S1, neglecting in this way all possible correlations
between S1 and S2. ( Entanglement). The state W(S1) is a genuine mixed state
except when (S) is a product state  = ϕ(S1) ⊗ψ(S2). In this special situation
W(S1) is the pure state P[ϕ(S1)]. In general, W(S1) does not admit an “ ignorance
interpretation”. The mixed state W(S1) is also called – somewhat misleadingly –
“improper mixture” [3]. See also  density operator; objectiﬁcation; states in quan-
tum mechanics; states, pure and mixed and their representation.
Literature
1. J. M. Jauch: Foundations of Quantum Mechanics (Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, 1968, 96)
2. P. Mittelstaedt: The Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics and the Measurement Process
(Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1998, 35–37)
3. B. d’Espagnat: Reality and the Physicist (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1989, 85)
4. W. Heisenberg: Physikalische Prinzipien der Quantentheorie (S. Hirzel, Leipzig, 1930, 43)
Mixing and Oscillations of Particles
Andrzej K. Wr´oblewski
In 1955 Murray Gell-Mann and Abraham Pais analyzed the behaviour of neutral
particles under the operation C of charge conjugation which changes every par-
ticle into its anti-particle [1]. According to the proposed scheme of classiﬁcation
of K mesons, the neutral kaon K0 was assumed to possess an anti-particle K0
distinct from itself (at that time these particles were called θ0 and θ0, respectively).

Mixing and Oscillations of Particles
391
M
Gell-Mann and Pais were able to show that in that case the neutral kaon must be
considered to be a “particle mixture”, exhibiting two distinct lifetimes and different
decay modes. The two mesons K0 and K0, are states of deﬁnite strangeness S = +1
and S = −1, and they are produced as such in the strong interactions which con-
serve strangeness. However, when these neutral particles then propagate through
empty space both can decay to pions by the weak interactions, with |S| = 1.
Their mixing can occur via virtual intermediate pion states, e.g. K0 ⇆2π ⇆K
0.
These are second-order S = 2 weak transitions. In the modern language of quarks
and intermediate bosons, the transitions occur between valence quarks, as shown in
Fig. 1. (Quarks, see  Color Charge Degree of Freedom in Particle Physics; Particle
Physics; Parton Model; QCD; QFT).
At that time it was believed that the particles which decay by the weak inter-
actions were eigenstates of combined parity CP. These eigenstates are quantum
mechanical linear superpositions of the K0 and K0,
| K1⟩= [| K0⟩+ | K0⟩]/
√
2 of CP = +1,
| K2⟩= [| K0⟩−| K
0⟩]/
√
2 of CP = −1.
Conservation of CP required the K1 to decay into two pions and the K2 into three
pions. Because of the large difference in available kinetic energy in two-pion and
three-pion decays, the K2 was expected to have much longer lifetime. In essence
Gell-Mann and Pais predicted that only half of the neutral kaons underwent the de-
cay into two pions which was well known at that time, while the other half remained
undetected. These bold predictions of Gell-Mann and Pais were soon conﬁrmed ex-
perimentally. In 1957 Leon Lederman and his group discovered a long-lived neutral
kaon decaying into three pions [2]. The mean lifetime of K2 was about 500 times
Fig. 1 Feynman diagrams explaining the oscillations between K0 and K
0. Similar ”box” dia-
grams account for the oscillations of neutral charm mesons D0 ⇆D0 and neutral bottom mesons
B0 ⇆B0

392
Mixing and Oscillations of Particles
longer than that of K1. In the following year the change in time of the nature of the
neutral particle produced in association with the &0 hyperon was detected [3]. The
particle, initially the K0 of strangeness +1, was observed to interact with matter to
produce another hyperon, thus proving to be a strangeness −1 particle. Yet another
experimental conﬁrmation of the particle-mixture theory was the observation of re-
generation of the short-lived neutral K meson [4].
Thus, an initially pure beam of K0 will turn into its anti-particle K
0while prop-
agating, which will turn back into the original particle, and so on. This is called
particle oscillation (strangeness oscillation, or more generally, ﬂavour oscillation).
On observing the weak decay into leptons, it was found that a K0 always decayed
into the electron, whereas the anti-particle K0 decayed into the positron. Analysis
of the time dependence of this semileptonic decay also showed the phenomenon of
ﬂavour oscillation and allowed the extraction of the mass splitting between the K1
and K2. In 1964 Jim Christenson, James Cronin, Val Fitch, and Ren´e Turlay dis-
covered that CP invariance was violated in the decays of long-lived neutral kaons
[5]. Thus, the short-lived neutral kaon KS and the long-lived neutral kaon KL had
to be redeﬁned as | KS⟩= [(1 + ε) | K0⟩+ (1 −ε) | K0⟩]/
)
2(1 + ε2) and
| KL⟩= [(1 + ε) | K0⟩−(1 −ε) | K0⟩]/
)
2(1 + ε2), where ε is a small parameter
responsible for CP symmetry breaking.
After the discovery of the charm quark and the bottom quark, physicists have
been searching for the ﬂavour oscillations of neutral charm mesons D0 ⇆D
0and
neutral bottom mesons B0 ⇆B
0. The lifetimes of these mesona are of order of
a picosecond which makes the experiments much more difﬁcult than those with
neutral kaons. The mixing of neutral B mesons was ﬁrst studied in 1987 and that of
neutral D mesons was discovered only in 2007.
The mixing of quarks was ﬁrst considered by Nicola Cabibbo in 1963 [6]. At
that time only three quarks, u, d, and s were known. In order to explain observed
differences in branching ratios of semileptonic decays of strange particles Cabibbo
proposed that the d and s quarks are mixed and it is the mixture d′ = d cos θC +
s sin θC which takes part in the weak interactions. The mixing angle θC = 12.7◦is
called the Cabibbo angle. Later Makoto Kobayashi and Toshihide Maskawa [7] gen-
eralized this idea to the three families of quarks. In the Standard Model ( Quantum
ﬁeld theory, particle physics) the mixing of quarks is described by a 3 × 3 matrix
called the CKM matrix after its proponents Cabibbo, Kobayashi and Maskawa. It
is written as
⎛
⎝
d′
s′
b′
⎞
⎠. = VCKM
⎛
⎝
d
s
b
⎞
⎠. The elements of the CKM matrix have been
determined in a large number of experiments.
In 1957 Bruno Pontecorvo, inspired by the paper of Gell-Mann and Pais [1],
pointed out that if lepton number is not absolutely conserved and neutrinos have
ﬁnite masses, then mixing may occur between neutrino ν and its anti-particle, anti-
neutrino ν, so that neutrino could be a “mixed” particle [8]. At that time only one
neutrino was known. In 1962 Ziro Maki, Masami Nakagawa, and Shoichi Sakata
generalized Pontecorvo’s idea to the case of three families of leptons [9]. We

Mixing and Oscillations of Particles
393
M
know now that the neutrino oscillation data can consistently be described within
a three-neutrino mixing scheme with massive neutrinos, in which the ﬂavor states
να(α = e, μ, τ) are mixed with the mass states νi(i = 1, 2, 3) via the unitary
3 × 3 Pontecorvo-Maki-Nagakawa-Sakata lepton mixing matrix (PMNS matrix).
The mass states νi(i = 1, 2, 3) propagate with slightly different frequencies be-
cause of their mass differences. If at the start there is a pure νe beam, oscillations
would occur and at subsequent times one would have admixtures of νe with νμ and
ντ ( Particle physics). The oscillations of neutrinos originating from interactions
of high energy cosmic ray particles in earth’s atmosphere were discovered in 1998
by the Super-Kamiokande Collaboration [10]. Neutrino oscillations also provided
the explanation of the deﬁcit of neutrinos coming to earth from the sun as observed
in several experiments which were sensitive only to νe produced in thermonuclear
reactions in the sun’s interior. It was experimentally conﬁrmed that in the passage
to the earth some of these electron neutrinos changed into muon neutrinos which
could be detected by the Solar Neutrino Observatory in Canada [11].
Primary Literature
1. M. Gell-Mann, A. Pais, Behavior of Neutral Particles Under Charge Conjugation, The Physical
Review 97, 1387 (1955)
2. K. Lande, E. T. Booth, J. Impeduglia, L. Lederman, Observation of Long-Lived Neutral V
Particles, The Physical Review 103, 1901 (1957)
3. E. Boldt, D. O. Caldwell, Y. Pal, θ0
1 - θ0
2 Mass Difference, Physical Review Letters 1, 150 (1958)
4. R. H. Good, R. P. Matsen, F. Muller, O. Piccioni, W. M. Powell, H. S. White, W. B. Fowler,
R, W. Birge, Regeneration of Neutral K Mesons and Their Mass Difference, The Physicial
Review 124, 1223 (1961)
5. J. H. Christenson, J. W. Cronin, V. L. Fitch, R. Turlay, Evidence for the 2π Decay of the K0
2
Meson, Physical Review Letters 13, 138 (1964).
6. N. Cabibbo, Unitary Symmetry and Leptonic Decays, Physical Review Letters 10, 531 (1963)
7. M. Kobayashi, T. Maskawa, CP-Violation in the Renormalizable Theory of Weak Interactions,
Progress in Theoretical Physics 49, 652 (1973)
8. B. Pontecorvo, Mesonium and Anti-Mesonium (in Russian), Soviet Journal Experimental and
Theoretical Physics 33, 549 (1957); Inverse β−Processes and Non-Conservation of Lepton
Charge (in Russian), ibidem 34, 247 (1958)
9. Z. Maki, M. Nakagawa, S. Sakata, Remarks on the Uniﬁed Model of Elementary Particles,
Progress in Theoretical Physics 28, 870 (1962).
10. Y. Fukuda et al., (Super-Kamiokande Collaboration), Evidence for Oscillations of Atmospheric
Neutrinos, Physical Review Letters 81, 1562 (1998).
11. Q. R. Ahmad et al., (SNO Collaboration), Direct Evidence for Neutrino Flavor Transforma-
tion from Neutral-Current Interactions in the Sudbury Neutrino Observatory, Physical Review
Letters 89, 011301 (2002)
Secondary Literature
12. H. Frauenfelder, E. M. Henley: Nuclear and Particle Physics (Benjamin, Reading, Mass. 1975,
507–50)
13. D. H. Perkins, Introduction to High Energy Physics, 4th Edition, Cambridge University Press
2000.

