Springer Textbooks in Law
Gianluca Sgueo
The Design 
of Digital 
Democracy

Springer Textbooks in Law

Springer Textbooks in Law compiles high-quality educational content aimed at 
undergraduate and graduate students in all areas of law. All self-contained volumes 
are authored by accomplished academics and suitable for use in class as well as 
individual study. Many of them include chapter abstracts, deﬁnitions of technical 
terms, cases and self-assessment exercises, as well as recommended reading sec-
tions. This series is an invaluable resource for students and lecturers alike and spans 
the full range of topics in international and European law, including fundamentals of 
law and comparative law. Special attention is paid to current and emerging topics 
such as IT law, intellectual property, human rights as well as dispute resolution, 
mediation, arbitration – and many more.

Gianluca Sgueo 
The Design of Digital 
Democracy

Gianluca Sgueo 
École d’Affaires Publiques 
Sciences Po Paris 
Paris, France 
ISSN 2509-999X
ISSN 2510-0009 
(electronic) 
Springer Textbooks in Law 
ISBN 978-3-031-36945-2
ISBN 978-3-031-36946-9 
(eBook) 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-36946-9 
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland 
AG 2023 
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are solely and exclusively licensed by the Publisher, whether 
the whole or part of the material is concerned, speciﬁcally the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of 
illustrations, recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microﬁlms or in any other physical way, and 
transmission or information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by 
similar or dissimilar methodology now known or hereafter developed. 
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this publication 
does not imply, even in the absence of a speciﬁc statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant 
protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use. 
The publisher, the authors, and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information in this 
book are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the publisher nor the authors or 
the editors give a warranty, expressed or implied, with respect to the material contained herein or for any 
errors or omissions that may have been made. The publisher remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional 
claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations. 
This Springer imprint is published by the registered company Springer Nature Switzerland AG 
The registered company address is: Gewerbestrasse 11, 6330 Cham, Switzerland

This book is dedicated to the good that chaos, 
transformation and change bring to our lives. 
Mine has a name; actually, two names: 
Elettra e Dafne.

Acknowledgments 
The inspiration for this book came from a chance meeting between the subject of my 
studies and ﬂashes of insight. My research, publications, and teaching endeavors 
focus on participatory democracy, digital technology, and innovative approaches to 
policy-making—and speciﬁcally to game-design applied to public policy. With 
regard to the latter subject, I published a book titled “Games, Powers & Democra-
cies,” in 2018, back when this debate was still in its infancy. It continues to evolve to 
this day. 
The hunch (good or bad, I shall leave readers to judge) is itself the result of a 
random combination of fortunate readings, stimulating conversations with people 
who inspired in me new reﬂections and thoughts, as well as professional experiences 
far and near in time. 
In this respect, I owe a lot to Massimo Mantellini and his book “Bassa 
Risoluzione” (Torino, Einaudi, 2018). Reading Massimo’s provocative thoughts 
on low-ﬁ technology literally paved the way to “Il Divario”—a book (in Italian) I 
published with EGEA in 2022, dedicated to the challenges of digital transition in 
public governance—as well as to the volume you are reading. I also owe my 
gratitude to the people with whom I have shared the adventure of the IRPA’s 
Observatory on the Digital State since 2019 (and among them, in particular, Luisa 
Torchia and Bruno Carotti). 
The six years spent at the European Parliamentary Research Service, in Brussels, 
were a great source of inspiration. In the role of policy analyst, I focused on the 
issues that are most dear to me: writing on democracy, digitalization, and innovation. 
It was also during this time when I ﬁrst shared publicly the intuition (at the time, in 
an embryonic state) I had about the aesthetics of digital democracy. I have very clear 
memories of that moment. It was January 2020. We had gathered with colleagues in 
the parliamentary library to present the annual report on the policy trends we foresaw 
for the year to come. None of us knew it yet, but just two months later, the world 
would change forever, dramatically. In retrospect, I can say the pandemic conﬁrmed 
my intuition right and motivated me to keep working on it. 
Just few months later (it was 2021 and in Europe stay-at-home lockdowns and 
social-distancing measures were in force), I was invited to participate in an online
vii

talk by a friend, Francesco Berti, who at that time was serving as elected member in 
the Italian Parliament. Francesco’s political party, the Five Stars Movement, has 
been traditionally attuned to topics such as digital democracy and civic engagement. 
It was in the aftermath of that event that the project of writing a book about the digital 
aesthetics of democracy took concrete shape and became the editorial project that, 
two years later, resulted in the volume you are now reading. 
viii
Acknowledgments
Another person to whom I wish to express my gratitude for being a source of 
inspiration and a guide is Vittorio Colao. The professional experience in the Digital 
Transformation Team of the Italian government that started in 2021 encouraged me 
to develop a more mature understanding of several key technical issues of digital 
government I touch upon in this book. My thanks are also extended to Alessio Butti, 
for offering me the chance of prolonging this experience with the new government 
that took over in October 2022. 
Among those with whom I have discussed the ideas presented in this volume, and 
whom I should credit for pushing me to see problems from fresh and unexpected 
perspectives, are my students at the École d’Affaires Publiques of Sciences Po. The 
cycle of lectures I gave on digital democracy during the fall 2022 in Paris were an 
incredible stimulus to help me making sense of digital challenges across countries 
and cultures. 
I am grateful to Professor Sabino Cassese for the comments and suggestions 
provided to earlier versions of this volume and to Giancarlo Vilella for the many and 
never mundane conversations we have had over the years. Useful comments on 
earlier drafts of this book also came from colleagues at the Brussels School of 
Governance, as well as from the scholars who attended the Conference “Quo vadis 
Digital Democracy?”, held in September 2022 in Bonn. At that conference, I 
presented a paper dedicated to digital design in collaboration with Gianluca 
Misuraca. 
It goes without saying that without friends and family, I would probably still be 
wandering about whether to write on digital aesthetics. Alessandro Elkhoury’s, Jesse 
Colzani’s, Giovanni Allegretti’s, and Jacopo Scipione’s comments on parts of this 
book, or articles I published on topics related to it, made tangible improvements to 
both content and style. Thanks to Dario Bevilacqua, who provided the most inspiring 
comments to read. I am particularly grateful to Sarah Tighe for helping with both the 
ﬂuency of the English language and the contents in this book. Errors, omissions, or 
inaccuracies, however, remain my sole responsibility. As regards family, the one 
person without whom I could not have even started writing is Claudia, my wife. She 
is the only reason I am able (or at least I try) to do what I am passionate about and 
interested in. 
Finally, I want to extend my gratitude to the editorial team at Springer 
(in particular, I want to thank Anja Trautmann for her supportive and efﬁcient 
handling of the book project) and to the anonymous reviewers, for their careful 
reading of the manuscript and their precious comments and suggestions. 
Two concluding notes for readers. First, despite being about technology, this 
book is the result of human labor. It was written without the aid of any artiﬁcial

intelligence tool—something I have the feeling one should be proud of these days. 
Second, in the book I will often resort to data and statistics, which immediately 
presented me with a dilemma: where and how to cite sources? I solved the dilemma 
by recurring to both footnotes and references. The former is meant to satisfy curious, 
skeptics, critics and all those who would like to explore further the sources from 
which I have drawn the data. In the references, readers will ﬁnd detailed information 
about authors and their articles and books. A selection of keywords and a brief 
summary concluding each chapter will provide students (and others) with an extra 
tool for orientation in the book’s issues.
Acknowledgments
ix

Contents 
1 
Introductory Remarks. When Did We Start Caring About Digital 
Aesthetics? . .  . .  . .  . .  . .  . .  . .  . .  . . .  . .  . .  . .  . .  . .  . .  . .  . .  . .  . .  . .  . .  .
1  
1.1 
Technology, Entertainment and Design . . . . . . . . .  . . .  . . .  . . .  .
1  
1.2 
Technological Progress and Social Interactions . . . .  . . . . .  . . . . .
3  
1.3 
Design-Thinking, Innovation and Experimentalism in Public 
Policy . . . . . . . .  . . .  . . . .  . . .  . . . .  . . .  . . .  . . . .  . . .  . . . .  . . .  .
4  
1.4 
The Aesthetics of Digital Democratic Governance . . . . . . . . . . . .
6  
1.5 
The Structure of the Volume . . . . . . . . . .  . . .  . . .  . . .  . . . .  . . .  .
7  
References . . . . .  . . . . . .  . . . . .  . . . . . .  . . . . .  . . . . .  . . . . . .  . . . . .  . .  
12  
2 
The Aesthetics of Consumer Tech . . . . . . . .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  . .  
13  
2.1 
The Four Parameters of Consumer Tech . . . . .  . . . . . .  . . . . . . .  .  
13  
2.2 
What Do We Know About Time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  . . . . . .  
14  
2.3 
The Apotheosis of Kronos . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
16 
2.4 
The Cult of Velocity . . . .  . . .  . . . .  . . .  . . . .  . . . .  . . .  . . . .  . . .  .  
19  
2.5 
Digital Accelerationism and Working Poverty . . . . . . . .  . . . . . .  .  
21  
2.6 
Immediate Feedback and Digital Economy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
22 
2.7 
Fast Technology, Changing Language . . . . . . . . . .  . . . . . . . . . .  
24  
2.8 
The ‘Ecstasy of Digital Speed’ and Dazzling Expectations . . . . . . 
28 
2.9 
Fool-Proof Technology . . . . . . .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
29  
2.10 
Simplicity Equals Sanity . . . . .  . . . . .  . . . . .  . . . . .  . . . . .  . . . . .  
31  
2.11 
Digital Singularity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
32 
2.12 
Digital Gratuity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
35 
2.13 
The Costs of Consumer Tech: Ownership, Quality and 
Contentment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  . . . . . . . . . . . .  . . . . . . . . . . .  
37  
2.14 
From Digital to Analogue, No Return . . . . . . .  . . . .  . . . . .  . . . .  .  
40  
References . . . . .  . . . . . .  . . . . .  . . . . . .  . . . . .  . . . . .  . . . . . .  . . . . .  . .  
43  
3 
Digital Aesthetics in the Public Sphere . . . . . .  . . . . . .  . . . . .  . . . . . .  
49  
3.1 
The Problem of Replicability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
49 
3.2 
The Inclusivity Dilemma . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
50
xi

xii
Contents
3.3 
The Longevity of Law . . . . . . .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  . .  
54  
3.4 
Generality Vs Singularity . . . . . . . . . . . . .  . . .  . . .  . . .  . . .  . . .  .  
58  
3.5 
Reliability and Digital Governance . . . . . . .  . . . . . . .  . . . . . . . .  .  
60  
3.6 
Digital Publicity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
62  
3.7 
Democratic Dissonances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
64 
3.8 
Post-Consultation Feedback. The Case of the French 
Convention Citoyenne Pour le Climat .  . .  . . .  . .  . .  . .  . . .  . .  . .  .  
66  
3.9 
The Aftermath of the Conference on the Future of Europe . . . . . .  
67  
3.10 
The Paradox of Digital Democracy: The ‘Digital 
Undemocratic’ .  . .  . .  . .  . .  . . .  . .  . .  . .  . . .  . .  . .  . .  . .  . . .  . .  . .  .  
69  
References . . . . .  . . . . . .  . . . . .  . . . . . .  . . . . .  . . . . .  . . . . . .  . . . . .  . .  
72  
4 
The Digital Undemocratic: Dazzling Expectations vs Disappointing 
Outcomes . .  . .  . .  . . .  . .  . .  . . .  . .  . .  . .  . . .  . .  . .  . .  . . .  . .  . .  . . .  . .  . .  
77  
4.1 
The Rhetoric of Digitally Efﬁcient Government . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
77 
4.2 
The Structural Argument: ‘Innovation Theaters’ and 
‘Knowledge-Scarcity’ . .  . . . . .  . . . .  . . . .  . . . .  . . . . .  . . . .  . . . .  
80  
4.3 
The Procedural Argument: Wicked Problems and Public 
Regulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  . . . . . . . . . . . .  
84  
4.4 
The Cultural Argument: Public Sector and Market 
Competition . . . .  . . . . . . .  . . . . . .  . . . . . . .  . . . . . . .  . . . . . . .  .  
86  
4.5 
The Pandemic Acceleration of Digital Government . . . . . . . . . .  .  
89  
4.6 
From Performance to Approach: The Design of Virtual 
Democratic Spaces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
91 
References . . . . .  . . . . . .  . . . . .  . . . . . .  . . . . .  . . . . .  . . . . . .  . . . . .  . .  
93  
5 
Re-Conceptualising the Aesthetics of Digital Democracy . .  . .  . . .  . . .  
97  
5.1 
A Look Into a More Technological Future . . . . . . . . . . . . .  . . .  .  
97  
5.2 
Protecting Complexities . . . . . . . .  . . . . . . . . . .  . . . . . . . . . .  . .  102  
5.3 
The Aesthetics of Virtual Democratic Interactions. Towards 
a New Narrative of Digital Democratic Spaces . . . . . . . . . . . .  . .  105  
5.4 
Re-Framing Digital Consultations: Interactions Not Outcomes . . . 
110 
5.5 
Game-Design and Digital Democratic Spaces . . . .  . . .  . . . .  . . .  .  117  
5.6 
Concluding Remarks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  120  
References .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  123

Chapter 1 
Introductory Remarks. When Did We Start 
Caring About Digital Aesthetics? 
Abstract This chapter introduces readers to the transformative effects fueled by 
converging and overlapping patterns of design, tech and entertainment. These are in 
part positive and in part negative. Technology, for a start, has dramatically changed 
the ‘infrastructure’ of democratic systems (the number and quality of connections 
between citizens and public administrations, the physiognomy of the public space, 
and access to information). A second beneﬁcial consequence inﬂuenced by technol-
ogy, design and entertainment into democratic processes consists of the prominence 
gained by design-thinking and creative experimentation applied to problem-solving 
in public policy. On the other hand, stronger ties between technology, entertainment 
and design have widened the gap between citizens’ expectations of everything 
related to digitalization, including government, and the actual rendering of digita-
lized public decision-making. The decreased satisfaction in digitally based forms of 
democratic decision-making poses a crucial challenge to digitalised policy-making, 
in both national and supranational venues. Public regulators are seeing the poorest 
results ever recorded in terms of interest, engagement and retention despiteusing the 
most cutting edge and advanced technologies. 
Keywords Toggling tax · TED conferences · Mass consumption electronics · 
Cybersyn project · Design-thinking · Innovation · Experimentalism · Wicked-
problems · Democratic innovations · Aesthetics · Digital democracy · Civic 
engagement 
1.1 
Technology, Entertainment and Design 
This book has a story to tell—a story that begins with the smartphone in your pocket. 
Pick it up and take a look at it. There is a good chance that you have done this 
multiple times today. The one billion users of Android mobile systems receive an 
average of eleven billion notiﬁcations per day. Those using Google’s email service 
receive notiﬁcations of incoming messages by default at the upper right corner of the
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2023 
G. Sgueo, The Design of Digital Democracy, Springer Textbooks in Law, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-36946-9_1
1

screen, the visual angle that is most likely to catch our attention.1 As a result, on any 
given day, the average smartphone user spends three hours and ﬁfteen minutes on 
their devices, averaging around ﬁfty-eight different ‘checks’. Divided per waking 
time, this is roughly one interaction every four minutes. In 2012, the average time 
spent on digital screens was around seventy-four seconds before switching. From 
2016 to 2021, it fell to forty-seven seconds. By 2025, it is estimated that a mere 
eighteen seconds will elapse between one interaction and the next.2 
2
1
Introductory Remarks. When Did We Start Caring About Digital Aesthetics?
But it is not just the quantity of time using our smartphones that has changed—the 
quality of time spent on our devices has also undergone a profound transformation. 
These days, the making ‘voice to voice’ telephone calls on a smartphone seems old 
fashioned when compared to the plethora of newer ways a device can be used to 
communicate and share information. Smartphones are used primarily to exchange 
messages with friends, colleagues, and family members, via instant messaging 
applications. Arguably the most well-known—WhatsApp—conveys forty-one mil-
lion messages per minute globally. In 2022, it was the fourth app with the most 
downloads worldwide.3 
Have you ever wondered what makes our smartphones—and more generally our 
digital screens—so attractive? Ease of use is a starting point. For the most part, 
devices are fast and relatively easy to use. Moreover, despite often being prohibi-
tively expensive, they host plenty of personalized services, many of which are 
offered free of charge—or so we would like to think, anyway. 
In reality, our repetitive interactions with digital screens have quantiﬁable costs 
that—according to a study published in the Harvard Business Review in 2022—adds 
up to almost one tenth of our productive time every year. In this study, the authors 
measured the frequency with which ‘Knowledge workers’ (who work primarily with 
computers) toggled between different mobile applications over the course of a 
working day. They quantiﬁed an average of one thousand and two hundreds 
switches per day between apps and websites. The time workers needed to spend 
acclimating to the semantic context and purpose of new applications after each 
switch was given the label ‘toggling tax’; it was calculated to account for about 
nine percentage points of the annual productive time of digital workers.4 
1 Williams (2018); North (2011); Chaparro-Peláez et al. (2022); Baltas (2003); Miller et al. (2014). 
2 Data provided by Exploding Topics, Time Spent Using Smartphones, 2023 (https:// 
explodingtopics.com/blog/smartphone-usage-stats); Exploding Topics, Screen Time Statistics, 
Exploding 
Topics, 
January 
13, 
2023 
(https://explodingtopics.com/blog/screen-time-stats); 
Vodafone – The Future Laboratory, The Connected Consumer 2030, 2022 (https://newscentre. 
vodafone.co.uk/app/uploads/2022/01/Vodafone_Report_FINAL_SD.pdf).
3 Data provided by Sensor Tower, Store Intelligence Data Digest, 2022 (https://go.sensortower.com/ 
q2-2022-data-digest-report.html). 
4 Nerayana Murty et al. (2022); Mark (2023); Rogers (2014); Georg (1999); Norbre and Kastner 
(2014); Ward et al. (2017). In another estimate (Microsoft 2023) the daily inﬂow of data, emails, 
meetings, and notiﬁcations accounts for 57% of the average employee’s working time, compared to 
the 43% of working time dedicated to creating (in documents, spreadsheets, and presentations).

1.2
Technological Progress and Social Interactions
3
Aside from productivity, pervasive digital technology bears social, environmen-
tal, and political costs—most of which have not yet been fully identiﬁed. So, as it 
stands right now, we can state that an extraordinary combination of advanced 
technology, enticing entertainment and captivating design has evolved to the point 
of locking many of us into a morbid relationship with our smartphones (but the same 
applies to other technological products and services). The consequences are signif-
icant and touch on multiple aspect of our lives: how we relate to others, what we 
expect from our elected representatives, or whether we choose to engage in civic 
activities like voting, signing a petition or participating in protests (both online and 
ofﬂine)—and the list goes on. 
This will be addressed in the coming pages. But to begin, we need to clarify 
another point: when exactly did technology, entertainment and design become so 
intertwined? 
To answer this question, we need to take a step back in time to 1984. That year, 
Richard Saul Wurman and Harry Marks co-funded an event that would, a decade 
later, become a globally acknowledged and widely celebrated format for public 
speeches: TED Conferences. Wurman and Marks envisioned an event that would 
capture and celebrate what they believed was a nascent and promising trend. Their 
intuition was simple but brilliant. They had realized that technological innovation, 
entertainment, and design—until then, three distinct areas—were not just becoming 
more similar; they were actually converging. As this occurred, these ﬁelds ampliﬁed 
the magnitude of their impact on societies, economies, politics and institutions 
globally. The compact disc, the e-book, and 3D graphics were all showcased during 
the ﬁrst TED conference. These innovations would eventually be hailed as successes 
and are now taught in business schools all over the world. 
While time proved Wurman and Marks correct, the two graphic designers were 
certainly not responsible for starting the process that led to what are now called 
‘mass consumption electronics’, that is: both highly sophisticated and carefully 
designed to entertain, serve and—most importantly than ever—gratify us. 
Smartphones, tablets, smartwatches and the majority of digital services and 
applications we use every day (multiple times a day, as we have just seen) are the 
result of a transformation spanning two centuries and involving cultural, political, 
economic and societal factors. Commodity economy, urbanization, and colonialism 
are caught up in this process. Futurism, amateur photography and language have also 
played a key role in this transformation. 
Point taken for now. We will come back to it later. 
1.2 
Technological Progress and Social Interactions 
This transformative process, fueled by converging and overlapping patterns of 
design, tech and entertainment, is still ongoing. Its destination (if ever there was 
one) remains uncertain and subject to debate. The actual effects for democratic 
systems, however, are already plain to see.

4
1
Introductory Remarks. When Did We Start Caring About Digital Aesthetics?
These are in part positive and in part negative. 
Technology, for a start, has dramatically changed the ‘infrastructure’ of demo-
cratic systems—that is, both the number and quality of connections between citizens 
and public administrations, the physiognomy of the public space, and access to 
information. With technological progress, social interaction costs have lowered 
radically, and citizens have gained improved access to public structures through 
digital communication channels. This also explains why innovative, tech-based 
approaches to inclusive and participated policy-making have become the subject 
of a growing debate between academics and politicians. 
Let us be clear though: utopias of tech-savvy, self-organized societies made their 
ﬁrst appearance around forty years ago, with the surge of cybernetics and the attempt 
to automate public processes for a more efﬁcient state. In 1970, the socialist 
government of Salvador Allende in Chile tested a primitive form of ‘algorithmic 
regulation’ aimed at controlling state-owned industries. The ‘Cybersyn Project’ 
worked on the creation of the so-called ‘liberty machine’. This machine would 
operate in close to real time and facilitate instant decision-making, through a 
distributed network of shared information.5 
The Cybersyn Project was fascinating and ahead of its time. However, it has only 
been in the last twenty years that the number of projects and discussions on the 
possible advantages and disadvantages of using technology in interactions between 
individuals and public bodies has exploded. Every day new conversations are being 
had as to the beneﬁts (and potential threats) of technical advancements associated to 
democratic institutions by academics, legislators, civic advocates and public ofﬁ-
cials. Here is a striking example: no less than thirty-one ofﬁcially recognized 
methods are being used in social sciences for theorizing, measuring, and applying 
deliberative democracy. Most of these methods are directly related to technological 
aspects, either as a tool for research (survey methods, indexes, and process tracings, 
for instance) or as the main area of analysis (as with the cases of online deliberative 
matrixes, social networks and big data analyses).6 
1.3 
Design-Thinking, Innovation and Experimentalism 
in Public Policy 
Another beneﬁcial consequence inﬂuenced by technology, design and entertainment 
into democratic processes consists of the prominence gained by design-thinking 
applied to problem-solving in public policy. Design-thinking broadened the very 
idea of ‘design’, moving it beyond the construction of physical products and spaces, 
into politics and policy, and elevating designers to a kind of medium capable of
5 Medina (2011); Loeber (2018); Espejo (2009); Alvarez and Gutierrez (2022); Schwenberg and 
Bossel (1977); Barrionuevo (2008). 
6 Ercan et al. (2022); Espejo (2014). 

reinventing systems to better meet the desires of the people within them. After all, 
our age is quintessentially (and perhaps more than in any other moment in history) 
the age of design. This makes the quest for ‘good’ digital design a contemporary 
challenge, in spite of very little agreement among academics and policy-makers on 
how policy and design relate and interact with each other. 
1.3
Design-Thinking, Innovation and Experimentalism in Public Policy
5
This is accompanied by the progressive expansion of the role played by govern-
mental entities in fostering innovation. From being primarily addressed to tackle 
market failures, innovation in government today is expected to simultaneously 
address societal, environmental and economic challenges, while creating new mar-
ket opportunities. 
Democratic participation provides a good example in this regard. Efforts in 
modernizing participatory channels through digital technology have evolved from 
redressing criticism on democratic deﬁcits through fostering digital interactions with 
stakeholders to current attempts at designing policy-making in a friendly, captivating 
and participative manner. Improving user interaction, for instance, has allowed 
policy-makers to draw on a wider and more dispersed range of expertise, thus 
helping identify and co-create new approaches to so-called ‘wicked’ problems. 
Citizens’ feedback to these efforts is very positive. Seventy-two percent of 
Europeans declare they would like to be able to vote in elections through their 
smartphone (while only seventeen percent would oppose it). There is even an 
alarming ﬁfty-one percent of Europeans who would be excited at the idea of 
reducing the number of national parliamentarians and give those seats to an 
algorithm.7 
To give another example, policymakers have widened disparities in technical 
abilities, cultural diversity, and linguistic capabilities among societal classes by 
using design techniques focused on inclusivity. Following Graham Smith’s ground-
breaking research in the area, academics interested in this subject have started to look 
into and discuss how ‘democratic innovations’ are thought up and put into practice.8 
To complete the list of positive consequences stemming from overlapping trends 
in technology, design and entertainment, we should credit the latter for slowly but 
steadily making its appearance in public governance. Experimental approaches 
based on nudging and game-design have helped public regulators worldwide to 
overcome cultural hurdles by opening decision-making to citizens. We know that 
such approaches differ in many ways. At the same time, we also know that they are 
all premised on the assumption that entertainment holds great potential in capturing 
citizens’ attention and stimulating their interest. Therefore, the complementary and 
holistic use of these various approaches, accompanied by ad hoc strategies to ensure
7 Data provided by the Centre for the governance of change – IE University, European Tech Insights 
2022 (https://www.ie.edu/cgc/research/european-tech-insights/). 
8 Smith (2009). Smith terms ‘democratic innovations’ the institutions ‘that have been speciﬁcally 
designed to increase and deepen citizen participation in the political decision-making process’. The 
innovation, claims Smith, is consequential to the fact that these institutions represent a departure 
from the traditional institutional architecture of advanced industrial democracies. Participatory 
budgeting, Citizens’ Assembly, town meetings, online citizen forums, and direct legislation are

participation by the widest possible selection of stakeholders and interest groups 
(including outreach efforts, education- and awareness- building) and a design 
approach that is focused on inclusiveness, is being acknowledged by many scholars 
for its capacity to foster citizens’ willingness to engage meaningfully in civic and 
political spaces in fun and rewarding manners.9 
6
1
Introductory Remarks. When Did We Start Caring About Digital Aesthetics?
1.4 
The Aesthetics of Digital Democratic Governance 
Unfortunately, the impact of the increased use of technology in democratic processes 
is not limited to the positive aspects. Stronger ties between technology, entertain-
ment and design have also transformed our relationship with (and expectations of) 
democratic decision-making. The widening gap between our expectations of every-
thing related to digitalization, including government, and the actual rendering of 
digitalized public decision-making has resulted in perverse and troubling outcomes. 
One for all: the higher our expectations in technology, the lower our satisfaction in 
digitally based forms of democratic decision-making. It seems as if the metrics that 
almost magically push our satisfaction to the extra mile when using digital tools have 
limited impact or no effect whatsoever when they are reproduced in digital public 
spaces.10 
Understanding this point is crucial. Online, human behaviour unfolds in a market 
where attention is the main commodity. What citizens in digital societies desire is 
strongly inﬂuenced by what they perceive as valuable and rewarding. When we are 
online or when we use digital products, we have a tendency to overestimate certain 
factors like speed of service and user-friendliness, and to underestimate the costs— 
both for ourselves and others. 
In a nutshell: our expectations in digital products and services are dazzling. This 
poses a crucial challenge to digitalised policy-making, in both national and supra-
national venues. Public regulators are seeing the poorest results ever recorded in 
terms of interest, engagement and retention despite using the most cutting edge and 
advanced technologies. Public authorities are not meeting citizens’ demands for
all classiﬁable as democratic innovations, according to Smith’s taxonomy. Yet, to be classiﬁed as 
democratically innovative, concludes Smith, these institutions must possess two key features: the 
ﬁrst is that they are designed to democratically engage non-organized or partisan citizens; the 
second is that they consist of institutionalized forms of participation; that is, they provide citizens 
with a formal role in policy, legislative or constitutional decision-making.
9 Sgueo (2019); Lerner (2014); Salen and Zimmerman (2003); Burke (2014); Bogost and Salen 
(2008); Waddington (2013). 
10 In this book, I look at digital democratic spaces in their broadest sense. I therefore range from 
more traditional and established channels of democratic engagement, such as online consultations, 
to more recent and innovative approaches, such as digital participatory platforms to co-create 
policies. While obvious differences exist between these methods of consultation, they also share 
common traits, especially in the design. 

tangible, fast and gratifying returns. This dramatic—and still unresolved—clash of 
values is hampering trust and eroding conﬁdence in politics and policies. 
1.5
The Structure of the Volume
7
Many questions arise from this observation. First and foremost, what leverage 
should we place on the digital design of institutions, rules and spaces of democratic 
interaction? What weight must we give to aesthetics in digital democratic 
governance? 
Please note that this is simultaneously a methodological and a theoretical ques-
tion. On the one hand, it leads us to wonder how digital government, and speciﬁcally 
digital democratic spaces, should be designed to widen the gap between expectations 
in and outcomes of democratic decision-making. In addition to procedural aspects, it 
forces us to consider whether aesthetic approaches to digital democratic decision-
making are functional in handling efﬁcaciously existing issues of civic engagement. 
1.5 
The Structure of the Volume 
Building on these 
considerations, 
this 
book 
has three 
overlapping 
aims, 
corresponding loosely to its ﬁve parts, each offering some necessarily preliminary 
answers to the dilemmas discussed above. 
In Chap. 2, focus is placed on a simple, yet challenging, dilemma: what makes 
electronics for general use, also referred to as ‘consumer tech’, so widespread and 
ubiquitous? My aim is to provide a preliminary understanding of the key design 
features of consumer tech, and how these impact on our expectations on technology. 
I suggest four reasons are prevalent in this respect. The ﬁrst couple relates to 
usage and time. Most consumer technology is offered to us with simpliﬁed interfaces 
designed 
to 
quickly 
meet 
users’ 
demands. 
The 
two 
additional 
features 
complementing hyper-velocity and over-simpliﬁcation are singularity and gratuity, 
respectively. Combined, these four characteristics are primarily intended to gratify 
users, almost in real time. However, as we have just said, they come at a cost. 
Consumer tech’s products and services are, on average, qualitatively lower in 
comparison to their analogical—or professional—counterparts. The images we 
share on social media, the songs we listen through streaming services, or the news 
we read via RSS feeds, online newspapers, blogs, and podcasts are all qualitatively 
rounded down. 
Hence, understanding and accepting what in Chap. 2 I describe in terms of the 
‘Lo-ﬁ nature’ of digital services and products, is the ﬁrst step to deﬁning and 
assessing an aesthetic dimension of digital democratic spaces capable of matching 
the capacities of democratic structures and procedures with the expectations of 
citizens. 
The latter task is entrusted to Chap. 3. This draws on the existing fundamental 
design differences between consumer technology and digital democratic spaces. 
My claim is that democratic decision-making is antithetical to consumer technol-
ogy on ﬁve grounds. First, digital democratic spaces must necessarily stay inclusive. 
Consumer tech instead can be—and often is—exclusive. Second, public regulation is

designed after durability, while consumer tech plans its obsolescence. Third, with 
occasional exceptions, norms are designed to serve the interest of large and 
undifferentiated communities rather than targeting individual stakeholders. Intui-
tively, this implies that the principle of singularity permeating commercial technol-
ogy is not applicable to digitalized public services. Fourth, virtual democratic spaces 
differ from consumer tech in terms of reliability. Consumers may always opt out and 
adopt cheaper alternatives—citizens do not enjoy the same degree of freedom. Fifth 
and ﬁnally, public regulators and market operators differ with regard to competitive 
gains. The former, unlike the latter, operate outside of market conditions. For this 
reason, they have fewer incentives to innovate at scale. 
8
1
Introductory Remarks. When Did We Start Caring About Digital Aesthetics?
Despite these distinctions, we nonetheless notice that the majority of digitalized 
public services in Western democracies are still predominantly modeled after con-
sumer technology. Democratic interactions between citizens and public authorities 
are imagined and implemented by the latter following the standard criteria used by 
consumer tech. 
This approach, I claim, is profoundly wrong, as it encourages a paradoxical 
outcome: the average citizen is less (not more) gratiﬁed and willing to interact 
with governments. I provocatively termed this paradox ‘the digital undemocratic’. 
We may in fact accept our role of consumers with regard to the standardized ‘Lo-ﬁ’ 
technology largely available on the market. We actually adapt relatively well to the 
trade-off between rapid gratiﬁcation and suboptimal performance. This compromise, 
however, becomes unacceptable when we think of ourselves as citizens interacting 
with public entities via online platforms or other digital means.11 With the overlap of 
the consumer’s and the citizen’s persona, the latter sets on expectations that digital 
public services are unable to fulﬁl. The idea that digital decision-makers are always 
capable of delivering rapid, simpliﬁed and effective responses to complex issues is 
misleading. 
Democratic participation is a case in point. Many of us quietly accept complexity, 
duration, and even limited accessibility when it comes to analogue, ofﬂine, demo-
cratic decision-making. Nobody protests if, before voting at the polling station, they 
have to stand in line and wait their turn. Many of us are used to the inconvenience of 
having to travel to the town hall to discuss proposed changes to municipal planning 
with neighbours, knowing it will take time (and possibly be pointless). However, our 
acceptance quickly turns into frustration when we relate to, and engage with, digital 
spaces for public participation. It is as if we expect our digital democratic institutions 
to always be easy to interact with, capable of responding both immediately and 
effectively to our demands, and keep us entertained.
11 Cohen (2016). It is difﬁcult to provide an unambiguous deﬁnition of the concept of a platform. 
This is due to the fact that the topic is suitable for multi-disciplinary analysis and application. 
Economic studies usually emphasize the propensity of platforms to become a space of interaction, at 
times exclusive, between two or more homogeneous groups of users. In this book, unless otherwise 
speciﬁed, the word platform will be used interchangeably with other expressions such as ‘space’, 
‘arena’,  or  ‘fora’, to describe a digital venue where public sector’s institutions and citizens engage in 
interaction and debate. 

1.5
The Structure of the Volume
9
Why does this happen? Chapter 4 investigates the paradox of the ‘digital undem-
ocratic’, with a focus on the rhetoric of digital government as the paradigm of 
efﬁcient democratic governance. In this Chapter I present three arguments to explain 
why most democratic governments choose ‘cookie-cutter’ replicas of consumer tech 
design in the formulation of digital engagement mechanisms. 
The ﬁrst is a structural argument: archaic and inefﬁcient public administrations 
are unprepared to meet challenges imposed by disruptive events. However, unfor-
tunately, the majority of public policies, indicators and standards aimed at engaging 
users in service design and delivery, involving them in testing and evaluating digital 
projects and initiatives, or monitoring satisfaction with digital governmental ser-
vices, are focussed on delivering with impact and at scale. To put it simply, the 
problem is not digital democracy, but rather how we judge and measure it. The 
second argument I use to explain the digital undemocratic is procedural: increasingly 
complex regulatory issues, I claim, require coordinated solutions across a range of 
actors, sectors, and skills—something that is often lacking in the public sector. 
Interestingly, while traditional, top-down, regulatory approaches are ineffective at 
coping with the digital undemocratic, co-operative and networked approaches are 
not safe either, especially when confronted with issues of time- and resources-
scarcity. The third argument is cultural. Public regulators have limited incentives 
to change because of existing safeguards from market competition and innovation. 
This is a concept that we will meet again and again in this book: the quest for 
designing a more inclusive, transparent and gratifying digital democracy is primarily 
a cultural challenge. 
Chapter 5 moves beyond the issue of the digital undemocratic and examines the 
possible futures of digital democracy, from an aesthetical point of view. I am aware 
of the fact that this is a contentious topic. In the view of some, technology dominates 
humanity, not the opposite. According to this theory (which I will call for simpliﬁ-
cation ‘the fatalist argument’) designing technology in accordance to people’s 
expectation and in line with public institutions’ capacities makes no sense. The 
fatalist argument is quite successful in media and public debate. However, upon 
closer scrutiny, it proves fallacious and is, for this very reason, unacceptable. With 
obvious differences, the fatalist argument can be likened Albert Speer’s self-defence 
at the Nuremberg trials. Speer pleaded guilty. But he claimed he was not responsible 
for the crimes perpetrated by the Nazi regime. He was a technician, he argued. 
Instead, I defend the validity of the aesthetic approach to digital democratic 
governance and civic engagement. I suggest that the former could (and should) be 
reconceptualized in order to boost the latter. Hence, the central argument of Chap. 5: 
the notion of digital participatory rights as fast and easy to enjoy should be 
abandoned. We should also downplay the suggestion that digital democratic 
decision-making can only be effective when it delivers rapid and successful 
responses to the issues of the day, regardless of its complexity. 
How can we reach this goal? I explore three approaches with the aim of 
re-designing the aesthetics of digital democratic spaces and interactions, keeping a 
focus on complexity. 
The ﬁrst is related to storytelling. I propose public decision-makers should 
elaborate a storytelling approach to digital democratic venues that shifts the focus

from immediacy to complexity. The latter, I argue, is key to frame a sustainable 
approach to narrating and encouraging citizens’ roles in co-creating and 
co-designing digital public services. The idea of complexity, which consumer tech 
drives us to neglect, or even to escape, is fundamental to build a collective imagi-
nation of digital democratic systems. 
10
1
Introductory Remarks. When Did We Start Caring About Digital Aesthetics?
Governing, after all, remains a complex action. It results from the contribution of 
different skills, operating on multiple levels: local, national and supranational. Those 
who govern are constantly challenged by uncertainty. In deciding, democratic 
powers have to weight in and out diverging interests. They need time to take in, 
evaluate and smooth out the differences between all interests at stake, in order to 
adequately 
protect 
all 
stakeholders. 
This 
is 
how 
digitalised 
democratic 
decision-making should be narrated. Undoubtedly, defending complexity is unpop-
ular today. Yet it is necessary. 
To deﬁne a storytelling of digital democracy that retrieves the importance of 
complexity is not enough. The second action I recommend to boost civic engage-
ment via digital tools relates to the design of public spaces with a focus on the 
interactions, not the outcomes. Digital omni-channel experiences, for instance, 
should be optimised for the needs of different user groups, but have similar outcomes 
across all channels. Or, to make another example, citizens engaged in online 
participatory projects should be informed about the structures and procedures that 
are in the backdrop of the decisions they are called to co-create. To enhance 
interactions over outcomes is key for democratic decision-makers interested at 
nurturing healthy, sympathetic and long-term sustainable bonds with their 
constituencies. 
Third, and ﬁnally, I suggest that digital civic engagement be encouraged through 
creative approaches—namely via game-design incentives. A growing body of 
scholarship, supported by empirical evidence, suggests that behavioural incentives 
applied to digital public spaces may encourage a more robust and longer-lasting 
engagement from participants compared with similar initiatives that make no use of 
such incentives. 
My claim is that game-design applied to democratic governance may offer a 
chance for public regulators to gain the trust of citizens, and thus be perceived as 
legitimate; it adapts policy-making to budgetary and regulatory challenges; and most 
importantly, it may help to set up digital democratic offer in line with citizens’ 
demanding needs. Indeed, as with any innovation in policy, game-design is not 
without concerns. Gamiﬁed democratic governance embodies a number of weak-
nesses, both practical and theoretical in nature. It is data-intrusive, for starters. 
Moreover, game dynamics are designed and modelled to meet the needs and please 
the expectations of certain categories of users. They may end up fostering exclusion 
rather than inclusion. Hence, in promoting game-design as a solution to the paradox 
of the digital undemocratic, I also take into account and discuss its most controver-
sial and problematic facets—namely: resource-consumption, privacy-intrusion, and 
long-term sustainability. 
Will democratic public powers ‘save’ themselves from the market? How will they 
make digital spaces more attractive—but also effective—at engaging citizens? This 
is the story this book would like to tell. It is a tale made of enormous and diverse

obstacles—structural, social and cultural—that widespread digital technologies pre-
sent to democracies that are losing ground, and how these challenges could be 
overcome. Let us be clear upfront: it is primarily a story of delays, unﬁnished 
journeys, loneliness and bewilderment—all stemming from our unmet, dazzling 
expectations for digital democracy. But there is a positive aspect to all of this: the 
story is still on-going and the ﬁnal chapter, positive or not so positive, is yet to be 
written. 
1.5
The Structure of the Volume
11
Summary
•
Pervasive digital technology bears social (how we relate to others), economic (our 
productive time vs leisure time), environmental, and political costs (what we 
expect from our elected representatives, or whether we choose to engage in civic 
activities like voting, signing a petition or participating in protests, both online 
and ofﬂine).
•
Smartphones, tablets, smartwatches and the majority of digital services and 
applications we use every day are the result of a transformation spanning two 
centuries and involving cultural, political, economic and societal factors. Com-
modity economy, urbanization, and colonialism are caught up in this process. 
Futurism, amateur photography and language have also played a key role in this 
transformation.
•
With technological progress, social interaction costs have lowered radically, and 
citizens have gained improved access to public structures through digital com-
munication channels.
•
Our age is quintessentially (and perhaps more than in any other moment in 
history) the age of design. This makes the quest for ‘good’ digital design a 
contemporary challenge, in spite of very little agreement among academics and 
policy-makers on how policy and design relate and interact with each other.
•
Efforts in modernizing participatory channels through digital technology have 
evolved from redressing criticism on democratic deﬁcits through fostering digital 
interactions with stakeholders to current attempts at designing policy-making in a 
friendly, captivating and participative manner.
•
The complementary and holistic use of experimental approaches based on nudg-
ing and game-design, accompanied by ad hoc strategies to ensure participation by 
the widest possible selection of stakeholders and interest groups (including 
outreach efforts, education and awareness building) and a design approach that 
is focused on inclusiveness, is being acknowledged by many scholars for its 
capacity to foster citizens’ willingness to engage meaningfully in civic and 
political spaces in fun and rewarding manners.
•
Asking ourselves what weight we should give to aesthetics in digital democratic 
governance is simultaneously a methodological and a theoretical question. On the 
one hand, it leads us to wonder how digital government, and speciﬁcally digital 
democratic spaces, should be designed to widen the gap between expectations in 
and outcomes of democratic decision-making. In addition to procedural aspects, it 
forces us to consider whether aesthetic approaches to digital democratic decision-
making are functional in handling efﬁcaciously existing issues of civic 
engagement.

12
1
Introductory Remarks. When Did We Start Caring About Digital Aesthetics?
References 
Alvarez J, Gutierrez C (2022) Cultural, scientiﬁc and technical antecedents of the Cybersyn project 
in Chile. AI Soc 37:1093–1103 
Baltas G (2003) Determinants of internet advertising effectiveness: an empirical study. Int J Market 
Res 45:505–513 
Barrionuevo A (March 28, 2008) Before ’73 coup, Chile tried to ﬁnd the right software for 
socialism. The New York Times 
Bogost I, Salen K (eds) (2008) The rhetoric of video games. In: The ecology of games: connecting 
youth, games, and learning. MIT Press, Cambridge 
Burke B (2014) Gamify: how gamiﬁcation motivates people to do extraordinary things. 
Bibliomotion, London 
Chaparro-Peláez J et al (2022) May I have your attention, please? An investigation on opening 
effectiveness in e-mail marketing. Rev Manag Sci 16:2261–2284 
Cohen JE (2016) The regulatory state in the information age. Theor Inq Law 17(2) 
Ercan A et al (eds) (2022) Research methods in deliberative democracy. Oxford University Press, 
Oxford 
Espejo R (2009) Performance management, the nature of regulation and the CyberSyn project. 
Kybernetes 38(1/2):65–82 
Espejo R (2014) Cybernetics of governance: the cybersyn project 1971–1973. In: Metcalf G 
(ed) Social systems and design. Translational systems sciences, vol 1. Springer, Tokyo 
Georg F (1999) The economy of attention. Merkur, Holladay 
Lerner J (2014) Making democracy fun: how game design can empower citizens and transform 
politics. MIT Press, Boston 
Loeber K (2018) Big data, algorithmic regulation, and the history of the Cybersyn Project in Chile, 
1971–1973. Soc Sci Comput Rev 7:65 
Mark G (2023) Attention span. Finding a focus for a fulﬁlling life. HarperCollins, London 
Medina E (2011) Cybernetic revolutionaries: technology and politics in Allende’s Chile. MIT Press, 
Boston 
Microsoft (2023) Work Trend Index Annual Report 
Miller EK, Buschman TJ, Nobre AC, Kastner S (eds) (2014) Natural mechanisms for the executive 
control of attention. In: The Oxford handbook of attention. Oxford University Press, Oxford 
Nerayana Murty R et al (August 29, 2022) How much time and energy do we waste toggling 
between applications? Harvard Business Review 
Norbre AC, Kastner S (2014) The Oxford handbook of attention. Oxford University Press, Oxford 
North P (2011) The problem of distraction. Stanford University Press, Palo Alto 
Rogers K (2014) The attention complex. Palgrave Macmillan, New York 
Salen K, Zimmerman E (2003) Rules of play: game design fundamentals. MIT Press, Boston 
Schwenberg H, Bossel H (eds) (1977) Cybernetics in government: experience with new tools for 
management in Chile 1971–1973. Concepts and tools of computer-assisted policy-analysis. 
BirkHäuser, Basel, pp 79–138 
Sgueo G (2019) Games, powers & democracies. Bocconi University Press, Milano 
Smith G (2009) Democratic innovations. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 
Waddington DI (2013) A parallel world for the World Bank: a case study of urgent: evoke, an 
educational alternate game. Revue Internationale des technologies en pédagogie universitaire 
10:42–56 
Ward AF et al (2017) Brain Drain: the mere presence of one’s own smartphone reduces available 
cognitive capacity. J Assoc Consum Res 2(2):140–154 
Williams J (2018) Stand out of our light – freedom & resistance in the attention economy. 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge

Chapter 2 
The Aesthetics of Consumer Tech 
Abstract What makes electronics for general use, also referred to as ‘consumer 
tech’, so widespread and ubiquitous? Digital products and services are ideated, 
designed and marketed according to four fundamental characteristics: speed, sim-
plicity, customization and gratuity. First, digital technology relates to time in an 
inverse proportionality ratio. The shorter the interval between the action performed 
by the user (and the expected result consequential to that action) the higher the level 
of satisfaction with the service. Second, technology and simplicity are bound 
together in a direct proportionality ratio. Users’ incompetence ceases to be a 
limitation with digital products and services; it becomes an asset. Third, digital 
singularity consists of digital services and products tailored on the needs of individ-
ual users. Fourth and ﬁnally, gratuity induces consumers to believe that digital 
technology is affordable and will become cheaper over time. The preference given 
by consumers to products and services designed according to these four parameters, 
may be represented as an ‘opportunity cost’, with important consequences on their 
expectations towards digital technology. 
Keywords Consumer tech · Kairologic time · Digital accelerationism · Instant 
gratiﬁcation · Time poverty · Technostress · Generative AI · Info-polyglots · Fool-
proof technology · Digital singularity · Lo-ﬁ technology · Digital lethargy 
2.1 
The Four Parameters of Consumer Tech 
What makes ‘consumer tech’ so widespread and ubiquitous? For the most part, 
digital products and services are ideated, designed and marketed according to four 
fundamental characteristics: speed, simplicity, customization and gratuity. These 
parameters prevail over other criteria and guide consumers’ choices. In comparison, 
reliability, durability, resistance to shocks or scalability, to name but a few of the 
many other features available, are negligible or secondary. 
This is evidenced by data. According to the consultancy ﬁrm Gartner, more than 
two-thirds of marketers working in business organizations say their ﬁrms compete
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2023 
G. Sgueo, The Design of Digital Democracy, Springer Textbooks in Law, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-36946-9_2
13

primarily on the quality of customer experience they provide.1 A 2020 survey from 
Qualtrics revealed that eighty percent of these marketers expect to compete almost 
exclusively through the experience of their customers. Most companies would not 
dare make major changes to its platforms without ﬁrst running extensive experi-
ments to understand how these changes would inﬂuence user behaviour.2
14
2
The Aesthetics of Consumer Tech
Let us now reverse the perspective. The preference given by the average con-
sumer to digital products and services designed in this manner, may be represented 
in terms of an ‘opportunity cost’, as described in classic economic theory. Con-
sumers pay for the repeated and immediate satisfaction of their requirements deliv-
ered by digital technologies built to handle them easily and quickly. However, 
customers grow accustomed to services and goods that are frequently of lower 
quality compared to the potential they might have. 
This Chapter investigates into the aesthetics of consumer tech, by analysing its 
four main characteristics. The ﬁrst to be addressed is the speed of service. Digital 
technology, as we shall see in a moment, relates to time in an inverse proportionality 
ratio. In essence, the user will be more satisﬁed with a service if there is shorter 
waiting period between the performance of an action and the results of that action. 
Technology and simplicity (the second aesthetical criterion driving consumer tech’s 
design) are instead tied together in a direct proportionality ratio. At times, this 
relationship is almost osmotic. Technological innovation is, in fact, simpliﬁcation 
itself. For this reason, the ‘incompetence’ of the average user is not a limitation. 
Fool-proof technology transforms such incompetence into an asset. Digital 
singularity—the third characteristic to be analyzed in this Chapter—consists of 
digital services and products designed to meet the needs and expectations of every 
single user; or at least to create the illusion of tailor-made digital services. Fourth and 
ﬁnally, gratuity—real or perceived—induces consumers to think that digital tech-
nology is affordable and will become cheaper over time. 
2.2 
What Do We Know About Time 
In Greek mythology, Kronos falls at the hand of his son Zeus. After being poisoned, 
Kronos is forced to expel Zeus’ siblings, the Hekatonkheires, and the Cyclopes from 
his stomach. With the help of his freed allies, Zeus overthrows his father and 
imprisons him in Tartarus. 
Digital technology tells us a different story. Kronos—the chronological, or 
sequential time—succumbs to Kairos, the qualitative time of life. 
1 Data provided by Gartner, Key Findings from the Gartner Customer Experience Survey, 2018 
(https://www.gartner.com/en/marketing/insights/articles/key-ﬁndings-from-the-gartner-customer-
experience-survey). 
2 Luca and Bazerman (2020).

2.2
What Do We Know About Time
15
‘Kairologic time’, a nonlinear interval that cannot be controlled or possessed, 
with neither a beginning nor an ending, is magniﬁed by the design of digital products 
and services, and eventually prevails over sequential time. Consumers of digital 
products and services are offered (and in consequence tend to give priority to) 
repeated and immediate gratiﬁcations of their needs. A loop is thus created: with 
digital tools, we can be gratiﬁed as many times as we desire. 
How digital technology encouraged this perception of time, as well as its key 
societal and political consequences, will be discussed thoroughly in the following 
pages. But before moving forward, it is worth a quick diversion into the nature of 
time—one of the most fascinating and unsolved dilemmas that challenges human 
thinking. Indeed, in addition to not having a standardized concept of time, we also 
lack a common understanding of how time passes. 
Philosophical thinking has long investigated both aspects (i.e., what is time, and 
how time ﬂows), reaching divergent conclusions.3 Similarly, other scientiﬁc disci-
plines approached critically the temporal dimensions and reached conﬂicting con-
clusions. Historians, for example, separate time into events, using sequences of 
‘before’ and ‘after’ aimed at clarifying when a given historical event has happened. 
Albeit lawyers consider chronological sequences in their work, within the legal 
profession, there is much focus on the time elapsed between the entry into force 
and the implementation of a norm. The underlying assumption of this approach is 
that a legal right that is ‘ungrounded’ into time certainty may deplete into an abuse. 
In both anthropology and sociology, time is functional to explaining human evolu-
tion. According to mainstream theories, homo sapiens came to dominate other 
species due to their capacity to imagine time (among other things) creatively, 
co-ordinately and ﬂexibly.4 Finally, in hard sciences, time is used as a variable in 
research studies. Speaking of which, it is worth remembering that in physics time is 
considered a mostly-negligible variable. The celebre 1960s ‘Wheeler-DeWitt’ equa-
tion explicitly deems time irrelevant to the understanding of the universe.5 
This brings us to a preliminary, albeit important, conclusion. If an attempt should 
be made with summarizing the diverging scientiﬁc approaches and understandings 
of time dimensions and ﬂows, then a common element should be addressed, namely: 
the utilitarian approach to the ﬂow of time. 
Let us pause a moment on this point. It tells us something interesting: that the 
comprehension of the temporal dimension and ﬂow is based on individual—or 
sectorial at best—rather than objective approaches. Said otherwise, time expands
3 McCumber (2014); Le Poidevin and MacBeath (1993); Ray (1991). 
4 Israeli scholar Yuval Noah Harari (2018) exempliﬁes this claim by comparing humans to other 
species. Ants and bees, for instance, can work together in large numbers, as humans do. But they do 
so in a rigid manner. Unforeseeable events may have disastrous consequences for their colonies. 
Other species, such as wolves and chimpanzees, argues Harari, can cooperate in a far more ﬂexible 
manner than insects. However, as Harari explained in a 2015 TedTalk (https://www.ted.com/talks/ 
yuval_noah_harari_what_explains_the_rise_of_humans), these species cooperate efﬁciently only 
in small numbers and with individuals that they know intimately. 
5 Norbury (1998).

or contracts according to our perception and to the environment within which it is 
measured.
16
2
The Aesthetics of Consumer Tech
With this in mind, we can now move back to digital technology, and speculate on 
how it pushes us to think of time as a resource—or rather a scarce resource. 
Consumer tech is in fact designed to amplify our perception of time as a rare 
commodity, while persuading us we could make good use of it. As digital con-
sumers, we are initially alarmed by scarcity and then convinced we are being offered 
a solution. Our satisfaction comes from the belief that we can accomplish more in 
less time. 
2.3 
The Apotheosis of Kronos 
Here are few examples to help illustrate this point better. One of the ﬁrst and most 
successful marketing efforts of the car-sharing service Uber was a simple but 
powerful promise to customers: ‘tap a button, get a ride’. Like most technology-
centred companies, the service offered by Uber is swift and enticing. Customers can 
get what they want with just a few ﬁnger-taps on a smartphone screen, saving them 
the time and effort of phoning a call centre or ﬁlling in an online form. 
Similarly, the one-touch service from PayPal is based on the concept of imme-
diate satisfaction. Once activated, users can shop online, freed from the formalities of 
authentication. There are cases in which credit card information is not even required. 
For example, to access the (free) trial of Sling’s streaming service, a ﬁrst and last 
name sufﬁce. It is fast and easy. Similarly, in 2014 online retailer Amazon intro-
duced the ‘Dash Buttons’ as a way for customers to quickly re-order popular 
household items. After being retired, the baton of e-commerce on the world’s largest 
online retail shop passed to voice commands. In 2020, over four billion voice 
assistants were active globally. By 2024 (it is estimated) they will double to eight 
billion.6 Amazon’s voice assistant—Alexa—is compatible with approximately sixty 
thousand smart home devices across the planet.7 
Two more examples: WhatsApp’s users can choose to listen to voice messages at 
double speed. This function is meant to help them save time. Alternatively, they can 
set an expiration date for any content they share. Once the time period expires, the 
content vanishes from view. This is called, rightly so, ‘ephemeral content’. The same 
underlying logic drives content shared via stories on the social network Instagram. 
6 Hay (2018); Ammari et al. (2019); Terzopoulos and Atratzemi (2020); Zwakman et al. (2021). 
Data provided by Insider Intelligence, How big is the voice assistant market?, September 16, 2022 
(https://www.insiderintelligence.com/content/how-big-voice-assistant-market). 
7 Data provided by Statista, Total number of smart home devices that are compatible with Amazon’s 
Alexa as of July 2020 (https://www.statista.com/statistics/912893/amazon-alexa-smart-home-
compatible/); Good House Keeping, Amazon Alexa vs. Google Home: Which assistant should you 
pick in 2023?, 24 January, 2023 (https://www.goodhousekeeping.com/uk/product-reviews/tech/a3 
9384401/alexa-vs-google-home/).

2.3
The Apotheosis of Kronos
17
Until 2014, purchases made through the Apple Store were subject to the ‘ﬁfteen-
minutes policy’—as the company named it. Once a password was entered, users had 
a ﬁfteen-minute window in which the payment mechanism of the in-app store 
remained active. This function was eventually removed after a United States 
(US) Federal Trade Commission investigation and settlement following complaints 
that it allowed children to make purchases from the Apple store without parental 
consent.8 
Is the rationale of instant gratiﬁcation understood? In the contemporary digital 
landscape, immediate gratiﬁcation of individual needs has become the benchmark 
for assessing the quality of digital services and products. Speediness (combined with 
user-friendliness, as we shall see later in this Chapter) is the guiding criterion of 
technology’s qualitative assessment. All examples we made above demonstrate that 
digital technology relates to time in an inverse proportionality ratio. This means that 
the shorter is the interval between the action performed by the user (and the expected 
result consequential to that action) the higher the satisfaction for the service will 
be. A striking ﬁgure to further prove this: on average, our physical interactions with 
mobile devices conclude within just seventy-two seconds.9 
Hence, the utilitarian understanding and use of digital time. It is worth empha-
sizing that this was not always the case. Actually, the idea of time-resource, not to be 
wasted, matured between the twelfth and ﬁfteenth centuries, in conjunction with 
three important events. 
The ﬁrst is the emergence of a mercantile economy in which time—linked to 
commerce and trade—was out of sync with the Church perception of time, which 
was tied to prayer and worship.10 
The second change is the emergence of the urban economy, which accompanied 
the spread of mechanical clocks (again, in Europe). This technology had a profound 
impact on the rhythms of human activities. These were no longer marked by the 
church bells, but were increasingly organized and systemized via the clocks located 
in public squares. Days were no longer just marked by mornings, afternoons and
8 United States of America before the Federal Trade Commission, in the Matter of APPLE INC., a 
corporation, Docket No. C-4444, March 25, 2014 (https://www.ftc.gov/system/ﬁles/documents/ 
cases/140327appledo.pdf). In its complaint, the Federal Trade Commission alleged that Apple 
failed to notify parents that entering their password would approve a purchase and then open a 
ﬁfteen-minute window in which unlimited charges could be made without authorization. In the 
complaint, the Commission cited examples of children incurring thousands of dollars in in-app 
purchases without their parents’ consent. Under the settlement, Apple was obliged to change its 
billing practices to ensure that it has obtained express, informed consent from consumers before 
charging them for in-app purchases. Apple was also obliged to provide full refunds, totaling a 
minimum of thirty-two and half million USD, to consumers who were billed for in-app purchases 
that were incurred by children and were either accidental or not authorized by the consumer. 
9 Data provided by Budiu (2015). 
10 Magnusson (1994); Johnson (1974); Judges (1939).

evenings. Hours were also reckoned; then minutes were calculated, and ﬁnally (form 
1656 onwards) seconds.11
18
2
The Aesthetics of Consumer Tech
The third factor contributing to the notion of time-resource is colonialism. The 
human conquest of terrestrial (and cultural) spaces often meant that settlers would 
‘appropriate’ the time of the territories under their dominance. The measurement of 
time practiced by indigenous communities and linked to the rhythms of nature, 
progressively gave way to the rational systems of measurement practiced—and 
imposed—by the colonists.12 
So, from the twelfth century onwards, the intertwining of efﬁciency and rapidity 
as measurements of performance emerged. The tracking of time implied that it could 
be treated as a commodity. Clearly, the apotheosis of Kronos. His, however, would 
be a short reign. 
Improvements in time-telling and time-tracking enabled the coordination of 
complex and large-scale activities. These innovations were not without detractors, 
and where there is change, there is (usually) opposition. In 1871, in Paris, revolu-
tionaries set public clocks on ﬁre. Their gesture had a strong symbolic value. It was 
meant to erase the (chronological) time that oppressed human lives. Two decades 
later, in 1894, Martial Bourdin, also a Frenchman, exploded a bomb in Greenwich 
Park, in East London. Bourdin was caught up in the explosion. He lost his life. We 
are not certain but it seems that his gesture was symbolically aimed at damaging the 
famous observatory that is named after that very park. A crazy romantic attempt 
from a man who wanted to annihilate the ambition to give time a standard measure 
on a global scale. 
Kronos, however, was not done. Not yet. Let us indulge him and jump ahead a 
few years. Measuring—and thus saving—time for the sake of efﬁciency grew in 
popularity at the turn of the nineteenth century. In 1909, Filippo Tommaso 
Marinetti’s Manifesto of Futurism celebrated the ‘bellezza della velocità’.13 Four 
years later, Frederick Taylor brought the chronometer into the factory. Taylor, an 
intellectual leader of the ‘Efﬁciency Movement’, suggested that industrial efﬁciency 
could be improved through measurement and standardization of workﬂow.14 Prior to 
Taylor, Adam Smith had already suggested increasing the dexterity of the workers 
and the productivity of the workshop.15 Karl Marx also proposed that workers 
should be compensated after the quantity of time they spent on the production side.16 
Interestingly, with the diffusion of calculating machines in ofﬁces (an event that 
would take off globally only in the second half of the twentieth century), the growing 
enthusiasm for the augmented speed of human labour faced a new and unexpected 
challenge. In short, the efﬁciency and accuracy of automated labour did not increase
11 Landes (2020). 
12 Carlson (2010). 
13 Marinetti (1914). 
14 Taylor (1913). 
15 Smith (1776). 
16 Magun (2009).

automatically as expected. It actually remained dependant on the dexterity and 
attentiveness of the workers responsible for managing the mechanical aspects related 
to the use of machines, by entering numbers, pulling levers, and punching cards.
2.4
The Cult of Velocity
19
Lorraine Daston describes how this new challenge profoundly impacted every 
time-related aspect of work.17 She explains that human operators had to adapt their 
working habits to the tempo of machines. However, because the gestures (and thus, 
skills) involved in the use of calculating machines could not be mastered to the point 
of becoming unconscious, the unusual combination of routine and unwavering 
concentration made calculation with machines exhausting for workers. 
By the early twentieth century technological innovation and human thinking had 
further progressed towards reshaping the understanding of time. On the one hand, 
the railroad compressed distance. The proliferation of steam locomotives allowed 
humans to overcome the limitations of geography. On the other hand, the telegraph 
condensed time, speeding up the transmission of information across space.18 
In that same period, beginning with Emile Durkheim in 1915, social scientists, 
legal theorists and economists began studying time applied to social and political 
venues, posing for the ﬁrst-time questions about what should be the pace and speed 
of politics.19 
2.4 
The Cult of Velocity 
We ﬁnally arrive at the twenty-ﬁrst century. The value—if you want to call it that— 
of digital technology is that it has brought chronological time to rout. Kronos 
abdicates. The dominance of Kairos, the cairological time, expressed in the cult of 
speed, begins. To borrow from Kundera: ‘La vitesse est la forme d’extase dont la 
révolution technique a fait cadeau à l’homme’—speed is the form of ecstasy the 
technical revolution has bestowed on man.20 
There is an emblematic episode that explains well this cultural change. It dates 
back to 1998, at the dawn of the digital revolution. In that year the Swatch Group, in 
collaboration with the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in Boston, proposed a 
new approach to measuring time. It was called, prophetically, ‘Internet Time’. The 
day was divided into a thousand parts, called ‘.beats’. Each beat lasted one minute 
and twenty-six seconds (clearly, an homage to the decimal minute introduced by the 
French Revolution). 
17 Daston (2022). 
18 Wheeler (2019). In Wheeler’s opinion, the world is experiencing a third great network revolution. 
The ﬁrst came in the ﬁfteenth Century with the advent of the movable-type printing press (which 
created the ﬁrst mass information economy). The second revolution came with the invention of the 
telegraph and the railroad early in the nineteenth century (which dissolved the geographical 
isolation that had created independent, self-sufﬁcient, local resource-based communities). 
19 Scheuerman (2004); Rosa and Scheuerman (2009). 
20 Kundera (1998); Jones (2009).

20
2
The Aesthetics of Consumer Tech
In Swatch’s proposal we ﬁnd, albeit in embryonic form, the idea that the linear 
ﬂow of time is superseded by a time composed of multiple different moments. Each 
of these moments is unique. The ﬁrst watches that, in addition to the standard time, 
measured Internet time were marketed by Swatch in 1999. At ﬁrst the idea seemed to 
catch on. The CNN network began to report the Internet Time on its website. In 
2001, Ericsson produced a mobile phone displaying two different time clocks. One 
of these was the Internet Time. 
Ultimately, however, Internet Time turned out to be a ﬂop. But not because of the 
concept itself—which had merit. What had been missing from the idea of Internet 
Time was foresight. Think about it: digital Kairos cannot be caged within any 
sequential trend format. If we assume that digital time is the multiplication of unique 
moments, each of which symbolizes a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity, then we must 
infer that it cannot tolerate the existence of timetables that must be adhered to. In 
cairological time everything necessarily happens on demand, when you want it 
to. And it is immediate. 
Today evidence of the binomial relationship between digital technology and 
velocity can be found everywhere online: Internet webpages, hyperlinks, and pop-
ular social networks like Facebook, for instance, are predominantly blue.21 A colour 
commonly associated, among other things, to speediness. 
Another example of the cult of velocity is global time synchronization. At the 
outset of the Internet, the machines connected via a network did not share a single, 
reliable synchronized time. Engineers working at the Arpanet project created the 
‘Network Time Protocol’ (NTP) to generate consensus on time and allow devices to 
communicate efﬁciently.22 In 1988 the NTP could synchronize the clocks of thou-
sands connected computers that prior to that moment had been telling vastly 
differing times. Ten years later, NTP servers ﬁelded eighteen billion time-
synchronization requests from several million computers. They further increased 
in the following decade. In recent years, several tech companies such as Google, 
Amazon and Facebook, have implemented their own versions of NTP to handle 
leap-second malfunctions, adding to a wide debate on time synchronization. Some-
time in the very near future, the issue of time synchronization is expected to depart 
planet earth and to accompany human exploration of space.23 
21 In 2016 designer Paul Hebert (http://paulhebertdesigns.com/web_colors/index.php) did an anal-
ysis of the ten most popular websites on the Internet, and scraped data about the colors they were 
using. The most popular color by far is blue. 
22 Hopper (2022). 
23 Gibney (2023); Dirks (1992).

2.5
Digital Accelerationism and Working Poverty
21
2.5 
Digital Accelerationism and Working Poverty 
Digital accelerationism is so widely—and often uncritically—accepted and cele-
brated that a label has arisen to describe those who resist linking modernization to 
social acceleration. The ‘slow down modernity’ movement suggests ‘unhasty 
tempo’ as a precondition for enhanced mental and physical well-being, ethical life, 
and even a more accountable democracy. 24 The greatest beneﬁt of these critical 
perspectives on digital accelerationism is the increased public awareness of its 
negative effects. Four are very signiﬁcant. These have to do with societal standing, 
the economy, language, and, most importantly, customer expectations. 
The ﬁrst consequence of digital accelerationism regards social status and how it is 
assessed. With digital technology, status in society stops being assessed on how little 
one works and begins to be parameterized according to the speed of web connection 
and the time spent online. It is no coincidence that since the 1980s, so-called ‘time 
poverty’ has increased globally.25 For equal hours worked—forty a week—many 
employees experience a net reduction in leisure time compared to working time. 
Digital technology has diluted the boundaries between productivity and fun, posing 
new dilemmas that are yet without satisfactory answers. If you watch a TV show 
while checking e-mails from your phone, is that free time or work time? What if you 
spend your lunch break sitting at your desk in ofﬁce? 
Another thing to consider is that, within the framework of dilated productive time, 
everything becomes potentially urgent. Immediate feedback drives the digital 
economy. Since 1983 ‘time-theft’ (e.g., doing private calls while at work, over-
associating with co-workers) has been formally codiﬁed—and it has been increas-
ingly used by employers like Amazon to terminate contracts.26 This also explains 
why for many of us it is ﬁne to check e-mails while watching a movie or eating 
dinner at a restaurant, to update social media proﬁles while attending business 
meetings or, worst, to tolerate with having conversations with friends cut short by 
constant phone checks. 
The incentives for optimizing any action in order to attain maximum efﬁciency, 
however, are where the most potent impact of the attention economy imposed by 
digital technology may be seen. This led American psychotherapist Craig Brod to 
coin in 1984 the deﬁnition of ‘technotress’ to describe an emerging disease of
24 Bauman (1990); Cohen (2018). In Filip Vostal’s (2017) claim, slowness becomes a ‘commodity’: 
one needs material and ﬁnancial resources to prepare food and cook all day, to buy watches and 
‘tune’ into the slow watch community. 
25 Data on Time-poverty are collected by OCSE (Time poverty rates for men and women, by 
presence of children in the household, in How’s Life? 2013: Measuring Well-Being, OECD 
Publishing, Paris (https://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/economics/how-s-life-2013/time-poverty-rates-
for-men-and-women-by-presence-of-children-in-the-household_how_life-2013-graph71-en). 
Giurge et al. (2020); Williams et al. (2016); Fraser et al. (2011); Lohmann and Marx (2018); Mark 
et al. (2008). 
26 Snider (2001).

adaptation caused by an inability to cope with computer technologies in a healthy 
manner.27
22
2
The Aesthetics of Consumer Tech
Many people became aware of technostress during the epidemic, particularly 
during the difﬁcult transition from lockdowns (with schools, ofﬁces, and stores 
shuttered) to the gradual resumption of in-person professional and leisure activities. 
It was more stressful than anticipated to go from a time that was forcibly digital to 
one that was instead human. On the one hand, digital time meant days ﬁlled with 
many online activities, with virtually no friction in between. Returning to human 
tempo, on the other hand, meant dealing with downtimes (moving from home to the 
ofﬁce, attending work meetings, taking part in conferences and business dinners) 
accompanied by a feeling of slowdown in productivity. Simply, many had lost the 
habit of it. 
This might also help to explain why, in the aftermath of the pandemic, so many 
workers declare that, if they were given the choice, they would be happy to give up 
part of their salary and company beneﬁts in order to continue working remotely. In 
growing numbers, corporations are trying to meet this demand. Since 2021, Google 
employees who choose to stay home permanently can do so. In return for giving up 
twenty-ﬁve percent of their salary. Those at Telefónica, in Spain, are free to work in 
the ofﬁce thirty-two hours a week, with a ﬁfteen percent cut in their pay checks. The 
fashion house Desigual has proposed to its employees a cut in working-hours from 
thirty-nine and half to thirty-four and half per week, with a consequent six and half 
percentage points pay cut. As from 2023, employees at the Japanese trading House 
Mitsui & Co. are free to pursue side careers, such as being an artist. The list goes on. 
2.6 
Immediate Feedback and Digital Economy 
Another area where we can observe the consequences of digital speed are ﬁnancial 
markets and transactions. Immediate feedback is at the backbone of the digital 
economy. Predictive tools based on machine learning and artiﬁcial intelligence 
(AI) are being applied by a wide range of market operators to speculating on the 
movements of ﬁnancial markets, turning a mere fraction of a second into a decisive 
asset to successfully securing the trading of securities in the stock exchange.28 
Financial capital is made, or lost, in a matter of (milli-) seconds. You might 
perhaps recall the famous case of the ‘Flash Crash’ happened on 6 May 2010 at the 
US stock market. The crash resulted in a nine percent drop of the Dow Jones 
Industrial Average in less than thirty minutes. The US Security and Exchange 
Commission and the Commodity Futures Trading Commission identiﬁed the cause
27 Brod (1984); Ennis (2005); Tarafdar et al. (2007, 2010); Mark (2023). 
28 Johnson (2018). The same principle is valid in online business. As reported by Jason Farman 
(Farman 2018), each tenth of a second spent by potential customer waiting on Amazon’s website is 
estimated to be equivalent to a revenue decline of one percentage point.

of the crash in the malfunctioning of a computer algorithm used to trade securities.29
2.6
Immediate Feedback and Digital Economy
23
Today, there are around three hundred and eighty underwater cables in operation 
around the world, spanning a length of over one million and two hundred thousand 
kilometres.30 These cables keep the Internet—and the economy—online. An esti-
mated ten trillion USD in ﬁnancial transactions are transmitted via these cables every 
day.31 One of the most important of these cables, operating from 2011, connect 
North America to Europe, and saves ﬁve milliseconds to market operators when 
completing ﬁnancial transactions.32 The VISA company alone declares to handle 
three hundred and ﬁfty thousand digital transactions per minute. It amounts at 
roughly six thousand transactions per second. Total revenues from such intangible 
transactions in 2022 reached two billion US dollars (USD).33 
Cryptocurrencies are also exemplary in this regard. In 2020 these amounted at 
eight hundred and twenty-six million USD globally. The market is projected to grow 
to nearly two billion USD in 2028.34 In 2021, market capitalization of 
cryptocurrencies reached three thousand billion USD, and El Salvador even adopted 
Bitcoin as its legal currency.35 
Parallel to the acceleration of digital transactions, however, has been the increase 
in volatility of the sector. It took only two tweets to Elon Musk to cause Bitcoin 
value to rise and fall precipitously.36 These wild ﬂuctuations occurred within a few 
hours, globally. Another curious episode in this regard: in late 2020, the Bitcoin 
community found itself discussing the accuracy of the predictive models that had 
been used up to that point to estimate the value of that cryptocurrency. By conven-
tion, these models placed the ‘human’ time required to mine Bitcoin on the x-axis.
29 Data provided by Security and Exchange Commission, Commodity futures Trading Commission, 
Findings Regarding the Market Events of May 6, 2010, 30 September 2010 (https://www.sec.gov/ 
ﬁles/marketevents-report.pdf). 
30 Data provided by TeleGeography: https://www2.telegeography.com. 
31 Sunak (2017). 
32 Data provided by ISPI, Undersea Cables: The Great Data Race Beneath the Oceans, May 
28, 2021 (https://www.ispionline.it/en/publication/undersea-cables-great-data-race-beneath-
oceans-30651). 
33 Data provided by World Bank, Where is the Wealth of Nations? Measuring Capital for the 21st 
Century, Washington D.C., 2006 (https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/7505); 
Statista, WorldWide Transactions, 2022 (https://www.statista.com/outlook/dmo/ﬁntech/ 
worldwide#transaction-value). 
34 Data provided by Fortune Business Insights, Cryptocurrency Market Size by Component, By 
Type, By End-Use, and Regional Forecast, 2021–2028 (https://www.fortunebusinessinsights.com/ 
industry-reports/cryptocurrency-market-100149). 
35 Alvarez et al. (2023), Sparkes (2022). 
36 Huynh (2022); Ante (2021); Burggraf et al. (2020). On January 2021, Musk tweeted about 
DOGE, a meme coin. After the Tweet, the price of Dogecoin surged over three hundred per cent 
in four hours, before dropping to nearly half of its new high in the following couple of hours. On 
May 27, 2022, Musk tweeted that Dogecoin could now be used to pay for ofﬁcial Tesla items, and 
that SpaceX would soon follow suit (‘Tesla merch can be bought with DOGE, soon Spacex merch 
too’) The Tweet caused Dogecoin’s price to surge for a few hours. Finally, on May 13, 2022, Musk 
tweeted a statement about Tesla’s plan to no longer accept Bitcoin payments. As an outcome, 
Bitcoin fell from 54,819 USD to 45,700 USD, its lowest since March 1, 2021.

Just a few months earlier, however, the Chinese government had banned the mining 
of the virtual currency, slowing down its global advancement. The Chinese ban had 
made one fact clear: the blockchain advancement does not depend on human time; it 
is actually contingent to the time of approved blocks.37
24
2
The Aesthetics of Consumer Tech
2.7 
Fast Technology, Changing Language 
The third consequence of digital speed concerns the structure and quality of lan-
guage. Here is another story deserving to be told in more detail. 
Let us move from the following premise: languages evolve naturally and—in a 
similar fashion to the evolution of biological species—adopt new styles and metrics 
in response to environmental stimuli.38 The evolution of the word ‘deadline’ is a 
good illustration of this point. Prior to the twentieth century, deadlines demarcated a 
speciﬁc territory, speciﬁcally the line around a military prison beyond which anyone 
attempting to escape would be shot. The current meaning given to the word—a 
moment past which an assignment or task would be considered late—has been in use 
since the 1920s. 
This adaptation is further hampered in the case of technology and language, 
though, by a long history of dystopian worries about the potential negative effects 
the former might have on the latter. Already with Socrates,39 attempts to rationalize 
language were described as consequential to the rapid takeover of new technologies. 
Back in the twelfth century, the Chinese philosopher Zhu Xi wrote that his age was 
one of distractions due to the technology of print. The French theologian Jean Calvin 
described readers wandering in a ‘confused forest’ of printed books. Across centu-
ries, the impact of technologies on languages has been met with public concern and 
at times even with ferocious resistance.40 
The contemporary landscape is particularly complicated in this regard. The 
diffusion of AI programs, collectively dubbed as ‘generative AI’, has escalated 
concerns on language integrity to a whole new level. Thanks to the support of 
technology, humanity has entered a phase in which the quantity of written language 
is unprecedented. The average digital-savvy citizens of the 2020s writes twice or 
three times more than their counterparts from a decade earlier. However, it is argued 
that the growth in volume of language (and content) as a result of technology is being
37 Chen and Liu (2022); Kaiser et al. (2018); Riley (2021); Rubechini (2023). 
38 The parallels between biological and language processes are summarized by The Economist, Like 
biological species, languages evolve, 12 November, 2020 (https://www.economist.com/books-and-
arts/2020/11/12/like-biological-species-languages-evolve). There are also studies (Wood et al. 
2014)) showing how ‘textism’ and deliberate spelling mistakes, abbreviations and omission of 
apostrophes should not be understood as deterioration of language skills, but rather as natural boosts 
of constantly evolving languages. 
39 Plato, ca. 370 B.C.E/1997, 551–552. 
40 McKean (2023).

offset by a decline in the quality of language. It is not just a matter of how much is 
written, claim critics, but also of how, with the aid of technology, our ability at 
memorizing new words, to write and communicate has improved or declined.
2.7
Fast Technology, Changing Language
25
Opinions are divided. Those who look favourably at the evolution of language 
and communication with technology, stress two points. First and foremost, they 
minimize the critical argument suggesting that attention was ‘stolen’ by the dopa-
mine dispensers embedded in digital technology. Fears about attention span and 
focus—they claim—are as old as writing itself. We have always been distracted. 
Technological advances could perhaps make things only a little worse. 
The second argument used by those in the camp of favourable opinions, suggest 
that it makes no sense to expect a twenty-year-old in 2023 to know and use words 
like ‘CD-ROM’, ‘MS-DOS’ or ‘trackball’. These are terms from a very recent but 
already vanished technological past, close to extinction. At best we have words 
related to obsolete objects that are still in use, but lose their original meaning. We 
still ‘dial’ telephone numbers. We still ‘hang up’ the telephone. The former, how-
ever, is an out-dated operation. The second is even devoid of literal meaning. 
Landline phones, and before that, wall-mounted phones, disappeared from our 
homes long time ago. 
Some authors claim that technology may actually help to further democratise 
language, by making it accessible to wider audiences.41 Some preliminary assess-
ments of existing AI-driven software’s impact on how people learn and engage with 
democratic tools and institutions, for instance, suggest these may support interac-
tions among citizens within digital democratic spaces in a number of ways—for 
example by assembling complex information into simpler texts, or by customising 
and editing answers.42 
Other favourable opinions on the impact of technology on language focus on 
language skills. Luciano Floridi, for instance, contends that info-polyglots are 
essential in today’s neo-manufacturing culture, where the bulk of employed indi-
viduals labor primarily with information.43 These are individuals who, aside from 
human language, are also knowledgeable in expressive languages such as design, 
logic, narrative composition, and coding. 
Opposing views focus more on the negative impacts that technology may have on 
the quality of language (and subsequently on the possibility that a set of shared 
democratic values and principles could be nurtured within digital democratic
41 Warschauer (2022); Chun et al. (2016); Godwin-Jones (2005, 2019). 
42 Data provided by Democracy Technology, How ChatGPT Could Be Useful for Democracy 
Technologies, Democracy Technologies, December 2022 (https://democracy-technologies.org/ 
opinion/the-team-tested-how-chatgpt-could-be-useful-for-democracy-technologies/?utm_source= 
Democracy+Technologies&utm_campaign=8c4cc3a192-EMAIL_CAMPAIGN_2022_11_2 
9_03_04_COPY_01&utm_medium=email&utm_term=0_-48b74a5386-%5BLIST_EMAIL_ID 
%5D). 
43 Floridi L., Onlife Blog: ‘Le tre funzioni del linguaggio digitale e le loro conseguenze’, September 
04, 2020(https://thephilosophyoﬁnformation.blogspot.com/2020/09/le-tre-funzioni-del-
linguaggio-digitale.html).

spaces). Critical voices argue that this additional component of the linguistic changes 
brought on by digital technology should worry us considerably more than it really 
does. The struggle against ‘cognitive sloth’ is what prevents language from accu-
rately capturing nuance and chiaroscuro.44 A few nations have already outlawed AI 
usage in colleges and universities.
26
2
The Aesthetics of Consumer Tech
Digital velocity is perceived as a major contribution to this problem. With the 
exception of narrative styles that are traditionally based on speediness, as in the case 
of tales,45 negative consequences may concern the impoverishment of linguistic 
complexity, as with the case of the abandonment of past tenses in favor of present 
tenses, encouraged by technology. Negative effects may also stem from the diffusion 
of AI-generating systems into educational practices46 or in computation;47 or could 
translate into widening existing barriers between linguistically versatile citizens and 
those citizens who are not proﬁcient in a second language (especially English for 
non-native English speakers);48 or could stretch as far as to be related to the crisis of 
the idea of the state.49 
Two examples may help us to further illustrate this point: Amazon’s publishing 
model and social networks. 
Let us look at Amazon ﬁrst. Every year, over one million and ﬁve hundred 
thousand authors self-publish a book. About three-quarters of these self-published 
books are available on Amazon. Differently from traditional publishing, that remu-
nerates authors on the basis of the number of copies sold, Amazon’s remuneration is 
done in accordance to the number of pages read by those who buy books. In the 
dynamics of e-commerce, it is not relevant how many copies a book sells. What is 
important is the number of hits and interactions with the book. This approach 
disrupts the coordinates of the literary ecosystem. Readers become customers. 
Authors instead are service providers, and books are the service they offer.
44 Gloria Mark (2008) dismantles common misconceptions about our attention, among them that we 
should always be striving to focus when at work on our computers, and that the mindless scrolling 
we do on screens is counterproductive. 
45 Italo Calvino (1985) explains that rapidity is among primary stylistic values. In a tale, events are 
concentrated in a few moments, and a narration becomes the essential element. When Calvino 
speaks of quickness, he is referring to both the ability of a writer to control the speed of a story 
(‘sentences can be used like the beats of a drum, dictating the march of the reader’s eyes. Syllables 
can warp time, pronunciations matter, spaces shape tempo’) and the pace at which the written word 
can travel. 
46 Natale and Henrickson (2022) move from the assumption that such technologies may require 
people to reorganize their practices and approaches, they should also encourage us to reﬂect on what 
is, or should be, distinctive in academic writing. 
47 Bindet (2022). Being increasingly dependent on words, symbolic computation has become 
entangled in debates about the nature of communication, progressively eroding the line between 
jargon and common language, and in doing so revealing the stakes underlying this boundary. 
48 Will Kymlicka (1999) suggests that non-native English speakers may be cut out from taking part 
meaningfully in online conversations, to participating in web polls, or to engaging in any other 
online-based participatory venue. 
49 Casini (2020, 2022).

Immediate gratiﬁcation of customers’ needs is what authors are expected to provide. 
The narrative style adapts in consequence. It becomes simpler. It leans toward 
sensationalism. It embraces and promotes primarily a quantitative approach to 
writing. Can we take it so far as to say that the Amazon model, in the long run, 
will deter readers from complexity?
2.7
Fast Technology, Changing Language
27
A second example of cognitive and linguistic laziness induced by digital tech-
nology is offered by the interactions nurtured through social networks. The digital 
platforms that host our virtual alter egos are designed following the principle of 
homophily—in order to bring together similar, or at least compatible, interests.50 
Social media intentionally reduce our exposure to differences. We ﬁnd ourselves 
interacting with like-minded people, removed from the complexity to which we 
would instead be exposed by a casual confrontation with different opinions. Thus, 
we polarize our opinions. In the US there is a Polarization Index that, based on data 
collected on social media, measures the average level of polarization of public 
opinion on a sample of ten divisive issues, from immigration to abortion rights, 
from health care reform to the minimum wage.51 
Moreover, social networks favor synthesis. In general, the average amount of 
space taken up by text in major mobile apps does not exceed thirty-six percent. Short 
and direct messages work best, visual content prevails over written content. Once 
again, this is causing social networks’ users to lose the habit of complexity. 
The disaccustom to complexity, in conclusion, is directly reﬂected in the way we 
think and imagine the world around us. It permeates the relationships with others. 
Here we ﬁnd a paradox. A society that is increasingly connected via technology is, 
for that very reason, also a more complex society. Yet the very spread of technol-
ogies that promise to take us away from complexity it is also depriving us of a mature 
understanding of that complexity. It fuels transactive forms of memory, based on a 
bartering between the desire to know and the Web. 
This is the reason for the existence of Google. Since 2014, the world’s most 
widely used search engine has featured an information box that appears at the top of 
the list of information produced by a search. The box contains a concise deﬁnition of 
the word, or combination of words, searched for by the user. These are called ‘direct 
answers’. They appear up to forty-one percent of the time if the search is conducted 
through a desktop computer. As much as sixty-three percent in the case of a search
50 Lee et al. (2019); Cialdini et al. (1998); Lerman et al. (2016); McPherson et al. (2001); Karimi 
et al. (2018). 
51 Data provided by The Polarization Index, 2022 (https://thepolarizationindex.com). The latest 
issue of the Report (October 2021–March 2022) indicates in immigration and policing policy the 
most polarizing topics in the country, both primarily driven by conservative or extremist political 
parties, with a heavy dose of information from unreliable sources. In 2022, the level of polarization 
around abortion increased by almost ten points due to mounting reaction from the Left to restrictive 
state legislation that could potentially pave the way for overturning Roe v. Wade. LGBTQ+ rights 
became the ﬁfth most polarizing issue. Finally, the topic of the vaccine remained a source of 
controversy, as both Left and Right poitical parties began to question the vaccine’s  efﬁcacy and 
long-term side effects.

launched from a mobile device. On at least half of the occasions, Google information 
takes up three-quarters of the screen. The aim is to encourage user retention by 
preventing people from moving to other web pages from Google. 52
28
2
The Aesthetics of Consumer Tech
2.8 
The ‘Ecstasy of Digital Speed’ and Dazzling 
Expectations 
The fourth consequence of cairological time is the most important for the purposes of 
our research on the aesthetics of digital democracy. It relates to the expectations that 
consumer tech generates regarding service delivery. Digital products and services 
are expected to reduce to the minimum the time elapsed between the action and its 
satisfaction. 
These expectations have been gradually rising, in correspondence to the acceler-
ation of pace of technological progress. Twenty years ago, an electronic processor 
was capable of interpreting about two or three million operations per second, with 
signiﬁcant energy consumption. Today, a device that is considerably smaller and 
consumes a small fraction of the energy used by its predecessor is capable of 
processing over thirty million instructions per second.53 The gain, in terms of 
time, is mighty, as exempliﬁed by the AMD processors advertising: they ‘make 
time irrelevant’.54 
Consider another example: Toy Story, the popular computer-animated comedy 
ﬁlm directed by John Lasseter, produced by Pixar Animation Studios and released 
by Walt Disney Pictures. It was released in theatres in 1996, revolutionizing the 
market of animated ﬁlms. The movie was so complex that Pixar, the production 
company, claims that it took between forty-ﬁve minutes and thirty hours to render 
each frame. In total, it took eight hundred thousand hours of computation on several
52 Tene (2008); Toubiana and Nissenbaum (2011). Data provided by The Markup, Google Top 
Search Result? Surprise! It’s Google, July 28, 2020 (https://themarkup.org/google-the-giant/2020/0 
7/28/google-search-results-prioritize-google-products-over-competitors). The authors of the study 
examined more than ﬁfteen thousand popular queries and found that Google devoted 41 percent of 
the ﬁrst page of search results on mobile devices to its own properties and what it calls ‘direct 
answers’, which are populated with information copied from other sources, ometimes without their 
knowledge or consent. Google’s decision to place its products above competitors’ and to present 
‘answers’ on the search page—explain the authors—has led to lawsuits and regulatory ﬁnes. For 
example, European Commission, CASE AT.39740, Google Search (Shopping), Antitrust Proce-
dure 27/06/2017 (https://ec.europa.eu/competition/antitrust/cases/dec_docs/39740/39740_14 
996_3.pdf). 
53 Data provided by Tech Centurion, Best Mobile Processor Ranking List 2021 (https://www. 
techcenturion.com/smartphone-processors-ranking). 
54 The AMD advertising is available here: https://subscriptions.amd.com/newsletters/ 
commercialchannelnews/archives/2019_11_en.html.

machines, totalling more than one hundred and fourteen thousand frames.55 With 
current technology, processing the entire Toy Story would take less time than the 
length of the ﬁlm itself.
2.9
Fool-Proof Technology
29
The principle is clear. If technology progresses by lowering the latency time 
between the demand and the delivery of digital services, consumers will expect the 
same from every technological and digital product. This, however, poses us a 
dilemma. To what extent is it fair to expect from democratic governments to provide 
equally fast digital services? This question cannot be answered in just one way. 
Actually, to be fair, the question is misleading because it uncritically imposes the 
parameter of speed as a measure of public performance. As we will see in Chap. 3, 
expecting rapidity from democratic decision-making is not always the optimal 
choice. 
2.9 
Fool-Proof Technology 
The second standard that drives consumer tech is user experience. In much the same 
way as with digital speed, user experience took years to develop and become the 
standard we now know. 
Literature abounds of tales of more technological and simpler futures. In one of 
his lesser-known pieces, Jules Verne—a nineteenth century French novelist—imag-
ined the future of the city of Paris, a century ahead of his time.56 Verne’s version of 
the French capital of 1960 looked very silent and ordered. Parisians would displace 
using speedy electromagnetic trains and gas-powered automobiles instead of horses. 
They would communicate via photographic telegraphs and would buy groceries in 
shops illuminated with electric lights. Verne’s vision was not uncommon at his time. 
A more technological future was already imagined as simpler and faster. 
The notion that technology needs to be easy to use, however, matured at the end 
of the nineteenth century. In 1888, Kodak was about to commercialize its ﬁrst 
non-professional photo camera model. George Eastman, the founder of the com-
pany, came up with a catchphrase destined for tremendous success in the years that 
followed: ‘You Press the Button, We Do the Rest’. 
55 Henne et al. (1986); Price (2008); Snider (1995) (https://www.wired.com/1995/12/toy-story/) 
reports that the ﬁlm began with animated storyboards to guide the animators in developing the 
characters. Twenty-seven animators worked on the ﬁlm, using four hundred computer models to 
animate the characters. Each character was ﬁrst either created out clay or modeled from a computer-
drawn diagram before reaching the computer-animated design. Out of all of the characters, Woody 
was the most complex, as he required seven hundred and twenty-three motion controls, including 
two hundred and twelve for his face and ﬁfty-eight for his mouth. Fort further info: Entertainment 
Weekly, ‘Toy Story: The inside buzz’, December 8, 1995 (https://ew.com/article/2010/06/29/toy-
story-inside-buzz/). 
56 Verne (2020).

30
2
The Aesthetics of Consumer Tech
First photography, then telecommunications, and later mobility and services: 
everywhere in the world, ‘ease of use’ has become a reference standard for technol-
ogy. Market success is determined primarily by the immediacy of interactions with 
new technological products or services. We only need ten actions to buy a product on 
Amazon. With just nine touches we can book a ﬂight; and in a mere six, we can have 
food delivered directly to our door. On a website, the ‘three-clicks rule’ makes the 
current standard of the average interactions needed to access the requested informa-
tion.57 A study by Sistrix published in 2022 found that the ﬁrst organic result in 
Google Search has an average click-through rate of twenty-eight percentage 
points.58 Google basically preloads the ﬁrst search result (on any search engine) in 
the background before users even click on it, hoping that they will do so. 
The principle that movements should be minimized in digital services is so 
widespread that in 2021 the French Commission Nationale de l’Informatique et 
des Libertés ﬁned Facebook sixty million euros because it forced two-clicks on users 
who elected not to be tracked by cookies. A perverse complication, according to the 
French Commission.59 
We have said that digitalization and speed are related in an inverse proportionality 
ratio. Technology and ease of use, on the other hand, are bound together in a direct 
proportionality ratio. At times, this relationship is almost osmotic. Technological 
innovation is, in fact, simpliﬁcation itself. For this reason, users’ incompetence has 
ceased to be a limitation; it has turned into an asset. Machines and technological 
products are being designed to augment human limitations and in turn encourage 
lazy or untrained users. 
Take the case of Microsoft’s user interface. Back in 1987, it was among the 
earliest forms of software designed with the goal of simplicity. Two years later, the 
ﬁrst iMac was commercialized. The product itself was revolutionary. The User 
Manual was a stroke of genius. Users were invited to plug in the computer and 
turn it on. They did not need to know any more. 
Starting from that moment, collective imagination metabolized the image of ever 
simpliﬁed future technologies. In cinema and literature, technological progress was 
not depicted by complex instrumentation, ﬂashing lights, and myriads of buttons 
anymore. The era of mastodontic electronic calculators, surrounded by busy scien-
tists in white coats ended. Suddenly, W.O.P.R. from War Games represented the 
past. As of that moment, the future belonged to KITT’s minimalist design. Black and 
sleek.60 
57 Zeldman (2001); Drapkin et al. (2002); Jiménez Iglesias et al. (2018). 
58 Data from Search Engine Journal, July 14, 2020 (https://www.searchenginejournal.com/google-
ﬁrst-page-clicks/374516/#close). 
59 Propp (2020), pp. 428–458; Della Valle (2020), p. 172. CNIL, Cookies: sanction de 60 million 
d’euros à l’encontre de Facebook Ireland Limited, 06 January 2022 (https://www.cnil.fr/fr/cookies-
sanction-de-60-millions-deuros-lencontre-de-facebook-ireland-limited). 
60 Glass (1984-1985); Ruzza and Cassini (2010); Weissert (2018); Hancock et al. (2011); Mann 
(2020); Brock (2006); Dwoskin et al. (2022); Shalf (2020). W.O.P.R (War Operational Plan 
Response) is the supercomputer programmed to continuously run war simulations and predict

2.10
Simplicity Equals Sanity
31
2.10 
Simplicity Equals Sanity 
It is at this point that—to put it with John Maeda’s words—‘simplicity began to 
equal sanity’.61 DVD players with too many menus, software accompanied by 
thousand-page manuals, and remote controllers with plenty of unnecessary 
options—in short, all technology that seemed too complicated—turned into some-
thing to be avoided or even to be rebelled against. 
Maeda makes two important points in his book. The ﬁrst concerns the cost of 
simplicity. Technology, he says, makes a good exception to the rule that a simpler 
and faster product is also more expensive. A direct ﬂight is more expensive than a 
ﬂight with one or more connections, for instance. But in most instances of digital 
technology (news-consumption or video-straming, for example) simplicity lowered 
accessibility and usage costs. 
The second point made by Maeda regards the link of mutual need between 
simplicity and complexity. The higher the number of ‘sophisticated’ offerings 
there are in a market, the better the chance that something ‘basic’ or simple will 
stand out. Because technology continuously grows in complexity, there is a clear 
economic beneﬁt in adopting a strategy of simplicity that could help to set a product 
apart. 
Strategic simplicity, for example, is the (not quite) secret ingredient that has made 
Apple’s recipe so successful worldwide. In January 2022, the company set a new 
record. It was the ﬁrst company in the world to surpass three trillion USD in 
capitalization, tripling its average value in just four years. That is roughly double 
the size of Italy’s gross domestic product. Moreover, in 2021 it was reported that the 
group’s stock had gained thirty-four percent over 2020.62 The company reached two 
billion active devices and nearly one billion and two hundred thousand users. The 
ﬁrm averages three hundred and thirty-seven USD per customer per year, a ﬁfth of 
that on services. 
possible outcomes of nuclear war, appearing in the 1983 American sci-ﬁ movie ‘War Games’, 
written by Lawrence Lasker and Walter Parkes and directed by John Badham. KITT (Knight 
Industries Two Thousand) is the short name of an artiﬁcially intelligent electronic computer module 
in the body of a robotic automobile, appearing in the TV series ‘Knight Rider’. Further cases in 
point of size-reduction in technology (combined with increasing performance) are rising hard disk 
capacity described by Mark Kryder (https://www.scientiﬁcamerican.com/article/kryders-law/); 
ﬁber-optic capacity described by Donald Keck (https://spectrum.ieee.org/is-kecks-law-coming-to-
an-end); bandwidth growth described by George Gilder (https://www.netlingo.com/word/gilders-
law.php?utm_source=substack&utm_medium=email); and decreasing transistor size described by 
Moore’s Law. Transistors are now getting so small that Intel has branded their next generation of 
chips the Angstrom era, the next unit of measurement below nanometers: Intel Corporation, Intel 
Accellerates Process and Packaging Innovations, July 26, 2021 (https://www.intel.com/content/ 
www/us/en/newsroom/news/intel-accelerates-process-packaging-innovations.html). 
61 Moeda (2006). 
62 Data provided by Macrotrend, Apple Revenue 2010–2022 (https://www.macrotrends.net/stocks/ 
charts/AAPL/apple/revenue); Statista, Global revenue of Apple 2004 to 2022 (https://www.statista. 
com/statistics/265125/total-net-sales-of-apple-since-2004/).

32
2
The Aesthetics of Consumer Tech
Another example is Microsoft. When in 2022 the company announced it would 
build a one-stop smartphone app that could combine shopping, messaging, web 
search, news feeds and other services, it did not just reveal its ambition to expand 
further into consumer services, but also to boost its advertising business leveraging 
simplicity. 63 
It is with mobile phone technology, however, that user experience has achieved a 
whole other level of ease. As we have already said, most of interactions with 
smartphones take place with just a few taps on the screen. Technological simplicity 
is also the cause of many commercial successes and failures. In 2012, with Nokia on 
the verge of disappearing from the market, the BlackBerry and the iPhone were 
competing for market shares. The race was compelling. On one side there was the 
traditional QWERTY keyboard, used by the BlackBerry phones. On the other side 
stood out the disruptive simplicity brought by the touchscreen. We all know how it 
turned out. Yet very few at the time would have imagined such a dramatic outcome. 
In 2011 Blackberry was selling ﬁfty million units a year—twenty percent of the 
global share. Five years later it had reached an all-time low in sales, with just over 
two hundred thousand devices sold worldwide. In 2022 the company announced the 
ﬁnal switch off, making its last models unserviceable.64 
2.11 
Digital Singularity 
The third standard that is driving consumer tech is singularity. We can introduce it 
with an anecdote. In 1988 Steve Jobs, Apple CEO, launched the original iMac in a 
now much-celebrated presentation. In that occasion, Jobs revealed that the capital ‘I’ 
at the start of the product name—‘Individual’—would, from that day on, accompany 
all of Apple’s future products. This is the concept of ‘digital singularism’: that the 
experiences with digital services and products are designed not only to be special, 
but also to some extent, intended to be unique for the users. 
The food we buy via delivery apps is not just good; it is the best choice in terms of 
our needs and ﬁnancial resources. The route indicated by digital navigators installed 
on mobile phones or in vehicles is the most convenient to reach a destination. The 
new words taught to us on a language app are based on our recent achievements and 
language skills. The parking spot indicated by dedicated mobile apps is the closest to 
the restaurant or the theatre where we will spend the evening. Even the partners 
suggested by dating apps’ algorithms are not just a simple match; they are presented 
to us as potential soul mates. Hence, the success of Tinder, and more generally of
63 Data provided by The Information, Microsoft Eyes ‘Super App’ to Break Apple and Google’s 
Hold on Mobile Search, December 6, 2022 (https://www.theinformation.com/articles/microsoft-
eyes-super-app-to-break-apple-and-googles-hold-on-mobile-search). 
64 Trivedi (2017); Moussi (2017).

online dating. They offer never-ending prolongations of the satisfaction we get from 
imagining, searching and ﬁnally ﬁnding the perfect partner.65
2.11
Digital Singularity
33
Digital singularity is especially evident in two areas: pricing and social media. 
Pricing in the digital technology market is increasingly personalized. Digital services 
are not necessarily valued according to factors such as production or marketing 
costs, nor according to per-unit revenue expectations. Increasingly, prices are deter-
mined by tech companies on the basis of (estimated) spending capabilities of their 
customers. Producers refer to the ‘reserve price’—i.e., the maximum cost we would 
be willing to pay for a service or a product that interests us. Reserve price is thus 
inﬂuenced by consumption habits, personal tastes and, of course, budget.66 This, 
however, is the least troubling aspect of personalized pricing. Its darker (and deeply 
disturbing) side relates to human labor. The ascent of personalized hourly pay built 
on data-collection is progressively transferring price discrimination from the con-
sumer to the labor context—a phenomenon labelled as ‘algorithmic wage 
discrimination’.67 
Social media provide another great example of how digital singularity works. 
How so? To elucidate this point, we need to take a step back in time, to April 2022, 
when Facebook announced an unprecedented net loss of ﬁve hundred thousand daily 
users. 68 In its eighteen-years history, the platform had never experienced a decrease 
in users. The founder and chief executive Mark Zuckerberg commented on these 
numbers by emphasizing the threats posed by fast-growing rival platforms such as 
TikTok and YouTube, based on short-form videos that are more attractive to young 
people. 
This explanation, however, is only partly true. Undoubtedly, short-form videos 
are the reason behind the fast growth of platforms such as TikTok, Reels, or Vine. 
Videos usually have a higher share rate compared to other types of content and for 
this reason become key to many brands’ marketing strategies. Another digital 
platform, Spotify, wrap packages of user listening data into shareable slides. Via 
the Spotify app users watch their data and tap through like viewing an Instagram 
story. Much of the information is customized for each user, from the number of 
genres listened (including preferred artists and songs) to the total minutes spent on 
the platform. As from 2022, a new feature categorizes the mood of the music a user 
typically listens to at given moments of a day.69 
65 Sumter et al. (2017); Timmermans and De Caluwé (2017); Bhattacharya (2015); Couch and 
Liamputtong (2008); Lawson and Leck (2006). 
66 Botta and Wiedemann (2020); Bourreau and De Streel (2018). 
67 Dubal (2023). 
68 The Washington Post, Facebook loses users for the ﬁrst time in its history, February 3, 2022 
(https://www.washingtonpost.com/technology/2022/02/02/facebook-earnings-meta/). 
69 The feature is called ‘Playlist in a Bottle’ and is designed to let users capture their current music 
tastes and revisit them one year later. Data provided by Techcrunch, Spotify’s new time capsule 
feature will let you revisit your musical taste a year from now, January 4, 2023 (https://techcrunch. 
com/2023/01/04/spotifys-time-capsule-feature-revisit-your-music-tastes-one-year-later/? 
guccounter=1&guce_referrer=aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuZ29vZ2xlLmNvbS8&guce_referrer_sig=

34
2
The Aesthetics of Consumer Tech
However, there is a second, more important, difference between short-form 
platforms and traditional ones. This consists of the social bonds linking platforms’ 
users. On Facebook, a friend relationship is mutual by design. So, in practice, user A 
requests friendship to user B, who decides whether to accept it or not. In contrast, on 
Instagram, users follow other users, with no implication of reciprocity. On TikTok, 
following is even more ephemeral. Users scroll and like content, with no further 
implication. Translated into social perception, this means that Facebook users are to 
some extent ‘forced’ to adapt their online personality to the many people they 
interact with. Being on Facebook is like being invited to a party where you only 
know a few people. What many would do naturally in such situation is to adapt their 
tone and gestures to the mood of the party. On TikTok—but the same applies to 
instant messaging apps—users do not feel the same pressure. 
The reason for this? Indeed, the capacity of these platforms to adapt and promote 
users’ singularity. The average WhatsApp user sends one thousand and two hundred 
messages a month, across multiple chats, using a different tone for each conversa-
tion, ranging from professional, or extremely formal, to very informal.70 In 2023 the 
company introduced a feature named ‘Message Yourself’ to allow users to send 
messages, notes and documents to themselves. WhatsApp’s main competitor, Tele-
gram, had been offering the same feature for quite some time already. One extra 
point in favor of digital singularity. 
You can go even further with digital singularity. Some scholars have gone as far 
as to suggest that norms could be personalized as well. With ‘smart contracts’, their 
argument goes, contractual terms could be tailored to contracting parties’ needs and 
expectations. Cases in point include medical responsibility, testamentary disposi-
tions or even organ donations.71 
What are the consequences of digital singularity? Once again, dazzling 
expectations—as in the case of digital velocity and ease-of-use. We expect consumer 
tech not only to be delivered quickly, and to be easily accessible, but also to be 
tailored to our needs. 
Digital services and products tailored on end-users, however, encourage an 
individual hypertrophy that makes the average consumer more demanding. Proof 
of this is given by the technologies that, despite promising commercial outlooks, 
have turned out to be unsuccessful. Take again the example of Alexa, that we have 
mentioned in Paragraph Three. The number of ‘skills’—the actions Alexa could 
perform, often provided by third parties such as brands and media companies—grew 
nine hundred percentage points in two years.72 User activation and retention,
AQAAAKB30V9tKIbzODA8tYfARm9OJUwLnW_6RbDIFLzlZl7Vp4-rc9tPDKgE0 
BQNUKqscF8cZMEBsuhI4u856FhVEws0Qu1BWG76zmC0MPSSj9k2g0DHnWr43 
f6FasoI9WVV7GB1QI-33uO3tzX5jgFmSi7F6yPStAsTID96H_xCSwes). 
70 Data from Statista, Whatsapp Statistics, 2022 (https://www.statista.com/statistics/1306022/ 
whatsapp-global-unique-users/). 
71 Rush and De Franceschi (2021); Kolvart et al. (2016); De Filippi et al. (2021). 
72 Amazon’s Alexa has gone from having one hundred and thirty skills in 2014 to over one hundred 
thousand skills as of September 2019. Data from Statista, Total number of Amazon Alexa skills

however, did not follow. According to Bloomberg, a quarter of Alexa users were no 
longer active with the device in their second week of use, and the majority of long-
time Alexa users use the device just to play music, set the timer while they cook, or 
turn on and off lights.73 This costs Amazon a loss of ten billion USD a year. While 
voice assistants are still seen as a promising market, they have left many problems 
unresolved, including the lack of browsability, poor speech recognition, and privacy 
concerns. In parallel, the personalized interfaces we ﬁnd on smartphones are improv-
ing every day, making it harder for voice assistants to stand out.
2.12
Digital Gratuity
35
2.12 
Digital Gratuity 
Gratuity is last on the list of design characteristics of consumer tech. It is based on a 
seemingly simple principle: we can use most of digital products free of charge. 
Moreover, the principle of gratuity suggests that most technology is affordable and 
will tend to become cheaper over time. 
To be clear about this point: gratuity is unrelated to the cost of digital products. 
Case in point: desktop computers. Undoubtedly, these products revolutionized 
accessibility to technology. In 1970, the IBM system/370 cost four million and six 
hundred thousand USD (nearly thirty-ﬁve million USD in today’s terms). Ten years 
later, the entry price for a computer was one thousand times lower—and prices 
continued to decline for the following twenty years.74 Yet a state-of-the-art technol-
ogy product can still cost hundreds or even thousands of Euros or USD. Clearly not 
for everyone—and despite data telling us that high-pricing strategies pay off. The 
mobile telephony sector, to make another example, in 2022 showed a year-on-year 
trend growth of nine and half percentage points.75 Moreover, not just direct, but also 
indirect costs should be considered. Research shows that a computer’s base price 
typically represents less than twenty percent of its total cost of ownership. The 
remaining eighty percent is determined by technical support, maintenance, labour 
costs and user experience.76 
from January 2016 to September 2019 (https://www.statista.com/statistics/912856/amazon-alexa-
skills-growth/). 
73 Businessweek, Amazon’ Alexa Stalled With Users an Interest Faded, Document Show, 
Businessweek Technology, 22 December 2021 (https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2021-
12-22/amazon-s-voice-controlled-smart-speaker-alexa-can-t-hold-customer-interest-docs?utm_ 
source=substack&utm_medium=email&leadSource=uverify%20wall). 
74 US Today, Check out how much a computer cost the year you were born, https://eu.usatoday. 
com/story/tech/2018/06/22/cost-of-a-computer-the-year-you-were-born/36156373/. 
75 Data provided by GSMA, The Mobile Economy 2022 (https://www.gsma.com/mobileeconomy/ 
wp-content/uploads/2022/02/280222-The-Mobile-Economy-2022.pdf). 
76 Data provided by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Workers’ compensation claims for 
musculoskeletal disorders among wholesale and retail trade industry workers – Ohio, 2005-2009, 
66(22) MMWR Morb Mortal Weekly Report 2013, 437–442.

36
2
The Aesthetics of Consumer Tech
Not to mention the fact that gaining access to products that are perceived as 
exclusive is usually rewarding to consumers. Sony’s Playstation 5 is a good example 
in this regard. It arrived on the market in November 2020. By March 2022, according 
to Sony, ﬁfteen million consoles had been distributed—one million less than had 
been estimated. This shortfall was explained as a consequence of a global semicon-
ductor shortage and pandemic-related logistical problems.77 It may also have been 
related to a market strategy that played on the scarcity/perceived value of a good. 
Dedicated Telegram channels were created for those hoping to get early news about 
the availability of a few models in their hometown. 
So, what exactly does digital gratuity consist of? 
First and foremost, the gratuity factor relates to using rather than just possessing 
digital products and services. Creating a new social media account, for instance, is 
free of cost.78 Also interacting with other users on the same platform is usually free 
of charge. It is certainly no coincidence if the announcement made by Elon Musk as 
CEO of Twitter to charge veriﬁed accounts eight USD a month was received with 
skepticism and outrage. Among the digital services embracing the free use approach 
we ﬁnd mobile apps for food delivery, websites for booking ﬂights and hotels, as 
well as online banking. 
In the second place, the principle of gratuity applies to market-competition, with 
competing operators forced to sell goods or services at rock bottom prices just to stay 
competitive. Take the example of Amazon. For many years, this company operated 
at a loss, selling and shipping goods below cost. This strategy was functional to gain 
access to the capital markets and to subsidize everything customers would buy. Once 
the platform consolidated its position, it shifted strategy and tarted to harvest the 
surplus from its business customers. 
Another example may be made again with the PlayStation 5 console: it is now 
widely known that the game console contributes negatively to the revenues of its 
manufacturer Sony. In 2003, the company declared a proﬁt of eighteen USD with 
each console sold. Two years later, PlayStation3 had a higher price: adjusted to 2022 
inﬂation, at six hundred and ﬁfty-nine USD per unit (a price many complained 
about). The estimated manufacturing costs, however, had increased to over eight 
hundred and forty USD per unit, resulting in a net loss for the company of over two 
hundred USD per unit. In the revenue model of Sony, such losses are offset by the 
royalties paid by developers for each of the game titles they would sell for this 
machine. 
77 Leslie (2022); Mohammad et al. (2022). In 2023 Sony announced that the shortage of PlayStation 
5 was over (The Verge, Sony says the PlaysTation 5 shortage is over, January 5, 2023 – https:// 
www.theverge.com/2023/1/4/23539918/sony-playstation-5-shortage-over). 
78 For a long time, social networks have been thought yielding welfare for the user because she/he is 
not obliged to pay a price. More recently, however, it has been shown that this approach neglects the 
costs in terms of information that the consumer is forced to bear in order to gain access to the digital 
platform.

2.13
The Costs of Consumer Tech: Ownership, Quality and Contentment
37
2.13 
The Costs of Consumer Tech: Ownership, Quality 
and Contentment 
Fast, reliable, intuitive, tailored to users’ needs and (occasionally) free-of-charge: 
consumer tech is designed to provide swift responses to users’ demands via simpli-
ﬁed interactions. Instant gratiﬁcation of needs becomes the key yardstick for 
assessing customers’ satisfaction. However, with the promise of quick rewards and 
access to (potentially unlimited) resources, there are three costs in terms of owner-
ship, quality, and contentment. In the remainder of this Chapter, we will focus on the 
ﬁrst (ownership) and second (quality) cost, and only brieﬂy on the third (content-
ment). The latter will be analyzed in more detail in Chap. 3. 
To start, consumer technology transforms the way we relate to our possessions, 
and thus to ourselves and the world around us. This is especially true with streaming 
and other Internet-based service consumption.79 Data are telling. Back in 2011, the 
sale of online music surpassed the sale of physical devices. In 2016 streaming 
services took over digital purchases. In 2020 digital video game sales outplaced 
their physical counterparts. Art and collectible markets are also quickly moving to 
digital forms. At the same time, sales of physical objects are declining everywhere. 
Digital customers cease to ‘own’ objects (at least in its traditional understanding) 
and set their consuming habits to the intangible and ephemeral. This implies that 
digital owners lack basic ownership rights such as the right to repair and the right 
to sell. 
Take the example of the Self-Service Repair program announced by major tech 
companies such as Google and Apple in 2022. The former partnered with repair 
specialists iFixit. Apple announced it would open an online repair shop, making a 
huge change from its traditional hostile approach to third-party repairs. However, 
upon closer examination, Apple’s decision seems to be more an attempt to respond 
to regulatory attempts to introduce a real right to repair. The announcement was in 
fact accompanied by the caveat that a ‘vast majority’ of customers should still visit 
professional repair providers to ensure that their devices are repaired safely and 
reliably.80 Moreover, it remains unclear whether the parts will be available directly 
on Apple’s website or only through Apple Support. Without considering that Apple 
has delayed the service in many countries due to component shortages (initially 
caused by the pandemic and then exacerbated by the Russia-Ukraine conﬂict). 
79 Tsioutsou et al. (2015); Ho et al. (2009); Doll and Torkzadeh (1988). Mohamed Khalifa and 
Vanessa Liu (Khalifa and Liu 2003, pp. 31–49) developed and tested a model for explaining the 
satisfaction of customers with Internet-based services in the context of an on-line knowledge 
community. The model empirically demonstrates the need to consider not only the expectations 
of customers but their desires in explaining their satisfaction. Khalifa and Liu also identiﬁed speciﬁc 
desires and expectations that drive the satisfaction of customers of Internet-based services. 
80 According to Apple, from 2019 to 2022 the company has expanded its repair network, including 
over 3,000 Independent Repair Providers and more than 5000 authorized service providers world-
wide Montello (2020).

38
2
The Aesthetics of Consumer Tech
This takes us to the second cost: quality. For the most part, products and services 
delivered through consumer technology are ‘Lo-ﬁ’.81 The pictures we post on social 
media, the music we listen to through streaming services, and the news we consume 
through RSS feeds, online newspapers, blogposts, or podcasts are all qualitatively 
rounded down. On average, the quality of consumer technology is signiﬁcantly 
lower than that of analogical (or professional) services and products.82 
For example, much of the music we get online would be considered low in terms 
of audio quality. In 2021, ﬁve hundred million people subscribed to a music 
streaming service, thereby accessing virtually boundless music databases (and 
music streaming apps generated twenty-ﬁve billion USD revenue in 2021, a thirty-
two percent increase on the year prior).83 The cost of access to vast amounts of music 
is a sacriﬁce in listening quality. In order to limit bandwidth space, ﬁles are zipped 
and compressed. More demanding customers may activate the option of high-quality 
services without decompression, but to the average consumer, the loss in listening 
quality would be negligible and one would ask: is it worth it? 
We also read sloppy, misleading or in some cases even false news online, on 
which we build biased and polarized beliefs and judgments. This is even more 
surprising considering how technology has empowered us with access to vast 
amounts of knowledge and information. Yet misinformation is widespread.84 Public 
health policies provide a good example in this regard. About twenty-ﬁve percent of 
the European population was perplexed or opposed to anti-Covid vaccination 
campaigns.85 Outside Europe, large segments of the public opinion reported some
81 Mantellini (2020); Cocks and Murdock (2023). 
82 Interestingly, this ‘Lo-ﬁ’ quality does not imply a loss in trust in users. Consumer tech design 
features are often meant to instill in consumers a sense of reliance in the products and services they 
are using. This is the case, for instance, with the standard lock, shield, and checkmark icons used by 
ecommerce websites to let users check up on a product. Although the design of these icons has little 
connection with the technology that powers the transaction, they are effective at representing 
security and therefore give users the feeling that they do not have to worry about how safe their 
data is. 
83 Data from Business of Apps, Musing Streaming App Revenue and Usage Statistics, 2023 (https:// 
www.businessofapps.com/data/music-streaming-market/). 
84 Di Gregorio (2019); Del Vicario et al. (2016); Flaxman et al. (2016). 
85 Already in the 2019 State of Health in the EU report (https://ec.europa.eu/commission/ 
presscorner/detail/en/IP_19_6336), vaccine hesitancy was stated as a major public health threat 
throughout Europe. In 2021-2022 polls showed that sizeable numbers of people in the EU were 
hesitant—or even opposed—to vaccination in general. As regards Covid-19 vaccination, surveys 
suggested that Europeans were among the most skeptical in the world. A survey conducted in 
October 2020 reported that 3% of respondents from ﬁfteen countries around the globe said that they 
would be vaccinated for Covid-19 if a vaccine were available. However, Covid-19 vaccination 
intent was expressed by just over half of adults in France (54%) and about two thirds in Spain 
(64%), Italy (65%) and Germany (69%). According to the survey, reasons for not accepting the 
vaccine included concerns about side effects and concerns that vaccines are moving through clinical 
trials too fast. Smaller numbers indicated that they did not think the vaccine would be effective, that 
they were against vaccines in general, and that they believed their risk of contracting Covid-19 
was low.

degree of ‘vaccine hesitancy’ (i.e., the delay in acceptance or refusal of vaccination 
despite availability of vaccination services86 ) about Covid-19 vaccination.
2.13
The Costs of Consumer Tech: Ownership, Quality and Contentment
39
Or we can take the example of social media. In the eighteen to twenty-nine age 
group, the primary sources of information are social networks.87 Yet on Twitter— 
arguably the most ‘content-based’ of the social networks—a post has an average life 
expectancy of around four hours. Only six percent of tweets gets at least one 
retweet.88 The average time elapsed between accessing a content posted on the 
platform and sharing that content among followers (the most common way to 
measure users’ engagement) is limited to a few seconds.89 Barely enough time for 
those sharing the tweet to have even read the content. 
To continue with examples, we watch videos online that are constantly 
interrupted by commercials. Every minute, YouTube publishes ﬁve hundred hours 
of new content. By the end of the day, globally, users would have ‘consumed’ one 
billion hours of videos. These are preceded, interrupted (multiple times if the length 
exceeds a certain threshold) and concluded with short commercials. Again, for those 
who want it, there is the possibility to switch to the premium formula and eliminate 
advertising. Once again, this is more expensive. But is it worth it? 
Finally, we work with more fatigue and less satisfaction. We discussed before the 
growing ﬁgures of ‘working poverty’ globally. According to Tung-Hui Hu, an 
omnipresent, pervasive and oppressive digital culture is resulting in burnout, exhaus-
tion and restlessness, which Hu terms ‘digital lethargy’.90 
What we may add here is that, in recent years, companies and policy-makers have 
proposed several options aimed at limiting digital stress. One is an employee ‘right 
to disconnect’, which has gained ground in the corporate sector and, more recently, 
in the public sector as well.91 Another proposed solution consists of e-mail services 
that work in line with principles such as slowness and mindfulness. One such service 
is Pony Messenger, which is marketed as a ‘once a day’ mail service. Emails are sent 
and delivered only once during a set time, and serves to limit the distraction caused 
by the constant ﬂow of incoming and outgoing emails for users. Apps like Coffee
86 MacDonald (2015); Scholz (2021). The World Health Organization’s Strategic Advisory Group 
of Experts working group on vaccine hesitancy, deﬁned the hesitancy on vaccines a behavior that is: 
‘inﬂuenced by a number of factors including issues of conﬁdence (do not trust vaccine or provider), 
complacency (do not perceive a need for a vaccine, do not value the vaccine), and convenience 
(access). Vaccine-hesitant individuals are a heterogeneous group who hold varying degrees about 
speciﬁc vaccines or vaccination in general. Vaccine-hesitant individuals may accept all vaccines 
but remain concerned about vaccines, some may refuse or delay some vaccines, but accept others, 
and some e individuals may refuse all vaccines’. 
87 Data provided by Pew Research Center, Social Media Fact Sheet, 2021 (https://www. 
pewresearch.org/internet/fact-sheet/social-media/); Our World in Data, The rise of social media, 
2019 (https://ourworldindata.org/rise-of-social-media); Datareportal, Global Social Media Statistics 
2023 (https://datareportal.com/social-media-users). 
88 Duncan and Zhang (2015). 
89 Antonakaki et al. (2021). 
90 Tung-Hui (2022). 
91 Muller (2020); Hesselberth (2018); Secunda (2019); Pansu (2018).

Meets Bagel conservatively limit the number of swipes and matches users can make 
each day. These models help combat choice overload, one of the more anxiety-
inducing aspects of online dating.92 Until recently Gmail customers could install 
Goggles, a service that activated by default late at night and on weekends. The 
intention was to discourage emailing under the assumption that these are times when 
we tend to write messages we might regret.
40
2
The Aesthetics of Consumer Tech
Yet, despite the many options introduced to safeguard users from digital stress, 
we still lack effective defenses against the work-sharing software that has been 
ﬂooding the market for the past few years. Slack, Asana, Trello or Ryver—one is 
spoiled for choice. In spite of some differences, these apps are based on the same 
approach: immediate responses and constant measurement of progress. They owe 
their success to the promise they would enhance productivity in a team. We are not 
certain on whether they improve the quality of work. But certainly, they impact on 
the well-being of team members. 
2.14 
From Digital to Analogue, No Return 
It is pointless to ty and run away from digital to avoid these perceived costs—there is 
simply no escaping it. The discourse on expectations begins with digital, but it later 
extends to everything that was initially analog but later became digitalized. I will 
give three examples: retail, politics, and public services. 
Shopping online is not a recent innovation. Even before the pandemic, many 
people were already choosing to buy milk, bread, cheese, and other basic food items 
through the online stores of large and medium-sized retailers. In Europe alone, 
between 2019 and 2020, e-commerce grew by ten percentage points, with food 
driving this growth.93 
Amazon has made the most innovative approach to retail. The trillion-dollar 
company has merged what previously seemed impossible: the physicality of retail 
shopping with the immateriality of digital. Thomas Edison launched the idea as early 
as 1910, envisioning a future retail without clerks.94 Putting it into practice, how-
ever, took another one hundred years. With Amazon, customers enter ‘physical 
shops’, without a credit card. They choose products and exit. An ecosystem of 
algorithms takes care of payment, cross-referencing the identiﬁcation codes of the 
products chosen, facial recognition data collected by cameras in the store, and those 
of the credit card registered on customers’ account.95 
92 https://tinyurl.com/4u2a7233. 
93 Data from Ecommerce Europe, European E-Commerce Report 2022 (https://ecommerce-europe. 
eu/wp-content/uploads/2022/06/CMI2022_FullVersion_LIGHT_v2.pdf). 
94 Collins et al. (2002); David (1992). 
95 Ives et al. (2019); Polacco and Backes (2018); Huberman (2021); Weigel (2023).

2.14
From Digital to Analogue, No Return
41
Political communication is another great example of digital expectations. Imper-
fection is elevated by several political leaders as a major aspect of their approach to 
politics and communication. This ‘Lo-ﬁ’ communication style becomes a new 
cultural hegemony in the moment in which voters judge political leaders based on 
their TV appearances, speeches, debates and social media activities rather than on 
their jobs.96 ‘Hyper-leaders’ measure their political inﬂuence through social media 
metrics (likes, followers and shares). In communicating to the electorate, they adopt 
the colloquial and demotic style of YouTubers and Instagram inﬂuencers, becoming 
often histrionic or even excessive (especially when compared to ‘traditional’ 
politicians). 
The 2022 Twiplomacy World Leader Power Ranking has identiﬁed that the most 
inﬂuential world leader on Twitter is the Prime Minister of India, Narendra Modi, 
closely followed by US President Joe Biden and Turkey’s President Recep Tayyip 
Erdoğan. All global names creating a global narrative. It is worth nothing that, 
among the key trends of 2022—according to the study—is the major shift away 
from traditional metrics of online inﬂuence (based on how many followers a leader 
has or how many tweets the leader puts out) in favor of how engaged that follower 
base is, and how likely they are to interact with a leader’s message.97 
‘Psycho-politics’—to borrow from Han Byung-Chul98 —is focused on seduction: 
instead of forbidding and depriving people and voters with commandments, disci-
pline and shortages, it works through pleasing and fulﬁlling. It seems to allow voters 
to buy what they want when they want, become what they want and realize their 
dreams. It would be a mistake, however, to limit understanding of the transformation 
of political communication to full democratic regimes. Drawing in part from Byung-
Chul, Sergei Guriev and Daniel Treisman have written about ‘informational 
autocrats’—i.e., autocrats who, rather than terrorizing citizens into submission, 
artiﬁcially boost their popularity by convincing the public they are competent.99 
The consequences are plain to see. One is the irrelevance of contradictory 
political content as criteria to assess political leaders’ skills and aptitude to deliver. 
People no longer care about consistency. As voters, we are prisoners of the constant 
removal of the past of disposable political communication. If everything is new, 
everything is quick, then every message, even if contradictory, is acceptable because
96 The topic is currently being explored by Nello Barile at IULM University in Italy, with a project 
dedicated to on lo-ﬁ politics and high-tech society (https://www.iulm.it/it/ricerca/progetti-di-
ricerca/ricerca-dipartimentale/Barile_1). Barile’s analysis focuses on how Matteo Salvini, the 
political leader of the Lega, cultivates a link with his community through digital platforms. 
According to Barile, the repositioning of Salvini as a populist/sovereign leader is a consequence 
of the landslide of the middle class that has put the centrist parties into further crisis, determining the 
coming together of two opposed but complementary political formations – Movimento 5 Stelle and 
Lega. Gerbaudo (2018, 2021); Gibson & Ward (2009). 
97 Twiplomacy, World Leader Power Ranking 2022 (https://www.twiplomacy.com/world-leader-
executive-summary). 
98 Byung-Chul (2017); Lushetich (2018); Ware (2018); Lin (2020). 
99 Gurie and Treisman (2019).

it opens up to new possibilities.100 Samuel Popkin’s ‘low information rationality’ 
theory stipulates that the majority of citizens have basic impressions about politics, 
and thus their voting choices are determined by shortcuts.101
42
2
The Aesthetics of Consumer Tech
Nadia Urbinati explains that ‘Lo-ﬁ’ political messages are constantly reframed 
and reshaped and only exist in the moment in which they are created.102 This 
approach, taken to the extreme, has already produced provocative and grotesque 
results—like the Synthetic Party, a Danish political party born in 2022, with an 
artiﬁcially intelligent representative and policies derived from AI;103 or SAM—an 
AI chatbot that simulates a New Zealander virtual politician who interacts with users 
through Facebook Messenger.104 
Third and ﬁnally, with constantly improved conditions, greater expectations 
(rather than greater contentment) follow. The consumer tech quest for making 
customers happy is on an upward trajectory. As pointed out by Juval Harari in 
Homo Deus, the interdependence between better conditions and greater expectations 
is risky in that future achievements might leave us as dissatisﬁed as ever.105 We will 
discuss this in depth in the next chapter. 
Summary
•
Digital technology and velocity are bound together in a binomial relationship. 
Digital products and services are expected to reduce to the minimum the time 
elapsed between the action and its satisfaction. Such ‘digital accelerationism’ has 
100 ‘Lo-ﬁ’ institutional communication is encouraged by scarce or non-existent literacy in demo-
cratic opportunities. Literacy in participatory channels is modest within the general population, 
especially young generations, but also among civil society organizations. Three causes are partic-
ularly important to low literacy: ﬁrst is the lack of integration of civic studies into the school 
curriculum, including a strong dimension of education for democracy and human rights; second, is 
the inadequate publicity of participatory instruments, often scattered across a variety of webpages; 
third is the uncoordinated nature of many participatory instruments, with the EU being a case in 
point. 
101 Popkin (1991); According to Philipp Converse (1964), most of the citizenry do not have 
meaningful beliefs, even on issues that have been at the center of intense political controversies 
for substantial amounts of time. 
102 Urbinati (2013); Deseriis (2020). 
103 The party was founded in May 2022 by Computer Lars (an artist collective) and the non-proﬁt 
MindFuture Foundation. The Synthetic Party’s public face is a chatbot named ‘Leader Lars’, 
programmed on the policies of Danish fringe parties since 1970 and meant to represent the twenty 
percent of Danes who do not vote in the election. For further info: https://detsyntetiskeparti. 
wordpress.com. 
104 Under the slogan ‘You can talk to me anytime, anywhere’, SAM claims to make decisions 
without bias, based on facts and opinions, and commits to never knowingly lie or misrepresent facts. 
See V. Kyselova, How SAM chatbot can change political life of New Zealand, Jasoren (https:// 
jasoren.com/how-sam-chatbot-can-change-political-life-of-new-zealand-2/). 
105 In Harari’s  (2016) view democracies might just become obsolete over the coming century, 
especially in the case in which information technology will be partnered with biotechnology, 
allowing its algorithms to access and act on human thought. Democracies—suggests Harari— 
might thus be replaced by tech-tyrannies, or just by new, more elaborate, political system.

References
43
profound consequences on societal standing, the economy, the evolution of 
language, and customer expectations.
•
Technology and simplicity are bound together in a direct proportionality ratio. 
Machines and technological products are being designed to augment human 
limitations and in turn encourage lazy or untrained users.
•
Digital services and products are tailored on end-users. ‘Digital singularism’ 
suggests that the experiences with digital services and products are designed 
not only to be special, but also to some extent, intended to be unique for the users.
•
Digital gratuity is based on the idea that most of digital products can be used 
(rather than just possessed) free of charge. It also suggests that most technology is 
affordable and will tend to become cheaper over time.
•
Consumer technology transforms the way we relate to our possessions, and thus 
to ourselves and the world around us. Digital customers cease to ‘own’ objects 
(at least in its traditional understanding) and set their consuming habits to the 
intangible and ephemeral.
•
On average, the quality of consumer technology is signiﬁcantly lower than that of 
analogical (or professional) services and products. This is functional to gratify 
end users. 
References 
Alvarez FE et al (2023) Are cryptocurrencies currencies? Bitcoin a legal tender in El Salvador. 
National Bureau of Economic Research – working paper 29968 
Ammari T et al (2019) Music, search and IoT: how people (really) use voice assistants. ACM Trans 
Comput-Human Inter 26(3):1–28 
Ante L (February 3, 2021) How Elon Musk’s twitter activity moves cryptocurrency markets. BRL 
Working Paper Series No. 16 
Antonakaki D et al (2021) A survey of Twitter research: Data model, graph structure, sentiment 
analysis and attacks. Exp Syst Appl, 164 
Bauman Z (1990) Modernity and ambivalence. Theory Cult Soc 7(2):143–169 
Bhattacharya S (2015) Swype and burn. New Sci 225:30–33 
Bindet JM (2022) Language and the rise of the algorithm. The University of Chicago Press, 
Chicago 
Botta M, Wiedemann K (2020) To discriminate or not to discriminate? Personalised pricing in 
online markets as exploitative abuse of dominance. Eur J Law Econ 50:381–400 
Bourreau M, De Streel A (2018) The regulation of personalised pricing in the digital era 
Brock DC (ed) (2006) Understanding Moore’s law. Four decades of innovation. Chemical Heritage 
Foundation, Philadelphia 
Brod C (1984) Technostress. The human cost oof the computer revolution. Addison-Wesley, 
London/Amsterdam 
Budiu R (2015) Mobile user experience: limitations & strengths. Nielsen Norman Group 
Burggraf T et al (2020) Do FEARS drive Bitcoin? Rev Behav Financ 13(3):229–258 
Byung-Chul H (2017) Psychopolitics: neoliberalism and new technologies of power. Verso, 
London/New York 
Calvino I (1985) Lezioni americane. Garzanti, Milano 
Carlson K (2010) The power of place, the problem of time: aboriginal identity and historical 
consciousness in the cauldron of colonialism. University of Toronto Press, Toronto 
Casini L (2020) Lo Stato nell’era di Google. Frontiere e sﬁde globali. Mondadori, Milano

44
2
The Aesthetics of Consumer Tech
Casini L (2022) Lo stato (im)mortale. Mondarori, Milano 
Chen C, Liu L (2022) How effective is China’s cryptocurrency trading ban? Financ Res Lett 46 
Chun D, Kern R, Mith B et al (2016) Technology in language use, language teaching, and language 
learning. Mod Language J 100:64–80 
Cialdini RB, Trost MR, Gilbert DT et al (eds) (1998) Social inﬂuence: social norms, conformity and 
compliance, in the handbook of social psychology. McGraw-Hill, New York 
Cocks S, Murdock J (January 24, 2023) Amazon Alexa vs. Google Home: Which assistant should 
you pick in 2023?, GoodHouseKeeping 
Cohen EF (2018) The political value of time. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 
Collins TM et al (2002) Thomas Edison and Modern America. A brief history with documents. 
Bedford/St. Martins, Boston/New York 
Converse PE (1964) The nature of belief systems in mass publics. Crit Rev 18:1–3 
Couch D, Liamputtong P (2008) Online dating and mating: the use of the internet to meet sexual 
partners. Qual Health Res 18(2):268–279 
Daston L (2022) Rules. A short history of what we live by. Princeton University Press, Princeton 
David PA (1992) Heroes, herds and hysteresis in technological history: Thomas Edison and ‘The 
Battle of the Systems’ reconsidered. Indl Corp Change 1(1):129–180 
De Filippi P et al (2021) Smart contracts. Int Policy Rev 10(2) 
Del Vicario M et al (2016) The spreading of misinformation online. Proc Natl Acad Sci 113(3): 
554–559 
Della Valle AI (2020) The (in) adequacy of the law to new technologies: the example of the Google/ 
Cnil and Facebook cases before the Court of Justice of the European Union. Eur J Priv Law 
Technol 172 
Deseriis M (2020) Two variants of the digital party: the platform party and the networked party. 
Partecipazione e conﬂitto 13(1):896–917 
Di Gregorio L (2019) Demopatìa: sintomi, diagnosi e terapie del malessere democratico. 
Mondadori, Milano 
Dirks NB (1992) Colonialism and culture. University of Michigan Press, Michigan, Ann Arbor 
Doll WJ, Torkzadeh G (1988) The measurement of end-user computing satisfaction. MIS Quart 
12(2):259–273 
Drapkin M et al (2002) Three clicks away: advice from the trenches of ecommerce. John Wiley & 
Sons, New York 
Dubal V (2023) On algorithmic wage discrimination. UC San Francisco Research Paper 
forthcoming 
Duncan B, Zhang Y (2015) Natural networks for sentiment analysis on Twitter. In: IEEE 14th 
International Conference on Cognitive Informatics & Cognitive Computing 
Dwoskin E et al (February 3, 2022) Facebook loses users for the ﬁrst time in its history. The 
Washington Post 
Ennis LA (2005) The evolution of technostress. Comput Libr 25(8):10–12 
Farman J (2018) Delayed response: the art of waiting from the ancient to the instant world. Yale 
University Press, New Haven 
Flaxman S et al (2016) Filter bubbles, echo chambers, and online new consumption. Public Opin 
Quart 80:298–320 
Floridi L (2020) Onlife Blog: ‘Le tre funzioni del linguaggio digitale e le loro conseguenze’ 
Fraser N et al (2011) Working poverty in Europe. A comparative approach. NewPalgrave-
MacMillan, New York 
Gerbaudo P (2018) The digital party. Pluto Press 
Gerbaudo P (2021) Are digital parties more democratic than traditional parties? Evaluating 
Podemos and Movimento 5 Stelle’s online decision-making platforms. Party Polit 27(4): 
730–742 
Gibney E (January 24, 2023) What time is it on the Moon?, Nature 
Gibson R, Ward S (2009) Parties in the digital age. A review article. Representation 45(1):87–100

References
45
Giurge LM et al (2020) Why time poverty matters for individuals, organizations and nations. Nat 
Human Behav 4:993–1003 
Glass G (1984-1985) Sign of the times: the computer as character in ‘Tron’, War Games’, and 
‘Superman III’. Film Quart 38(2):16–27 
Godwin-Jones R (2005) Skype and podcasting: disruptive technologies for language learning. Lang 
Learn Technol 9(3):9–12 
Godwin-Jones R (2019) In a World of SMART technology, why learn another language? Edu 
Technol Soc 22(2):4–13 
Gurie S, Treisman D (2019) Informational autocrats. J Econ Persp 33(4) 
Hancock PA et al (2011) Can you trust your robot? Ergon Design 19(3):24–29 
Harari JN (2016) Homo Deus. Vintage, London 
Harari JN (2018) Sapiens. A brief history of humankind. Vintage, London 
Hay MB (2018) Alexa, Siri, Cortana, and more: an introduction to voice assistants. Med Ref Serv 
Quart 37:81–88 
Henne M et al (1986) The making of toy story. CopCon:463–468 
Hesselberth P (2018) Discourses on disconnectivity and the right to disconnect. New Media Soc 
20(5):1994–2010 
Ho CF, Wu WH, Sprague RH Jr (eds) (2009) Antecedents of customer satisfaction on the Internet: 
An empirical study of online shopping, Proceedings of the Thirty-second Hawaii International 
Conference on System Sciences. IEEE Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos, CA 
Hopper N (September 30, 2022) The thorny problem of keeping internet’s time. The New Yorker 
Huberman J (2021) Amazon Go, surveillance capitalism, and the ideology of convenience. Econ 
Anthropol 8(2):337–349 
Huynh TLD (2022) When Elon Musk changes his tone, does Bitcoin adjust its tune? Comput Econ 
Ives B et al (2019) Amazon Go: disrupting retail? J Inf Technol Teach Cases 9(1):2–12 
Jiménez Iglesias L et al (2018) User experience and the media: The three-click rule on newspaper 
websites for smartphones. Revista Latina de Comunicación Social 76:595–613 
Johnson HG (1974) Mercantilism: past, present and future. J World Trade Law 8:1 
Johnson SGB (2018) Financial alchemists and ﬁnancial shamans. Behav Brain Sc 41 
Jones T (2009) Milan Kundera’s slowness – making it slow. Rev Eur Stud 1(2):64–75 
Judges AV (1939) The idea of a mercantile state. Transact Royal Hist Soc 21:41–69 
Kaiser B et al (2018) The Looming Threat of China: An Analysis of Chinese Inﬂuence on Bitcoin. 
Cornell University Research Paper 
Karimi F et al (2018) Homophily inﬂuences ranking of minorities in social networks. Sci Rep 41: 
11077 
Khalifa M, Liu V (2003) Satisfaction with internet-based services: the role of expectations and 
desires. Int J Electr Commer 7(2):31–49 
Kolvart M et al (2016) Smart contracts. In: Kerikmäe T, Rull A (eds) The future of law and 
eTechnologies. Springer, pp 133–147 
Kundera M (1998) La Lenteur. Gallimard, Paris 
Kymlicka W, Shapiro I, Hacker-Cordon C (eds) (1999) Citizenship in an era of globalization, 
democracy’s edge. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 
Landes D (2020) Revolution in time. Clocks and the making of the modern world. Harvard 
University Press, Harvard 
Lawson HM, Leck K (2006) Dynamics of internet dating. Soc Sci Comput Rev 24(2):189–208 
Le Poidevin R, MacBeath M (eds) (1993) The philosophy of time. Oxford University Press, Oxford 
Lee E et al (2019) Homophily and minority-group size explain perception biases in social networks. 
Nat Human Behav 3:1078–1087 
Lerman K et al (2016) The ‘majority illusion’ in social networks. PLoS One 11:e0147617 
Leslie M (2022) Pandemic scrambles the semiconductor supply chain. Engineering 9:10–12 
Lin S (2020) Psychopolitics: theorization against. Crisis 28(1) symploke:517–522 
Lohmann H, Marx I (2018) Handbook on in-work poverty. Edgar Elgar, Cheltenham 
Luca M, Bazerman MH (2020) The power of experiments. MIT Press, Boston

46
2
The Aesthetics of Consumer Tech
Lushetich N (2018) Chained to the digital camp: review essay of Byung Chul Han’s Psychopolitics: 
neoliberalism and new technologies of power. Media Theory 
MacDonald NE (2015) Vaccine hesitancy: deﬁnition, scope and determinants. Vaccine 33(34): 
4161–4164 
Magnusson L (1994) Mercantilism. The shaping of an economic language. Routledge, London 
Magun A (2009) Marx’s theory of time and the present historical moment. Rethinking Marxism. J 
Econ Cult Soc 22(1):90–109 
Mann C (2020) The end of Moore’s law? Technol Rev 3 
Mantellini M (2020) Bassa risoluzione. Einaudi, Torino 
Marinetti FT (1914) I Manifesti del futurismo, Firenze 
Mark G (2023) Attention span: a groundbreaking way to restore balance, happiness and produc-
tivity. Hanover Square Press, New York 
Mark G et al (2008) The cost of interrupted work: more speed and stress. Proceedings of the 
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 
McCumber J (2014) Time and philosophy. Routledge, London 
McKean CA (February 2, 2023) We’ve always been distracted, Aeon 
McPherson M et al (2001) Birds of a feather: homophily in social networks. Ann Rev Sociol 27: 
415–444 
Moeda J (2006) The laws of simplicity. MIT Press 
Mohammad W et al (2022) The global semiconductor chip shortage: causes, implications, and 
potential remedies. IFAC-PapersOnLine 55(1):476–483 
Montello S (2020) The right to repair and the corporate stranglehold over the consumer: proﬁts over 
people. Tulane J Technol Intell Prop 22:165–184 
Moussi A (2017) Mini-case study: the downfall of Blackberry, University of Amsterdam Research 
Paper 
Muller K (2020) The right to disconnect. European Parliamentary Research Service Brussels 
Natale S, Henrickson L (2022) The Lovelace effect: perceptions of creativity in machines. New 
Media Soc 0(0) 
Norbury JW (1998) From Newton’s laws to the Wheeler-DeWitt equation. Eur J Phys 19(12):143 
Pansu L (2018) Evaluation of ‘Right to Disconnect’ legislation and its impact on employee’s 
productivity. Int J Manage Appl Res 5(3):99–119 
Polacco A, Backes K (2018) The amazon go concept: implications, applications, and sustainability. 
J Bus Manage 24(1):79–92 
Popkin S (1991) The reasoning voter: communication and persuasion in presidential campaigns. 
University of Chicago Press, Chicago 
Price D (2008) The Pixar touch: the making of a company. Alfred A. Knopf, New York 
Propp K, (2020) Google LLC v. Commission Nationale de l'Informatique et des Libertés (CNIL) 
and Eva Glawischnig-Piesczek v. Facebook Ireland Ltd. (CJEU). Int Legal Mater 59(3): 
428–458 
Ray RC (1991) Time, space and philosophy. Philosophical issues in science. Routledge, London 
Riley J (2021) The current status of cryptocurrency regulation in China and its effect around the 
world. China WTO Rev 1:135–152 
Rosa H, Scheuerman WE (2009) High-speed society: social acceleration, power, and modernity. 
Pennsylvania University Press, Philadelphia 
Rubechini P (2023) Tecnologia blockchain e ﬁducia amministrativa. Editoriale Scientiﬁca, Napoli 
Rush C, De Franceschi A (2021) Algorithmic regulation and personalised law. Hart Publishing, 
Oxford 
Ruzza S, Cassini E (ed) (2010) Wargames, ovvero: come applicare la logica del paradosso e vincere 
una guerra impossibile, in La superﬁcie e l’abisso: Percorsi culturali e politici nel cinema 
americano degli anni Ottanta, Aracne, Roma: 253–266 
Scheuerman WE (2004) Liberal democracy and the social acceleration of time. John Hopkins 
University Press, Baltimora

References
47
Scholz N (2021) Covid-19 vaccination campaigns: the public dimension. European Parliamentary 
Research Service, Brussels 
Secunda PM (2019) The employee right to disconnect. Notre Dame J Int Comp Law 9:1 
Shalf J (2020) The future of computing beyond Moore’s law. Philosophical Transactions of the 
Royal Society 
Smith A (1776) The wealth of nations 
Snider B (1995) The Toy Story Story, Wired, December 1 
Snider L (2001) Crimes against capital: discovering theft of time. Soc Just 28(3):105–120 
Sparkes M (2022) El Salvador revamps bitcoin system. New Sci 253 (3373):8 
Sumter SR et al (2017) Love me Tinder: untangling emerging adults’ motivations for using the 
dating application Tinder. Telemat Inf 34(1):7–78 
Sunak R (2017) Undersea cables. Indispensable, insecure, Policy Exchange 
Tarafdar M et al (2007) The impact of technostress on role stress and productivity. J Manage Inf 
Syst 24(1):301–328 
Tarafdar M et al (2010) Impact of technostress on end-user satisfaction and performance. J Manage 
Inf Syst 27(3):303–334 
Taylor F (1913) The principles of scientiﬁc management. Harper & Brothers, New York 
Tene 
O 
(2008) 
What 
Google 
knows: 
privacy 
and 
internet 
search 
engines. 
Utah 
Law Rev:1434–1490 
Terzopoulos G, Atratzemi M (2020) Voice assistants and smart speakers in everyday life and in 
education. Inf Edu Int J 19(3):473–490 
Timmermans E, De Caluwé E (2017) To tinder or not to tinder, that’s the question: an individual 
differences perspective to tinder use and motives. Pers Ind Diff 110:74–79 
Toubiana V, Nissenbaum H (2011) An analysis of Google log retention policies. J Priv Conﬁdential 
3(1):2, 
Trivedi PD (2017) Consumer dictates the market: Lesson from blackberry. J Manage Res Anal 4(4): 
183–185 
Tsioutsou RH, Wirtz J, Bryson JR, Daniels PW (eds) (2015) The three-stage model of service 
consumption, handbook of service business. Elgar, London 
Tung-Hui H (2022) Digital lethargy. Dispatches from and age of disconnection. MIT Press, Boston 
Urbinati N (2013) Democrazia diretta. Le nuove sﬁde della rappresentanza. Feltrinelli, Torino 
Verne J (2020) Paris au XXieme Siecle. Beta Publisher 
Vostal F (2017) Slowing down modernity: a critique. Time Soc 28(3):1039–1060 
Ware B (2018) The Burnout society/psychopolitics, neoliberalism and new technologies of power. 
New Format 94:175–179 
Warschauer M (2022) A developmental perspective on technology in language education. Tesol 
Quart 36(3):453–475 
Weigel M (2023) Amazon’s Trickle-down monopoly: third-party sellers and the transformation of 
small business. Data & Society Research Institute, New York 
Weissert P (2018) KITT is real – How conversational AI changes the way we drive (not only for 
Knight Rider). Internationales Stuttgarter Symposium: Automobilund Motorentechnik 18: 
1463–1463 
Wheeler T (2019) From Gutenberg to Google: the history of our future. Brookings Institution Press, 
Washington DC 
Williams JR et al (2016) A measure whose time has come: formalizing time poverty. Soc Ind Res 
128:265–283 
Wood C et al (2014) Grammatical understanding, literacy and text messaging in school children and 
undergraduate students: a concurrent analysis. Comput Edu 70:281–290 
Zeldman J (2001) Taking your talent to the web. New Riders, Indianapolis 
Zwakman DS et al (2021) Usability evaluation of artiﬁcial intelligence-based voice assistants: the 
case of Amazon Alexa. SN Comput Sci 2

Chapter 3 
Digital Aesthetics in the Public Sphere 
Abstract In this Chapter we explore the fundamental differences in structures, 
goals and dynamics separating digitalised public spaces from private spaces. Five 
are especially important. Namely: inclusivity, longevity, generality, reliability, and 
publicity. The ﬁrst (inclusivity) can be summarised as follows: digital public spaces 
aim to be inclusive. Consumer tech can be—and often is—exclusive. The second 
difference is longevity. It describes the aspiration of public regulation to be as 
durable as possible. Consumer tech instead plans its obsolescence. Third on the 
list is generality. Democratic spaces are designed by governments to serve the 
interests of large and undifferentiated communities. Consumer tech aims primarily 
at targeting individual users. Fourth, virtual democratic spaces differ from consumer 
tech in terms of reliability. Consumers are always offered the chance to opt out and 
adopt cheaper or more functional alternatives. However, citizens are usually not 
offered any alternative to the policy-making tools that are provided by a particular 
governmental authority. That is, they cannot opt out of one tool and then re-engage 
via a different, more useful or attractive digital technology. Fifth and ﬁnally, 
technological forms of power are structured on the principle of secrecy. Public 
powers are instead grounded on the principles of publicity and ofﬁciality. 
Keywords Polarization · Broadcast model · One-to-many approach · Cognitive 
overload · Digital inequality · Sunset clauses · Longevity principle · Programmed 
obsolescence · Legal dynamism · Digital representativeness · Compulsory digitality · 
CivicTech · New feudal society · Democratic dissonance · Onlife · Digital 
undemocratic 
3.1 
The Problem of Replicability 
In Chap. 2 we described the relatively ‘Lo-ﬁ’ attributes of consumer tech. We also 
stressed that this is done intentionally, by design. Finally, we explored the nature and 
consequences of the opportunity cost that consumers of technology agree to pay. 
Let us take our reasoning a step further, by shifting focus from the private to the 
public sector, and introducing two further questions. The ﬁrst regards the impact that 
consumer tech’s design has on individual and collective expectations about
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2023 
G. Sgueo, The Design of Digital Democracy, Springer Textbooks in Law, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-36946-9_3
49

digitalized public services. The second goes into more detail and investigates the 
consequences of the dazzling expectations offered by consumer tech with regard to 
the digital interactions between democratic decision-makers and their constituencies.
50
3
Digital Aesthetics in the Public Sphere
We will begin with an empirical observation. As consumers, we understand and 
accept that digital spaces and connections differ greatly from their ofﬂine counter-
parts, and we behave accordingly—with occasional (albeit signiﬁcant) exceptions. 
Psychologist Robin Dunbar, for instance, demonstrated that the structures of social 
communities and the number of friends people have online tend to resemble closely 
to their ofﬂine counterparts. According to Dunbar, our capacity for friendship online 
is limited to around one hundred and ﬁfty people.1 Just to be clear: it is not true that 
we have more friends online than ofﬂine. We just fool ourselves that we do. 
On the other hand, we are generally not very good at separating the dissimilarities 
dividing digital scenarios. Perhaps more than any other, most people make the 
assumption that digital public spaces are built using the same standards and guide-
lines as digital goods and services, and as a result, they should resemble one another. 
However, this is a fallacious assumption that neglects the existence of fundamen-
tal differences in structures, goals and dynamics between digitalised public and 
private spaces. With that said, I am not implying that no commonalities exist 
between the formats and standards guiding the design of public spaces for digital 
interactions between public regulators and their constituencies and consumer tech’s 
standard design features. What I would like to stress are the problematic aspects 
stemming from an aesthetical dimension of digital democratic interactions that 
mocks-up entirely consumer technology. Therefore, my claim is that ignorance or 
disregard of key design differences separating private from public digital aesthetics 
is a major—if not the primary—cause of dysfunctional digital democracies. 
Why most democratic governments worldwide decide to mimic consumer tech 
may be explained as an attempt to adapt public structures and rules to the pace of 
technological innovation. Chapter 4 will take this point up at length. But ﬁrst we 
need to ponder the reasons that make this approach problematic and ﬂawed. 
There are ﬁve areas in which differences in design separate digital public from 
private spaces. These are: inclusivity, longevity, generality, reliability, and publicity. 
3.2 
The Inclusivity Dilemma 
The ﬁrst and by far most relevant difference between the aesthetics of consumer tech 
and that of digital public spaces is that of inclusivity. It can be summarized as 
follows: digital public spaces, on the one hand, aim to be inclusive, and for this 
reason must necessarily be designed not only to include all potential interests, but 
also do so in a way that is transparent and ﬁnancially sustainable. Consumer tech, on 
the other hand, can be—and often is—exclusive. 
1 Dunbar (2020, 2021); Dunbar et al. (2015).

3.2
The Inclusivity Dilemma
51
This would seem, at least on the surface, to be a simple or even predictable 
difference. In spite of how they are frequently explained to (and understood by) users 
and citizens, it becomes apparent that neither the virtual nor the physical aspects of 
digital aesthetics are necessarily and fundamentally democratic. The terms ‘technol-
ogy’, ‘digital’ and ‘the Internet’ conceal signiﬁcant disparities in accessibility, usage, 
and maturity (the latter refers to the ability of public and private organizations to 
respond and adapt to shifting trends in technology). 
Take the example of the Internet. We said already in Chap. 2 that the Internet gave 
digitally literate individuals direct access to the equivalent of a printing press. 
Thanks to the Internet, information and knowledge have grown unprecedented levels 
globally. Back in 1453, it took forty days for Pope Niccolò V to be informed of the 
fall of Constantinople to the Turks.2 Breaking news events such as the destruction of 
the Twin Towers in 2001, the attacks to Capitol Hill in 2021, or the Russian invasion 
of Ukraine in 2022 were broadcasted on television and online, in real time, all around 
the globe.3 
There are, however, other, less positive, elements to consider. Some were 
discussed in the previous Chapter. Polarization, for instance. The Web has reduced 
our capability to tolerate opposing and challenging viewpoints.4 Another major 
critical aspect of this technology relates to the possibility that it may exacerbate 
the already existing gap between the minority of citizens who care for the quality of 
their ‘informational diet’ and the majority that seems uninterested in the issue. 
Why does this happen? For many, the explanation may be found precisely in the 
undemocratic consequences stemming from the impact of the Internet on informa-
tion consumption. This is a claim worth further clariﬁcation. Media studies separate 
news-consumption in two broad categories. On one side, we have traditional (ana-
log) democratic systems, where citizens consume and share information following a 
linear and unidirectional (top-down) pattern. At the apex of the so-called ‘broadcast 
model’ are located traditional media outlets: print, radio and television. These are 
responsible for the narration and interpretation of events. At the base we ﬁnd the 
readers, listeners, and viewers. They draw on sources passively. Or at the most they 
share and comment on the news with their small circles of contacts.5 
On the other side, we have contemporary (digital) democratic regimes, where the 
informational diet of most citizens follows a circular pattern. This pattern has four 
distinctive features compared to its predecessor. The ﬁrst is that mainstream infor-
mation sources are losing importance. Only a handful of certiﬁed media websites 
have a signiﬁcant audience. Countless websites instead struggle to ﬁnd an audience.6 
This is exacerbated by page rank algorithms, that prioritizes websites that are already 
reputable. 
2 Chanda (2007). 
3 Sgueo (2016). 
4 Hindman (2008). 
5 Mcluhan and Powers (1996); Thompson (1996); Noelle-Neumann (1974); Zuckerman (2019). 
6 Postman (1987) De Mateo et al. (2010); Raboy and Dagenais (1996); Sampson (1996).

52
3
Digital Aesthetics in the Public Sphere
The shrinking number of readers of traditional media is certainly indicative of the 
generalized waning interest in mainstream sources of information. But it does not 
necessarily suggest that the demand for information is shrinking. In fact, the latter is 
intercepted and absorbed by the Web, which replaces the mainstream media as the 
primary source of information for increasingly large segments of the population. 
Neil Postman has argued that the crisis of media is related to the growing demand of 
entertainment by large segments of the public. Seventy-two percent of Europeans 
aged between sixteen and seventy-four years old regularly access online sources of 
information.7 This is the second distinguishing feature of the circular model of 
information transmission. 
The third feature of this model is the superposition between the author and the 
receiver of the news. From the one-to-one approach of the traditional model, digital 
democracies switch to a one-to-many approach.8 Manuel Castells in 1996 argued 
that a communication technology such as the Internet would soon allow anyone to 
communicate information from any location simultaneously.9 Geoff Mulgan took 
Castell’s argument one step further claiming that the growing connectedness of the 
world was among the most important social facts of our times, and that constant 
connectedness would force governments to rethink their policies and structures.10 
Today anyone can, through the Web, share a piece of content with a number of 
individuals that largely exceeds the circle of family members and acquaintances. We 
have already mentioned this in Chap. 2: data sharing occurs very quickly, through 
one million and three hundred thousand kilometers of undersea cables that convey 
ninety-ﬁve percent of global data.11 In the one-to-many model, each of us is 
potentially, at the same time, a reader, a broadcaster and an opinion-maker. 
The last feature of the circular model is the most disturbing: with the breakdown 
of information monopolies, the subsequent multiplication of information sources, 
and the resulting ‘cognitive overload’,12 the irrational inﬁltrates the social fabric, 
diluting the boundaries between what is true, likely, or demonstrably false. 
Prolonged exposure to content that conforms to one’s views encourages denialist 
and polarized opinions.13 According to Nobel prize laureate Robert Shiller, whether 
true or false, stories transmitted by word of mouth, by the news media and, 
increasingly, by social media, may have major impacts on the economy
7 Data provided by Eurostat, Consumption of online news rises in popularity Brussels 2022. 
8 Cassese (2021). 
9 Castells (1996). 
10 Mulgan (1997). 
11 Burnett et al. (2013); Carter (2010); Coffen-Smout and Herbert (2000). 
12 Blair (2010); Orman (2016); Williams (2018). 
13 Bentzen (2018); Gnambs and Markus (2017); Kramer et al. (2014). According to Oxford 
Dictionaries, the use of the term ‘post-truth’, increased by two thousand percent between 2015 
and 2016. Researchers at US RAND corporation use the deﬁnition ‘truth-decay’ to capture four 
related trends: growing disagreement about facts, blurred lines between opinions and facts, the 
increasing inﬂuence of opinions over facts and declining trust in formerly respected sources of 
factual information.

(by driving collective decisions about how and where to invest, and how much to 
spend and save) as well as politics.14 In 2016 for instance, the radicalization of 
positions led the majority of voters to declare themselves in favor of the United 
Kingdom’s (UK) exit from the European Union (EU). For Thomas Nichols we are 
witnessing the ‘death of expertise’.15
3.2
The Inclusivity Dilemma
53
It is not just large technological infrastructures like the Internet that may hide 
troubling inequalities. Even the physical components that enable us to enjoy the 
digital rights we are accorded in democratic systems are profoundly undemocratic, 
as they often result from exploitation of human and natural resources. 
Metals make up around half of the mobile devices and computers that control 
signiﬁcant portions of our social, ﬁnancial, and professional lives. These metals 
come, in part, from advanced economies (North America’s lead and silver, for 
example) and in part from developing countries (South America’s tin and zinc). 
Some minerals, however, are rarer than others. Cobalt is one of those. Scarce in 
nature, difﬁcult to extract and laborious to work with, cobalt is the main component 
in the lithium batteries powering most of the technological products on the market. 
Two-thirds of the world’s reserves of this mineral are concentrated in the Democratic 
Republic of Congo. Surprisingly, however, Congo is not the leading global exporter 
of cobalt. Nearly half of global cobalt exportation comes from China. Through a 
holding of subsidiary companies, China buys almost all of this mineral from Congo, 
processes it, and eventually markets it. In doing so, the Chinese government is able 
to produce more than ten thousand tons of Cobalt annually. This allows China to 
consolidate a monopolistic position in global markets, maximize proﬁt, and retain 
formidable political leverage over large companies, from Apple and Samsung and to 
almost all operators in the automotive sector. 
This is yet another paradox of the digital agora. The commodities through which 
we feed the rhetoric of (more) inclusive and transparent digital democracies narrate 
stories of exploitation, marginalization and prevarication. In the Congo, cobalt 
mining is left in the hands of unskilled miners, many of whom are under the age 
of twelve, who use crude instruments to dig the earth without any safety precautions 
and, most crucially, for a meager daily wage of just one USD and half.16 
To conclude on this point, we should add that the inclusivity challenge currently 
faced by public regulators is not expected to decrease globally. Rather the opposite. 
According to the Global Trend Unit of the European Parliamentary Research 
Service, Public sector’s catch-up in digital technology usage for democratic
14 Shiller (2020). 
15 Nichols (2017); Eyal (2019); White and Taket (1994). 
16 Tech companies are well aware of these facts. Some have even taken countermeasures such as 
auditing the suppliers that make up the cobalt production chain, making ﬁnancial information 
transparent, and supporting humanitarian initiatives against human exploitation. In 2019, the 
nongovernmental organization International Rights Advocates ﬁled a class action lawsuit in the 
US District Court for the District of Columbia against Apple, Google, Dell, Microsoft, and Tesla. 
The claim seeks compensation for forced labor, unjust enrichment, negligent supervision, and 
intentional imposition of emotional distress on fourteen Congolese families.

purposes could indeed incentivize inclusivity, but might also increase inequalities, 
particularly among the lower-skilled, the less educated and less trained.17 Or in 
choosing to favor some design criteria over others, it could further empower 
dominant positions in online spaces, while simultaneously undermine those of 
subordinate actors and minorities. This is typically the case with identiﬁcation 
requirements. The more these requirements are complex and demanding, the more 
they increase the cost of participation, reducing the potential size of the participating 
group.18
54
3
Digital Aesthetics in the Public Sphere
3.3 
The Longevity of Law 
In a famous letter written by Thomas Jefferson to George Madison, Jefferson argued 
that ‘neither the representative of a nation, nor the whole nation itself assembled can 
validly engage debts beyond what they pay in their own time’. In arguing against the 
possibility that a society could make a perpetual constitution (or indeed a perpetual 
law) that binds future generations, Jefferson suggested that every regulation should 
be set to expire within ninety years from its entry into force.19 
There is no denying that Jefferson’ argument is valid from a pragmatic perspec-
tive. Outdated norms are unjust and inefﬁcient. They force future generations to 
abide to behaviors no longer acceptable or sustainable. The problem is that the 
opposite is also true. At least in principle, every public regulation should aspire to 
durability. In a hypothetical democratic society in which no rules would be granted 
with reasonably durable application, chaos would prevail. It is not by chance that 
existing exceptions to the principle of durability are not meant to avoid unjust 
consequences of long-lasting norms. Quite the opposite: these exceptions are 
meant to tighten the legal certainty and the stillness of the rule of law. Look at the 
example of ‘sunset clauses’.20 In a typical application, these clauses complement 
marketing authorizations for new drugs. Permits expire whether, in the three years 
following authorization, the authorized drug has not yet been marketed in the 
country where it was approved. This is a clear attempt to avoid confusion about 
regulatory frameworks and ensure legal certainty. 
17 Norris (2003a); Barber (1998). 
18 Deseriis (2021) elaborates this argument by arguing that authentication systems requiring no 
identiﬁcation are also more inclusive. Yet lack of identiﬁcation makes it difﬁcult for system 
administrators to verify that a user has a right to participate in the process. The decision to favor 
control over inclusivity has clear political implications insofar it affects the size and composition of 
the polity and the mode of interaction. 
19 The Papers of Thomas Jefferson (1958), Thomas Jefferson to James Madison, 15:27, 27 March 
1789 to 30 November 1789. 
20 Kouroutakis 
(2018); 
Ranchordás
 (2015); 
Ranchordás
 (2014); 
Kouroutakis 
and 
Ranchordás  (2016).

3.3
The Longevity of Law
55
We can also put it in another way, and describe provocatively the longevity 
principle in terms of a privilege granted to lawmakers. Public regulators can afford to 
cherish an ambition forbidden to humans: eternity. This is the exact term (‘eternity 
clauses’, to be precise) used by constitutionalists to identify legal provisions 
intended to make amendments to legislation more difﬁcult, or even impossible. 
The German Grundgesetz is a good example. The Basic Law of the Federal Republic 
of Germany protects the principles of popular sovereignty and the democratic, 
federal and social nature of the German Republic from constitutional revision. It 
basically makes them immutable.21 
Let us now move to the market. Perhaps not surprisingly, durability here is just a 
secondary matter, or it is even absent. Look around you. We are surrounded by 
obsolete items. In the fashion industry, collections follow one after another at the 
pace of one every six months. According to the canon imposed by designers and 
clothing companies, the garment you wear today will be outdated in less than a year. 
Schools and academic publishers, to make another example, make a point of 
updating handbooks every year. The volume you bought in the fall will very likely 
have a new chapter added next spring. In the automotive industry, newer models are 
marketed in the yearly-cycles—and the majority of new models give customers not 
much more than cosmetic updates. 
Technology takes this pattern to the extreme. Technological obsolescence is 
based on the idea that digital products become progressively devaluated due to 
technological progress. This means that new technological products will replace 
older ones without these being necessarily dysfunctional.22 For years Microsoft 
updated its operating systems twice every year. In 2021 it announced that the release 
cadence of updates would be set to ‘only’ one every year. On average, companies 
replace their printers every two years. On most modern home computers, security 
software is scheduled to run once daily by default. The list of examples is endless 
and, in the large majority of cases, is motivated by similar marketing purposes. No 
company would produce something so resistant to aging that it would never require 
upgrading or changing. It would be uneconomic. 
What becomes notoriously problematic is ‘programmed obsolescence’ –  i.e., the 
market strategy consisting of deliberately ensuring that versions of a given digital 
product or service will become out of date or useless within a known time period. 
This proactive move aims at bolstering consumers’ demand via programmed need of 
replacements. An early example of such type of obsolescence dates back as far as 
1923, when a few global light bulb manufacturers joined in a cartel to artiﬁcially 
reduce the lifespan of the products they sold. The ‘Phoebus cartel’ artiﬁcially cut the 
life of light bulbs from two thousand and ﬁve hundreds to one thousand hours.23
21 Deutscher Bundestag, Basic law for the federal Republic of Germany, https://www.btg-
bestellservice.de/pdf/80201000.pdf. 
22 Ma (2021); Mellal (2020). 
23 Krajewski (2014); Friedel (2013); Valant (2016); Sasaki and Strausz (2008).

Today, many technology transitions take place in twelve to ﬁfteen years, even when 
these transitions involve hard physical stuff, like factories.24
56
3
Digital Aesthetics in the Public Sphere
While law remains at odds with pre-programmed obsolescence, with the digital 
transition of public services the topic of longevity of rules has become more 
controversial. As scholarly analysis suggests, this condition might soon change. 
Those favorable to re-think the longevity of law in a digital scenario, move from the 
claim that the former has resisted technical transformations longer than most other 
disciplines. 
This argument is advanced from two perspectives. Some authors focus on the 
differences of pace separating the evolution of technology from law. The former 
evolves exponentially, quickly stretching its effects across all areas of human life: 
jobs, politics, diplomacy, economy, social connections. The latter instead evolves 
incrementally. It therefore takes longer (compared to technological innovation) to 
adapt and react to changes.25 This may have unexpected and unwanted conse-
quences. It may take decades, for instance, to get governmental approvals to build 
new infrastructures that are essential for digital transition, often due to the antiquated 
legislation governing such projects. Out-of-date regulations may even favor 
old-school players, rather than new stakeholders. 
This line of reasoning raises an important point. To get an idea of the differential 
of pace between law and technology it is sufﬁcient to remember that it took just ﬁfty 
years to electricity to reach ﬁfty million consumers in the US. The airplane took 
sixty-four years—two more than the automobile. For television and computers, 
twenty-two and fourteen years, respectively. When compared to non-digital 
technologies—which 
can 
take 
multiple 
decades 
or 
centuries 
to 
scale 
up
24 Foster (1985); Genus and Coles (2008); Geels (2005). A technological transition is described as a 
collection of theories regarding how technological innovations occur, the driving forces behind 
them, and how they are incorporated into society. 
25 Azhar (2021); Ford (2009); Raikov (2018); Deudney (2018); Kirwan (2001). The history of 
technology is marked by the ﬁrst use of stone tools by our ancestors, around 3.4 million years ago. It 
took 2.4 million years for them to control ﬁre and use it for cooking. The last 12,000 years – a 
geological period formally known as ‘Holocene’ (later renamed ‘Anthropocene’ by Nobel laureate 
Paul Crutzen) – technological change was faster, but it was still relatively slow: several thousand 
years passed between the invention of agriculture, writing, and the wheel. From 1800 onwards, 
many major inventions rapidly followed one after another. From the ﬁrst ﬂight in human history 
(1903) to the ﬁrst man landing on the moon, only 66 years have passed (data provided by Our World 
in Data: https://ourworldindata.org/technology-long-run). Technological change conﬁrms this 
trend. It took less than a century from the advent to the ﬁrst modern computers to the pervasive 
diffusion of technology at all levels of society. In the public sector, the ﬁrst modern computers were 
used in 1930 to crack cipher codes of foreign governments. By the 1940s computers were used in 
the defense establishments of many countries. Between the 1950s and the 1960s, public adminis-
trations began to use computers to assist in large-scale operations, censuses for instance. As from 
the 1990s ICT technologies explode globally. In the year 2000 Lawrence Lessig (Code is law: on 
liberty in cyberspace, Harvard Magazine, January 1, 2020—https://cartorios.org/wp-content/ 
uploads/2020/11/LESSIG._Lawrence_Code_is_law.pdf) argued that ‘Code is law’, that is to say 
that software, along with laws, social norms and markets, can regulate individual and social 
behavior.

internationally—advances in the digital realm take relatively little time to mature and 
disseminate. From the time the ﬁrst Motorola hit the market—in 1983—to the latest 
iPhone model, the advancement of mobile phone technology has literally hit the 
ground running. It took a mere twenty-three years (1993–2016) for the Internet to go 
from ten percent to eighty-eight percent adoption rate in the US, and a mere seven 
years for the tablet to reach sixty-four percent of adoption in 2017.
3.3
The Longevity of Law
57
In contrast, the period of time needed for the majority of Western democracies to 
adopt basic democratic rights has remained the same across time. Let us take the 
example of the US. It took one hundred and forty-four years for women to be granted 
the right to vote (in 1920); and one hundred and eighty-nine years for black people to 
be granted the ame right (in 1965); over two hundred years were needed to grant 
individuals the right to an abortion before fetal viability (which was overturned in 
2022).26 
The fact that law progresses at a much slower pace than technological innovation 
can be seen as the main reason behind the many failed attempts to regulate technol-
ogy in an efﬁcient manner. Cybersecurity and cryptocurrencies are just two exam-
ples. Both are characterized by continuously evolving technology and related 
challenges, partially addressed by a plethora of regulations, legal standards and 
soft law. ‘Normative hypertrophy’, as someone named it, is a well-known issue at 
the EU level.27 
There is, however, another way to look at the same problem and consists of 
stressing the potential beneﬁts that are consequential to the rapid expansion of 
computational approaches into the creation and implementation of law. The theory 
of ‘legal dynamism’ suggests that a law, by means of computational tools, can be 
expressed either as a static rule statement, or as a dynamic object that includes 
system performance goals, metrics for success, and the ability to adapt the law in 
response to its performance. The regulation of digital assets presents an opportunity 
for dynamic regulation, as for instance with central bank digital currencies and 
money-laundering.28 
26 Coen-Sanchez et al. (2022); Sun (2022). The decision overturned the longstanding Constitutional 
right to abortion and eliminated federal standards on abortion access that had been established by 
earlier decisions in the cases, Roe v. Wade and Planned Parenthood v. Casey. 
27 Data provided by LSE Blog, Too much EU interference? A look at the areas where critics say the 
single market overreaches itself, January 28, 2016 (https://blogs.lse.ac.uk/brexit/2016/01/28/too-
much-eu-interference-a-look-at-the-areas-where-critics-say-the-single-market-overreaches-itself/). 
The ‘Over Regulatocracy’ hypothesis, in the words of the Joint Research Centre of the European 
Commission (Vesnic Alujevic et al. 2019), consists of over-protective approaches, which risk 
suffocating innovation. The ﬁrst to be concerned by over-regulation are designers and developers. 
They see excessive legislation as an obstacle to the development of disruptive and creative 
approaches. 
28 Mahari et al. (2022).

58
3
Digital Aesthetics in the Public Sphere
Legal dynamism proposes design frameworks for human-machine systems based 
on ﬁve components: speciﬁcation of system performance goals, testing, robust 
adaptive system design, continuous auditing, and reporting of suspicious transac-
tions. This also helps to better seize and appreciate the variations of policy actors’ 
perceptions of what counts as evidence. Eleanor MacKillop and James Downe 
described how these perceptions may change as careers progress, and are inﬂuenced 
by the roles taken on by policy-makers, the organizations they work in, and the 
policy issues they work on.29 
3.4 
Generality Vs Singularity 
The third characteristic separating the design of digital government from consumer 
tech is generality. The underlying concept is that norms (with occasional exceptions) 
are designed to serve the interest of large and undifferentiated communities rather 
than targeting individual stakeholders. Consequently, the digital spaces within which 
interactions between governments and stakeholders unfold ought to be designed to 
welcome all potential stakeholders. 
Private operators in the digital markets follow the opposite logic. Human atten-
tion is treated as a commodity. As we saw in Chap. 2, microtargeting, search engine 
ordering, curated newsfeeds and automated recommendation systems are designed 
in accordance to the principle of singularity, to maximize user attention and satisfy 
individual preferences.30 
With that in mind, we should also stress the fact that despite the metric of 
singularity and digital democratic spaces being at odds with each other, reality has 
often returned a very different picture. Many experiments carried out by democratic 
governments to enhance participation through digital channels have failed to meet 
expectations, proving exclusionary and self-selective. Digital consultations neither 
guarantee that the number of participants is higher than in participatory processes 
carried out in an analog format, nor do they offer guarantees of representativeness of 
all interests. They pose, if anything, unknowns (heretofore unseen) issues of regu-
latory-capture,31 information systems’ security (in 2022, ransomware attacks are
29 MacKillop and Downe (2022). 
30 Zuboff and Rigotti (2021); Parisier (2011); Wu (2017); Fogg (2022); Berdichevsky and 
Neuenschwander (1999); Hamari et al. (2014); Johnson et al. (2002); Xu (2021). 
31 Easton (1965); Drutman (2015).

estimated to have caused six trillion USD of losses globally),32 as well as of 
reliability of digital platforms.33
3.4
Generality Vs Singularity
59
Of all these problems, the most troubling is the so-called ‘problem of digital 
representativeness’.34 In democratic consultations it frequently occurs in the form of 
a clear predominance of some categories of individuals over others. More men than 
women, for example. Or more elders than young participants. Or, again, more 
Caucasians than ethnic minorities. This is a familiar issue in online consultations 
organized by the European Commission in conjunction with the presentation of new 
regulatory initiatives. These regularly receive solicitations from a narrow pool of 
interests, always the same.35 
So, at least for the moment, full digital inclusion of all stakeholders remains more 
a theoretical than a realistic scenario. The ‘Future of Government’ simulation funded 
by the European Commission between 2018 and 2019 on future governmental 
models, for instance, imagined situation scenarios including the increase of AI in
32 According to the consultancy AAG (https://aag-it.com/the-latest-ransomware-statistics/), 2021 
saw 623.3 million ransomware attacks (ransomware is a type of malware that blocks a victim’s 
access to their data until a ransom is paid) worldwide, an increase of one hundred and ﬁve percent 
over 2020 ﬁgures. Also in 2021, more than a third of organizations globally suffered an attempted 
ransomware attack. Despite a drop of twenty-two percentage points of ransomware attacks in 2022, 
attack methods evolved from ‘traditional’ ransomware techniques such as encrypting target data 
and charging victims a fee for the decryption key, to so-called ‘double-extortion’ schemes. 
33 Cingolani (2020) compared four hundred and sixty-ﬁve open government platforms operating in 
eighty-seven countries, concluding that while open code remains the potentially most effective 
standard, it hides reliability and durability pitfalls whose solution requires careful planning and 
constant updates. 
34 Lijphart (1997); Norris (2003b). Studies on participation separate so-called ‘hard-core partici-
pants’ from ‘unqualiﬁed masses’. The former category includes people who participate a lot. 
Thanks to their commitment, they become extraordinary experts on speciﬁc issues and dominate 
participation. They are, however, a minority. Only those citizens with preferential access to three 
fundamental resources – time, money and knowledge—can be included in this category. The hard-
core participant’s identikit is easy to sketch: male, college-educated, middle-aged and wealthier 
than the average citizen. Unqualiﬁed masses’ category includes citizens who participate occasion-
ally, who generally do not commit for longer periods, and show little interest in engaging in 
conventional forms of participation. They include women, racial and linguistic minorities, and 
often people with poor education. Segall et al. (1996) explain that research based on sample surveys 
is also frequently affected by representativity biases. Questionnaires are answered primarily by 
those who have the time and resources to participate. In jargon, they are referred to by the acronym 
‘WEIRD’, meaning Western, Educated, Industrialized, Rich and Democratic. There are cases in 
which WEIRD components reached eighty percent of the total participants. In such cases, the data 
collected through the survey may bring the authors of the study to draw conclusions that are wrong 
or out of sync with reality. 
35 Quittkat (2001); Alemanno (2020); Kohler-Koch (2010); Eising (2007). According to the 2019 
audit conducted by the EU Court of Auditors (Special Report no. 14/2019: ‘Have your say!’: 
Commission’s public consultations engage citizens, but fall short of outreach activities, 2019 – 
https://www.eca.europa.eu/en/Pages/DocItem.aspx?did=50895) the average participation to a 
Commission’s consultation ranges between 500 responses (2015–2016) and 2000 responses 
(2017–2018) each. On average, just over a third of the sample of consultations examined received 
over 1000 responses, while over a third received under 75.

government and the concept of citizen-centrism resulting in a new design of 
government. In this scenario, open governments had a real-time understanding of 
socio-economic problems, and public services could be offered predictively and 
individualized to citizens.36
60
3
Digital Aesthetics in the Public Sphere
This explains why, along with the progress made with the digitalization of public 
services, governments worldwide are investing resources to train citizens with 
limited or no digital skills to enable them to interact digitally with public adminis-
trations. The key precondition of digital government is that everyone must have 
equal access to and use of digital government in order for it to be effective. 
3.5 
Reliability and Digital Governance 
A fourth difference between digital democratic spaces and consumer tech is reliabil-
ity. Consumers are always offered the chance to opt out and adopt cheaper or more 
functional alternatives. A glaring example of this was encountered in Chap. 2, when 
speed and simplicity were identiﬁed as two of the key design characteristics of 
consumer tech. Consumers that are forced to wait for a response from customer 
service, or to buy a product, would be more likely to look for a competitor that offers 
a better experience. Already in 2012 American Express quantiﬁed as ﬁfty percent the 
quota of Americans who had scrapped a planned purchase because of a bad customer 
experience, and seventy-four percent the number of those who had switched brands 
due to the difﬁculties in ﬁnalizing the purchasing process.37 
It should be said, for the sake of completeness, that exceptions apply to the 
unlimited freedom choice of digital consumers. Recent studies have highlighted how 
consumers may become entrapped into subtle forms of ‘compulsory digitality’. Adi 
Kuntsman and Esperanza Miyake explored opt-out options of digital products and 
described how these may be hidden or obfuscated by mazes of confusing or overly 
complicated information, terms of service and instructions.38 In such cases, opting 
out from consumer tech may be increasingly difﬁcult, if not impossible, for users. 
Suppose now, for simplicity, that digital consumers enjoy the right to opt-out in 
full. What would be their options? As famously pointed out by Albert Hirschman, 
consumers have two ways to express discontent with organizations with which they 
do business. They can either voice their complaints, while remaining customers, in 
the hope that the situation will improve, or they can switch to competing products. It 
is interesting to note that, according to Hirschman, the latter option is also available
36 Vesnic Alujevic et al. (2019); Vesnic Alujevic and Scapolo (2019). 
37 Data provided by Harris Interactive, Costumer Experience Impact Report, 2012 (https://www. 
slideshare.net/RightNow/2011-customer-experience-impact-report/6). 
38 Kunstsman and Miyake (2022).

to citizens and interest groups in a given political system.39 However, he adds, the 
decision to exit from the government is ‘deplorably’ infrequent.
3.5
Reliability and Digital Governance
61
If we apply Hirschman’s theory to the domain of digital technology and public 
service, we can argue two things. The ﬁrst is encouraging. Digital technology has de 
facto expanded both the number and the range of possibilities for citizens to voice 
against public sector organizations.40 In the current historical phase, we are 
witnessing the global echo of new digital civic movements, which is even more 
surprising considering that these movements lack structures and operate in complete 
informality. #BlackLivesMatter, #Metoo, #IceBucketChallenge, and #Friday-
sforFuture, to name some of the best known, are movements without hierarchies, 
headquarters, or membership. Initiatives as virtual as the symbols by which they are 
represented, yet celebrated for their potential to decisively affect public decisions, 
globally.41 Some argue that Twitter is to be credited if African dictatorships have 
fallen during the ‘Arab Spring’.42 The Turkish uprisings of 2013, as well as the 
‘Occupy Wall Strett’ protests that begun in Zuccotti Park in New York in 2011 (and 
rapidly expanded globally) were bolstered by social networks.43 Multinationals such 
as Netﬂix have rescinded multi-million-dollar contacts with world-class actors as a 
result of the pressure exerted through major digital platforms by millions of indi-
viduals from around the world.44 
We can even go as far as to say that, unlike their analogic counterpart, within 
digital spaces, silence and non-participation may empower citizens, as far as we 
conceptualize and describe them as passive forms of engagement.45 
However, none of these considerations reverse our initial assumption. There is no 
solid alternative for citizens to opt out from participating in policy-making via digital 
tools and re-engaging via a different, yet more functional or better designed, 
digital tool. 
Take the case of digital health. It has been demonstrated that privately owned 
health apps intertwined with the UK National Health Service may help to reduce the
39 Hirshman (1972). 
40 Thomas Schrepel (2020) argued that blockchain’s attributes allow for the creation of an ecosys-
tem in which the rule of law cannot be enforced as easily as in the real-space. As a result, an 
individual may be offered new possibilities to escape, at least for certain digital activities. 
41 Brannen et al. 2020; Jackson et al. (2020). Between 2009 and 2019 mass protests increased 
annually by an average of eleven and half percentage points. Samuel Brannen suggests that, in stark 
opposition to claims that democratic values are in decay, these mobilized citizens are the proof that 
not only does global demand for participation exist, it is thriving. Blossoming engagement practices 
only need fertile ground to grow and develop. 
42 Lynch (2013); Bruns et al. (2013); Axford (2011); Isherwood (2008); Lotan et al. (2011). 
43 Tufekci (2017); Kumkar (2019). 
44 The reference is to the case of Kevin Spacey, star of the TV series ‘House of Cards’, produced by 
Netﬂix. In 2018, the company terminated Spacey’s contract following sexual harassment allega-
tions made against him by a former member of the editorial staff. The Guardian, Netﬂix ﬁres Kevin 
Spacey from House of Cards, 4 November, 2017 (https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2017/ 
nov/04/netﬂix-ﬁres-kevin-spacey-from-house-of-cards). 
45 Pena Gangadharan (2021).

workload of health professionals and enhance affordable services to patients. Yet, at 
the same time, the terms of engagement of such apps are difﬁcult to patients as well 
as health workers to understand, hampering opt-out options for the former.46
62
3
Digital Aesthetics in the Public Sphere
To conclude on reliability, a provocative remark: by observing the interplay 
between technology and public services, we come to understand that the political 
leverage of citizens stemming from disappointing or unsatisfactory experiences with 
public administrations, compared to that of consumers, is qualitatively inferior. 
3.6 
Digital Publicity 
The ﬁfth and ﬁnal difference between consumer tech and digital public spaces can be 
found in the dichotomy between the secrecy that dominates in consumer tech and the 
publicity that characterizes public spaces. 
Digital private markets are based on the principle of secrecy. What we describe as 
technological power is generally an ecosystem of private powers, occasionally 
partnering with public powers, but remaining independent from the latter. These 
ecosystems are disaggregated and horizontal, contrary to the vertical and aggregated 
structures of power characterizing the modern state. 
Public powers are grounded on the principle of publicity and ofﬁciality. Pierre 
Bourdieau describes the State as an institutional theatre staging truth based on a 
canon of ofﬁciality.47 Civic participation itself has been compared by Matthew Elliot 
to a theatrical piece: ‘a highly stylized process for displaying in a formal way the 
essence of something which in real life takes place in other venues’.48 
But we need to put this statement into perspective, as we have already done with 
the other principles. Digital democracy is also data-consuming. Public services that 
are more targeted, customized, cheaper and faster are, in fact, data-intensive. ‘Cit-
izen-scoring’ systems are a case in point. Described as systems to categorize, 
segment, rate and rank segments of the population according to a variety of datasets, 
with the goal of allocating services and identifying risks, such systems are increas-
ingly being used to enhance civic engagement. While governmental approaches 
vary, they often lack adequate regulatory frameworks, posing serious threats to 
citizens’ privacy.49 
Privacy is further threatened by the growing number of links between public 
organizations and tech companies applying emerging technologies to innovative 
policy-making techniques—a ﬁeld known as ‘CivicTech’. Today the largest and 
most valuable pool of data is no longer held by governments but by private 
companies. Civic technology provokes mixed reactions. According to some, it is
46 Kunstsman and Miyake (2022). 
47 Bourdieau (2015). 
48 Elliott (1992). 
49 Dencik et al. (2018).

the ideal solution to the problems of democracies: it creates a channel for conveying 
citizens’ demands in an orderly manner to institutional venues, which, in turn, 
beneﬁt in terms of transparency and shared decision-making.50 Mobilize, to make 
an example, offers (for a fee) the most ﬁtting strategy for mobilizing new connec-
tions within the framework of an advocacy strategy.51 The French Parlement et 
Citoyens was also created to facilitate contacts between French political representa-
tives and their constituencies, to discuss new legislative projects and proposals.52 
IssueVoter and Pop Vox collect and sort information related to US decision-making 
processes (both federal and local) to make them more transparent and accessible to 
civic stakeholders.53 Others have looked at the economic opportunities offered by 
the civic technology sector. The European market for participation and deliberation 
technologies, for instance, in 2022 was estimated to be worth €100 million, and it is 
expected to reach €300 million by the year 2028. 54
3.6
Digital Publicity
63
While beneﬁts of civic tech initiatives are tangible and important, the issues raised 
by skeptics are not being offered comprehensive answers. Critics question the 
economic sustainability of these initiatives.55 Indeed, we are talking of entrepre-
neurial activities that, while not necessarily aiming for proﬁt, at least aim to become 
sustainable. Hence the question: to what extent is the quest for ﬁnancial self-
sufﬁciency an obstacle to the lasting impact that civic technologies can have on 
democratic processes? 
The ﬁgure is clear: ninety percent of civic startups ‘shut down’ in less than ten 
years. It is undeniable, then, that sustainability becomes a decisive element in 
ensuring the longevity of participation rights. In a nutshell, users are allowed to 
participate as long as generous investors are willing to support the civic technologies 
that convey the demand for participation. However, the moment in which we
50 Jäske and Ertiö (2019); Gilman and Peixoto (2019); Mellon et al. (2022). Brabham (2008) places 
the technology/democracy pair within the broader framework of civic crowdsourcing activities. 
Other scholars (Scholz 2014) recognize it as an evolution of the ‘platform cooperativism’ conceived 
by Trevor Smith (https://medium.com/@trebors/platform-co-operativism-vs-the-sharing-economy-
2ea737f1b5ad), or the ‘open cooperativism’ theorized by Michel Bauwens. Among the most widely 
accepted taxonomies of the Civic Tech sector is the one proposed by Tom Steinberg (2013), who 
proposes a breakdown into four segments https://www.mysociety.org/2013/04/09/what-should-we-
do-about-the-naming-deﬁcitsurplus/). Another classic distinction was made by Michael Stempeck 
(2016) (http://blogs.microsoft.com/on-the-issues/2016/04/27/towards-taxonomy-civic-technology/ 
#sm.0000p1uccywuddxxvc922puxz90gz) and separates ‘conformist’, ‘reformist’ and ‘transforma-
tive’ projects. The philanthropic ﬁrm Omidyar Network (2016) also distinguishes between ‘Citizen 
to Citizen’, ‘Citizen to Government’ and ‘Governmental Technology’. 
51 https://www.mobilize.io. Since 2016, there has also been Mobilize America, a spin-off designed 
for political mobilization, organizing and managing the voluntary contribution of voters during 
election campaigns. 
52 https://purpoz.com. 
53 https://issuevoter.org; https://popvox.com. 
54 The Innovation in Politics Institute GmbH (2023). 
55 Spada and Ryan (2017).

legitimize the expansion or compression of democratic spaces based on the avail-
ability of private funding, we end up placing an unacceptable condition on the 
maturation of a digital democracy: that of capital.
64
3
Digital Aesthetics in the Public Sphere
Then there is a second problem related to the use of civic technologies. Are we 
sure, critics ask, that these initiatives ensure that everyone has an equal chance to 
participate? Here again the answer is negative, for two reasons. The ﬁrst is well-
known (and cross-cutting with respect to technology): the digital skills and culture 
gap. So it may be that some beneﬁt from the use of civic technologies, to the 
detriment of others who, marginalized, see their interests further removed from the 
center of gravity of public decision-making. Other perplexities emerge when one 
looks more closely at the usage habits of the audience of adherents to these 
applications. Namely, it happens that among those who access civic technologies, 
inevitably some are more active than others. This is not necessarily a problem, 
except when it returns a result that, once again, sounds paradoxical: exclusion rather 
than social inclusion. 
Let us take an example. In 2012, the city of Boston launched a trial with the 
mobile application ‘StreetBump’.56 Through this, residents could report road surface 
disruptions to the administration. The reports activate a team of municipal techni-
cians who intervene on the spot, remedying the disruption. All ﬁne, on the surface. 
The city administration soon realized that the reports came almost exclusively from 
residents of afﬂuent, predominantly white, male neighborhoods. An application that 
was created primarily to reduce social inequalities stratiﬁed in the urban fabric had 
ended up exacerbating them. This demonstrates two facts: ﬁrst, technological plug-in 
is not enough to smooth out the imbalances that plague a community; and second, 
unequal access to and use of technology are problems with respect to which the 
digital democracy offering still fails to experiment with adequate solutions. 
Let us conclude on this point with a reference to Bruce Schneier from the Harvard 
Law School. According to Schneier, the pervasiveness of tech companies in our lives 
has created a new feudal society. In his view, most of us sacriﬁce complete control 
over our data and pledge allegiance to large corporations. These corporations, in 
turn, protect us from security threats. The use of digital tools has increased the 
control of data by governments and decreased citizens’ control of their privacy.57 
3.7 
Democratic Dissonances 
To recap: the standard design of consumer tech and that of public spaces are at odds 
with each other. They differ of various levels: the openness and accessibility to 
stakeholders, the longevity and reliability of the service offered to users, and the
56 Brisimi et al. (2016); Carrera et al. (2013). 
57 Schneier (2015a, b).

publicity versus the secrecy of information hared between citizens/users and deci-
sion-makers.
3.7
Democratic Dissonances
65
These differences, put together, may help us to answer the two questions posed at 
the beginning of this Chapter: the ﬁrst concerned with the impact that consumer 
tech’s design has on individual and collective expectations about digitalized public 
services; the second related to the consequences of the dazzling expectations offered 
by consumer tech with regard to the digital interactions between democratic 
decision-makers and their constituencies. 
Answering both questions lead us to a paradoxical outcome: citizens are less (not 
more) willing to interact with digitalized public powers. Taken further: the most 
advanced and potentially empowering technologies ever utilized by public regula-
tors are returning the poorest results ever recorded in terms of interest, engagement 
and retention. Or, to put it more optimistically, they are discouraging meaningful 
participation from citizens. According to traditional scholarly analysis, such political 
apathy and citizen non-involvement in state affairs are just another sign of demo-
cratic decline or recession.58 
This paradox is common across countries, sectors and levels of administration. 
Take Europe as an example. As of 2019, sixty-four percent of European citizens had 
used an online public service at least once.59 In 2013, this ﬁgure was only forty-one 
percent. When asked to comment on their experience, however, many reported 
poorly designed websites, unnecessarily complex procedures and problems with 
timing of the digitalized procedures. 
It is under this premise that many voice concerns related to the digitalization of 
civic life along with persistent differences in access to technology. To borrow from 
Roberto Garganella, the discrepancy between our expectations of (digital) demo-
cratic institutions and traditional political behaviors results in a ‘democratic disso-
nance’.60 Thus, building on the assumption that unequal participation inevitably 
leads to unequal outcomes, it could be argued that this democratic dissonance may 
end up exacerbating existing political inequalities. If, the argument goes, online 
participants are unrepresentative of the population, then participation outcomes will 
beneﬁt groups who participate and disadvantage those who do not—sometimes at 
the peril of ‘empowering the already empowered’. 
Interestingly, studies that put this critical assumption to test, could not ﬁnd a 
direct correlation between unequal online participation and unequal political
58 Crozier et al. (1975); Verba et al. (1995); Putnam (1995); Diamond (2015); Hay (2007). Peter 
Mair (2013) described as a ‘void’ both the space left by a global political class that was abandoning 
its representative function and was retreating into the institutions of the state, and that left by 
citizens who were consequently retreating into apathy. Roberto Foa and Yascha Mounk (2016) 
suggest that across the West the percentage of people who say it is ‘essential’ to live in a democracy 
has plummeted. People, and especially millennials, have become ‘more cynical about the value of 
democracy as a political system, less hopeful that anything they do might inﬂuence public policy, 
and more willing to express support for authoritarian alternatives’. 
59 Data provided by European Commission, The Digital Economy Society Index (DESI), 2020. 
60 Garganella (2022).

representation. Returning for a moment to the civic tech debate, there is a study 
published by the World Bank Group in 2022 that examined four civic tech models: 
digital participatory budgeting in Brazil, constitutional crowdsourcing in Iceland, 
online citizen reporting in the UK, and online petitioning across one hundred and 
thirty-two countries. The study shows that none of these models reﬂect the typical 
assumption that inequalities in who participates translate directly into inequalities in 
who beneﬁts from the policy outcome. The authors of the study make the suggestion 
that technological platforms be considered political institutions that encourage 
certain types of behavior while discouraging others. They also support moving 
beyond the demographics of participants to assess the true extent of inclusive 
participatory and deliberative democracy practices.61
66
3
Digital Aesthetics in the Public Sphere
3.8 
Post-Consultation Feedback. The Case of the French 
Convention Citoyenne Pour le Climat 
The divergence of expectations is particularly evident in the case of online consul-
tations. As reported in the Digital Economy Society Index, the divergence of 
expectations in the case of online consultations was particularly evident. Complaints 
were made that consultations were often occurring late in the legislative process as 
well as disappointment regarding feedback.62 
The 2019/2020 French Convention citoyenne pour le climat is a good example in 
this regard. The Grand Débat was held in France from January to April 2019, led by 
two ministers and a Collège des Garants and organized by a dedicated taskforce 
(Mission Grand Débat). The initiative made use of six different and complementary 
formats, including a web platform that received over one million and ﬁve hundred 
thousand contributions from citizens. More precisely, one million and nine hundred 
thousand online contributions were made, ten thousand and one hundred and thirty-
four local meetings were held, over sixteen thousand municipalities reviewed sub-
missions from participating citizens, and twenty-seven thousand and three hundred 
and seventy-four letters and emails were received. The twenty-one Grand Débat 
conferences, in particular, were divided into three categories: thirteen were held in 
the regions of mainland France, seven overseas, and one at the national level 
speciﬁcally for young people. Events took place simultaneously over two weekends 
(15–16 and 22–23 March) and followed the same structure, with task that included 
the development of a joint diagnosis to the presentation of collective proposals, 
alternating between group and plenary work, with the help of facilitators. 
All of these processes were designed with the help of participatory democracy 
experts, and the discussion methodologies were prepared through a long develop-
ment process involving, in the case of the Grand Débat, the members of the Collège
61 Mellon et al. (2022). 
62 Data provided by European Commission Digital Economy and Society Index 2022 (https:// 
digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/library/digital-economy-and-society-index-desi-2022).

des Garants, who oversaw ensuring compliance with the key principles of the 
debate.
3.9
The Aftermath of the Conference on the Future of Europe
67
The outcomes, however, were not positive. According to one hundred and ﬁfty 
randomly picked members from the public who participated in the consultation, the 
French government did not perform well in ‘implementing’ any of the topics on 
which the citizen’s climate convention was structured. Citizens expressed dissatis-
faction with governmental performance in realizing the six main topics of the 
Convention (i.e., housing, transport, food, consumption of natural resources, pro-
duction, and work), rating it with an average of six out of ten points. Citizens’ 
discontent was motivated by the choice made by the French government to ignore or 
dilute certain proposals. A survey found that the wider population who had partic-
ipated in the consultation supported all but one of the one hundred and forty-nine 
proposals.63 
It is arguable that in the French case the trust relationship between citizens and the 
public administration was damaged instead of being reinforced by the digital 
interactions between the former and the latter. 
3.9 
The Aftermath of the Conference on the Future 
of Europe 
The French Convention citoyenne pour le climat is not an isolated case. Another 
recent example we could take to clarify how insufﬁcient feedback impacts on the 
legitimacy of governing institutions and citizens’ trust is provided by the Conference 
on the Future of Europe (CoFoE). 
It is important to keep in mind that CoFoE was designed with the intention that it 
be a quick and effective participation process from the moment it began on May 
9, 2021.64 Sufﬁce to say that in his introductory speech to the European Parliament 
in Strasburg, France President Emanuel Macron insisted that democracy be fast and 
efﬁcient, suggesting that the authority of democracy is ‘the only answer to author-
itarianism’, and this authority ‘can only be won through efﬁciency and speed’.65 
Despite a number of interruptions and changes introduced while the consulting 
process was still ongoing, and some ambiguities related to its outcomes (a ﬁnal
63 Data provided by Réseau action climat, Sondage: Des Galois pas si réfractaires à l’action 
climatique, Paris 2020 (https://reseauactionclimat.org/sondage-des-gaulois-pas-si-refractaires-a-
laction-climatique/). 
64 The launch of the Conference was postponed one year due to the pandemic. 
65 The speech is available at this website: https://multimedia.europarl.europa.eu/it/package/ 
conference-on-future-of-europe-inaugural-event_18901.

report containing forty-nine proposals was presented to the European Parliament, the 
Council of the European Union and the European Commission66 ) CoFoE was 
welcomed with enthusiasm by the large majority of Europeans,67 and the aftermath 
of CoFoE was characterized by raising citizens’ expectations for greater citizen 
participation in EU decision-making. According to a poll conducted by the CoFoE 
secretariat, more than seventy percent of Europeans expect a more regular and 
meaningful involvement with the EU level of government.
68
3
Digital Aesthetics in the Public Sphere
This enthusiasm was partly encouraged by the EU institutions—both the 
European Commission and European Parliament’s follow-up documents called for 
continuous involvement of citizens’ participation and consultation in the decision-
making processes of the Union68 —and partly sustained by a lively scholarly and 
policy debate on how the experience of CoFoE should be leveraged and transformed 
into a more structural participatory process, operating beyond electoral moments and 
complementing existing initiatives like the European Citizens’ Initiative (ECI) and 
the Public consultations held by the European Commission.69 
However, already one year and half after the conclusion of the consultation 
process, it is still unclear how to effectively harness the potential of this innovative 
participatory democracy experience and incorporate the views of European citizens 
into a structural procedure that may change the course of Europe. 
This is due in part to legal arguments (although in principle the forty-nine 
citizens’ proposals have not been ruled out, far-reaching reforms do not seem likely 
to take place within the current set-up of the conference70 ) and in part to political 
arguments. As noted by the Council of the European Union, CoFoE does not fall 
within the aim of Article 48 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the EU.71 
66 Data provided by Conference on the Future of Europe, report on the ﬁnal outcome, Brussels, 2022 
(https://www.europarl.europa.eu/resources/library/media/20220509RES29121/20220509RES2 
9121.pdf). 
67 Data provided by Eurobarometer, Special Eurobarometer 500 – Future of Europe, European 
Union 2021 (https://www.europarl.europa.eu/at-your-service/ﬁles/be-heard/eurobarometer/2021/ 
future-of-europe-2021/en-report.pdf). 76% agreed that the conference represents ‘signiﬁcant pro-
gress for democracy’ within the bloc. The strongest levels of agreement with that statement were in 
Ireland (90%), Sweden and Belgium (both 88%), and Lithuania (87%). On the opposite side of the 
spectrum, we ﬁnd Latvia (61%), Romania (67%), Spain (70%), France (72%) and Estonia (73%). 
When asked whether they would be willing to take part in this democratic exercise, half the 
respondents said they would do so ‘as a citizen’. However, again, there is a wide gap between 
EU countries in that regard. 81% of Irish would like to attend, followed by Belgians (64%), 
Luxembourgish (63%) and Slovenians (63%). Citizens in Portugal (34%), Bulgaria (34%) and 
Finland (38%) showed the least interest in it. 
68 European Commission, Communication on the Conference on the Future of Europe, Putting 
Vision into Concrete Action, COM(2022) 404 ﬁnal, Brussels, 17 June 2022; European Parliament, 
Resolution of 9 June 2022 on the call for a Convention for the revision of the Treaties, 2022/2705 
(RSP). 
69 Kotanidis (2022); Sgueo (2022); Fabbrini (2020); Pirozzi (2021); Johansson and Raunio (2022); 
Alemanno (2022); Von Ondarza and Ålander (2021). 
70 Von Ondarza and Ålander (2021). 
71 Council of the European Union, Conference on the Future of Europe – revised Council position, 
5911/21, Brussels, 3 February 2021.

3.10
The Paradox of Digital Democracy: The ‘Digital Undemocratic’
69
3.10 
The Paradox of Digital Democracy: The ‘Digital 
Undemocratic’ 
To sum-up, there are three reasons that may explain the paradox of highly innovative 
public decision-making and the underwhelming response (both qualitatively and 
quantitatively) or total disengagement of citizens. 
We encountered the ﬁrst already when we described the possibility of undemo-
cratic consequences stemming from technologies like the Internet or mobile phones. 
The second reason is that in digital democratic spaces individuals’ personas as 
both citizens and consumers overlap, as do their expectations. This is an increasingly 
common situation. Luciano Floridi claims that as we move into the future, the less 
sense it will make to separate ofﬂine and online spheres. ‘Onlife’, as Floridi names it, 
is increasingly a status of hyper connection, in which we ﬁnd ourselves holding 
multiple identities at the same time, both virtual and real. Onlife, which was later 
turned into a manifesto,72 builds upon four major cultural and societal transforma-
tions: the ﬁrst and the second consist of the blurring of the distinction between reality 
and virtuality, on the one hand, and of the distinction between human, machine and 
nature, on the other hand. The third transformation addresses the reversal from 
information scarcity to information abundance. The fourth and ﬁnal transformation 
concerns the shift from the primacy of stand-alone things, properties, and binary 
relations to the primacy of interactions, processes and networks. 
While Floridi looks at multiple and overlapping online and ofﬂine identities, 
network studies have focused on relatedness and intersectionality as distinctive 
features of identity. This is the third cause explaining the digital undemocratic. 
We introduced it earlier, in Chap. 2 (when we discussed how social relations evolve 
on social media) and in then again in the present Chapter, in connection to the 
concept of reliability. 
Social identities are described by social-network theorists as traits of personality. 
These traits are deﬁned primarily by membership in communities (examples include 
our professional sphere, ethnic background, religious and political beliefs), by social 
categories (such as race, gender, or class) or by our interpersonal relations (such as 
being married, a parent, a friend or a neighbor).73 Within the digital sphere, network 
identities are often celebrated for being the engine of social and political movements 
with great impact on policy-making. Networked identities are based on weak—as 
opposed to strong—social ties. In classic theory about tie strength, information ﬂows 
through social ties of two strengths: weak ties that are used infrequently but bridge 
distant groups that tend to possess diverse knowledge; and strong ties, that are used 
frequently, knit communities together, and provide dependable sources of support.74 
72 Floridi (2014). 
73 Wallace (2019). 
74 Granovetter (1973).

70
3
Digital Aesthetics in the Public Sphere
Unconventional forms of engagement are built on weak ties. With family mem-
bers, friends and colleagues, we are linked by strong ties. Weak ties, explains Clay 
Shirky, differ from these in two fundamental ways.75 First, they are activated by 
necessity and, second, they encourage tiny acts of participation, like sharing text 
messages or images relating to a political issue or signing up to a digital campaign. 
None of these acts, taken alone, is capable of impacting on social or political 
discourse. Collectively, however, weak ties may be extremely impactful. They 
may enable large crowds to disseminate information, expose violations, or mobilize 
for a cause. Furthermore, the number of individuals that can be mobilized online is 
potentially unlimited. The cognitive limit to the number of people with whom one 
can maintain stable social relationships identiﬁed by Robin Dunbar does not seem to 
apply to weak ties. 
Having acknowledged unconventional forms of participation, academics have 
coined new terms to describe unconventionally engaged citizens. Ethan Zuckerman 
names them ‘participatory civics’.76 Stephan Coleman uses the deﬁnition of ‘auton-
omous citizens’.77 The ‘communities of practice’ theorized by Jean Lave and 
Etienne Wenger consist of groups of citizens collaborating to develop ideas on 
issues of common concern.78 Finally, the ‘communities of trust’ described by 
Irene Wu exchange information and ideas through the internet, which in a later 
stage are the subject of advocacy towards established powers.79 
More recently, research for policy has highlighted the importance of converging 
identities and values between citizens and policy-makers. Policymaker could 
enhance impact of policies if they addressed citizens’ values and used them 
ethically.80 
This raises again the fundamental question of how digital democratic spaces 
should be designed. So, as a preliminary reaction to this question, we should 
acknowledge the limits of digital democracy. Digital democratic spaces can only 
meet the expectations of citizens but are inherently incapable of satisfying the 
expectations of consumers. Technology has indeed multiplied the opportunities for 
citizens to interact with their governments. Hyperconnected citizens have access to 
the broadest-ever information base, can join networks of peers, and engage directly 
with public decision-makers. For most public regulators, however, the reality of 
meeting such demands has not matched the early promises of technology for more 
participatory and inclusive governance. 
This is for reasons as varied as structural (due to anachronistic structures, public 
administrations may be unprepared to meet technological challenges, or may be too
75 Shirky (2013). 
76 Zuckerman (2014). 
77 See Coleman S., in Bennet (2008). 
78 Lave and Wenger (1991). 
79 Wu (2015). 
80 European Commission – Joint Research Centre, Values and Identitites. A policymaker’s Guide, 
EUR 30800 EN, Brussels, 2021.

slow at adapting to the fast societal changes imposed by technology),81 procedural 
(increasingly complex regulatory issues demands for coordinated solutions across 
actors, sectors, and skills)82 and cultural (safeguards from market competition for 
public regulators also means that they receive limited incentives for change. Result: 
governments either persist with addressing demands for participation with tradi-
tional, inefﬁcient, regulatory approaches, or—worst—they disregard the innovative 
potential of technological innovation).
3.10
The Paradox of Digital Democracy: The ‘Digital Undemocratic’
71
We will deal with all these aspects in more detail in the next Chapter. 
Summary
•
The primary cause of dysfunctional digital democracies is the ignorance or 
disregard of the key differences separating the design of public spaces for digital 
interactions between public regulators and their constituencies and consumer 
tech’s standard design features.
•
Digital public spaces aim to be inclusive, and for this reason must necessarily be 
designed not only to include all potential interests, but also do so in a way that is 
transparent and ﬁnancially sustainable. Consumer tech instead is exclusive. Large 
technological infrastructures (like the Internet) and physical components of 
digital products hide profound inequalities.
•
At least in principle, every public regulation should aspire to durability. In a 
hypothetical democratic society in which no rules would be granted with reason-
ably durable application, chaos would prevail. In the technology market, dura-
bility is just a secondary matter, or it is even absent (as exempliﬁed by 
‘programmed obsolescence’).
•
Digital public spaces are designed to serve the interests of large and 
undifferentiated communities rather than targeting individual stakeholders. Pri-
vate operators in the digital markets follow the opposite logic. Human attention is 
treated as a commodity.
•
There is no solid alternative for citizens to opt out from participating in policy-
making via digital tools and re-engaging via a different, yet more functional or 
better designed, digital tool. This is known a ‘reliability’. In consumer tech, 
reliability works in reverse. Consumers are always offered the chance to opt out 
and adopt cheaper or more functional alternatives.
•
Public powers are grounded on the principle of publicity and ofﬁciality, and the 
structures of power characterizing the modern state are vertical and aggregated. 
By contrast, digital private markets are based on the principle of secrecy. What we 
describe as technological power is generally an ecosystem of private powers, 
occasionally partnering with public powers, but remaining independent from the 
latter. These ecosystems are disaggregated and horizontal. 
81 Noveck and Glover (2019). 
82 Gray and Purdy (2018); Innes JE, Booher DE (2018).

72
3
Digital Aesthetics in the Public Sphere
•
The ‘digital undemocratic’ describes the paradox of highly innovative public 
decision-making and the underwhelming response (both qualitatively and quan-
titatively) or total disengagement of citizens. 
References 
Alemanno A (2020) Levelling the EU participatory playing ﬁeld: a legal and policy analysis of the 
Commission’s public consultations in light of the principle of political equality. Eur Law J 
26(1–2):114–135 
Alemanno A (2022) Towards a permanent citizens’ participatory mechanism in the EU, European 
Parliament – Policy Department for Citizens’ Rights and Constitutional Affairs, Directorate-
General for Internal Policies, PE 735.927, Brussels 
Axford B (2011) Talk about a revolution: SocialMedia and the MENA uprisings. Globalizations 
8(5):686 
Azhar A (2021) Exponential: how accelerating technology I leaving us behind and what to do about 
it. Random House Business, New York 
Barber B (1998) Three scenarios for the future of technology and strong democracy. Polit Q 113(4): 
573–589 
Bentzen N (2018) From post-truth to post-trust? European Parliamentary Research Service, 
Brussels 
Berdichevsky D, Neuenschwander E (1999) Toward an ethics of persuasive technology. Commun 
ACM 42(5):51–58 
Blair A (2010) Too much to now. Managing scholarly information before the modern age. Yale 
University Press, New Haven 
Bourdieau P (2015) On the State. Lectures at the College de France. 1989–1992, Polity, Cambridge 
Brabham DC (2008) Crowdsourcing as a model for problem-solving: an introduction and cases. 
Convergence: Int J Res New Media Technol 14(1):75–90 
Brannen CS et al (2020) The age of mass protests. Understanding an escalating global trend. Center 
for Strategic & International Studies, Washington 
Brisimi TS et al (2016) Sensing and classifying roadway obstacles in smart cities: the street bump 
system. IEEE Access 4:1301–1312 
Bruns A et al (2013) The Arab spring and social media audiences: English and Arabic twitter users 
and their networks. Am Behav Sci 57(7):871–898 
Burnett DR et al (2013) Submarine cables: the handbook of law and policy. Martinus Nijhoff 
Publishers, Leiden 
Carrera F et al (2013) By the people, for the people: the crowdsourcing of ‘Streetbump’, an  
automatic pothole mapping app, International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sens-
ing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume XL-4/W1, 29th Urban Data Management 
Symposium, 29–31 May, 2013, London, United Kingdom 
Carter L (2010) 31 Submarine cables and the oceans: connecting the world. UNEP/Earthprint, 
Cambridge 
Cassese S (2021) Una volta il futuro era migliore. Lezioni per invertire la rotta, Solferino, Milano 
Castells M (1996) The rise of the network society. Blackwell, Hoboken 
Chanda N (2007) Bound together. How traders, preachers, adventurers, and warriors shaped 
globalization. Yale University Press, New Haven 
Cingolani L (2020) The survival of open government platforms, empirical insights from a global 
sample. Gov Inf Q 38 
Coen-Sanchez K et al (2022) Repercussions of overturning Roe v. Wade for women across systems 
and beyond borders. Reprod Health 19(1):1–5 
Coffen-Smout S, Herbert GJ (2000) Submarine cables: a challenge for ocean management. Mar 
Policy 24:441–448

References
73
Coleman S (2008) Doing IT for themselves: management versus autonomy in youth 
E-citizenship. In: Bennet W (ed) Civic life online: learning how digital media can engage 
youth. MacArthur Foundation Series on Digital Media and Learning, MIT Press, Cambridge, pp 
189–206 
Crozier M et al (1975) The crisis of democracy. New York University Press, New York 
De Mateo R et al (2010) Crisis, what crisis? The media: business and journalism in times of crisis. 
tripleC: communication, capitalism & critique. Open Access J Glob Sustain Inf Soc 8(2): 
251–274 
Dencik L et al (2018) Data scores as governance: investigating uses of citizen scoring in public 
services. Data Justice Lab - Open Society Foundations, Cardiff University, UK 
Deseriis M (2021) Rethinking the digital democratic affordance and its impact on political repre-
sentation: toward a new framework. New Media Soc 23(8):2452–2473 
Deudney D (2018) Turbo change: accelerating technological disruption, planetary geopolitics, and 
architectonic metaphors. Int Stud Rev 20(2):223–231 
Diamond L (2015) Facing up to democratic recession. J Democr 26(1):141–155 
Drutman L (2015) The business of America is lobbying: how corporations became politicized and 
politics became more corporate. Oxford University Press, Oxford 
Dunbar RIM (2020) How many friends does one person need? Harvard University Press, 
Cambridge 
Dunbar RIM (2021) Friends: understanding the power of our most important relationship. Little 
Brown, London 
Dunbar RMI et al (2015) The structure of online social networks mirrors those in the ofﬂine world. 
Soc Networks 43:39–47 
Easton D (1965) A systems analysis of political life. John Wiley, New York 
Eising R (2007) The access of business interests to EU institutions: towards elite pluralism? J Eur 
Publ Policy 14:399–403 
Elliott ED (1992) Re-inventing rulemaking. Duke Law J 41:1490–1496 
Eyal G (2019) The crisis of expertise. John Wiley & Sons, New York 
Fabbrini F (2020) The conference on the future of Europe: process and prospects. Eur Law J 
26(5–6):401–414 
Floridi L (2014) The Onlife manifesto. Springer, Berlin 
Foa RS, Mounk Y (2016) The democratic disconnect. J Democr 27:5–17 
Fogg BJ (2022) Persuasive technology. Ubiquity:89–120 
Ford MR (2009) The lights in the tunnel: automation, accelerating technology and the economy of 
the future. Acculant Publishing, London 
Foster RN (1985) Timing technological transitions. Technol Soc 2(3):127–141 
Friedel F (2013) Obsolescence: origins and outrages. Technol Cult 54(1):167–169 
Garganella R (2022) The law as a conversation among equals. Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge 
Geels FW (2005) Technological transitions and system innovations: a co-evolutionary and socio-
technical analysis. Edward Elgar Publishing, London 
Genus A, Coles AM (2008) Rethinking the multi-level perspective of technological transitions. Res 
Policy 37(9):1436–1445 
Gilman HR, Peixoto TC (2019) Digital participation. In: Elstub S, Escobar O (eds) Handbook of 
democratic innovation and governance. Edward Elgar Publishing, London 
Gnambs T, Markus A (2017) Narcissism and social networking behavior: a meta-analysis. Journal 
of Personality 
Granovetter MS (1973) The strength of weak ties. Am J Sociol 78(6):1360–1380 
Gray B, Purdy J (2018) Collaborating for the future: multistakeholders partnerships for solving 
complex problems, Oxford 
Hamari J et al (2014) Do persuasive technologies persuade? A review of empirical studies, 
Persuasive Technology: 9th International Conference, Padua 
Hay C (2007) Why we hate politics. Polity Press, London

74
3
Digital Aesthetics in the Public Sphere
Hindman M (2008) The myth of digital democracy. Princeton University Press, Princeton 
Hirshman A (1972) Exit, voice, and loyalty. Responses to decline in ﬁrms, organizations, and states. 
Harvard University Press, Cambridge 
Innes JE, Booher DE (2018) Planning with complexity: an introduction to collaborative rationality 
for public policy. London 
Isherwood T (2008) A new direction or more of the same? Political blogging in Egypt. Arab Media 
Soc 6:1–17 
Jackson SJ et al (2020) #HashtagActivism. Networks of race and gender justice. Penguin, London 
Jäske M, Ertiö T (2019) The democratic potential of civic applications. Inf Polity 24(1):21–39 
Johansson KM, Raunio T (2022) Shaping the EU’s future? Europarties, European Parliament’s 
Political Groups and the Conference on the Future of Europe, European Parliament’s Political 
Groups in Turbulent Times, pp 73–197 
Johnson EJ et al (2002) Defaults, framing and privacy; why opting in-opting out. Mark Lett 13:5–15 
Kirwan B (2001) Coping with accelerating socio-technical systems. Saf Sci 37(2–3):77–107 
Kohler-Koch B (2010) Civil society and EU democracy: Astroturf representation? J Eur Publ Policy 
17:100–116 
Kotanidis S (2022) Uncharted waters: what to expect after the conference on the future of Europe. 
In Bassot E (ed) Ten issues to watch in 2022, European Parliamentary Research Service, PE 
698.852, Brussels 
Kouroutakis A, Ranchordás S (2016) Snoozing democracy: sunset clauses, de-Juridiﬁcation, and 
emergencies. Minn J Int Law 25:29 
Kouroutakis AE (2018) The lives and times of temporary legislation and sunset clauses. Am J 
Comp Law 66(2):453–457 
Krajewski M (2014) The great lightbulb conspiracy: the Phoebus cartel engineered a shorter-lived 
lightbulb and gave birth to planned obsolescence. IEEE Spectrum 51(10):56–61 
Kramer ADI et al (2014) Experimental evidence of massive-scale emotional contagion through 
social networks. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 111(24):8788–8790 
Kumkar NC (2019) The tea party, Occupy Wall Street, and the great recession. Palgrave Macmillan, 
New York 
Kunstsman K, Miyake E (2022) Paradoxes of digital disengagement. In search of the opt-out 
button. University of Westminister Press, London 
Lave J, Wenger E (1991) Situated learning. Legitimate peripheral participation, Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, Cambridge 
Lessig L (2020) Code is law: on liberty in cyberspace. Harvard Magazine, January 1 
Lijphart A (1997) Unequal participation: democracy’s unresolved dilemma. Am Polit Sci Rev 91: 
1–14 
Lotan G et al (2011) The revolutions were tweeted: information ﬂows during the 2011 Tunisian and 
Egyptian revolutions. Int J Commun 5:1375–1405 
Lynch M (2013) The Arab uprising – the unﬁnished revolutions of the new Middle East. Public 
Affairs, New York 
Ma S (2021) Technological obsolescence. NBER Working Paper 29504, Cambridge 
MacKillop E, Downe J (2022) What counts as evidence for policy? An analysis of policy actors’ 
perceptions. Public Adm Rev:1–14 
Mahari RZ et al (2022) AML by design: designing a central bank digital currency to stiﬂe money 
laundering. MIT Sci Pol Rev 3:57–65 
Mair P (2013) Ruling the void – the hollowing of Western democracy. Verso, London 
Mcluhan M, Powers BR (1996) The global village: transformations in world life and media in the 
21st century. Oxford University Press, Oxford 
Mellal MA (2020) Obsolescence – a review of the literature. Technol Soc 63:101347 
Mellon J et al (2022) The Haves and the Have Nots. Civic Technologies and the Pathways to 
Government Responsiveness, World Bank Group, Policy Research Working Paper 10195, 
Washington DC

References
75
Mulgan G (1997) Connexity: how to live in a connected world. Harvard Business School Press, 
Cambridge 
Nichols T (2017) The death of expertise: the campaign against established knowledge and why it 
matters. Oxford University Press, Oxford 
Noelle-Neumann E (1974) The spiral of silence: a theory of public opinion. J Commun 24:43–51 
Norris P (2003a) Democratic Phoenix: reinventing political activism. Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge 
Norris P (2003b) Preaching to the converted? Pluralism, participation and party websites. Party 
Polit 9:21–45 
Noveck B, Glover R (2019) Today’s problems, yesterday’s toolkit. The Australia and New Zealand 
School of Government 
Orman V. (2016) Information overload paradox: drowning in information, starving for knowledge. 
CreateSpace, 63, 73, 34 
Parisier E (2011) The ﬁlter bubble: what the internet is hiding from you. Penguin Press, London 
Pena Gangadharan S (2021) Digital exclusion: a politics of refusal. In: Bernholz L et al (eds) Digital 
technology and democratic theory. University of Chicago Press, Chicago 
Pirozzi N (2021) The conference on the future of Europe: tackling differentiated integration. IAI 
Comment 21:21 
Postman N (1987) Amazing ourselves to death: public discourse in the age of show business. 
Penguin, Harmondsworth 
Putnam R (1995) Bowling alone: the collapse and revival of American community. Simon & 
Schuster, New York 
Quittkat C (2001) The European Commission’s online consultations: a success story? J Common 
Mark Stud 49:653–655 
Raboy M, Dagenais B (1996) Media, crisis and democracy. Mass Commun 1992:314 
Raikov A (2018) Accelerating technology for self-organising networked democracy. Futures 103: 
17–26 
Ranchordás S (2014) Innovation-friendly regulation: the sunset of regulation, the sunrise of 
innovation. Jurimetrics 55 
Ranchordás S (2015) Sunset clauses and experimental regulations: blessing or curse for legal 
certainty? Statute Law Rev 36(1):28–45 
Sampson A (1996) The crisis at the heart of our media. Br Journal Rev 7(3):42–51 
Sasaki D, Strausz R (2008) Collusion and durability, 246 Governance and the efﬁciency of 
economic systems, Berlin, Discussion Paper, 8 
Schneier B (2015a) Secrets and lies. Digital security in a networked world. Wiley, Indianapolis 
Schneier B (2015b) Data and goliath. The hidden Battle to collect your data and control your world. 
WW Norton & Company, New York 
Scholz T (2014) Platform Cooperativism vs. the Sharing Economy, in Medium 
Schrepel T (2020) Anarchy, state, and Blockchain utopia: rule of law versus Lex Cryptographia. In: 
Bernitz U et al (eds) General principles of EU law and the EU digital order. Wolters Kluwer 
Segall MH et al (1996) The inﬂuence of culture on visual perception. Bobbs-Merrill, Indianapolis 
Sgueo G (2016) Beyond networks. Interlocutory coalitions, the European and global legal orders. 
Springer, Berlin 
Sgueo G (2022) I tre problemi della Conferenza sul Futuro dell’Europa. Rivista trimestrale di diritto 
pubblico 1:21–48 
Shiller RJ (2020) Narrative economics: how stories go viral and drive major economic events. 
Princeton University Press, Princeton 
Shirky C (2013) Here comes everybody. The power of organising without organisations. Penguin, 
London 
Spada P, Ryan M (2017) The failure to examine failures in democratic innovation. Polit Sci Polit 
50(3):772–778 
Steinberg T (2013) What should we do about the naming/deﬁcit surplus? MySociety Blog, April 9 
Stempeck M (2016) Towards a taxonomy of civic technology, Microsoft Blog

76
3
Digital Aesthetics in the Public Sphere
Sun N (2022) Overturning Roe v Wade: reproducing injustice, BMJ: 377 
The Innovation in Politics Institute GmbH (2023) Democracy Technologies in Europe. Online 
Participation, Deliberation and Voting, Vienna 
The Papers of Thomas Jefferson (1958) Thomas Jefferson to James Madison, 15:27, 27 March 1789 
to 30 November 1789. Princeton University Pres, Princeton, pp 392–398 
Thompson JB (1996) The media and modernity. Stanford University Press, Palo Alto 
Tufekci Z (2017) Twitter and tear gas. The power and fragility of networked protests. Yale 
University Press, New Haven 
Valant J (2016) Planned obsolescence: exploring the issue. European Parliamentary Research 
Service, Brussels 
Verba S et al (1995) Voice and equality: civic voluntarism in American politics. Harvard University 
Press, Cambridge 
Vesnic Alujevic L, Scapolo F (2019) The future of government 2030+: policy implications and 
recommendations, EUR 29853 EN. Publications Ofﬁce of the European Union, Luxembourg 
Vesnic Alujevic L et al (2019) The future of government 2030+, EUR 29664 EN. Publications 
Ofﬁce of the European Union, Luxembourg 
Von Ondarza N, Ålander M (2021) The Conference on the Future of Europe. Obstacles and 
Opportunities to a European Reform Initiative That Goes beyond Crisis Management, SWP 
Comment No. 19 
Wallace K (2019) The network self. Relation, process, and personal identity. Routledge, London 
White L, Taket A (1994) The death of the expert. J Oper Res Soc 45(7):733–748 
Williams J (2018) Stand out for our light. Freedom and resistance in the attention economy. 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 
Wu I (2015) Forging trust communities. How technology changes politics. Johns Hopkins Univer-
sity Press 
Wu T (2017) The attention merchants. Atlantic Books, London 
Xu X (2021) To repress or to co-opt? Authoritarian control in the age of digital surveillance. Am J 
Polit Sci 65(2):309–325 
Zuboff S, Rigotti F (2021) Surveillance Capitalism. L’era del Singolo, Einaudi, Torino 
Zuckerman E (2014) New media, new civics. Policy Int 6(2):151–158 
Zuckerman E. (2019) Building a more honest internet. What would social media look like if it 
served the public interest? Columbia Journalism Review

Chapter 4 
The Digital Undemocratic: Dazzling 
Expectations vs Disappointing Outcomes 
Abstract This Chapter investigates the paradox of the ‘digital undemocratic’, with 
a focus on the rhetoric of digital government as the paradigm of efﬁcient democratic 
governance. Technical and political arguments will be used to explain why most 
democratic governments choose ‘cookie-cutter’ replicas of consumer tech design in 
the formulation of digital engagement mechanisms. On the technical side, digital 
agendas require governments to completely rethink their roles and functions. Dig-
itization is said to result in greater efﬁciency, increased sustainability, streamlining 
of services and renewed competitiveness. From a political perspective, democratic 
decision-making delivered via digital methods is thought to support the transforma-
tion of public policies and bureaucratic structures, while also mitigating existing 
issues of representativeness in online consultations. Yet, it is argued in this Chapter, 
this ‘modelling’ of democratic government on consumer tech is ﬂawed, and is 
inherently incapable of satisfying the expectations of citizens. There are three 
reasons for this. The ﬁrst is structural—archaic and inefﬁcient public administrations 
are unprepared to meet challenges imposed by disruptive events. Bureaucracies are 
simply too cumbersome to adapt to the societal changes with the necessary pace 
needed to keep up with events in the digital realm. The second is procedural— 
increasingly complex regulatory issues require coordinated solutions across a range 
of actors, sectors, and skills—something that is often lacking in the public sector. 
The third reason is cultural. Public regulators have limited incentives to change 
because of existing safeguards from market competition and innovation. 
Keywords Complexity · Digital transition · Digital efﬁciency · Democratic 
innovations · Innovation theatres · Wicked problems · Knowledge scarcity · 
Bureaucratic anachronism · Skills shortages · Policrises · Global datasphere · Agile 
stability · Design science 
4.1 
The Rhetoric of Digitally Efﬁcient Government 
Focus. Try to remember the last time you took part in a participatory process in a 
digital format. What did it look like? Was it through a web portal? Perhaps an app 
installed on your phone? Or a physical interface—something similar to an ATM
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2023 
G. Sgueo, The Design of Digital Democracy, Springer Textbooks in Law, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-36946-9_4
77

machine—through which to check-in and interact with the government? Try to recall 
if the experience was rewarding and in line with your expectations. Did everything 
work as it should have? Chances are, you were left disappointed or even frustrated. 
So, what went wrong?
78
4
The Digital Undemocratic: Dazzling Expectations vs Disappointing Outcomes
Whatever your experience, you have just been thinking about the aesthetical 
dimension of digital democracy. This is a dimension tied to both our imagination 
(how we would like digital democratic spaces to look) as well as to reality (how 
these spaces look in reality). 
Our imagination is framed by four parameters. Primarily that of speed 
(of services-delivery) and simplicity (of services-usage), and secondarily, by 
(expected) singularity and gratuity. The reality is instead framed on the basis of 
the following ﬁve elements: inclusivity, longevity, generality, reliability, and pub-
licity. In previous Chapters we compared these design methodologies and their 
different approaches and concluded that their different competencies and models 
were responsible for the widespread and growing dissatisfaction with the perfor-
mance 
of 
digital 
democratic 
spaces—a 
paradox 
we 
named 
the 
‘digital 
undemocratic’. 
Continuing along this line of reasoning, this Chapter supplements the analysis 
initiated in Chap. 3, and investigates further into the die-hard rhetoric of digital 
government as paradigmatic of effective government. For decades now, public 
regulators have, if not openly discouraged, at the very least refrained from 
demystifying citizens’ expectations in digital democracy. Western governments 
have been at the forefront of efforts to popularize the idea of undifferentiated, easily 
manageable, 
cost-free 
civic 
participation 
in 
public 
decision-making 
using 
technology. 
Which brings us to the question to be answered: why would the majority of 
Western governments, when designing digital spaces for consultation and demo-
cratic debate, choose to replicate the design features of consumer tech? Or, put 
another way, why would democratic decision-makers be interested in popularizing 
the idea of the digitally efﬁcient democracy? 
The reasons are partly technical and partly political. 
In one respect, the digital agendas promoted by governments from all around the 
world, sponsored by supranational regulators and promoted by international orga-
nizations are based on targets and milestones to be achieved within given deadlines. 
These agenda of interventions impose on governments an all-out rethinking of their 
roles and functions. A rethinking to be shaped primarily in terms of greater efﬁ-
ciency, increased sustainability, as well as further simpliﬁcation and renewed com-
petitiveness. In a word: innovation. 
The EU’s Recovery and Resilience Facility (RRF) is a case in point. This is the 
centerpiece of ‘NextGenerationEU’, the temporary instrument adopted by the EU to 
repair the economic and social damages brought about the coronavirus pandemic. In 
the RRF’s mechanism, funds have to be committed by EU’s Member States between 
2021 and 2023, and all ﬁnanced measures have to be completed by the end of 2026. 
Such funds are distributed to EU’s member states following satisfactory fulﬁll-
ment (assessed by the European Commission) of milestones and targets as deﬁned

by the national recovery and resilience plans. As a precondition for the approval of 
these plans, EU Member States have been obliged to dedicate at least twenty percent 
of their recovery and resilience plan’s total allocation to measures contributing to the 
digital transition or to addressing the challenges resulting from the plan.1 Further-
more in 2021, the European Commission declared the period from 2020 to 2030 the 
EU’s digital decade, thus setting strategic digital objectives in four broad areas: 
digital skills, digital infrastructure, digital transformation of businesses, and the 
digitalization of public services.2 
4.1
The Rhetoric of Digitally Efﬁcient Government
79
Hence, the driving philosophy of reform plans and digital transition strategies: to 
couple the integration of technologies into decision-making processes with reduced 
legal and administrative complexity, enhanced simpliﬁcation, improved innovation 
and maximized efﬁciency. 
The arguments are not just technical in nature: the inextricable relationship 
between digital and efﬁciency is also supported by two key political arguments. 
The ﬁrst suggests that democratic decision-making delivered via digital platforms 
and applications may not only favor greater legitimacy of public sector’s institutions 
and trust in public-policy, but also encourage innovation in policy-making and 
bureaucratic structures. The second argument shifts focus from the output to the 
process: it argues that the more digitized participatory processes and initiatives are, 
the greater the possibility for democratic decision-makers of curbing social exclu-
sion and mitigating participatory apathy. Thus, in fact, greater efﬁciency. 
Those favorable to the ﬁrst argument, suggest that digitalization improves per-
formance, by supporting the transition from inefﬁcient to optimal outputs in gover-
nance. To achieve this goal, however, they claim governments must commit to 
deliver decisions in the least amount of time. To this end, public discussion, 
deliberation and co-creation’s time must also be eroded. According to this political 
narration, the ‘latency’ (that is, the interval between the consultation and the 
democratic decision) of digital democracy must be as short as possible.3 
Those who support the second argument maintain that the primary purpose of 
online consultations (and more broadly of digital democratic spaces) is not to 
generate solid proposals that could be later transformed into public decisions. For 
the sake of efﬁciency, the purpose of digital participatory initiatives should be 
instead that of generating debate, which democratic decision-makers could use to 
understand better the views of citizens on selected policy issues. Proponents of this 
argument downplay the relevance of the number and range of stakeholders engaged 
in debate to assess the success of digital participatory initiatives. The impact (thus, 
the efﬁciency) of such initiatives—they claim—should be evaluated against the
1 Lilyanova (2022). 
2 The Path to Digital Decade does two things primarily. First and foremost, it establishes a shared 
governance framework among EU Member States to assess progresses on digitization. To achieve 
this goal, the Digital Path creates a proper cooperation plan and introduces a monitoring mechanism 
of EU Member States’ progresses in relation to digitization goals. 
3 Chesneaux (2000); Owen (2006); Motupalli (2017); Scheuerman (2001); Barber (2001); Saward 
(2017); Rosa (2005).

capacity to emphasize issues of interest to the population (or parts of it) and make 
policy-makers aware of it.
80
4
The Digital Undemocratic: Dazzling Expectations vs Disappointing Outcomes
Breaking free from quantitative assessment is considered beneﬁcial in terms of 
accepting that (both physical and digital) democratic spaces are populated by 
multiple types of publics,4 and of classifying sporadic or low participation as 
meaningful participation (that is, beside those who neglect participating, there are 
citizens who participate only when they perceive a threat to their personal interests). 
Returning to the case of CoFoE (that we have examined in Chap. 3), we know that 
since launch, some nineteen thousand participants registered on the platform hosting 
the consultation. They shared around ﬁve thousand ideas, left ten thousand com-
ments and endorsed other people’s proposals over twenty-nine thousand times. It 
might seem a lot, but it is not much when compared to the hundreds of millions of 
Europeans potentially engageable. There you have a second advantage of not 
focusing on quantity. 
Outside academia, this position was supported by the Advocate General of the 
Court of Justice of the EU, in the opinion regarding the ‘Puppinck Case’, in relation 
to the ECI. The Advocate General argued that the ECI was not designed to impose an 
obligation on the European Commission to adopt citizens’ proposals. Instead, he 
argued, the purpose of ECI is to ‘institutionalize’ the emergence of policy issues of 
interest to (groups of) European citizens. The opinion was aimed at reconciling 
critical voices with ECI, especially those who had voiced against the excessive 
cumbersomeness of the ECI (particularly in the face of the modest results obtained 
until then).5 
4.2 
The Structural Argument: ‘Innovation Theaters’ 
and ‘Knowledge-Scarcity’ 
We will return to ECI in the next Paragraph. But ﬁrst a recap: governments 
popularize the idea that digital governance is faster and more efﬁcient—and by 
analogy, that participatory rights exercised within digital public spaces are quicker 
and easier to enjoy when compared to physical (i.e., non-digital) forms of partici-
pation. A further consequence of the popularization of digital efﬁciency is that 
democratic decision-making is postulated to be efﬁcient only when it delivers
4 Those favorable to this approach distinguish between conventional and unconventional forms of 
participation. Examples include Stephen Coleman’s ‘autonomous citizens’ (2008), that call for 
creative avenues for engaging in policy-making; the ‘quiet citizens’ described by the Woolf Institute 
as individuals that place trust in organizations based on their effectiveness, and that decide to 
contribute positively in their communities, often without recognition or reward of their work; and 
Nancy Fraser’s (1990) ‘Subaltern counter-publics’. The latter, argues Fraiser include minor voices 
that coalesce around common issues, circulate counter-discourses and formulate oppositional 
interpretations of issues. 
5 Bobek (2019); Longo (2019); Anglmayer (2015).

rapid and effective responses to the issues of the day, regardless of complexity. In the 
rhetoric of digital efﬁciency, the aesthetic of democratic-decision making is modeled 
after the design criteria implemented by consumer tech, which implies the exclusion 
of complexity from the idyllic picture of fully-digitalized public spaces.
4.2
The Structural Argument: ‘Innovation Theaters’ and ‘Knowledge-Scarcity’
81
This is a major mistake. My claim is that digital government is inherently 
incapable of satisfying the expectations of the users of technology. This is caused 
by the fundamental differences in structures, goals and dynamics separating digita-
lized public spaces from private spaces (explored in Chap. 3) and motivated by three 
reasons (to be described in the present Chapter). One is structural, and will be 
discussed in the present Paragraph. The second and third are procedural and cultural, 
respectively.6 These will be analyzed in the following Paragraphs. 
The bottom line of the structural argument is that governments, and democratic 
systems more generally, are uncapable of providing the scale and speed of decision-
making required to tackle ongoing crises, such as climate emergency, public health, 
rising inequality or inﬂation, to name but a few. Anachronistic structures make 
public administrations unprepared to meet these challenges, or too slow at adapting 
to the fast societal changes imposed by disruptive events. As pointed out by the 
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), the public 
sector will need ‘a major course correction’ to come to terms with the uncertainty 
posed by globalization, rising inequality and indeed disruptive technologies.7 
The structural argument ﬁnds many advocates. For example, only nine percent of 
business executives globally nominate governments and public authorities as top 
drivers of innovation in society, compared to twenty-three percent and eighteen 
percent of executives mentioning multinational corporations and startups, respec-
tively. A median of ﬁfty-six percent of people surveyed in seventeen advanced 
economies believe there should be a major or complete reform of their political 
systems to make them more innovative and performative.8 Some go as far as to 
suggest that democracies are outdated, and that it is necessary to move forward and 
adopt more efﬁcient decision-making systems.9 A more optimistic version of this 
theory suggests adopting ‘sortition’,10 in which representatives are appointed based
6 Noveck and Glover (2019); Zelikow (2019). 
7 Data provided by OECD, Embracing Innovation in Government, 2017, www.oecd.org/gov/ 
innovative-government/embracing-innovation-in-government.pdf. 
8 Data provided by Pew Research Centre, Global Public Opinion in an Era of Democratic Anxiety, 
December 2021 (Wilke and Fetterolf 2021). (https://www.pewresearch.org/global/2021/12/07/ 
global-public-opinion-in-an-era-of-democratic-anxiety/). 
9 Among those who take this radical line is Jason Brennan (2016) when he claims that less, not 
more, participation is in fact desirable. Most people, he argues, do not have the knowledge or 
capacity to understand political discourse. They should therefore not worry at all about politics, but 
should leave public engagement to a small number of individuals. Others (Gilens and Page 2014) 
suggest to shift democratic systems that would reﬂect the opinions of those who actually have a 
chance to impact on policies. 
10 Van Reybrouck (2013). Posner and Weyl (2014) popularised the concept of ‘quadratic voting’. 
According to Weyl and Posner, decentralized technologies allow, at scale, the sort of public input 
on a wide range of complex issues that would have been impossible before. Hence, they claim,

on chance, through randomly selected juries. Likewise, political scientist Heléné 
Landermore envisions a model called ‘open democracy’, in which citizens are 
selected to serve in legislation much like they would be chosen for jury duty.11
82
4
The Digital Undemocratic: Dazzling Expectations vs Disappointing Outcomes
Those who counter this argument usually look at the innovations and experimen-
tations introduced by democratic governments over the last decade (examples 
include regulatory sandboxes, strategic foresight, nudging, co-creation, system-
thinking, etc.) and claim that more innovation may overcome the limitations tied 
to outdated bureaucratic structures.12 These claims are countered by arguments that 
these ‘innovative’ approaches have been more apparent than concrete. This ‘inno-
vation theatre’—to borrow from Sean Martin McDonald13 and Bruce Schneier14 — 
includes most of the approaches used by public regulators to convince citizens that 
‘wicked’ problems are being solved creatively and by innovating from the past, but 
actually doing nothing concrete to solve these problems. 
A further consideration related to the structural argument is that ‘knowledge-
scarcity’ due to skills shortages is tied to—and encourages—bureaucratic anachro-
nism.15 Accounts of sluggish, unhelpful bureaucracy from Kafka to Balzac and 
Dickens have imprinted in the collective conscious the cliché that civil servants 
lag behind workers in the private sector in terms of digital abilities.16 These accounts 
might be exaggerated—but the fact remains: that is not unheard-of in public 
administrations. 
Four distinct gaps afﬂict the public workforce. First, public administrations lack 
adequately trained professional proﬁles. Second, the knowledge of public sector’s 
workforce is often inadequate to meet technological challenges. The public sector 
has a surplus of humanistic skills (law, economics and social sciences) and a deﬁcit 
of technical skills—in particular the skills required to design and implement digital 
participatory spaces to nurture solid links with stakeholders. Traditionally, for 
engineers, managers, innovators, and creative people the ideal professional landing 
place has been in the private sector. Public administrations have recruited in prev-
alence lawyers, economists, political scientists and sociologists. The resulting over-
representation of humanists compared to technicians is considered a major cause of 
the slowdown on digital transformation in many governments. The third gap is the 
lack of a managerial culture apt to guiding the digital action of public
alternatives to traditional voting can be tested. Unlike a binary ‘yes’ or ‘no’ vote for or against one 
thing, quadratic voting allows a large group of people to use a digital platform to express the 
strength of their desire on a variety of issues. 
11 Landemore (2013). 
12 Newton and Norris (1999) theorized the ‘institutional performance model’ to demonstrate that 
lack of innovation in governance corresponds to decline in trust and engagement from citizens. 
According to Newton and Norris, it is primarily government performance that determines the level 
of citizens’ trust in public institutions. Once this trust is lost, it takes a long time to regain. 
13 McDonald (2020). 
14 Schneier (2009). 
15 Noveck and Glover (2019). 
16 Howard (2019).

administrations. Those responsible for leading public structures often lack the 
sensitivity that is needed to translate ofﬁce expertise into digital services. The fourth 
and last gap involves investments in training, which are minimized.
4.2
The Structural Argument: ‘Innovation Theaters’ and ‘Knowledge-Scarcity’
83
Combined, these skill shortages make public administrations simply incapable of 
accessing, interpreting and processing the data they need to make informed deci-
sions. Because of information scarcity, democratic decision-makers are at risk of 
losing both the trust of citizens and the chance to engage with them meaningfully. 
On the positive side, it is worth noting that many public regulators worldwide have 
started to adopt dedicated measures to tackle skills-shortages. In 2022, for instance, 
more than ninety percent of professional roles required by European public admin-
istrations demanded applicants to possess at least a basic knowledge of digital 
applications and software. A number of EU funding programs are aimed at 
expanding digital literacy in the talent pool in both public and private sectors.17 
Having acknowledged the structural argument and the related issue of 
knowledge-scarcity (Chap. 5 will return to human factor in democratic government) 
we can look at two examples illustrative of the impact that structural gaps have on 
attempts to engage citizens via digital spaces. The ﬁrst example is Futurium; the 
second the ECI. 
Futurium is a foresight project launched in 2012 by the European Commission’s 
Directorate General for Communications Networks, Content and Technology 
(DG Connect).18 Initially developed with the primary purpose of hosting and 
curating visions and policy ideas generated by the ‘Digital Futures’ initiative, it 
was later transformed into a participatory platform. Futurium aimed at facilitating the 
joint creation of ideas to help design future policies. It did so by incorporating 
different variables, ranging from leveraging the potential of social networks, open 
data, semantic and knowledge mining technologies to engaging stakeholders and 
harnessing their views and creativity to better inform the policies that matter to 
them.19 The platform, however, never took off. Participation remained sporadic and 
engagement low. This was likely due to the gaps in the participatory process and
17 Still in 2022, approximately forty-two percent of Europeans lacked basic digital skills, including 
thirty-seven percent of those in the workforce. The DESI Index (https://digital-strategy.ec.europa. 
eu/en/library/digital-economy-and-society-index-desi-2022) shows that four out of ten adults and 
every third person who works in Europe lack basic digital skills. There is also low representation of 
women in tech-related professions and studies, with only one in six ICT specialists and one in three 
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) graduates being women. The European 
Commission has set targets in the European skills agenda and the digital education action plan to 
ensure that seventy percent of adults have basic digital skills by 2025. These initiatives aim to 
reduce the level of 13–14-year-olds who underperform in computing and digital literacy from thirty 
percent (2019) to ﬁfteen percent in 2030. 
18 https://futurium.ec.europa.eu/en. 
19 Franco Accordino (2013)  deﬁnes Policy Making 3.0 as a model that: ‘brings together a number of 
concepts and tools in a comprehensive and highly scalable model to ensure incremental adoption of 
future developments’. Examples include using front-end participatory tools, knowledge-harvesting 
tools (for both policymakers and stakeholders), data-crawling tools (from social networks), and 
data-gathering tools (from real world data). Also on this point: Macintosh (2012).

most importantly to the lack of clarity regarding the outputs of the proposals that 
were debated on the platform.
84
4
The Digital Undemocratic: Dazzling Expectations vs Disappointing Outcomes
The ECI was launched in 2012 as the EU’s answer to the quest for greater citizen 
and legislative participation to EU’s decision-making. Despite being presented as the 
instrument that would bring to the fore issues that European cared about,20 the ECIs 
have been ignored by Europe’s political class. In its ﬁrst ten years of life 
(2011–2021) a total of one hundred and one ECIs requested registration, at an 
average of around one per month. However, only seventy-six requests were regis-
tered, and just six managed to collect the required one million signatures in at least 
seven member states. Of these, only two ECIs resulted in a legislative proposal from 
the European Commission. 
The meagre success rate of ECI was caused by a number of administrative hurdles 
frustrating the collection of online signatures (e.g., signature requirements varying 
across countries) and the European Commission’s monopoly on the legislative 
follow-up of ECIs.21 
4.3 
The Procedural Argument: Wicked Problems 
and Public Regulation 
Alongside the structural argument is the procedural argument—explaining why 
governments are unﬁt to design digital democratic spaces that are satisfying to the 
expectations of their constituencies. 
The procedural argument can be introduced in this way: for over twelve thousand 
years the earth has beneﬁted from an unusual stability, with no momentous biolog-
ical or environmental events nor natural upheavals on a global scale. The infrastruc-
tures of modern societies and economies, such as states and capitalist markets, 
developed accordingly. Conceived for operating in steady conditions, the backbone 
institutions of our societies and economies are poorly trained for handling the 
radical, human-induced, alterations that our planet is undergoing (and will expect-
edly be going further into in the near future).22 Every day new environmental, 
natural, economic and political hazards are posed to states. The pace, geographical 
scale and degree of complexity of such challenges are unprecedented. There is little 
doubt that such radical changes will be likely to impact on how public decision-
makers operate and deliver their decisions. In order to settle interconnected, cross-
cutting and unpredictable regulatory issues, contemporary public sector institutions 
need to be swift, adaptive, inclusive, and innovative. 
20 Kauffman (2012); Greenwood (2012); Cuesta-López (2012); Szeligowska and Mincheva (2012); 
Bouza Garcia and Greenwood (2014). 
21 Anglmayer (2015); Salm (2018); Athanasiadou (2019). 
22 Dryzek and Pickering (2019).

4.3
The Procedural Argument: Wicked Problems and Public Regulation
85
Authors suggest that collaboration is key to addressing ‘policrises’ that cannot be 
handled efﬁcaciously by a single regulator.23 Traditional, top-down, nationalistic 
regulatory approaches are considered ineffective at coping with contemporary prob-
lems and alleviating the social, economic and political consequences of such out-
breaks. Synergies between ideas, competences and skills are identiﬁed as the 
solution for democratic governments to cope with these issues.24 
Yet co-operative and networked policy-makers are not safe either. More often 
than not, they are impaired by the scarcity of another fundamental resource: time. 
While access to data has grown exponentially—it has brought with it an expectation 
of speed and agility in decision-making—yet good decision-making remains a time-
consuming effort. Haste threatens the reliability of sound decision-making because it 
leaves insufﬁcient time to thoroughly explore consequences. Not to mention the fact 
that the more novel the tools of policymaking are, the less predictable the results are 
and, consequently, the more likely it is that they will fail. 
Data are exemplary of such failures. We have a global ‘datasphere’ that is 
expected to grow to one hundred and sixty-three zettabytes by 2025,25 yet many 
governments thus far have underestimated the potential (and the risks) of big and 
open data. Roughly a decade from the advent of open data, twenty-nine percent of 
datasets collected by the one hundred and ﬁfteen countries surveyed by the Open 
Data Barometer are not published online, ten percent are not available free of charge 
and only seven percent are truly open.26 
Digital democratic governance is also exemplary in this regard. Clearly, this is not 
to say that that regulatory efforts in this ﬁeld are always unsuccessful—or late—at 
addressing emerging issues. There are key public policies to prove otherwise. Think 
about the regulation of the Internet, GPS, or biotech industries.27 The point is that 
when public regulators have used technology to encourage or expand the exercise of 
participatory rights, the proposed solutions, with sporadic exceptions, have been 
disappointing. Or the use of digital participatory tools, combined with ofﬂine spaces
23 Wolf (2022); Zeitlin et al. (2020); Belov (2022); Homer-Dixon et al. (2022). To put it in the words 
of the historian Adam Tooze, (‘Welcome to the world of polycrisis’, Financial Times, 28 October 
2022 – https://www.ft.com/content/498398e7-11b1-494b-9cd3-6d669dc3de33) ‘economic and 
non-economic shocks’ are entangled ‘all the way down’. From 2019 to 2023 the globe experienced 
an inﬂation shock emanating from the disruptions caused by a pandemic, the policy responses to 
that pandemic and an energy shock caused by a war. That war in turn related to the breakdown in 
relations among great powers. 
24 Gray and Purdy (2018); Innes and Booher (2018). 
25 Reinsel et al. (2017). 
26 The Open Data Barometer (https://opendatabarometer.org/?_year=2017&indicator=ODB) is a  
global measure of how governments are publishing and using open data for accountability, 
innovation and social impact. It analyses the existence and quality of ﬁfteen key datasets (such as 
land registries or government budgets) across all one hundred and ﬁfteen countries. 
27 Compton and Hart (2019).

for interaction, has paled in comparison what would take place at the in-person 
events, rather than boosting participation.28
86
4
The Digital Undemocratic: Dazzling Expectations vs Disappointing Outcomes
On occasions even success stories of democratic innovations—despite being 
brought forward by political scientists as a response to worrying democratic 
deﬁcits—have failed at being inclusive, participatory or sustainable over time.29 
Two examples out of many: Madrid’s participatory online platform—‘Decide 
Madrid’—had its budget halved and many supporting participatory activities halted 
after a change in the government of the municipality. Participation in vTaiwan’s (the 
digital participatory platform launched in 2014 in Taiwan) has remained remarkably 
concentrated among a small group of people for years. Only a few thousand people 
have subscribed to the initiative’s mailing list, and very few contribute to the 
discussion forum. 
4.4 
The Cultural Argument: Public Sector and Market 
Competition 
We ﬁnally arrive at the ﬁnal argument: the limited incentive for public regulators to 
change, transform and innovate at scale because of ‘cultural’ safeguards protecting 
them from market competition. 
Schumpeter argued that businesses are driven by the fear of being eliminated by 
competitors—and for this reason are motivated to constantly innovate and explore 
new approaches. Companies—or at least successful ones—are on the constant 
lookout for new assets and to reconﬁgure their approaches to the market on the 
basis of perceived opportunities or assessed risks.30 The public sector, by contrast, is 
not primarily deﬁned by competition. Despite being a major purchaser of goods, 
services and labour—the public sector accounts for around twenty-ﬁve percent of 
Gross Domestic Product and thirty-eight percent of recorded employment 
globally31 —the average public sector organization does not react to changes in the 
environment by radically changing its approach and structure. 
There are reasonable justiﬁcations for this condition, but the fact remains that 
protecting public regulators from market conditions limits their motivation to
28 Nesta (2022). 
29 Lindholm and Berg (2022) created a digital democratic innovation in the form of a mobile 
application called ‘Pocket Democracy’. The basic idea of the mobile app was to present information 
about municipal decision-making in a user-friendly manner. In the study the authors demonstrated 
why the app did not fully meet the democratic ideal of inclusiveness at the process stage, especially 
in reaching young people. 
30 Giersch (1984). Lucena Vaz-Corado and Mueller (2019); McKee (1990). 
31 This means that generating efﬁciency gains in the public sector has important implications for a 
country’s overall economic performance. This argument is well explained by World Bank Bureau-
cracy Lab, Worldwide Bureaucracy Indicators (https://www.worldbank.org/en/data/interactive/201 
9/05/21/worldwide-bureaucracy-indicators-dashboard).

improve and evolve. Result: governments continue to address demands for partici-
pation with traditional and inefﬁcient regulatory approaches, or—worse—they dis-
regard the innovative potential of technological innovation. On this point, how most 
public administrations utilize the Internet is telling.32 Traditionally, public authori-
ties have used the Internet as a one-way publishing and distribution network rather 
than a medium to connect with citizens and stakeholders.
4.4
The Cultural Argument: Public Sector and Market Competition
87
Now, given the limitations of a competitive nature that we have just outlined, we 
must also look at the views expressed by those who caim that public policies are 
comparable to products, and therefore need to be marketed and ‘sold’ to citizen-
consumers.33 We would then need to answer a new question, namely: how do we 
measure productivity in democratic decision-making? 
To begin, we must say that there is no consensus on the criteria for evaluation, 
and no magic bullet for accurately measuring the productivity of the public-sector. 
There are a number of reasons for this. One is the lack of market transactions for 
public services—or, when such transactions exist, often they are distorted by 
subsidies and other market imperfections. The complexity of most public services 
means that there is also no way to accurately assess the productivity of public 
administrations. These normally require inputs from multiple individuals and orga-
nizations. Moreover, classic methods used to collect these inputs (online surveys, for 
instance) often return biased data.34 Yet another reason is the substantial lag time 
between investments in inputs and the realization of outputs and outcomes. To 
overcome these limits and deﬁne accurate assessments of public sector’s productiv-
ity, the World Bank complements traditional ‘macro’ measures of public sector 
productivity, with ﬁne-grained ‘micro’ measures at the individual organization, 
employee, and task and process level.35 
That said, public sector productivity is conventionally assessed with the ‘Water-
fall method’, which operates through a sequence of consequential and rigid steps.
32 Schlosberg et al. (2006); Sack (2005). 
33 The idea of government as a product is developed by Donald Kettl (2008), who compared 
governing institutions to vending machines (citizens put money in, and get out goods and services). 
This metaphor has been later replaced by the ‘Concorde’ metaphor. The last Concorde ﬂight in 2003 
put an end to the golden age of supersonic ﬂight. The public lost trust in the vision that Concorde 
represented; just as they are now with governments. Bevir and Trentmann (2007) claim that political 
and governmental discourses on reform have progressively enlisted the ﬁgure of the consumer, 
installing new tensions between ideas and practices of consumerism, and nurturing a problematic 
relationship to the ﬁgure of the citizen. They considered responses from people who use public 
services: exploring their preferred forms of identiﬁcation and conceptions of the relationships that 
are at stake in public services. These responses indicate a degree of skeptical distance from 
governmental address and point to problems about the effectiveness of strategies of subjection. 
34 For the most part, surveys used by public administrations suffer from limitations in data collection 
and sampling. Such surveys focus primarily on individual interactions and are based only on the 
feedback of those who decide to answer questionnaires, or other feedback mechanism (undermining 
the variability and reliability of the sample). 
35 Data provided by World Bank Bureaucracy Lab, Public Sector Productivity. Why is it important 
and can we measure it?, 2021 (https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/35165).

The ideation and testing phases precede the release of (an) application. So, to 
simplify, a policy process is efﬁcacious insofar as it complies with all steps. The 
drawback of this approach is that it inevitably stretches the time frame and exposes 
the regulator to the risk of reaching the solution to a problem when the problem itself 
has already morphed.
88
4
The Digital Undemocratic: Dazzling Expectations vs Disappointing Outcomes
The alternative options to assess productivity in policy-making are called 
‘Orchestration’ and ‘Agile’ and are both based on incremental work and adaptive 
planning. Orchestrated governance postulates that policy-makers refrain from 
engaging in regulation in order to facilitate cooperation among multiple intermedi-
aries. The goal of Agile governance is to adapt the solution to the actuality of the 
problem.36 In their book on bureaucratic innovation, Rainer Kattel, Wolfgang 
Drechsler and Erkki Karo promote the idea of ‘agile stability’ for state bureaucracies. 
This is described as the balancing act between ensuring stability in the core functions 
provided to the public while also maintaining the ﬂexibility to evolve and add new 
capabilities over time. In the ‘Agile model’ governments, businesses, individuals, 
and communities carry out ongoing analysis of the social situations in which they 
ﬁnd themselves; deﬁne the goals they seek to achieve; design various systems for 
achieving these goals; and carry out ongoing dialogue-based assessments of out-
comes to make improvements to these systems. Via these cycles, public policies are 
expected to better adapt to constantly changing societies and economies. Thus, we 
are in the presence of a more ﬂexible but equally time-consuming system. 
With speciﬁc regard to participatory and consultative initiatives, the assessment 
of success or failure is usually related to the dissatisfaction with the initiative 
expressed by either the participants (i.e., the initiative failed due to inability to 
perform the user’s wishes) or the organisers (i.e., the initiative failed due to the 
incapacity to put together a consultative process to engage participants). Other 
scholars—one of whom is Paul Ginsborg37 —suggests to assess deliberative demo-
cratic initiatives in terms of both the contribution given to expanding the pool of 
‘critical’ citizens, capable of engage in dialogue with public institutions, and to the 
promotion of a more responsible and informed political class. 
To summarize, we could say that success or failure of participatory initiatives is 
linked to the capacity of democratic decision-makers to establish a connection with 
different actors, get them to communicate, and ensure participation from all relevant 
stakeholders.38 Unfortunately, this assessment methodology neither ﬁxes the time-
consumption problem presented by Waterfall and Agile methodologies described 
above, nor presents a valid solution to the cultural argument. 
Case in point: in 2020, a European research consortium was estabished to develop 
a mobile application designed to boost the political participation and civic engage-
ment of EU mobile citizens (those with European citizenship who live permanently 
in an EU country other than their country of origin). The research project was
36 https://agilemanifesto.org. 
37 Ginsborg (2018). 
38 Dean et al. (2020); Fernández-Martínez et al. (2020); Hamm et al. (2021).

divided in three steps: ﬁeld research, information and awareness-raising, and ﬁnally 
the design and development of the mobile application. It took twenty-four months 
before the mobile application to be ready and usable by citizens, by which time 
politics and institutions in Europe had gone through numerous changes.39
4.5
The Pandemic Acceleration of Digital Government
89
4.5 
The Pandemic Acceleration of Digital Government 
There is actually a condition in which the limitations caused by the cultural argument 
have been overcome. History demonstrates that disruptive events have the ability to 
transcend cultural barriers, compelling governments to replace antiquated models 
with modern ones. The web-based participatory platform Better Reykjavik, to name 
one example, was created in the aftermath of the Kitchenware Revolution, a wide-
spread protest that exploded in Iceland in 2009.40 The launch of vTaiwan followed 
on from the Sunﬂower Movement, a student-driven protest that came to a head in 
March 2014.41 To some extent, the creation of e-voting platforms in Madrid and 
Barcelona were also fuelled by the rise of Podemos, a left-wing political party 
advocating for radical change and innovation in the Spanish political system.42 
Is it possible to argue that the global health crisis that began in late 2019 has 
similarly resulted in change? Opinions are mixed in this regard. On the one hand, the 
Corona virus severely stressed both democratic systems and their basic functions. 
Curfews, bans on public gatherings, and reductions in religious freedom were just 
some of the emergency measures taken by democratic governments around the 
world that imposed severe restrictions on fundamental rights, while autocracies 
responded by imposing broad measures that threatened the rule of law.43 
On the other hand, it is safe to say that the pandemic accelerated the public 
sector’s journey to digitalization, forcing public regulators to shift from analog to 
digital services. This was certainly a positive outcome. Technological applications
39 Sgueo et al. (2020). 
40 Orriols and Cordero (2016); Chironi and Fittipaldi (2017); Errejón et al. (2016). Barcelona used 
Decidim, a digital platform created to support civic engagement (https://www.decidim.barcelona); 
in Madrid the municipal council launched an open-source platform to consult citizens (https:// 
decide.madrid.es). 
41 Rowen (2015). Launched in 2014, in the aftermath of the Sunﬂower Movement, a student-driven 
protest, vTaiwan involves a mix of online (e.g., visual clusters of participants who agree and 
disagree on an issue) and ofﬂine activities (typically questions and suggestions collected through 
the platform and later addressed in public meetings) aimed at encouraging Taiwanese citizens to 
reach a consensus on speciﬁc policy issues. 
42 Better Reykjavik (https://oecd-opsi.org/innovations/better-reykjavik/) is an online platform for 
the crowdsourcing of solutions to urban challenges launched by the Icelandic Citizens Foundation 
in May 2010. It has multiple democratic functions which can roughly be split up into three 
divisions: Agenda setting, Participatory budgeting and Policy crowdsourcing. 
43 Balz (1998); Birkner (2015). Carl Schmitd considered the decision on the state of exception as the 
purest form of sovereignty.

and initiatives multiplied in efforts to limit the spread of the virus, treat patients and 
simplify the tasks of overworked essential personnel. Governments used advanced 
analytics to collect, process and share data for effective front-line responses. For 
instance, parliamentary assemblies shifted wholly online, with parliamentary votes 
held virtually. The European Parliament is a case in point. In March 2020 the plenary 
session in Brussels was moved to Strasbourg, and then reduced to a mere two days. 
A set of measures is now in place to facilitate the remote participation of Members of 
the European Parliament (MEPs) in committees, enabling them to view and listen to 
proceedings, ask for the ﬂoor and speak in meetings. Arrangements to allow MEPs 
to express themselves in the language of their choice ensure respect for the linguistic 
regime.44 Structural changes also occurred, as evidenced by the emergence of many 
new, peripheral, innovation labs and networks of various types (task forces, SWAT, 
crisis teams, Nudge units, etc.).45
90
4
The Digital Undemocratic: Dazzling Expectations vs Disappointing Outcomes
Digitization also ﬂourished in the area of civic engagement activities. Space was 
opened up for bold innovations. Public sector’s most used public-engagement tools 
were virtual public meetings, social media, dedicated project websites or webpages, 
email blasts, and electronic surveys.46 The growing relevance of virtual and hybrid 
models had interesting consequences, including the increased overlap between 
democratic innovation and digital participation, due to the importance of online 
forums for decision-making (from traditional parliamentary debates to citizen 
assemblies). 
44 Del Monte (2020). 
45 Sgueo (2020). In 2020 the European Parliamentary Research Service conducted an in-house 
review of existing policy labs—also named ‘behavioural insights teams’, ‘nudge units’, ‘innovation 
labs’, or simply ‘task forces’—and how these gained prominence in government as policy advisors. 
The study identiﬁed ten policy labs operating in Europe. It suggested that major contributions to the 
rising number of these labs were, on the one hand, the scale, haste and complexity of issues to be 
regulated (and the necessity for public sector institutions to adopt inclusive, innovative and adaptive 
methods in the exercise of regulatory powers); on the other hand, these depended by the growing 
relevance of design-thinking approaches in policy venues. The European Union itself relies on a 
complex system of agile, in-house and external advice. The Commission relies on the Directorate-
General for Research & Innovation, the Joint Research Center, and the European Political Strategic 
Center—the Commission’s strategic think tank (which as of 2019 has a new name: IDEA). The 
European Parliament, on the other hand, has put in place an original mix of structures between 
politics and administration. The EU Parliamentary Panel for the Future of Science and Technology 
(known to most by its acronym STOA) is the group of Members of the European Parliament that 
deals with issues related to science and technology. The European Parliamentary Research Service 
is the internal parliamentary research service. Finally, the European Strategic and Policy analysis 
System (ESPAS) provides a framework for cooperation and consultation at administrative level, on 
a voluntary basis, between the European Parliament, the European Commission, the Council of the 
EU, and other EU structures (including the European External Action Service, the European 
Investment Bank, the Committee of the Regions, the European Economic and Social Committee, 
the European Institute for Security Studies and the European Court of Auditors) to work together on 
medium- and long-term trends facing or relating to the EU. 
46 Salerno et al. (2022).

4.6
From Performance to Approach: The Design of Virtual Democratic Spaces
91
Yet this hasty shift to digital venues revealed the dramatic divide separating the 
utopia of digital democratic governance from reality. The toxic combination of 
short-sighted digital initiatives, technical problems and ill-framed communication 
strategies, together with preexisting problems that remained unsolved, has yet again 
shown the urgent need for coherent design approaches able to effectively tackle the 
demand for participation by civil society actors and meet the expectations of citizens. 
4.6 
From Performance to Approach: The Design of Virtual 
Democratic Spaces 
One important lesson to be drawn from the aforementioned considerations is that the 
challenge of digital democratic spaces is not necessarily related to their performance. 
The issue lies with the design of these virtual spaces of interaction, debate and 
cooperation. Digitalized forms of democratic engagement should focus on encour-
aging those who show interest in participating, engaging for those who decide to step 
in and interact with democratic decision-makers in digital arenas, and meet the needs 
and expectations of participants. 
This is nothing new. The suggestion that public administrations could, and 
should, be designed to meet speciﬁc goals or fulﬁl speciﬁc needs is not a recent 
concept. In 1969, Herbert Simon imagined a ‘design science’ applied to public 
administration. Simon argued that public administrators ought to diagnose problems 
and devise optimal ways to deal with them.47 Other scholars have followed, 
underscoring the idea of public administrations as a design science and speculating 
about the best design of public services.48 In the last decade, designers have ﬁnally 
played a role in designing the relationships between legislators, communities and 
technology. 
Today, design-based approaches are credited with opening new options to policy-
makers and thus helping them to explore potentially more effective regulatory 
solutions. Despite very little agreement on how policy and design differ, relate and 
interact with each other,49 a growing number of design methods and approaches 
have made their way into policy-making worldwide. Policy-makers, designers and 
stakeholders of various classes (corporations, start-ups, think-tanks and citizens) 
have created ‘epistemic communities’ engaged in tackling policy challenges from 
UK and North America to Brazil, South Africa and New Zealand.50 
This includes online consultations and initiatives aimed at engaging citizens in 
co-managing complex processes, mediating between diverging cultures and
47 Simon (1969). 
48 Ostrom (1974); Miller (1984); Radine (1987); Shangraw and Crow (1989); Lietdka (2014); 
Howlett (2014). 
49 Bason (2014); Howlett (2019); Buchanan (1992). 
50 Haas (1999); Haas (1990); Sand (1991).

interests, and co-creating policies, via digital tools. Public regulators, at both 
national and supranational levels, explore design with the goal of addressing citi-
zens’ needs and expectations more efﬁciently.51
92
4
The Digital Undemocratic: Dazzling Expectations vs Disappointing Outcomes
This brings us to a new dilemma—what exactly should be re-designed? Having 
clariﬁed the in-built limitations of traditional design approaches to digital democ-
racy, the next Chapter will address the unraveling of this fascinating dilemma. It will 
explore various solutions and related challenges, including the role of technology in 
enabling inclusive online civic engagement, the security and privacy of citizens, and 
promotion of transparency and accountability in democratic decision-making. 
Ultimately—as Chap. 5 will explain more fully—the success or failure of digital 
democracy will depend on the ability to design digital democratic spaces with a 
commitment to complexity, to ensure that technology serves to strengthen, rather 
than undermine, democratic institutions. 
Summary
•
The aesthetical dimension of digital democracy is tied to both our imagination 
(how we would like digital democratic spaces to look) as well as to reality (how 
these spaces look in reality).
•
The majority of governments popularize the idea that digital governance is faster 
and more efﬁcient—and by analogy, that participatory rights exercised within 
digital public spaces are quicker and easier to enjoy when compared to non-digital 
forms of participation.
•
Despite the aesthetic of democratic-decision making being largely modeled after 
the design criteria implemented by consumer tech, digital government is inher-
ently incapable of satisfying the expectations of the users of technology. This is 
caused by the fundamental differences in structures, goals and dynamics separat-
ing digitalized public spaces from private spaces (and motivated by structural, 
procedural and cultural reasons.
•
Democratic systems are uncapable of providing the scale and speed of decision-
making required to tackle ongoing crises, due to anachronistic structures and 
skills shortages.
•
Contemporary public sector institutions are unﬁt to design digital democratic 
spaces that are satisfying to the expectations of their constituencies because due to 
the lack of innovative and adaptive approaches to contemporary challenges.
•
There are limited incentives for public regulators to change, transform and 
innovate at scale because of ‘cultural’ safeguards protecting them from market 
competition. This explains why many governments continue to address demands 
for participation with traditional and inefﬁcient regulatory approaches, or— 
worse—they disregard the innovative potential of technological innovation
•
The pandemic accelerated the public sector’s journey to digitalization, forcing 
public regulators to shift from analog to digital services, including activities in the 
area of civic engagement. At the same time, this hasty shift to digital venues 
51 Fisher and Gamman (2019); Ehn et al. (2014); IBM (2018).

References
93
revealed the dramatic divide separating the utopia of digital democratic gover-
nance from reality. 
References 
Accordino F (2013) The Futurium – a foresight platform for evidence-based and participatory 
policymaking. Philos Technol 26(3):321–332 
Anglmayer I (2015) The European citizens’ initiative: the experience of the ﬁrst three years. 
European Parliamentary Research Service, Brussels 
Athanasiadou N (2019) The European citizens’ initiative: lost in admissibility? Maastricht J Eur 
Comp Law 26(2):251–270 
Balz H (1998) Head of state of exception: Federal German chancellor Helmut Schmidt and the 
supralegal crisis management during the 1970s. Zeitschrift für Politikwissenschaft 28(4): 
469–483 
Barber BR (2001) Which technology for which democracy? Which democracy for which technol-
ogy? Int J Commun Law Policy 6(8):7 
Bason C (2014) Design for policy. Routledge, London 
Belov M (2022) Rule of law and democracy in times of transitional constitutionalism, constitutional 
poycrisis and emergency constitutionalism. Toward a global algorithmic technocracy? 
Routledge, New York 
Bevir M, Trentmann F (2007) Governance, consumers and citizens. In: Agency and resistance in 
contemporary politics. Palgrave Macmillan, London 
Birkner T (2015) Mediatization of politics: the case of the former German chancellor Helmut 
Schmidt. Eur J Commun 30(4):454–469 
Bobek G (2019) C-418/18 P, Puppinck and others v European Commission, par. 69 
Bouza Garcia L, Greenwood J (2014) The European citizens’ initiative: a new sphere of EU 
politics? Interest Groups Adv 3:246–267 
Brennan J (2016) Against democracy. Princeton University Press, Princeton 
Buchanan R (1992) Wicked problems in design thinking. Des Issues 8(2):5–21 
Chesneaux J (2000) Speed and democracy: an uneasy dialogue. Soc Sci Inf 39(3):407–420 
Chironi D, Fittipaldi R (2017) Social movements and new forms of political organization: Podemos 
as a hybrid party. Partecipazione e conﬂitto 10:275–305 
Coleman S (2008) Doing IT for themselves: management versus autonomy in youth 
e-citizenship. In: Bennett WL (ed) Civic life online: learning how digital media can engage 
youth. MIT Press, Boston 
Compton M, Hart P (2019) Great policy successes. Oxford University Press, Oxford 
Cuesta-López V (2012) A comparative approach to the regulation on the European citizens’ 
initiative. Persp Eur Polit Soc 13(3):257–269 
Dean R et al (2020) Designing democratic innovations as deliberative systems: the ambitious case 
of NHS citizen. Polit Stud 68(3):689–709 
Del Monte M (2020) Remote voting in the European Parliament and national parliaments. European 
Parliamentary Research Service, Brussels 
Dryzek JS, Pickering J (2019) The politics of Anthropocene. Oxford University Press, Oxford 
Ehn P et al (2014) Making futures: marginal notes on innovation, design, and democracy. MIT 
Press, Boston 
Errejón I et al (2016) Podemos: in the name of the people. Lawrence & Wishart, London 
Fernández-Martínez JL et al (2020) Participatory frustration: the unintended cultural effect of local 
democratic innovations. Adm Soc 52(5):718–748 
Fisher T, Gamman L (2019) Tricky design: the ethics of things. Bloomsbury, London 
Giersch H (1984) The age of Schumpeter. Am Econ Rev 74(2):103–109

94
4
The Digital Undemocratic: Dazzling Expectations vs Disappointing Outcomes
Gilens M, Page BI (2014) Testing theories of American politics: elites, interest groups, and average 
citizens. Persp Polit 12:564–581 
Ginsborg P (2018) Democracy. Crisis and Renewal. Proﬁle Books, London 
Gray B, Purdy J (2018) Collaborating for the future: multistakeholders partnerships for solving 
complex problems. Oxford University Press, Oxford 
Greenwood J (2012) The European citizens’ initiative and EU civil society organizations. Persp Eur 
Polit Soc 13(3):325–336 
Haas PM (1990) Saving the mediterranean. Columbia University Press, New York 
Haas PM (1999) Do Regimes Matter? Epistemic communities and mediterranean pollution control. 
International Organizations, p 34 
Hamm A et al (2021) What makes civic tech initiatives to last over time? Dissecting Two Global 
Cases, ACM Digital Library 
Homer-Dixon T. et al. (2022) A Call for An International Research Program on the Risk of a Global 
Polycrisis, Technical Paper #2022-3, July 20, 2022 
Howard PK (2019) Bureaucracy vs. Democracy. The American Interest, Washington 
Howlett M (2014) From the ‘old’ to the ‘new’ policy design: design-thinking beyond markets and 
collaborative governance. Policy Sci 47(3):187–208 
Howlett M (2019) The policy design primer: choosing the right tools for the job. Routledge, 
New York 
IBM (2018) Creating the ultimate government experience. How to use design-thinking to put 
citizens at the centre of public sector services 
Innes E, Booher DE (2018) Planning with complexity: an introduction to collaborative rationality 
for public policy. Routledge, London 
Kauffman B (2012) The European citizens’ initiative pocket guide. Initiative and Referendum 
Institute Europe 
Kettl D (2008) The next government of the United States: why our institutions fail us and how to ﬁx 
them. W.W. Norton & Co., New York 
Landemore H (2013) Democratic reason: politics, collective intelligence, and the rule of the many. 
Princeton University Press, Princeton 
Lietdka J 2014 Why design-thinking works. Harv Bus Rev, 2018 
Lilyanova V (2022) Digital public services in the National Recovery and Resilience Plans, 
European Parliamentary Research Service, PE 739.271, Brussels 
Lindholm J, Berg J (2022) Why do innovations fail? Lessons learned from a digital democratic 
innovation. JeDEM - EJournal EDemocracy Open Government 14(2):130–148 
Longo E (2019) The European citizens’ initiative: too much democracy for EU polity? German Law 
J 20:181 ss–181200 
Lucena Vaz-Corado SF, Mueller A (2019) The concept of entrepreneur of Schumpeter in compar-
ison to Kirzner. MISES: Interdiscipl J Philos Law Econ 7(3):613–642 
Macintosh A (2012) Characterizing E-Participation in Policy-Making. IEEE’s International Con-
ference on System Sciences 
McDonald SM (2020) Technology Theatre. When the public is focusing on a technology instead of 
a holistic solution to address complex policy issues, technology theatre is working, Centre for 
International Governance Innovation 
McKee DL (1990) On Schumpter, services and economic change: his evolutionary economy could 
not have foreseen the burgeoning of issue-speciﬁc consulting. Am J Econ Sociol 49(3):297–306 
Miller TC (1984) Public sector performance: a conceptual turning point. Johns Hopkins University 
Press, Baltimore 
Motupalli V (2017) How big data is changing democracy. J Int Aff 71(1):71–80 
Nesta (2022) Democratic innovation and digital participation. Harnessing Collective Intelligence 
for 21st Century Decision-Making, London 
Newton K, Norris P (1999) Conﬁdence in public institutions: faith, culture or performance? 
Harvard Kennedy School, Cambridge

References
95
Noveck B, Glover R (2019) Today’s problems, yesterday’s toolkit. The Australia and New Zealand 
School of Government 
Orriols L, Cordero G (2016) The breakdown of the Spanish two-party system: the upsurge of 
Podemos and Ciudadanos in the 2015 general election. South Eur Soc Polit 21(4):469–492 
Ostrom V (1974) The intellectual crisis in American public administration. University of Alabama 
Press, Tuscaloosa 
Owen JM (2006) IV, democracy, realistically. Natl Interest 83:35–42 
Posner EA, Weyl EG (2014) Voting squared: quadric voting in democratic politics. Coase-Sandor 
Institute for Law & Politics Working Paper No. 657 
Radine LB (1987) Organization theory in administrative law a proposal for design science. Am 
Sociol 18(3):278–283 
Reinsel D et al (2017) Data Age 2025: the evolution of data to life-critical. IDC White Paper 
Rosa H (2005) The speed of global ﬂows and the pace of democratic politics. New Polit Sci 27(4): 
445–459 
Rowen I (2015) Inside Taiwan’s sunﬂower movement: twenty-four days in a student-occupied 
parliament, and the future of the region. J Asian Stud 74(1):5–21 
Sack W (2005) Discourse architecture and very large-scale conversation. In: Lat-ham R, Sassen S 
(eds) Digital formations: IT and new architecture in the global realm. Princeton University 
Press, Princeton 
Salerno M et al (2022) Virtual public involvement. Lessons from the Covid-19 pandemic. NCHRP 
Document 349 
Salm C (2018) The added value of the European citizens’ initiative (ECI), and its revision. 
European Parliamentary Research Service, Brussels 
Sand PH (1991) Lessons learned in global environmental governance. Bost Coll Environ Aff Law 
Rev 18(2):213–275 
Saward M (2017) Agency, design and ‘slow democracy. Time Soc 26(3):362–383 
Scheuerman WE (2001) Liberal democracy and the empire of speed. Polity 34(1):41–67 
Schlosberg D et al (2006) Virtual environmental citizenship: web-based public participation in 
rulemaking in the United States. In: Dob-son A, Bells D (eds) Environmental citizenship. MIT 
Press, Boston 
Schneier B (2009) Beyond security theater. New Internationalist, Oxford 
Sgueo G (2020) Policy labs at European level. European Parliamentary Research Service, Brussels 
Sgueo G et al (2020) PRODEMO Research Report, Rights, Equality and Citizenship Programme of 
the European Union 
Shangraw RF, Crow MM (1989) Public administration as a ‘design science’. Int J Public Adm 
21(6–8):153–160 
Simon H (1969) The sciences of the artiﬁcial. MIT Press, Boston 
Szeligowska D, Mincheva E (2012) The European citizens’ initiative–empowering European 
citizens within the institutional triangle: a political and legal analysis. Persp Eur Polit Soc 
13(3):270–284 
Tooze A (2022) Welcome to the world of polycrisis. Financial Times, 28 October 
Van Reybrouck D (2013) Against elections: the case for democracy. Seven Stories Press, New York 
Wilke R, Fetterolf J (2021) Global public opinion in an era of democratic anxiety. Pew Research 
Centre, Washington 
Wolf M (2022) How to think about policy in a polycrisis. Financial Times 29 November 
Zeitlin J et al (2020) Europe beyond Polycrisis? Routledge, New York 
Zelikow P (2019) To regain policy competence: the software of American public problem-solving. 
Tex Natl Secur Rev 2:110–127

Chapter 5 
Re-Conceptualising the Aesthetics of Digital 
Democracy 
Abstract In order to dispel the notion that digital democratic decision-making can 
only be successful when it offers quick and effective solutions to current concerns, 
this Chapter examines three methods for redesigning the aesthetics of digital democ-
racy while maintaining the focus on complexity. The ﬁrst method is related to 
storytelling. Public decision-makers are encouraged to elaborate a storytelling 
approach to digital democratic spaces that shifts the focus from immediacy to 
complexity. The second recommendation for increasing civic involvement with 
digital tools is to design public spaces with an emphasis on the interactions rather 
than the results. This is key for democratic decision-makers interested in nurturing 
healthy, sympathetic and long-term sustainable bonds with their constituencies. The 
third and last suggestion in this Chapter is to use innovative methods, namely game-
design incentives, to promote digital civic engagement. Game-design applied to 
democratic governance offers a chance for public regulators to engage citizens in 
co-creation in a sustainable manner, and thus be perceived as legitimate. Further-
more, it helps to align what digital democracy has to offer with the expectations of 
citizen-users. 
Keywords Urbanization · Competition · Digitally fragile · Up-skilling · Re-
skilling · Digital storytelling · Framing · Flow of information · Digital interactions · 
Crowdsourcing · Collective intelligence · Co-creation · Game-design · Digital 
aesthetics 
5.1 
A Look Into a More Technological Future 
In 2023, the world population crossed the eight billion mark. There are about seven 
hundred million more individuals than in 2020 and—according to estimates—about 
two hundred million fewer than in 2025.1 The year 2023 also marks the fourth
1 Data provided by United Nations—Department of Economic and Social Affairs, World Population 
Prospects 2022 (https://population.un.org/wpp/). According to the report, global population growth 
is caused in part by declining levels of mortality, as reﬂected in increased levels of life expectancy at 
birth (globally, life expectancy reached 72.8 years in 2019, an increase of almost nine years since 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2023 
G. Sgueo, The Design of Digital Democracy, Springer Textbooks in Law, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-36946-9_5
97

consecutive pandemic year. For most of the worlds’ population—and with a few 
notable exceptions—the future is characterized by uncertainty and challenges.
98
5
Re-Conceptualising the Aesthetics of Digital Democracy
We are reasonably certain, for example, that we will experience a more urban 
future. In 2021 more than half (ﬁfty-ﬁve percent) of the global population resides in 
cities. In the coming two decades, the United Nations estimates that the global share 
of the urban population will reach sixty-eight percent.2 Other studies estimate that, 
by 2030, part of the world population will live in so called ‘megacities’—i.e., urban 
agglomerations with more than ten million residents—and the remaining part will 
populate medium-sized cities.3 Local governments are already at the forefront of 
attempts to create distributed, collaborative digital decision-making processes in 
order to spur creative responses to urban problems, and this trend will only intensify 
in the upcoming years.4 
It will also be a future that is, in its own way, more integrated. In 2020, there were 
two hundred and eighty-one million international migrants living and working 
permanently outside their country of origin. In the twenty-seven EU member states 
alone, mobile citizens (ﬁfteen million in all) account for over three percent of the 
labour force between the ages of twenty and sixty-four.5 The migration ﬂows, of
1990). At the same time, the report calls governments to adopt policies to tackle overspread 
reduction in fertility rates as well as targeted welfare measures to support young individuals 
ﬁnancially. Data on population growth provided by European Commission—Competence Centre 
on Foresight, Global population is growing, December 21st, 2022 (https://knowledge4policy.ec. 
europa.eu/foresight/global-population-growing_en). According to The Brookings Institution, The 
Unprecedented Expansion of the Global Middle Class, Global Economy & Development Working 
Paper, 2017 (https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2017/02/global_20170228_global-
middle-class.pdf) 5.3 billion people (up from 3.2 billion currently) will be classiﬁed as ‘middle 
class’ (i.e. individuals enjoying between 67% and 200% of the median income in a country). 
Second, a large chunk of this global middle class will be situated in emerging economies, especially 
in China. The accumulation of wealth, however, will remain in the hands of a few. 
2 Data provided by United Nations – Department of Economic and Social Affairs, 2018 Revision of 
World Urbanization Prospects (https://population.un.org/wup/publications/Files/WUP2018-High 
lights.pdf). 
3 Data provided by European Political Strategy Centre, Global Trends to 2030: Challenges and 
Choices for Europe Report (https://www.iss.europa.eu/content/global-trends-2030-–-challenges-
and-choices-europe). 
4 Ranchordas (2018); Beard (2012). Mayors of big cities have set up policy labs to enhance civic 
engagement more systematically: New York with Michael Bloomberg, for instance, or Seoul with 
Park Won-soon and the so-called ‘Sharing City’. Also interesting are the cases of Barcelona (Fab 
Initiative) and Chicago. Other cities have followed, engaging citizen planners in all phases of urban 
management, from planning to service provision, by digital means. 
5 Herm (2008); Data provided by Eurostat, EU citizens in other EU Member States, 2018 (https://ec. 
europa.eu/eurostat/documents/2995521/8926076/3-28052018-AP-EN.pdf/48c473e8-c2c1-4942-
b2a4-5761edacda37) and Migration Policy Institute, The integration needs of mobile EU citizens, 
Impedments and opportunities, 2018 (https://emnbelgium.be/sites/default/ﬁles/publications/ 
mpieurope_- _integration_mobile_eu_citizens.pdf). Over the last decade (2009–2019) the share 
of EU mobile citizens has increased of 0.9%—a growth that may have been favored by the 
consolidation of the beneﬁcial conditions of the European Single Market’s four freedoms, namely: 
the free movement of people, goods, services and capitals. Encouraged by the possibility to travel

those who have nothing and those who have a lot, are bound to continue. Energy and 
climatic shocks, changes in global political balances, and the crisis of traditional 
Western democratic systems are among the (near) certainties that lie ahead for 
humanity.
5.1
A Look Into a More Technological Future
99
But above all, what we are most certain of is that the future will be more 
technological. Mobility, information, social relations, medicine, ﬁnancial transac-
tions, electoral systems and democracies as a whole—all these areas will evolve 
according to digital logics and dynamics. In 2018 there were three billion people 
connected online, and nearly nine billion connected machines. In 2023 the number 
of connected devices had doubled, surpassing the ﬁfteen billion globally. By 2030 
this number is expected to reach thirty billion.6 
This will result in major effects for companies, governments and citizens. 
For businesses, the present is already characterized by increasing amounts of 
technological investment and by the race to innovate. This trend is expected to 
continue—and increase—in the near future. Analysts estimate that the pandemic has 
produced a seven-year leap forward in the digitalization of businesses globally.7 The 
race to invest in technology development has just begun. In 2021, the global value of 
AI was estimated at sixty-seven billion USD. By 2025, this is expected to increase to 
one hundred and ninety billion USD.8 By the end of 2022, the Metaverse was worth 
eight hundred billion USD; Facebook alone invested ten billion USD in this area in 
2021.9 Also, in 2022, cloud computing was valued at six hundred and sixty-one 
billion USD; the Fintech sector ﬁve hundred and twenty-ninety billion USD; and 
cryptocurrencies were valued at three trillion USD globally.10 
freely, study, work, and live across borders (and beneﬁted with the possibility to access to better 
prices, higher environmental and social standards, as well as more comprehensive consumer 
protection) European citizens of all ages have been increasingly moving across EU borders. 
6 Data provided by Statista, Number of IoT connected devices worldwide from 2019 to 2021, with 
forecasts from 2022 to 2030 (https://www.statista.com/statistics/1183457/iot-connected-devices-
worldwide/). 
7 Data provided by McKinsey&Company, How Covid-19 has pushed companies over the technol-
ogy tipping point – and transformed business forever, October 5, 2020 (https://www.mckinsey. 
com/capabilities/strategy-and-corporate-ﬁnance/our-insights/how-covid-19-has-pushed-compa 
nies-over-the-technology-tipping-point-and-transformed-business-forever). 
8 Smirnov and Lukyanov (2019); Soni et al. (2020). Data provided by United States of America – 
Department of Commerce, Top global Artiﬁcial Intelligence Markets, 2022 (https://www.trade.gov/ 
sites/default/ﬁles/2022-05/Top%20Global%20AI%20Markets%20Report%204.20%20%282%2 
9%20%281%29.pdf). 
9 Kastrenakes and Heath (2021); Kraus et al. (2022); Hughes (2022); Knox (2022). 
10 According to the consultancy Grand View Research (Cloud Computing Market Size, Share & 
Trends https://www.grandviewresearch.com/industry-analysis/cloud-computing-industry) in 2022 
the global cloud computing market size was valued 545.8 billion USD in and is projected to grow 
USD 1240.9 billion by 2027. Data on Fintech and cryptocurrencies provided by Statista (Fintech – 
Worldwide, https://www.statista.com/outlook/dmo/ﬁntech/worldwide; Cryptocurrencies – World-
wide, https://www.statista.com/outlook/dmo/ﬁntech/digital-assets/cryptocurrencies/worldwide).

100
5
Re-Conceptualising the Aesthetics of Digital Democracy
Increased investment will increase competition. For those prepared to take 
advantage of them, there will be tremendous opportunities, but there will also be 
higher risks for market participants. The latter because competition will become 
ﬁercer than even before. Not that this is bad news, of course. Competition will result 
in the creation of fresh connections that will support an ecosystem rich in informa-
tion, projects, and ideas. This is already populated by operators large and small, ‘Big 
Tech’ and start-ups, research centres, public-private partnerships, institutions, 
researchers, digital nomads, policy-entrepreneurs and innovators. Competition and 
aggregation will determine which players are able to adapt and innovate—and thus 
survive—and those who will be left behind. 
Governments will likely need to invest more in innovation in the coming tech-
nological era and search for useful regulatory frameworks to balance various and 
often conﬂicting inﬂuences in technology. The drive for competition will need to be 
balanced with the protection of rights. 
In 2021, the public sector increased investment in digitization by over three 
percent from the previous year, exceeding four hundred and ﬁfty-two billion USD 
globally.11 In CHAPTER FOUR we mentioned the Next Generation EU stimulus 
package. This, combined with the EU’s multi-year budget, raised over two thousand 
billion Euros to ﬁnance, among others, the digital transition.12 
On-going works on new regulatory arrangements will be particularly challenging 
for governments. In Europe (but the same is true in many legal systems outside 
Europe), major regulatory dossiers on digital technologies are being negotiated. 
These concern digital services and markets, the regulation of AI, cybersecurity and 
the governance of data.13 
11 Data provided by Gartner, forecasts Worldwide Government IT Spending to Grow 5% in 2022, 
June 13, 2022 (https://www.gartner.com/en/newsroom/press-releases/2022-06-13-ww-govt-it-
spending-forecast-2022). 
12 Sgueo (2023). As Chapter Three explained, according to EU rules, at least a quarter of the 
resources used by EU member states in national post-pandemic recovery plans must be allocated to 
digital transition. 
13 Metzger et al. (2021). So-called ‘industrial data’ alone are expected to reach a total volume of one 
hundred and seventy-give zettabytes by 2025. Data provided by Statista (Volume of data/informa-
tion created, captured, copied and consumed worldwide from 2010 to 2020, with forecasts from 
2021 to 2025, https://www.statista.com/statistics/871513/worldwide-data-created/). More generally 
about the public regulation of tech companies, already Colin Crouch (2004) coined the term ‘post-
democracy’ to describe the rise in the power of corporations to inﬂuence decisions that were 
previously taken by national governments in response to popular pressure. A study by the Knight 
Foundation and Gallup (2020) conﬁrmed that so-called ‘techlash’ is widespread and bipartisan, 
especially in the US. Long celebrated for harnessing and distributing the energies of individuals, 
corporations have fallen under public scrutiny for their excessive political and social power. Public 
sectors’ demands for regulation are well summarized in a note published by Facebook’s CEO Mark 
Zuckerberg in November 2018: ‘What content should be distributed and what should be blocked? 
Who should decide these policies and make enforcement decisions? To whom should tech compa-
nies be accountable?’. In an attempt to address these concerns, Facebook committed to develop 
oversight and monitoring mechanisms and to ﬁlter harmful content proactively. Other companies 
have adopted different strategies, developing what are referred to (Manfredi 2019)  as  ‘brand

5.1
A Look Into a More Technological Future
101
Other regulatory dossiers will open soon. These will concern both individual 
(privacy, copyright, freedom of expression) and collective rights (in particular 
political and democratic freedoms). The French six-month presidency of the EU 
(January-June 2022) was accompanied by an impactful slogan: “Relance, Puissance, 
Appartenance”—where ‘belonging’ was primarily intended as a reference to digital 
assets, data in particular, whose sovereignty has been debated in Europe for some 
years now.14 What logic will European governments follow? Proprietary, value-
sharing or redistributive? 
These normative dossiers—as we stated earlier—will be challenged with the need 
to balance growth and rights. But that’s not all. Public regulators will also be 
expected to design ‘agile’ rules to govern technological evolution. That is, rules 
that are efﬁcient, easily adapted to the needs of the recipients, capable of promoting 
transparency, and scalable across national borders. 
Finally, technology will make all our lives simpler—and perhaps even (dare 
we say?) better. There is no doubt that with rapidly advancing digital technology, 
unprecedented and fascinating scenarios are opening up before us.15 These are 
scenarios 
to 
which 
we 
need 
to 
look 
with 
optimism. 
However, 
without 
underestimating the risks. One in particular is the most signiﬁcant. We run the risk 
of forgetting complexity in our unrelenting race to digitize everything. Most impor-
tantly, we run the risk of underestimating the signiﬁcance and universality of 
complexity in terms of individuals’ choices, collective expectations, and perfor-
mances of democratic decision-making. 
activism’ approaches. According to Sarkar and Kotler (2020), brand activism is a natural progres-
sion beyond values-driven corporate social responsibility and environmental, social and governance 
programs. With brand activism, corporations seek to inﬂuence citizen-consumers by means of 
campaigns created and sustained by political values. In this way, companies aim to contribute to the 
social production of citizen-consumers’ identity. Exemplary in this regard is the Nike campaign 
entitled ‘Believe in something’, featuring Colin Kaepernick, a player in the US National Football 
League, owing to his ties with the Black Lives Matter (BLM) movement. 
14 France22, Présidence française du conseil de l’Union européenne, Relance, puissance, 
appartenance. Le programme de la présidence française du Conseil de l’Union européenne, 
2022 (https://wayback.archive-it.org/12090/20221120102926/https://presidence-francaise. 
consilium.europa.eu/media/zeqny1y5/fr_programme-pfue-v2-5.pdf). 
15 According to OECD (How’s Life in the Digital Age? Opportunities and Risks of the Digital 
Transformation for People’s Well-being, OECD Publishing, Paris, 2019—https://doi.org/10.1787/ 
9789264311800-en) ongoing digital transformations affect people’s lives across eleven dimensions, 
including jobs and earnings, housing, social connections and security. The review shows that these 
impacts can be positive as digital technologies expand the boundaries of information availability 
and enhance human productivity, but can also imply risks for people’s well-being, ranging from 
cyber-bullying to the emergence of disinformation or cyber-hacking.

102
5
Re-Conceptualising the Aesthetics of Digital Democracy
5.2 
Protecting Complexities 
Ignoring or underestimating complexity would be an enormous, and inexcusable, 
mistake. Complexity—indeed, complexities—must be protected. First and most 
relevant is the complexity of the human factor. 
The human factor in the digital public service race has already been dealt with in 
this book, so only a brief recap here is needed. If democratic governments wish to 
implement effective and efﬁcient systems of digital decision-making, they must 
work from the bottom up and focus on the people and systems that will be tapping 
into these digital mechanisms. Let us not forget that, everywhere in the world, the 
‘digitally fragile’ (i.e., individuals or groups who may be at disadvantage or face 
challenges in accessing, using, or understanding digital technologies) still represent 
substantial portions of the population. A striking statistical ﬁgure: in 2022, half of the 
world’s population was ofﬂine; that is, one billion individuals were, and continue to 
be, without a legal (and therefore also digital) identity.16 To address this challenge, 
democratic decision-makers will be requested to implement a vast and complex 
array of measures, starting from digital literacy programs, going through more 
investments in connectivity infrastructures, up to designing democratic initiatives 
with an eye for those with limited access to digital technologies. 
Beyond fragility, the human factor complexity concerns the telluric movements 
that are violently shaking up the global market of professions (and among them that 
of civil servants) and the subsequent State programmes for the up-skilling and 
re-skilling of the workforce aimed at withstanding, and possibly govern, these 
movements. 
At present, the picture is as follows: on the one hand, digital technology and 
automation are changing production processes and the way work is done. The 
production of tangible goods loses centrality. Instead, there is growing interest in 
the production of intangible goods, data and services. On the other side, there are 
professionals experiencing equal and opposing pressures on two fronts. The ﬁrst 
pushes them to quickly adapt the skills they have to the market’s demand. This is no 
easy feat. The World Economic Forum estimates that over the next decade, eighty-
ﬁve million jobs in the US alone will disappear as a result of digitization. But digital 
technology will also create another ninety-seven million, in positions and areas that 
are currently partially or completely non-existent.17 Such change is not unheard-of:
16 Beduschi (2019); Sullivan (2018); Mutung’u and Rutenberg (2020). According to the World 
Bank Global ID4D Dataset (https://datacatalog.worldbank.org/search/dataset/0040787) an esti-
mated one billion people worldwide cannot ofﬁcially prove their identity. A 2019 report by 
Mastercard (Unravelling the web of inclusion, 2019 – http://ﬁnancial-inclusion.com/wp-content/ 
uploads/2019/03/MCC1-FinInc-Report-Screen.pdf) of  ﬁfteen countries accounting for over sixty 
percent of the global unbanked population, where six hundred and seven million people have a 
mobile phone, but do not yet have a bank account. 
17 Au-Yong-Oliveira et al. (2019); Vochozka et al. (2018); Paolillo et al. (2022); Colombo et al. 
(2019); Leduc and Liu (2019). Data provided by World Economic Forum, The Future of Job Report 
2020 (https://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_Future_of_Jobs_2020.pdf).

sixty percent of the occupations that exist today perform functions that had not been 
invented half a century ago.18 But change has never before happened at this speed. 
The rapidity with which the skills market is ‘cannibalizing’ professions, imposing 
new standards and new knowledge to access the most coveted job positions, is 
unprecedented.19
5.2
Protecting Complexities
103
Unfortunately, current systems for skills training are not helping this rapid and 
ruthless selective process. Everywhere in the West, educational systems are suffer-
ing from serious asymmetries with respect to the demand for occupations. Under-
graduate and post-graduate education is misaligned with the skills and competencies 
required by the current and future job market. Industrial restructuring and rapidly 
evolving skillsets in technologically intensive sectors and occupations like ICT and 
ﬁnance are rendering previously essential skills obsolete. Six years after graduation, 
the knowledge capital gained in university is already inadequate compared to the 
market. If we look only at digital knowledge, ﬁgures are even more troubling: with 
every passing year, one in three digital skills becomes obsolete.20 
The second front is concerned with professional services-delivery. We may not 
all like it, but the traditional nine-to-ﬁve ofﬁce setting in 2020 has gone into the 
sunset. Clearly, it will not disappear completely and immediately. But in many 
productive sectors, is the very notion of the ofﬁce that is becoming obsolete. 
Workers are being asked by the post-pandemic digital evolution to rethink not 
only themselves, but also the very concept of home, social relations with neighbours, 
and even their familial relationships.21 
What does the intertwining of these multiple human complexities—of digital 
skills, of professional training, of continuing education, and of job delivery—imply 
for the public sector? At least two needs. 
The ﬁrst: to invest more and consistently in employee recruitment and training. 
Administrations need proﬁles and skills that traditionally did not have an interest in 
bureaucratic work. Second, administrations need to take care of upgrading the skills 
of those already in the public service. Re-skilling adapts civil servants to understand 
and use new technologies. Up-skilling makes them more digitally competent. 
It is not just the challenge to be complex: the steps needed to meet this challenge 
must also be carefully deﬁned and managed. Governmental measures in this area 
overlap, depend on each other, have very high start-up costs and equally high
18 Data provided by McKinsey&Company, Job lost, jobs gained: Workforce transitions in a time of 
automation, 2017 (https://www.mckinsey.com/~/media/mckinsey/industries/public%20and%20 
social%20sector/our%20insights/what%20the%20future%20of%20work%20will%20mean%20 
for%20jobs%20skills%20and%20wages/mgi%20jobs%20lost-jobs%20gained_report_december% 
202017.pdf). 
19 These arguments (by far prevalent in both academic and political venues) are criticized and to 
some extent downplayed by Roose (2022). 
20 Walter and Lee (2022); Abe et al. (2021); Cros et al. (2021). 
21 Data from Statista, Work from home and remote work – Statistics and facts, 16 February, 2023 
https://www.statista.com/topics/6565/work-from-home-and-remote-work/#topicOverview.

overhead. Furthermore, these measures take a long time to achieve consistent 
results—and in any case, do not guarantee certain outcomes. Quite a knot to untie.
104
5
Re-Conceptualising the Aesthetics of Digital Democracy
Last is the complexity of public decision-making, which revolves around two 
elements—one protective, the other pragmatic. 
The protective element moves from the assumption that, all things being equal, 
there cannot be different treatment of citizens by a public institution. This is the 
reason for the widespread scepticism about personalized norms that were mentioned 
in CHAPTER TWO of this book. What does protectionism mean? Certainly not that 
administrative procedures should be perverse, involuted—‘Kafkaesque’, some 
would say. However, these procedures must guarantee above all impartiality of 
judgment, fairness of assessment and equality of approach. To achieve this result, 
those who are in charge of democratic decisions will necessarily need more time. In 
addition, they will be asked to defend all the complications (design and regulatory) 
necessary to safeguard stakeholders’ rights (including those of the digitally fragile 
we have mentioned before). 
From a purely pragmatic point of view, digitalised decision-makers are unable to 
go along with the cairological trend of digital time. Chapter 3 explained the reason 
for this: democratic governments must stay engaged in the balancing of all the 
interests that converge in digitalised fora for debate and negotiation. Paying attention 
to multiple public and collective prerogatives not only is time-consuming, but also 
reduces discretionary approaches, and most importantly prevents governments from 
providing immediate, gratiﬁcation-oriented feedback. 
Again, this is not to say that the administrations should not strive to compress 
decision-making time. When this can be achieved, results are great. But imagining 
lightning-fast decision-making processes as the standard for democratic decisions is 
unrealistic. Rather, the standard is precisely the opposite: long lead times. Just two 
examples: it took nine years for the Laeken Declaration (of 2001) to turn into the 
Lisbon Treaty (2009).22 It took two years, under a simpliﬁed procedure, to amend 
Article 136 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union with the 
European Stability Mechanism.23 
At the end of all this talk, what will democratic public powers do? How will they 
save themselves from the market? How will they make digital spaces more attractive 
but also effective at engaging citizens? The answer is to be found in a deeper, 
cultural movement. “Dans un monde qui s’annonce plus chaotique et moins 
prévisible”—suggests Stéphane Grumbach—“gouverner signiﬁera s’adapter tant 
aux catastrophes ponctuelles qu’à l’évolution des conditions globales”.24 Adaptive
22 Laeken Declaration on the future of the European Union (15 December 2001) – https://www. 
cvce.eu/content/publication/2002/9/26/a76801d5-4bf0-4483-9000-e6df94b07a55/publishable_en. 
pdf. 
23 European Council, Decision of 25 March 2011 amending Article 136 of the Treaty on the 
Functioning of the European Union with regard to a stability mechanism for Member States 
whose currency is the euro, 2011/199/EU, https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/? 
uri=CELEX:32011D0199&rid=4. 
24 Grumbach (2022).

democratic governments must return to defending complexity, to acknowledge— 
instead of demonising—the conﬂictual dimension of social interests,25 and to estab-
lish realistic and achievable expectations in participants to digital democratic initia-
tives, starting from the language used to narrate democracy, continuing through the 
design of the interactions with stakeholders, all the way to using creative approaches 
to engage and entertain participants.
5.3
The Aesthetics of Virtual Democratic Interactions. Towards a New. . .
105
5.3 
The Aesthetics of Virtual Democratic Interactions. 
Towards a New Narrative of Digital Democratic Spaces 
In previous Chapters of this book, we saw how experiments in democratic innova-
tion may fail to endure beyond the piloting stage. Chapter 4, in particular, analysed 
the ‘Orchestration’ and ‘Agile’ methodologies as proposed solutions by academics 
and policy-makers to keep policy-making ﬂexible and adaptable to new challenges. 
This Chapter suggests three further interventions to ensure democratic decision-
making is aligned with current challenges. Although these interventions differ in 
structure and content from each other, they share the same goal: to re-imagine the 
aesthetics of digital democratic interactions with a focus on complexity and impact. 
The ﬁrst intervention is related to storytelling and will be discussed in this 
Paragraph. It recommends building a new narrative of digital consultations. The 
second intervention (to be discussed in the following Paragraph) involves the 
framing (or re-framing) of online consultations to focus on the interactions between 
citizens and public powers, not the outcomes. The third intervention (analyzed in 
Paragraph Five) proposes the enhanced use of creative and experimental approaches 
in digital democratic spaces. As a case in point, I will discuss the use of game-design 
as a promising (although challenging) boost to citizens’ participation and long-term 
civic engagement. 
The ﬁrst intervention, about storytelling, can be introduced with a question: why 
is it important to narrate digital democracy? The bottom line is that expectations in 
and comprehension of digital democratic spaces are related to each other. This means 
that political unintelligibility (understood as people’s actual competence and knowl-
edge in politics and policy-making) is a democratic problem.26 This has been 
discussed in previous Chapters of this book in analyzing the negative consequences 
that phenomena such as information overload, polarization, ‘Lo-ﬁ’ political com-
munication and misinformation cause on democratic systems. Authors explain that 
citizens ‘ignorant’ in politics,27 or possessing very basic understanding of issues at
25 Mouffe and Laclau (1991). 
26 Innerarity (2021). 
27 Somin (2013). According to Somin, the majority of citizens could be deﬁned as knowing nothing 
about politics.

the center of public debate,28 or just trusting unreliable sources,29 are also less 
inclined to trust democratic institutions.
106
5
Re-Conceptualising the Aesthetics of Digital Democracy
Therefore, it is crucial to use a storytelling approach in digital democratic spaces 
that can help move the emphasis from immediacy to complexity by encouraging an 
understanding of the place of online consultations within larger, more intricate, and 
stratiﬁed decision-making processes. My claim is that governments that are capable 
of communicating with their constituencies in simple and transparent manners, 
without excluding elements of complexity (i.e., time-consumption, implementation 
costs, unexpected outcomes) in their narration, are better protected from political 
unintelligibility, and thus better able to manage the expectations of citizens. 
To re-imagine the storytelling of digital democracy is at the same time a structural 
and a content-related endeavor. Structurally, it demands the acknowledgment of 
professional ﬁgures dedicated to public-sector storytelling. In the US, for instance, 
public administrations may appoint a Chief Storytelling Ofﬁcer (CSO).30 This role, 
generally held by communication professionals, includes responsibility for deﬁning 
the institutional position in the target market. In the speciﬁc case of digitization 
of services, it is the storytelling ofﬁcer who is responsible for identifying the needs of 
the public, measuring their expectations, and then contributing to the work of 
developers to generate public services tailored to users’ needs. Unfortunately, 
cases like that of CSOs are quite rare. In Europe, for instance, the only comparable 
example is that of ‘territorial marketing’, which, however, has a local dimension and 
is concerned almost exclusively with tourism and culture. 31 
As an alternative to dedicated professional ﬁgures, public institutions could 
mandate internal structures with the task of empowers citizens to participate in the 
decision-making processes, including the ideation and implementation of commu-
nication campaigns to promote digital democratic spaces. Until 2021, for instance, 
the OECD’ Directorate on Public Governance included a team dedicated to innova-
tive citizen participation, tasked with the responsibility to shape a global public 
conversation on the future of democracy and innovative approaches to democratic 
policy-making.32 
28 Converse (1964). Following in the tradition of Converse, Samuel Popkin’s (1991) ‘low informa-
tion rationality’ theory stipulates that the majority of citizens have basic impressions about politics, 
and thus their voting choices are often determined by shortcuts. 
29 Gloria Origgi (2017) clariﬁes how contemporary society is experiencing a fundamental paradigm 
shift in its relationship with knowledge and reputation. In the age of reputation, claims Origgi, 
information is valuable if it has a ‘good reputation’, meaning that it has already been ﬁltered, 
evaluated and commented upon by others. It might seem empowering for citizens, but in reality, it 
has the exact opposite outcome. With reputation becoming the gatekeeper to knowledge, people are 
acknowledged by relying on what are the inevitably biased judgments of other people, most of 
whom are not even known to them. 
30 Bennett and Orr (2018). 
31 Proulx and Tremblay (2006); Eidelman et al. (2016); Āzena and Keišs (2009). 
32 The team was dismissed in 2022. More info here: https://www.oecd.org/gov/.

5.3
The Aesthetics of Virtual Democratic Interactions. Towards a New. . .
107
Alternatively, governments can create independent administrative structures and 
appoint them with the task of promoting citizen participation, including communi-
cation and storytelling. One such case was the Minister of Direct Democracy 
appointed by the Italian government led by Giuseppe Conte between 2018 and 
201933 ; or, at the local level, the Tuscany’s Regional Authority for the Guarantee 
and Promotion of Participation.34 
As a further alternative, governments could create virtual spaces where profes-
sionals, civil servants and citizens could work cooperatively to discuss ideas, design 
future-scenarios and frame content related to proposed policies. Although perhaps 
less effective than previous hypotheses, this option would have the advantage of 
involving citizens in imagining future policies, thus contributing to the narration of 
democratic decision-making even before the actual decision-making process begins. 
One such example is ‘Witness’, an online open-source participatory space where 
economists and science ﬁction writers imagine a range of plausible and economic 
scenarios.35 
Moving now to considering the content of storytelling, three elements are key to 
delivering impactful stories of digital democracy: one is the simplicity of language; 
another is the reduction of uncertainties; and a third is the use of appropriate framing. 
With regard to communication style, the most prevalent scenario by far is where 
public regulators make use of involuted and unnecessarily complex language. In 
2014, a study on the communication of the World Bank (WB) found that thirty-one 
percent of all publications the WB made available on its website—a total of one 
thousand and six hundred documents—had not been viewed even once. Just twenty-
ﬁve reports (that is, one and half percent of the total) had exceeded one thousand 
downloads.36 A 2022 study of the communication used by the European Commis-
sion analyzed almost forty-ﬁve thousand press releases, published across a thirty-
ﬁve years timespan.37 The study highlights the extremely technocratic style of 
communication. Both the WB’s and Commission’s language are described as too 
complex and involute. In the case of the EU, authors of the study explain that 
technocratic language has led to serious disadvantages in a politicized context: 
these include criticism of EU institutions’ legitimacy, and widespread belief of the 
incapability of the EU legal order to be truly democratic and innovative.38 Persistent
33 Kauffman (2018). 
34 The Authority was created by Regional Law 46/2013 to oversee and ensure the implementation of 
public participation in regional and local politics. The Authority is charged with the task of creating 
‘greater social cohesion through the diffusion of the culture of participation and the valorization of 
all forms of civic engagement, knowledge and widespread skills in society’. See http://www. 
consiglio.regione.toscana.it/oi/default?idc=47. 
35 For further info: https://edgeryders.eu/t/different-economic-systems-one-ﬂoating-megacity-intro 
ducing-witness/15358. 
36 Doemeland and Trevino (2014). 
37 Rauh (2022); Kurki (2011); Bertsou and Pastorella (2017). 
38 Lebessis and Paterson (2000). See also Kriesi et al. (2013). See Wike et al. (2019). Of the six 
‘political tribes’ that, according to Chatham House and Kantar Public (2017) exist within the EU

criticisms of the EU—as democratic deﬁcit and dysfunctional decision-making 
system run by elites located in Brussels (the so-called ‘European technocrats’)— 
are evidence of this. An exclusive club of overpaid civil servants—EU critics 
claim—feeds an overly complex institutional environment, structured to ‘please’ 
corporate interests at the expense of ordinary citizens.39 Interestingly, similar critics 
can be found with regard to most supranational regulators.40
108
5
Re-Conceptualising the Aesthetics of Digital Democracy
The second key element in building a sound and functional narration of digital 
democratic initiatives is the reduction of uncertainties. Although governments 
should not completely dismiss uncertainty from the narratives of participatory 
processes (as this is an essential component of the complexity of such processes) 
they should, however, strive to reduce its margins. Too much uncertainty in fact is 
harmful in that it discourages citizens from participating, or impact negatively on 
long-term engagement. Why would I choose to participate if I am completely 
unaware of the consequences, either positive or negative, of the consultative 
process? 
One typical example of ‘harmful’ uncertainty is the multiple and overlapping 
options made available to citizens, in the framework of digital public spaces, to 
interact with policy-makers. This multiplicity of options is likely to cause confusion 
and encourage discontent, especially when synchronous (i.e., live-chats, video-
conferences) and asynchronous modes of interaction (Emails, text-messaging, 
video-recordings) are mixed together. Another example of harmful uncertainty 
consists of initiatives that do not state in a clear manner neither the expected beneﬁts 
of participating in a digital democratic initiative, nor its potential outcomes. Case in
today, ‘hesitant Europeans’, together with ‘EU rejecters’, the ‘austerity rebels’ and ‘frustrated 
pro-Europeans’, make up sixty-eight percent of the total EU population. The 2020 Global Satis-
faction with Democracy Report found that nearly sixty percent of European citizens were dissat-
isﬁed with democracy in 2019. According to the report, Europeans fall into two broad categories: 
those living in the so-called ‘zone of complacency’ across Nordic countries (Scandinavia, Germany 
and the Benelux) and those populating the ‘zone of despair’, encompassing Southern European 
countries and France. 
39 The European Commission (DG for Research & Innovation, Past, present and future of democ-
racy, Brussels, 2019) writes of a ‘vertical incongruence’ among the many deﬁnitions in use to 
describe the supposed incapability of the EU to be innovative. Eyal Benvenisti (2018) makes the 
case in relation to the ‘mega-regional trade agreements’. Benvenisti explain that the complexity and 
variety of the issues regulated in these agreements, combined with the conﬁdentiality under which 
these agreements are negotiated, make them a perfect target for criticism—and, by consequence, of 
the EU bureaucracy. 
40 According to the International Social Survey Program’s National Identity module series (com-
prising three cross-national surveys conducted in 1995, 2003, and 2013 –https://www.gesis.org/en/ 
issp/modules/issp-modules-by-topic/national-identity), one in two world citizens say international 
organizations are taking too much power away from their country. A dissatisfaction that is further 
exacerbated by two causes: the complexity of international matters (that puts supranational regu-
lators beyond the immediate capacity of many citizens to appraise) and the remoteness of most 
supranational regulators from local communities, which encourages a sense of disempowerment in 
citizens. On complexity in international matters and remoteness of supranational organizations: 
Dahl (1999a).

point: the communication of infection-tracking applications experimented with by 
many governments during the ﬁrst phase of the pandemic. The storytelling of these 
applications, in a nutshell, was as follows: citizens were advised to download and 
install contact-tracing apps on their mobile phones. They were told that with sixty 
percent of the population tracked, everyone would be safe from infection. A twenty 
percent portion of the population, however, was indicated as the minimum threshold 
needed to slow the spreading of the infection. In Europe alone, public investment in 
contact-tracing were signiﬁcant. Germany spent sixty-seven and half million euros. 
The Netherlands nearly nineteen million. France spent two million and half Euros 
(plus another ﬁve million in communication campaigns). Indeed, European govern-
ments 
invested 
around 
one 
hundred 
and 
six 
million 
Euros 
in 
tracking 
applications41 —yet these ended up tracking less than ﬁve percent of conﬁrmed 
Covid-19 cases. So, what happened? Beyond the numerous cases of malfunctioning, 
governments did not adequately protect the public opinion from hoaxes and 
misinformation. Widespread uncertainty contributed to the diffuse (and irrational) 
perception of contact-tracing apps as tools of control and surveillance.
5.3
The Aesthetics of Virtual Democratic Interactions. Towards a New. . .
109
Third and last is framing. The scholarly literature devoted to assessing the impact 
that information framing can have on behavior is endless, and this is not the place to 
delve into it.42 We therefore limit ourselves to pointing out the importance of 
highlighting practical (for example, the procedural steps planned for the post-
consultation, or the administrative structures involved in analyzing and processing 
the opinions shared by participants) over emotional (for example, vague references 
to democratic values) aspects in the presentation of new democratic initiatives. 
Another recommended framing approach consists of balancing potential gains 
(e.g., ‘if you participate, your ideas will contribute to co-create this policy’) with 
potential losses (e.g., ‘if you don’t participate, your position could not be reﬂected in 
full in the policy’). Long-established behavioral studies have shown that loss-
aversion (the desire to avoid loss) is twice as powerful as the pleasure of acquiring 
equivalent gain.43 
41 Data provided by VoxEU, A cross-country comparison of contact-tracing apps during COVID-
19, 2 August, 2021 (https://cepr.org/voxeu/columns/cross-country-comparison-contact-tracing-
apps-during-covid-19); World Health Organization, Tracking health expenditure on COVID-19 
within the System of Health Accounts Framework: technical note, Geneva, 2022. 
42 In their popular book on nudge theory, Nobel Prize-winners Thaler and Sunstein (2008) suggest 
that nudges may be used to promote (a more preferred) collective behavior, rather than obstruct 
it. Nudges—argue Thaler and Sunstein—may help regulators to avoid some of the challenges and 
potential pitfalls of traditional regulation, for example costly procedures and ineffective 
campaigning, or invasive choice regulation, such as bans. More on this topic: Frederick (2002); 
Abdukadirov (2016); John et al. (2020); Alemanno and Sibony (2015). On nudge and evidence-
informed policy-making: Davies and Nutley (2020); Truijens (2022); Barton and Grüne-Yanoff 
(2015); Cartwright et al. (2009); Cartwright and Hardie (2012). On the correlation between 
information-framing and policy-making Yang and Hobbs (2020); Nabi (2003); Lee et al. (2008). 
43 In their famous study Tversky and Kahneman (1979) demonstrated that people underweight 
outcomes that are merely probable in comparison with outcomes that are obtained with certainty. 
This tendency, which they call ‘the certainty effect’, contributes to risk aversion in choices

o
110
5
Re-Conceptualising the Aesthetics of Digital Democracy
To give one ﬁnal example of the importance of proper framing in public com-
munication, we can mention another case from recent history: the public announce-
ment that Boris Johnson, at the time UK Prime Minister, made in the aftermath of the 
ﬁrst pandemic wave. Johnson justiﬁed the decision to avoid restrictive measures in 
order to shield the UK economy from the damage that would inevitably follow a 
more severe lockdown. At that time Johnson also had to explain the estimated cost of 
this decision—and unfortunately this was not good news. The policy would come at 
a cost in human lives, especially of the most fragile individuals in the community. A 
painful price to pay, but one that—Johnson explained—was bearable if the health 
crisis would be overcome quickly. It did not work. The UK government quickly 
backtracked, very few days after the announcement. The backlash from the public, 
both domestically and internationally, was decisive in the change. 
5.4 
Re-Framing Digital Consultations: Interactions Not 
Outcomes 
The second idea to redesign the aesthetics of digital democracy is concerned with the 
physiognomy of interactions between policy-makers and citizens within digital 
public spaces. 
In his book on the future of democracy, Graham Smith discusses how and 
whether democracies could be designed to give due weight to the interests of future 
generations. In Smith’s opinion, ‘democratic myopia’, as he terms it, consists of the 
tendency of contemporary democratic systems to be shortsighted—i.e., unﬁt t  
adequately consider long term visions and challenges. Smith describes four causes 
of this myopia and indicates future-proof design among the solutions to this issue.44 
Another academic, Catherine Fieschi, has written that the generally inadequate 
response of public institutions to overcome gaps in immediacy and ease-of-use for 
citizens, has transformed democracies into ‘populocracies’—that is, democratic 
institutions self-reinforcing the sense of inadequacy by remaining unreceptive to 
the new dynamics unleashed by social media.45 
involving sure gains and to risk seeking in choices involving sure losses. On the basic principle of 
loss aversion and how it can explain why penalty frames are sometimes more effective than reward 
frames in motivating people: Tversky and Kahneman (1991); Cubitt et al. (2011). Recent studies 
(Dorison et al. 2022) examined information framing in relation to COVID-19 health information, 
investigating whether it is more effective to frame health messages in terms of potential losses or 
potential gains. Authors of the study judge the latter option more effective and highlight the 
emotional toll of loss-framed messages. 
44 Smith (2021). The four causes are the non-presence of future generations in public policies, the 
electoral cycles, the resistance from incumbent interests, and the dynamics of the capitalist system. 
More generally about the future of democracy: Bobbio (1984); Luhmann (1990); Dahl (1999b); 
Alonso et al. (2011); Schlesinger (1997). 
45 Fieschi (2019).

5.4
Re-Framing Digital Consultations: Interactions Not Outcomes
111
Drawing from Smith’s and Fieschi’s arguments, I suggest that digital interactions 
between democratic governments and citizens, to be future-proof, should be 
re-designed in terms of a service rather than a product. Said otherwise, virtual public 
arenas should be re-conceptualized as places where policy-makers and participants 
engage in a ‘ﬂow’ of information- and ideas- sharing, rather than just as places where 
future decisions are negotiated among stakeholders and decision-makers.46 With this 
approach, it is my claim, stakeholders might ﬁnd more compelling the choice to 
engage in consultations or to contribute to participatory initiatives held online by 
governments. Digital public arenas would in fact serve as the Greek ‘synoikismos’— 
places to harmonize diversity of cultural backgrounds, conﬂict interests and multi-
plicity of ideas through discussion.47 
So how can this be done? We said earlier that, aesthetically, current digital 
democratic interactions are based on a simple formula: replicating reality in a virtual 
scenario. For example, by creating digital counters, or allocating (virtual) rooms 
within which to gather users, assigning them a place in a queue, which is also virtual. 
This 
approach—we 
also 
clariﬁed—is 
ﬂawed, 
and 
should 
be 
abandoned. 
Dematerializing bureaucracy within a digital scenario, in fact, does not necessarily 
solve the shortcomings of public administrations operating in analogic formats; 
instead, it may generate new reasons for dissatisfaction in citizens (and we return 
again to the problem of expectations). 
Among the most frequent cases of design-malpractice, perhaps most insidious is 
where access to digital public spaces occurs ‘in hiccups’, during set times and days. 
Beyond the legitimate organizational needs of the public administration, closing a 
digital space is at odds with the logic of a system that is perceived as open and 
accessible by default. Said in other words, it is like being in a virtual room, with a 
closed door. 
Let us further elaborate this concept: a digital interaction framed within a speciﬁc 
timing responds to the idea of a product. Users may access at given moments, and 
only for a limited amount of time. A service, on the other hand, is activated as often 
as users need it. To achieve this result, digital interactions between citizens and 
public powers should be conceptualized, designed and implemented in the context of 
an ongoing relationship—one that is activated as many times as the stakeholders
46 Csikszentmihalyi (2008). 
47 Sennett (2016). In Aristotle’s politics (See Stanford’s Encyclopaedia of Philosophy, Aristotle’s 
Political Theory, July 1, 2022—https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/aristotle-politics/) the synoikismos 
described the drawing together of different families and tribes, competing economic interests, and 
natives and foreigners. Urban environments were up to the task of letting diverging interests 
co-habit peacefully; Greek cities were designed for that purpose. In amphitheatres, citizens could 
listen to public debates and take collective decisions. They would sit in assigned places, with 
members of their tribe, and listen to the orator’s speech, replying if they so wished. The town 
square, the ‘agora’, served a different purpose. It exposed citizens to differences in a less mediated 
way. Typically, public squares hosted various events simultaneously. It was common, while 
walking across the square, to be caught up in debates: a trial occurring in the law court, for instance. 
So much so that, by leaving the square, citizens would symbolically step back from engagement, 
transitioning from the public to their private space.

a
need it. This would help democratic decision-makers to promote a more holistic 
understanding of digital spaces for activism and civic engagement.
112
5
Re-Conceptualising the Aesthetics of Digital Democracy
To get an idea of service-design, you need to look at private digital platforms. 
Contents such as a Facebook post, a picture on Instagram, or a tweet on Twitter—are 
designed with the precise goal to feed an ecosystem of interactions in which the 
author and the recipient of content overlap. So, basically, the outcome of a service 
design process is in itself a process, where value is ‘co-created’ (a concept to which 
we will return shortly, in the next few pages) between users and producers. 48 
Service-design cases in the public sector are infrequent. The best acknowledged 
practice in this area is ‘prototyping’—which is used with the aim of testing policy 
options in a protected environment, in order to trial potential interventions at a really 
early stage.49 In 2022, for instance, the UK government designed prototypes in a 
project on marine plans with the Department for Environment, Food and Rural 
Affairs and Marine Management Organization.50 Another noteworthy example— 
although still in an embryonic stage—may be found in the EU proposal to establish 
an ‘EU digital citizenship’. Based on ﬁve pillars (digital foundations, digital well-
being, digital engagement and media literacy, digital empowerment, and digital 
opportunities) the EU digital citizenship aims at giving European citizens equal 
access to all public services, including the right to participate in online consultations 
and other participatory opportunities organized at the EU and national levels, 
possibly via a single digital platform.51 On this matter, it is worth being remembered 
that in 2023 a new ECI was submitted to the European Commission with the goal of 
lengthening the functionalities of the CoFoE Platform, by including petitioning and 
consultation tools that would allow European citizens to open in-depth debates 
involving institutions and policy stakeholders, and collect consensus on proposals 
to be submitted to the European institutions.52 
Looking instead at cases that have already been implemented, an interesting 
example of participatory design focused on (engaging participants in) the process 
rather than (asking for their contribution to) an outcome is ‘Empaville’,
48 Spagnoletti et al. (2015); Viglia et al. (2018); Thies et al. (2016). Speciﬁcally on service-design: 
Polaine et al. (2013); Holmlid (2012); Yu and Sangiorgi (2018). 
49 Data provided by UK government Policy Lab, Open Policy Making toolkit, 2017 (https://www. 
gov.uk/guidance/open-policy-making-toolkit/4-delivery-prototyping-and-improving-ideas). 
50 Other acknowledged beneﬁts of prototyping include the possibility to implement ‘Lo-ﬁ’ solutions 
that reduce risk and costs when an idea would be complex and time consuming to develop; the 
possibility of keeping multiple options open to examination; and the possibility of fostering 
engagement of citizens. 
51 Tomasello (2022); Calzada (2022); Fernández-Prados et al. (2021). 
52 The ECI also demands to appoint a participation ofﬁce for each European commissioner, acting as 
a bridge between the Commission and citizens request collected via the platform and other existing 
direct democracy tools; to implement recommendations Eighteen and Thirty-nine of the CoFoE 
Citizens’ Panel ‘EU democracy, values, rights, rule of law, security’—the ﬁrst related to the 
introduction of a EU-wide referendum in exceptional cases on extremely important matters to all 
European citizens, and the second related to the introduction of a citizen’s assembly on EU matters 
through legally binding and compulsory law or regulation.

pilot-experiment produced by the EU funded-project ‘Empatia’.53 The purpose of 
Empaville was to test the deliberativeness of participants to a participatory budgeting 
experience in a ﬁctitious city. Between 2017 and 2019, several municipalities in 
Portugal, as well as in the rest of Europe, hosted sessions of Empaville to assess the 
receptivity of local communities to the introduction of participatory budgeting. 
Interestingly, such sessions were not designed to reach consensus among partici-
pants. Quite the opposite: participants were challenged with the complexities related 
to consensus-building, and exposed to elevate risks of failure of the negotiations.54
5.4
Re-Framing Digital Consultations: Interactions Not Outcomes
113
We have now reached a crucial point. One must be realistic, though. I concede 
that digital participatory processes with the sole purpose of generating debate, 
however useful they might be in generating ideas, would be a ‘downward play’ on 
any democratic system aspiring to generate collective decisions via technology. So 
now the question is: how do we tie the suggestion of digital aesthetics of democratic 
spaces focussed on enhancing interactions (over outcomes) with the legitimate aim 
of generating democratic decisions? 
A standard answer to this question is provided by the body of scholarship that 
explored ‘crowdsourcing’—an umbrella concept used to describe a model of dis-
tributed problem-solving and production that leverages the collective efforts of 
online communities for speciﬁc purposes set forth by a crowdsourcing public 
organization. The topic has become quite popular in academic and practitioners’ 
circles. Since 2018, for instance, a ‘Crowdlaw Manifesto’ call for legislatures, 
technologists and the public to participate in creating more open and participatory 
law-making practices.55 Meanwhile, political scientists and lawyers have tried to 
give a sense to the manifold hypotheses of tech-based approaches to crowdsource 
policy-making. One of the best-known categorizations (but there are also others) 
describe four different types of crowdsourcing, each corresponding to the function 
that is crowd-sourced.56 The ﬁrst is ‘information generation’, and is exempliﬁed by 
Wiki-type forms of collaboration57 ; the second is ‘service co-production’ and has as
53 https://empatia-project.eu/the-project/. 
54 Meloni et al. (2018); Sgueo (2016); Allegretti and Sgueo (2022). Participants in Empaville 
(https://www.empaville.com) were asked to identify and point out the needs of the main districts 
of the city (Downtown, Midtown and Uptown), engaging as equal partners on issues of public 
signiﬁcance, arriving from individual preferences to collective decisions. 
55 The CrowdLaw project (http://manifesto.crowd.law) is run by the NYU GovLab and incorporates 
a section with suggestions for the thoughtful design of participatory platforms. Recommendations 
include the clariﬁcation of demand of participation, optimisation of resources, better information 
systems and diversiﬁcation of engagement opportunities tailored on diverse publics. A repository of 
CrowdLaw cases includes over one hundred examples from local, regional and national adminis-
trations, spanning thirty-nine countries and six continents (https://crowd.law). 
56 Liu (2017). 
57 Szpir (2002); Gulick et al. (2010); Moon and Sproull (2008). One may take the example of 
‘Clickworkers’(http://www.nasaclickworkers.com), initiated in the year 2000 as a pilot study by 
NASA to determine whether or not online volunteers would be interested in contributing, and if 
they could produce data useful to answering interesting science questions, it asked users to identify 
craters or asteroids. The project helped scientists and researchers to build an extensive database of

its objective the production of services58 ; the third type of crowdsourcing is named 
‘creation’59 ; the fourth type of crowdsourcing is known as ‘policy-making’.60
114
5
Re-Conceptualising the Aesthetics of Digital Democracy
As we are discussing public policy, it is inevitable that, in the opinion of many, 
the preferred hypothesis of crowdsourcing is the one in which stakeholders and 
policy-makers not only share knowledge and ideas via a digital platform, but also 
integrate this knowledge into policy. ‘Co-creation’—as this hypothesis is commonly 
referred to—works as a ‘democratic boost’ that help policy-producers (i.e., public 
ofﬁcials) and users (i.e., citizens) to come closer and work together. Everyone in the 
policy process has something to proﬁt by co-creating. Policy-makers enhance their 
legitimacy by harnessing the skills and expertise of citizens into future decisions; 
citizens, in turn, are empowered in that they gain the opportunity to shape new 
policies in line with their needs and expectations.61 
landforms from data captured by the Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter’s High Resolution Imaging 
Science Experiment. 
58 Noveck (2006); Bestor and Hamp (2010). In a famous article published on Wired in 2006, Jeff 
Howe (The Rise of crowdsourcing, Wired, June 1, 2006—https://www.wired.com/2006/06/ 
crowds/) described crowdsourcing as a new business practice deriving from outsourcing. With the 
latter, business organizations would assign tasks to identiﬁed participants (for example through 
online surveys). With Crowdsouring ﬁrms could harness the labour of anonymous and unattached 
task contractors, who would replace the traditional workforce. In the public sector, an interesting 
example is provided by ‘Peer to Patent’ (https://www.peertopatent.org), an initiative sponsored by 
the US Patent and Trademark Ofﬁce (USPTO) that opens the patent examination process to public 
participation. It consists of an online system that enables the public to supply the USPTO with 
information relevant to assessing the claims of pending patent applications. 
59 This is exempliﬁed by digital platforms where public institutions post their problems, set 
conditions and rules for the participants, and occasionally award prizes to the best ideas. One 
such type of platform is the US Congressional App Challenge (www. 
congressionalappchallenge.us) sponsored by the US house of representatives to host district-wide 
congressional app challenges for middle school and high school students, encouraging them to learn 
to code and inspiring them to pursue careers in computer science. Another examples is ‘Grand 
Challenges (www.grandchallenges.org) which is aimed at solving global health and development 
problems. 
60 Katsonis (2019); Doyle (2009); Williamson (2016); Benjamin (2005); Epstein et al. (2012). 
Examples of the latter include ‘Future Melbourne’ (https://www.melbourne.vic.gov.au/about-
melbourne/future-melbourne/Pages/future-melbourne.aspx) in Australia and the ‘e-Rulemaking 
Initiative’ (https://www.law.upenn.edu/institutes/ppr/erulemaking/) in the United States. The ﬁrst 
was launched in 2008 by the City of Melbourne with the aim of outlining the city’s values and goals 
on the long term. In 2015 the City Council decided to refresh the plan, taking into account the 
changes and developments that had happened since 2008. An extensive community engagement 
process started in 2016. The process was divided in three phases (sharing ideas, bringing ideas 
together, deliberation) and concluded with the decision of a citizens’ jury. The ‘eRulemaking 
Initiative’ was developed by Cornell University to create an online public participation platform, 
named “Regulation Room”, to offer citizens selected an area for policy discussion. The aim was to 
foster citizens’ participation in decision-making processes. 
61 For this reason, citizens engaged in co-creation via digital tools are also described as ‘prosumers’. 
Dahlberg (2010); Alderete (2017). Prosumerism describes a market in which the basic needs of 
consumers are already satisﬁed by mass production and companies initiate processes of mass 
personalization through mass-producing highly personalized products: Tofﬂer (1984).

5.4
Re-Framing Digital Consultations: Interactions Not Outcomes
115
Someone pairs the concept of co-creation with another notion: collective intelli-
gence. The argument goes as such: public institutions that experiment with 
crowdsourcing rely on the intelligence (that is, the cultural background, professional 
expertise, as well as other skills and competences) possessed by participants collec-
tively, to feed with fresh ideas the policy-making process and build consensus in 
support to public decisions.62 In this context, digital technology has been indicated 
as a further support to policy-makers interested in harnessing the ‘civic surplus’ (yet 
another deﬁnition of the same concept) of citizens and provide smarter solutions to 
regulatory challenges. French philosopher Pierre Levy was among the ﬁrst, in 1997, 
to speculate on the collaborative potential offered by technology to human intelli-
gence, suggesting that the Internet could foster the emergence of a ‘meeting of 
minds’.63 In 2010, a team of researchers in Zurich estimated that if a million 
individuals were to contribute towards answering a problem, they would have a 
ninety-seven-percentage chance likelihood of solving it correctly.64 It might be also 
argued that the combination of AI and collective intelligence is going to play an 
ever-increasing role in the future, augmenting human capacities in quests and 
problem-solving.65 
The best known (and certainly the most celebrated) experiment in using digital 
tools to gather the collective intelligence of citizens is that of the rewriting of the 
Icelandic Constitution. In 2011, Iceland was recovering from a ﬁnancial crisis so 
serious that it undermined trust in the ﬁnancial sector and public institutions. In order 
to rebuild trust in democratic decision-making, the government decided to involve
62 Blum and Merkle (2008); Kennedy (2006). Please note that collective intelligence is not inher-
ently human. Animals and algorithms can also engage in forms of ‘swarm intelligence’ and 
collectively gather pieces of information and combine them through social interaction. Humans, 
however, are among those species that are particularly good at developing collaborative and 
imaginative capacity. According to Geoff Mulgan (2017) ‘collective intelligence’ may be under-
stood according to three quantitative variants. The ‘narrow’ variant is concerned with modalities of 
online cooperation of groups of people. This reﬂects the research of Joseph Licklider (1960), who 
pioneered the study of artiﬁcial intelligence. Licklider claimed that the most effective intelligences 
will not replace humans with machine capability. Rather, they will couple humans and digital 
networks. The ‘large’ variant of collective intelligence indicated by Mulgan encompasses the whole 
of human civilization and culture. Mid-variants include forms of intelligence occurring on a large 
scale. The latter have also been described as ‘wisdom of the crowd’. The phenomenon was ﬁrst 
observed in 1907 by Sir Francis Galton (1952). Galton described a carnival game in which 
participants could guess the weight of an ox. As people made their estimates, Galton recorded 
them and observed that the median—which at the time he described as Vox Populi—was remark-
ably close to the correct answer. Over the years scholars have attempted to ﬁnd the wisdom of the 
crowd through scaling up or scaling down group interactions in deliberative processes: Goel and 
Lee (2010); Milotay and Sgueo (2020). 
63 Levy (1997); Levy (1999); Smith (1994). American journalist James Surowiecki (2004) demon-
strated how large groups of independent, motivated, and well-informed people can, collectively, 
make better decisions than isolated individuals. 
64 Fellermann et al. (2010). 
65 This topic has been recently discussed by Hélène Landemore (https://hai.stanford.edu/events/ 
helene-landemore-can-ai-bring-deliberation-masses).

Icelanders in the constitutional reforms. The crowdsourcing process was therefore 
divided into four phases. In the ﬁrst phase, citizens were invited to participate in 
national assemblies, where they shared their views and perspectives. The second 
phase consisted of the election of twenty-ﬁve representatives chosen from among 
ordinary citizens. The elected representatives would then make up the Constitutional 
Reform Council. The third phase, lasting for two months after the election, consisted 
of the writing of new drafts of the Constitution and their publication on a speciﬁc 
website as well as on the Facebook page of the Council. Icelanders had the chance to 
comment on these drafts and to send an email or a letter to Council members. The 
fourth phase consisted of a referendum, which returned a positive result with two 
thirds of the votes in favor of the ﬁnal draft. In the end, however, the proposed 
Constitutional reform did not ﬁnd the necessary majority in the newly elected 
Parliament.66
116
5
Re-Conceptualising the Aesthetics of Digital Democracy
Can we claim that the coupling of digital tools and co-creative approaches to 
public policy is a winning trade-off between interaction-focused aesthetics of digital 
public spaces and the legitimate expectation of public institutions to make demo-
cratic decisions? On the one hand, digital co-creation seems to effectively bridge the 
gap between expectations and reality of digital democracy. But a word of warning: 
on the other hand, the results achieved by digital co-creation are less promising 
compared to their academic account. 
Hence, the concerns shared by those who have looked critically at co-creation. 
These concerns can be separated in three broad categories.67 The ﬁrst and second 
relate to technical and inclusive features, respectively. On a technical level, criticism 
of co-creation is essentially the same as the core argument defended in this book: it is 
not enough to claim that citizens and public decision-makers could engage in 
co-creation via digital tools. Thought also needs to be given to the most appropriate 
design of digital spaces dedicated to co-creation—that is, a design capable of 
motivating citizens to collaborate with public decision makers. Concerns about 
inclusivity remind us that multiple forms of digital exclusion separate those poten-
tially able to use technology from those who, although they want to, lack the tools 
and knowledge to do so. The third concern is logistic and claims that, so far, 
co-creation has been used primarily in local contexts. The proximity between 
institutions and stakeholders makes the ideal condition for co-operative efforts. 
Hence, they question whether co-creation could be scaled-up in national and 
supra-national venues. Case history in this regard is not very encouraging. We 
have just discussed the unsuccessful constitutional reform in Iceland. Similar out-
comes could be seen in the Estonian ‘Rahvakogu’.68 
66 Aitamurto (2012); Hudson (2018); Landemore (2017); Popescu and Loveland (2022). 
67 Sancino et al. (2018); Gebauer et al. (2013); Lund (2018). 
68 Jonsson (2015); Toots (2019). As in the Icelandic case, this initiative was structured in four parts. 
During the ﬁrst phase, Estonians were encouraged to share ideas and comments about ﬁve issues 
that had been selected in advance. The second phase consisted of classifying the input provided by 
citizens into ﬁfty-nine categories. The third phase consisted of ﬁve subject-speciﬁc seminars 
organized for the authors of the proposals and experts. The fourth phase consisted of a gathering

5.5
Game-Design and Digital Democratic Spaces
117
5.5 
Game-Design and Digital Democratic Spaces 
There is a fourth problem with digital co-creation initiatives which is arguably of far 
greater concern than the critical elements we mentioned in the previous Paragraph: it 
consists of the ‘sustainability’ of crowdsourced democratic decision-making. As it is 
already the case with most participatory processes, both online and ofﬂine, the 
greatest challenge for policy-makers is not to attract citizens and engage them in 
participating once, but to ensure consistent levels of participation over time by 
stakeholders. 
A possible solution to this problem—and at the same time the last proposed 
intervention to re-design the aesthetics of digital democracy—consists of behavioral 
incentives applied to digital interactions between policy-makers and citizens. Game-
design in particular, offers a potentially highly remunerative way of engaging 
demanding audiences while maintaining high levels of trust in the institutions.69 
Let us begin by saying that this is not a recent subject. Games and rewards have 
been used throughout human history to generate approval of the exercise of public 
power.70 Back in the 1930s, Johan Huizinga discussed the huge potential of linking 
public powers, human relations and play.71 In his study, Huizinga argued that play is 
a cultural foundation of society. Later studies have investigated further into the 
matter, and concluded that public decision-making and play share common traits: in 
both cases there are rules to be followed, a goal to be achieved and unforeseen 
outcomes.72 Academics have used game theory to describe the dynamics of public 
regulation,73 or have resorted to the metaphor of play to illustrate processes of 
transformation of public administrations.74 
Contemporary game-design experiments in public policy have touched on a vast 
range of issues, including urbanism, aid to development, education and cooperation.
of more than three hundred people in Tallinn for the ‘Rahvakogu deliberation day’—a microcosm 
of Estonian society in which gender, age, local origin, and education were taken into account. In the 
end, ﬁfteen initiatives were selected by the Estonian parliament. However, only three made 
into laws. 
69 Sgueo (2018). Please note that I am intentionally using the deﬁnition of ‘game-design’ in order to 
include all linguistic and conceptual variations of this topic. These include, among the others, the 
term ‘gamiﬁcation’, ‘games with purpose’ (i.e., games that encourage collaboration among indi-
viduals possessing competences that cannot be replicated by an electronic computer) and ‘serious 
games’ (i.e., games in their own right; however, they have the purpose of teaching players to 
perform a particular activity, or more generally aim). 
70 Games were part of the inner public sphere in Greek and Roman societies and have existed in 
some form or other throughout the history of public power. In ancient Rome, for instance, it was 
common to provide poorer citizens with free wheat and circus games as a means of gaining political 
power. 
71 Huizinga (2013). 
72 Gastil and Black (2007). 
73 Medda (2007). 
74 Picci (2014).

These experiments differ greatly in purpose, duration, and target audience. They also 
vary in terms of complexity, costs, and time of implementation. There is, however, 
one recurring element, that is the use of playful design features (such as scores, 
leaderboards, challenges, virtual currencies, and liking/disliking options) to retain 
citizens interested and foster long-term engagement. Hence, I assert that by routinely 
incorporating game-design into digital democratic spaces, it will be possible to 
engage citizens, to amuse them, and most importantly even to encourage them to 
think of themselves as ‘architects’ of democratic decision-making. To borrow from 
Ricardo Blaug, I posit that game-design nurtures ‘incumbent’ forms of democratic 
engagement—a form of democracy that is primarily interested in channeling, sim-
plifying, and rationalizing participatory inputs.75
118
5
Re-Conceptualising the Aesthetics of Digital Democracy
Among of the most interesting cases of game-design in digital public spaces there 
are the following three: at the municipal level, Decide Madrid; at the national level, 
the US ‘Challenge.gov; and, at the supranational level, the WB’s Evoke. 
Decide Madrid was already discussed in CHAPTER FOUR. The creators of this 
platform report that over twenty-seven thousand people over the age of sixteen 
have been regular visitors of the website. According to the rules of the platform, 
ideas are moved to the voting phase if at least one percent of its visitors express 
interest in them. At the beginning of 2017, the municipal council enacted the ﬁrst 
two ideas submitted through the platform. Similar to Decide Madrid are ‘Buenos 
Aires Elige’, created by the municipality of Buenos Aires, ‘Decidim’, operating in 
Barcelona and the ‘Active Citizen App’ in Moscow.76 
Moving now to the national level, the Challenge.gov digital platform is designed 
to support US federal agencies to mature and scale prize competitions in order to 
advance their missions. Participants are invited to share their ideas and solutions to 
policy-challenges. Since 2010, the US government has run over one thousand and 
two hundred prize competitions—engaging students, professionals, small business 
owners and academic researchers into collective ideation and problem-solving.77 
To conclude with the list of examples, the most renowned case of supranational 
gamiﬁed democratic governance is Evoke, a graphic novel game developed by the 
WB in 2010. The game allowed players to impersonate the participants in the ‘Evoke 
Network’—a network of the best scientists and thinkers worldwide—and challenged 
them with real issues of cooperation for development. During its initial run,
75 Blaug (2002). 
76 Since its creation in 2017, Buenos Aires Elige (https://baelige.buenosaires.gob.ar) crowdsourced 
over 26,000 ideas. Decidim (https://www.decidim.barcelona) was launched in February 2016 to 
allow the direct participation of residents in decisions concerning the city. The preparation of the 
Municipal Action Plan engaged more than 40,000 people and received over 10,000 suggestions. 
Via the Active Citizen app (https://ict.moscow) Muscovites can vote on non-political city decisions, 
such as naming a new subway station or setting the speed limits. They are awarded points for every 
vote they cast. City-wide votes are afforded more points than district-level ones. 
77 https://www.challenge.gov. More on this topic: Mergel (2018); Mergel and Desouza (2013); 
Hameduddin et al. (2020).

according to the WB, the host website drew one hundred thousand visitors from one 
hundred and ﬁfty countries.78
5.5
Game-Design and Digital Democratic Spaces
119
Despite some minor shortcomings, the examples we just mentioned received 
positive feedbacks and helped the organizing institutions to overcome described 
issues of decreasing interest. Is this enough to say that game-design is the ultimate 
solution to the problem of the sustainability of digital democracy? Yes and 
no. Indeed, it should be pointed out, for the sake of completeness, that game-
design embodies a number of weaknesses, both practical and theoretical in nature. 
First and foremost, game dynamics are not democratic a priori. Said otherwise, 
game-incentives are generally modelled to meet the needs and please the expecta-
tions of certain categories of users. Players are in competition with each other for 
most of the time they play. Translated into practice, this means that implementing 
gamiﬁcation strategies into policy-making in order to make it more inclusive may 
end up returning the opposite outcome: lower engagement. Or may lead to the 
‘capture’ of the regulators by dominant interest groups. Especially in the case of 
large-scale participation, participants may end up being orchestrated by advocacy 
groups that can generate hundreds of thousands of submissions that are not infor-
mative nor reliable indicators of citizens’ informed value preferences. 
Solutions to this dilemma (and more broadly to the issue of representativeness in 
digital democratic spaces) exist, but are not fully convincing. The best known of 
these solutions is the one devised by John Dryzek, Graham Smith, Matthew Ryan 
(and many others) who propose the formation of small groups of citizens composed 
of the non-elite.79 Such ‘mini-publics’ would involve using more localized or task-
speciﬁc fora to reach consensus. As further clariﬁed by Frank Fischer, via these mini 
publics, citizens gain a better control of their relationship with experts, and for this 
reason can be understood as a mode of ‘democratizing’ expertise.80 Contrary to this 
idea, I posit that digital democratic spaces should not address a single societal 
environment, but rather operate on the logic of mini-publics; that is, designing 
digital participatory processes in a way that could attract diversiﬁed audiences at 
different stages of the participatory process. Ideally, the aesthetics of digital
78 Waddington (2013). 
79 The basic rationale for the mini-public approach is that relatively small groups of citizens, usually 
recruited through random sampling, could deliver effective decisions and overcome the issues 
commonly faced by democratic decision-making. Thus, the root notion of mini-publics is that 
democracy requires a balance between diverging arguments in a context of mutually civic and 
diverse discussion. Citizens’ juries, deliberative polls and consensus conferences are all exemplars 
of mini-publics. John Dryzek (2011) envisages in mini-publics a solution to the risk of anti-
democratic representation. He explains that deliberative processes involve mechanisms for driving 
and supporting interactions within and between governance networks. These networks, however, 
are often populated by society’s elites. Hence the risk of anti-democratic representation that could 
narrow the context for deliberation. Dryzek proposes as a solution the formation of small groups of 
citizens composed of the non-elite. These mini-publics would involve a more localised or task-
speciﬁc forum purposed to reach consensus. Further on this topic: Ryan and Smith (2014); Smith 
and Setala (2018); Farrell and Stone (2020). 
80 Fischer (2000).

democracy should be responsive to as wide a range of publics as possible in order to 
attract (and beneﬁt from) skills, social leverage and personal/direct engagement.
120
5
Re-Conceptualising the Aesthetics of Digital Democracy
Second, increased use of game-design could lead participants to behave as 
consumers, expecting fun and engagement as a permanent, rather than occasional, 
component of digital participatory processes. We thus return to the starting point of 
this volume. Once citizens get used to fun-incentives they may no longer respond to 
different stimuli, leaving public regulators with no choice but to gamify policy-
making.81 
Third and ﬁnally, instances of game-deign are necessarily (and inevitably) 
privacy-intrusive. Issues of privacy and anonymity are pervasive in most of the 
experimental forms of digital civic engagement. Anonymity, on the one hand, has 
positive outcomes because it allows people to express critical and controversial 
views without worrying about potentially adverse effects. However, user anonymity 
can lead to uncivil forms of behavior, as it reduces people’s accountability for their 
conduct. Uncivil forms of communication, especially those that are interpersonal, 
can undermine people’s willingness to take part in deliberative processes, and 
prevent them from expressing their views freely and sincerely. Privacy is related 
to anonymity, but does not overlap with it entirely. The cases show that there can be 
various degrees of intrusiveness in citizens’ private spheres. In some cases, such as 
Decide Madrid, users had to register and identify themselves to participate. 
5.6 
Concluding Remarks 
We have started our journey by asking whether democratic governments could make 
digital spaces more attractive—but also effective—at engaging citizens—and how 
they could do so. To answer this question, we have explored various aspects of the 
relationship between technology and democracy, including the role the former has in 
strengthening our collective intelligence, nurturing empathic relations between cit-
izens and institutions, and supporting processes of political aggregation, deliberation 
and collaboration. But we also investigated the challenges brought by technology to 
the security and privacy of citizens within digital democratic spaces, the negative 
impact it has on growing social polarization, fake news and hate speech and the 
many ways in which digital technology may encourage the concentration of power 
in the hands of few actors, and thus undermine representation, transparency and 
inclusivity in democratic decision-making. 
Perhaps unsurprisingly, we arrive at the end of this long journey into the 
aesthetics of digital democracy with some—few—certainties (one of which is 
certainly the crucial importance of digital design) and many questions that are still 
without clear answers. The many persuasive arguments we have met in favor of 
using digital technology to the goal of engaging citizens in policy-making are
81 Grant (2012).

contrasted by equally persuasive claims about the drawbacks of digital technology. 
So, if everyone is right, then is no one right?
5.6
Concluding Remarks
121
Four points are worth a ﬁnal and brief reﬂection. These points—and related 
questions—will serve as the basis for a future research agenda interested in analyz-
ing 
the 
multiple 
design-challenges 
of 
digital 
democracy 
and 
possibly 
overcoming them. 
Let us look at each of these points brieﬂy. 
The ﬁrst is that technological progress is transforming both the state and society. 
The former in its constituent components: people, territory and sovereignty. The 
latter both with regard to individual relations among citizens and its collective 
dimension. These transformations are made dramatically evident by the different 
pace of social progress compared to technological progress: one evolves progres-
sively, the other exponentially. 
We thus asked ourselves whether democratic rights would evolve at the frenetic 
pace imposed by technological innovation. We said that the conquest and expansion 
of many of these rights (e.g., voting rights, gender equality, jurisdictional protec-
tions) in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries advanced slowly, mostly through 
incremental changes. Will this change with digital formats? It is too early to say. It 
seems, however, that digital transition of governments and societies is not acceler-
ating the evolution of participatory rights, either in one direction (more rights) or the 
opposite direction (fewer rights). Rather, it seems to have triggered a subtle and, in 
many ways, uncertain transformation: the osmosis between individual and collective 
spheres. Digital participation appears to be more vivid and incisive in the second 
dimension—the collective, reticular, and disaggregated dimension that matures 
through networks. It is less so in its singular dimension. 
Second point: the democratic model of government is in crisis. It is a different 
and, in some ways, autonomous crisis than the one triggered by the spread of digital 
technologies in contemporary societies. Above all, it is a paradoxical crisis, since it is 
exacerbated at a historical moment when the supply of participation and the social 
capital willing to embrace it are increasing. 
It 
is 
a 
crisis 
of 
the 
democratic 
model—we 
said—not 
necessarily 
of 
representation—which is just one, but not the only, outcome of the former. The 
point (third in our list) is that those who extol the digital tool in the service of 
deliberative contexts often merge the two concepts. But the (to date unfulﬁlled) 
ambition to involve more and better all citizens in collective decisions through 
digital tools is primarily a matter of representation. Instead, the democratic crisis is 
also (and, perhaps, above all) caused by other issues: the intricate and frequently 
overlapping public-private spheres, demographic decline, digital skills illiteracy, as 
well as lowering social mobility. And the list goes on. 
The question to be asked in this regard is: can digital tools surrogate these gaps? 
This question can be answered in different ways. If we want to follow an 
optimistic reasoning, we could say that digital technology is not impacting democ-
racy per se, but its infrastructure (i.e., how individuals relate to each other, how they 
interact with public administrations, access and exchange information, and so on). 
The digital transformations we have discussed in this book may well change the

functioning of a democracy, not its idea. Or we could follow a provocative reason-
ing, and go as far as to argue that for those with (at least) adequate digital skills, the 
democratic divides brought about by digital technology are of less concern. Even 
social mobility and social inclusion may appear to us to be less serious problems 
when placed in a digital perspective. A young person who is not afﬂuent but digitally 
savvy, for instance, has more opportunities to be heard within digital public spaces 
than a senior citizen who is afﬂuent but lacks adequate skills in the use of technol-
ogy. We should also be mindful of the fact that non-participation and silence, 
transposed in digital democratic spaces, may indicate a desire to engage outside of 
traditional forms—and should therefore be treated as participation. So perhaps we 
should start reconsidering traditional understandings of citizens’ non-involvement in 
public affairs as a sign of unavoidable democratic decline. 
122
5
Re-Conceptualising the Aesthetics of Digital Democracy
The fourth and ﬁnal point sums up all the previous points. The beneﬁt 
(or shortcoming, depending on one’s point of view) of technological advancement 
is that it has forced contemporary democratic structures to grapple with issues of 
scarcity and foresight. Scarcity (mainly due to the widespread perception of fewer 
opportunities for social progression, as well as the perceived risks of marginalization 
and control) is countered by technology, which ‘propels’ those who make use of 
technological products into the future (here it is the foresight). Democratic 
structures—we said—struggle to manage these two opposing drives. The result is 
the tensions that are shaking up democratic systems. Digital citizens, compared to 
their analog counterparts, have dazzling expectation. These, however, are frustrated 
by disappointing realities. 
Is this a story with an already written ending then? Not necessarily. Conﬂicting 
scenarios are created by the described conﬂict between expectations and reality. 
There is indeed a chance that the next chapter in the story of digital democracy will 
be written by few, selected, elites. This unfortunate hypothesis would be equivalent 
to a betrayal of the values of participatory democracy. Or we can look at current 
disenchantment with digital democracy with a longer-term viewpoint. We could 
speculate that, in the long run, current efforts to digitalize democratic decision-
making will progressively become more ordered and meaningful, thus lessening 
social exclusion and abuses. This second hypothesis, however, comes at a greater 
cost to those who support it. It imposes a belief in the ability of democratic 
governments to be adaptive reshape the aesthetics of digital democratic spaces. It 
also demands a conﬁdence in the resilience and adaptability of democratic systems. 
Summary
•
Mobility, information, social relations, medicine, ﬁnancial transactions, electoral 
systems and democracies as a whole are evolving according to digital logics and 
dynamics. This will result in major effects for companies (with increasing 
amounts of technological investment and the race to innovate), governments 
(challenged by the quest for regulatory frameworks balanced between competi-
tion and the protection of rights) and citizens (confronted with profound changes 
in the job market)

References
123
•
Digital democratic governments must return to defending complexity, to set-up 
realistic and achievable expectations in participants to digital democratic initia-
tives, starting from the language used to narrate democracy, continuing through 
the design of the interactions with stakeholders, all the way to using creative 
approaches to engage and entertain participants.
•
It is crucial for democratic decision-makers to use a storytelling approach in 
digital democratic spaces that can help move the emphasis from immediacy to 
complexity by encouraging an understanding of the place of online consultations 
within larger, more intricate, and stratiﬁed decision-making processes. Structur-
ally, this demands the acknowledgment of professional ﬁgures, ofﬁces or work-
ing spaces dedicated to public-sector storytelling. In terms of content, three 
elements are key to delivering impactful stories of digital democracy: one is the 
simplicity of language; another is the reduction of uncertainties; and a third is the 
use of appropriate framing.
•
To re-design the physiognomy of interactions between policy-makers and citi-
zens within digital public spaces, digital interactions between citizens and public 
powers should be conceptualized and implemented in the context of an ongoing 
relationship—one that is activated as many times as the stakeholders need it. This 
would help democratic decision-makers to promote a more holistic understanding 
of digital spaces for activism and civic engagement.
•
Digital co-creation seems to effectively bridge the gap between expectations and 
reality of digital democracy. Yet the results it achieved in practice are less 
promising compared to their academic account. Those who have looked critically 
at co-creation remind us of its technical, inclusive and logistic limitations.
•
Behavioral incentives (and speciﬁcally game-design) applied to digital interac-
tions between policy-makers and citizens offer a potentially highly remunerative 
way of engaging demanding audiences while maintaining high levels of trust in 
the institutions. By routinizing game-design into digital democratic spaces could 
serve the goal to capture citizens’ attention, entertain them and stimulate in 
participants the perception they are architects of their collective life. 
References 
Abdukadirov S (ed) (2016) Nudge theory in action: behavioral design in policy and markets. 
Springer, Berlin 
Abe EN et al (2021) Future of work: skill obsolescence, acquisition of new skills, and upskilling in 
the 4IR, future of work, work-family satisfaction, and employee Well-being in the fourth 
industrial. Revolution, pp 217–231 
Aitamurto T (2012) Crowdsourcing for democracy – a new era in policy-making, Parliament of 
Finland, Committee for the future 
Alderete MV (2017) The age of prosumerism: some micro-economic analysis. J Theor Appl 
Electron Commer Res 12(3):1–12 
Alemanno A, Sibony AL (2015) Nudge and the law: a European perspective. Hart Publishing, 
London

124
5
Re-Conceptualising the Aesthetics of Digital Democracy
Allegretti G, Sgueo G (2022) Connecting the dots of an implicit agenda: the case of participatory 
budgeting a a travelling policy. In: Gelli F, Basso M (eds) Identifying models of national urban 
agendas. A view to the global transition. Palgrave Macmillan, London 
Alonso S et al (eds) (2011) The future of representative democracy. Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge 
Au-Yong-Oliveira M et al (2019) The role of AI and automation on the future of jobs and the 
opportunity to change society. New Knowl Inf Syst Technol 3:348–357 
Āzena L, Keišs S (2009) Speciﬁcs of territorial marketing strategy planning. Eur Integr Stud 3 
Barton A, Grüne-Yanoff T (2015) From libertarian paternalism to nudging – and beyond. Rev 
Philos Psychol 6(3):341–359 
Beard VA (2012) Citizen planners: from self-help to political transformation, The Oxford Hand-
book of Urban Planning. Oxford University Press, Oxford 
Beduschi A (2019) Digital identity: contemporary challenges for data protection, privacy and 
non-discrimination rights. Big Data Soc 6(2):205395171985509 
Benjamin SM (2005) Evaluating e-rulemaking: public participation and political institutions. Duke 
Law J 55:893 
Bennett M, Orr K (2018) Storytellers in Chief. How top local government managers use storytelling 
to lead. University of St. Andrews, UK 
Benvenisti E (2018) Upholding democracy amid the challenges of new technology: what role for 
the law of global governance?, Tel Aviv University Working Paper Series 
Bertsou E, Pastorella G (2017) Technocratic attitudes: a citizens’ perspective of expert decision-
making. West Eur Polit 40(2):430–458 
Bestor DR, Hamp E (2010) Peer to patent: a cure for our ailing patent examination system. 
Northwest J Technol Intellect Prop 9:16 
Blaug R (2002) Engineering democracy. Polit Stud 50:102–122 
Blum C, Merkle D (eds) (2008) Swarm intelligence: introduction and applications. Springer 
Science & Business Media, Berlin 
Bobbio N (1984) The future of democracy. Telos 61:3–16 
Calzada I (2022) Emerging digital citizenship regimes: post-pandemic technopolitical democracies. 
Emerald Group Publishing, Bingley 
Cartwright H, Hardie J (2012) Evidence-based policy: a practical guide to doing it better. Oxford 
University Press, Oxford 
Cartwright N et al (2009) Evidence-based policy: where is our theory of evidence? J Children’s 
Serv 4(4):6–14 
Colombo E et al (2019) AI meets labor market: exploring the link between automation and skills. 
Inf Econ Policy 47:27–37 
Converse PE (1964) The nature of belief systems in mass publics. Crit Rev 18(1):1–3 
Cros E et al (2021) Is the obsolescence of the skills of older employees an inevitable consequence of 
digitalization? Digital transformations in the challenge of activity and work: understanding and 
supporting technological changes. pp 169–181 
Crouch C (2004) Post-democracy. Wiley, London 
Csikszentmihalyi M (2008) Flow: the psychology of optimal experience. Harper Perennial, 
New York 
Cubitt RP et al (2011) Framing and free riding: emotional responses and punishment in social 
dilemma games. Exp Econ 14:254–272 
Dahl R (1999a) Can international organizations be democratic? A sceptic’s view. In: Shapiro I, 
Hackercordon C (eds) Democracy’s edges. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 
Dahl RH (1999b) The past and future of democracy, Università degli studi di Siena. Dipartimento di 
Scienze storiche, giuridiche, politiche e sociali 
Dahlberg L (2010) Cyber-libertarianism 2.0: a discourse theory/critical political economy exami-
nation. Cult Polit 6(3):331–356 
Davies HT, Nutley SM (eds) (2020) What works?: evidence-based policy and practice in public 
services. Policy Press, Bristol

References
125
Doemeland D, Trevino J (2014) Which World Bank Reports Are Widely Read?, Policy Research 
Working Paper n. 6851, Washington 
Dorison CA et al (2022) In COVID-19 health messaging, loss framing increases anxiety with little-
to-no concomitant beneﬁts: experimental evidence from 84 countries. Affect Sci 3:577–602 
Doyle R (2009) Future Melbourne: a visionary city. Waste Management and Environment 20(5):16 
Dryzek J et al (2011) Toward a deliberative global citizens’ assembly. Global Policy 2 
Eidelman BM et al (2016) Applying of the territorial marketing technologies in organizations of 
socio-culture service and tourism. Int Bus Manag 10(23):5568–5571 
Epstein D et al (2012) Not by technology alone: the ‘Analog’ Aspects of online public engagement 
in policymaking. Cornell e- Rulemaking Initiative Publications, paper 18 
Farrell D, Stone P (2020) Sortition and mini-publics: a different kind of representation. Oxford 
University Press, Oxford 
Fellermann H et al (eds) (2010) Artiﬁcial life XII: proceedings of the twelfth international 
conference on the synthesis and simulation of living systems, Odense, Denmark, August 
19–23. MIT Press, Boston 
Fernández-Prados JS et al (2021) Measuring digital citizenship: a comparative analysis. Informatics 
8(1):18 
Fieschi C (2019) Populocracy: the tyranny of authenticity and the rise of populism. Agenda 
Publishing, Newcastle Upon Tyne 
Fischer F (2000) Citizens, experts and the environment: the politics of local knowledge. Duke 
University Press, Durham 
Frederick S (2002) Automated choice heuristics. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 
Galton F (1952) The ballot-box. Nature 75 
Gastil G, Black L (2007) Public deliberation and the organizing principle of political communica-
tion research J Public Delib 4(1):1 
Gebauer J et al (2013) The dark and the bright side of co-creation: triggers of member behavior in 
online innovation communities. J Bus Res 66(9):1516–1527 
Goel A, Lee DT (2010) Large-scale deliberation via small group interactions, and the importance of 
triads. University of Stanford Research Paper, Stanford 
Grant RW (2012) Strings attached: untangling the ethics of incentives. Princeton University Press, 
Princeton 
Grumbach S (2022) L’empire des algorithmes. Armand Colin, Paris 
Gulick VC et al (2010) Online citizen science with click-workers, AGU Fall Meeting Abstracts: 
13B-08 
Hameduddin T et al (2020) Conditions for open innovation in public organizations: evidence from 
Challenge.gov. Asia Pac J Public Adm 42(2):111–131 
Herm A (2008) Recent migration trends: citizens of EU-27 member states become even more 
mobile while EU remains attractive to non-EU citizens, Eurostat 98/2008 
Holmlid S (2012) Participative; co-operative; emancipatory: from participatory design to service 
design, Conference Proceedings ServDes – DeThinking Service; ReThinking Design, Oslo 
Norway 24–26 November 2009. Linköping University Electronic Press, pp 105–118 
Hudson A (2018) When does public participation make a difference? Evidence from Iceland’s 
crowdsourced constitution. Policy Internet 10(2):185–217 
Hughes I (2022) The metaverse: is it the future? It Now 64(1):22–23 
Huizinga J (2013) Homo Ludens Ils 86. Routledge, London 
Innerarity D (2021) No democracy without comprehension: political unintelligibility as a demo-
cratic problem. Polity 53(2) 
John P et al (2020) Nudge, nudge, think, think: experimenting with ways to change citizen 
behaviour. Manchester University Press, Manchester 
Jonsson ME (2015) Democratic innovations in deliberative systems – the case of the Estonian 
citizens’ assembly process. J Delib Democr 11(1) 
Kastrenakes J, Heath A (25 October 2021) Facebook is spending at least $10 billion this year on its 
metaverse division, The Verge

126
5
Re-Conceptualising the Aesthetics of Digital Democracy
Katsonis M (2019) Designing effective public engagement: the case study of future Melbourne 
2026. Policy Design Pract 2(2):215–228 
Kauffman B (2018) Italy gets the world ﬁrst minister for direct democracy, Swissinfo 
Kennedy J (2006) Swarm intelligence. In: Zomaya AY (ed) Handbook of nature-inspired and 
innovative computing. Springer, pp 187–219 
Knox J (2022) The metaverse, or the serious business of tech frontiers. Postdig Sci Edu 4(2): 
207–215 
Kraus DK et al (2022) Facebook and the creation of the metaverse: radical business model 
innovation or incremental transformation? Int J Entrepreneur Behav Res 
Kriesi H et al (eds) (2013) Democracy in the age of globalization and Mediatization. Palgrave 
Macmillan, London 
Kurki M (2011) Democracy through technocracy? Reﬂections on technocratic assumptions in EU 
democracy promotion discourse. J Interv State-Build 5(2):211–234 
Landemore H (2017) Inclusive constitution making and religious rights: lessons from the Icelandic 
experiment. J Polit 79(3):762–779 
Lebessis N, Paterson J (2000) Developing new modes of governance. European Commission, 
Forward Studies Unit 
Leduc S, Liu Z (2019) Robots or workers? A macro analysis of automation and labor markets. 
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco 
Lee NJ et al (2008) Framing policy debates: issue dualism, journalistic frames, and opinions on 
controversial policy issues. Commun Res 35(5):695–718 
Levy P (1997) L’intelligence collective pour une anthropologie du cyberspace. La decouverte, Paris 
Levy P (1999) Les Technologies de l’intelligence. Points, Paris 
Licklider JC (1960) Man-computer symbiosis. IRE Trans Human Factors Electr 1:4–11 
Liu HK (2017) Crowdsourcing government: lessons from multiple disciplines, public 77(5). Adm 
Rev 77:656–667 
Luhmann N (1990) The future of democracy. Thesis Eleven 26(1):46–53 
Lund DH (2018) Co-creation in urban governance: from inclusion to innovation. Scand J Public 
Adm 22(2):3–17 
Manfredi JL (2019) Brand activism. Commun Soc 32(4):343–359 
Medda F (2007) A game theory approach for the allocation of risks in transport public private 
partnerships. Int J Proj Manag 25(3):213–218 
Meloni G et al (2018) Participlaying: a reﬂection on gamiﬁcation techniques from the standpoint of 
participatory budgeting, Hope for democracy: 30 years of participatory budgeting worldwide, 
pp 566–587 
Mergel I (2018) Open innovation in the public sector: drivers and barriers for the adoption of 
Challenge.gov. Public Manag Rev 20(5):726–745 
Mergel I, Desouza K (2013) Implementing open innovation in the public sector: the case of 
Challenge.gov. Public Adm Rev 73(6):882–890 
Metzger A et al (2021) Taming the giants: the DMA/DSA package. Common Mark 
Law Rev:1028–1040 
Milotay N, Sgueo G (2020) Collective intelligence. Social and democratic dimensions. European 
Parliamentary Research Service, Brussels 
Moon JY, Sproull LS (2008) The role of feedback in managing the internet-based volunteer work 
force. Inf Syst Res 19(4):494–515 
Mouffe C, Laclau E (1991) La democracia de ﬁn de siglo. Centro de Documentación y Estudios, 
Asunción 
Mulgan G (2017) Big mind: how collective intelligence can change our world. Princeton University 
Press, Princeton 
Mutung’u G, Rutenberg I (2020) Digital id and risk of statelessness. Statelessness Citizenship Rev 
2:348, 354

References
127
Nabi RL (2003) Exploring the framing effects of emotion: do discrete emotions differentially 
inﬂuence information accessibility, information seeking, and policy preference? Commun Res 
30(2):224–247 
Noveck BS (2006) Peer to patent: collective intelligence, open review, and patent reform. Harv J 
Law Technol 20:123 
Origgi G (2017) Reputation. What it is and why it matters. Princeton University Press, Princeton 
Paolillo A et al (2022) How to compete with robots by assessing job automation risks and resilient 
alternatives. Sci Robot 7(65):5561 
Picci L (2014) Actors and strategies of the bureaucratic reputation game. In: Waeraas A, Maor M 
(eds) Organizational reputation in the public sector. Pluto, London 
Polaine A et al (2013) Reason, service design: from insight to implementation. Rosenfeld Media, 
New York 
Popescu D, Loveland M (2022) Judging deliberation: an assessment of the crowdsourced Icelandic 
constitutional project. J Deliber Democr 18(1) 
Popkin S (1991) The reasoning voter: communication and persuasion in presidential campaigns. 
University of Chicago Press, Chicago 
Proulx MU, Tremblay D (2006) Marketing territorial et positionnement mondial: global positioning 
of the peripheries with territorial marketing. Géographie Économie Société 8(2):239–256 
Raines T et al (2017) Europe’s political tribes. Exploring the diversity of views across the 
EU. Chatham House, London 
Ranchordas S (2018) Cities as corporations? The privatization of cities and the automation of local 
law, AdminLaw Blog 
Rauh C (2022) Clear messages to the European public? The language of European Commission 
press releases 1985-2020. J Eur Integr 45:683–701 
Roose K (2022) Futureproof. 9 rules for humans in the age of automation. John Murray, London 
Ryan M, Smith G (2014) Deﬁning mini-publics. Deliberative mini-publics: Involving citizens in the 
democratic process, pp 9–26 
Sancino A et al (2018) Cross-sector collaboration for public value co-creation: a critical analysis. In: 
Stout M (ed) From austerity to abundance? Creative approaches to coordinating the common 
good. Emerald Publishing Limited, Bingley 
Sarkar C, Kotler P (2020) Brand activism. Idea Bite Press 
Schlesinger A Jr (1997) Has democracy a future. Foreign Aff 76 
Sennett R (2016) The limits of design, Theatrum Mundi – LSE Cities – Fondation Maison des 
sciences de l’homme 
Sgueo G (2016) Participatory budgeting. An innovative approach. European Parliamentary 
Research Service, Brussels 
Sgueo G (2018) Games, powers & democracies. Bocconi University Press, Milano 
Sgueo G (2023) Italy’s digital strategy. In: Secchi C, Gili A (eds) Digitalisation for sustainable 
infrastructure: the road ahead. ISPI, Milano 
Smirnov EN, Lukyanov SA (2019) Development of the global market of artiﬁcial intelligence 
systems, vol 15. Inst Econ Russian Acad Sci, pp 57–69 
Smith G (2021) Can democracy safeguard the future? Polity, London 
Smith G, Setala M (2018) Mini-publics and deliberative democracy. In: Bachtiger A (ed) The 
Oxford handbook of deliberative democracy. Oxford University Press, Oxford 
Smith JB (1994) Collective intelligence in computer-based collaboration. Laurence Erlbaum 
Associates, New York 
Somin I (2013) Democracy and political ignorance: why smaller government is smarter. Stanford 
University Press, Redwood City 
Soni N et al (2020) Artiﬁcial intelligence in business: from research and innovation to market 
deployment. Proc Comput Sci 167:22 
Spagnoletti P et al (2015) A design theory for digital platforms supporting online communities: a 
multiple case study. J Inf Technol 30(4):364–380

128
5
Re-Conceptualising the Aesthetics of Digital Democracy
Sullivan C (2018) Digital identity–from emergent legal concept to new reality. Comput Law Secur 
Rev 34(4):723–731 
Surowiecki J (2004) The wisdom of crowds. Doubleday, New York 
Szpir M (2002) Clickworkers on Mars (science observer). Am Sci 90(3):226–228 
Thaler R, Sunstein C (2008) Nudge: improving decisions about health, wealth, and happiness. Yale 
University Press, New Haven 
Thies F et al (2016) Effects of social interaction dynamics on platforms. J Manag Inf Syst 33(3): 
843–873 
Tofﬂer A (1984) The third wave. Bantam Books, New York 
Tomasello F (2022) From industrial to digital citizenship: rethinking social rights in cyberspace. 
Theory Soc 1:1–24 
Toots M (2019) Why E-participation systems fail: the case of Estonia’s Osale. Gov Inf Q 36(3): 
546–559 
Truijens D (2022) Coherence between theory and policy in nudge and boost: is it relevant for 
evidence-based policy-making? Ration Soc 34(3):368–394 
Tversky A, Kahneman D (1979) Prospect theory: an analysis of decision under risk Econometrica 
2 263–292, 47 
Tversky A, Kahneman D (1991) Loss aversion in riskless choice: a reference-dependent model. Q J 
Econ 106(4):1039–1061 
Viglia G et al (2018) The determinants of stakeholder engagement in digital platforms. J Bus Res 
89:404–410 
Vochozka M et al (2018) Participating in a highly automated society: how artiﬁcial intelligence 
disrupts the job market. Econ Manage Financ Mark 13(4):57–62 
Waddington DI (2013) A parallel world for the World Bank: a case study of urgent: evoke, an 
educational alternate game. Revue Internationale des technologies en pédagogie universitaire 
10:42–56 
Walter S, Lee JD (2022) How susceptible are skills to obsolescence? A task-based perspective of 
human capital depreciation. Foresight and STI Governance. Foresight-Russia till No. 3/2015, 
16(2):32–41 
Wike R et al (2019) Europeans credit EU with promoting peace and prosperity, but say Brussels is 
out of touch with its citizens. Pew Research Centre 
Williamson C (2016) A history of the future: imagining Melbourne. Plan News 42(5):14–15 
Yang Y, Hobbs JE (2020) The power of stories: narratives and information framing effects in 
science communication. Am J Agric Econ 102(4):1271–1296 
Yu E, Sangiorgi D (2018) Service design as an approach to implement the value cocreation 
perspective in new service development. J Serv Res 21(1):40–58

