Functional Integration; Path Integrals
243
F
6. H. Geiger, K. Scheel eds.: Quanten (Springer, Berlin 1926, Handbuch der Physik 23)
7. J. Lemmerich: Max Born, James Franck: Physiker in ihrer Zeit (Reichert, Wiesbaden 1982)
8. J. Lemmerich: Aufrecht im Sturm (Spektrum, Berlin 2005) (Biography of J. Franck)
9. J. Kuczera: Gustav Hertz (Teubner, Leipzig 1985)
Functional Integration; Path Integrals
Cecile DeWitt-Morette
Deﬁnitions
Functional integral is, by deﬁnition, an integral over a space of functions. The func-
tions are the variables of integration. When the variables are paths, the functional
integral is usually called a “path integral”. For example, let x be a path parameter-
ized by time t ∈T , taking its values in a D-dimensional manifold MD, i.e.
x : T →MD
by
t →x(t),
(1)
a sum over all paths x is a path integral.
To compute a path integral

X
Dx F(x),
x ∈X,
(2)
one needs to deﬁne the domain of integration X, a norm on X, a volume element
Dx on X, and choose an integrable functional F on X.
If the variable of integration is a ﬁeld, a functional integral is sometimes called
“a sum over histories”.
Functional integration is a rich and powerful mathematical technique because the
domain of integration X is an inﬁnite dimensional space. Short of having intuitive
understanding of inﬁnite dimensional spaces of functions, we have extensive studies
of such spaces developed during the last century.
Path Integrals, A Modern Approach to  Quantization
Functional integration entered physics in 1942 in the doctoral dissertation of Richard
P. Feynman, “The Principle of Least Action in Quantum Mechanics” [1]. The goal
was a formulation of  quantum electrodynamics beginning with quantum me-
chanics formulated in terms of the classical action functional S of a given system.

244
Functional Integration; Path Integrals
Schematically, the path integral constructed by Feynman that gives the probabil-
ity amplitude for a particle, known to be at a at a time ta, be found at b at time
tb is
< b, tb | a, ta > =

Xa,b
Dx exp( i
ℏS(x))
(3)
where Xa,b is the space of all paths x from a to b. The paths x were replaced by n
of their values
{x(t1), x(t2), . . . , x(tn)} ,
x(t) ∈RD
for n ordered values of ti in the interval [ta, tb].
The path integral is approximated by an integral over (RD)n.
This crude approximation was both beneﬁcial and detrimental.
• It lead Feynman to a powerful formulation of Quantum Electrodynamics in terms
of diagrams, and to the award of the 1965 Nobel prize. The diagrams correspond-
ing to a particular matrix element are both an aid to its calculation and a picture
of its physical process. They rapidly became popular  Feynman Diagrams.
• Unfortunately, the time-slicing approximation is fundamentally deﬁcient because
it ignores the domain of integration. Indeed a functional space is rarely the limit
of RDn when n goes to inﬁnity. It also ignores the topological properties of the
range MD of the paths. In addition, it makes it extremely awkward, not to say
impossible, to implement the two basic techniques for computing integrals: inte-
gration by parts and change of variable of integration.
Gaussian Integrals, Semi-classical Approximations
Gaussian integrals are easily deﬁned by their Fourier transforms.
In one-dimension the Fourier transform of a real gaussian is:

R
dx
√a exp(−πax2) exp(−2πi x′x) := exp(−πx′2
a );
the right hand side deﬁnes the gaussian on the left.
In D-dimensions the Fourier transform of a real or complex gaussian is:

RD Dx exp(−π
s Q(x)) exp(−2πi⟨x′, x⟩) := exp(−πsW(x′))
(4)

Functional Integration; Path Integrals
245
F
where
Dx = dx1 dx2 . . . dxD (det Qij )−1/2 ,
s ∈{1, i},
Q(x) =

ij
Qijxixj ,
W(x′) = W ij x′
ix′
j,

Qij W jk = δk
i ,
x′ ∈RD(dual of RD).
A gaussian functional integral has the same structure. Given a quadratic form W
on the dual space X′ of the domain of integration X, one deﬁnes a gaussian volume
element Dx exp(−π
s Q(x)) by its Fourier transform exp(−πsW(x′)). Integrating
polynomials with respect to gaussian volume elements follow the same rules in ﬁnite
and inﬁnite dimensions. The Feynman diagrams are the graphic representation of
integrals of polynomials with respect to a gaussian volume element.
In order to use gaussian techniques in the integral (3), one expands the action
functional S(x) around its value at a ﬁducial choice x0 often chosen to be a classical
solution xcl of the Euler–Lagrange equation:
S(x) = S(xcl) + 1
2 S′′(xcl) J.J + 1
3! S′′′(xcl) J.J.J + . . .
(5)
The second variation S′′(xcl) J.J of the action functional S is a quadratic form on
the space of vector ﬁelds J on TxclX (tangent space to X at xcl). The calculus of
variation provides powerful techniques [2] for computing gaussian integrals deﬁned
by the second variation of the classical action functional.
If one terminates the expansion (5) at the second variation, the integral (3) is the
semi-classical approximation of the matrix element on the left-hand side.
The second variation is degenerate in many interesting situations: conservation
laws, caustics, etc...; then the contributions of the ﬁrst, third...variations come
into play and provide explicit results. For example, explicit cross sections of glory
scattering of waves (scalar, electromagnetic and gravitation) by black holes can be
obtained from gaussian integrals where the second variation is degenerate. The ex-
plicit result is given in terms of Bessel functions [2].
Geometrical and Topological Applications
From a small seed in 1942, functional integration in Quantum Physics has grown
into a large and widespread tree [2]. Just a few examples corresponding to a variety
of paths and a variety of action functionals:
1. A path
x : R →MD
by
s →x(s)

246
Functional Integration; Path Integrals
is characterized by
• Its analytic properties: it is an element of a space of continuous paths, or a
Sobolev space when the action functional contains a kinetic energy term, or a
space of Poisson paths for solutions of the telegrapher equation and the Dirac
equation.
• Its domain: s can be the time in a ﬁxed time interval, or the time in a path-
dependent time interval (e.g. in an interval terminating at a ﬁrst-exit time),
or the intrinsic time of a given process, etc...The parameter s need not be a
time variable, it can be any ordering parameter, e.g. a scale variable in coarse-
graining problems.
• Its range: MD can be a (pseudo) riemannian manifold, and/or a multiply con-
nected space, or a ﬁbre bundle.
Detailed calculations of all these cases can be found in [2].
2. An action functional
• If S is a Chern–Simons action [3], functional integration provides an intrin-
sic deﬁnition of Jones polynomials of knot theory in 3-dimensions, explicit
evaluations of topological invariants and applications to physics.
• S maybe deﬁned on supervariables (commuting and anticommuting vari-
ables). Functional integrals in supersymmetric quantum mechanical systems
can be used for proving the Atiyah–Singer index theorem, for computing the
index [4,5], and for related results.
Conclusion
From a heuristic tool, functional integration is gradually becoming a mathematical
tool. Path integrals are by now a well-deﬁned, robust tool. A number of explicit
path integrals can be found in [6]. A number of functional integrals in Quantum
Field Theory are mathematically reliable.
The power of functional integrals stems from the fact that function spaces are inﬁ-
nite dimensional. For example, a linear change of variable of integration for x ∈RD
can be useful but it is not spectacular; a linear change of variable of integration for
x ∈X offers a great variety of possibilities, and uses concepts and techniques from
several areas of analysis [2].
Primary Literature
1. R. P. Feynman: The Principle of Least Action in Quantum Mechanics. Princeton University
Press No 2948 (1942) (University Microﬁlms, Ann Arbor Michigan). R. P. Feynman, with L.
Brown: Feynman’s Thesis: A New Approach to Quantum Theory. (World Scientiﬁc, Singapore
2005). R. P. Feynman: Space-time approach to non-relativistic quantum mechanics. Reviews
of Modern Physics. 20, 367–87 (1948).

Functional Integration; Path Integrals
247
F
2. P. Cartier, C. DeWitt-Morette: Functional Integration; Action and Symmetries. (Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge 2006). This book has an extensive bibliography.
Secondary Literature
3. E. Witten: Quantum ﬁeld theory and the Jones polynomial Communications in Mathematical
Physics. 121, 351–99 (1989).
4. L. Alvarez-Gaume: Supersymmetry and Index Theorem in Supersymmetry. Proceedings of the
1984 NATO School in Bonn, ed. by K. Dietz, R. Flume, G. U. Gehlen, V. Rittenberg (1984).
5. B. DeWitt: Supermanifolds. 2nd Edition, 385–89. (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
1992). B. DeWitt: The Global Approach to Quantum Field Theory. Revised edition (Oxford
University Press, Oxford, 2004).
6. C. Grosche, F. Steiner: Handbook of Feynman Path Integrals. (Springer, Berlin, 1998).

