Hidden-Variables Models of Quantum Mechanics (Noncontextual and Contextual)
287
H
3. N. Wiener: The Role of the Observer. Phil. Sci. 3, 307–319 (1936)
4. D. Bohm: A Suggested Interpretation of the Quantum Theory in Terms of Hidden Variables, I
and II. Phys. Rev. 85, 166–179; 180–193 (1952)
5. L. de Broglie: La m´echanique ondulatoire et la structure atomique de la mati´ere et du rayon-
nement. J. Phys. Radium, 6e series 8, 225–241 (1927)
6. L. de Broglie: Non-linear Wave Mechanics: a Causal Interpretation (Elsevier, Amsterdam
1960)
7. W. Pauli: Reports on the 1927 Solvey Congress (Gauthiers-Villars et Cie, Paris 1928, p. 280)
8. D. Bohm, B. J. Hiley: The Undivided Universe: an Ontological Interpretation of Quantum
Theory (Routledge, London 1993)
9. P. R. Holland: The Quantum Theory of Motion (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 1993)
10. J. S. Bell: On the Problem of Hidden Variables in Quantum Theory. Rev. Mod. Phys. 38, 447–
452 (1966)
11. A. M. Gleason: Measures on the Closed Sub-spaces of Hilbert Space. J. Math. Mechs. 6, 885–
893 (1957)
12. J. M. Jauch, C. Piron: Can Hidden Variables be Excluded from Quantum Mechanics. Helv.
Phys. Acta 36, 827–837 (1963)
13. S. Kochen, E. P. Specker: The Problem of Hidden Variables in Quantum Mechanics. J. Math.
Mech. 17, 59–87 (1967)
14. N. Bohr: Atomic Physics and Human Knowledge (Science Editions, New York 1961, p. 39)
15. D. Bohm, B. J. Hiley: On the Intuitive Understanding of Nonlocality as Implied by Qauntum
Theory. Found. Phys. 5, 93–109 (1975)
16. J. S. Bell: On the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen paradox. Physics 1, 195–200 (1964)
17. D. Bohm, B. J. Hiley, P. N. Kaloyerou: An Ontological Basis for the Quantum Theory: II - A
Causal Interpretation of Quantum Fields. Phys. Reports 144, 349–375 (1987)
Secondary Literature
18. F. J. Belinfante: A Survey of Hidden-Variables Theories (Pergamon Press, Oxford 1973)
19. M. Jammer: The Philosophy of Quantum Mechanics (Wiley-Interscience, New York 1974)
20. J. S. Bell: Speakable and Unspeakable in Quantum Mechanics (Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge 1987)
Hidden-Variables Models of Quantum
Mechanics (Noncontextual and Contextual)
Abner Shimony
In the following discussion of hidden variables models of quantum mechanics the
 Hilbert space formulation of quantum mechanics and the standard interpretation
of its notation and concepts will be taken to be initially understood, even though
challenges to the standard interpretation are implicit in the proposals of  hidden
variables.

288
Hidden-Variables Models of Quantum Mechanics (Noncontextual and Contextual)
Very soon after the formulation of the new quantum mechanics by Werner
Heisenberg (1901–76) and Erwin Schr¨odinger (1887–1961) its advocates, notably
Niels Bohr (1885–1962) [1], made strong claims that the new theory provided a
complete framework for physics. Nevertheless, conjectures that quantum mechan-
ics does not provide a complete description of physical reality materialized in each
of the two competing (but equivalent, as was eventually recognized) formulations of
the theory by Heisenberg and Schr¨odinger. The  Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle
– asserting a limitation on the precision of simultaneous determinations of position
and linear momentum – suggested to Albert Einstein (1879–1955)[2] that the uncer-
tainty was due to limitations of customary experimentation, and that two quantum
mechanically incompatible quantities could in principle be shown to have simul-
taneous precise values by more sophisticated measuring procedures. Max Born’s
(1882–1970)  probabilistic interpretation [3] of Schr¨odinger’s wave function –
that the  wave function Ψ (r, t), where r is position of a particle in three-space
and t is the time coordinate, is connected with a physically observable quantity by
the rule
|ψ(r, t)|2dr = probability that at time t the particle is found
in the interval (r, r + dr)
(1)
– suggested to Louis de Broglie (1892–1987) [4] and Einstein [2] that quantum
mechanics, despite its predictive power is an incomplete physical theory in a man-
ner analogous to the relation between classical statistical mechanics and classical
mechanics. This appeal to an analogy was greatly strengthened by Einstein’s paper
( EPR) with Podolsky and Rosen [5] in 1935, studying a wave function in which
the positions of particles 1 and 2 are strictly correlated when ψ is expressed in the
position representation, and their linear momenta are strictly correlated when it is
expressed in the momentum representation. They postulate a sufﬁcient condition for
the existence of an element of physical reality: “If, without in any way disturbing
a system, we can predict with certainty (i.e., with probability equal to unity) the
value of a physical quantity, then there exists an element of physical reality cor-
responding to this physical quantity” [5, p. 777]. When this sufﬁcient condition is
applied to the pair of correlated particles 1 and 2, with the tacit assumption that
the outcome of a measurement on one of the particles cannot causally affect the
outcome of a measurement on the other – a consequence of relativistic causality
if the two measurements are events with space-like separation – they inferred that
both position and linear momentum are elements of physical reality of both 1 and 2.
This conclusion suggested models in which the quantum state was regarded as an
incomplete description of physical reality, in need of supplementation by “hidden
variables.” In spite of John von Neumann’s [6] argument of 1932 (inﬂuential but
later shown to inconclusive), that a hidden variables model cannot agree with all
of the experimental predictions of standard quantum mechanics, and Bohr’s widely
accepted epistemological critique [7] in1935 of EPR’s argument, the early attraction
of hidden variables survived (undoubtedly because of Einstein’s prestige) at least as

Hidden-Variables Models of Quantum Mechanics (Noncontextual and Contextual)
289
H
a heterodox curiosity, but it ﬁnally was seriously investigated with greater subtlety
in the latter half of the twentieth century.
Important new subtleties were the distinction between “noncontextual” and “con-
textual” hidden-variable models, ﬁrst articulated explicitly (though without these
names) by Bell [8] in 1966, and the recognition that these two kinds of models
required different analyses. A noncontextual hidden variables model postulated that
an isolated physical system is characterized by a complete state λ, which is the com-
pendium of the real properties of the system at a deﬁnite time – the prototype being
a point in the Gibbsian phase space of a classical mechanical system. When λ is
given, then the result of measuring any property A of the system at the given time
by an ideal measuring apparatus (one that introduces no distortions due to its own
imperfections) is a function A(λ). The outcome of the measurement is assumed to
be independent of other properties B, C, . . . that may be measured simultaneously
with A, and indeed such an independence may be tacitly assumed to be intrinsic to
the ideal character of the measurement process.
The program of noncontextual hidden variables models was demonstrated in
various ways to be incompatible with the predictions of quantum mechanics for a
system associated with a Hilbert space of dimension 3 or greater – by  Gleason [9],
Bell [10],  Kochen and Specker [11], Belinfante [12], Mermin [13], and others. A
particularly simple proof was given by Belinfante and followers concerning a sys-
tem of spin unity (neglecting the conﬁguration space variables of this system), for
which quantum mechanics predicts the following constraint: the measurement of
two of the squared components of spin sx2, sy2, sz2 – where x, y, and z are three
orthogonal directions – will yield value 1 (in units of  Planck’s constant h divided
by 2π) and one of them will yield value 0. In a noncontextual model the complete
state λ will ascribe values to each component of  spin, regardless of what other
components are measured with it. The proof of incompatibility of the noncontextual
hidden variables assignment of deﬁnite values to all spin components proceeds by
cleverly choosing an appropriate set of directions n, most belonging to more than
one orthogonal triad of directions in the set, and then showing that the quantum
mechanical constraint on values of sn2 can be satisﬁed only if for some n this value
is 1 when n is measured along with r and s in one orthogonal triad and 0 when it
is measured along with r′ and s′ in another orthogonal triad. (The number of direc-
tions considered in this proof is 138. In other proofs fewer directions sufﬁce but the
argumentation is more complex.)
John Stewart Bell (1928–90) gave a new lease on life to the program of hidden
variables by proposing contextuality. In the physical example just considered the
complete state λ in a contextual hidden variables model would indeed ascribe an
antecedent element of physical reality to each squared spin component sn2 but in a
complex manner: the outcome of the measurement of sn2 is a function sn2 (λ, C)
of the hidden variable λ and the context C, which is the set of quantities measured
along with sn2. If the context C is the pair (su2, sv2), then sn2 (λ, C) is 1, and
if C is (su′2, sv′2) the value is 0. In other words, the demonstration by Belinfante
and his followers of the impossibility of a noncontextual hidden variables theory
for quantum mechanics is converted into a demonstration of the compatibility of

290
Hidden-Variables Models of Quantum Mechanics (Noncontextual and Contextual)
a contextual theory. Bell argues practically that “the result of an observation may
reasonably depend not only upon the state of the system (including the hidden vari-
ables) but also on the complete disposition of the apparatus” [14].
Two important questions remain concerning contextual hidden variables models:
how do they account for the probabilistic character of quantum mechanical predic-
tions, and what are the constraints on the context C?
The ﬁrst question is answered by assuming an appropriate probability distribu-
tion ρ over the space Λ of hidden variables. The speciﬁcation of λ is determined by
the physical circumstances which determine the quantum state of the system – viz.
the mode of preparation of the state and interactions with the environment of the sys-
tem – and when these circumstances are not sufﬁciently precise to ﬁx λ exactly they
may sufﬁce to determine a distribution ρ over the space Λ. The integral ∫A(λ, C)dρ
over the space Λ will recover the quantum mechanical expectation value of the
quantity A if the contextual hidden variables theory is properly constructed.
As to the second question, a minimum constraint on the context C is that it con-
sist of quantities that are quantum mechanically compatible, that is represented by
 self-adjoint operators which commute with each other. If A is a projection oper-
ator P ( projection) of interest, a natural context with this property is a maximal
Boolean algebra of projection operators containing P, studied intensively by Stanley
P. Gudder [15].
Another reasonable constraint on C of great conceptual importance was proposed
by Bell when the system of interest consists of two or more spatially separated
parts, and the physical quantity of interest A concerns one of these parts. C should
not include quantities whose measurements are events with space-like separation
from the measurement of A, since there would be a violation of relativistic lo-
cality if those measurements affected the outcome of the measurement of A. This
 locality constraint on the context has been studied intensively by Bell and his fol-
lowers. When the context C satisﬁes the locality constraint, Bell and his followers
derived inequalities which are violated by the quantum mechanical predictions of a
large class of systems [16]. Consequently, even though contextual hidden variables
models may agree with the predictions of quantum mechanics when the locality con-
straint is not imposed on C, no local contextual hidden variables model can recover
all the quantum mechanical predictions. Very brieﬂy, without providing details, we
can assert that experimental tests of local contextual hidden variables models against
quantum mechanics have strongly supported the latter [17]. See also  Bohm Inter-
pretation, Bohmian Mechanics.
Literature
1. N. Bohr: Atomic Physics and Human Knowledge (Wiley, New York, 1958, 60–61)
2. A. Einstein: In Electrons et Photons – Rapports et Discussions du Cinqui`eme Conseil de
Physique Tenu `a Bruxelles. . . sous les Auspices de l’Institut International de Physique Solvay
(Gauthier-Villars, Paris 1928, 256)
3. M. Born: Quantenmechanik der Stossvorg¨ange. Zeitschrift fur Physik 38, 803 (1926)

Hilbert Space
291
H
4. L. de Broglie: La m´ecanique ondulatoire et la structure atomique de la matiˆere et du rayon-
nement. Journal de Physique et du Radium 8, 225 (1927)
5. A. Einstein, B. Podolsky, N. Rosen: Can quantum-mechanical description of physical reality
be considered complete? Physical Review 47, 777 (1935)
6. J. von Neumann: Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics (Princeton University
Press, Princeton, 1955, 305–324)
7. N. Bohr: Can quantum-mechanical description of physical reality be considered complete?
Physical Review 48, 696 (1935)
8. J.S. Bell: On the problem of hidden variables in quantum theory. Reviews of Modern Physics
38, 450 (1966). Reprinted with numerous related articles in Speakable and Unspeakable in
Quantum Mechanics (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2004). The name “contextual-
istic” was introduced by A. Shimony: Experimental test of local hidden variable theories, in
B. d’Espagnat ed.: Foundations of Quantum Mechanics (Academic, New York 1971), and a
shortening to “contextual” was performed by E.G. Beltrametti and C. Cassinelli: The Logic of
Quantum Mechanics (SIAM, 1983)
9. A. Gleason: Measures on the closed subspaces of a Hilbert space. Journal of Mathematics and
Mechanics 6, 885 (1957)
10. J.S. Bell: Ref. [8], sect. 5.
11. S. Kochen, E. Specker: The problem of hidden variables in quantum Mechanics. Journal of
Mathematics and Mechanics 17, 59 (1967)
12. F. Belinfante: A Survey of Hidden-Variables Theories (Pergamon, Oxford, 1973). This sketch of
a proof is ﬁlled out in E. de Obaldia, A. Shimony, and F. Wittel: Ampliﬁcation of Belinfante’s
demonstration of the non-existence of a dispersion free state. Foundations of Physics 18,
1013 (1988)
13. N.D. Mermin: Hidden variables and the two theorems of John Bell. Reviews of Modern Physics
65, 803 (1993)
14. J.S. Bell: Ref. [8] (1966) p. 451 and (2004), p. 9.
15. S. Gudder: On hidden-variable theories. Journal of Mathematical Physics 11, 431 (1970)
16. J.S. Bell: On the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen Paradox. Physics 1, 195 (1964); reprinted in Bell,
Ref. [8] (2004), 14.
17. A. Aspect: Introduction: John Bell and the second quantum revolution, in Bell: Ref. [8] (2004),
xvii–xxxix
Hilbert Space
Erhard Scholz and Werner Stulpe
Hilbert space, a generalization of the concept of Euclidean vector space, i.e., of a
ﬁnite-dimensional real vector space equipped with a scalar product. A Hilbert space
H [7–12] is a vector space over the real or complex numbers (sometimes over the
quaternions) in which a scalar product is deﬁned and which is complete w.r.t. the
norm induced by the scalar product.
The scalar product in a complex Hilbert space H associates any two vectors
φ, ψ ∈H with a complex number ⟨φ|ψ⟩such that (i) ⟨φ|ψ⟩is linear in ψ, i.e.,
⟨φ|χ + ψ⟩= ⟨φ|χ⟩+ ⟨φ|ψ⟩and ⟨φ|λψ⟩= λ⟨φ|ψ⟩where φ, χ, ψ ∈H and
λ ∈C, (ii) ⟨φ|ψ⟩= ⟨ψ|φ⟩where the bar denotes complex conjugation, (iii)
⟨φ|φ⟩⩾0 for all φ ∈H, and (iv) ⟨φ|φ⟩= 0 if and only if φ = 0; as a con-
sequence of (i) and (ii), the scalar product is antilinear in the ﬁrst argument, i.e.,

