P
Parity
Andrzej K. Wr´oblewski
The term is used in two ways, ﬁrst, as the operation P of spatial inversion, and
the second as a numerical quantity associated with the system. Parity in the second
sense is a multiplicative quantum number ( Quantum numbers) which could be
+1 or −1. In quantum mechanics the operation of spatial inversion is described by
equation P (−→r ) = P (−−→r ), where the unitary parity operator P acting on a
 wave function  has only two eigenvalues P = +1 or P = −1 which correspond
to even and odd parity, respectively.
By convention, protons and neutrons have been assigned the same positive in-
trinsic parity. The intrinsic parity of the pion has been established experimentally
to be negative. The total parity of the system of particles is the product of their in-
trinsic parities and the spatial parity given by (−1)l, where l denotes the angular
momentum of the wave function of the system. Thus the parity of a particle of spin
l decaying into two pions is just (−1)l and that of a particle of spin l decaying into
three pions equals (−1)l+1.
History of parity began in 1924, when Otto Laporte (1902–1971), and indepen-
dently Henry Norris Russell (1877–1957), analyzed the structure of the spectrum of
iron and titanium and found that there were two kinds of energy levels, such that
the transitions never occurred between levels of the same kind but always between
levels of the ﬁrst and the second kind. No convincing explanation of the existence
of two types of levels was found within the framework of the old quantum theory.
Then, in 1927, Eugene Wigner (1902–1995) analyzed Laporte’s ﬁnding and showed
that the two types of levels and the selection rule followed from the invariance of
the Schr¨odinger equation ( Schr¨odinger equation) under the operation of inver-
sion of coordinates x −→−x, y −→−y, z −→−z. This property was originally
called “Spiegelung”, at least until 1933, when the term was still used by Pauli. The
name “parity” appeared later. In 1935, Condon and Shortley used the term “parity
operator” in their book on atomic spectra.
In modern language the two types of energy levels found by Laporte and Rus-
sell are states of positive and negative parity. The electric dipole transitions between
states of the same parity are forbidden by parity conservation in electromagnetic in-
teractions. The intrinsic parity of the emitted photons ( light quantum) is negative
and in order for the total parity of the system to be conserved the parity of the atomic
state must change.
The concept of parity conservation was quickly accepted by physicists. As the au-
thors of a well-known textbook [13] put it: ‘Since invariance under space reﬂection
D. Greenberger et al. (eds.), Compendium of Quantum Physics: Concepts, Experiments,
450
History and Philosophy, c⃝Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2009

Parity
451
P
is intuitively so appealing (why should a left- and a right-handed system be differ-
ent?), conservation of parity quickly became a sacred cow’.
Complications appeared in the early 1950s. Several new “mesons”, i.e. parti-
cles with mass intermediate between the electron and the proton, were discovered
( Particle physics). When more precise data became available, the two particles
Kπ3 ≡τ ± −→π±+ π++ π−and Kπ2 ≡θ± −→π±+ π0 appeared to have
almost identical masses and lifetimes, although their parities seemed to be different.
The decay properties of the θ were simple. The decay θ0 −→π0 + π0 has been
observed. The Bose–Einstein statistics ( Quantum statistics) requires the system
of two neutral pions to have even parity and therefore even orbital momentum l. The
intrinsic parity of the θ must be even and its spin ( Spin) must be zero. The spin of
the τ meson was established to be even. Because of the decay into three pions the τ
parity was found to be negative. This became known as the tau-theta puzzle. There
were several attempts to solve it. Of course it could have been just a coincidence:
two different particles of almost identical mass and lifetime but different parities.
But usually physicists are wary when they encounter coincidences.
In August, 1955, Tsung Dao Lee (b. 1926) and Jay Orear [1] proposed to explain
the tau-theta puzzle by assuming that there are two different particles; the heavier
one decays rapidly into the lighter: τ −→θ + γ or θ −→τ + γ . This hypothesis
had soon to be rejected because of negative results of the search for the supposed
γ rays. In December, 1955, Lee and Chen Ning Yang (b. 1922) came forward with
another explanation [2]. All particles with odd strangeness S were assumed to be
“parity doublets”, that is, two particles with opposite parity. The θ+ and τ + were
assumed to have the same spin but opposite parity (such as, e.g. 0+ and 0−). Thus,
in particular, for the reaction π+ +n −→&0
1 +θ+, one obtained a reaction of equal
amplitude by taking the parity conjugation of all the particles π+ +n −→&0
2 +τ +.
Here &0
2 was the parity conjugated state of &0
1.
One of its main topics of discussion during the Sixth Annual Rochester Confer-
ence in April, 1956, was the rapidly growing ﬁeld of the new elementary particles, in
particular, the tau-theta puzzle. However, no convincing solution was found. A few
weeks later Lee and Yang discussed the possibility that parity could be violated
in weak processes. After consultations with Chien Shiung Wu (1912–1997) from
Columbia, an expert in beta decay, they soon discovered that nobody has ever proved
that parity conservation was valid for weak interactions. They presented analysis of
the problem in the paper submitted on June 22, 1956 [3]. Several possible exper-
imental tests of parity conservation in β decay were listed in this paper. Lee and
Yang suggested to measure the angular distribution of the  electrons coming from
β decays of oriented nuclei, e.g. Co60. If θ is the angle between the orientation of
the parent nucleus and the momentum of the electron, an asymmetry of distribution
between θ and 1800 – θ constitutes an unequivocal proof that parity is not conserved
in β decay. The angular distribution of the β radiation was assumed to be of the form
I(θ)dθ = (constant)(1 + a cos θ) sinθ dθ. If a ̸= 0, one would then have a positive
proof of parity nonconservation in β decay. Lee and Yang also proposed to study the
distribution of the angle θ between the μ momentum and the electron momentum

452
Parity
Fig. 1 The direction of rotation and the spin of rotating object are reversed by mirror reﬂection.
Thus, if parity is conserved, the emission of electrons at angles θ and π −θ must be the same
in the decay processes π −→μ + ν, μ −→e + ν + ν, starting from a π meson at
rest. If parity is not conserved the distribution would not in general be identical for
θ and π −θ.
Chien Shiung Wu resolved to try an experiment even before Lee and Yang sub-
mitted their paper for publication. The idea of an experiment with Co60 was simple
only in theory (Fig. 1). In order to make the measurement possible the radioactive
nuclei must be aligned (polarized) so that their spins pointed in the same direction.
It required very low temperatures, otherwise the thermal motion of the nuclei would
destroy the alignment. Wu combined forces with Ernest Ambler (b. 1923) whose
group at the National Bureau of Standards in Washington was involved in a nuclear
orientation work.
The Co60 nucleus emits both β and γ rays. The degree of polarization can be
measured by the anisotropy of the γ radiation, which is emitted more in the polar
direction than in the equatorial plane. The β particles from 60Co could not penetrate
any substantial thickness of matter. For this reason Wu and her collaborators had
to locate the radioactive nuclei in a very thin layer of only 0.002 inch on a surface
of cerium magnesium (cobalt) nitrate. The β counter had to be placed inside the
demagnetization cryostat. The β particles emitted by 60Co nuclei were detected by
scintillations in a thin anthracene crystal located inside the vacuum chamber about
2 cm above the 60Co source. The scintillations were transmitted through a glass
window and a Lucite light pipe 4 feet long to a photomultiplier located at the top of
the cryostat.

Parity
453
P
The paper [3] by Lee and Yang was published only on October 1, 1956, but its
contents was known earlier because of a circulated preprint. Most physicists re-
jected the idea of parity nonconservation as too fantastic and adverse to universally
accepted notions on symmetries in physics.
First readings conﬁrming parity violation were obtained by Wu’s team on De-
cember 27, but the results were not consistently reproducible in the following days.
They announced success only on January 9, 1957, after everything had been checked
and rechecked. A few days earlier, during a discussion among Columbia physicists
over a meal in a cafe on Friday, January 4, Leon Lederman (b. 1922) learned about
Wu et al. preliminary results. He quickly realized that it was possible to check Lee
and Yang’s ideas about decay processes π −→μ + ν, μ −→e + ν + ν, by using
the muon beam from the cyclotron at the Nevis Laboratory of Columbia University.
He explained the idea over the phone to his colleague, Richard Garwin (b. 1928).
It took Garwin, Lederman, and Lederman’s graduate student Marcel Weinrich, just
little over 48 hours to prepare and carry out the experiment with a muon beam from
the university cyclotron. The two papers [4, 5] from Columbia University were sub-
mitted for publication on January 15.
The chain of decays π −→μ + ν, μ −→e + ν + ν was studied also at the
University of Chicago. Valentine Telegdi (1922–2006) read a preprint of Lee and
Yang paper in August and, not knowing about Wu et al. effort, began an experi-
ment similar in many respects to that of Lederman. With his postdoctoral researcher,
Jerome Friedman (b. 1930), he exposed nuclear emulsion to a π+ beam of the
University of Chicago synchrocyclotron. They scanned the emulsions for charac-
teristic π −→μ + ν events. In each case the scanner followed the muon to the
end of its range and measured the angle of the positron emission. Their paper [6]
was submitted for publication on January 17, two days after the two papers from
Columbia. With 2000 π −→μ −→e events Telegdi and Friedman were able to
determine that the electron emission indeed followed the linear law of the form 1+a
cosθ, postulated by Lee and Yang, and determined a = 0.174 ± 0.038.
At the beginning of 1957 an experiment similar to that of Wu et al. has also been
done in Leyden with 58Co, which is a positron emitter [7]. It decays into 58Fe and
emits a positron and a neutrino 58Co −→58Fe + e++ν. In this case the positron was
found to be preferentially emitted along the direction of the nuclear spin (magnetic
ﬁeld) (Fig. 2).
There were numerous experiments checking parity nonconservation in various
circumstances. Good review of these works can be found in [14], whereas a popular
account of the theory is given in [15]. Parity nonconservation effects have been well
explained by the two-component theory of the neutrino proposed independently by
Landau (1908–1968) [8], Salam (1926–1996) [9], and Lee and Yang [10]. Massless
neutrinos were assumed to possess a “handedness” to their spin. All neutrinos in
nature were found to spin in a left-handed sense relative to their direction of ﬂight,
whereas antineutrinos were right-handed.
The discovery that parity is not conserved in weak interactions increased interest
in the discrete symmetry operations, the charge conjugation C and time reversal T .
It was shown that relativistic locality required invariance of the Lagrangian of any

454
Parity
Fig. 2 Comparison of beta decays of 60Co and 58Co. The electrons from the 60Co decay are emit-
ted preferentially into the hemisphere opposite to the nuclear spin s, whereas the positrons from
the 58Co are emitted preferentially along the spin of the nucleus. It illustrates the left-handedness
of neutrinos and right-handedness of antineutrinos
system under the combined operation CPT , irrespective of order of the three op-
erations ( CPT theorem). The two-component theory of the neutrino allowed a
natural formulation of a CP-conserving, but P- and C- violating, weak interaction.
Then, in 1964, the unexpected discovery of CP nonconservation in kaon decay [11]
took the physics community by surprise. It followed from the CPT theorem that
time reversal symmetry must also be violated. It was indeed conﬁrmed in 1998 by
experiments at CERN [12].
Primary Literature
1. T. D. Lee, J. Orear, Speculations on Heavy Mesons, The Physical Review 100, 932 (1955)
2. T. D. Lee, C. N. Yang, Mass Degeneracy of the Heavy Mesons, The Physical Review 102, 290
(1956); Possible Interference Phenomena Between Parity Doublets, The Physical Review 104,
822 (1956)
3. T. D. Lee, C. N. Yang, Question of Parity Conservation in Weak Interactions, The Physical
Review 104, 254 (1956)
4. C. S. Wu, E. Ambler, R. W. Hayward, D. D. Hoppes, R. P. Hudson, Experimental Test of Parity
Conservation in Beta Decay, The Physical Review 105, 1413 (1957)
5. R. L. Garwin, L. M. Lederman, M. Weinrich, Observations of the Failure of Conservation of
Parity and Charge Conjugation in Meson Decays: The Magnetic Moment of a Free Muon, The
Physical Review 105, 1415 (1957)
6. J. I. Friedman, V. L. Telegdi, Nuclear Emulsion Evidence for Parity Nonconservation in the
Decay Chain π+ −→μ+ −→e+, The Physical Review 105, 1681 (1957)
7. H. Postma, W. J. Huiskamp, A. R. Miedema, M. J. Steenland, H. A. Tolhoek, C. J. Gorter,
Asymmetry of the Positron Emission by Polarized 58Co Nuclei, Physica 23, 259 (1957); Asym-
metry of the Positron Emission by Polarized 58Co and 58Mn Nuclei, Physica 24, 157 (1958)
8. L. Landau, On the Conservation Laws for Weak Interactions, Nuclear Physics 3, 127 (1957)
9. A. Salam, On Parity Conservation and Neutrino Mass, Il Nuovo Cimento, 5, 299 (1957)
10. T. D. Lee, C. N. Yang, Parity Nonconservation and the Two-Component Theory of the Neu-
trino, The Physical Review 105, 1671 (1957)

Particle Physics
455
P
11. J. Christenson, J. W. Cronin, V. L. Fitch, R. Turlay, Evidence for the 2π Decay of the K0
2
Meson, Physical Review Letters 13, 138 (1964)
12. A. Angelopoulos et al., First Direct Observation of Time-reversal Non-invariance in the Neutral
Kaon System, Physics Letters B 444, 43–51 (1998)
Secondary Literature
13. H. Frauenfelder, E. M. Henley, Nuclear and Particle Physics (Benjamin, Reading, MA 1975,
258–416)
14. C. S. Wu, Parity Experiments in Beta Decay, Reviews of Modern Physics 31, 783 (1959);
V. L. Telegdi, The Early Experiments Leading to the V −A Interaction, in: Pions to
Quarks. Particle Physics in the 1950s, ed. Laurie M. Brown, Max Dresden, Lillian Hoddeson
(Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 1989)
15. T. D. Lee, Space Inversion, Time Reversal and Particle-Antiparticle Conjugation, Physics
Today 19(3), 23 (1966)
Particle Physics
Kim Milton
The ﬁrst discovered of what we would now call an elementary particle is the elec-
tron; although its discovery was a long and complicated process, J. J. Thomson’s
experiments of 1897 played a decisive role, since he was the ﬁrst to obtain a quanti-
tative value for e. Remarkably, precision experiments conducted last year (2006) [1]
show that the electron still possesses no structure other than that demanded by quan-
tum mechanics and relativity – it is a point particle. The proton, as the nucleus of
the hydrogen atom, was identiﬁed as soon as the Rutherford scattering experiment
demonstrated the  model of the atom ( large-angle scattering); its partner in the
nucleus, the neutron, was discovered by Chadwick in 1932. (For a review of the
history of particle physics told in words of some of its creators, see Ref. [13]. See
also Refs. [14,15].)
Antiparticles were theoretically predicted by P.A.M. Dirac in 1928 on the basis
of his famous  Dirac equation describing the relativistic electron, or more gener-
ally, any particle carrying  spin ℏ/2 [2]. At ﬁrst he thought the positive proton was
the antiparticle to the negative electron, but then he was convinced that the antipar-
ticle had to have the same mass as the particle (this is now seen as a consequence
of the famous  CPT theorem). The positron was actually discovered in 1933 by
Anderson, Blackett, and Occhialini [3]. The antiproton was found in 1955 [4].
Nuclear forces were studied extensively in the 1930s, aided immeasurably by
the use of Lawrence’s cyclotron. It was clear that new forces beyond those known
since ancient times, gravity and electromagnetism, had to come into play in order to

