280
Heisenberg Picture
momentum is on the order of px ∼= (2h/λ) sin θ. The Heisenberg microscope
thought experiment therefore leads to a product of uncertainties x px ∼= h.
The thought experiment contains the notion that the uncertainty relation is a re-
sult of a disturbance of the electron by the measurement process. This may lead
to the assumption that without this disturbance the electron could have a well de-
ﬁned position and momentum, which conﬂicts with our current understanding of
quantum mechanics. The uncertainty principle applies to all quantum objects and
should not be viewed as only the result of us not being able to make an accurate
measurement.
Literature
1. W. Heisenberg:
¨Uber quantentheoretische Umdeutung kinematischer und mechanischer
Beziehungen. Zeitschrift f¨ur Physik 33, 879–893 (1925)
2. W. Heisenberg:
¨Uber den anschaulichen Inhalt der quantentheoretischen Kinematik and
Mechanik. Zeitschrift f¨ur Physik 43, 172–198 (1927); English translation in (Wheeler and
Zurek, 1983, pp. 62–84)
3. J.A. Wheeler, W.H. Zurek (eds): Quantum Theory and Measurement (Princeton NJ, Princeton
University Press 1983)
Heisenberg Picture
Marianne Breinig
In non-relativistic quantum mechanics, the state of a physical system at a ﬁxed time
t0 is deﬁned by specifying a ket |ψ(t0)⟩belonging to the space ε. ε is a complex,
separable  Hilbert space, a complex linear vector space in which an inner product
is deﬁned and which possesses a countable  orthonormal basis. The vectors in such
a space have the properties mathematical objects must have in order to be capable
of describing a quantum system.
In the Heisenberg picture the time evolution of a physical system is described as a
continuous, passive unitary transformation. Passive unitary transformations change
the basis vectors but leave the state vectors unchanged.  Operators are deﬁned
through their action on the basis vectors and therefore change under a passive
unitary transformation.
Let the state vector in the Heisenberg picture be |ψH⟩at t = t0. As the system
evolves, the state vector will not change. The  Schr¨odinger equation is replaced
by an equation describing the time evolution of any operator H in the Heisenberg
picture. If the operator does not depend explicitly on time, then
dH
dt
= 1
iℏ
#
H,HH
$
.

Heisenberg Uncertainty Relation (Indeterminacy Relations)
281
H
The Heisenberg picture leads to equations similar to the classical equations of
motion and is often used to explore general properties of quantum systems and the
formal analogy between classical and quantum theory.
One can switch from the  Schr¨odinger picture to the Heisenberg picture at any
time t by applying a unitary transformation. The transformation
|ψH⟩= U(t0, t)|ψS(t)⟩= UT(t, t0)|ψS(t)⟩= |ψS(t0)⟩
yields the state vectors |ψH⟩in the Heisenberg picture given the state vector |ψS(t)⟩
in the Schr¨odinger picture, and the transformation
H(t) = UT(t, t0)SU(t, t0)
yields the operator H(t) in the Heisenberg picture given the operator S in the
Schr¨odinger picture. This is a change of representation. The matrix elements of any
operator, , are independent of the representation.
Primary Literature
1. C. Cohen-Tannoudji, B. Diu, F. Lalo¨e: Quantum Mechanics, Volume 1 (Wiley, New York
1977, 312–314)
Heisenberg Uncertainty Relation
(Indeterminacy Relations)
Paul Busch and Brigitte Falkenburg
The term Heisenberg uncertainty relation is a name for not one but three distinct
trade-off relations which are all formulated in a more or less intuitive and vague
way in Heisenberg’s seminal paper of 1927 [1]. These relations are expressions and
quantiﬁcations of three fundamental limitations of the operational possibilities of
preparing and measuring quantum mechanical systems which are stated here in-
formally with reference to position and momentum as a paradigmatic example of
canonically conjugate pairs of quantities:
(A) It is impossible to prepare states in which position and momentum are simulta-
neously arbitrarily well localized. In every state, the probability distributions
of these  observables have widths that obey an uncertainty relation.

