690
Selection Rules
There exists a linear operator that transforms |ψ(t0)⟩into |ψ(t)⟩.
|ψ(t)⟩= U(t, t0)|ψ(t0)⟩.
The operator U(t, t0) is called the evolution operator. The evolution operator is
a  unitary operator. If H does not explicitly depend on time, then U(t, t0) =
exp(−iH(t–t0)/ℏ). If |ψ(t0)⟩is expanded in terms of eigenstates of H, i.e. if
|ψ(t0)⟩= %n an(t0)|En⟩,
where H|En⟩= En|En⟩, then
|ψ(t)⟩=

n
an(t0) exp(−iEn(t −t0)/ℏ)|En⟩=

n
an(t) |En⟩.
Time evolution is a unitary transformation. All unitary transformations are changes
of representation. We distinguish between active and passive unitary transforma-
tions. Active transformation change all state vectors while leaving the basis vectors
unchanged.  Operators are deﬁned through their action on the basis vectors and
therefore do not change under an active transformation. Passive transformations
change the basis vectors and therefore change the operators, but leave the state vec-
tors
unchanged.
In the Schr¨odinger picture the time evolution of a physical system is a contin-
uous, active unitary transformation. The state vector is transformed, it evolves in
time. The basis vectors are not changing. All operators are constant in time, unless
they contain time explicitly. The Schr¨odinger equation describes the evolution of a
physical system in a particular representation.
Primary Literature
1. C. Cohen-Tannoudji, B. Diu, F. Lalo¨e: Quantum Mechanics, Volume One (Wiley, New York,
1977, 312–314)
Selection Rules
Klaus Hentschel
According to Niels Bohr’s (1885–1962)  Bohr’s atomic model, spectral lines oc-
cur when  electrons perform  quantum jumps between stable orbits around the
positively charged nucleus. For simple atoms like hydrogen and helium, Bohr’s

Selection Rules
691
S
model achieved pretty good agreement between theoretical predictions or retro-
dictions and experimental data. The situation was more complicated for some of the
heavier atoms, however, or when external electric or magnetic ﬁelds were present
(see  Stark effect and  Zeeman effect). In such cases, by no means all com-
binatorically possible transitions between the various energy levels are actually
observable. Many theoretically possible spectral lines were missing, thus leading
to quite complicated spectral patterns. In order to explain such observed patterns
and the absence of other spectrum lines, Bohr and his co-workers as well as some
members of the  Sommerfeld school in Munich introduced what are called selec-
tion rules (Auswahlregeln).
In terms of the Bohr/Sommerfeld  quantum numbers n, m, l and j, one of
these rules stipulated that the magnetic quantum number m, linked to the num-
ber of components into which a spectral line split in the  Zeeman effect, has to
change by units of ±1 or remain unchanged, i.e., m = ±1 or 0. In addition, the
transition m = 0 →m = 0 is also forbidden. Similar constraints were also estab-
lished for l and j, i.e., l = ±1 and j = ±1. During the semi-classical phase of
 quantum theory, such phenomenological rules were physically uninterpretable.
Physicists simply stipulated them ad hoc, in a consciously instrumentalistic atti-
tude ( quantum theory, crisis period). A deeper physical understanding of these
selection rules in terms of the conservation of total angular momentum – an ex-
act  symmetry strictly obeyed by all quantum systems – only became possible
after the introduction of the concept of  spin in late 1925.  See also Stern–
Gerlach experiment; Vector model. Because electrons are spin 1/2 particles and
 light quanta (photons) have spin 1, the emission of a photon against the elec-
tron’s axis of rotation is compensated by the spin-ﬂip of the electron in order to
preserve the overall angular momentum of the system (hence m = ±1). A tran-
sition with m = 0 is possible only if the emission is tilted with respect to
the electron’s axis of rotation, thus explaining the different state of polarization
of the emitted photons and the requirement that in this case m has to differ
from 0 (i.e., the electron has to precess around the axis; cf., e.g., [1], pp. 84ff.,
153ff.).
Similar ad hoc rules to explain “restrictions on the nature and scope of possi-
ble measurements” were also introduced into elementary particle theory by Wick,
Wightman and Wigner [2], Heisenberg [3] et al., there called  super-selection
rules.1 In some versions of Everett’s  many world interpretation, probabilistically
deﬁned selection rules also exist for quantum histories.
1 According to Wick et al. [2, p. 103], “a superselection rule operates between subspaces [of the
total Hilbert space], if there are neither spontaneous transitions between their state vectors (i.e., if a
selection rule operates between them), and if, in addition to this, there are no measurable quantities
with ﬁnite matrix elements between their state vectors.”

692
Self-Adjoint Operator
Literature
1. G. Herzberg: Atomic Spectra and Atomic Structure (New York: Prentice-Hall 1937, 2nd edn.
New York: Dover Publications 1944)
2. G.C. Wick, A.S. Wightman, E.P. Wigner: The intrinsic parity of elementary particles. Physical
Review (2nd ser.) 88, 101–105 (1952)
3. W. Heisenberg: Quantum theory of ﬁelds and elementary particles. Reviews of Modern Physics
29, 269–278 (1957)
4. A. Sommerfeld: Atombau und Spektrallinien (Braunschweig: Vieweg 1919; Engl. transl. Atomic
Structure and Spectral Lines, London: Methuen 1923)
5. M. Weis: Selection rules, online as http://math.ucr.edu/home/baez/spin/node10.html
Self-Adjoint Operator
Werner Stulpe
Self-adjoint operator, a sharpening of the concept of a symmetric operator. A linear
 operator A acting in a complex  Hilbert space H and deﬁned on a dense linear
submanifold DA is called symmetric or Hermitian if ⟨φ|Aψ⟩= ⟨Aφ|ψ⟩for all
φ, ψ ∈DA. A densely deﬁned operator in H is symmetric if and only if the scalar
products ⟨φ|Aφ⟩, φ ∈DA, are real.
The adjoint A∗of a densely deﬁned linear operator A is deﬁned as follows. The
domain DA∗of A∗consists of all vectors φ ∈H for which there exists a vector
χφ ∈H such that ⟨φ|Aψ⟩= ⟨χφ|ψ⟩for all ψ ∈DA; since DA is dense in H, χφ is
uniquely determined, and A∗φ = χφ concludes the deﬁnition of A∗. In particular,
⟨φ|Aψ⟩= ⟨A∗φ|ψ⟩for all ψ ∈DA and all φ ∈DA∗. The adjoint is a closed
( operator) linear operator, but the submanifold DA∗need not be dense in H; DA∗
is dense in H if and only if A is closable in which case A = A∗∗(by deﬁnition,
A∗∗= (A∗)∗). A densely deﬁned linear operator A is called self-adjoint if A = A∗,
i.e., ⟨φ|Aψ⟩= ⟨Aφ|ψ⟩for all φ, ψ ∈DA = DA∗.
A densely deﬁned linear operator is symmetric if and only if A∗is an extension of
A (brieﬂy written as A ⊆A∗), that is, A∗coincides with A on DA, but possibly has
a larger domain. It can be shown that a symmetric operator satisﬁes A ⊆A∗∗⊆A∗
where A∗∗is the closure ( operator) of A. Thus, for a closed symmetric opera-
tor, A = A∗∗⊆A∗holds true, and for a self-adjoint operator, A = A∗∗= A∗.
A symmetric operator is called essentially self-adjoint if its closure A = A∗∗is
self-adjoint; an essentially self-adjoint operator satisﬁes A ⊆A∗∗= A∗. A nec-
essary and sufﬁcient criterion for the self-adjointness of a symmetric operator A is
that RA+iI = RA−iI = H, where I is the unit operator and RA+iI, for instance,
the range of the operator A + iI which is deﬁned on DA; a criterion for the es-
sential self-adjointness of A is that RA+iI and RA−iI are dense in H.—For a linear
operator with domain DA = H the concepts of symmetry and self-adjointness are
equivalent; a symmetric or self-adjoint operator deﬁned on H is necessarily bounded
( operator).

