Coatings for Microneural Implants: Electrical
Considerations
Kaitlynn P. Olczak and Kevin J. Otto
Contents
1
Coatings for Improving Electrical Properties. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
181
1.1
Rationale for Adding a Device Coating. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
181
1.2
Device Coating Considerations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
181
2
Coatings for Faradaic Charge Transfer. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
185
2.1
Platinum Black (Pt-Black). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
186
2.2
Iridium Oxide (IrOx). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
187
2.3
Platinum-Iridium (Pt-Ir). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
193
2.4
Rhodium Oxide (RhO2). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
193
2.5
Conductive Polymers. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
195
3
Coatings for Non-faradaic Charge Transfer. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
199
3.1
Titanium Nitride. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
199
3.2
Carbon Nanotubes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
202
4
Conclusion. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
203
References. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
203
Abstract
This chapter provides an overview of coatings that have been used to improve
charge transfer across the electrode-tissue interface. Faradaic and non-faradaic
charge transfer mechanisms are introduced, and their beneﬁts and disadvantages
are discussed in context of charge transfer at the electrode-tissue interface. The
chapter then discusses speciﬁc examples of coatings for faradaic charge transfer
and coatings for non-faradaic charge transfer. For each coating, the charge
K. P. Olczak · K. J. Otto ()
J. Crayton Pruitt Family Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Florida,
Gainesville, FL, USA
e-mail: kpolczak@gmail.com; kevin.otto@bme.uﬂ.edu
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2023
N. V. Thakor (ed.), Handbook of Neuroengineering,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-16-5540-1_7
179

180
K. P. Olczak and K. J. Otto
transfer mechanism is discussed, along with examples of their use in the literature
to highlight their advantages and disadvantages.
Keywords
Microelectrode · Neural implants · Brain-machine interfaces · Surface
modiﬁcation · Stimulation · Charge transfer · Faradaic · Capacitive
Abbreviations
AIROFs
Activated iridium oxide ﬁlms
CCC
Charge-carrying capacity
Cdl
Double-layer capacitance
CIC
Charge injection capacity
CNTs
Carbon nanotubes
CPs
Conductive polymers
CV
Cyclic voltammetry
CVD
Chemical vapor deposition
DC
Direct current
Dex
Dexamethasone
DPI
Days postimplantation
EIROFs
Electrodeposited iridium oxide ﬁlms
EIS
Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy
ESA
Electrochemical surface area
EtO
Ethylene oxide
FBR
Foreign body response
IrOx
Iridium oxide
ITO
Indium tin oxide
MWNTs
Multiwalled carbon nanotubes
PAA
Poly(acrylic acid)
PBS
Phosphate buffered saline
PEDOT
Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)
PPy
Polypyrrole
PSS
Polystyrene sulfonate
Pt-black
Platinum black
pTS
Para-toluenesulfonate
PVA
Poly(vinyl alcohol)
redox
Reduction and oxidation
RF
Radio frequency
RhO2
Rhodium oxide
ROS
Reactive oxygen species
sccm
Standard cubic centimeters per minute
SEM
Scanning electron microscopy
SIROFs
Sputtered iridium oxide ﬁlms
SNR
Signal-to-noise ratio
SWCNT
Single-walled carbon nanotubes
TiN
Titanium nitride
TIROFs
Thermally deposited iridium oxide ﬁlms
UEA
Utah electrode array
VTMs
Voltage transient measurements

Coatings for Microneural Implants: Electrical Considerations
181
1
Coatings for Improving Electrical Properties
1.1
Rationale for Adding a Device Coating
The performance of an implanted electrical neural interfacing device ultimately
depends on its ability to transfer charge between the electronic components of the
device and the surrounding tissue. Since decreasing the device size has been shown
to decrease the foreign body response (FBR), there is a continual push in the ﬁeld
to further miniaturize [1–4]. As devices decrease in size, the electrode dimensions
inherently decrease as well. Electrode impedance is inversely proportional to surface
area, meaning smaller devices with smaller surface areas have electrodes with higher
impedance to charge transfer.
High impedance electrodes can negatively impact recording and stimulation
applications. Electrodes with high impedance result in greater noise in electro-
physiological recordings, which reduces signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) and the ability
to reliably distinguish low-amplitude signals [5]. For constant current stimulation,
electrodes with greater impedance require greater potentials to push a given current,
which can cause the electrode to surpass the safe potential range. Coatings that lower
device impedance can be beneﬁcial for both recording and stimulating applications
since they are both affected by electrode impedance.
1.2
Device Coating Considerations
1.2.1
Charge Transfer Mechanism
Before a meaningful discussion of how coatings can be used to improve electrical
properties, the reader must ﬁrst be introduced to the physical phenomena at the
device-tissue interface. When a metal is placed in contact with an electrolyte, a
double layer is formed at the electrode-electrolyte interface and is composed of
several regions [6] (Fig. 1a):
1. The inner Helmholtz plane is the locus of the center of ions or molecules
speciﬁcally adsorbed to the electrode surface.
2. The outer Helmholtz plane is the locus of the center of solvated ions at their
closest distance to the electrode.
3. Beyond the outer Helmholtz plane is the diffuse layer, which consists of solvated
anions and cations and has a net charge to maintain electroneutrality of the
electrode-electrolyte interface.
Charge transfer across the electrode-electrolyte interface can occur via two
mechanisms: faradaic or non-faradaic. Faradaic charge transfer results in electron
transfer across the electrode-electrolyte interface and causes reduction or oxidation
to occur. Non-faradaic charge transfer occurs through rearrangement of ions at the
double layer of the electrode-electrolyte interface and leads to the double-layer

182
K. P. Olczak and K. J. Otto
Fig. 1 (a) Schematic of the electrical double layer at an electrode-electrolyte interface showing
the inner Helmholtz plane (IHP), outer Helmholtz plane (OHP), and diffuse layer. (b) Bode plot
illustrating frequency ranges relevant for neural interfacing devices used for recording (blue) and
stimulation (orange)
capacitance (Cdl) that is typically in the range of 10–40 mC/cm2 for metals [6].
Changing electrode potential will cause rearrangement of ions which results in
current ﬂow.
Faradaic Coatings
Coatings that increase charge transfer via faradaic reactions introduce a chemical
species that can participate in reduction and oxidation (redox) reactions to facil-
itate charge transfer. Faradaic reactions can be further classiﬁed as reversible or
irreversible. In reversible faradaic reactions, the redox products are converted back
to their original state upon reversing the electrode potential. This occurs when the
molecules participating in the redox reactions are bound to the electrode surface
or if the molecules are in close proximity to the electrode when the potential is
reversed. Coatings that inject charge via reversible faradaic reactions don’t change
the chemical makeup of the surrounding tissue and thus are better suited for neural
implants. Examples of reversible faradaic reactions include the valance transitions
that occur within iridium oxide (IrOx) ﬁlms. While there are no new chemical
species produced during this reaction, there is a production or consumption of
protons and hydroxyl ions (to maintain electroneutrality within the ﬁlm) which can
cause large pH shifts adjacent to the tissue. Irreversible faradaic reactions occur
when the redox reaction is not reversed upon switching potentials. This alters the
chemical composition of the surrounding tissue and can have negative effects on the
electrode (i.e., corrosion).

Coatings for Microneural Implants: Electrical Considerations
183
Non-Faradaic Coatings
Coatings that transfer charge exclusively through charging the double-layer capaci-
tance (i.e., through ion movement) are attractive for neural interfacing because they
do not change the surrounding environment. The charge (Q) available for capacitive
injection is determined by the capacitance (C) of the electrode and the voltage
applied (V):
Q = C ∗V
Thus, to increase charge injection while minimizing the potential applied, the
capacitance needs to be increased. The capacitance of the electrode is described by
the following equation:
C = εε0A
d
where ε is the dielectric constant of the capacitor material, ε0 is the dielectric
constant of free space (8.854 × 10−12 F/m), A is the area of the electrode, and
d is the thickness of the dielectric material. This offers two main ways to increase
the electrode capacitance: (1) increasing the electrode surface area or (2) adding a
dielectric material to the electrode with a large dielectric constant.
Since the electrode size of a device is ﬁxed, coatings can increase the electro-
chemical surface area (ESA) of a device via surface roughness or porosity. The
increase in ESA is limited by the ability of ions to penetrate the small space in the
time frame of a stimulus pulse. Additionally, although the electrical properties of
all electrodes are affected by implantation, these have been found to have a greater
effect on porous than smooth electrodes [7].
1.2.2
Electrical Properties
Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) is a useful electrochemical measure-
ment to assess how a coating will affect device performance for both recording and
stimulating applications. EIS is a quick and nondestructive technique that measures
the impedance of the system across a wide range of frequencies. EIS has been
used to evaluate many different types of coatings. Since EIS is a nondestructive
measurement, it can monitor changes over time to assess coating stability.
The ability to assess charge transport across multiple frequencies is important
for coatings on neural electrodes since the critical frequency range depends on the
application (i.e., recording or stimulating) (Fig. 1b). Lower frequencies relevant
for neural recordings include 10–300 Hz for local ﬁeld potentials (LFPs) and
700–15,000 Hz for single-unit recordings. The relevant frequencies for stimulation
applications depend on the stimulation parameters and the type of electrode.
Electrodes that transfer charge via faradaic and non-faradaic mechanisms may
appear to have similar impedance values on a bode plot. However, the difference

184
K. P. Olczak and K. J. Otto
between them is clear when looking at the real and imaginary parts of the impedance
over a range of frequencies. Readers are referred to Orazem et al. [8] for detailed
information on extracting electrode information such as double-layer capacitance
and charge-transfer resistance from EIS data.
Cyclic voltammetry (CV) is useful for characterizing the effect of a coating on
device stimulation properties. CV can be used to determine if any electrochemical
reactions are occurring at the electrode. Although CV is commonly used to calculate
the charge-carrying capacity (CCC) of electrodes, the conditions used during CV are
not representative of the conditions during electrical stimulation. Rather, CV can be
useful in quantifying redox reactions [6].
Voltage transient measurements (VTMs), also useful for device stimulation
assessment, measure the polarization of the electrode when a current-controlled
stimulation pulse is applied and are used to determine the charge injection capacity
(CIC) of electrodes. The CIC is deﬁned as the maximum amplitude that can be
applied for a given stimulation waveform before the electrode is polarized to unsafe
potentials. The potential limits used to calculate the CIC are commonly the potential
limits before electrolysis (i.e., the reduction or oxidation of water molecules)
occurs. Comprehensive reviews on electrochemical evaluation testing methods and
interpretation of stimulating and recording electrodes are available [9, 10].
1.2.3
Biocompatibility
It is important to ensure that coatings used to improve the electrical properties
do not have unintended negative impacts on the surrounding tissue. Thus, in
addition to testing the biocompatibility of the coating material itself, it is necessary
to test for any contaminants that may be present within the coating or on the
device. An example of this is the release of unreacted monomer from poly(3,4-
ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT) coatings [11, 12]. For coatings where the device
substrate is in contact with chemicals during the coating deposition, it is also
important to ensure there are no chemicals absorbed within the substrate that could
leach out over time and intensify the tissue reaction [13].
1.2.4
Stability
Coatings that improve the electrical properties of a device should remain stable
for the lifetime of the device. Coating stability includes electrical and mechanical
stability, meaning the coating maintains its ability to transfer charge and remains
adhered to the electrode surface. Stability should be veriﬁed in vitro prior to in vivo
testing to ensure the coatings can withstand the intended stimulation and in vivo
environment.
Two common methods of testing charge injection stability include continuous
CV cycling and continuous pulsing. CV cycling offers the advantage of depicting
changes in faradaic reactions occurring at the electrode. One disadvantage of this
method is that it does not accurately represent the stimulation conditions the device
will be subjected to in vivo, and thus could inaccurately predict stability. Continuous
pulsing has the advantage of accurately representing the stimulation the device
will be subjected to in vivo. However, this method provides limited information

Coatings for Microneural Implants: Electrical Considerations
185
regarding any potential changes in redox reactions. One method to combine the
advantages of both methods is continuous stimulation with periodic CV scans.
The coatings also need to remain stable in the in vivo environment where the
device is subjected to harsh conditions, such as reactive oxygen species (ROS).
Reactive accelerated aging is a useful tool to evaluate device performance in harsh
conditions in short amount of time [14]. This type of testing could provide useful
information regarding a coating’s stability in vivo, though the high temperatures and
high ROS concentrations may overestimate failure.
1.2.5
Sterilization
The method used to sterilize the device before implantation is an important
consideration because the extreme conditions used for many sterilization methods
can negatively affect the coatings. The ability to sterilize coated devices is critical
since residual endotoxins can signiﬁcantly exacerbate the FBR [15]. Commonly
used sterilization methods include autoclaving, dry heat, ethylene oxide (EtO), and
ultraviolet radiation. Many materials used for coatings have melting points below
temperatures used in dry heat (∼160 ◦C) and autoclave sterilization (∼120 ◦C),
making them unacceptable sterilization methods. Room temperature EtO does not
use elevated temperatures, making it compatible for coatings that are temperature-
sensitive, and is commonly used for sterilizing devices. EtO has been shown to not
affect the electrical performance of PEDOT/para-toluenesulfonate (pTS) coatings,
despite some of the coatings showing ﬁne cracks [16]. Coated electrodes should
be evaluated before and after sterilization to ensure the sterilization process did not
negatively affect the electrical properties of the coating.
2
Coatings for Faradaic Charge Transfer
Coatings that improve charge transfer through faradaic processes can introduce
species that participate in redox reactions and/or increase the amount of existing
faradaic species by increasing the ESA, providing more surface area for faradaic
charge transfer to occur. One advantage of introducing faradaic charge transfer
pathways through coatings is that the redox active species are attached to the
electrode site, making the reaction reversible. Coatings that facilitate faradaic charge
transfer are commonly a focus of efforts to improve stimulation performance of
devices since faradaic charge transfer allows for greater charge injection than non-
faradaic charge transfer. These coatings also improve recording performance since
they decrease electrode impedance. Initial studies focused on metal oxide coatings
using materials such as iridium oxide (IrOx), rhodium oxide (RhO2), and platinum
black (Pt-black). More recently, CP coatings have become increasingly popular
using conjugated polymers such as polypyrrole (PPy) and PEDOT.

186
K. P. Olczak and K. J. Otto
2.1
Platinum Black (Pt-Black)
Pt-black is a ﬁne Pt powder that has been electrodeposited onto electrodes for over
50 years to improve device electrical properties [17, 18]. Pt-black is a sponge-like
coating that increases the ESA of the electrode [18]. The CCC of Pt-black coatings
can be increased by increasing the current density used for deposition. Gunning
et al. increased the CCC from 0.083 mC/cm2 to 0.591 mC/cm2 by increasing
the current density from 4 nA/μm2 to 10 nA/μm2 [19]. However, this was still
signiﬁcantly lower than the 4.11 mC/cm2 recorded for AIROF electrodes. The
comparison of Pt-black to IrOx coatings depends on the deposition parameters used
for both coatings, since other studies have reported larger CCC for Pt-black than
sputtered iridium oxide ﬁlms or PEDOT electrodes [20]. A potential explanation for
the discrepancies observed in comparisons between Pt-black and other coatings is
the impact of storage conditions on Pt-black coatings. Electrodes stored in distilled
water were stable (Fig. 2a), whereas electrodes that were allowed to dehydrate
cracked (Fig. 2b) [21].
Various studies have used Pt-black coatings to improve recording performance
of neural interfacing devices [21–23]. Schuettler et al. applied a 1 kHz sine wave
to represent a neuronal signal and recorded the signal using Ir electrodes and
electrodes coated with Pt-black and AIROF [23]. Pt-black electrodes had the highest
amplitude, which were 2 times the amplitude recorded on Ir and 1.5 times the
amplitude recorded to AIROF. Pt-black coatings have also increased SNR of in vitro
recordings of local ﬁeld potentials [22]. Pt-black-coated electrodes had signiﬁcantly
higher SNR than uncoated Au electrodes and slightly higher SNR than carbon
nanotube-coated electrodes. Despite the improved performance provided by Pt-
black coatings, stability of the coating has remained a challenge.
Fig. 2 Effect of storage conditions on Pt-black coating stability. (a) Electrodes stored in deionized
water remained stable. (b) Electrodes stored in nonaqueous environment and allowed to dehydrate
developed cracks. Figure adapted with permission from [21]

Coatings for Microneural Implants: Electrical Considerations
187
Several methods have been utilized to improve the electrochemical properties
and stability of Pt-black coatings, including changing the deposition conditions,
increasing the roughness of the electrode surface, and incorporating other molecules
into the coating. Using ultrasonic agitation during Pt-black deposition (to remove
loosely adhered Pt) has been a popular way to improve Pt-black durability [24]. Pt-
black ﬁlms deposited using sonication had lower polarization than Pt-black coatings
deposited using direct current (DC) or pulsed potential. This deposition method has
been used to create Pt-black electrodes for recording and stimulation in both the
central and peripheral nervous system [25, 26]. Increasing the surface roughness
of the substrate before deposition has also been a successful method of improving
the electrical properties and stability of Pt-black electrodes [27]. Pt-black deposited
onto laser-roughened Pt had lower impedance and lower polarization during a
biphasic pulse than Pt-black deposited onto smooth Pt foil [27].
2.2
Iridium Oxide (IrOx)
To overcome the limited CIC of traditional noble metals such at platinum (Pt),
early work used IrOx to increase the CIC of neural electrodes. IrOx is classiﬁed
as a valance change oxide because it has several stable oxidation states that are
electrically conductive [28]. The ability of Ir ions in the IrOx ﬁlms to reversibly
switch between these oxidation states causes IrOx electrodes to have high CCC.
Since charge transfer occurs within the IrOx coating, the faradaic reaction is
reversible. Redox reactions between oxidation states of the IrOx coating take the
general form of:
Ir(OH)n ⇐⇒(IrOx) (OH)n−x + xH+ + xe−
where n represents the oxidation state of the IrOx ﬁlm which increases from 1 to
3 with increasing potential and x represents the number of electrons and protons.
For the Ir(III)/Ir(IV) transition (n = 3), the values of x reported in the literature
range from 1 to 3 [29–31]. The reversibility of the redox reaction between IrOx
oxidation states is important for neural stimulation because it allows large charges
to be injected without altering the surrounding environment.
The method used to prepare IrOx can have signiﬁcant effects on the electro-
chemical and mechanical properties of the coating. The following sections discuss
the four most common methods to produce IrOx: activated iridium oxide ﬁlms
(AIROFs), sputtered iridium oxide ﬁlms (SIROFs), thermally deposited iridium
oxide ﬁlms (TIROFs), and electrodeposited iridium oxide ﬁlms (EIROFs).
2.2.1
Activated Iridium Oxide Films (AIROFs)
AIROF , one of the most common forms of IrOx for neural interfacing devices,
is formed by electrochemically activating Ir metal electrodes via potential cycling
between anodic and cathodic limits. Ir activation requires potential cycling between
anodic and cathodic limits via CV or square pulses, and will not occur upon

188
K. P. Olczak and K. J. Otto
application of a ﬁxed potential [32, 33]. The anodic and cathodic portions of the
activation play important roles in the formation of the AIROF. The anodic cycle
forms an inner oxide layer; then at a critical anodic potential, the surface of the
inner oxide layer is oxidized and hydrated to form an outer hydrous layer [33,
34]. The cathodic cycle serves to reduce the inner oxide layer back to Ir metal,
leaving a monolayer of hydrous oxide on the electrode [33, 35, 36]. Repetition of
this anodic-cathodic cycling forms additional monolayer deposition, which forms
the multilayered hydrous oxide of AIROF electrodes.
AIROF formation can be measured quantitatively by measuring charge or
qualitatively by tracking the color. AIROF formation is commonly monitored by
CV between successive sets of pulses (every ∼50 pulses), and the activation is
stopped once the CCC reaches a predeﬁned limit (∼30 mC/cm2). Another method
of monitoring AIROF activation utilizes the electrochromic properties of IrOx [37].
As the Ir surface is oxidized with increasing number of activation pulses, it shifts in
color, transitioning from colorless (for Ir) to brown, then to dark blue, and ﬁnally
pale blue (Fig. 3a–e). The color shift seen with increasing oxidation is also observed
in the total charge passed during activation (Fig. 3f) and cyclic voltammograms
(Fig. 3g), where distinct redox peaks become more deﬁned as the number of pulses
increases.
Due to the high CIC, AIROF electrodes have been popular for many different
stimulation applications. Robblee et al. ﬁrst demonstrated the potential of AIROF
coatings for neural stimulation in 1983 [38]. In this study, the voltage limits for
electrolysis and dissolution were compared between AIROF, deactivated Ir, PtIr, and
Pt electrodes. AIROF electrodes were the only electrodes that had no dissolution
after continuous, charge-balanced, biphasic pulsing in a PBS-protein solution.
AIROF electrodes also had the largest CIC for both anodic and cathodic monophasic
pulses. Further analysis by Beebe et al. demonstrated AIROF electrodes stimulated
with anode leading biphasic pulses reached a CIC of 2.1 mC/cm2, which was almost
double that of the cathode leading biphasic pulses, which reached 1.0 mC/cm2 [39].
Although these limits are less than the water window potential limits reported by
Robblee et al. [38], they are still signiﬁcantly greater than the CIC for Pt electrodes
[40]. The high stability and increased charge injection capabilities compared to Pt
sparked interest in AIROF electrodes from other groups, and AIROF electrodes have
been used for acute and chronic stimulation in various animal models [41–43], and
AIROF microwires have been used to stimulate the visual cortex in humans [44].
To avoid delamination of AIROF during stimulation, several studies have evalu-
ated methods to improve AIROF stability by modifying the stimulation waveform
or hardware used. Following observations of Ir deposits in tissue after prolonged
stimulation with AIROF electrodes [45], Cogan et al. extensively characterized
the stability of AIROF in vitro and in vivo [46]. This study found AIROF
electrodes used to deliver stimulation pulses beyond their CCC capabilities resulted
in electrode damage and IrOx deposits in the tissue. Cogan et al. noted that these
deposits were only observed around electrode sites stimulated at 3 mC/cm2, not
electrodes stimulated at 2 mC/cm2 or 0.4 mC/cm2. Furthermore, explanted probes
showed electrode pulsed at 3 mC/cm2 had thick and irregular oxide coatings that

Coatings for Microneural Implants: Electrical Considerations
189
Fig. 3 IrOx-coated electrodes. (a–g) Electrode color shifts that can be used to monitor growth
of AIROF coatings during polymerization. (a–e) Optical images of electrodes after 0, 50, 125,
250, and 500 pulses. (f) The total charge passed during activation with colored circles representing
the AIROF coating color at that point. (g) Voltammograms of AIROF coatings after 0, 50, 125,
250, and 500 pulses from CV swept between −0.8 and 0.8 V (vs. Ag/AgCl) at 100 mV/s. (Figures
adapted with permission from [37]). (h) Electrode damage limits for SIROF and AIROF electrodes
stimulated with current pulses with various charges/phases. (Figure adapted with permission from
[55]). (i) Charge storage capacity of EIROF coatings on different electrode materials after 30 × 106
cathodic pulses (200 μs at 50 Hz, ∼168 h) at a current density of 5.9 A/cm2. The change in CSC
for AIROF-coated electrodes is shown as a dashed line for comparison. (Data from [70]). (j–l)
Scanning electron micrographs of (j) a carbon ﬁber microelectrode with a ∼5 μm diameter and
(k) an EIROF-coated carbon microﬁber. (l) Increased magniﬁcation of the SEM of the EIROF
coating in (k) showing highly porous coating. (Images reproduced with permission from [71]).
(m–o) Effect of PVA/PAA hydrogel on changes in electrochemical properties of EIROF electrodes
after implantation. (m) Uncoated EIROF electrodes had similar 1 kHz impedance as PtIr in vivo
between 1 and 28 DPI. (n) PVA/PAA hydrogel coatings signiﬁcantly lowered the 1 kHz impedance
of EIROF electrodes at all-time points between 1 and 28 DPI. (o) Voltammograms of electrodes
(−0.6–0.8 V (vs. SCE), at 50 mV/s) before implantation and after explanation show similar redox
peaks for PVA-/PAA-coated EIROF, indicating the electrochemical reactions were not affected by
the PVA/PAA coatings. (Images adapted with permission from [75])

190
K. P. Olczak and K. J. Otto
appeared loosely adhered to the electrode. Using the same stimulation parameters,
electrodes pulsed in vitro showed similar morphological changes and delamination
after only 1,600 s of pulsing. These morphological changes and delamination were
attributed to continued activation of the Ir metal, creating an unstable AIROF layer.
To avoid creating this unstable AIROF layer during stimulation, Cogan et al. noted
the importance of ensuring stimulation parameters was within the CCC of the
electrode, so it is not polarized beyond the water window [46]. In a latter study,
Cogan et al. evaluated the combination of potential bias and asymmetric biphasic
pulses to maximize the CIC of AIROF electrodes [47]. The CIC was signiﬁcantly
increased for cathode leading pulses when a positive bias was applied and for
anode leading pulses when a negative bias was applied. Another strategy to improve
AIROF stability involved modifying the stimulation hardware to limit the potential
to the safe potential range [48].
2.2.2
Sputtered Iridium Oxide Films (SIROFs)
SIROFs share many of the same advantages as AIROFs and can be easily incorpo-
rated into microfabrication processes used for fabricating neural devices. SIROFs
are formed by sputtering Ir ions in an oxidizing plasma onto the electrode
surface. The morphology and electrochemical behavior of SIROFs are inﬂuenced by
deposition parameters such as the sputtering gas composition [49] and electrode bias
potential [50]. Voltammograms of SIROF are relatively featureless and don’t exhibit
the characteristic redox peaks of AIROF, suggesting SIROF has a high charging
current [51]. Cogan et al. demonstrated that increasing the SIROF thickness
increased the CCC and the prominence of the Ir3+ ⇌Ir4+ redox peaks [52, 53].
In a later study assessing the stability of SIROF electrodes, Cogan et al. also noted
the redox peaks became more prominent following continuous CV cycling [52].
The in vitro electrochemical properties of SIROF electrode have been shown to
be superior to AIROF coatings. Comparison between SIROF and AIROF during in
vitro testing demonstrated SIROF has a greater stability. After soaking in PBS for
9 days, SIROF’s 1 kHz impedance was more stable than AIROF’s [54]. The greater
stability of SIROF compared to AIROF was also conﬁrmed by thorough stability
testing by Negi et al. [55]. Electrodes were pulsed using biphasic cathode leading
charge-balanced waveforms with variable amplitude and width. Ir dissolution was
lower for SIROFs than AIROF pulsed under the same conditions. The threshold
for SIROF damage was found to be greater than the threshold for neural damage
(Fig. 3h); thus, the SIROF coating is not the limiting factor for safe electrical
stimulation [55].
SIROF coatings have been used in multiple studies for in vivo stimulation
and recording applications. Kane et al. evaluated the electrical performance of
SIROF electrodes on a Utah electrode array (UEA) implanted over 358 days [56].
Electrochemical characterization revealed a linear increase in CCC over time,
which Kane attributed in part to current leakage due to cracks in the insulation.
Stimulation of the visual cortex of a nonhuman primate with SIROF over 500 days
postimplantation (DPI) was shown to produce consistent visual precepts [57].
Voltage excursions remained within the −0.6 V water window threshold for 100 μA

Coatings for Microneural Implants: Electrical Considerations
191
biphasic stimulation. Chronic stimulation using SIROFs showed no additional signs
of damage compared to unstimulated electrodes implanted in a nonhuman primate
[58]. Stimulation for 4 h/day, 5 days/week over 6 months did not signiﬁcantly alter
tissue response compared to unstimulated electrodes, even at the highest charge
density used (1 mC/cm2). UEAs having SIROF electrode sites have been used
to stimulate the motor cortex of a tetraplegic patient to provide somatosensory
information [59–61]. Although mainly used for stimulation, SIROFs have also been
used to successfully record from the central and peripheral nervous systems [62, 63].
For example, Kane et al. was able to record single-unit activity from SIROF-coated
UEAs throughout their 358-day study previously discussed [56].
2.2.3
Thermally Deposited Iridium Oxide Films (TIROFs)
TIROFs are prepared by thermal decomposition of the Ir salt H2IrCl6 on a metal
substrate. The electrode to be coated is placed in a solution containing H2IrCl6
and then annealed at temperatures ranging from 300 to 800 ◦C. This procedure can
be repeated to create multilayer TIROF electrodes. The CCC of TIROF electrodes
decreases with increasing annealing temperature and has been attributed to loss of
hydrous layer and decreased surface area [64].
TIROFs can improve the electrical properties of electrodes, but relatively few
studies have used TIROF for neural interfaces due to the harsh deposition parame-
ters, which can damage electrode substrate and insulating materials. Comparison of
the CIC of TIROF to AIROF has shown they have similar charge injection capacities
for anode leading biphasic pulses, but TIROF has a slightly lower CIC for cathode
leading pulses [65]. Robblee et al. found that the CIC of TIROF could be increased
by modifying the stimulation waveform and that the maximum CIC was achieved
using asymmetric anode leading pulses [66]. This study also tested the stability of
TIROF by applying continuous pulsing and found 0.1–1.0 μg of dissolved Ir in
solution; this ﬁnding was despite subsequent CV measurements showing increased
CCC. This discrepancy was attributed to Ir-Cl complexes that were not converted
to IrOx during annealing. The extremely high temperatures required for TIROF
deposition can be difﬁcult to incorporate into a fabrication process and are not
compatible with many polymer substrates such as polyimide. Thus, despite having
similar electrochemical properties as AIROFs, TIROFs are not commonly used for
neural interfacing devices.
2.2.4
Electrodeposited Iridium Oxide Films (EIROFs)
IrOx ﬁlms can be deposited on a variety of electrode substrates by electrodeposition
of electrolytes containing IrOx complexes. The solution used for the deposition
generally contains an Ir precursor (e.g., IrCl63−), potassium carbonate, oxalic acid,
and H2O2 [67]. IrOx is not soluble in alkaline solutions, so potassium carbonate is
used to increase the pH, which enhances IrOx deposition. This increased pH can
lead to precipitation of the IrOx; to avoid this, a complex-forming agent, such as
oxalic acid, is added to the solution. The addition of H2O2 in the solutions lowers
the potential needed for deposition, allowing the oxides to be deposited under lower

192
K. P. Olczak and K. J. Otto
current densities. The deposition solution must ﬁrst be heated or aged to allow
hydrolysis of the Ir precursor to form Ir(OH2)2Cl4−[68]; then IrOx is formed via
oxidation of the Ir complex [67]:

Ir(COO)2(OH)4
2−= IrO2 + 2CO2 + 2H2O + 2e−.
EIROF coatings have been shown to have comparable electrochemical properties
as AIROF coatings and offer the advantage of being able to be deposited on a
variety of electrode materials. Meyer et al. deposited EIROF on gold electrodes
using anodic pulsing and observed similar behavior to AIROF electrodes [69].
Anodic pulses resulted in an average deposition rate of ∼0.09 mC/cm2/pulse,
reaching 17.6 mC/cm2 after 200 pulses. Cyclic voltammograms of the EIROF-
coated gold electrodes had the characteristic peaks seen with AIROF electrodes. In
a follow-up study, Meyer et al. compared the deposition and stability of EIROFs on
various substrates [70]. EIROF was successfully deposited on Au, Pt, PtIr, and the
stainless-steel alloy 316LVM, but unsuccessful on W and Ti due to electrochemical
interactions with the deposition solution. Of the metals that were successfully coated
with EIROFs, Au was the most readily coated, while others (Pt, PtIr, 316LVM)
required priming with CV before adherent EIROFs were formed. EIROF stability
was assessed by comparing the CCC before and after the application of 30 × 106
cathodic pulses (200 μs at 50 Hz, ∼168 h) at a current density of 5.9 A/cm2. The
percent change in CCC is shown in Fig. 3I in comparison to the percent change of
AIROF electrodes subjected to the same protocol. Although EIROF on Au had the
largest percent decrease (∼8.5%), the CCC after stimulation (23.6 mC/cm2) was
still similar to the CCC of AIROF after stimulation.
EIROF coatings have been used to improve the stimulation performance of
several different types of neural interfacing devices. Deku et al. evaluated EIROF
coatings on carbon microﬁbers to improve their CIC for stimulation (Fig. 3j–k)
[71]. They found that introducing a potential bias during stimulation increased the
CIC to a maximum of 17 mC/cm2 at a bias of 0.6 V (vs. Ag/AgCl). The EIROF
utilization, deﬁned as the CIC/CCC, was found to be ∼35% at a bias of 0.6 V,
which is greater than the 5% utilization of other EIROF-coated microelectrodes
[70]. The chronic stimulation performance of EIROF-coated electrodes in vivo was
evaluated by Han et al. [72]. Initially after implantation, the charge injection limit
of the EIROF electrodes ranged from 0.01 to 0.16 mC/cm2; after 84 weeks, the
charge injection limit was 0.14 mC/cm2 (for 1 array with 16 electrode sites), which
demonstrated good stability.
EIROF coatings have also been used to reduce electrode impedance in order to
improve recording performance of neural interfacing devices. Neural recording with
EIROF electrodes was ﬁrst shown by Han et al. who showed single-unit activity
recorded by EIROF-coated electrodes 70 DPI [73]. Han et al. later demonstrated
the ability of EIROF-coated electrodes to record single-unit neuronal activity over
500 DPI [72]. EIROF-coated carbon ﬁber microelectrodes were used to record
stimulation-evoked action potentials and evoke action potentials in the peripheral

Coatings for Microneural Implants: Electrical Considerations
193
nervous system of a song bird [74]. The carbon ﬁbers originally had high impedance
and low CCC (∼0.1 mC/cm2) due to their small size (5 μm diameter), which is
below the threshold for most CNS applications. Deposition of an ∼100 nm EIROF
coating reduced the impedance by an order of magnitude and increased the CCC to
∼25 mC/cm2.
Deposition of hydrogel coatings on EIROF-coated electrodes has been shown
to improve their stability. Zhou et al. evaluated hydrogel coatings to improve the
stability of EIROF coatings in vivo [75]. The impedance of uncoated electrodes
increased over time after implantation, and EIROF electrodes had higher 1 kHz
impedance than PtIr electrodes at days 7, 14, and 21 (Fig. 3m). Addition of a
poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA)/poly(acrylic acid) (PAA) hydrogel to the EIROF-coated
electrodes decreased the 1 kHz impedance by 54.5% in vitro and had lower 1 kHz
impedance across the entire implantation period (Fig. 3n). To assess the coating’s
impact on EIROF redox reactions, CV measurements were taken before and after
implantation (Fig. 3o). Although the CCC of the explanted EIROF-PVA/PAA
electrodes decreased to 13.2 mC/cm2, compared to 15.4 mC/cm2 before, both
voltammograms exhibited the characteristic redox peaks of EIROF.
2.3
Platinum-Iridium (Pt-Ir)
Composites of Pt-Ir have also been used as electrode coatings to improve device
electrical properties. Composite Pt-Ir ﬁlms can be electrodeposited from a mixture
of Pt and Ir salts [76, 77] or sputter coated using Pt and Ir targets [78]. Equivalent
circuit models of Pt-Ir composite-coated electrodes show they have a signiﬁcantly
lower polarization impedance than Pt electrodes, and voltage transient measure-
ments show the lower polarization impedance is evident even at low pulse widths
(17–32 μs) [79]. This low polarization impedance results in signiﬁcantly lower-
power consumption for voltage-controlled stimulation at pulse widths between 0.3
and 2 ms [80]. Cassar et al. compared neural recording of Pt-Ir coated to uncoated
electrodes [81]. Coated devices had lower 1 kHz impedances (Fig. 4a) and greater
number of single units per electrode over the entire implantation period (Fig. 4b).
The average SNR was greater for uncoated electrodes until 4 weeks, after which the
coated electrodes had greater SNR for the remainder of the experiment (Fig. 4c).
This increased SNR at later time points was attributed to the noise at the electrode
interface, which remained stable for the coated electrodes and gradually increased
for uncoated electrodes.
2.4
Rhodium Oxide (RhO2)
RhO2 is another metal oxide that was historically used for stimulation. Rh forms a
hydrous oxide layer and injects charge via electron valance changes, similar to IrOx
[82]. Rh is stable over a wide range of pH values at potentials relevant for neural
stimulation and was found to have minimal mass loss when subjected to continuous

194
K. P. Olczak and K. J. Otto
Fig. 4 Characterization of Pt-Ir composite-coated electrodes compared to uncoated electrodes. (a)
Pt-Ir-coated electrodes had lower 1 kHz impedances than uncoated electrodes at all-time points.
(b) The number of single-unit recordings per electrode was greater for Pt-Ir-coated electrodes
than uncoated electrodes after 2 weeks postimplantation. (c) The signal-to-noise ratio of uncoated
electrodes was greater than Pt-Ir-coated electrodes after until 4 weeks postimplantation; then Pt-Ir-
coated electrodes had a higher signal-to-noise ratio from 4 to 12 weeks postimplantation. (Figures
adapted with permission from [81])
electrical stimulation [83, 84]. Analysis of electrode dissolution by Johnson et al.
conﬁrmed that Rh remained stable during electrical stimulation, having lower
dissolution rates than Au, Pt, and Ir at current densities of 0.1 A/cm2 and 1 A/cm2
[83]. The maximum charge injection for RhO2 using a biphasic, charge-balanced
pulse was greater than Pt for both anode and cathode leading pulses but signiﬁcantly
lower than AIROF and TIROF [65]. For monophasic cathodic pulses with an anodic
bias, RhO2 charge injection was ∼3mC/cm2, which was comparable to AIROF and
TIROF.
Factors that have limited the use of RhO2 as a coating for neural interfacing
devices include uncertainties regarding its biocompatibility and its high cost.
Reports of the in vivo response to RhO2 electrodes have been mixed; some studies
have found it to be toxic [85], while other studies have reported no signs of neural
damage for stimulated or unstimulated RhO2 electrodes [86]. The limited studies
regarding the in vivo performance of RhO2 coatings in vivo can in part be attributed

Coatings for Microneural Implants: Electrical Considerations
195
to its high cost. Rh is twice the price of Ir and thrice the cost of Pt, making it an
expensive alternative to other commonly used electrode materials.
2.5
Conductive Polymers
Conductive polymers have been increasingly used to improve the electrical prop-
erties of electrodes due to their ability to accommodate both electronic and ionic
charge transfers. This unique ability improves charge transfer between the electron-
conducting electronics and ion-conducting tissue. The conductivity of conjugated
polymers is due to the extended pi-bond formation along their backbone due to
alternating single and double bonds [87]. The most commonly used conductive
polymers (CPs) for neural interfacing devices are PPy and PEDOT (Fig. 5a, b). The
following sections focus on the properties, use, and limitations of PPy and PEDOT
as coatings for neural interfaces.
2.5.1
PPy
The conductivity of PPy can be used to lower the impedance of neural electrodes.
Polymerization of the pyrrole monomer creates PPy ﬁlms on the electrode which
are neutral in their reduced state and positively charged when oxidized. Negatively
charged ions are incorporated into the PPy during oxidation to counterbalance the
positive charge of the PPy backbone and maintain electroneutrality; this process is
referred to as doping. Commonly used counterions include polystyrene sulfonate
(PSS) and pTS, though other types of counterions can be used to create additional
functionality to the PPy ﬁlm.
The electrical properties of PPy coatings are affected by the polymerization
parameters such as dopant concentration and polymerization time. Increasing the
concentration of pTS from 0.001 M to 0.05 M increased the conductivity of PPy
ﬁlms by over three orders of magnitude, from 0.015 S/cm to 34 S/cm [88]. In 2001,
Cui et al. coated electrodes on a Michigan-style electrode array with PPy reducing
impedance and improving recording ability [89]. PPy ﬁlms were polymerized at a
constant current density of 2 mA/cm2, and the coating thickness was controlled by
the amount of charge passed during deposition (i.e., the duration of the deposition).
The 1 kHz impedance magnitude signiﬁcantly decreased following deposition of
a 1 μm PPy ﬁlm and then continued to decrease as the PPy thickness increased,
reaching a minimum of ∼4.9 k for 13 μm thick PPy coatings. Further increases
in thickness resulted in a gradual increase in impedance until delamination was
observed at 28 μm.
To improve the biological integration of the neural interface, biologically active
molecules and peptides can be incorporated into PPy ﬁlms both as dopants and
through functionalization of the PPy. To be used as a dopant, a molecule must be
negatively charged, such as dexamethasone (Dex), which has a negatively charged
sulfate group. The Dex incorporated into the coating is then released by cycling
the PPy coating between reduced and oxidized states. This repetitive cycling can
negatively impact the coating, and reduced electroactivity and mechanical instability

196
K. P. Olczak and K. J. Otto
Fig. 5 Conductive polymer coatings. Chemical structures of (a) polypyrrole (PPy) and (b)
poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT). (c–d) The effect of using a peptide dopant on the
electrochemical property PPy. PPy was doped with silk-like peptide fragment (SLPF) or PSS and
polymerized on a 1250 μm2 gold electrode at a current density of 0.5 mA/cm2 for a total charge of
10 μC. (c) Nyquist plots show curvilinear behavior for the PPY/PSS coatings indicating parallel
RC circuit behavior; this behavior is not observed for PPy-/PSS-coated electrodes. (Figure adapted
with permission from [92]). (d) Decreasing charge-carrying capacity of PEDOT/PSS and PPy/PSS
following polarization at 0.4 V (vs. Ag/AgCl). The charge-carrying capacity of the coatings after
polarization compared to their initial charge-carrying capacity is shown as residual activity. Inset
depicts proposed mechanism of PPy overoxidation. (Figure adapted with permission from [96]).
(e) SNR of PEDOT- and PPy-coated electrodes doped with pTS and SO4. Bars represent average
and error bars show standard deviation. Average SNR of uncoated Ir shown as dashed line with
standard deviation shown in gray. (Data from [100]). (f–i) PEDOT coatings deposited using (h, j)
potentiostatic (constant voltage) or (i, k) galvanostatic (constant current) deposition. The potential
was set to 1.1 V (vs. SCE) for potentiostatic deposition, and the total charge was 2.8 μC (top) and
20 μC (bottom) for galvanostatic deposition. (Figures adapted with permission from [101]). (j)
CCC of PEDOT polymerized using different dopants. Initial CCC for each electrode is shown
in white, and blue represents the CCC after 800 scans. CCC was calculated from the area of
voltammograms from CV using a sweep rate of 120 mV/s between −0.7 and 0.7 V (vs. Ag/AgCl).
(Data from [104]). (k) Voltage transients of Ir, AIROF, and PEDOT in response to biphasic cathode
leading current pulses. The 200 μs phase duration and 45 μA amplitude resulted in a charge density
of 5 mC/cm2. (Figure adapted with permission from [105]). (l–m) Comparison of the adherence of
PEDOT ﬁlms and PEDOT nanotubes after ﬁve CV cycles between −0.9 and 0.5 V (vs. Ag/AgCl) at
100 mV/s. (l) SEM of PEDOT ﬁlm showing delamination from the electrode site/silicon substrate.
(m) SEM of PEDOT nanotube coatings showing no signs of delamination. (Images adapted with
permission from [99])

Coatings for Microneural Implants: Electrical Considerations
197
are commonly observed following Dex release [90, 91]. Larger molecules such as
peptide sequences have also been used as dopants [92, 93]. Some peptide fragments
do not appear to have a signiﬁcant effect charge transfer [93], while other peptides
such as silk-like peptide fragment [92] and laminin fragment DCDPGYIGSR
(p31) [93] produce coatings that show semicircles in Nyquist plots, indicating RC
behavior within the coating (Fig. 5c). For molecules that are intended to remain at
the PPy coating, covalent bonding has been used to create stable bonds between
the PPy and molecule. The impact of the functionalization on the electrochemical
properties depends on the position of functionalization. Functionalizing the PPy
monomer at the N-position causes a signiﬁcant decrease in conductivity [94],
whereas functionalizing post-polymerization at the α-position produces coatings
with conductivities comparable to PPy [95].
Poor stability and performance compared to other CPs are a few of the major
limiting factors of PPy coatings for chronic use. PPy coatings, due to defects in
the PPy structure (e.g., α,β-coupling between monomer units), have been postulated
to be susceptible to nucleophilic attacks, which can cause overoxidation of PPy
and loss of conjugation (Fig. 5d) [96–98]. The impact of overoxidation on PPy
electrical properties is illustrated in Fig. 5d; The electrical properties of PPy-coated
electrodes held at 0.4 V (vs. Ag/AgCl) quickly deteriorated, retaining only 5% of
their original capacity after 16 hours [96]. PPy coatings have performed worse than
PEDOT coatings in both in vitro and in vivo testing [99, 100]. Harris et al. compared
the recording abilities of PPy-coated, PEDOT-coated, and uncoated Ir electrodes
on a four-shank Michigan-style microelectrode array [100]. PPy coatings exhibited
lower SNR compared to the PEDOT-coated and uncoated Ir electrodes (Fig. 5e); this
effect persisted with both pTS and SO4 as dopants. Taken as a whole, despite the
advantages of PPY coatings (e.g., lowered impedance and the ability to functionalize
the coatings), the limited stability and performance of PPy in some applications have
spurred investigation of alternative CP coatings.
2.5.2
PEDOT
Over the past few decades, PEDOT coatings have been of major interest due to
their superior stability and electrochemical properties compared to PPy coatings.
The α,β-coupling that is postulated to limit the stability of PPy does not occur for
PEDOT due to the dioxyethylene bridging across the three and four positions on
the heterocycle [101]. The functional implications of PEDOT’s increased stability
are evident in Fig. 5d; the residual electroactivity of PEDOT remained above 80%
after 80 h of polarization at 0.4 V (vs. Ag/AgCl), whereas PPy lost 95% of its
electroactivity within 16 h [96].
The deposition parameters used to polymerize PEDOT affect its physical,
mechanical, and electrochemical properties. Several different polymerization meth-
ods can be used to create PEDOT, though electrodeposition is the most common
for coating neural devices. Electrochemical polymerization can be achieved by
controlling the electrode potential (potentiostatic) or current (galvanostatic) to
oxidize EDOT and form PEDOT. Both methods are used in the literature but
have been shown to produce PEDOT coatings with different electrical properties

198
K. P. Olczak and K. J. Otto
[102] and morphologies [101]. In contrast to the uniform coatings produced via
galvanostatic polymerization, potentiostatic polymerization resulted in distinct areas
of increased polymerization around the electrode perimeter (Fig. 5f–i) [101]. The
counterion used during polymerization can also have a signiﬁcant impact, with
several studies showing PEDOT coatings with smaller dopants, such as pTS and
ClO4, have larger CCC compared to PEDOT/PSS coatings [103, 104]. Baeck et al.
polymerized PEDOT with different sized dopants to elucidate dopant size on the
PEDOT coating CCC and stability (Fig. 5j) [104]. PEDOT/ClO4, with the smallest
dopant, had the highest CCC before and after CV cycling (800 scans), but also had
the largest decrease in CCC. In contrast, PEDOT/PSS, with the largest dopant, had
the smallest CCC before and after CV cycling, but had the smallest change in CCC.
PEDOT can improve the stimulation capabilities of electrodes due to its high
CIC and stability. The low impedance of PEDOT is advantageous for current-
controlled stimulation because it allows larger charge densities to be applied while
staying within a safe potential range. Multiple studies have shown that PEDOT has
lower-voltage transients than standard electrode materials such as Au and Pt when
a constant current pulse is applied. Wilks et al. demonstrated that PEDOT also
has lower-voltage transients than AIROF electrodes (Fig. 5k) [105]. Later studies
by Venkatraman et al. conﬁrmed the lower polarization, and thus greater CIC,
of PEDOT compared to AIROF electrodes [106]. The lower-voltage transient for
PEDOT-coated electrodes resulted in a CIC 15 times greater than AIROF or Pt.
The electrochemical properties of PEDOT that improve stimulation capabilities
(e.g., low impedance) also serve to improve recording abilities. Cui et al. initially
demonstrated the ability of PEDOT-coated electrodes to record neuronal activity
over acute time periods [101].The beneﬁts of PEDOT coatings are exempliﬁed
in a 2011 study by Ludwig et al. where they used PEDOT coatings to improve
the recording ability of small surface area (177 μm2) electrodes [107]. The high
impedance of uncoated electrodes generated high noise ﬂoors, and no single units
were recorded over the 8-day study. Conversely, the PEDOT-coated electrodes
had a signiﬁcantly lower impedance and noise ﬂoor and were able to record an
average 0.8 ± 0.1 units per site during the ﬁrst 2 DPI. The recording ability fell
to 0.4 ± 0.2 units per site at the end of the study (6–8 DPI) and was attributed to
the biological response to the implanted device. This trend of improved recording
quality followed by decreased recording performance has also been observed in
several other studies and has been suggested to be caused by the FBR [108].
To improve the biological integration of the device, various biologically active
molecules have been incorporated into PEDOT coatings via doping, entrapment,
and covalent modiﬁcation. Molecules that have a negative charge can be used as
dopants during polymerization, and both large molecules such as peptides and
small molecules such as dexamethasone have been used [12, 101]. In contrast
to doping, entrapment of molecules within the PEDOT ﬁlm does not require the
molecule to be charged since another counterion is incorporated to serve as the
dopant. Entrapment of some molecules has been shown to not impact the PEDOT
coating’s electrochemical properties, as in the case of chitosan [109], while other
molecules, such as nerve growth factor, have been shown to have negative effects

Coatings for Microneural Implants: Electrical Considerations
199
[110]. Covalent bonding has been used to improve the stability of the coating
compared to doping and entrapment where the molecules can potentially leave the
coating upon PEDOT reduction. Molecules have been attached to the monomer
before polymerization [111] and to the PEDOT coating post-polymerization [112].
Delamination of PEDOT coatings and loss of electroactivity are commonly
reported for prolonged stimulation; consequently, various strategies have been
investigated to improve its stability. After 2 weeks of in vivo stimulation using
biphasic charge-balanced stimulation pulsing, minor cracking was observed on
∼30% of PEDOT-coated electrodes, and delamination was observed on ∼23%
[113]. Several studies have shown PEDOT adhesion can be improved by increasing
the surface roughness of the substrate [103, 114]. Boehler et al. demonstrated
that PEDOT adhesion could be further improved by combining physical and
chemical bonding [114]. The stability of PEDOT/PSS was seven times higher on
SIROF than nanostructured-Pt despite both substrates having similar roughness.
The increased stability was attributed to carbide bonds between the PEDOT and
SIROF. Polymerizing PEDOT on sacriﬁcial nanoﬁbers to create PEDOT nanotubes
has also been shown to improve PEDOT adhesion [99]. After ﬁve CV scans from
−0.9 to 0.5 V (vs. Ag/AgCl) at 100 mV/s, PEDOT nanotube coatings remained
fully adhered, while PEDOT coatings showed delamination from the electrode
site/silicon substrate (Fig. 5l, m). Growing PEDOT through hydrogels has also been
used to stabilize PEDOT coatings [115, 116]. While most hydrogels cover both
the electrode and substrate, the Asplund group has recently engineered conductive
hydrogel polymers that are compatible with photolithography, enabling selective
deposition on the electrode site [116].
3
Coatings for Non-faradaic Charge Transfer
Researchers have increased non-faradaic charge transfer of neural interfacing
devices by both increasing the electrode surface area and applying dielectric
coatings. The use of dielectric coatings was investigated early in device modiﬁcation
studies but largely abandoned following the introduction of IrOx, and thus will not
be discussed in this section. On the other hand, coatings that increase the ESA
of electrodes are becoming increasingly popular. The geometric surface area of
electrodes is constrained by the size of the device, so rough or porous coatings
have been used to increase the ESA. The following sections cover two commonly
used materials to increase the ESA of electrodes: titanium nitride (TiN) and carbon
nanotubes (CNTs).
3.1
Titanium Nitride
TiN has been used as an electrode material to facilitate non-faradaic charge transfer.
The featureless voltammograms of TiN indicate charge transfer is facilitated by
charging and discharging the double layer (Fig. 6a). It is important to note that

200
K. P. Olczak and K. J. Otto
Fig. 6 Titanium nitride (TiN) capacitive charge injection and effect of structure on charge-
carrying capacity. (a) Voltammograms of TiN coatings from CV scanning between 0.6 and −0.8 V
(vs. Ag/AgCl) at 0.5 V/s. The voltammogram has no apparent redox features and a rectangular
shape that illustrates the large contribution of double-layer charging. (b–c) SEM images illustrating
the porosity of a TiN coating. (b) The pyramidal surface features contribute to the high surface
roughness of the coating. (c) The cross-sectional image of the TiN coating shows the columnar
structure that generates the porosity. (Images adapted from [119]). (d) The effect of N2 ﬂow rate
during TiN deposition on coating morphology and CCC. CCC calculated from CV scans between
−0.6 and 0.9 V (vs. Ag/AgCl)) at a sweep rate of 50 mV/s. SEM insets show surface morphology
corresponding to respective N2 partial pressure. (Figure adapted with permission from [119])
the absence of redox peaks indicates double-layer charging is the dominant form of
charge transfer but does not strictly rule out the presence of faradaic reactions. The
non-faradaic charge transfer of TiN offers advantages with respect to tissue safety
during stimulation, but also comes with disadvantages such as a limited ability to
store charge. CCCs as low as 0.17 mC/cm2 have been reported for TiN electrodes,
which does not meet the requirements of many neural stimulation applications
[117]. However, CCCs as large as 23 mC/cm2 have also been reported [118]. The
large range of CCCs reported in the literature can be attributed to experimental
differences used during measurements, though it is also likely to differences in
coating deposition methods.
TiN can be deposited as a highly porous coating resulting in a high ESA
which increases the capacitance of the electrode. The porosity of TiN coatings
comes from a columnar structure which also results in rough surface morphology
(Fig. 6b–c) [119]. Meijs et al. modiﬁed deposition parameters of TiN coatings

Coatings for Microneural Implants: Electrical Considerations
201
to assess the effect of surface morphology on their electrochemical behavior
[119].The TiN morphology was controlled by modifying the partial pressure of N2
during deposition, and pyramidal features were formed above 30 standard cubic
centimeters per minute (sccm) with increasingly small feature size as the partial
pressure increased further. The increased surface roughness initially produced a
large increase in CCC and then started to decrease for electrodes with the smallest
feature size (Fig. 6d). This example highlights the limits of increasing electrode
porosity; as the size of the pore decreases, so does the penetration depth of ions
within, which limits the active portion of the pore to a fraction of its actual size.
The limitations of increasing ESA via porosity are especially evident during in
vivo stimulation where biological material can reduce access to the pores. Meijs
et al. compared the polarization of porous and smooth TiN electrodes pulsed with
biphasic, cathode leading current pulses [7]. The polarization of the porous TiN
was less than the smooth TiN during the cathodic phase in vitro; however, once
implanted, the polarization of the porous TiN exceeded the smooth TiN during both
the cathodic and anodic phases. The different impact of implantation on porous
TiN compared to smooth TiN was attributed to protein adsorption, blocking the
smaller pores of the porous TiN and effectively lowering the electrochemically
active surface area. Brunton et al. also observed decreased CIC of TiN in vivo
compared to in vitro [117]. The CIC of TiN electrodes, measured using 100 μs
biphasic current pulses, was reduced from 194 ± 17 μC/cm2·ph in vitro to 72 ± 13
μC/cm2·ph in vivo. Despite this ∼63% reduction in CIC, the in vivo CIC of TiN
was still four times greater than Pt (18 ± 17 μC/cm2·ph).
The increased CIC of TiN electrodes compared to standard metal electrodes
has led to the use of TiN coatings in a variety of neural interfacing devices. TiN
has been used as an electrode material for intracortical devices [118, 120–123],
retinal prostheses [124, 125], spinal cord stimulators [126], and peripheral nervous
system electrodes [127–130]. Deku et al. compared the electrochemical properties
of 100 μm2 electrodes coated with TiN and SIROF [62]. At low frequencies,
TiN and SIROF had similar impedances, while at frequencies above 100 Hz, TiN
had lower impedance magnitudes. At 1 kHz, the average impedance magnitude of
TiN was 31.1 ± 7.3 k, which was approximately 35% of the SIROF impedance
(90.2 ± 26.1 k). Deku et al. also compared the stimulation abilities of TiN and
SIROF electrodes by measuring the charge injection capacities using monophasic
200 μs cathodal pulses with increasing interpulse bias from 0 to 0.8 V (vs.
Ag/AgCl). At 0 V interpulse bias, the charge injection capacities of TiN (24.2 μA)
and SIROF (25.4 μA) were similar. Although the CIC of both TiN and SIROF
increased with increasing bias potential, the maximum CIC of SIROF at 0.8 V bias
(114.6 μA) was ∼2.4 times larger than TiN (46.9 μA).
Although the CIC of TiN electrodes is lower than other electrode coatings, its
stability in vivo is a major advantage. CV and EIS measurements of explanted TiN
electrodes revealed the electrode sites remained stable after 30 days in vivo [126].
Meijs et al. found TiN-coated electrodes remained remarkably stable over the 90-
day implantation [129]. The maximum cathodic potential in response to a 20 mA,
200 μs biphasic current pulse only dropped from −82 ± 7 mV preimplantation

202
K. P. Olczak and K. J. Otto
to −93 ± 5 mV postimplantation. Furthermore, SEM images of explanted devices
revealed the TiN electrodes retained their highly porous structure and showed no
signs of delamination or cracking.
3.2
Carbon Nanotubes
CNT coatings improve electrochemical properties of electrodes due to their high
ESA. CNTs have a large surface area due to their geometry, which increases their
ability to store charge via Cdl charging and discharging. The electroactivity of
the edge plane of CNTs is signiﬁcantly greater than the basal plane (sidewalls)
(Fig. 7) [131]; thus, the electrochemical properties can be improved by the use of
deposition methods that produce vertically aligned CNTs, such as chemical vapor
deposition (CVD) [132]. Wang et al. ﬁrst demonstrated the use of CVD to deposit
vertically aligned CNT coatings on microelectrodes for neural interfaces in 2006
[133]. The Cdl of the initial CNT coating was only 5.4 μF/cm2 but was increased
to 1600 μF/cm2 by functionalizing the CNTs with PEG-lipid conjugates to increase
their hydrophilicity.
CNT coatings have been used to improve recordings for stimulation performance
of neural interfaces in vitro and in vivo. Keefer et al. demonstrated the beneﬁts of
electrodeposited CNT coatings on neural interfaces in vitro and in vivo [134]. CNT-
coated electrodes increased the neuronal response to voltage-controlled stimulation
pulses in vitro compared to uncoated Au electrodes. To evaluate the in vivo
performance of CNT coatings, this study evaluated the recording performance
of neural interfaces in the rat motor cortex and the nonhuman primate visual
Fig. 7 Cyclic voltammograms of sidewall of CNTs (bottom voltammogram) and edge plane of
CNTs (top voltammogram). The ampliﬁcation coefﬁcients for the measurements are indicated next
to their corresponding voltammograms. The dotted lines represent the unmodiﬁed CNTs and the
solid lines represent oxidized CNTs. (Figure adapted with permission from [131])

Coatings for Microneural Implants: Electrical Considerations
203
cortex. Recordings in both animal models showed CNT coatings had higher
signal amplitudes than uncoated electrodes. Furthermore, SEM images of explanted
CNT-coated electrodes showed the CNT coating remained intact after penetration
through the dura. Shin et al. compared acute recording performance of tungsten
microwire electrodes with and without CNT coatings [135]. CNT-coated electrodes
had greater percent of electrodes that recorded high-quality (SNR > 4) neuronal
signals compared to uncoated electrodes. Minnikanti et al. compared the stimulation
performance of CNT-coated stainless steel electrodes in vitro and in vivo [136]. In
contrast to the reduced CCC that is commonly seen for other electrode materials, the
CCC of CNT-coated electrodes increased in vivo to 1.111 ± 0.401 mC/cm2 from
1.080 ± 0.283 mC/cm2 in vitro.
4
Conclusion
Device coatings have been used to improve the performance of neural interfacing
devices by improving their electrical properties. This chapter has discussed the coat-
ings that improve charge transfer through faradaic and non-faradaic mechanisms.
Speciﬁc coatings that utilize faradaic and non-faradaic charge transfer are discussed,
and examples of their use in the literature are used to highlight their advantages and
disadvantages.
References
1. Patel, P.R., Na, K., Zhang, H., Kozai, T.D.Y., Kotov, N.A., Yoon, E., Chestek, C.A.: Insertion
of linear 8.4 Mm diameter 16 channel carbon ﬁber electrode arrays for single unit recordings.
J. Neural Eng. 12(4), 046009 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1088/1741-2560/12/4/046009
2. Seymour, J.P., Kipke, D.R.: Fabrication of polymer neural probes with sub-cellular features
for reduced tissue encapsulation. In: 2006 International Conference of the IEEE Engineering
in Medicine and Biology Society; IEEE, pp. 4606–4609 (2006). https://doi.org/10.1109/
IEMBS.2006.260528
3. Kozai, T.D.Y., Langhals, N.B., Patel, P.R., Deng, X., Zhang, H., Smith, K.L., Lahann, J.,
Kotov, N.A., Kipke, D.R.: Ultrasmall implantable composite microelectrodes with bioactive
surfaces for chronic neural interfaces. Nat. Mater. 11(12), 1065–1073 (2012). https://doi.org/
10.1038/nmat3468
4. Luan, L., Wei, X., Zhao, Z., Siegel, J.J., Potnis, O., Tuppen, C.A., Lin, S., Kazmi, S., Fowler,
R.A., Holloway, S., Dunn, A.K., Chitwood, R.A., Xie, C.: Ultraﬂexible nanoelectronic probes
form reliable, glial scar–free neural integration. Sci. Adv. 3(2), e1601966 (2017). https://
doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.1601966
5. Lempka, S.F., Johnson, M.D., Barnett, D.W., Mofﬁtt, M.A., Otto, K.J., Kipke, D.R., McIntyre,
C.C.: Optimization of microelectrode design for cortical recording based on thermal noise
considerations. Annu. Int. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Proc., 3361–3364 (2006). https://
doi.org/10.1109/IEMBS.2006.259432
6. Bard, A.J., Faulkner, L.R.: Electrochemical Methods: Fundamentals and Applications, 2nd
edn. Wiley, New York (1990)
7. Meijs, S., Sørensen, C., SØrensen, S., Rechendorff, K., Fjorback, M., Rijkhoff, N.J.M.M.:
Inﬂuence of implantation on the electrochemical properties of smooth and porous TiN

204
K. P. Olczak and K. J. Otto
coatings for stimulation electrodes. J. Neural Eng. 13(2), 026011 (2016). https://doi.org/
10.1088/1741-2560/13/2/026011
8. Orazem, M.E., Bernard, T., Cells, E.: Electrochemistry. In: Electrochemical Impedance
Spectroscopy. Wiley, Hoboken (2008)
9. Cogan, S.F.: Neural stimulation and recording electrodes. Annu. Rev. Biomed. Eng. 10, 275–
309 (2008). https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.bioeng.10.061807.160518
10. Hung, A., Goldberg, I.B., Judy, J.W.: Stimulation electrode materials and electrochemical
testing methods. In: Zhou, D., Greenbaum, E. (eds.) Implantable Neural Prostheses 2:
Techniques and Engineering Approaches, pp. 191–216. Springer New York, New York
(2010). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-0-387-98120-8_7
11. Boehler, C., Oberueber, F., Asplund, M.: Tuning drug delivery from conducting polymer ﬁlms
for accurately controlled release of charged molecules. J. Control. Release. 304, 173–180
(2019). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jconrel.2019.05.017
12. Boehler, C., Asplund, M.: A detailed insight into drug delivery from PEDOT based on
analytical methods: effects and side effects. J. Biomed. Mater. Res. Part A. 103(3), 1200–
1207 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1002/jbm.a.35252
13. Boehler, C., Kleber, C., Martini, N., Xie, Y., Dryg, I., Stieglitz, T., Hofmann, U.G.,
Asplund, M.: Actively controlled release of dexamethasone from neural microelectrodes
in a chronic in vivo study. Biomaterials. 129, 176–187 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.biomaterials.2017.03.019
14. Sivaji, V., Grasse, D.W., Hays, S.A., Bucksot, J.E., Saini, R., Kilgard, M.P., Rennaker, R.L.:
ReStore: a wireless peripheral nerve stimulation system. J. Neurosci. Methods. 320, 26–36
(2019). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneumeth.2019.02.010
15. Ravikumar, M., Hageman, D.J., Tomaszewski, W.H., Chandra, G.M., Skousen, J.L.,
Capadona, J.: The effect of residual endotoxin contamination on the neuroinﬂammatory
response to sterilized intracortical microelectrodes. J. Mater. Chem. B Mater. Biol. Med.
2(17), 2517–2529 (2014). https://doi.org/10.1039/C3TB21453B
16. Green, R.A., Matteucci, P.B., Hassarati, R.T., Giraud, B., Dodds, C.W.D., Chen, S., Byrnes-
Preston, P., Suaning, G.J., Poole-Warren, L.A., Lovell, N.H.: Performance of conducting
polymer electrodes for stimulating neuroprosthetics. J. Neural Eng. 10(1), 016009 (2013).
https://doi.org/10.1088/1741-2560/10/1/016009
17. Gesteland, R.C., Lettvin, J.Y., Howland, B., Howland, B., Pitts, W.H., Lettvin, J.Y., Pitts,
W.H.: Comments on microelectrodes. Proc. IRE. 47(11), 1856–1862 (1959). https://doi.org/
10.1109/JRPROC.1959.287156
18. Robinson, D.A.: The electrical properties of metal microelectrodes. Proc. IEEE. 56(6), 1065–
1071 (1968). https://doi.org/10.1109/PROC.1968.6458
19. Gunning, D.E., Chichilnisky, E.J., Litke, A.M., O’Shea, V., Smith, K.M., Mathieson, K.:
Performance of ultra-high-density microelectrode arrays. Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res.
Sect. A Accel. Spectrom. Detect. Assoc. Equip. 576(1), 215–219 (2007). https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.nima.2007.01.155
20. Lee, Y.J., Kim, H.-J., Do, S.H., Kang, J.Y., Lee, S.H.: Characterization of nerve-cuff electrode
interface for biocompatible and chronic stimulating application. Sensors Actuators B Chem.
237, 924–934 (2016). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.snb.2016.06.169
21. Zátonyi, A., Fedor, F., Borhegyi, Z., Fekete, Z.: In vitro and in vivo stability of black-platinum
coatings on ﬂexible, polymer microECoG arrays. J. Neural Eng. 15(5), 054003 (2018). https:/
/doi.org/10.1088/1741-2552/aacf71
22. Suarez-Perez, A., Gabriel, G., Rebollo, B., Illa, X., Guimerà-Brunet, A., Hernández-Ferrer,
J., Martínez, M.T., Villa, R., Sanchez-Vives, M.V.: Quantiﬁcation of signal-to-noise ratio in
cerebral cortex recordings using ﬂexible MEAs with co-localized platinum black, carbon
nanotubes, and gold electrodes. Front. Neurosci. 12, 1–12 (2018). https://doi.org/10.3389/
fnins.2018.00862
23. Schuettler, M., Praetorius, M., Kammer, S., Schick, B., Stieglitz, T.: Recording of auditory
evoked potentials in rat using a 60 channel polyimide electrode array: preliminary results.

Coatings for Microneural Implants: Electrical Considerations
205
In: Proceedings of the Second Joint 24th Annual Conference and the Annual Fall Meeting
of the Biomedical Engineering Society [Engineering in Medicine and Biology]; IEEE, pp.
2109–2110 (2003). https://doi.org/10.1109/IEMBS.2002.1053192
24. Desai, S.A.: Improving impedance of implantable microwire multi-electrode arrays by
ultrasonic electroplating of durable platinum black. Front. Neuroeng. 3, 1–11 (2010). https://
doi.org/10.3389/fneng.2010.00005
25. Yoshida, K., Jovanovi´c, K., Stein, R.B.: Intrafascicular electrodes for stimulation and
recording from mudpuppy spinal roots. J. Neurosci. Methods. 96(1), 47–55 (2000). https:/
/doi.org/10.1016/S0165-0270(99)00176-4
26. Zhang, C., Liu, J., Tian, H.C., Kang, X.Y., Du, J.C., Rui, Y.F., Yang, B., Yang, C.S.:
Implantable electrode array with platinum black coating for brain stimulation in ﬁsh.
Microsyst. Technol. 21(1), 139–145 (2013). https://doi.org/10.1007/s00542-013-2017-3
27. Schuettler, M.: Electrochemical properties of platinum electrodes in vitro: comparison of
six different surface qualities. In: 2007 29th Annual International Conference of the IEEE
Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, vol. 2007, pp. 186–189. IEEE (2007). https://
doi.org/10.1109/IEMBS.2007.4352254
28. Stieglitz, T.: Electrode materials for recording and stimulation. In: Neuroprosthetics, World
Scientiﬁc, pp. 475–516 (2004). https://doi.org/10.1142/9789812561763_0015
29. Yuen, M.F., Lauks, I., Dautremont-Smith, W.C.: PH dependent voltammetry of iridium
oxide ﬁlms. Solid State Ionics. 11(1), 19–29 (1983). https://doi.org/10.1016/0167-2738(83)
90058-9
30. Hüppauff, M.: Valency and structure of iridium in anodic iridium oxide ﬁlms. J. Electrochem.
Soc. 140(3), 598 (1993). https://doi.org/10.1149/1.2056127
31. Koetz, R., Neff, H., Stucki, S.: Anodic iridium oxide ﬁlms: Xps-studies of oxidation
state changes and O2-evolution. J. Electrochem. Soc. 131(1), 72–77 (1984). https://doi.org/
10.1149/1.2115548
32. Stonehart, P., Kozlowska, H.A., Conway, B.E.: Potentiodynamic examination of electrode
kinetics for electroactive adsorbed species: applications to the reduction of noble metal
surface oxides. Proc. R. Soc. A Math. Phys. Eng. Sci. 310(1503), 541–563 (1969). https://
doi.org/10.1098/rspa.1969.0091
33. Pickup, P.G., Birss, V.I.: A model for anodic hydrous oxide growth at iridium. J. Electroanal.
Chem. 220(1), 83–100 (1987). https://doi.org/10.1016/0022-0728(87)88006-3
34. Burke, L.D., Scannell, R.A.: An investigation of hydrous oxide growth on iridium in base.
J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem. 175(1–2), 119–141 (1984). https://doi.org/
10.1016/S0022-0728(84)80350-2
35. Mozota, J., Conway, B.E.: Surface and bulk processes at oxidized iridium electrodes – I.
Monolayer stage and transition to reversible multilayer oxide ﬁlm behaviour. Electrochim.
Acta. 28(1), 1–8 (1983). https://doi.org/10.1016/0013-4686(83)85079-8
36. Conway, B.E., Mozota, J.: Surface and bulk processes at oxidized iridium electrodes – II.
Conductivity-switched behaviour of thick oxide ﬁlms. Electrochim. Acta. 28(1), 9–16 (1983).
https://doi.org/10.1016/0013-4686(83)85080-4
37. Harris, A.R., Paolini, A.G., Wallace, G.G.: Effective area and charge density of iridium
oxide neural electrodes. Electrochim. Acta. 230, 285–292 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.electacta.2017.02.002
38. Robblee, L.S., Lefko, J.L., Brummer, S.B.: Activated Ir: an electrode suitable for reversible
charge injection in saline solution. J. Electrochem. Soc. 130(3), 731 (1983). https://doi.org/
10.1149/1.2119793
39. Beebe, X., Rose, T.L.: Charge injection limits of activated iridium oxide electrodes with 0.2
Ms pulses in bicarbonate buffered saline (neurological stimulation application). IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng. 35(6), 494–495 (1988). https://doi.org/10.1109/10.2122
40. Rose, T.L., Robblee, L.S.: Electrical stimulation with Pt electrodes. VIII. Electrochemically
safe charge injection limits with 0.2 Ms pulses (neuronal application). IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng. 37(11), 1118–1120 (1990). https://doi.org/10.1109/10.61038

206
K. P. Olczak and K. J. Otto
41. Mccreery, D.B., Yuen, T.G.H., Agnew, W.F., Bullara, L.A.: Stimulation with chronically
implanted microelectrodes in the cochlear nucleus of the cat: histologic and physiologic
effects. Hear. Res. 62(1), 42–56 (1992). https://doi.org/10.1016/0378-5955(92)90201-W
42. Bradley, D.C., Troyk, P.R., Berg, J.A., Bak, M.J., Cogan, S.F., Erickson, R., Kufta, C.,
Mascaro, M., Mccreery, D.B., Schmidt, E.M., Towle, V.L., Xu, H.: Visuotopic mapping
through a multichannel stimulating implant in primate V1. J. Neurophysiol. 93(3), 1659–1670
(2005). https://doi.org/10.1152/jn.01213.2003
43. Koivuniemi, A.S., Regele, O.B., Brenner, J.H., Otto, K.J.: Rat behavioral model for high-
throughput parametric studies of intracortical microstimulation. In: 2011 Annual International
Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, pp. 7541–7544. IEEE
(2011). https://doi.org/10.1109/IEMBS.2011.6091859
44. Bak, M.J., Girvin, J.P., Hambrecht, F.T., Kufta, C.V., Loeb, G.E., Schmidt, E.M.: Visual
sensations produced by intracortical microstimulation of the human occipital cortex. Med.
Biol. Eng. Comput. 28(3), 257–259 (1990). https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02442682
45. Agnew, W.F., Yuen, T.G.H., Mccreery, D.B., Bullara, L.A.: Histopathologic evaluation of
prolonged intracortical electrical stimulation. Exp. Neurol. 92(1), 162–185 (1986). https://
doi.org/10.1016/0014-4886(86)90132-9
46. Cogan, S.F., Guzelian, A.A., Agnew, W.F., Yuen, T.G.H., McCreery, D.B.: Over-pulsing
degrades activated iridium oxide ﬁlms used for intracortical neural stimulation. J. Neurosci.
Methods. 137(2), 141–150 (2004). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneumeth.2004.02.019
47. Cogan, S.F., Trybała, A., Ehrlich, J., Plante, T.D., Detlefsen, D.E.: Potential-biased, asymmet-
ric waveforms for charge-injection with activated iridium oxide (AIROF) neural stimulation
electrodes. I.E.E.E. Trans. Biomed. Eng. 53(2), 327–332 (2006). https://doi.org/10.1109/
TBME.2005.862572
48. Troyk, P.R., Cogan, S.F., Demichele, G.A., Laboratories, E.I.C., Ma, N.: Compliance supply-
limited driving of iridium oxide (AIROF) electrodes for maintenance in a safe operating
region. In: 10th Annual Conference of the International FES Society; Montreal (2005)
49. Klein, J.D., Clauson, S.L., Cogan, S.F.: Reactive IrO2 sputtering in reducing/oxidizing
atmospheres. J. Mater. Res. 10(2), 328–333 (1995). https://doi.org/10.1557/JMR.1995.0328
50. Klein, J.D., Clauson, S.L., Cogan, S.F.: The inﬂuence of substrate bias on the morphology and
charge capacity of Rf-sputtered iridium oxide ﬁlms. J. Mater. Res. 4(6), 1505–1510 (1989).
https://doi.org/10.1557/JMR.1989.1505
51. Aurian-Blajeni, B., Boucher, M.M., Kimball, A.G., Robblee, L.S.: Physicochemical charac-
terization of sputtered iridium oxide. J. Mater. Res. 4(2), 440–446 (1989). https://doi.org/
10.1557/JMR.1989.0440
52. Cogan, S.F., Ehrlich, J., Plante, T.D., Smirnov, A., Shire, D.B., Gingerich, M., Rizzo, J.F.:
Sputtered iridium oxide ﬁlms for neural stimulation electrodes. J. Biomed. Mater. Res. B
Appl. Biomater. 89(2), 353–361 (2009). https://doi.org/10.1002/jbm.b.31223
53. Cogan, S.F., Plante, T.D., Ehrlich, J.: Sputtered iridium oxide ﬁlms (SIROFs) for low-
impedance neural stimulation and recording electrodes. In: The 26th Annual International
Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, vol. 4, pp. 4153–4156.
IEEE (2005). https://doi.org/10.1109/IEMBS.2004.1404158
54. Franklin, R.K., Joo, S., Negi, S., Solzbacher, F., Brown, R.B.: A comparison of fabrication
methods for iridium oxide reference electrodes. In: 2009 IEEE Sensors, pp. 1086–1089. IEEE
(2009). https://doi.org/10.1109/ICSENS.2009.5398565
55. Negi, S., Bhandari, R., Rieth, L., Van Wagenen, R., Solzbacher, F.: Neural electrode
degradation from continuous electrical stimulation: comparison of sputtered and acti-
vated iridium oxide. J. Neurosci. Methods. 186(1), 8–17 (2010). https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.jneumeth.2009.10.016
56. Kane, S.R., Cogan, S.F., Ehrlich, J., Plante, T.D., Mccreery, D.B., Troyk, P.R.: Electrical
performance of penetrating microelectrodes chronically implanted in cat cortex. I.E.E.E.
Trans. Biomed. Eng. 60(8), 2153–2160 (2013). https://doi.org/10.1109/TBME.2013.2248152
57. Davis, T.S., Parker, R.A., House, P.A., Bagley, E., Wendelken, S., Normann, R.A., Greger,
B.: Spatial and temporal characteristics of V1 microstimulation during chronic implantation

Coatings for Microneural Implants: Electrical Considerations
207
of a microelectrode array in a behaving macaque. J. Neural Eng. 9(6) (2012). https://doi.org/
10.1088/1741-2560/9/6/065003
58. Rajan, A.T., Boback, J.L., Dammann, J.F., Tenore, F.V., Wester, B.A., Otto, K.J., Gaunt, R.A.,
Bensmaia, S.J.: The effects of chronic intracortical microstimulation on neural tissue and ﬁne
motor behavior. J. Neural Eng. 12(6), 066018 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1088/1741-2560/12/
6/066018
59. Salas, M.A., Bashford, L., Kellis, S., Jafari, M., Jo, H., Kramer, D., Shanﬁeld, K., Pejsa, K.,
Lee, B., Liu, C.Y., Andersen, R.A., Armenta Salas, M., Bashford, L., Kellis, S., Jafari, M.,
Jo, H., Kramer, D., Shanﬁeld, K., Pejsa, K., et al.: Proprioceptive and cutaneous sensations
in humans elicited by intracortical microstimulation. Elife. 7, e32904 (2018). https://doi.org/
10.7554/eLife.32904
60. Flesher, S.N., Collinger, J.L., Foldes, S.T., Weiss, J.M., Downey, J.E., Tyler-Kabara, E.C.,
Bensmaia, S.J., Schwartz, A.B., Boninger, M.L., Gaunt, R.A.: Intracortical microstimulation
of human somatosensory cortex. Sci. Transl. Med. 8(361), 361ra141–361ra141 (2016). https:/
/doi.org/10.1126/scitranslmed.aaf8083
61. Weiss, J.M., Flesher, S.N., Franklin, R., Collinger, J.L., Gaunt, R.A.: Artifact-free recordings
in human bidirectional brain–computer interfaces. J. Neural Eng. 16(1), 016002 (2019).
https://doi.org/10.1088/1741-2552/aae748
62. Deku, F., Cohen, Y., Joshi-Imre, A., Kanneganti, A., Gardner, T.J., Cogan, S.F.: Amorphous
silicon carbide ultramicroelectrode arrays for neural stimulation and recording. J. Neural Eng.
15(1), aa8f8b (2018). https://doi.org/10.1088/1741-2552/aa8f8b
63. Byun, D., Cho, S., Lee, B.H., Min, J., Lee, J.-H., Kim, S.: Recording nerve signals in canine
sciatic nerves with a ﬂexible penetrating microelectrode array. J. Neural Eng. 14(4), 046023
(2017). https://doi.org/10.1088/1741-2552/aa7493
64. Ardizzone, S., Carugati, A., Trasatti, S.: Properties of thermally prepared iridium dioxide
electrodes. J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem. 126(1–3), 287–292 (1981). https://
doi.org/10.1016/S0022-0728(81)80437-8
65. Kelliher, E.M., Rose, T.L.: Evaluation of charge injection properties of thin ﬁlm redox
materials for use as neural stimulation electrodes. MRS Proc. 110, 23 (1987). https://doi.org/
10.1557/PROC-110-23
66. Robblee, L.S., Mangaudis, M.J., Lasinsky, E.D., Kimball, A.G., Brummer, S.B.: Charge
injection properties of thermally-prepared iridium oxide ﬁlms. MRS Proc. 55, 303 (1985).
https://doi.org/10.1557/PROC-55-303
67. Yamanaka, K.: Anodically electrodeposited iridium oxide ﬁlms (AEIROF) from alkaline
solutions for electrochromic display devices. Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 28(4 R), 632–637 (1989).
https://doi.org/10.1143/JJAP.28.632
68. Garner, C.S., Garner, S., Chang, J.C., Garner, C.S.: Kinetics of aquation of aquopen-
tachloroiridate(III) and chloride anation of diaquotetrachloroiridate(III) anions. Inorg. Chem.
4(2), 209–215 (1965). https://doi.org/10.1021/ic50024a018
69. Meyer, R.D., Nguyen, T.H., Twardoch, U.M., Rauh, R.D., Cogan, S.F.: Electrodeposition of
iridium oxide charge injection electrodes. In: Proceedings of the First Joint BMES/EMBS
Conference. 1999 IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology 21st Annual Conference and
the 1999 Annual Fall Meeting of the Biomedical Engineering Society (Cat. No.99CH37015),
vol. 1, p. 382. IEEE (1999). https://doi.org/10.1109/IEMBS.1999.802459
70. Meyer, R.D., Cogan, S.F., Nguyen, T.H., Rauh, R.D.: Electrodeposited iridium oxide for
neural stimulation and recording electrodes. IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 9(1),
2–11 (2001). https://doi.org/10.1109/7333.918271
71. Deku, F., Joshi-Imre, A., Mertiri, A., Gardner, T.J., Cogan, S.F.: Electrodeposited iridium
oxide on carbon ﬁber ultramicroelectrodes for neural recording and stimulation. J. Elec-
trochem. Soc. 165(9), D375–D380 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1149/2.0401809jes
72. Han, M., Manoonkitiwongsa, P.S., Wang, C.X., Mccreery, D.B.: In vivo validation of
custom-designed silicon-based microelectrode arrays for long-term neural recording and
stimulation. I.E.E.E. Trans. Biomed. Eng. 59(2), 346–354 (2012). https://doi.org/10.1109/
TBME.2011.2172440

208
K. P. Olczak and K. J. Otto
73. Han, M., Mccreery, D.B.: A new chronic neural probe with electroplated iridium oxide
microelectrodes. In: 2008 30th Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering
in Medicine and Biology Society, pp. 4220–4221. IEEE (2008). https://doi.org/10.1109/
IEMBS.2008.4650140
74. Gillis, W.F., Lissandrello, C.A., Shen, J., Pearre, B.W., Mertiri, A., Deku, F., Cogan, S.F.,
Holinski, B.J., Chew, D.J., White, A.E., Otchy, T.M., Gardner, T.J.: Carbon ﬁber on polyimide
ultra-microelectrodes. J. Neural Eng. 15(1), 016010 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1088/1741-
2552/aa8c88
75. Zhou, H., Li, T., Duan, Y.Y.: Reduce impedance of Intracortical iridium oxide microelectrodes
by hydrogel coatings. Sensors Actuators B Chem. 161(1), 198–202 (2012). https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.snb.2011.10.019
76. Petrossians, A., Whalen III, J.J., Weiland, J.D., Mansfeld, F.: Electrodeposition and charac-
terization of thin-ﬁlm platinum-iridium alloys for biological interfaces. J. Electrochem. Soc.
158(5), D269 (2011). https://doi.org/10.1149/1.3559477
77. Petrossians, A., Whalen, J.J., Weiland, J.D., Mansfeld, F.: Surface modiﬁcation of neural
stimulating/recording electrodes with high surface area platinum-iridium alloy coatings. Proc.
Annu. Int. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc. EMBS, 3001–3004 (2011). https://doi.org/
10.1109/IEMBS.2011.6090823
78. Ganske, G., Slavcheva, E., van Ooyen, A., Mokwa, W., Schnakenberg, U.: Sputtered
platinum–iridium layers as electrode material for functional electrostimulation. Thin Solid
Films. 519(11), 3965–3970 (2011). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tsf.2011.01.344
79. Lee, C.D., Hudak, E.M., Whalen, J.J., Petrossians, A., Weiland, J.D.: Low-impedance, high
surface area Pt-Ir electrodeposited on cochlear implant electrodes. J. Electrochem. Soc.
165(12), G3015–G3017 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1149/2.0031812jes
80. Davuluri, N.S., Nimmagadda, K., Petrossians, A., Humayun, M.S., Weiland, J.D.: Strate-
gies to improve stimulation efﬁciency for retinal prostheses. Proc. Annu. Int. Conf.
IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc. EMBS. 2016, 3133–3138 (2016). https://doi.org/10.1109/
EMBC.2016.7591393
81. Cassar, I.R., Yu, C., Sambangi, J., Lee, C.D., Whalen, J.J., Petrossians, A., Grill, W.M.: Elec-
trodeposited platinum-iridium coating improves in vivo recording performance of chronically
implanted microelectrode arrays. Biomaterials. 205, 120–132 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.biomaterials.2019.03.017
82. Burke, L.D., Lyons, M.E.G.: Electrochemistry of hydrous oxide ﬁlms. In: Modern Aspects of
Electrochemistry, Vol 18. pp. 169–248. Springer, Boston, MA (1986). https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-1-4613-1791-3_4
83. Johnson, P.F., Hench, L.L.: An in vitro analysis of metal electrodes for use in the neural
environment. Brain Behav. Evol. 14(1–2), 23–45 (1977). https://doi.org/10.1159/000124612
84. Pourbaix, M.J.N., Van Muylder, J., De Zoubov, N.: Electrochemical properties of the platinum
metals. Platin. Met. Rev. 2, 47–53 (1959)
85. Bernstein, J.J., Johnson, P.F., Hench, L.L., Hunter, G., Dawson, W.W.: Cortical histopathology
following stimulation with metallic and carbon electrodes. Brain Behav. Evol. 14(1–2), 142–
157 (1977). https://doi.org/10.1159/000125580
86. Pudenz, R.H., Agnew, W.F., Bullara, L.A.: Effects of electrical stimulation of brain. Brain
Behav. Evol. 14(1–2), 103–125 (1977). https://doi.org/10.1159/000125578
87. Martin, D.C.: Molecular design, synthesis, and characterization of conjugated polymers for
interfacing electronic biomedical devices with living tissue. MRS Commun. 5(2), 131–153
(2015). https://doi.org/10.1557/mrc.2015.17
88. Kaynak, A., Rintoul, L., George, G.A.: Change of mechanical and electrical properties of
polypyrrole ﬁlms with dopant concentration and oxidative aging. Mater. Res. Bull. 35(6),
813–824 (2000). https://doi.org/10.1016/S0025-5408(00)00280-4
89. Cui, X.T., Hetke, J.F., Wiler, J.A., Anderson, D.J., Martin, D.C.: Electrochemical deposi-
tion and characterization of conducting polymer polypyrrole/PSS on multichannel neural

Coatings for Microneural Implants: Electrical Considerations
209
probes. Sensors Actuators A Phys. 93(1), 8–18 (2001). https://doi.org/10.1016/S0924-
4247(01)00637-9
90. Wadhwa, R., Lagenaur, C.F., Cui, X.T.: Electrochemically controlled release of dexametha-
sone from conducting polymer polypyrrole coated electrode. J. Control. Release. 110(3),
531–541 (2006). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jconrel.2005.10.027
91. Ryan, E.M., Breslin, C.B.: Formation of polypyrrole with dexamethasone as a dopant: its
cation and anion exchange properties. J. Electroanal. Chem. 824, 188–194 (2018). https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jelechem.2018.07.052
92. Cui, X.T., Lee, V.A., Raphael, Y., Wiler, J.A., Hetke, J.F., Anderson, D.J., Martin, D.C.:
Surface modiﬁcation of neural recording electrodes with conducting polymer/biomolecule
blends. J. Biomed. Mater. Res. 56(2), 261–272 (2001). https://doi.org/10.1002/1097-
4636(200108)56:2<261::AID-JBM1094>3.0.CO;2-I
93. Stauffer, W.R., Cui, X.T.: Polypyrrole doped with 2 peptide sequences from laminin.
Biomaterials.
27(11),
2405–2413
(2006).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biomaterials.2005.
10.024
94. Lee, J.-W., Serna, F., Nickels, J., Schmidt, C.E.: Carboxylic acid-functionalized conductive
Polypyrrole as a bioactive platform for cell adhesion. Biomacromolecules. 7(6), 1692–1695
(2006). https://doi.org/10.1021/bm060220q
95. Lee, J.-W., Serna, F., Schmidt, C.E.: Carboxy-endcapped conductive polypyrrole: biomimetic
conducting polymer for cell scaffolds and electrodes. Langmuir. 22(24), 9816–9819 (2006).
https://doi.org/10.1021/la062129d
96. Yamato,
H.,
Ohwa,
M.,
Wernet,
W.:
Stability
of
polypyrrole
and
poly(3,4-
ethylenedioxythiophene) for biosensor application. J. Electroanal. Chem. 397(1–2),
163–170 (1995). https://doi.org/10.1016/0022-0728(95)04156-8
97. Schlenoff, J.B.: Evolution of physical and electrochemical properties of polypyrrole during
extended oxidation. J. Electrochem. Soc. 139(9), 2397 (1992). https://doi.org/10.1149/
1.2221238
98. Beck, F., Braun, P., Oberst, M.: Organic electrochemistry in the solid state-overoxidation of
polypyrrole. Ber. Bunsenges. Phys. Chem. 91(9), 967–974 (1987). https://doi.org/10.1002/
bbpc.19870910927
99. Abidian, M.R., Corey, J.M., Kipke, D.R., Martin, D.C.: Conducting-polymer nanotubes
improve electrical properties, mechanical adhesion, neural attachment, and neurite outgrowth
of neural electrodes. Small. 6(3), 421–429 (2010). https://doi.org/10.1002/smll.200901868
100. Harris, A.R., Morgan, S.J., Chen, J., Kapsa, R.M.I., Wallace, G.G., Paolini, A.G.: Conducting
polymer coated neural recording electrodes. J. Neural Eng. 10(1), 016004 (2013). https://
doi.org/10.1088/1741-2560/10/1/016004
101. Cui, X.T., Martin, D.C.: Electrochemical deposition and characterization of poly (3,4-
ethylenedioxythiophene) on neural microelectrode arrays. Sens. Actuators B-Chem. 89,
92–102 (2003). https://doi.org/10.1016/S0925-4005(02)00448-3
102. Castagnola, V., Bayon, C., Descamps, E., Bergaud, C.: Morphology and conductivity of
PEDOT layers produced by different electrochemical routes. Synth. Met. 189, 7–16 (2014).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.synthmet.2013.12.013
103. Green, R.A., Hassarati, R.T., Bouchinet, L., Lee, C.S., Cheong, G.L.M., Yu, J.F., Dodds, C.W.,
Suaning, G.J., Poole-Warren, L.A., Lovell, N.H.: Substrate dependent stability of conducting
polymer coatings on medical electrodes. Biomaterials. 33(25), 5875–5886 (2012). https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.biomaterials.2012.05.017
104. Baek, S., Green, R.A., Poole-Warren, L.A.: Effects of dopants on the biomechanical
properties of conducting polymer ﬁlms on platinum electrodes. J. Biomed. Mater. Res. Part
A. 102(8), 2743–2754 (2014). https://doi.org/10.1002/jbm.a.34945
105. Wilks, S.: Poly(3,4-ethylene dioxythiophene) (PEDOT) as a micro-neural interface
material for electrostimulation. Front. Neuroeng. 2, 7 (2009). https://doi.org/10.3389/
neuro.16.007.2009

210
K. P. Olczak and K. J. Otto
106. Venkatraman, S., Hendricks, J., King, Z.A., Sereno, A.J., Richardson-Burns, S., Martin,
D.C., Carmena, J.M.: In vitro and in vivo evaluation of PEDOT microelectrodes for neural
stimulation and recording. IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 19(3), 307–316 (2011).
https://doi.org/10.1109/TNSRE.2011.2109399
107. Ludwig, K.A., Langhals, N.B., Joseph, M.D., Richardson-Burns, S.M., Hendricks, J.L.,
Kipke, D.R.: Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT) polymer coatings facilitate smaller
neural recording electrodes. J. Neural Eng. 8(1), 014001 (2011). https://doi.org/10.1088/
1741-2560/8/1/014001
108. Charkhkar, H., Knaack, G.L., McHail, D.G., Mandal, H., Peixoto, N., Rubinson, J.F.,
Dumas, T.C., Pancrazio, J.J.: Chronic intracortical neural recordings using microelectrode
arrays coated with PEDOT–TFB. Acta Biomater. 32, 57–67 (2016). https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.actbio.2015.12.022
109. Sui, L., Zhang, B., Wang, J., Cai, A.: Polymerization of PEDOT/PSS/chitosan-coated
electrodes for electrochemical bio-sensing. Coatings. 7(7), 96 (2017). https://doi.org/10.3390/
coatings7070096
110. Green, R.A., Lovell, N.H., Poole-Warren, L.A.: Impact of co-incorporating laminin peptide
dopants and neurotrophic growth factors on conducting polymer properties. Acta Biomater.
6(1), 63–71 (2010). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actbio.2009.06.030
111. Carli, S., Trapella, C., Armirotti, A., Fantinati, A., Ottonello, G., Scarpellini, A., Prato,
M., Fadiga, L., Ricci, D.: Biochemically controlled release of dexamethasone covalently
bound to PEDOT. Chem. A Eur. J. 24(41), 10300–10305 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1002/
chem.201801499
112. Wang, K., Tang, R., Zhao, X.-B., Li, J., Lang, Y.-R., Jiang, X.-X., Sun, H.-J., Lin, Q.-
X., Wang, C.-Y.: Covalent bonding of YIGSR and RGD to PEDOT/PSS/MWCNT-COOH
composite material to improve the neural interface. Nanoscale. 7(44), 18677–18685 (2015).
https://doi.org/10.1039/C5NR05784A
113. Cui, X.T., Zhou, D.D.: Poly (3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) for chronic neural stimulation.
IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 15(4), 502–508 (2007). https://doi.org/10.1109/
TNSRE.2007.909811
114. Boehler, C., Oberueber, F., Schlabach, S., Stieglitz, T., Asplund, M.: Long-term stable
adhesion for conducting polymers in biomedical applications: IrOx and nanostructured
platinum solve the chronic challenge. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces. 9(1), 189–197 (2017).
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.6b13468
115. Kim, D.-H., Wiler, J.A., Anderson, D.J., Kipke, D.R., Martin, D.C.: Conducting polymers on
hydrogel-coated neural electrode provide sensitive neural recordings in auditory cortex. Acta
Biomater. 6(1), 57–62 (2010). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actbio.2009.07.034
116. Kleber, C., Bruns, M., Lienkamp, K., Rühe, J., Asplund, M.: An interpenetrating, microstruc-
turable and covalently attached conducting polymer hydrogel for neural interfaces. Acta
Biomater. 58, 365–375 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actbio.2017.05.056
117. Brunton, E.K., Winther-Jensen, B., Wang, C., Yan, E.B., Hagh Gooie, S., Lowery, A.J., Rajan,
R.: In vivo comparison of the charge densities required to evoke motor responses using
novel annular penetrating microelectrodes. Front. Neurosci. 09, 1–11 (2015). https://doi.org/
10.3389/fnins.2015.00265
118. Janders, M., Egert, U., Stelzle, M., Nisch, W.: Novel thin ﬁlm titanium nitride micro-
electrodes with excellent charge transfer capability for cell stimulation and sensing appli-
cations. In: Proceedings of 18th Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering
in Medicine and Biology Society, vol. 1, pp. 245–247. IEEE (1996). https://doi.org/10.1109/
IEMBS.1996.656936
119. Meijs, S., McDonald, M., Sørensen, S., Rechendorff, K., Fekete, L., Klimša, L., Petrák,
V., Rijkhoff, N., Taylor, A., Nesládek, M., Pennisi, C.P.: Diamond/porous titanium nitride
electrodes with superior electrochemical performance for neural interfacing. Front. Bioeng.
Biotechnol. 6, 1–10 (2018). https://doi.org/10.3389/fbioe.2018.00171

Coatings for Microneural Implants: Electrical Considerations
211
120. Weiland, J.D., Anderson, D.J., Humayun, M.S.: In vitro electrical properties for iridium oxide
versus titanium nitride stimulating electrodes. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 49(12 I), 1574–1579
(2002). https://doi.org/10.1109/TBME.2002.805487
121. Yuan, F., Wiler, J., Wise, K., Anderson, D.J.: Micromachined multi-channel microelectrodes
with titanium nitride sites. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. 9, 379 (2003). https://doi.org/10.1109/
iembs.1999.802456
122. Zhou, D.M., Greenberg, R.J.: Electrochemical characterization of titanium nitride micro-
electrode arrays for charge-injection applications. In: Proceedings of the 25th Annual
International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society
(IEEE Cat. No.03CH37439), vol. 2, pp. 1964–1967. IEEE (2003). https://doi.org/10.1109/
IEMBS.2003.1279831
123. Fiáth, R., Raducanu, B.C., Musa, S., Andrei, A., Lopez, C.M., van Hoof, C., Ruther,
P., Aarts, A., Horváth, D., Ulbert, I.: A silicon-based neural probe with densely-
packed low-impedance titanium nitride microelectrodes for ultrahigh-resolution in vivo
recordings.
Biosens.
Bioelectron.
106(2017),
86–92
(2018).
https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.bios.2018.01.060
124. Stelzle, M., Stett, A., Brummer, S.B., Graf, M., Nisch, W.: Electrical properties of micro-
photodiode arrays for use as artiﬁcial retina implant. Biomed. Microdevices. 3(2), 133–142
(2001). https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1011450326476
125. Hämmerle, H., Kobuch, K., Kohler, K., Nisch, W., Sachs, H., Stelzle, M.: Biostability of
micro-photodiode arrays for subretinal implantation. Biomaterials. 23(3), 797–804 (2002).
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0142-9612(01)00185-5
126. Garcia-Sandoval, A., Pal, A., Mishra, A.M., Sherman, S., Parikh, A.R., Joshi-Imre, A.,
Arreaga-Salas, D., Gutierrez-Heredia, G., Duran-Martinez, A.C., Nathan, J., Hosseini, S.M.,
Carmel, J.B., Voit, W.: Chronic softening spinal cord stimulation arrays. J. Neural Eng. 15(4),
045002 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1088/1741-2552/aab90d
127. González-González, M.A., Kanneganti, A., Joshi-Imre, A., Hernandez-Reynoso, A.G., Ben-
dale, G., Modi, R., Ecker, M., Khurram, A., Cogan, S.F., Voit, W.E., Romero-Ortega, M.I.:
Thin ﬁlm multi-electrode softening cuffs for selective neuromodulation. Sci. Rep. 8(1), 16390
(2018). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-34566-6
128. Meijs, S., Fjorback, M., Sørensen, S., Rechendorff, K., Rijkhoff, N.J.M.: Increasing voltage
transients using implanted titanium nitride neural stimulation electrodes. In: Jensen, W.,
Andersen, O.K., Akay, M. (eds.) Replace, Repair, Restore, Relieve – Bridging Clinical and
Engineering Solutions in Neurorehabilitation Biosystems & biorobotics, vol. 7, pp. 543–551.
Springer International Publishing, Cham (2014). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-08072-
7_80
129. Meijs, S., Fjorback, M., Jensen, C., Sørensen, S., Rechendorff, K., Rijkhoff, N.J.M.:
Electrochemical properties of titanium nitride nerve stimulation electrodes: an in vitro and
in vivo study. Front. Neurosci. 9, 1–11 (2015). https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2015.00268
130. Meijs, S., Sørensen, C., Sorensen, S., Rechendorff, K., Fjorback, M., Rijkhoff, N.J.M.:
Comparison of the electrochemical properties of smooth and porous TiN electrode coatings
in rats. Int. IEEE/EMBS Conf. Neural Eng. NER. 2015, 486–489 (2015). https://doi.org/
10.1109/NER.2015.7146665
131. Gong, K., Chakrabarti, S., Dai, L.: Electrochemistry at carbon nanotube electrodes: is the
nanotube tip more active than the sidewall? Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 47(29), 5446–5450 (2008).
https://doi.org/10.1002/anie.200801744
132. Fedorovskaya, E.O., Bulusheva, L.G., Kurenya, A.G., Asanov, I.P., Rudina, N.A., Funtov,
K.O., Lyubutin, I.S., Okotrub, A.V.: Supercapacitor performance of vertically aligned multi-
wall carbon nanotubes produced by aerosol-assisted CCVD method. Electrochim. Acta. 139,
165–172 (2014). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.electacta.2014.06.176
133. Wang, K., Fishman, H.A., Dai, H., Harris, J.S.: Neural stimulation with a carbon nanotube
microelectrode array. Nano Lett. 6(9), 2043–2048 (2006). https://doi.org/10.1021/nl061241t

212
K. P. Olczak and K. J. Otto
134. Keefer, E.W., Botterman, B.R., Romero-Ortega, M.I., Rossi, A.F., Gross, G.W.: Carbon
nanotube coating improves neuronal recordings. Nat. Nanotechnol. 3(7), 434–439 (2008).
https://doi.org/10.1038/nnano.2008.174
135. Shin, J.H., Kim, G.B., Lee, E.J., An, T., Shin, K., Lee, S.E., Choi, W., Lee, S., Latchoumane,
C., Shin, H.-S., Lim, G.: Carbon-nanotube-modiﬁed electrodes for highly efﬁcient acute
neural recording. Adv. Healthc. Mater. 3(2), 245–252 (2014). https://doi.org/10.1002/
adhm.201300183
136. Minnikanti, S., Pereira, M.G.A.G., Jaraiedi, S., Jackson, K., Costa-Neto, C.M., Li, Q.,
Peixoto, N.: In vivo electrochemical characterization and inﬂammatory response of multi-
walled carbon nanotube-based electrodes in rat hippocampus. J. Neural Eng. 7(1), 16002
(2010). https://doi.org/10.1088/1741-2560/7/1/016002

