Galilean Methodology and Abductive
Inference
Fabio Minazzi
Contents
The Galilean Dialogue as a Document of a Decisive Conceptual Change. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
Predictivity as the Rationalization of a Fact?. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
Galileo: The Scientist as a “Mathematical Philosopher”. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
Peirce: Abduction as a Rationalization of Any Fact. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
Descartes: The Deductive Method as an Instrument of Research. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
Vailati: The Deductive Method as an Instrument of Research. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
From the Dogma of the Method to a Critical-Historical-Normative Image of Knowledge. . . .
20
Galileo: Detective or Scientist?. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
Conclusions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
References. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
Abstract
Galileo, in founding modern science, ended up attributing a decisive role to
the deductive method by means of which human reason must do violence to
sense in order to know the world. This emphasizes, in a highly admirable way,
precisely the constitutively counterfactual aspect of modern scientiﬁc reasoning,
which no longer starts from empirical observation, but rather conjecturally
constructs a theory whose mathematically deduced conclusions are then placed in
relation to the experimental dimension. This revolutionary approach to scientiﬁc
research outlined by Galileo has not always been understood. On the contrary,
the empiricist image of science has often been superimposed on the very way in
which scientists work. Peirce’s elaboration of abduction corrected this empiricist
reading of science, emphasizing the need to include abduction itself in a great
multiplicity of perspectives, all very open and very broad. The essay retraces this
F. Minazzi ()
Dp di Scienze Teoriche e Applicate, Università degli Studi dell’Insubria, Varese, Italy
e-mail: fabio.minazzi@uninsubria.it
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
L. Magnani (ed.), Handbook of Abductive Cognition,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-68436-5_45-1
1

2
F. Minazzi
complex knot concerning the most correct epistemological image of scientiﬁc
knowledge, following and analyzing the contributions provided by both the
empiricist and idealist traditions, and then focusing on the contribution of two
authors such as Peirce and Vailati who, in two different contexts, grasped the
importance of a normativist vision of scientiﬁc knowledge and the role of
deduction and of Peircean abduction itself. In this way, the critical problematic
nature of scientiﬁc knowledge is placed at the center of our image of scientiﬁc
knowledge.
Keywords
Human reason · Counterfactual · Abduction · Normativist knowledge ·
Conjectural knowledge
Poirot said placidly, ‘One does not, you know, merely employ the muscles. I do not need to
bend and measure the footprints and pick up the cigarette ends and examine the bent blades
of grass. It is enough for me to sit back in my chair and think. It is this’ – he tapped his
egg-shaped head – ‘this, that functions.’ Agatha Christie, Five Little Pigs (1943, p. 2)
The Galilean Dialogue as a Document of a Decisive Conceptual
Change
In the Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems (1632), Galileo imagines
a critical comparison not only between the two principal astronomical systems of the
time – the Ptolemaic and the Copernican – but also between two different traditions
of thought, namely, the traditional Aristotelian tradition and that connected with
the genesis of the new modern science, which he himself inaugurated. Viewed in
this hermeneutic perspective, Salviati, Simplicio, and their intelligent host Sagredo
not only represent different traditions of thought, but place before the reader the
dialogue, more intimate and profound, that induced Galileo himself, from being
a Ptolemaic as he was by formation and culture, to ﬁnally become a convinced
exponent of Copernicanism. With these pages of the Dialogue Galileo illustrates
and analytically documents, in short, a truly extraordinary page of his own radical
conceptual change . The various objections that Simplicio puts forward are in fact
the perplexities, doubts, and critical questions that Galileo himself had experienced
in person, when he began to reﬂect critically on the Ptolemaic astronomical system
of the scientiﬁc tradition preceding him, and then to gradually focus his attention
on the revolutionary version presented by Copernicus. Or rather, in this precise
hermeneutic perspective, the Galilean Dialogue enables us to follow, in slow motion
(so to speak), step by step, the same, extraordinary, conceptual change by virtue of
which Galileo ﬁnally decided to abandon the Ptolemaic system and instead create
his own and openly defend the new and revolutionary Copernican system. Namely,
a heliocentric and heliostatic system which, at least according to what Isaac Newton
would write in his De mundi systemate (of 1728), was very likely an opinion

Galilean Methodology and Abductive Inference
3
spread by the Egyptians, who “were early observers of the heavens; and from them,
probably, this philosophy was spread abroad among other nations; for from them
it was, and the nations about them, that the Greeks, a people of themselves more
addicted to the study of philology than of nature, derived their ﬁrst, as well as their
soundest, notions of philosophy; and in the vestal ceremonies we may yet trace the
ancient spirit of the Egyptians; for it was their way to deliver their mysteries, that
is, their philosophy of things above the vulgar way of thinking, under the veil of
religious rites and hieroglyphic symbols” (Newton, 1728, §1). According to this
Newtonian reconstruction, it was thinkers such as Anaxagoras and Democritus who
ﬁnally conceived the Earth as an immobile celestial body, placed at the center of
the universe, while, subsequently, the conception of “solid orbs was of a later date,
introduced by Eudoxus, Calippus, and Aristotle; when the ancient philosophy began
to decline, and to give place to the new prevailing ﬁctions of the Greeks” (ibidem).
But, leaving aside this very interesting Newtonian overview, in the Dialogue by
Galileo, we are faced with the precise conceptual and critical process which ﬁnally
induced Galileo to abandon the traditional Ptolemaic astronomical system, in order
to be able to share and ﬁnally make his own the new and revolutionary heliocentric
and heliostatic perspective presented by Copernicus in De rivolutionibus orbium
coelestium (1543). To illustrate analytically the reasons that led him to embrace
the new astronomical point of view illustrated and advanced by Copernicus,
Galileo, in the Dialogue, also dealt with another decisive problem, one that more
directly concerned modern science and its new and revolutionary conceptual,
critical, prospective, and methodical approach. Simplicio, in fact, openly disputes
the possibility of using mathematics to understand the physical world, subject to
many, too many, incessant qualitative changes. In accordance with the traditional
thought of the ancient Greeks, Simplicio does not believe that it is possible to
use mathematics – namely, a discipline based on great intrinsic rigor – in the
terrestrial physical world, which, by contrast, is dominated by incessant change and
continuous qualitative transformation, hence by a process that constantly causes
all things to pass from being to non-being and from non-being to being, since
change, corruption, and death itself dominate completely unchallenged the sublunar
world in which there is only imperfection and a continuous qualitative panta
rei, as constant as it is indispensable and inevitable. Faced with this qualitative
dimension, intrinsically ephemeral and inevitably transient, peculiar, and speciﬁc
to the sublunar world, in the supralunar world we would instead ﬁnd ourselves
faced with the opposite reality, always immutable and perfect because it is made
of a special material, namely, the ether, that by its intrinsic nature does not undergo
any change or any physical and qualitative transformation. For this basic reason,
the terrestrial physical world would constitute a reality that is at the same time too
complex and always subject to an ontological and constitutive imperfection, which,
moreover, appears to be one with our own destiny as mortal beings, born, in fact, to
die.
Against this traditional conception of the cosmos and of the precise central place
occupied by the Earth within the ﬁnite universe, Galileo had already openly been
ﬁghting since the time of his ﬁrst, revolutionary, terrestrial observations, made, as

4
F. Minazzi
is well known, with his “long-sighted cannon”, namely, his famous telescope, the
instrument with which the Pisan scientist, in the winter of 1609 and in the early
winter months of 1610, explored the starry sky, thus being the ﬁrst man in the history
of humanity to have seen new celestial objects that had never been observed by
anyone else before him. Not for nothing did Galileo entrust his extraordinary report
concerning the “celestial novelties” which he had discovered thanks to the telescope
and this radically innovative exploration of the starry sky to his famous Sidereus
nuncius (English title The Starry Messenger), a precious yet small book, published
in the spring of 1610, which, in a few weeks, was sold out and transformed this
serious and respected, but rather obscure scholar of mechanics at Padua University
into the most famous European scientist of the seventeenth century, whose name
immediately rose to a highly deserved international reputation.
But if a technical instrument such as the Galilean telescope had undoubtedly
helped him to achieve a new and revolutionary view of celestial bodies, this same
unprecedented and innovative exploration of the starry sky was inserted, by its
intrinsic nature, into the precise claim of a profound material continuity between
the sublunar and supralunar worlds. In his exploratory research, Galileo took it for
granted that the whole universe is always made of the same matter present on earth
and in the sublunary world, thus conceiving the entire universe as a reality made
up entirely of a homogeneous material. Galileo in fact denied that there was any
possible qualitative leap between the terrestrial world and the supralunar world,
which he conceived as made and formed out of the same physical material present
on earth and in the entire universe. But in addition to maintaining this basic material
homogeneity existing in the entire universe, Galileo also developed a new way
of practicing and conceiving the scientiﬁc investigation of the physical world, in
order to continuously increase the technical-cognitive patrimony which was actually
available to humanity in the different historical phases of civilization.
Predictivity as the Rationalization of a Fact?
Seen in this perspective, the Galilean reﬂection on the new way of proceeding in
scientiﬁc investigation helps us to understand better his own image of scientiﬁc
progress. In this particular and decisive perspective, the objection that Simplicio
puts forward, against the Galilean claim to be able to use the heuristic tool of
mathematics to better investigate the physical world, constitutes a truly crucial,
decisive and even quite strategic objection. It is, in fact, a completely radical
epistemological observation, because it strikes at the heart of the very possibility
of using the rigor of mathematics in order to study a sublunar physical world that
is always imperfect and always changing, in constant mutation, precisely because it
is said to lack any traditional “perfection”, which the ancients generally perceived
as coinciding with a static, ﬁxed, and substantially unalterable condition. For this
precise reason Simplicio then puts forward a decisive objection, explicitly appealing
to traditional Euclidean geometry, since Simplico points out that “then whenever
you apply a material sphere to a material plane in the concrete, you apply a sphere

Galilean Methodology and Abductive Inference
5
which is not perfect to a plane which is not perfect, and you say that these do
not touch each other in one point” (Galilei, 1962, 207 and Galilei, 1968, vol.
VII, p. 233). Faced with this ﬁrst but decisive objection, Galileo – as if “playing
for time” within the pressing rhythm, typical of every authentic critical dialogue
between interlocutors who take their stand on opposite positions – immediately
sketches out a ﬁrst possible answer, in order to be able to “immunize”, as far
as possible, Simplicio’s decisive criticism. For this reason, Galileo then tries to
immediately “minimize” the decisive signiﬁcance of this objection presented by
Simplicio. A truly decisive objection precisely because it disputes the heuristic use
of mathematics as an instrument which, by its intrinsic nature, would precisely
delineate a rather poor, diminished and completely distorted image of the inﬁnite
empirical-qualitative complexity of the real world. Faced with this criticism, Galileo
reacts with the following, traditional reasoning: “but I tell that even in the abstract,
an immaterial sphere which is not a perfect sphere can touch an immaterial plane
which is not perfectly ﬂat in not one point, but over a part of its surface, so that
what happens in the concrete up to this point happens the same way in the abstract”.
In this way there would exist, in short, a sort of perfect parallel and an undeniable
congruence between theory and reality: an equally imperfect theory would follow
from an imperfect reality. In this way he tries to immunize Simplicio’s objection by
imagining a theory that explicitly states how an imperfect sphere would necessarily
touch an imperfect plane in several places. Which actually happens in our imperfect
world of the quinque sensibus in which, for example, imperfect wooden spheres rest,
in several points, on an equally imperfect wooden surface. In this case, Galileo then
adds, in an almost “triumphant” way, “it would be novel indeed if computations and
ratios made in abstract numbers should not thereafter correspond to concrete gold
and silver coins and merchandise”.
However, with this ﬁrst reply Galileo did not really answer the objection of those
who dispute, radically, the possibility of heuristically using a rigorous instrument
like mathematics to study an imperfect, changeable and qualitatively changing
reality like the one we live in in the sublunar world. Galileo himself is perfectly
aware of the overall inadequacy of his ﬁrst response, by which he only sought to
repel, in the ﬁrst instance, his adversary’s criticism, while also seeking to “stall for
time”, in order to then develop a truer answer, much more fully articulated, deeper,
and more relevant. What is more, with this ﬁrst answer, in which a theory, in the
ﬁnal analysis, is limited only to “duplicating”, on a conceptual level, what happens
in the physical world, Galileo relates, completely consciously, to the traditional and
equally widespread “epistemological creed” typical of Greek antiquity, according to
which our theories could only be isomorphic “copies” of the qualitative world that
they seek to describe and know. In fact, for the traditional, and very widespread,
correspondence theory, the statement “snow is white” turns out to be true “if and
only if ‘snow is white,’” that is to say, if there is a physical body called “snow”
which enjoys the property of being effectively “white”. For many centuries this
correspondence thesis thus constituted the precise and fundamental epistemological
standard criterion to which almost the whole tradition, albeit quite composite, of
ancient pre-scientiﬁc thought always appealed.

6
F. Minazzi
Moreover, this correspondence criterion is still dominant even within our own
common sense, as well as in our courts of law today, and also in almost all the rea-
soning typical of almost all the bureaucracies of the contemporary world. Moreover,
because of this precise “correspondence” motive, the ancients adopted the Ptolemaic
system and discarded the decidedly “counterfactual” system developed by the
Pythagorean Aristarchus of Samos who, if we are to believe Newton’s observation
mentioned earlier, instead drew directly on the astronomical concepts of the ancient
Egyptians. The Ptolemaic system seemed to adhere much more closely to the reality
directly observed by our senses, while the heliocentric system seemed to enter into
open and ﬂagrant contradiction precisely with our own sense experience. Moreover,
seen in this perspective, even the perfect geometric equivalence subsisting between
the geocentric and geostatic system with the heliocentric and heliostatic one seemed
to constitute, in turn, a useless and bizarre “complication” of a simple and immediate
physical-material reality directly attested by quinque sensibus, since all men can
see and observe, with their own eyes, the movement of the sun in the sky in the
course of a day. For all these reasons – variously stratiﬁed over time, within the
widespread epistemological creed of ancient thought – Galileo therefore knew very
well that his ﬁrst response to Simplicio did not by any means constitute the true
and authentic reply to the objection of his interlocutor. Also because this objection
was very radical, contesting, ab imis fundamentis, the very possibility of being able
to use mathematics to know the sublunary world, which is always imperfect and
constantly changing. It is not for nothing that the entire tradition of ancient Western
thought had always and systematically undervalued and underestimated the critical-
heuristic role of mathematics, to which it had, if anything, opposed syllogistic logic,
moreover formally well codiﬁed by Aristotle in the Organon.
Galileo: The Scientist as a “Mathematical Philosopher”
Hence Galileo introduces his true answer, with a rapid and emblematic change
in the literary style of his writing. He deliberately introduces his answer, with a
completely rhetorical and even rather ironic question, typical of those who are “very
knowledgeable” and are now ready to unveil an innovative and revolutionary point
of view that cannot fail to radically undermine the traditional framework within
which Simplicio always thinks: “Do you know what does happen, Simplicio? Just
as the computer who wants his calculations to deal with sugar, silk, and wood
must discount the boxes, bales, and other packing, so the mathematical scientist [in
Italian: ﬁlosofo geometra, see Minazzi 1994a], when he wants to recognize in the
concrete the effects which he has proved in the abstract, must deduct the material
hindrances, and if he is able to do so, I assure you that things are in no less agreement
than arithmetical computations.”
With this revolutionary and completely unexpected response, the scientiﬁc
procedure inaugurated and practiced by Galileo appears to be completely at the
antipodes of the traditional epistemological correspondence creed, peculiar and
speciﬁc to antiquity and all ancient science. In fact, for Galileo the ﬁlosofo geometra

Galilean Methodology and Abductive Inference
7
or “mathematical philosopher” must, ﬁrst of all, be capable of demonstrating, in the
abstract, the effects of his own theory. Therefore for Galileo the starting point of the
scientist is precisely identiﬁed in his ability to know how to use his imagination and
his creative fantasy to construct a new theory (or a new prospective-conceptual point
of view) within which he must then be able to deduce some precise consequences.
But how can a new theory be built? Naturally by starting from some precise
and original theoretical assumptions. But, one might still ask: how can these new
theoretical assumptions be introduced? Ex suppositione, Galileo would explicitly
write in his famous letter to Giovanni Battista Baliani of 7 January 1639, an epistle
in which the scientist from Pisa explains fully to his interlocutor how he constructed
the physics of the motion of rigid bodies in the Dialogues Concerning Two New
Sciences (1638). According to this epistemological explanation, Galileo ﬁrst of all
formulated a precise abstract deﬁnition, ex suppositione, of motion, a deﬁnition
from which he then rigorously derived deductively the conclusions that can, in fact,
be reached, thus constructing a highly articulated physical theory of motion. In this
ﬁrst preliminary phase, which is eminently theoretical, Galileo moves, therefore,
in a sphere of thought that turns out to be, at the same time, creative-conventional
(thanks to the introduction of conventional assumptions), but which is also, at the
same time, deductive (according to the most rigorous requirements of mathematical
deduction, which in fact makes it possible to construct a speciﬁc, accurate and
precise physical theory).
It is only after having deduced all the rigorous consequences that can be derived
from this physical theory of his that the “mathematical philosopher” can ﬁnally
investigate whether all these consequences are eventually conﬁrmed (or refuted) by
the experimental dimension. In starting his innovative experimental investigation,
Galileo clearly knows, moreover, that the “mathematical philosopher” at all times
“must deduct the material hindrances” if “he wants to recognize in the concrete
the effects which he has proved in the abstract”. Consequently, for Galileo, the
scientist’s way of proceeding can only be at the same time decisively counterfactual
and also distinctly conceptual, to then compare the theoretical predictions with the
experimental dimension, which is given the last, decisive, word. In any case, the
cognitive process never starts from sense experience as such, because, if anything,
the physical dimension to which constant and fundamental reference is made must
always be “conquered” through the elaboration of a particular theory capable of
making certain predictions, on the basis of which it will inevitably be judged
and evaluated. In this way the facts have only rights towards theories, while the
latter always have, if anything, precise duties towards empirical facts, the latter of
which must always be scientiﬁcally “explained”, so making them known to us as
the “results” of precise logical-random-deductive connections, by virtue of which
we are able to also know them predictively. As it is easy to understand, this new
epistemological model gives us a much more complex and highly articulated image
of human knowledge itself which, for Gaileo, is always constructed in the fruitful
and free problematic entwining between the speciﬁc dimension of scientiﬁc thought
and that of experimental conﬁrmation of a certain theoretical prediction. Thus in the
scientiﬁc proceeding theorized and speciﬁed by Galileo, conventional moments ex

8
F. Minazzi
suppositione, theory, mathematical deduction and even the experimental dimension
itself all constitute indispensable phases of a modern scientiﬁc procedure worthy
of the name. This then achieves an authentic physical revolutionary reversal with
respect to the traditional and established scientiﬁc procedure of antiquity: in the
latter, an overall inductivist approach always predominated, while in the modern
scientiﬁc mentality precisely the deductivist phase acquires a decisive prevalence.
In this more complex and highly articulated scientiﬁc and epistemological
universe, the scientist must therefore always know how to start from a precise
and rigorous hypothetical deﬁnition, which he introduces, conventionally and in a
completely creative way, in order to then be able to develop, deductively, a precise
physical theory, through which he will ﬁnally have to be able to compare his own
theoretical conclusions with the experimental material available, which, in turn,
will arise from a precise mathematization of the reality by means of which he will
construct the necessary experimental dimension. But it is then evident that even the
latter – which also plays a decisive and indispensable role in verifying or refuting
a theory – is by no means assumed in a neutral way, precisely because, thanks to
the construction of a new theory, the scientist must always be able to interpret,
normatively, different aspects of the real world, within which he must know how
to construct and develop a new speciﬁc explanation of the “experimental facts”
which he took into due consideration. In this perspective, the “facts” themselves
then change their very epistemic nature, because they can no longer be conceived in
an atomistic way, as “isolated empirical facts,” because, if at all, they must be traced
back to a precise and equally rigorous “theoretical framework,” through which a
certain “scientiﬁc fact” is actually rationalized to be duly related and interconnected
with other “facts”, also thought of and conceived always within a determinate and
equally precise theoretical perspective.
In other words, it can then be argued that these same “facts,” known and studied
within a speciﬁc and particular theoretical context, constitute, by themselves, a
possible objectiﬁcation of reality which does not, however, exhaust all its physical
potential. In short, we are faced with an objectiﬁcation of the real which, while
never exhausting all the intrinsic and inﬁnite potentialities of reality (see Agazzi
2014), initiates a cognitive process that is articulated precisely in its ability to always
be capable of critically extending the different levels of our possible knowledge
of the real world. In this precise epistemological perspective, the experimental
dimension therefore plays an absolutely decisive and insuppressible role for Galileo,
but, in any case, it never comes before theories, because it follows them and judges
them only afterwards, by conﬁrming or disproving a determinate and speciﬁc
prediction. In this way, for Galileo, the game of science appears much more
complex, malleable and creative than ancient thought was ever able to suspect and
conceive (with very few exceptions, among which we must naturally include the
quite extraordinary work of a great scientist of antiquity, Archimedes of Syracuse
who – and not by chance – always represented for Galileo an indispensable,
fundamental and privileged strategic point of reference that was both theoretical
and practical-experimental). After all, ancient thought was always based precisely
on the qualitative sense experience peculiar to the quinque sensibus after which they

Galilean Methodology and Abductive Inference
9
sought to rationalize it in the most appropriate way possible. From this point of view,
Aristotle’s Physics remained for many centuries a reliable and truly emblematic
paradigmatic model of reference that even today helps us to better understand the
different conceptual approach existing between the traditional physical researches
of antiquity and the modern ones inaugurated by Galileo in the seventeenth century,
opening a new and revolutionary path that has never since been abandoned, thus
introducing a completely fundamental and decisive turning point in human history,
by virtue of which, to put it in Bertrand Russell’s words, three centuries of science
have changed the world more than four thousand years of pre-scientiﬁc culture
(see Russell, 1931). In this hermeneutic perspective, ancient science constitutes an
undoubted model with respect to which modern science constitutes a decidedly
alternative guide, since it is based on counterfactual theoretical innovations that
authorize the delineation of some predictive statements which must then be
rigorously checked and veriﬁed precisely through the experimental dimension.
Thus in modern science the phase of conventionality, that of deductivism and also
that of inductivism and of the experimental dimension itself all end up by being
some decisive, and yet quite different phases, autonomous and profoundly different,
through which a new and revolutionary methodology is constructed, in order to be
able to better understand, namely in a somewhat deeper way, the physical world in
which we live.
Peirce: Abduction as a Rationalization of Any Fact
To explain the nature of the scientiﬁc procedure, Charles Sanders Peirce observed
that “we all know that as soon as a hypothesis has been settled upon as preferable
to others, the next business in order is to commence deducing from it whatever
experiential predictions are extremes and most unlikely among those deducible
from it, in order to subject them to the test of experiment, and thus either quite
to refute the hypothesis or make such corrections of it as may be called for by the
experiments; and the hypothesis must ultimately stand of fall by the result of such
experiments” (Peirce, 1960–1966, CP 7.182). In this case, however, we are not faced
with what in the twentieth century became the overused Popperian slogan “daring
conjectures, ruthless refutations” (in this regard see Minazzi, 1994b), since Peirce
outlines, with a greater critical-interpretative reﬁnement, a fruitful and articulated
image of the scientiﬁc process, which, pace Popper, starts from the assumption that
“science seeks to discover whatever there may be that is true”, since science only
demands “solid truth, or reality” (CP 7.186). Consequently, for Peirce it is evident
that “the different sciences deal with different kinds of truth”, precisely because,
one could add in the manner of Husserl (see Husserl, 1928), all the various, possible
and multiple disciplines construct, constitute and identify, always different “regional
ontologies” within which their own peculiar cognitive objectivity is progressively
deﬁned. After all, for Peirce “the work of reason consists in ﬁnding connection
between facts” (CP 7.198).

10
F. Minazzi
In this precise perspective, à la Kant (and, this time, pace Peirce!), reason
constitutes a speciﬁc function of critical integration of reality: a function of critical
integration which critically probes the opacity and darkness of the real world,
in order to delineate a speciﬁc hermeneutic comprehension of it. Thanks to this
innovative scientiﬁc hermeneutics, the feeble critical focus of the rational human
understanding of the universe makes it progressively less dark and, therefore,
better known objectively. Better still: Peirce’s epistemological approach shows
with bright epistemological clarity that scientiﬁc knowledge always “renders the
fact a conclusion, necessary or probable, from what is already well known. It
might be called a regularization, explanation and regularization being the two
types of rationalization” (CP 7.199). Which brings out the intrinsically normative
character of scientiﬁc knowledge as was clearly illustrated by Kant in his illustrious
epistemological examination of Newtonian physics entrusted to the pages of
his Metaphysische Anfagsgründe der Naturwissenschaft (see Kant, 1786; Pollok,
2001). This entails that “now it is true that the effect of the regularization is that the
fact observed is less isolated than before; but the purpose of the regularization is, I
think, much more accurately said to be to show that it might have been expected,
had the facts been fully known” (CP 7.199).
In fact, for Peirce the authentic spark that sets the cognitive process in motion
does not at all arise from the consideration of the irregularities of experience, but
rather from perceiving and identifying an unexpected fact, namely a phenomenon
that proves to be contrary to the expectations connected with our standard scientiﬁc
explanation of the world. Exactly on this basis Peirce then introduces the role and
function of abduction (or retroduction in close connection with the heuristic role
of induction. Indeed, Peirce writes: “accepting the conclusion that an explanation
is needed when facts contrary to what we should expect emerge, it follows that
the explanation must be such a proposition as would lead to the prediction of the
observed facts, either as necessary consequences or at least as very probable under
the circumstances. A hypothesis then, has to be adopted, which is likely in itself,
and renders the facts likely. This step of adopting a hypothesis as being suggested
by the facts, is what I call abduction. I reckon it as a form of inference, however
problematical the hypothesis may be held” (CP 7.202). This problematicity of the
hypothesis is one with the criticality of the scientiﬁc procedure, since, Peirce further
points out, “a hypothesis adopted by abduction could only be adopted on probation,
and must be tested”.
This profoundly changes not only our traditional standard image of science,
but also provides the opportunity for a very different reading of the history of
science itself. For example, consider one of the most important steps that took
place in modern times with the progressive afﬁrmation of the Copernican theory.
As is well known, the singular paradox of Copernicus (1473-1543) can perhaps
be identiﬁed precisely in the fact that this astronomer was decidedly original and
very innovative in his astronomical conception, at the same time, however, as
his scientiﬁc method was, by contrast, somewhat conservative, to the point that
Copernicus always believed, in profound agreement with the ancients, and with
the famous Platonic dogma, that the celestial bodies necessarily followed uniform

Galilean Methodology and Abductive Inference
11
and circular movements. Precisely because of his prejudicial attachment to the
traditional astronomical dogmas of antiquity, his astronomical system ended up
being, paradoxically, on the one hand “simpler” than that presented by Ptolemy,
though, on the other hand, it was also much more complex, at least compared to
the system later conﬁgured by Kepler (1571-1630), using his seven ellipses for
the apparent movements of the celestial bodies which, in this way, replaced the
thirty-four circles which Copernicus had to refer to in order to explain the apparent
motions of the celestial bodies themselves. The innovative and certainly decisive
astronomical result achieved by Kepler was after all obtained by this mathematician,
then in the service and under the protection of his patron, the Emperor Rudolf II,
undoubtedly being able to beneﬁt from the most precise, widespread, and systematic
astronomical observations, all made with the naked eye by the astronomer Tycho
Brahe (1546-1601). Kepler’s Rudolphine Tables, published in 1627, attest that they
were undoubtedly much more accurate than the Prutenic Tables devised, on the
basis of the Copernican theory, by Reinhold in 1551 and also compared to the
Alfonsine Tables, dating back to the thirteenth century, still based on the Ptolemaic
system. The greater accuracy of Kepler’s Rudolphine Tables stemmed precisely
from the fact that Kepler had been able to use all of Tycho Brahe’s precious and
rigorous observational results. But precisely this fact, which is completely correct,
has then led a substantial part of the historiographical tradition to believe that the
three famous laws of Kepler were obtained by the German astronomer directly by a
purely inductive method, which has given rise to a veritable “inductivist ‘legend’”
(see Singer, 1959; Mason, 1962), which corresponds to an authentic “mental cramp”
à la Wittgenstein. For what reason? For several reasons.
In the ﬁrst place, because it was not in the least taken into account that in his
Epitome astronomiae copernicanae, composed by Kepler between 1618 and 1621,
this astronomer-mathematician expounded with precision his astronomical method,
which turns out to be quite different from the Copernican one. In fact in this work
Kepler argues that, in his opinion, astronomy presupposes ﬁve parts, which are
autonomous and quite different. First of all, astronomical observation of the sky,
which, however, must be combined with the ability to develop hypotheses to explain
the apparent motions of the celestial bodies observed. Then, thirdly, according to
Kepler it is also necessary to know how to elaborate a physics and a metaphysics of
cosmology, which latter must also be connected with the precise calculation of the
positions – future and past – of the single celestial bodies. Finally, again according
to Kepler, it is also necessary to know how to conceptually dominate a discipline
such as mechanics, which enables us to construct optical instruments, so placing us
in the best position to be able to use them in the best possible way.
Certainly Kepler also believed that the metaphysical component was not, how-
ever, an essential factor in astronomical research, being ready to declare that
if the hypotheses were congruent with the metaphysical structure, this certainly
constituted a result not to be despised. However if they turned out to be openly
at odds with astronomical theory, then, according to Kepler, it was certainly
metaphysics that needed to give way. In any case, Kepler was also convinced that the
hypotheses used in the astronomical ﬁeld should always be reasonable and always

12
F. Minazzi
capable of making possible “The demonstration of the phenomenon” taken into
consideration, while also being able to show “its usefulness in practical life”.
In the second place, because the image has gradually spread of an inductivist
Kepler, one who constructed his new explanation of the solar system and the orbits
of celestial bodies, emblematically epitomized in his famous three laws of the
movement of the planets, which was based systematically on the extensive and
highly articulated body of precise observational results. These were made by the
Danish astronomer Tycho Brahe, with his numerous assistants, in the course of his
research conducted over many years, from 1576 to 1597, on the island of Hven in
the Sound, the strait of Copenhagen. Undoubtedly these observations by Brahe were
far more accurate than those previously collected by Johannes Müller (1436-1476),
the famous Regiomontano, in collaboration with his friend (and patron) Bernhard
Walther (1430-1504), with whom another friend of Müller’s collaborated, namely,
the famous artist Albrecht Dürer (1471-1528). After all, this complex and highly
articulated set of astronomical observations was now available to astronomers when
Copernicus began his work.
Faced with this basic framework which, in general, has somehow “crystallized”,
to then become a reference model for the main historical reconstructions of science,
Peirce, by contrast, had the ability to reconsider the speciﬁc heuristic link which is
established in the inductivist phase with the nomological-deductivist. In particular,
in reconsidering the speciﬁc genesis of the new Keplerian image of the movement
of the heavenly bodies, Peirce rightly felt the hermeneutic need to reconsider
precisely this particular nomological-deductive link between a theory and the plan
of experimental observations. In this regard, Peirce wrote:
all necessary reasoning consists of tracing out what is virtually asserted in the assumed
premises. While some of these may be new observations, yet the principal ones relate to
states of things not capable of being directly observed. As has often been said, especially
since Kant, such reasoning really does not amplify our positive knowledge; although it may
render our understanding of our own assumptions more perfect. It is the kind of reasoning
for any application of science. For example, it is by such reasoning that, assuming the law
of gravitation to have been scientiﬁcally established, we go on to predict the time and place
of an eclipse of the sun. Or, if our desire is to rectify our theory of the moon, we may do so
by comparing such predictions, regarded as conditional, with observations, If, in making the
correction, we assume that there can be no error discoverable by these observations except
in the values of one or two constants employed, the correction is itself made by a mere
application of principles assumed to be already scientiﬁcally established; and although it
will be called a contribution to science, it leaves the frame-work of the theory untouched,
and merely consists in incorporating the new observations into the places provided for them
in our existing assumptions, so that there really is, in the logician’s sense, no enlargement
of our knowledge, but merely an arrangement or preservation of the systematization of
knowledge already established. (CP 7.180)
But then what is a hypothesis rooted in? Peirce replies: “the entire meaning of a
hypothesis lies in its conditional experiential predictions: if all its predictions are
true, the hypothesis is wholly true” (CP 7.203). Consequently, for Peirce, abduction
cannot but be closely linked to induction, since “this sort of inference it is, from
experiments testing predictions based on a hypothesis, that is alone properly entitled

Galilean Methodology and Abductive Inference
13
to be called induction” (CP 7.206). The complex game that then takes place between
abduction and induction within the scientiﬁc procedure is qualiﬁed by Peirce as
follows:
Abduction seeks a theory. Induction seeks for facts. In abduction the consideration of
the facts suggest the hypothesis. In induction the study of the hypothesis suggests the
experiments which bring to light the very facts to which the hypothesis had pointed.
The mode of suggestion by which, in abduction, the facts suggest the hypothesis is
by resemblance, – the resemblance of the facts to the consequences of the hypothesis.
The mode of suggestion by which in induction the hypothesis suggests the facts is by
contiguity, – familiar knowledge that the conditions of the hypothesis can be realized in
certain experimental ways. (CP 7.218)
Descartes: The Deductive Method as an Instrument of Research
But, as we have seen, Peircian abduction is not solely concerned with inductivist
inference, since it also fully highlights the epistemological and heuristic role of
deductivist inference, namely, the opposite and contrary operation, by virtue of
which the object of knowledge is deﬁned normatively. However, there has not
always been a full epistemological awareness of the crucial role that deductivism
performed within the very birth of modern science and its consequent research
program, both philosophical and scientiﬁc (for this factor connected to the historical
and theoretical link between scientiﬁc and philosophical thought, the reference to
Geymonat 1970-1976 is still fundamental today). However, as Giovanni Vailati
pointed as early as 1898, in his inaugural lecture to the course of History of
Mechanics at the University of Turin, year 1897-1898 (Vailati, 1911, pp. 118-148
and Id., 2010, pp. 23-62):
We can see that the distinction between the processes of induction or generalization and
those of deduction and demonstration is already clearly acknowledged in the work of Greek
philosophers, who may have made the ﬁrst attempts at analysis and systematic classiﬁcation
of the processes and artiﬁces used by the human mind in proceeding from the unknown to
the known. (Vailati, 2010, p. 25, italics in the text)
In this way Vailati explicitly referred to the reﬂection present in Aristotle’s
Organum, which clearly distinguishes between inductive and deductive inference.
Induction (epagoghé) is thus “deﬁned by Aristotle as that form of reasoning by
means of which, from the examination and comparison of a series of particular
cases, we arrive at a general proposition which contemplates not just the observed
cases, but also an indeterminate number of other cases, which have a certain relation
of similarity with the former cases” (ibidem). Conversely, deduction (apodeixis) is
qualiﬁed by Aristotle “as any form of reasoning that can be reduced to the kind
he has designated as syllogism (syllogismos), which, as we know, consists of the
following: starting with two propositions, when one afﬁrms a given property of an
entire class of objects, and the other states that one or more objects belong to such
a class, we get to a third proposition, where the initial property is also attributed
to the aforementioned objects” (ibidem). On this basis Aristotle then stresses the

14
F. Minazzi
fundamental distinction existing between deductive and inductive inference : in the
former, if one admits the truth of the premises, one is then forced and obliged – by
an evident logical necessity – to admit the truth of the consequences. Otherwise,
one would end up violating the principle of non-contradiction, leading to theories
that are logically too powerful, because they can demonstrate everything and the
opposite of everything, showing, in their very “power”, their substantial irrelevance
and uselessness. On the other hand, the results obtained inductively, while admitting
the truth of the premises, would never give rise to any particular contradiction or
inconsistency, if one ended up rejecting the truth of the inferential generalization.
For this basic reason Aristotle then emphasizes that deductive inference always leads
to necessary and compulsory results, while only inductive inference, by contrast,
enables us to start from sense data drawn from the direct testimony of the senses.
Again for this underlying epistemological reason, Aristotle is then fully convinced
that the principles from which all our deductions must be articulated should always
be based on the observation of some special facts (which, of course, change from
discipline to discipline), precisely because he is convinced that all principles and
axioms of a particular discipline have an inductive origin. He is so convinced of this
that, in his opinion, even Euclidean geometry has an inductive origin.
In any case, it should not be overlooked that Aristotle holds that deductive
inference has a preeminent and fundamental function, namely that of rendering a
certain statement more reliable and it should therefore contribute to increasing its
certainty, with the simultaneous decrease in uncertainty, so succeeding in reducing
what is questionable and doubtful to what is indisputable and indubitable. For this
reason, Aristotle held that deduction constitutes an entirely privileged logical tool,
being able to guarantee the truth of propositions that may appear to us, at ﬁrst glance,
only to be probable and partly plausible, relating them to indubitable, certain,
reliable and incontestable propositions. In this respect, Geometry and Rhetoric again
constituted for Aristotle two truly exemplary ﬁelds of intervention, since in both
cases the different interlocutors nevertheless seek to corroborate their statements by
deducing them from and/or supporting them by axioms or legislative provisions
accepted and unquestioned by all. But precisely on this decisive point – which
leads, therefore, to a clear contrast between deduction and induction – we can
then see all the enormous epistemological and scientiﬁc distance that inevitably
separates the image of scientiﬁc knowledge typical of antiquity from that developed
by the scientists of modernity. For the former, in fact, one must always start
from indubitable statements, to be derived directly from experience, while for the
moderns, on the contrary, it is necessary in our reasoning to proceed scientiﬁcally
from conjectural propositions that are always in need of proof.
This innovative raising of critical awareness clearly emerges, moreover, from the
texts of the founders of modern science. To give just one emblematic example, we
can take the celebrated Discours de la méthode (1637) by René Descartes, in the
second part of which the French thinker presents his famous four rules of scientiﬁc
reasoning, which he polemically contrasts with the method of proceeding typical
of the ancients. Now, his third rule explicitly refers to the function of order: “le
troisième, de conduire par ordre mes pensées, en commençant par les objets les plus

Galilean Methodology and Abductive Inference
15
simplex et les plus aisés à connaître, pour monter peu à peu, comme par degrés,
jusques à la connaissance des plus composés; et supposant même de l’ordre entre
ceux qui ne se précèdent point naturellement les uns les autres” (Descartes, 1987, pp.
18–19). Seen in this new perspective, the order of the different elements – the fruit
of human sagacity – therefore means that the explanation of the next link certainly
requires that of the previous link, while the opposite is not true, precisely because
the previous element can – and must – be explained without reference to the next.
Precisely on this new function of order, therefore, we can construct a new knowledge
that begins from a starting point that can also constitute – as we have already seen
in Galileo’s work – a decisively conjectural moment.
In any case, also in Descartes the enumeration – that is the operation of control by
which the whole deductive chain of all the links in a determined and speciﬁc order
is traced – is rooted in the order established to understand the world. In this horizon,
the chains of deductions are also capable of connecting distant reasons to all the
objects of human knowledge, provided that we are able to consider only those that
are evident (the ﬁrst Cartesian rule) respecting their order that envisages starting
from the simplest to then rise to the most complex (second and third Cartesian rule).
Therefore in this innovative reﬂection outlined in the Discours de la méthode, the
enumeration (or the fourth Cartesian rule) rigorously seals this new conceptual and
scientiﬁc deductive approach, which on the heuristic plane undermines traditional
inductivism, replacing it with a deductivism fully aware of all its innovative critical
potential. In fact Descartes writes, precisely for the purpose of defending the
deductivist approach he used both in Dioptriques and in Les Météores:
Que si quelques-unes de celles [arguments, ed.] dont j’ai parlé, au commencement de la
Dioptrique et des Météores, choquent d’abord, à la cause que je les nomme des suppositions,
et que je ne semble pas avoir envie de les prouver, qu’on ait la patience de lire le tout avec
attention, et j’espère qu’on s’en trouvera satisfait. Car il me semble que les raisons s’y entre-
suivent en telle sorte que, comme les dernières sont démontrées par les premières, qui sont
leurs causes, ces premières le sont réciproquement par les dernières, qui sont leurs effets.
Et on ne doit pas imaginer que je commette en ceci la faute que les logiciens nomment un
cercle; car l’expérience rendant la plupart de ces effets très certains, les causes dont je les
déduis ne servent pas tant à les prouver qu’à les expliquer; mais, tout au contraire, ce sont
elles qui sont prouvée par eux. (Descartes, 1987, p. 76)
In defending this deductivist conjectural procedure, expounded and practiced both
in the Dioptrique and Les Météores, Descartes draws on the scientiﬁc mode of
proceeding of astronomers, who often make use of assumptions to develop their
geometric constructions, by which they then try to explain the positions (past,
present and future) of the various celestial bodies they have studied. Now, all
these suppositions, even without ever pretending to be true, nevertheless enable
us to identify a fruitful principle from which deductions can be drawn, as indeed
Descartes did in the Dioptrique, in which from the initial suppositions he was
ﬁnally able to deduce an explanation for refraction and for vision itself, etc., while
from the suppositions of Les Météores he was able to explain the nature of vapors,
winds, fumes, etc. Moreover, Descartes himself, in a letter dated 13 July 1638,
addressed to Jean-Baptiste Morin (see Descartes, Correspondance, CXXVII, in

16
F. Minazzi
Oeuvres de Descartes 1996, vol. II, pp. 196-221, in particular pp. 197-198), had
already defended himself from the accusation of having fallen into a “vicious
circle”, specifying that, in reality, there is no vicious logical circularity when one
proves a cause starting from the effects, known through experience, to then prove
some other effect derived from this same supposed cause. In short: for Descartes,
if one proceeds from conjectural principles, one does not end up with a dogmatic
circularity, but with a reciprocity by means of which the hypotheses help to better
explain and understand physical phenomena, while, in turn, it is precisely the
physical phenomena that enable us to prove (or disprove) the hypotheses. It is
precisely through this new consciously deductivist approach that modern science
has critically emancipated itself from traditional metaphysical inductivism and
inaugurated a new and fruitful program of scientiﬁc research that has profoundly
changed our world of praxis, as well as our very image of knowledge. Moreover, the
passages quoted should clearly bring out the full cultural and prospective harmony
existing between the Cartesian and the Galilean positions. A harmony that ﬁnally
allowed Vailati to state that:
The characteristic difference between Aristotle’s ideas and those of the founders of modern
science about the function of deduction in scientiﬁc research lies precisely in how little
importance has been given to deduction as an instrument of explanation and anticipation
of experience, compared to the large amount of trust put in it as a mean of proof and
ascertainment. His arguments about natural phenomena, even in those cases where, instead
of being used to demonstrate the conclusions they led to, are used to test the premise on
which they are founded, aim to reach this purpose more by showing the contradictions and
inconsistencies among the various statements, or by showing that they cannot be afﬁrmed
simultaneously, rather than by venturing to conclusions never before suspected, whose
veriﬁcations would have been able to give rise to new observations, which would have
contributed to a better clariﬁcation on the matter at issue. (Vailati, 2010, p. 30 and see
Minazzi, 2011, 2022)
Vailati: The Deductive Method as an Instrument of Research
Modern science lives precisely on its predictive spirit, to the point where a
chemist and microbiologist like Louis Pasteur, as Vailati rightly points out, “has
appropriately deﬁned the experiment as an observation guided by preconceptions,
that is, in other words, an observation preceded and guided by deductive processes”
(Vailati, 2010, p. 31, note 11). Moreover, Vailati, taking up his considerations
relating to the history of science, also comes to remind us that:
the history of science clearly shows us that, amongst the causes which gradually led to
the substitution of the modern experimental methods in place of the ancient methods of
mere passive observation, the application of deduction has to be included as one of the
most important, even in those cases where the propositions taken as a starting point were
considered more in need of proof than the resulting ones, cases where, therefore, the
resultant propositions were those which had to pass on, to the initial conjectures, the grade
of certainty that they were directly acquiring from a comparison with facts and experimental
veriﬁcations. (Vailati, 2010, p. 31)

Galilean Methodology and Abductive Inference
17
Modern science has therefore clearly understood that experience, by itself, does
not teach anything unless we are able to critically probe the opacity of the world
by the critical light of inquiring reason. Or rather, modern science is fully aware
that what experience teaches us, precisely through inductive inference, is mainly
linked to a pragmatic and practical-sensitive dimension, within which a basic
degree of knowledge is attained that is the preliminary and yet fundamental one
that we share with the other forms of life present on earth. With respect to this
primordial and vital knowledge of the world, we can then develop only an essentially
qualitative and pragmatic rationalization, according to the model of Aristotle’s
Physics, which, undoubtedly, from this point of view, provides an excellent frame
of reference for understanding the values and limits of the ancient world’s physical
knowledge. Hence this ancient way of proceeding, which is perhaps conﬁgured as
very “natural”, produces a rationalization with a low conceptual content which
completely lacks the ability to implement a computational synthesis of critical
integration of reality, in order to achieve a greater abstraction of thought. To
achieve this further, deeper and more paradoxical level of knowledge, one must
in fact have the ability, intelligence, and will to establish a new way of practicing
scientiﬁc investigation, namely, the very decidedly counterfactual one that was
initially developed by Galileo Galilei and then provided a privileged heuristic frame
of reference for all modern science. The intrinsic, but extremely fruitful paradox,
of the Galilean scientiﬁc model – which has since increasingly become a frame of
reference for modern science – is rooted precisely in that curious inverted relation-
ship that is established between abstraction and the practical-operative fruitfulness
of this approach. After all, three centuries of modern science amply testify to
how science has initiated, from the seventeenth century onwards, a continuous
process of abstraction that has made it possible to achieve increasingly abstract and
increasingly counterfactual levels. But precisely this curve that constantly grows
towards an abstraction that is ever more abstract has enabled us to extend, equally
constantly, our knowledge of the world. The paradox of this counterfactual model
is rooted precisely in this inversely proportional relationship: the more human
thought tried to adhere to the world of praxis and sense experience, the less it was
able to develop an in-depth objective knowledge of this same physical world, but
when it detached itself from the most immediate sense experience and began to
test different hypotheses that were increasingly conjectural, abstract and daring, it
progressively managed to penetrate ever more deeply into the secrets of life and
of reality itself, thus initiating a revolutionary but constant process of growth of
our technical-cognitive heritage, by which the possibilities of life on earth have
also been improved. In this way, the more abstract, counterfactual and empirically
improbable our theories are, the more they succeed in enabling us to penetrate into
the most secret and hidden mechanisms of the world and of physical reality itself.
For this basic reason, in order to truly know reality, it is not enough to observe
it carefully and very scrupulously (as the ancients believed), because, if anything,
it is necessary to be able to develop new ideas and new theories to try to explain
this reality. In short, without theories you cannot know the world, even if it is also
true that these theories and these same audacious abstract ideas must be promptly

18
F. Minazzi
veriﬁed and subjected to an experimental control, within which the physical reality
itself – as Galileo clearly understood – again plays an equally fundamental and
decisive role since it is precisely through it that the world conﬁrms or disproves our
theories.
For this underlying reason Vailati then observes that:
in other words, ancient physicists were not inclined to experiment, mostly because they
were busier making sure of the certainty of the starting propositions than of the truthfulness
of those that were deducted by them, and therefore they did not have any reason to question
what happens in cases different from those that, presenting, themselves spontaneously to
their observations, immediately suggested the generalization on which their arguments
were based. Therefore it can be assumed that, in a sense, the increasingly widespread and
systematic application of deduction to the study of natural phenomena provided the ﬁrst
stimulus to the development of modern experimental methods, and it is not by chance that
the ﬁrst eminent initiators of such methods were also at the same time the greatest founders
and advocates of the application of that powerful tool of deduction, mathematics, to the
sciences of physics. (Vailati, 2010, p. 32)
Viewed in this precise perspective, mathematics – used as a privileged heuristic
tool above all in physical investigations – then “lent wings” to scientiﬁc thought,
meaning initially the physics. Again in this perspective, Vailati emphasizes how, for
the ﬁrst scientists of modernity, the experimental dimension took on the appearance
of an authentic cimento or “trial”, to be precise “trial by ordeal,” since cimento is
the word commonly used by Galileo to indicate an experiment:
Maybe it has not been mentioned enough, by those who dealt with the history of Mechanics,
that the ﬁrst and most decisive experiences to determine the advancement, by those who
undertook them, non as inquiries toward nature, but rather as challenges, some kind of
cimenti, to use the word which has now become classic, to which nature was subjected
in order to challenge it to answer differently from how it should have answered. In fact,
for a great number of the most important cases, the experiences turned out to be mere
veriﬁcations of conclusion that had already been reached independently by the experiments.
They would have been really astonished if the answers of nature had not conformed to their
anticipations, and such a lack of conformity, when it actually did occur, led them to wonder
why the experiments had not worked, rather than immediately doubting the legitimacy
of their assumptions. Moreover, sometimes they appeared to be drawn to the experiment
more as a way of convincing other than as way to convince themselves, because for them
appealing to facts was, in a way, the line of least resistance in penetrating the stubborn
minds of their adversaries, not being able to counter their preconceptions with their own,
without basing such preconceptions on some less subjective basis than their own personal
convictions. (Vailati, 2010, pp. 32–33, italics in the text)
Precisely this approach, consistently deductivist, then helps us better understand the
precise primary role that ideas, thoughts and theories play within modern science in
order to start an innovative and fruitful cognitive process. This was also openly
recognized and emphasized by Galileo, who on the third day of the Dialogue
Concerning the Two Chief World Systems signiﬁcantly breaks out of the text, making
Salviati stress the role that reason always plays in knowing how to do “violence to
meaning”:
But the experiences which overtly contradict the annual movement are indeed so much
greater in their apparent force that, I repeat, there is no limit to my astonishment when I

Galilean Methodology and Abductive Inference
19
reﬂect that Aristarchus and Copernicus were able to make reason so conquer sense that, in
deﬁance of the latter, the former became mistress of their belief. (Galilei, 1962, p. 328 and
Galilei, 1968, vol. VII, p. 355)
Which emphasizes, in a highly admirable way, precisely the constitutively counter-
factual aspect of modern scientiﬁc reasoning, which no longer starts from empirical
observation, but rather conjecturally constructs a theory whose mathematically
deduced conclusions are then placed in relation to the experimental dimension, so
that a theory, to put it now with Imre Lakatos, can thus “stick its neck out” to the
cleaver of experience. But, of course, this doesn’t trigger some naive falsiﬁcationist
game (à la Popper) because, if anything, it instead ﬁts into that more complex
heuristic game by which “sense experiences” and “necessary demonstrations” are
cleverly linked critically to lead to an effective critical increase in our knowledge of
the world. In working in this way Galileo is moreover so artful that in the Dialogue
he even pretends to attribute this scientiﬁc method of proceeding to Aristotle. Thus
on the ﬁrst day he presents Simplicio, who points out that “Aristotle ﬁrst laid the
basis of his argument a priori, showing the necessity of the inalterability of heaven
by means of natural, evident, and clear principles. He afterward supported the same
a posteriori, by the senses and by the traditions of the ancients” (Galilei, 1962, p.
50 and Galilei, 1968, vol. VII, p. 75). Faced with this deductivist Aristotle Galileo
has the dialectical skill to twist this image against Simplico end up attributing his
new scientiﬁc way of proceeding to the Stagirite. In fact, Galileo puts the following
reﬂection into Salviati’s mouth:
What you refer to is the method he used in writing his doctrine, but I do not believe it
to be that with which he investigated. Rather, I think it certain that he ﬁrst obtained it by
means of the senses, experiments, and observations, to assure himself as much as possible
of his conclusions. Afterward he sought means to make them demonstrable. That is what
is done for the most part in the demonstrative sciences; this comes about because when the
conclusion is true, one may by making use of analytical methods hit upon some proposition
which is already demonstrated, or arrive at some axiomatic principle; but if the conclusion
is false, one can go on forever without ever ﬁnding any known truth – if indeed one does not
encounter some impossibility of manifest absurdity. And you may be sure that Pythagoras,
long before he discovered the proof for which he sacriﬁced a hecatomb, was sure that the
square on the side opposite the right angle in a right triangle was equal to the squares on
the other two sides. The certainty of a conclusion assists not a little in the discovery of its
proof – meaning always in the demonstrative sciences. (Galilei, 1962, p. 51 and Galilei,
1968, vol. VII, p. 75)
Naturally in this passage Galileo is conducting a skillful polemical use of the
experimental method precisely because he attributes its use directly to Aristotle, in
order to try to critically displace the Peripatetics of his time, also to demonstrate
that it is he – and not the Peripatetics – who is in greater scientiﬁc harmony
with the cognitive research developed by Aristotle. However, if this polemical and
instrumental use is dropped, it also emerges from this page that it is precisely the
new Galilean experimental method that is capable of critically integrating both
“sense experiences” and “necessary demonstrations”, as well as induction and
deduction within a new and revolutionary scientiﬁc procedure, capable of initiating
a cognitive venture that has never found any stopping point from that time until the
present.

20
F. Minazzi
From the Dogma of the Method to a Critical-Historical-Normative
Image of Knowledge
This new, and certainly much more complex, theoretical-practical approach to the
scientiﬁc study of reality is therefore based on many different and even contrasting
elements that cannot be reduced at all to the well-known “discourse on method”
of Cartesian memory. Certainly the famous work by Descartes, which appeared,
as we have seen, in 1637, clearly proved seminal and, in its own way, it certainly
contributed to spreading the modern scientiﬁc mentality. But in doing so it also
contributed to spreading a precise and circumscribed idea of the same scientiﬁcity
that made it substantially coincide with the method of science. Consequently
this work of Descartes has contributed, in a way that is certainly fundamental
and directly proportional to its cultural and theoretical success, to disseminating
in modernity what has rightly been qualiﬁed as the “Cartesian syndrome” (see
Pera, 1991, pp. 3–17). According to this Cartesian approach, science is essentially
characterized by the development of a precise “scientiﬁc method”, by applying
which it is possible to produce scientiﬁc knowledge worthy of the name. From
this perspective, science and method thus end up by coinciding. This goes so far
that it becomes a sort of “common sense” to believe that if the scientiﬁc method
is not applied, no knowledge worthy of the name could be produced. Thus the
Cartesian syndrome introduced a true dogma, or the dogma of method, which
profoundly conditioned Western epistemological thought from Descartes’ Discours
de la méthode (1637) all the way to Against Method by Paul K. Feyerabend
(Feyerabend 1975). Nor can it be overlooked that the spread of this “Cartesian
syndrome” through the centuries has also given rise to a situation that today
appears to be rather singular and bizarre. While the overwhelming majority of
scientists and epistemologists have fully identiﬁed themselves with this syndrome,
nevertheless the history of the last three centuries analytically documents how all
those who have reduced modern science to the scientiﬁc method, have been in
profound disagreement among themselves as to specifying what this same scientiﬁc
method consisted of. Moreover, since the seventeenth century, an empiricist image
of science was rapidly established which certainly did not help to grasp the role of
deductivism within the dynamics of growth of the technical-scientiﬁc heritage of
modernity. But then, in the face of the inductivist empiricism that has often played
a hegemonic role in relation to the image of scientiﬁc knowledge, there have also
been different and contrasting epistemological traditions that have variously reduced
the “scientiﬁc method” to conjecturalism, conventionalism, mere deductivism,
idoneism, pragmatism, materialism, instrumentalism, empiriocriticism, mathemat-
ics and even spiritualism, according to the most varied (and even curious) theoretical
interpretations. In the light of this composite tradition of Western epistemological
thought it can thus be afﬁrmed that all these epistemologists, while converging
in the thesis that modern science is invariably reducible to its scientiﬁc method,
nevertheless have constantly quarrelled and disputed in trying to deﬁne, once and
for all, the precise nature of this mythical “scientiﬁc method”. There was no doubt

Galilean Methodology and Abductive Inference
21
that it existed, while it was highly questionable that it would be possible to identify
the precise nature of this same “scientiﬁc method”. The critical discussion was so
highly articulated and the positions differed so widely that today almost a different
problem arises, namely, the following: how is it possible to avoid and escape from
this singular epistemological stranglehold? An epistemological stranglehold that, in
systematically reducing modern science to its method, is then unable to establish,
with rigor, the precise nature of this scientiﬁc method itself. In order to try to
emerge critically from this somewhat paradoxical epistemological outcome that on
the whole distinguishes the last three centuries of our history, it is necessary to try
to elaborate a different theoretical perspective by taking a different epistemological
path.
First by observing that an eminent scientist such as Galileo Galilei, the acknowl-
edged founder of modern science, despite having published, in 1623, an important
methodological work such as The Assayer (original title Il Saggiatore, see Galilei,
2016 and Galilei, 1968, vol. VI), yet never codiﬁed procedure in science in a rigid
method deﬁned once and for all. Why? Did he forget to do this? Or did Galileo,
having discovered the “scientiﬁc method”, consciously wish to conceal his “secret”?
Or, again, did he want to create a smokescreen to make the knowledge of this
mythical “scientiﬁc method” more difﬁcult? The paradox of these same questions
should lead us to adopt a different theoretical perspective. Because precisely in The
Assayer Galileo (as also emerges in other works of his) deliberately conﬁned himself
to indicating how scientiﬁc knowledge arises from the linking of two different
and antinomic poles that he identiﬁed in “necessary demonstrations” and “sense
experiences”. In other words, for Galileo, scientiﬁc knowledge always springs from
the critical intertwining between the experimental dimension and the more properly
theoretical dimension that found in mathematics its privileged heuristic instrument.
But why did Galileo limit himself to providing this general indication without
specifying, more analytically and in detail, as Descartes did, the speciﬁc nature of
the scientiﬁc method?
In my opinion, this crucial and decisive question can be answered by observing
that Galileo was far too skillful and aware a scientiﬁc researcher to pursue the
chimera of being able to freeze the scientiﬁc method into a single aseptic formula,
valid for all areas of different scientiﬁc investigations. Moreover, it is also true that,
in the course of his life as a researcher, he explored different ﬁelds of scientiﬁc
investigation, so dealing with astronomy, physics, the problem of the ﬂoating of
rigid bodies on water, anatomy, mathematics, geometry and many other scientiﬁc
disciplines and problems. Certainly the still initial and often quite preliminary
degree of many of these scientiﬁc researches undoubtedly enabled the Pisan scientist
to deal with different and profoundly different ﬁelds of study, in keeping with
a scientiﬁc practice that today the hyper-specialization achieved by the various
disciplines would certainly make impossible. Today, specialization has gone so
far that often two scientists who deal with similar but different problems have
serious problems in understanding each other precisely because specialization in
their speciﬁc and particular ﬁeld of research requires precisely such a monomaniacal
concentration that it prevents a scientist from being able to deal with anything

22
F. Minazzi
else. On the other hand, this was not the condition of science at the beginning
of modernity and then this wealth of different themes and different scientiﬁc
problems – which Galileo dealt with variously throughout his scientiﬁc life – must
have helped him to be very cautious in claiming to be able to reduce the scientiﬁc
“method” to a single and indivisible methodological version.
If anything, precisely the experience of profoundly different physical and
scientiﬁc ﬁelds such as those to which his scientiﬁc research was devoted must
have made Galileo understand the complexity of reality that the scientist can
study from different and even opposite points of view, as well as within different
disciplinary ﬁelds. The extraordinary richness of his scientiﬁc experience must then
have led him to assume a prejudicial critical caution in the name of which he
ﬁnally understood clearly that, within every scientiﬁc inquiry, precisely to be able to
achieve a better objective knowledge of a particular sector of reality coinciding with
what one wishes to investigate and study, one must inevitably forge, autonomously,
a speciﬁc and peculiar program of scientiﬁc research, as well as a speciﬁc method
of investigation, a speciﬁc language, together with a series of speciﬁc conceptual
categories, speciﬁc methods of veriﬁcation and also falsiﬁcation, so giving rise to a
precise conceptual disciplinary tradition, etc. Now, precisely the full awareness of
the interaction that can therefore be established between all these different elements
within a particular disciplinary ﬁeld must have ﬁnally persuaded him that there
is no presumed and mythical “scientiﬁc method” to be applied automatically in
every different disciplinary ﬁeld. On the contrary, it seems instead that every single
scientiﬁc discipline must always know how to develop, independently, its own
speciﬁc and peculiar method of critical-heuristic investigation to study the world
from its own particular point of view. Besides, in The Assayer, in introducing the
famous fable of the study of sounds, commenting on the 21st passage of the Sarsi,
Galileo wrote, and certainly not by chance, this important preliminary warning:
Long experience has taught me this about the status of mankind with regard to matters
requiring thought: the less people know and understand about them, the more positively
they attempt to argue concerning them, while on the other hand to know and understand a
multitude of things renders men cautious in passing judgment upon anything new. (Galilei,
1992, p. 14)
In this admirable Galilean position, however, it is not necessary to perceive, as
has also been done by some interpreters, either an (uncritical) exaltation of the
function of experience, or an overall skeptical outcome of his reﬂection, which
would even open the doors to his acceptance of the famous “argument of Urban
VIII”, emblematically (but also polemically) recalled, with undoubted rhetorical
ability, at the end of the Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems. These
two references, often mentioned by critics in commenting on Galileo’s fable of the
study of sounds, are not in fact pertinent precisely because Galileo’s intention is, if
anything, in profound harmony with the ancient Socratic teaching. On the basis of
this, as is well known, the more we get to know a particular sector of experience (and
of the world), the more we become aware of our profound ignorance. Seen in this
perspective, knowledge and ignorance, if anything, constitute two sides of the same
coin of the cognitive process proper to humanity, a complex process within which

Galilean Methodology and Abductive Inference
23
the human knowledge of the world progresses always haltingly, learning from its
mistakes, always having to be critically warned of the partiality of its results, which
are always revisable and critically investigable.
Certainly this Galilean-Socratic approach is very distant from what in the ﬁnal
pages of the ﬁrst day of Dialogue, distinguishing between extensive knowledge
and intensive knowledge, almost seems to “load” the feeble scientiﬁc knowl-
edge achieved by humanity with the inﬁnite weight typical of absoluteness (and
unchangeability) traditionally attributed to divinity. However, if one bears in mind
the complexity of the cultural (and civil) battle sustained by Galileo almost all
through his life, then it will not be difﬁcult to understand that these different stages
of his reﬂection are also explained above all in the light of the different phases and
various forms that his tenacious commitment in favor of science, of Copernicanism,
and of his own courageous cultural program necessarily had to adopt, conﬁguring
different curvatures and also different accentuations of perspective, which last,
among them, may not be all precisely congruent or lacking in obvious contradic-
tions. But, in any case, the transition from the fable of the study of sounds evidently
attests to the possibility of always being able to critically extend our knowledge of
a particular reality, with the conclusion that it is always necessary to increase our
own critical spirit in order not to fall into any undue dogmatization of the cognitive
results which, however, have actually been achieved. In other words, in this passage
Galileo shows that he has always clearly understood the open and never concluded
character of scientiﬁc research. It was precisely this critical awareness that led him
to explain the scientiﬁc method at the time, making a deliberately loose but also
indispensable reference. A programmatic and deliberately open reference, through
which Galileo reminds us all how our objective knowledge of the world can only
be extended by always leveraging both the relative autonomy of our thinking, with
which we can precisely devise the most fruitful assumptions to dissect a certain
problem, which we must then subject to an equally rigorous experimental control,
since it is precisely the world, as we have seen, that has the function of conﬁrming,
or falsifying, our most daring forecasts and also our dearest and most challenging
theoretical assumptions.
Galileo: Detective or Scientist?
Hence Galileo did not wish to present a “recipe” of his own for the scientiﬁc method,
precisely because he was an excellent scientist who ventured into different and
quite disparate ﬁelds of scientiﬁc investigation, drawing from all these different
and contrasting scientiﬁc experiences of studying the real and effective world a
full critical awareness that the scientist, if he wishes to adhere in a profound and
fruitful way to his object of study, must always be able to pursue the object of his
investigations with all the intelligence and all the critical-hypothetical openness of
mind that such research always implies. In short: in the case of Galileo (as had
already happened with Euclid) there were no comfortable roads or royal paths
already traced that will enable us to comfortably reach knowledge, since every

24
F. Minazzi
cognitive conquest always implies a fully original and often completely new way
of being able to conceive one’s own scientiﬁc research in a hypothetically fruitful
way. The difﬁculty of the human condition consists precisely in this: no one explains
to humanity how the world is made, and for this very reason humanity can only
proceed through abductions, hypotheses, trial and error, to try to trace a new fruitful
path, in order to be able to critically extend its technical-cognitive patrimony.
In the light of all these considerations (at the same time Kantian, Vailatian and
Peircian), it is then easy to realize how the Galilean description of the scientiﬁc
procedure is largely congruent with the interlinking between hypothesis, abduction,
deduction and induction, and experimental control. Certainly in Peirce’s reﬂection
the suggestion of the hypothesis assumed as the basis of the hypothetical theory
occasionally seems to derive mainly from the inductive sphere, through an operation
of retroduction, while in Galileo, Kant and Vailati the theoretical hypothesis ex
suppositione seems to be more rooted in a free and creative conventional act of
thinking. Nor can it be overlooked that Peirce’s ideas on abduction are always very
articulate and adapt to a great variety of perspectives.
On the other hand, it should not be forgotten that from the time of John Stuart
Mill onwards, the term induction has come to have different meanings. It has also
come to be understood as reasoning that can identify various causal relations and
explanations. Peirce also distinguishes different types of induction. For example, by
means of induction, inductive generalizations can be made so that we can express
general laws. But with induction we can also subject certain hypotheses to a test
in order to conﬁrm or falsify them. When Peirce emphasizes the controlling role of
abductive hypotheses through induction, he is evidently referring to eliminative and
falsifying induction and not to induction as creative inference. One cannot therefore
forget the articulation of all these different meanings that induction has come to play
in different argumentative contexts.
But, in any case, in Galileo’s work these two different perspective accentuations
actually ﬁnd a fruitful critical balance because in his work and his epistemolog-
ical reﬂection on the way that science proceeds, an innovative epistemological
model of scientiﬁc knowledge emerges, within which the role of hypothetical
deduction is always and necessarily entwined with that of abduction, induction
and experimentation itself (cf. Magnani, 2017). Within these complex and highly
articulated dialectical ties between all these different components, however, it is
still hypothetical deduction that operates in a fruitful and decisive way, as Giovanni
Vailati rightly pointed out, again in his lecture on the history of mechanics, held at
the University of Turin in 1898:
It could seem paradoxical to say that the power of deduction in this regard is such that
through it we come to discover not only the more general and elementary properties that
we study, but even get to force them to be reproduced in our minds as if the laws that
regulate them and the properties they possess were far more simple and general than they
actually are. Nevertheless, this is literally true. So, for example, the fact that there are no
perfectly rigid bodies or absolutely incompressible ﬂuids does not prevent the physicist
from studying and determining which properties they should have if they were to exist,
or by means of deduction come to analyze them, connect them, and recognize them as
independent from one another, exactly as though they were properties of bodies which

Galilean Methodology and Abductive Inference
25
actually existed. In this way we obtain conclusion that are still applicable to bodies that are
not perfectly rigid or absolutely incompressible, provide that, of course, their lack of rigidity
or incompressibility is not such so as to make the difference between their actual behaviour
and that of their ideal ﬁctitious models so great that it generates errors of inconvenience
that are not compensated by the advantages provided by the performed simpliﬁcation.
Perfectly similar to this is the procedure that had to be followed by those who started
the study of shapes and ﬁgures of bodies, emancipating it from any consideration of the
other properties of the bodies themselves or the matter from which the ﬁgures were made.
This simple process of abstraction that made at the same time both possible and necessary
the applications of deduction to the research of properties of space, seems to us so simple
and natural that we almost cannot conceive that it required any labor or intellectual effort.
(Vailati, 2010, pp. 55–56, italics in the text)
For this reason, the scientist’s way of proceeding is not then comparable to that
generally adopted by the policeman or by an investigator à la Sherlock Holmes. As
was rightly pointed out by Massimo Bonfantini and Giampaolo Proni:
a detective is a riddle-solver, not an interpreter of “opaque” facts. His art of abduction must
thus belong to puzzle-solving, not to hermeneutics. Puzzle-solving, like detective work, calls
for keen observation and encyclopaedic knowledge in order to have at one’s ﬁngertips the
ﬁnite and predetermined set of immediate and clue-ﬁtting possible hypothetical solution.
Then one needs training in logical calculation, coolness, and patience for comparing and
selecting the hypotheses until one ﬁnds the line of interpretation supplying the only solution
that ﬁts all the clues. (Bonfantini & Proni, 1983, pp. 127–128, italics in the text)
Conclusions
For this basic reason, Holmes’s rigor is rooted, ﬁrst of all, in an “imperative of
simplicity and plausibility according to logical and empirical criteria ﬁrmly accepted
by society” and, secondly, it “obeys a complementary ban ‘never guess!’” On the
contrary, a scientist (but also a brilliant investigator like Poirot) must have the
ability to formulate bold hypotheses, precisely because he must always be able
to critically probe the opacity and passivity of the world, using the light of his
intelligence and rational understanding of reality. For this reason Poirot always
alerts his interlocutors by warning them that “the accepted version of certain facts
is not necessarily the true one”. For what reason? Because - to put it again with
Poirot - “you can really see only with the mind’s eye.” In this perspective, the facts
may also be in the public domain, but not the interpretations: “[T]here are many
ways of regarding, for instance, a historical fact. Take an example: many books
have been written on your Mary Queen of Scots, representing her as a martyr, as
an unprincipled and wanton woman, as a rather simpleminded saint, as a murderess
and an intriguer, or again as a victim of circumstance and fate. One can take one’s
choice” (Christie, 1943, p. 82). But in all these cases the scientist, like Poirot, but not
Sherlock Holmes, is precisely the one who ﬁnally manages to explain the various
facts by constructing an explanation capable of presenting his reasons together
with a demonstration. These reasons will never be deﬁnitive and ultimate, precisely
because ours is a knowledge that can always be explored and critically reviewed.

26
F. Minazzi
It is not a question of knowledge capable of being valid for eternity because it is
human knowledge made by mortal men, born to die (cf. also Magnani, 2017).
References
Agazzi, E. (2014). Scientiﬁc Objectivity and Its Contexts. Springer.
Bonfantini, A. M., & Proni, G. (1983). To Guess or not to Guess? (pp. 119–134). Eco-Sebeok.
Christie, A. (1943). Five Little Pigs. Collins.
Descartes, R. (1987). Discors de la méthode. Texte et commentaire par Étienne Gilson, Sixieme
édition. Librairie Philosophique J. Vrin.
Descartes, R. (1996). Oeuvres de Descartes. Publiées par Charles Adam & Paul Tannery. Librairie
Philosophique J. Vrin, 11 vols.
Eco, U., & Sebeok, T. A. (1983). The Sign of Three. Dupin, Holmes, Peirce. Indiana University
Press, Blomington and Indianapolis.
Feyerabend, P. K. (1975). Against method: Outline of an anarchistic theory of knowledge. NLB.
Galilei, G. (1962). Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems – Ptolemaic & Copernican
(S. Drake, Trans., A. Einstein, Foreword). University of California Press.
Galilei, G. (1968). Le opere di Galileo Galilei, Edizione Nazionale (A. Favaro, Ed.). G. Barbèra
Editore, 20 vols.
Galilei, G. (1992). Il Saggiatore. With an introduction and edited by Libero Sosio, Feltrinelli.
Galilei, G. (2016). The Assayer. Translated from the Italian by Stillman Drake. University of
Pennsylvania. (1st ed., 1957).
Geymonat, L. (1970–76). Storia del pensiero ﬁlosoﬁco e scientiﬁco. Garzanti, 7 vols.
Husserl, E. (1928). Logiche untersuchungen. Max Niemeyer, 3 vols.
Kant, I. (1786). Metaphysische Anfagsgründe der Naturwissenschaft. Translated and edited by
Michael Friedman. Cambridge University Press.
Magnani, L. (2017). The Abductive Structure of Scientiﬁc Creativity. An Essay on the Ecology of
Cognition. Springer.
Mason S. F., (1962). A History of the Sciences (New Rev. ed.). Macmillan Publishing Company.
Minazzi, F. (1994a). Galileo “ﬁlosofo geometra”. Rusconi.
Minazzi, F. (1994b). Il ﬂauto di Popper. Franco Angeli.
Minazzi, F. (2011). Giovanni Vailati epistemologo. Mimesis.
Minazzi, F. (2022). Historical epistemology and European philosophy of science. Rethinking
critical rationalism and transcendentalism. Springer. (in print).
Newton, I. (1728). De mundi systemate. Impensis J. Tonson, J. Osborn & T. Longman, Londini.
Peirce, C. S. (1960–1966). Collected Papers (A. W. Burks, Ed.). The Belknap Press of Harvard
University Press, 8 vols.
Pera, M. (1991). Scienza e retorica. Laterza. (English translation by Clarissa Botsford, The
Discourses of Sciences. University of Chicago Press, 1994).
Pollok, K. (2001). Kant “Metaphysische Anfagsgründe der Naturwissenschaft”. Ein Kritischer
Kommentar, Felix Meiner Verlag.
Russell, B. (1931). The Scientiﬁc Outlook. George Allen & Unwin.
Singer, C. (1959). A Short History of Scientiﬁc Ideas to 1900. Clarendon Press.
Vailati, G. (1911). Scritti di G. Vailati (1863–1909) (M. Calderoni, U. Ricci, & G. Vacca, Eds.).
Johann Ambrosius Barth Verlagsbuchhandlung- Successori B. Seeber Librai-Editori.
Vailati, G, (2010). Logic and Pragmatism. Selected essays (C. Arrighi, P. Cantù, M. De Zan, & P.
Suppes, Eds.). CSLI Publications.

