Entanglement
201
E
Secondary Literature
6. D. Home, M. A. B. Whitaker: Ensemble Interpretations of Quantum Mechanics. Phys. Rep.
210(4), 223–317 (1992).
Entanglement
Peter Mittelstaedt
Consider two proper quantum systems S1 and S2 with  Hilbert spaces H1 and H2,
respectively. If S1 and S2 are independently prepared in the pure states ϕ1 ∈H1 and
ϕ2 ∈H2, then the compound system S1 + S2 is correctly described in the tensor-
product Hilbert space H1 ⊗H2 by the product state ψ0 = ϕ1 ⊗ϕ2. In this case, the
state ψ0(S1 + S2) determines uniquely the states ϕ1 and ϕ2 of subsystems S1 and
S2, respectively.
In the general case, the state ψ(S1 +S2) of the compound system cannot be writ-
ten as a product of states referring to S1 and S2. (A state of this general kind can be
prepared by a convenient interaction between the two systems for a limited period of
time, as in a scattering process of S1 and S2.) However, even if the state ψ(S1 + S2)
(after the interaction) cannot be written as a product, it can be decomposed with re-
spect to two orthonormal systems in H1 and H2 into a weighted sum of products. In
particular, for any pure state ψ(S1 +S2) there exist orthonormal systems ξ(1)i ∈H1
and η(2)k ∈H2 that allow for a biorthogonal decomposition [1,2]
ψ(S1 + S2) =

i
ciξ(1)
i
(S1) ⊗η(2)
i (S2)
with one summation index i and complex numbers ci. In this state, the two systems
are called entangled provided that the sum consists of more than one term. The en-
tanglement [3] of S1 and S2 means in particular, that the compound state ψ(S1 + S2)
does not provide deﬁnite information about pure states of S1 and S2. We can only
say, that the probability pn for ﬁnding S1 in the state ξ(1)n(S1) and S2 in the state
η(2)n(S2) is given by the value pn = |cn|2.
Primary Literature
1. J. Von Neumann: Mathematische Grundlagen der Quantenmechanik (Springer, Berlin, 1932,
231–232)
2. J. M. Jauch: Foundations of Quantum Mechanics (Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, 1968,
179–182)

202
Entanglement Puriﬁcation and Distillation
3. ‘Entanglement’ is the English translation of the German word “Verschr¨ankung”, ﬁrst introduced
by E. Schr¨odinger: Die gegenw¨artige Situation in der Quantenmechanik. Die Naturwis-
senschaften 23, 807–49 (1935)
Entanglement Puriﬁcation and Distillation
Dagmar Bruß
In quantum mechanics, subsystems of a composite system can exhibit correlations
( correlations in quantum mechanics) that are stronger than any classical corre-
lations. Quantum correlations are also called entanglement [1]. A mixed quantum
state ϱ consisting of two subsystems (i.e. a bipartite state) can be either separable or
entangled. It is separable [2] if ϱ = 
i pi| ai⟩⟨ai | ⊗| bi⟩⟨bi |, with pi being proba-
bilities, and entangled otherwise. Entanglement can be quantiﬁed via entanglement
measures. Maximally entangled states are pure, and mixing generally decreases en-
tanglement. For further reading on entanglement, see [18–20] and general textbooks
on quantum information, e.g. [21–23].
In quantum information entanglement is viewed as a resource, see protocols such
as quantum teleportation [3], superdense coding [4] or entanglement-based quan-
tum cryptography ( quantum communication) [5]. Therefore, one is interested in
maximally entangled (pure) quantum states. In a realistic scenario, noise due to
interaction with the environment ( decoherence) or imperfect gate operations gen-
erally reduces both purity and entanglement of a given state. However, if one has
several copies of some less than maximally entangled state available, it is possible
that the two parties Alice (A) and Bob (B) concentrate or distill the entanglement,
by acting locally on their parts of the states (in their corresponding laboratories) and
exchanging classical information via a telephone. Thus, by using so-called local
operations and classical communication (LOCC) they can create fewer pairs with
higher entanglement and higher degree of purity. This process is called entangle-
ment puriﬁcation or entanglement distillation.
In this context, two topics are of interest: First, one wants to ﬁnd distillation
protocols that are as efﬁcient as possible. Second, one studies the possibility of
distillation. The “distillability problem” is phrased as: given a certain density matrix
ϱ, is it distillable or not?
For pure, but not maximally entangled states, it is possible to increase the entan-
glement by “local ﬁltering” [6]. Here Alice and Bob apply certain local operators,
and with some probability p arrive at a state with higher entanglement. However,
as it is not possible to increase entanglement on average by local operations, with
probability 1 −p the resulting state is less entangled than before. The ﬁrst puriﬁ-
cation and distillation protocols for mixed states were suggested in [7, 8]. In [7]
the given state ϱ is ﬁrst brought by random local rotations into a standard form,

