Q
Quantization (First, Second)
Helge Kragh
If there is a second quantization, presumably there is also a ﬁrst quantization. The
latter term refers to the ordinary application of the  Schr¨odinger equation to phys-
ical objects characterized by  wave functions, while the surrounding environment
(such as an electromagnetic ﬁeld) is treated classically. In second quantization the
environment is treated quantum-mechanically – the ﬁeld is quantized – and the wave
function is considered as a dynamical system subject to quantization. To put it dif-
ferently, one takes the wave function of an already quantized system and turns it
into an  operator.
The method of second quantization goes back to works of Paul A.M. Dirac and
Pascual Jordan in 1927. Dirac used a kind of second quantization to the electro-
magnetic ﬁeld by identifying the coefﬁcients of the Fourier expansion of the ﬁeld
as photon  creation and annihilation operators. He showed that there is a close
connection between quantum ﬁelds and statistics, and derived in this way that pho-
tons obey  Bose-Einstein statistics. Jordan went considerably further, in part alone
and in part in works together with coauthors. Whereas Dirac restricted his ap-
proach to photons ( light quantum), Jordan quantized  matter waves given by
the Schr¨odinger equation, ﬁrst non-relativistically and, with Eugene Paul Wigner in
1928, relativistically. Jordan’s quantization could be performed in two ways, lead-
ing either to  Bose-Einstein or  Fermi-Dirac statistics. In the latter case it gave a
quantum-mechanical justiﬁcation of Pauli’s  exclusion principle.
It was Jordan’s ﬁeld-quantization method that was taken up by other physicists
and used in quantum ﬁeld theory. It is also in Jordan’s paper of 1927 that the name
“second quantization” ﬁrst appears. Dirac, who did not appreciate Jordan’s method
of second quantization, did not consider the discreteness of matter a property de-
ducible from quantum mechanics. Jordan, on the other hand, claimed ambitiously to
have derived from quantization of matter ﬁelds the very existence of particles. “The
basic fact of electron theory, the existence of discrete electric particles, appears. . . as
a characteristic quantum phenomenon,” he wrote in 1927; “indeed, it means exactly
that matter waves occur only in discrete quantum states.”
Second quantization was discussed by Pauli at the 1927 Solvay congress. Ein-
stein did not like the idea and later told Oskar Klein that “second quantization, that
is sin squared.” In spite of some opposition, Jordan’s method was developed by
several physicists in the years around 1930. It was applied by Wolfgang Pauli and
Werner Heisenberg in their relativistic quantum theory of wave ﬁelds 1929–30 and
given a new formulation by V. Fock in 1932. Fock’s version allowed the translation
D. Greenberger et al. (eds.), Compendium of Quantum Physics: Concepts, Experiments,
509
History and Philosophy, c⃝Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2009

510
Quantization (Systematic)
of the formalism of second quantization into the language of conventional quantum
mechanics, which helped making the method more acceptable.
Primary Literature
1. P. A. M. Dirac: The Quantum Theory of the Emission and Absorption of Radiation. Proceedings
of the Royal Society of London A 114, 243–265 (1927)
2. P. Jordan: ¨Uber eine neue Begr¨undung der Quantenmechanik. Zeitschrift f¨ur Physik 44, 1–25
(1927)
3. V. Fock: Konﬁgurationsraum und zweite Quantelung. Zeitschrift f¨ur Physik 75, 622–647 (1932)
Secondary Literature
4. O. Darrigol: The origin of quantized matter waves. Historical Studies in the Physical Sciences
16, 197–253 (1986)
5. H. D. Zeh: There Is no “ﬁrst” quantization. Physics Letters A 309, 329–334 (2003)
Quantization (Systematic)
N.P. Landsman
The term quantization (in the sense described here) refers to attempts to con-
struct a mathematical description of a quantum system from its formulation as a
classical system (which is supposed to be known). Such attempts go back to the
pioneers of the old quantum theory (Planck, Einstein, Bohr, Sommerfeld); see [16]
and  Quantization: (First, Second). (The opposite procedure is the subject of the
 quasi-classical limit.)
The modern era of quantization theory started with Heisenberg’s famous paper
[5] from 1925, in which he proposed the idea of a ‘quantum-theoretical reinterpre-
tation (Umdeutung) of classical observables.’ All later work on quantization may be
said to consist of various different implementations of this idea.
The ﬁrst successful such implementation consisted of the position and momen-
tum  operators introduced by Schr¨odinger [9], i.e. ˆqj = xj and ˆpj = −iℏ∂/∂xj,
seen (in modern parlance) as unbounded operators on the  Hilbert space L2(R3).
Substituting these expressions into the classical Hamiltonian yields the left-hand
side of the  Schr¨odinger equation. These operators satisfy the so-called canonical
commutation relations
[ ˆpj, ˆqk] = −iℏδk
j,
(1)
along with [ ˆpj, ˆpk] = 0 and [ˆqj, ˆqk] = 0. This fact formed the basis of the various
equivalence proofs of  matrix mechanics and  wave mechanics that were given

