Probabilistic Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics
485
P
Probabilistic Interpretation of Quantum
Mechanics
Brigitte Falkenburg and Peter Mittelstaedt
The probabilistic interpretation of quantum mechanics is based on Born’s 1926
papers and von Neumann’s formal account of quantum mechanics in  Hilbert
space. According to Max Born (1882–1970),the quantum mechanical  wave func-
tion  does not have any direct physical meaning, whereas its square ||2 is a
probability [1]  Born rule, probability in quantum mechanics. According to Jo-
hann von Neumann (1903–1957), the scalar product (, O) of the pure states 
and O is the expectation value of the observable O, with spectral decomposition
O = OiP(Oi), in the state . The products (, P(Oi)) give the probabilities
of the possible measurement outcomes Oi [2].
(Spectral decomposition, see  Density operator; Ignorance interpretation; Mea-
surement theory; Objectiﬁcation; Operator; Propensities in Quantum Mechanics;
Self-adjoint operator; Wave mechanics).
The probabilistic interpretation holds for all quantum theories, i.e., for non-
relativistic or  relativistic quantum mechanics as well as for quantum ﬁeld theory.
In general, the probabilities for transitions between two quantum states are calcu-
lated from the density matrix of a quantum system. In  quantum ﬁeld theory, this is
the S-matrix. The squared S-matrix element or scattering amplitude gives the tran-
sition probability of a certain type of particle interaction. In this way, the S-matrix
is directly related to the effective cross section of particle reactions in  scattering
experiments.
In view of the probabilistic interpretation, it has been discussed for decades
whether quantum theory refers to individual quantum systems or only to ensembles
of identically prepared systems. The laws provided by the theory are statistical and
they are experimentally conﬁrmed to a very high degree of accuracy. But our scien-
tiﬁc language is concerned with individual systems: with the properties of a system,
its preparation, its development in time, and the measurement of its objective  ob-
servables. The difﬁculties in understanding the physical behavior of an individual
system on the basis of an essentially statistical theory gave rise to von Neumann’s
quantum theory of  measurement [2], to the  hidden variable theories, and to
the  many worlds interpretation. The latter had an enormous impact [3] on re-
cent attempts to make the relation between individual quantum systems and their
probabilistic behavior more precise, in the quantum theory of measurement [5–7].
Born’s Derivation
In order to interpret the wave function, Born generalized the  Schr¨odinger equation
from bound states inside the atom to a scattering problem, laying the grounds for

486
Probabilistic Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics
the quantum mechanics of scattering, too [1]. He applied the Schr¨odinger equation
to the stationary wave of an asymptotically free quantum state, in  correspon-
dence to the scattering of classical particles at the Coulomb potential. Born’s model
employs  wave-particle duality in the following sense. The scattering process is
calculated in the wave picture  Davisson–Germer experiment; Stern–Gerlach ex-
periment; Schr¨odinger equation, whereas the scattering outcomes are interpreted in
the particle picture  Franck–Hertz experiment.
In the wave picture, a plane wave ϕin is diffracted by a hydrogen atom  Bohr’s
atom model in the ground state 0. In ﬁrst approximation, the diffraction results in
a superposition of spherical waves ϕnm(q) with amplitudes fnm(θ) (which today are
called the scattering amplitudes, in the quantum theory of scattering):
ϕout =

nm
cnm

fnm(θ) ϕnm(q) d.
Here, q is the momentum transfer to the atom, nm indicates the state of the atom
after a transition from an electron from state n to state m, θ is the propagation
angle, and the integration is taken over the solid angle . Due to the momentum
transfer, the superposition ϕout is entangled with the ground state 0 and the excited
states nm(q) of the atom. A momentum transfer q may give rise to the excitation
of an electron in state n to the mth level. Accordingly, the momentum transfer is
quantized. This explains the results of the  Franck–Hertz collision experiment.
In the particle picture which applies to the detection of scattered particles, θ
is the scattering angle related to the momentum transfer q by q = |p −p′| cos θ.
Here, p, p′ is the particle momentum before and after the scattering. Born stated the
scattering outcomes in terms of an Ausbeutefunktion nm(q) which is identical to
the differential cross section ( scattering experiments) of the scattering:
nm(q) = c2
nm|fnm(θ)|2.
Finally, Born argued that the calculation is only consistent with the empirical scatter-
ing results if the squared amplitudes |nm(q)|2 of the outgoing waves are interpreted
as the probabilities for the scattering of particles of momentum p′ = p−q into direc-
tion θ. This interpretation relates the squared amplitudes of the partial waves ϕnm(q)
to the relative frequencies of the particles measured in direction θ. The relation be-
tween both quantities is a correspondence rule in an empiricist sense [8], i.e., a rule
for relating a theoretical concept to an observable quantity (in contradistinction to
Bohr’s  correspondence principle, which establishes inter-theoretic relations).
Problems of Born’s Approach
Born established the probabilistic interpretation by plausible reasoning, but obvi-
ously he did not give any proof. The probabilistic interpretation is merely opera-

Probabilistic Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics
487
P
tional, without being anchored in the axiomatic foundations of quantum mechanics.
(In von Neumann’s approach, it is established by the problematic  projection pos-
tulate [2].) Born’s model relates the squared amplitude of the scattered wave to the
observed particle detections. Here, “scattered wave” means the asymptotic behav-
ior of the diffracted wave ϕout, considered a long time after the interaction between
the incoming plane wave ϕin and the atom, as if after the interaction there was no
 entanglement between ϕout and the atom wave function .
Following Born, the quantum mechanical wave function determines the proba-
bilistic ensemble ( ensembles in quantum mechanics), whereas the measurement
outcomes are the individual events. This gave rise to a widespread pragmatic view
of  wave-particle duality, according to which the waves show up in the quantum
probabilities and the particles in the individual events [9].
In order to say more about the obscure relation between the wave and particle
pictures employed in the above model, Born’s papers [1] suggested also some philo-
sophical ideas beyond the probabilistic interpretation. He suspected whether there
might be quantities that causally ﬁx the measurement outcomes, giving, however, a
tentative answer in the negative. And he characterized Schr¨odinger’s wave function
 in terms of a ghost-like particle-guiding ﬁeld or pilot wave and the transfer of
energy or momentum in terms of corpuscle propagation. These ideas, which stem
from Albert Einstein (1879–1955) [10], were later taken up in the  hidden vari-
ables approach [4].
Born’s derivation of the probabilistic interpretation has crucial gaps. First, (theo-
retical) probabilities and (empirical) relative frequencies are different. Probabilities
may only be identiﬁed with relative frequencies in the limit of inﬁnitely many events
or measurement outcomes. Born neglected this point. Second, there is no explana-
tion of how a statistical law may emerge from an interaction of individual quantum
systems. Third, the quantum mechanics of scattering cannot explain why ﬁnally in-
dividual particles are detected. The quantum theory of measurement addressed these
questions, providing answers for the ﬁrst and second (see below), whereas the third
gap, the notorious measurement or objectiﬁcation problem, remains ( ignorance
interpretation, measurement theory) [6,7].
The Split-Beam Experiment
Let us consider the split-beam experiment of Fig. 1, which has been realized both
with photons ( light quantum) and with neutrons. The state ϕ of the incoming
photon is split by a beam splitter BS1 into two orthogonal components described by
orthonormal states ϕ(B) and ϕ(¬B). The two parts of the split beam are reﬂected
at two (fully reﬂecting) mirrors M1 and M2 and recombined with a phase shift δ
at a second beam splitter BS2. In the experiment there are two mutually exclusive
measuring arrangements: If the detectors D1 and D2 are in the positions (DB
1 , DB
2 )
one observes which way (B or ¬B) the photon came. If the detectors are in the
position (DA
1 , DA
2 ) one observes the interference pattern, i.e., the intensities which

488
Probabilistic Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics
Fig. 1 Photon split-beam experiment with beam splitters BS1 and BS2, two fully reﬂecting mirrors
M1 and M2, a phase shifter PS providing a phase shift δ, and two detectors D1 and D2 in mutually
exclusive positions (DA
1 , DA
2 ) and (DB
1 , DB
2 )
depend on the phase δ. In this experiment the object system S is prepared in the state
ϕ (which belongs to the two-dimensional Hilbert space H2 = C2). There are two
non-commuting observables, the path observable B with eigenstates ϕ(B), ϕ(¬B)
and the interference observable A with eigenstates ϕ(A) and ϕ(¬A). The probability
for B (to register a photon in DB
2 ) and for ¬B (to register a photon in DB
1 ) reads
p(ϕ, B) = p(ϕ, ¬B) = 1/2.
The probability for A (to register a photon in D1) and for ¬A (to register a photon
in D2) reads
p(ϕ, A) = cos2(δ/2)
and
p(ϕ, ¬A) = sin2(δ/2),
respectively. [7] This means that the relative frequency of photons detected at D1 is
approximately given by cos2(δ/2) and the relative frequency of photons detected at
D2 by sin2(δ/2).
The Measurement Process
The quantum mechanical probabilities in the split-beam experiment refer to the state
of the system after the measurement. According to the  measurement theory, we
consider both the object system S and the apparatus M as proper quantum systems
with Hilbert spaces HS and HM, respectively. Let us further assume that the systems
S and M are prepared in pure states ϕ ∈HS and  ∈HM. A measurement process
of the observable A and in particular of the observable P(A), which is given by the

Probabilistic Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics
489
P
projection operator P[ϕ(A)] of the eigenstate ϕ(A), can be described by a unitary
operator UA acting on the tensor product state ϕ >  of the compound system
S + M. After the measurement process the compound system is in the pure state
UA(ϕ > ), whereas the object system is given in the reduced  mixed state
WS(ϕ, A) = cos2 δ/2 P[(ϕ(A)] + sin2 δ/2 P[(ϕ(¬A)],
i.e., by a weighted sum of projection operators P[ϕ(Ai)] of states ϕ(Ai) with Ai ∈
{A, ¬A}.
The Probability Reproducibility Condition
The interpretation of the  mixed state WS(ϕ, A) of the object system after the pre-
measurement is usually given by the following probability reproducibility condition.
The (formal) probability distribution p(ϕ,Ai), Ai ∈{A, ¬A} induced by the prepa-
ration ϕ and the measured observable P(A) is reproduced in the statistics of the
post-measurement values (ZA, Z¬A) and states (A, ¬A) of the pointer. In case
of repeatable measurements, i.e., when a realistic interpretation of the observables
is possible, this means that p(ϕ,Ai) is also reproduced in the statistics of the states
(ϕ(A), ϕ(¬A)).
On the basis of these arguments we can now formulate the main problem. Let
an ensemble of systems S be given, which before the measurement are identically
prepared and after the premeasurement of A in the reduced  mixed state WS(ϕ, A).
Is it then possible to justify that the (formal) probability p(ϕ,Ai) is reproduced in
the statistics of the measurement results A and ¬A, respectively?
In order to answer this question, consider a large number of identically prepared
systems Si in states ϕi which are not eigenstates of the observable P(A). Let us fur-
ther assume that the unitary operator UA used for a measurement of the observable
P(A) fulﬁlls the calibration postulate for repeatable measurements. Then we know
that a measurement of the observable P(A) in case of the particular preparation ϕ(A)
leads with certainty to the states A and ϕ(A) showing the result A. Are we able to
show, on the basis of this probability free interpretation of quantum mechanics, that
for arbitrary preparations ϕ ̸= ϕ(A), ϕ ̸= ϕ(¬A), the formal probability p(ϕ, Ai)
induced by ϕ and P(A) is reproduced in the statistics of the measuring outcomes
Ai? If this is the case, then the probability reproducibility condition is a theorem of
the probability free theory and no longer an additional postulate.
The Emergence of Statistical Laws in Quantum Mechanics
Let us consider N independent systems Si with identical preparation ϕi as a com-
pound system SN in the tensor product state
(ϕ)N = ϕ1 ⊗ϕ2 ⊗... ⊗ϕN, (ϕ)N ∈H(SN),

490
Probabilistic Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics
where H(SN) is the tensor product of N Hilbert spaces H(Si). A premeasurement of
A transforms the initial state ϕi of each system Si into the mixed state
W i = p(ϕi, A) P[(ϕi, A)] + p(ϕi, ¬A) P[(ϕi, ¬A)]
with eigenstates ϕi(Ak) of A corresponding to results Ak. If A is measured on each
system Si, then the measurement result is given by a sequence {Al(1), ...Al(N)} of
system properties Al(i) and states ϕ(Al(i)), respectively, with an index sequence
l : = {l(1), l(2), ...l(N)} such that Al(i) ∈{Ak} = {A, ¬A}.
In the N-fold tensor product Hilbert space H(SN) of the compound system SN,
the special states (ϕ)N
l
= ϕ(1)(Al(1)) ⊗... ⊗ϕ(N)(Al(N)) with ϕ(i)(Al(i)) ∈H(Si)
form an  orthonormal basis. The relative frequency f N(k, l) of outcomes Ak ∈
{A, ¬A} in the state (ϕ)N
l is then given by f N(k, l) = 1/N  δl(i),k. We can now
deﬁne in H(SN) an operator “relative frequency of systems with properties Ak” by
f N
k := %f N(k, l) P[(ϕ)N
l ],
where the sum is taken over all sequences l. The eigenvalue equation of this operator
f N
k (ϕ)N
l = f N(k, l)(ϕ)N
l
then shows that the relative frequency of the measurement result Ak is an objective
property of SN in the state (ϕ)N
l
and given by f N(k, l). The eigenvalue equation
can also be written in the equivalent form
tr{P[(ϕ)N
l ](f N
k −f N(k, l))2} = 0.
After a premeasurement of P(A) a system Si is in a mixed state Wi. If N premea-
surements of P(A) are performed, then the state of the compound system SN is given
by the N-fold tensor product state
(W)N = W 1 ⊗W 2 ⊗... ⊗W N
of these mixed states W i. One easily veriﬁes that the expectation value of f N
k
in
this product state is given by p(ϕ, Ak). However, in general the state (W)N is not
an eigenstate of the relative frequency operator f N
k
with eigenvalue p(ϕ, Ak). This
means that
TN
k : = tr{(W)N(f N
k −p(ϕ, Ak))2} ̸= 0
and that the relative frequency of outcomes Ak is not an objective property of the
system SN in the state (W)N. In contrast to this somewhat unsatisfactory result
one ﬁnds that for large values of N the post-measurement product state (W)N of the
compound system SN becomes an eigenstate of the operator f N
k
and the value of
the relative frequency of results Ak approaches the probability p(ϕ,Ak). Indeed, one
ﬁnds after some tedious calculations [3, 5, 7]

Probabilistic Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics
491
P
TN
k : = 1/N p(ϕ, Ak)(1 −(ϕ, Ak))
and thus one ﬁnally obtains the desired result
lim
N→∞tr{(W)N(f N
k −p(ϕ, Ak))2} = 0.
This means that in the limit of an inﬁnite number N of systems the state (W)N is
an eigenstate of the operator f N
k of the relative frequency of results Ak and that the
compound system SN possesses the relative frequency p(ϕ,Ak) of Ak as an objective
property. In order to ensure this way of reasoning against mathematical objections
one has to guarantee that the overwhelming majority of index sequences l = {li}
are random sequences and that the contribution of the non-random sequences can
be neglected [5,7].
Primary Literature
1. M. Born: Zur Quantenmechanik der Stoßvorg¨ange. Z. f. Phys. 37, 863–867 (1926). M. Born:
Quantenmechanik der Stoßvorg¨ange. Z. f. Phys. 38, 803–827 (1926)
2. J. von Neumann: Mathematische Grundlagen der Quantenmechanik (Springer, Berlin 1932).
Engl. Transl. by R. Beyer: Mathematical Foundation of Quantum Mechanics (Princeton Uni-
versity Press, Princeton 1955)
3. B. S. DeWitt: The Many-Universes Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics, in: Foundations of
Quantum Mechanics. IL Corso, B. d’Espagnat (ed.) (Academic, New York 1971, 167–218)
4. D. Bohm: A Suggested Interpretation of the Quantum Theory in Terms of “Hidden” Variables,
I and II. Phys. Rev. 85, 166–179 (1952)
5. P. Mittelstaedt: The objectiﬁcation in the measuring process and the many worlds interpre-
tation. In: Symposium on the Foundations of Modern Physics (World Scientiﬁc, Singapore
1990, 261–279). P. Mittelstaedt: Quantum Measurement I. The Measuring Process and the
Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics. Int. J. Theor. Phys. 32, 1763–1775 (1993). P. Mittel-
staedt: The Emergence of Statistical Laws in Quantum Mechanics. In: M. Ferrero and A. van
der Merwe (eds.): New Developments on Fundamental Problems in Quantum Physics (Kluwer,
Dordrecht 1997, 265–274). P. Mittelstaedt: Quantum Mechanics without Probabilities. In: John
von Neumann and the Foundations of Physics. M. R´edei and M. St¨oltzner (eds.) (Kluwer,
Dordrecht 2001, 189–200)
Secondary Literature
6. P. Busch, P. J. Lahti, and P. Mittelstaedt: The Quantum Theory of Measurement (Springer,
Berlin 1991, 2nd edition 1996)
7. P. Mittelstaedt: The Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics and the Measurement Process
(Cambridge University, Cambridge Press 1998)
8. E. Nagel: The Structure of Science. Problems in the Logic of Scientiﬁc Explanation (Routledge
& Kegan Paul, London 1961)
9. B. Falkenburg: Particle Metaphysics. A Critical Account of Subatomic Reality (Heidelberg,
Berlin, New York, Springer 2007), p. 269–272, 278–289.
10. M. Jammer: The Conceptual Development of Quantum Mechanics (McGraw-Hill, New York
1966)

