S
Scattering Experiments
Brigitte Falkenburg
The scattering experiments of subatomic physics probe subatomic structure. The
scattering of well-known “probe particles” at some unknown structures gives rise
to two kinds of results: (i)  large-angle scattering and the discovery of pointlike
structures inside the atom ( Rutherford atom); (ii) the production of stable and
unstable particles, which are identiﬁed from characteristic particle tracks, scattering
events and resonances. In a scattering experiment, a particle beam of well-known
mass m and charge q is extracted with well-known momentum p and energy E
from a particle accelerator. In a ﬁxed-target m experiment, the particles are scattered
at some bulk of matter. In a collider experiment, two particle beams are crossed
in a small interaction zone and scattered off each other. The scattering results are
obtained by measuring the kinematic and dynamic properties of scattered particles
and counting their relative frequencies. The effective cross section obtained from
these relative frequencies corresponds to the transition probability of a quantum
mechanical scattering process.
History
In the earliest scattering experiments, radiation from a radioactive source was col-
limated and sent to some target [1]. The measurement results were obtained by
counting the relative frequency of particles scattered into direction θ. Around 1908,
Ernest Rutherford (1871–1937) and his assistants scattered α-particles at thin alu-
minium or gold foil and detected them using a simple scintillation method. As
discovered in 1903, a screen laminated with zinc sulﬁde starts to phosphoresce in
total darkness when it is exposed to α-rays. Observed with a magnifying glass, this
glow could be resolved into a variety of single light ﬂashes. In 1909, they found un-
expected large-angle scattering. In 1911, Rutherford postulated the atomic nucleus
as a pointlike scattering center inside the atom described by a Coulomb potential
 Rutherford Atom. Niels Bohr (1885–1962) developed this into his  Bohr’s
atomic model.
Scattering experiments at particle accelerators started in the 1950s [2]. In a
particle accelerator, charged particles ( electrons, protons, or heavy ions) are ac-
celerated by means of electric and/or magnetic ﬁelds to high energies. The ﬁrst
cyclotron, designed by Ernest Lawrence (1901–1958) in 1929 and running in 1930,
had magnetic poles of diameter 10 cm. A later 9-in. model accelerated protons
D. Greenberger et al. (eds.), Compendium of Quantum Physics: Concepts, Experiments,
676
History and Philosophy, c⃝Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2009

Scattering Experiments
677
S
beyond 1 MeV. After the second world war, the era of the big machines began.
The size of the machines was rapidly increased in order to increase the beam en-
ergy. In the 1950s, the ﬁrst proton synchrotrons were built. They generated beams
of 1–10 GeV. In the 1970s, 500 GeV were reached. Current machines (2007) gener-
ate beams of the order of 1–14 TeV, the LHC (large hadron collider) at CERN will
reach 14 TeV.
The bubble chamber, developed in 1952, was a particle detector and a hydrogen
target, too. In order to increase the efﬁciency, later experiments used heavy targets
equipped with electronic particle detectors (photomultipliers, spark chambers, drift
chambers, ˘Cerenkov counters, etc.) These detectors made the collider experiments
possible.
The scattering experiments in the 1950s–1970s showed that the atomic nucleus
is not pointlike [2, 3]. In the 1950s, the form factors of protons and neutrons were
measured. In addition, the resonances of many unstable particles were detected, giv-
ing rise to an increasing “particle zoo” which was tamed in terms of group theory. In
1967, large-angle scattering recurred in a collider experiment at the Stanford Linear
Accelerator (SLAC), indicating the quark constituents of the nucleon. In 1974, the
J/-resonance conﬁrmed the current standard model of particle physics by estab-
lishing the prediction of a “charmed” particle. ( Quantum ﬁeld theory). The high
energy scattering experiments of the 1980s and 1990s measured further particles
of the standard model, namely the b and t quark and the vector bosons W±,
Z0 of the electro-weak interaction. The current scattering experiments at the LHC
are designed to ﬁnding the last “missing link” of the standard model, the Higgs
boson, and particles beyond the standard model [4].
Scattering Models
1. Classical model: Charged massive particles, described as mass points, are scat-
tered at some potential without or with energy transfer, giving rise to elastic or
inelastic scattering. For elastic scattering, the trajectory of a particle is described
by the impact parameter b which depends on the scattering angle θ and the kinetic
energy E of the particle before and after the scattering. θ and E can be measured.
b is characteristic of classical scattering, it is the minimum distance of the scattered
particle to the scattering center or potential source (see  Rutherford atom).
2. Quantum mechanical model: A particle beam of well-deﬁned energy is pre-
pared as a  wave function in a momentum state that corresponds to a plane wave.
The scattering process is described by the quantum mechanics of scattering, in
Born approximation plus eventually some higher order(s) of perturbation theory.
The scattering is described in the wave picture  Davisson–Germer experiment;
Stern–Gerlach experiment; Schr¨odinger equation, whereas the measurement results
are described in the particle picture  Franck–Hertz experiment. Here, the usual
 probabilistic interpretation of quantum mechanics applies. The quantum mechan-
ical expectation value for a certain scattering outcome gives the probability of this

678
Scattering Experiments
kind of scattering process, which empirically corresponds to the relative frequency
of particle detections of this kind, for a large number of scattering events.
3. Relation between both models: In the quantum mechanical model, there is
neither a trajectory nor an impact parameter of the individual scattered particles. For
the Coulomb potential, however, the quantum mechanical and the classical model
give exactly the same probabilistic prediction, namely Rutherford’s formula.
Beam Energy and Spatial Resolution
Why were the machines made bigger and bigger in order to generate beams of higher
and higher energies? Due to the formal analogy between the wave equations of quan-
tum mechanics and optics, the spatial resolution of a particle beam is analogous to
that of the microscope: The smaller the wavelength of the rays of an observation
instrument, the smaller the structures that can be observed. Indeed the beam mo-
mentum p corresponds to a  de Broglie wavelength λ = 2πℏ/p. With increasing
beam energy E or beam momentum p, the de Broglie wavelength λ of the scattered
“probe” particles decreases. Therefore, the higher the beam energy is, the better
the spatial resolution of a scattering experiment will be, and hence the smaller the
spatial structures which may be measured.
The idea behind the design of collider experiments is also to increase the scatter-
ing energy. A ﬁxed target is at rest in the laboratory, whereas a collider experiment
brings two beams of high energy and opposite momentum into collision. In the
Fig. 1 Collider experiment: JADE detector for the measurement e+e−collisions, DESY [4, 3rd
edn., p. 63; by permission of the author.]

Scattering Experiments
679
S
center-of-gravity frame of the scattering process, in a collider experiment the beam
energy is much higher.
The Effective Cross Section
The characteristic quantity of the scattering is the effective cross section or (scatter-
ing) cross section. In the classical model, it is calculated from the angle dependence
of the impact parameter b. It has the dimension of an area and is expressed in units
of Barn (1 Barn = 10−24 cm2). In particle physics, the differential and total cross
section are distinguished.
The differential cross section dσ/dΩ is proportional to the probability of the
scattered particles per scattering angle θ respectively a corresponding inﬁnitesimal
solid angle dΩ. As an empirical quantity, dσ/dΩ is measured from the relative
frequency of particles which are scattered into a ﬁnite solid angle Ω. In the the-
oretical model, dσ/dΩ is deﬁned from the number of particles Nsc scattered into
the differential solid angle dΩ that belongs to the scattering angle θ, per differential
surface dF and per scattering center and taken in the formal limit of inﬁnitely many
incoming particles (NC = number of scattering centers):
dσ
dΩ =
lim
Nin→∞
Nsc
NinNC
· dF
dΩ .
The formal limit expresses the difference between probability and relative fre-
quency, i.e., the unavoidable gap between a probabilistic quantity and its empirical
basis. Here, probability is understood as the limit of relative frequency for very big
event numbers.
The number Nin of incoming particles per differential surface dF is usually
unknown, just as the number of scattering centers NST. Without these numbers,
dσ/dΩ is only known up to some normalization factor. In the classical model,
dσ/dΩ depends on the impact parameter b as follows:
dσ
dΩ =
b
sin θ · | db
dθ |
For the Coulomb potential V (r) = C/r, Rutherford’s formula is obtained (large
angle scattering).
The total cross section σ is obtained by integrating dσ/dΩ over all solid angles.
It expresses the probability of a certain kind of scattering process. It is a measure
for the “hit ratio” of some kind of particle reaction. In a simple mechanical model,
the total cross section may be illustrated as the effective surface of the reaction, that
is, as the area of an extended and impenetrable scattering center, at which negligibly
small probe particles bounce off just like balls at the slats of a garden fence. The
expression “effective cross section” or “scattering cross section” stems from this

680
Scattering Experiments
simple mechanical model. In general, σ or dσ/dΩ depends not only on geometric
quantities, but in addition on the kinetic energy of the probe particles and an eventual
energy transfer, in accordance with the relation between the beam energy and the
spatial resolution explained above.
In quantum mechanics, the effective cross section is deﬁned as an abstract prob-
abilistic quantity. In a scattering experiment, the effective cross section is measured
from the relative frequency of scattering events of a given type. In the effective
cross section of a kind of particle reaction, quantum ﬁeld theory meets experiment.
For a given kind of subatomic scattering process, σ and dσ/dΩ are proportional to
the quantum mechanical transition probability respectively to the corresponding el-
ement of the S-matrix. The cross section of a particle reaction is calculated from the
S-matrix of the interaction term of a quantum ﬁeld theory. The S-matrix gives the
transition probabilities of initial quantum states to ﬁnal quantum states. The initial
quantum states correspond to the incoming particles of a scattering experiment, i.e.,
the beam particles and the target nuclei. The ﬁnal quantum states correspond to the
outgoing diffracted wave or the scattered particles which are detected.
Data Analysis
The data analysis of a scattering experiment proceeds in the following steps [5].
Position measurements are made. They give rise to  particle tracks. The particle
tracks are interpreted in terms of scattering events. The particle tracks and scatter-
ing events are analyzed in terms of mass, charge, momentum, and various other
kinematic and dynamic quantities. The numbers of scattering events of a certain
dynamic type are counted. In a high energy scattering experiment, relativistic kine-
matics is used. From the relative numbers of scattering events for a given momentum
transfer ﬁnally the differential or total cross section of a certain particle reaction is
determined. Standard statistical methods are used to correct systematic errors of the
measurement, as far as possible, and to determine the measurement errors.
Primary Literature
1. E. Rutherford, J. Chadwick, C. D. Ellis: Radiations from Radioactive Substances (Cambridge
University Press, London, 1930) Repr.: Cambridge University Press, 1951)
Secondary Literature
2. A. Pais: Inward Bound, (Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1986, pp. 190–192)
3. M. Riordan: The Hunting of the Quark, (Simon & Schuster, New York, 1987, Chaps. 6–8)

Schr¨odinger Equation
681
S
4. D. H. Perkins: Introduction to High Energy Physics (Addison-Wesley, Menlo Park, CA, 3rd edn.
1987, 4th edn. 2000)
5. B. Falkenburg: Particle Metaphysics. A Critical Account of Subatomic Reality (Springer,
Heidelberg, 2007, Chaps. 3, 5)
Schr¨odinger Equation
Marianne Breinig
In non-relativistic quantum mechanics, the state of a physical system at a ﬁxed time
t0 is deﬁned by specifying a ket |ψ(t0)⟩belonging to the space ε. ε is a complex, sep-
arable  Hilbert space, a complex linear vector space in which an inner product is
deﬁned and which possesses a countable,  orthonormal basis. In the  Schr¨odinger
picture the time evolution of the state vector is governed by a partial differential
equation called the Schr¨odinger equation,
(iℏ∂/∂t)|ψ(t)⟩= H(t)|ψ(t)⟩,
which is a recipe for calculating |ψ(t)⟩when |ψ(t0)⟩is known. Here H is the
 Hamiltonian operator for the system.
The Schr¨odinger equation was developed by Erwin Schr¨odinger (1887–1961) in
1926 in coordinate representation, where the state vector is represented by a wave
function ψ(r,t). Schr¨odinger’s original aim was to ﬁnd a consistent mathematiza-
tion of De Broglie’s intuitive vision of the  electrons as standing  matter waves
around the nucleus. Like Louis de Broglie (1892–1987), Schr¨odinger hoped that
the  quantization of electron orbits would thus be reinterpretable as the result of
the condition that the electron waves around the nucleus are mutually reinforcing
themselves, i.e. as a periodicity constraint between the orbit 2πr equal to integral
multiples of their hypothetical wavelength λ. Because he knew from spectroscopic
ﬁne structure effects ( spectroscopy and Bohr-Sommerfeld’s model  Bohr’s
model) that the velocity of the electrons around the nucleus was actually quite
high, he ﬁrst attempted a relativistically invariant description, taking account of the
velocity-dependence of electron mass. A preserved Schr¨odinger-manuscript writ-
ten during a ski holiday in Arosa during Dec. 1925/ Jan. 1926 shows that he thus
ﬁrst ended up with an equation surprisingly close to the Klein-Gordon-equation,
found one year later by Oskar Klein (1894–1977) and Walter Gordon (1893–1939)
and then instrumental in Dirac’s  relativistic quantum mechanics of 1930. But
in early 1926, Schr¨odinger gave up his effort to formulate a theory of electrons
as standing waves in relativistically invariant terms and instead tried a simpler
non-relativistic variant (on the detailed reconstruction of Schr¨odinger’s pathway to
the equation named after him, differing strongly from the much more formal and

