T H E  F R O N T I E R S  C O L L E C T I O N
F R O M
O M E L EE C T
C
R O N S T O E L E P H
A N T S A N DD
N
E L E C TT I O N S F R O M
E L E CC T R
T R O NN S T O E L E P H
P H A N
A
T S A
N D
N D E L E
L E C T
C T I O
I
N S
N
F R OO M E L E C T
R O N S
N
T O  E LL E PP H A
H
N T S A N D  E L
E C T I O N
O N S F R
F
O M E L E C T R O
R
N SS T O
E L E P
E
H A N T
N TT S
A N D
E L E C T I O N S
F R O M E L EE
L
C T
C
R O
R O N S T O E L E P H
A N T SS A N D
N D E L E C T I O N S F R O M
E L E C T R O NN S T O E L E P H
P
A N T S A
N D E L E C T I O N S
N S F R O M E L E C T
R O N S T O E L E P H AA N T S A N D E LL
E C T I O N
O N S F RR O M
O M E L EE C T R O N S T O
E L E P H A N TT S
A N
A
D
E LL E C T I O NN S
F R O MM E L EE C T R O N S T O E LL E P H
A N T S A N D
N D
N D E L E C T I O N SS F R O M
E L E C T R O NN S T O
T O E L E P H A N
A N T S A
N D E L E
L E C T I OO N S
N
F R O M E LL E C T
Shyam Wuppuluri 
Ian Stewart  (Eds.)
FROM ELECTRONS    
       TO ELEPHANTS
  AND ELECTIONS
Exploring the Role of 
           Content and Context
With a Foreword by Nicholas Rescher

The Frontiers Collection
Series Editors
Avshalom C. Elitzur, Iyar, Israel Institute of Advanced Research, Rehovot, Israel
Zeeya Merali, Foundational Questions Institute, Decatur, GA, USA
Maximilian Schlosshauer, Department of Physics, University of Portland, Portland,
OR, USA
Mark P. Silverman, Department of Physics, Trinity College, Hartford, CT, USA
Jack A. Tuszynski, Department of Physics, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB,
Canada
Rüdiger Vaas, Redaktion Astronomie, Physik, bild der wissenschaft,
Leinfelden-Echterdingen, Germany

The books in this collection are devoted to challenging and open problems at the fore-
front of modern science and scholarship, including related philosophical debates. In
contrast to typical research monographs, however, they strive to present their topics
in a manner accessible also to scientiﬁcally literate non-specialists wishing to gain
insight into the deeper implications and fascinating questions involved. Taken as a
whole, the series reﬂects the need for a fundamental and interdisciplinary approach
to modern science and research. Furthermore, it is intended to encourage active
academics in all ﬁelds to ponder over important and perhaps controversial issues
beyond their own speciality. Extending from quantum physics and relativity to
entropy, consciousness, language and complex systems—the Frontiers Collection
will inspire readers to push back the frontiers of their own knowledge.
More information about this series at https://link.springer.com/bookseries/5342

Shyam Wuppuluri · Ian Stewart
Editors
From Electrons to Elephants
and Elections
Exploring the Role of Content and Context

Editors
Shyam Wuppuluri
Einstein Forum
Potsdam, Germany
Ian Stewart
Mathematics Institute
University of Warwick
Coventry, UK
ISSN 1612-3018
ISSN 2197-6619 (electronic)
The Frontiers Collection
ISBN 978-3-030-92191-0
ISBN 978-3-030-92192-7 (eBook)
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-92192-7
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature
Switzerland AG 2022
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are solely and exclusively licensed by the Publisher, whether
the whole or part of the material is concerned, speciﬁcally the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse
of illustrations, recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microﬁlms or in any other physical way, and
transmission or information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar
or dissimilar methodology now known or hereafter developed.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this publication
does not imply, even in the absence of a speciﬁc statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant
protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
The publisher, the authors and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information in this book
are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the publisher nor the authors or
the editors give a warranty, expressed or implied, with respect to the material contained herein or for any
errors or omissions that may have been made. The publisher remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional
claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
This Springer imprint is published by the registered company Springer Nature Switzerland AG
The registered company address is: Gewerbestrasse 11, 6330 Cham, Switzerland

Foreword
Natural reality—and in consequences our knowledge of it—is organised hierarchi-
cally, in successive level of increasing aggregation, complexity: as per particles,
atoms, molecules, condensed matter or cells, systems, organisms, communities or
words, sentences, paragraphs, books and the like. Every level of such a systemic
hierarchy has its characteristic regularities and laws descriptive of the phenomena
encompassed at this level. Often, the phenomenal occurring at one level can be
derived from and explained by those of its lower-level constituents. But not always.
For everywhere, one encounters conditions and modes of operation that are emer-
gent in being characteristic innovations not accounted for in terms of the modus
operandi of lower-level phenomena. Thus, not all group behaviour can be accounted
for by individual psychology, nor is all of social choice reducible to individual pref-
erences. Systemic complexity stands in the way of constituent-geared ‘reductive
explanations’. (Even in mathematical logic, we encounter systems that are omega-
inconsistent in that while each individual constituent possessed a critical factor the
systemic generalist that this factor is all pervasive is false and the move from each
to every inappropriate.)
Such reduction-resistant emergent higher-level phenomena have profound impli-
cations for our understanding of science. For the task of scientiﬁc understanding here
becomes far more challenging. When our cognitive grasp of the lowest level of the
hierarchy is sufﬁcient, we need not worry about those super-ordinate levels. However
interesting in itself, systemic integration and holistic syntheses are now dispensable.
But since this is not in general the case, the demands of understanding grow exponen-
tially with hierarchical assent, and the challenges of scientiﬁc understanding multiply
accordingly.
The phenomenology of emergence accordingly transforms our understanding of
science itself. The classical Greek model of geometry as a paradigm science where
everything needful is achieved by the understanding of the basics becomes untenable
as entirely different models of scientiﬁc understanding are called for.
v

vi
Foreword
The illuminating discussions of the present volume show how this situation arises
recurrently through the range of scientiﬁc endeavour, constituting an illuminating
Leitmotif across the entire range of inquiry into the ways of the natural and social
realms.
Pittsburgh, USA
February 2022
Nicholas Rescher

Acknowledgements
We are but dwarfs mounted on the shoulders of giants,
so that we can see more and further than they; yet not
by virtue of the keenness of our eyesight, nor through
the tallness of our stature, but because we are raised
and borne aloft upon that giant mass.
—Bernard of Chartres
Assembling a volume with the length and breadth of this is no cakewalk. Let me begin
by thanking everyone who has helped me do so. I shall do this in a chronological
way. When I began working on this project for my Albert Einstein fellowship—with
a preliminary structure and list of interested authors in my hand—I approached Prof.
Ian Stewart to ask if he would be interested in joining this endeavour as a co-editor.
Not only did he graciously agree to be a part of this project by commenting that the
title I choose ‘From Electrons, Elephants and Elections’ has certain Je ne sais quoi
to it, but given his association with diverse domains of knowledge, he could quickly
understandthecontent andcontext ofthisproject,reminiscingandindeedmentioning
about the content/context relationship he has been reﬂecting upon since a very long
time. His encouragement, support and kindness are acknowledged herewith. I would
then like to acknowledge Prof. Nicholas Rescher for graciously providing me with
a foreword for this volume. Dr. Angela Lahee has been a constant source of encour-
agement since the time I started to publish with Springer. Her valuable inputs, her
constant support and her kindness are acknowledged herewith. I would also like to
thank Springer editorial staff for their support during the typesetting.
Given the unprecedented times during which this volume was assembled, I reserve
my heartfelt gratitude to all of the authors for their efforts and time. My sincere
thanks to Prof. John Heil, Prof. Gianfranco Minati, Prof. Luciano Boi and Prof.
Ehtibar Dzhafarov for being extremely supportive and encouraging. I would like to
thank Prof. Jose Acacio de Barros, Prof. Decio Krause and Prof. Nana Last for their
willingness to work on another volume of mine—it has been a pleasure collaborating
with them. I am very grateful to Prof. Graham Priest for agreeing to contribute an
article to the volume. His books are storehouses of practical wisdom to me and to
vii

viii
Acknowledgements
many others, from time to time. I would also like to thank Prof. Tim Maudlin for his
kindness and for his contribution. My deep gratitude to Prof. Denis Noble for his
support, words of wisdom and warmth. I would also like to acknowledge the kindness
of Prof. Leonardo Chiatti and am very grateful for his association and friendship.
Much of this work has been done during my Albert Einstein fellowship and in the
context of that I would like to thank Prof. Susan Neiman and other members of the
board for having faith in me. I am particularly indebted to Susan for patiently replying
and sharing her inspirational perspectives on various things in life. I thank the staff of
Einstein Forum for their hospitality and warmth: which I can never forget! I am also
thankful to Prof. David Shulman for encouraging me and for being an inspiring peace
activist—we all look up to! Prof. Lorraine Daston and Prof. Wendy Doniger have
been so generous towards me and I can’t thank them enough. I am also very indebted
to Dr. Krystyna Kauffmann for making my stay at Caputh unforgettable and I also
thank the people of Caputh and around for treating me with love and compassion.
Finally, words cannot express my gratitude towards Thích Nh´ât Ha.nh and Tâm Liên
Ðài for inspiring me to witness the intricate interconnectedness of reality. During
the moments of despair, I keep returning to Nh´ât Ha.nh’s books to ﬁnd hope, solace
and meaning—and they acted as my refuge all through. ‘The wave lives the life of
a wave, and at the same time, the life of water. When you breathe, you breathe for
all of us’ Nh´ât Ha.nh writes. May we continue to breathe so, reassuring each other
that all of our lives matter and spread joy and well-being everywhere we go.
Einsteinhaus, Caputh
Shyam Wuppuluri

Introduction
The Context for this Volume
Electrons, elephants, elections... what connects them? Aside from all three of the
words occurring within a span of ten pages in the Oxford English Dictionary? Their
etymology sheds little light. ‘Electron’ comes from the ancient Greek ἤλεκτρον,
meaning amber. ‘Elephant’ derives from the Latin elephantus, whose earlier origins
are shrouded in mystery—possibly African. ‘Election’ comes from Latin eligere: to
pick out. That makes more sense.
Whatbringsthemtogetherinthiscollectionofessaysisadeepphilosophicalissue:
the relation between fundamental physics and the world in which we live. Many of
us have seen an elephant, perhaps ridden on one; many of us have taken part in an
election, as either voter or candidate. Many have seen, or own, amber, but no one has
seen an electron. Not even physicists. We infer the existence of electrons indirectly
and deduce that deep down inside every elephant there are enormous numbers of
electrons. Similarly, deep down inside every election are numerous voters, and again
physics tells us that deep down inside every voter there are enormous numbers of
electrons. An elephant is estimated to contain about 1031 electrons, mostly bound up
in its atoms; a voter has a mere 1029.
Today, none of this is particularly contentious. What remains debatable is the argu-
ment that since particles like electrons underpin all material objects—in particular
elephants, electors, and through their actions, elections—the entire material world,
in all its richness and variety, is a consequence of 17 types of ‘fundamental’ particles,
interacting in vast numbers according to a small number of basic rules. We used to
call such rules ‘laws of nature’, but we no longer use that term because it claims too
much. Now what once were laws are often demoted to the status of models. Indeed,
the most fundamental rules in today’s particle physics constitute the drably named
standard model.
The chain of reasoning that leads from lowly electrons to majestic pachyderms—
let us leave elections aside for the moment to focus on a single topic—is long and
convoluted. We can traverse it ‘bottom-up’: electrons and similar particles combine
ix

x
Introduction
to make atoms, which make molecules such as amino acids and DNA, which make
proteins and other biomolecules, which make chromosomes and mitochondria and
nuclei, which make cells, which make organs such as hearts, lungs, skin and trunks,
which make an elephant. Alternatively, we can view the same sequence ‘top-down’,
passing from elephant to electron. Roughly speaking, most scientiﬁc discoveries
are made top-down, and most scientiﬁc explanations are bottom-up. So, our title is
about reasoning processes in science and their contribution to human knowledge and
because much the same philosophical issues arise in any area of human intellectual
enquiry, the contributions of the humanities, social sciences and arts.
Read in either direction, this type of causal sequence exempliﬁes the method of
reductionism, in which the behaviour of a whole is inferred from that of its constituent
parts, and how these parts interact. The scientiﬁc method has evolved to be heavily
reductionist. Indeed, the sense in which ‘fundamental’ particles are fundamental
reﬂects reductionist methodology. Immediate questions are: Does it have to be that
way? What alternatives are there? How successful is reductionism anyway? Does it
really construct a connected causal chain from 1031 electrons to one elephant? If you
know enough about electrons, can you predict an elephant?
Such questions inspire other related ones and focus attention on a loosely
connected set of abstract concepts: content, context, emergence, reductionism,
holism. They draw attention to big issues of human existence: the nature of life,
consciousness, free will, language, the bizarrely indeterminate world of the quantum,
and the vast and enigmatic cosmos of which we experience only a minuscule part.
How do we currently go about understanding these issues? Are there hidden gaps in
our knowledge? How might we proceed instead? You will ﬁnd a rich variety of anal-
yses of all of these things within this volume. A few pages later, I will summarise a
few key features, but ﬁrst, let me indulge in some personal remarks, to help establish
a context for this book.
About 30 years ago, I became aware that many of the questions that intrigued me
could all be viewed as variations on a deeper theme: the relation between content
and context. It was a time when mathematicians and scientists were coming to grips
with the natural world in a radically new way: the behaviour of nonlinear dynamical
systems. Very broadly, these are systems in which twice the input does not yield
twice the output. However, the real world is often nonlinear. If one pill is good for
you, two need not be twice as good for you; they might even kill you. If one bag
of fertiliser increases a farmer’s yield of crops by ten per cent, two bags do not
necessarily increase it by twenty per cent and might even decrease it. An extra road
can cause more trafﬁc congestion, not less. A global increase in mean temperatures
does not make everywhere on the planet slightly warmer, all the time: it causes
massive heatwaves, cold snaps and huge ﬂoods. But evolutionary survival often
depends on a rapid response rather than an accurate one, so default human thinking
is often quick, dirty and relentlessly linear.
Moreover, before the twentieth century, most models in applied mathematics and
mathematical physics were based on linear mathematics. The reasons are straight-
forward. Linear problems are, by and large, mathematically tractable. Nonlinear

Introduction
xi
ones are not, at least, with the traditional methods of explicit formulas and calcula-
tions done by hand. So, science was full of linear approximations to reality: small
swings of a pendulum, shallow water waves, slowly moving objects. Even elephants
whose mass can be neglected. There were some successes in the nonlinear realm, of
course; the poster child is probably Newton’s law of gravitation and his explanation
of Johannes Kepler’s discovery that Mars’s orbit is an ellipse. But such successes
were rare compared to the enormous progress being made in the linear realm.
Around 1960, all that changed. Theoretical advances made in the late nineteenth
and early twentieth centuries, such as Henri Poincaré’s discovery of chaos in the
three-body problem, suddenly became practical because of the rapid increase in
speed and power of electronic computers. Models that could not be solved by tradi-
tional methods yielded easily to new technology and brute-force calculation. The
counterintuitive nature of nonlinear systems promptly became unavoidable: it stared
you in the face from your computer screen, even if at ﬁrst it seemed largely incom-
prehensible. Simple equations led to behaviour of huge complexity—in a mathemat-
ical ideal, inﬁnitely complex. Jargon like ‘chaos’ and ‘complex adaptive systems’
became widespread. Scientists came to realise that the world is far more complicated,
far more interesting, but far more puzzling, than they had imagined. Attention turned
in particular to complex systems and emergent phenomena, where an interconnected
system behaves in ways that seem to transcend the behaviour of its components. For
example, an elephant’s manifest attributes are apparently unrelated to the quantum
physics of electrons, even though most physicists would maintain that in principle
those attributes are consequences of the rules of the quantum world. More precisely,
an elephant cannot ﬂout the quantum rule book—which is entirely reasonable, but
not quite the same thing.
Much of today’s science is reductionist. The metaphor of ‘levels of description’
is rampant, with elephants at the top and electrons at the bottom. Reductionist expla-
nations are therefore said to be ‘bottom-up’: behaviour on one level is explained
by reducing it to interacting components on a lower level. Chemistry is reduced to
molecules, which are reduced to atoms, which are reduced to electrons, protons and
neutrons, which are reduced to quarks. Ecosystems are explained in terms of popu-
lations of organisms, organisms are explained in terms of genetics, and genetics is
explained in terms of DNA and proteins, which, in turn, are explained by molecules,
atoms, electrons, etc. Causality runs from bottom to top: electrons determine how
an elephant behaves, but elephants cannot inﬂuence the physics of electrons. So it is
said.
In practice, such reductions are easier to accomplish than the converse: showing
that the lower-level system really does explain the higher-level system from which
it was reduced. For example, it is not known how to calculate the properties of
atoms beyond hydrogen by a rigorous use of quantum equations. Not even helium.
The behaviour of a molecule cannot be inferred with complete conﬁdence from its
atoms. How a protein folds cannot be calculated rigorously from its amino acid
sequence. Deducing the phenotype of an organism from its genome seems hope-
less. The dynamics of galaxies cannot be calculated, even numerically, from the
forces exerted by gravity on its constituent stars, even if we simplify them to point

xii
Introduction
masses. The chain from electron to elephant may consist of massive links, but their
connections are weak.
The concept of emergence reﬂects this difﬁculty. In an extreme form, it denies any
causal connection between electron and elephant, in which case it disputes the basis
of reductionism. In its most common form, it accepts that in principle there is a causal
connection, but one that is so complicated that in practice it would be impossible to
describe it in detail. I prefer a less extreme deﬁnition: emergence is a causal network
whose behaviour is deterministic but computationally intractable: even if in principle
1031 electrons imply an elephant, no one could possibly do the calculations using
the equations of particle physics. Whatever the deﬁnition, there is often convincing
evidence to suggest, with high plausibility, that the low-level description does imply
what is observed on the higher level. However, such deductions are always partial,
lack mathematical rigour and are based on approximations and assumptions whose
validity is open to question. Ultimately, what ought to be rigorous logical deductions
are replaced by leaps of faith. ‘Handwaving’, in mathematicians’ parlance.
An example contributing the third component of our title is an election. In prin-
ciple, each voter’s decision is the result of a complex ﬂow of electrons (and other
stuff) in his or her brain. With enough prior knowledge, we merely have to solve
Schrödinger’s equation for a sufﬁciently large system to predict each voter’s deci-
sion.Somehowtheﬁnalresultemergesfromtheﬂowsofallthoseelectrons.However,
no one in their right mind would use that method to try to forecast who will become
the next President. The calculations would be almost inﬁnitely beyond the capabil-
ities of even the fastest supercomputer. There may well be a clear chain of widely
accepted scientiﬁc theories that leads from electrons to the winning candidate, but
every link in that chain rests on unproved beliefs.
An alternative approach, taking pretty much the opposite approach, is holistic (or
top-down) thinking. Consider an ecosystem or an organism as a whole, and seek
patterns on the same scale. Model a galaxy not as 400 billion point masses (stars) but
as an object in its own right with its own properties (spiral and elliptic). Model a hurri-
cane not as a continuum of tiny ﬂuid particles, but as a structured form of moist air and
water vapour. Model an election in terms of probability distributions of voter prefer-
ences and mass psychology. Model an elephant as an intelligent autonomous agent
interacting with its environment. Seek patterns on the same scale as the phenomenon
of interest.
Reductionism is largely about content, whereas holistic models are more attuned
to context. The articles in this volume examine the relationship between the two,
along with issues that intertwine with them, such as emergence, from an enormous
variety of points of view. The key point, to my mind at least, is that reductionism
and holism, content and context, are not opposing philosophies. They work best in
tandem. Why restrict yourself to one tool when two are available?

Introduction
xiii
Blind Men and Elephants
Back to 1990 and my philosophical epiphany. My interest in the mathematics of
chaos led to a meeting with the biologist Jack Cohen, which started a collaboration
that continued until his death in 2018. Despite working in different ﬁelds, we found
many common interests, ranging from science ﬁction fandom to the philosophy of
science. Together, we examined issues such as chaos, complexity and emergence in
several joint books, starting with The Collapse of Chaos and Figments of Reality. It
all began at that ﬁrst meeting when Jack asked me an intriguing question: If nonlinear
systems are enormously complex and unpredictable, but also ubiquitous, how can
living organisms possibly work? This innocent question led into much deeper waters
than either of us expected, and before examining the articles contributing to this
book, I want to set the scene by sharing one of Jack’s early insights. It was inspired
by a cartoon he had come across in a science ﬁction magazine. Not this cartoon: the
next one. But we have to start with this one.
Blind men and the elephant, version 1
You probably know the story. It originated on the ancient Indian subcontinent, and
one of the earliest versions occurs in the Buddhist text Udana 6.4. Several blind men,
who have never before encountered an elephant, touch an unknown object and report
their deductions. One declares it to be a rope, another a tree, the third maintains that
it is a wall, the fourth a leaf, the ﬁfth a spear and the sixth a snake.
‘Aha!’ says a wise man passing, ‘I know what it is! It’s an elephant’.
To quote Wikipedia: ‘The moral of the parable is that humans have a tendency
to claim absolute truth based on their limited, subjective experience as they ignore
other people’s limited, subjective experiences which may be equally true’. It is a neat
piece of social relativism, but I think it misses the point. The lesson of the blind men
and the elephant depends on how wise the wise man really was.

xiv
Introduction
Let me contrast this interpretation with the cartoon in the science ﬁction magazine.
This cartoon told much the same story, but with a twist. Four blind men each declare
the object to be an elephant. Actually, one holds a snake, another is touching a tree,
the third is touching a wall, and the fourth is holding a rope.
Blind men and the elephant, version 2
Both cartoons, so Jack told me, are about content and context. The content—the
experiences of the blind men—is the same in both cases. But in the ﬁrst cartoon,
the context they are assuming does not include elephants, so they interpret each
separate experience as best they can, in the context of what they do know. In the
second cartoon, the context does include elephants, so each blind man interprets his
experience as an elephant, even though it is not. If the wise man assumes the right
context, his synthesis is correct; if not, it is not.
Science, Jack suggested, can be seen in both ways. Substitute ‘electron’ for
‘elephant’, and the ﬁrst cartoon illustrates the early days of particle physics, when
the concept of an electron had not yet crystallised. The experience for an ancient
Greek was the ability of amber to attract small objects when rubbed against fur. (As I
said at the start, the ancient Greek word for amber is ἤλεκτρον.) In the 1700s, Charles
François du Fay found that while amber rubbed with wool attracts a charged gold
leaf, glass rubbed with silk repels it. His interpretation was of two ﬂuids: vitreous
ﬂuid emanating from glass rubbed with silk and resinous ﬂuid from amber rubbed
with wool. These ﬂuids, which neutralise each other when combined, he called elec-
tricity. Benjamin Franklin’s view, ten years later, was that electricity is a single ﬂuid
that can exist in two opposite states: positive and negative. The ﬂuid ‘carries’ a charge
and can have an excess of it or a deﬁcit. George Stoney, doing experiments in elec-
trolysis, decided that the electric ‘ﬂuid’ is not a continuum: there is a ‘single deﬁnite
quantity’ of electricity, the charge on a single ion. But he also thought these charges
are permanently attached to atoms. In 1881, Hermann von Helmholtz interpreted

Introduction
xv
the observations as evidence for ‘behaviour like atoms of electricity’. Stoney named
these elementary charges electrolions, but soon changed the name to electrons.
As in the ﬁrst cartoon, the blind men had interpreted their observations very
differently. One had perceived an attractive force, another two ﬂuids, a third one
ﬂuid with two opposite properties, a fourth something more granular than a ﬂuid, a
ﬁfth something like a lot of atoms, but different. At that point, a passing wise man
(Sir Joseph John Thomson, building on the work of dozens of others) cut through the
confusion and synthesised all of these disparate observations into a single thing: an
exceedingly diminutive particle equipped with a negative electrical charge. Now the
blind men were ﬁnally able to perceive their metaphorical elephant as an entity in its
own right, an electron. It was the same name that Stoney had used, but yet again it
was being interpreted differently.
That was not the end of the story. With the advent of quantum mechanics, light,
hitherto considered to be a wave, sometimes behaved like a particle, the photon.
Conversely an electron, thought to be a particle, could also behave like a wave.
Matter on its smallest scales could be both wave and particle, though never both
at once. Today’s view is even subtler and technically different. The wise man has
moved on, and his homely wisdom is now hedged with obscure caveats and shrouded
in mathematical formulas.
The second cartoon invites us to question this entire train of reasoning. The reso-
lution of the different perceptions centres upon their content. The unspoken assump-
tion is that the same ‘it’ explains all of the observations, and that the very different
contexts for the experiments—rub amber with wool, perform electrolysis—do not
affect the thing itself, only how we observe ‘it’. If this assumption is wrong, then we
are equating several unknowns and creating a phantom. The philosophical question
is whether ‘the’ electron actually exists. Is there truly a single object that has all of
the different attributes experienced by all those scientists over the ages—or is the
world more like the second cartoon, with different attributes being combined to offer
the illusion of a single underlying cause?
Physicists like unity. Albert Einstein spent much of his later life trying to combine
the two great physical theories, relativistic gravity and quantum physics, into a
single uniﬁed ﬁeld theory. He never succeeded, and neither has anyone else, yet. But
the search continues with, if anything, even greater fervour: superstrings, quantum
gravity, etc. On the other hand, the universe might be what Jack and I call the ‘glass
menagerie’: each phenomenon is explicable by a theory of limited validity, but no
underlying uniﬁcation of those theories is possible. As Banesh Hoffmann wrote in
The Strange Story of the Quantum, at one time scientists ‘went around with woebe-
gone faces sadly complaining that on Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays they must
look on light as a wave; on Tuesdays, Thursdays, and Saturdays, as a particle. On
Sundays they simply prayed’. In a glass menagerie world, that is the best we can
ever do.
For electrons, the verdict of physics is clear and resounding: electrons are real
objects—in some sense. Philosophers might dispute this conclusion and make a
reasonable case for doing so, or question what that sense is, but the same concept
explains so many diverse observations and experiments that from the point of view

xvi
Introduction
of physics, ‘the’ electron clearly exists. More precisely, the uniﬁed concept of an
electron provides a consistent mathematical context in which all of the observations
and experiments make sense. And that is what physicists mean by ‘exist’. Although
we cannot observe an electron directly, we can infer its existence in this sense using
several independent lines of evidence. Just as we infer that the Sun’s interior is
extremely hot without ever having been there, even though for all we can tell it might
be hollow, cold and surrounded by an alien force ﬁeld that emits the appropriate
radiation.
Less contentiously, we can ask similar questions about other basic concepts of
modern science where the answers are less clear-cut. Fervently held theories where
today’s trumpeting elephants might turn into tomorrow’s brick walls and ropes are
not hard to ﬁnd. Historical examples abound. Early experiments on how materials
burn were interpreted as evidence for an unknown substance, phlogiston, emitted
by a burning object. The phlogiston theory, proposed in 1667, was the conventional
wisdom for just over a century. Then, it turned out that burnt matter weighs more
than unburnt, provided all the products of burning are accounted for. Phlogiston was,
in effect, negative oxygen. Indeed, for a time oxygen was named ‘dephlogisticated
air’.
More recently, cosmologists have spent years (and huge sums of cash) seeking
direct evidence for ‘dark matter’, which they believe must exist in order to explain
various gravitational anomalies in galaxies and other celestial objects. Even though
dark matter must outweigh conventional ‘baryonic’ matter ﬁvefold, no dark matter
has yet been found. Some of the anomalies may have other explanations, some may
even be modelling errors, but right now, cosmology’s walls and ropes and snakes
have been lumped together into an entity named ‘dark matter’. This may well be a
stroke of genius akin to the electron, or it may be cosmic phlogiston. Only time will
tell.
Science has a habit of focusing on content rather than context. The successes of
molecular biology in the second half of the twentieth century led to an overemphasis
on genes as the sole explanation for the form and behaviour of organisms, only now
being reversed. The relevant context for dark matter is almost universally assumed
to be Albert Einstein’s theory of general relativity, or, when appropriate, the older
Newtonian theory of gravity, which is often entirely adequate for calculations. If you
do not question this context, then the observations that led to the hypothesis of dark
matter are puzzling. Within that context, the most plausible explanation is invisible
matter formed by a hitherto unknown particle or particles, so everyone looks for this
amazing new kind of matter. Few question the context, and those that do are largely
ignored, even when they suggest plausible alternatives or point to difﬁculties in the
dark matter theory.
To close this part of the discussion, let me describe a third cartoon. It would be
hard to draw, because it involves 1031 blind men observing an elephant. Every single
one of them says ‘it’s an electron!’ (We could add similar numbers who perceive a
proton or a neutron to obtain a more complete description. Or reduce it all to quarks
and the like.) They are arguably correct, but that leaves open the key question: What
does this tell us about the elephant?

Introduction
xvii
The Content of this Volume
The content/context relationship is not just important in physical and biological
sciences. It is if anything even more important in social science, the humanities and
the arts. And this, ﬁnally, brings me to the main point of this introduction. I have
examined the context for this volume; now I want to summarise its content.
The contributors include philosophers, scientists of all kinds, mathematicians,
logicians, specialists in the humanities and others from a wide variety of disci-
plines. Their essays cut across traditional subject boundaries, mix speculation with
traditional wisdom, question things long ago accepted as fact by most practitioners
and interpret old evidence in new ways. The viewpoints represented are equally
diverse. Any order imposed on such an eclectic collection must be artiﬁcial, but I
have bitten the bullet and classiﬁed them into twelve overlapping categories. Many
essays address several of these in combination, in which case I will locate them in
the most prominent or most convenient category. The categories are: reductionism,
holism, context, emergence, causality, probability, physics/mathematics, quantum,
computation, biology/medicine, sociology and art. Important strands that cut across
this classiﬁcation include philosophy and creativity.
Reductionism. As already remarked, until recently most science has been reduc-
tionist in spirit, almost by default. Looking inside things to understand how they
function has led to remarkable successes. Nevertheless, most authors in this volume
are critical of reductionism as an overarching philosophy.
Mario de Caro makes a valuable distinction between reductionism as a guide
to methodology and reductionism as a sweeping claim that reductions are always
possible in principle. His example is the reduction of chemistry to physics, probably
the case that ought to be most clear-cut; he argues that it is anything but. He also traces
this extreme form of reductionism to the monist belief that everything in the universe
ought to be explicable in the same way. Gianfranco Minati asks whether the standard
approach to reductionism in terms of well-deﬁned ‘levels of description’ is tenable,
andsuggeststhatincompletenessisonereasonforrejectingthismetaphor.Incontrast,
Terry Horgan makes a case in favour of reductionism, arguing that micro-physical
phenomena are primary, so that the history of the cosmos must be an inevitable
consequence of its microscopic history.
Holism. This is a standard alternative to reductionism, and like everything in this
volume, the term is open to many interpretations. Urging people to focus on ‘the
whole’ is easy, and it is difﬁcult to argue against that advice, but deciding what ‘the
whole’ actually is, and ﬁguring out how to embrace it and understand it, is trickier.
JohnHeilpointstothegapbetweentheaspirationsofreductionismanditsachieve-
ments, considers holistic alternatives and suggests that although holism need not
involve emergence, emergence is a key reason for rejecting strong reductionism. In
the opposite direction, Sven Ove Hansson criticises misuses of the term ‘holism’ to
justify pseudo-scientiﬁc claims, such as rejecting vaccinations to improve a child’s
prospects after reincarnation. He traces such attitudes to the belief that ‘the whole’
can be identiﬁed and forms a closed system, which need never be modiﬁed.

xviii
Introduction
Context.Itisbecomingincreasinglyapparentthatmanyreal-worldsystemscannot
be understood purely in terms of their content. This challenges standard reductionism
and emphasises the role of context.
AnessaybythelateJackCohen,reproducedineditedformfromhis1990Novacon
Special Are You Content in Your Context, explains his belief that context is at least
as important as content. He contrasts information with meaning, taking genetics as
an example, and explores the role of context in science ﬁction. I have added editorial
notes for readers who are not ‘fen’ (SF fans in their jargon). Erich Rast relates systems
of mathematical logic to context dependence, especially when investigating the rela-
tion between interdependent theories and meaning. Otávio Bueno also considers a
mathematical topic: the extent to which theorems depend on their context, a relation-
ship that is often denied by mathematicians. Hildegard Meyer-Ortmanns examines
emergent phenomena in different contexts that have a uniﬁed underlying mathe-
matical explanation, provided by modern theories of nonlinear dynamics. Mathe-
matics provides the content; the interpretation of its variables adapts the results to
different contexts. Robert Bishop explores a similar theme, emphasising the impor-
tance of context for all natural phenomena and showing how contextual emergence
can capture the interplay between constituents and context.
Emergence. This topic is central to many of the issues discussed in this volume
and appears in many essays discussed under other headings. What is emergence to
one thinker is nothing of the kind to another, but all uses refer to systems whose
behaviour appears to transcend that of its components. The differences arise from
the meaning assigned to ‘transcend’ and the extent to which appearances are valid.
James Miller considers emergence in language. Here, some properties, such
as truth, make sense only for high-level structures such as sentences—a single
word cannot be categorised as true or false. He asks to what extent such ontolog-
ically emergent properties are inherent in lower-level forms. Arturo Carsetti also
deals with linguistics, focusing on the origin of meaning, human cognition and
creativity. Timothy O’Connor points out that although the successes of reductionist
science demonstrate that everything we observe arises through elementary physical
processes, it is wrong to deduce that the behaviour of more complex objects is merely
a coarse-grained version of some of those basic processes. When new conﬁgurations
of basic elements arise, they can create genuinely new processes and powers. Carl
Gillett surveys historical disputes between proponents of reductionism and emer-
gentism in science, with explicit examples such as protein form and function. He
argues that the principle of parsimony does not justify reductionism, and offers a
way to resolve such disputes. Alexander Carruth asks when apparently emergent
phenomena can be meaningfully related to the behaviour of components’ parts when
the behaviour concerned is micro-latent: comes into play only in speciﬁc complex
circumstances. If so, the phenomenon is often considered not to be truly emergent. He
proposes a compromise position. Michael Silberstein investigates the role of contex-
tual emergence in network neuroscience, cognition and psychology, emphasising the
fundamental importance of multiscale contextual constraints. Michael Tye explores
the role of emergence in consciousness by asking whether, in principle, we could
construct an elephant by acquiring a supply of the relevant subatomic particle and

Introduction
xix
assembling them to make an exact copy of an elephant. He suggests that the ‘hard
problem’ of consciousness could be an obstacle, and that consciousness is not an
emergent phenomenon but a basic feature of the universe. Conscious electrons give
rise to a conscious elephant.
Causality. Philosophers have debated the meaning and nature of causality since
at least the time of the ancient Greeks. Proximate causes (go out in the rain and you
will get wet) differ from ultimate ones (water is formed from hydrogen and oxygen;
hydrogen goes back to the Big Bang; oxygen was created by nuclear reactions in stars,
etc.) Reductionism seeks ultimate causes in the micro-structure of the universe, but
its grip on the causal chain is weaker than it likes to pretend. Context is as much part
of causality as content. Relativity and quantum theory have cast their own peculiar
doubts on naive views of causality.
Graham Priest surveys historical views of causation in Buddhist philosophy,
paying special attention to questions of reductionism and holism. George Ellis and
Jonathan Kopel tackle causality from a different viewpoint: how the interplay of
upward emergence and downward causation combine to create complexity through
adaptive modules. Purely bottom-up explanations of emergence, from lower levels to
higher ones, assume that the underlying physics is complete, but this never happens.
Causal closure also involves top-down effects, from higher levels to lower. COVID-
19 provides an example. Tim Maudlin examines ‘top-down’ causality, a concept that
depends on what is top, what is bottom and what is causality. Reference to Aristotle
sheds some light on these issues.
Probability. Our most powerful mathematical tool for resolving and quantifying
uncertainty is probability theory. The techniques are well established, but their inter-
pretation is not—witness the ongoing debate between Frequentists (probability is a
long-term proportion) and Bayesians (probability is a degree of belief). As is often
the case, we know how to compute probabilities; we just do not know what they are.
Three essays discuss how context affects our view of probabilities and suggests new
techniques and concepts.
Ehtibar Dzhafarov reviews work on the logic of contextuality, applying it to
basic philosophical issues in probability, such as the nature of random variables,
and stochasticity versus determinism. He also describes new ideas applying contex-
tual logic to Bayesian probability, visual illusions and logical paradoxes. Sergio
Chibbaro, Lamberto Rondoni and Angelo Vulpiani study the relation between the
conceptual notions of probability and the interpretation of experimental results,
in the particular context of statistical mechanics and Hamiltonian systems. This
sheds light on the longstanding problem of irreversible macroscopic change—
such as the increase in entropy—occurring in microscopically reversible systems.
Andrei Khrennikov reviews applications of quantum probability outside physics.
Being context-dependent, this conception of probability can potentially shed light
onothercontext-dependentsystems,suchashumanbeings.Suchapplicationsinvolve
inherent ambiguities and uncertainties, but they also motivate a calculus of contextual
probabilities.
Physics and Mathematics. Several authors locate their discussions in speciﬁc areas
of mathematics and science, lending a more concrete aspect to the issues raised. In

xx
Introduction
this category are essays featuring metals, electrons, quantum gravity, particle physics
and chemical molecules. In each case, the crucial issue is the connection between
micro- and macro-structure—including whether it aids understanding.
Tom Lancaster focuses on condensed matter physics: to be precise, the physics
of metals. Metals have made huge impacts on human civilisation, but only recently
have a deep understanding of metals from the point of view of quantum physics
appeared. The electron ceases to be viewed as a simple particle; instead, it is a
quasiparticle, ‘dressed up’ in interactions with the rest of the system—a context for
the electron. This example provides lessons for other investigations of the universe.
Karen Crowther examines recent developments in quantum gravity, suggesting that
space-time in Einstein’s sense is not fundamental. Instead, it emerges from relations
between entities that are not themselves spatiotemporal. Attempts to construct such
theories use both top-down and bottom-up strategies. However, the tidy metaphor of
‘levels’ that is typical does not necessarily make sense in this area. Leonardo Chiatti’s
chosenareaisparticlephysics,normallyviewedasacentralexampleofreductionism.
He points out that the ‘real’ nature of fundamental particles is not understood; indeed,
the usual approach to quantum models is not to ask such questions. These issues allow
an exploration of the relation between local and global structures and processes.
Quantum. Several authors mentioned above consider questions in quantum
physics, but the articles in the next group are more explicitly focused on the deep
scientiﬁc and philosophical issues posed by the radical nature of quantum mechanics.
Among these are apparently irreducible uncertainty, the meaning, if any, of the
wave function, and the problem of quantum measurement: How does the crisp,
simple mathematical deﬁnition of an observation relate to the complex macroscopic
apparatus used in practice?
Ignacio Licata discusses limitations to science, exempliﬁed by the process by
which an observable is measured in an experiment—the source of much debate in
quantum theory. This process is affected by the choice of model as well as the actual
experiment, because the model provides a context for interpreting the observations.
The structure of science involves complex networks of inference, all with systemic
uncertainty. Arkady Plotnitsky provides a historical survey of how quantum theory
changed scientists’ views of space, time and matter. Quantum uncertainty imposes
limits on the applicability of reductionist views, because there is no deterministic
link from bottom to top. On the other hand, quantum theory does not lend itself to a
holistic approach either. So, it represents a distinct way of thinking in both physics
and philosophy. Michel Planat tackles the problem of quantum observation in a
novel, mathematically technical, way. He uses the ‘language’ of ‘words’ (sequence
symbols) in a free group. Commutators in the group correspond to the commutators
of operators that are basic to the quantum formalism. Words correspond to paths
in a suitable 4-dimensional manifold, a kind of exotic space-time. Measurements
correspond to related but distinct manifolds. The outcome is a kind of quantum
logic, ‘exotic non-contextuality’. Luciano Boi reviews current ideas in topological
quantum ﬁeld theories and string theory, from the point of view of geometry, topology
and invariants. He discusses relations to recent breakthroughs in knot theory, which
suggest connections between knot and link invariants and physical observables—a

Introduction
xxi
modern slant on an old suggestion of Peter Guthrie Tait, long discredited in its original
‘vortex atom’ form. He also considers the fuzziness of space-time. José Acacio de
Barros, Federico Holik and Decio Krause discuss how context and content cause
problems in quantum mechanics, because quantum properties depend on context.
They explore the strange implications of this issue for elementary particles, which
make them unsuitable for study using standard mathematics and thus require new
mathematical ideas.
Computation. It might seem strange that something as concrete as computation
should lead to deep philosophical issues, but the history of the subject argues that this
is inevitable when suitable questions are asked. The nature of computability is one,
and it led Alan Turing to his discovery that the halting problem is algorithmically
undecidable. His interest in artiﬁcial intelligence is now ﬂowering, with methods
such as deep learning, and algorithms are beginning to affect daily life in myriad
ways. Applications of computation are now posing serious social and philosophical
questions. Not to mention the possibility of quantum computers…
Samson Abramsky offers a perspective on paradoxes and their resolution, the
concept of partiality. He illustrates this in two settings: classical computation and the
Church–Turing thesis that all sufﬁciently ﬂexible computational systems are equiva-
lent,andquantumcomputation,wherepartialityisaconsequenceofthemathematical
formalism. Ilkka Niiniluoto examines another computational issue of great current
interest, deep learning and artiﬁcial intelligence. He considers the training processes
of AI from a philosophical perspective and reconsiders Hubert Dreyfus’s criticism
of AI. Thomas Filk analyses a related mathematical structure, the neural network,
an archetypal complex adaptive system. A neural network can be viewed as inter-
polating between content and context, depending on its size. Recurrent networks
behave like non-classical mechanics, with memory effects, and can even be trained
to violate Bell inequalities of quantum mechanics, normally considered as ruling
out deterministic explanations of quantum uncertainty. Genetic algorithms resemble
Darwinian evolution.
Biology and Medicine. Nowhere is the challenge facing reductionist explanations
more apparent than in the life sciences, where even the basic question ‘what is
life?’ opens up Pandora’s box (‘Pandora’s warehouse’ might be a more appropriate
metaphor). Despite decades of major advances in molecular biology, even a single
cell has, if anything, become more enigmatic than ever. Let alone an organism or
an ecosystem. This is not to denigrate the astonishing advances opened up by the
discovery of the double helix, but it shows how much further we have yet to travel.
John Bickle explores a problem in which traditional holistic psychological ideas
interface with the neuroscientiﬁc ﬁeld of molecular and cellular cognition. That is,
how high-level brain functions emerge from neurons and biochemistry. He observes
that in this case, the links between the different ‘levels’ leave much to be desired.
Raymond and Sir Denis Noble provide a layman’s introduction to the idea that no
speciﬁc causal level can be assumed primary, contrary to the reductionist assump-
tion that micro-levels are privileged in terms of explanation. In his view, agency and
consciousness are real, not illusions, because they result from functional constraints
at higher levels. Daniel Dennett offers some speculative but insightful ideas about

xxii
Introduction
the machinery in the brain that is responsible for intelligent action, suggesting that
foresight and self-monitoring are crucial to intelligent behaviour. The rational delib-
erator mostly worries about problems that never happen, because they worry about
them and take action to prevent them. He explores implications of these ideas for the
design of intelligent robots. Luciano Boi examines one of the most perplexing exam-
ples of just this issue: how an organism’s genetics and molecular structure relate to
its growth and evolution. He proposes that morphology on a macro-level has its own
structures and patterns, which, although they may ultimately derive from genes and
molecules, can be understood and used without reference to the micro-level. In effect,
the proposal is to replace genetic ‘information’ by nonlinear dynamics. Marta Berto-
laso and Héctor Velázquez observe that the tension between reductionist and holistic
methods is becoming increasingly apparent in the life sciences, usually viewed as
a dependency between content and context. Complexity is ubiquitous, and inves-
tigating the nature and origins of life inevitably leads to this tension. He suggests
that the focus should shift from universal reductionist principles, such as basing
everything on molecules, to ‘a philosophy of the particular’, and offers examples
such as cancer. Marco Buzzoni, Luigi Tesio and Michael Stuart take the discussion
further into medical territory with the need for doctors to combine knowledge and
methods from both macro-level (the patient) and micro-level (drugs and genetics).
The basic questions are ‘what is disease?’ and ‘how should we treat it?’ They suggest
that the experimental paradigm can proﬁtably be applied to holistic ‘complemen-
tary’ medicine, a proposal rejected or ignored by most of its practitioners. Manuel
Rebuschi concentrates on a single example: schizophrenia. Here, it is necessary to
interpret conversations with the patient, which involve context. Analysis of ﬁctional
conversations shed light on both the disease and how to manage it.
Sociology. ‘Know then thyself, presume not God to scan; the proper study of
mankind is man’. So wrote the poet Alexander Pope in An Essay on Man: Epistle II
in 1733-4. Generations of scientists have studied anything but humanity; others have
studied it, but not on its own level. Social scientists ﬁll the gap and correctly remind us
that the word ‘Man’ here is sexist. (My excuse is that this is what Pope wrote. Blame
him.)Sociologyofferspenetratinginsightsintothehumancondition,butisbedevilled
by huge and unavoidable obstacles, such as the difﬁculty of performing controlled
experiments. It therefore faces issues such as context and emergence head-on.
Friedel Weinert examines the debate between two schools of thought on the level
at which social science explanations should be stated. Is the key factor the behaviour
of an individual in a social unit, or are social factors that affect that individual the
important ones? A compromise position is to select the level according to the nature of
the problem; however, in some cases the macro-level is unavoidable. Diederik Aerts
and Massimiliano Sassoli de Bianchi investigate connections between basic science,
such as thermodynamics and evolution, and aspects of matter, life and human culture.
Following Erwin Schrödinger’s pioneering footsteps in What is Life? they discuss
how the second law of thermodynamics relates to living creatures and culture. Annika
Döring and José García also discuss culture: speciﬁcally, the pitfalls of unrecog-
nised cultural differences. They contrast Okakura Kakuzo’s The Book of Tea with
Martin Heidegger’s Being and Time. The two works have quite of a lot of content in

Introduction
xxiii
common, leading some to suspect that Heidegger drew on Kazuko’s work. Here, it is
pointed out that this resemblance is superﬁcial: the two authors use similar words but
with radically different meanings; they have similar contents, but different contexts.
Understanding differences between Eastern and Western culture can correct this
misperception.
Art. Historically, art and science were intimately related for much of human
history. The early cave artists had to make their own pigments and oil lamps, not just
sketch the outlines of mammoths. During the Enlightenment, scientists and artists
routinely met together, and each inﬂuenced the other. In the twentieth century, the
two areas of activity started to decouple in various ways: schools often had a science
stream and an arts stream, for instance. Most artists and scientists still accept this
separation, but a growing band is once more bridging the gap.
Nana Last tells us about the huge changes in architectural thinking inspired by
the shift from postmodernist architecture-as-text to the digital age’s architecture-as-
algorithm. This has transformed the design process by making it possible to transfer
information from a late detail to the overall conception, instead of starting with
an overall plan and adding details later. John Barrow’s essay was written shortly
before his untimely death in 2020 and reﬂects his lifelong interest in connections
between science and art. Here, he observes that both activities involve complexity,
and considers one of physics’ favourite complex systems: the sandpile. This is an
example of robust simplicity on the level of the whole pile, resulting from huge
complexity on the level of its individual sand grains. He suggests that the appeal
of musical performances rests in a similar overall robustness, made all the more
interesting by differences in ﬁne structure.
Simplex, Complex, Multiplex
Each of us will have our own opinions about which authors and which assertions we
agree with, and logic indicates that we cannot securely agree with them all. That is
why this volume exists. It is why we all need to read every essay and try to understand
the line of reasoning.
To wrap everything up in one tidy package, I will take inspiration from the other
element of my collaboration with Jack Cohen: science ﬁction. One of the great
science ﬁction authors, most active in the 1960s and 1970s, is Samuel R. Delany.
His books are not the clichéed shoot-em-up space battles that those unfamiliar with
the genre believe to constitute the whole of ‘sci-ﬁ’. Actually, very little of it ﬁts that
description. Like most of the best SF, Delany’s novels are thoughtful and insightful
explorations of the human condition, albeit in imaginative contexts. The novel that
bears most keenly on our topic is Empire Star, published in 1966, and I recommend
getting hold of a copy—especially if you have never read any SF—because it has a lot
to say about the topic of this volume. It is short, clever, imaginative and superﬁcially
circular in structure, just as James Joyce’s Finnegans Wake starts by completing an

xxiv
Introduction
unﬁnished sentence with which it ends. However, Delany’s structure is less simplex.
In fact, his novel explicitly declares itself to be multiplex. And thereby hangs a tale...
The story centres on a boy called Jo who lives on a backwoods planet called
Rhys. He encounters Jewel, who is a crystallised Tritovian and the sole survivor of a
crashed organiform cruiser that had been en route to Empire Star, the administrative
centre of the galaxy. One of the crew lives just long enough to tell Jo to take a
message to Empire Star, but not long enough to tell him what the message is. Much
later he ﬁnds out: ‘Someone has come to free the Lll’. These immensely intelligent
creatures are kept in slavery because of their ability to rebuild entire civilisations,
and as payback they make everyone who owns them irredeemably sad. Jo also ﬁnds
out that he should not deliver this message until someone has come to free the Lll,
and this is not clear.
Anyway, that is the frame—the context. The speciﬁc element of content that I
want to discuss, one small detail within Delany’s widescreen baroque parable, is a
running theme about the mental processes of sentient beings. Namely, they come
in three main types: simplex, complex and multiplex. One test is to ask someone
what is the most important thing in the world. If they are simplex, they will answer.
Another test is whether they ask questions. Simplex minds seldom do. Thus, the
inhabitants of the Geodetic Survey Station, in the midst of a vast project to catalogue
all of the knowledge in the universe alphabetically, are enormously intelligent but
hopelessly simplex. As proof, their project means everything to them and they never
ask themselves whether it is sensible, feasible or worthwhile. A complex intellect
appreciates that different people and cultures can have different opinions about the
same thing, without one being wrong and the other right, and that new knowledge can
appear at any time. Multiplex minds contemplate things simultaneously from many
points of view. When faced with a mass of apparently contradictory or confusing
information, the multiplex personality orders their perceptions until they ﬁgure out
the correct question to ask.
Reductionism and holism alone are both simplex, as are all isms. To assert the
superiority of one way of thinking, to the exclusion of all others, is irreducibly
simplex, however cleverly the claim is expressed. As Delany’s character Lump—the
linguistic ubiquitous multiplex—says, ‘intelligence and plexity do not necessarily
go together’. Most of the essays in this book are complex, and the book itself is most
deﬁnitely so, since some authors ﬂatly contradict others. Indeed, the entire collec-
tion, approached in an appropriate frame of mind, is undoubtedly multiplex. Merely
order your perceptions multiplexually, and you will understand how everything ﬁts
together.
Ian Stewart

Introduction
xxv
References
Delany, S. R. (1966). Empire star. New York: Ace Books.
Heidegger, M. (1996). Being and time (English translation). New York: State University of New
York Press.
Hoffmann, B. (1959). The strange story of the quantum. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Kakuzo, O. (1906). The book of tea (English translation). New York: Dufﬁeld.
Schrödinger, E. (1944). What is life?. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Stewart, I. & Cohen, J. (1994). The collapse of chaos. New York: Viking.
Stewart, I. & Cohen, J. (1997). Figments of reality. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Contents
Setting the Context
Are You Content in Your Context? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
Jack Cohen
The Incremental Chain of Being . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
John Heil
Does Linguistics Need (Weak) Emergence? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
J. T. M. Miller
Contextual Meaning and Theory Dependence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
Erich H. Rast
Scientiﬁc Naturalism and Its Faults . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
Mario De Caro
Scientiﬁc Emergentism and the Mutualist Revolution: A New
Guiding Picture of Nature, New Methodologies and New Models . . . . . . .
79
Carl Gillett
Causation in Buddhist Philosophy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
99
Graham Priest
A Realistic View of Causation in the Real World . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
117
George F. R. Ellis and Jonathan Kopel
Where is the Top and What Might Go Down? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
135
Tim Maudlin
Multiplicity, Logical Openness, Incompleteness, and Quasi-ness
as Peculiar Non-reductionist Properties of Complexity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
151
Gianfranco Minati
Micro-Latency, Holism and Emergence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
175
Alexander Carruth
xxvii

xxviii
Contents
Enactive Realism. A First Look at a New Theoretical Synthesis . . . . . . . .
195
Arturo Carsetti
Holism and Pseudoholism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
215
Sven Ove Hansson
Explanatory Emergence, Metaphysical Emergence,
and the Metaphysical Primacy of Physics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
229
Terry Horgan
Contextual Emergence: Constituents, Context and Meaning . . . . . . . . . . .
243
Robert C. Bishop
Mathematics/Theoretical Physics
Contents, Contexts, and Basics of Contextuality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
259
Ehtibar N. Dzhafarov
Content, Context, and Naturalism in Mathematics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
287
Otávio Bueno
Shared Mathematical Content in the Context of Complex Systems . . . . .
307
Hildegard Meyer-Ortmanns
United but not Uniform: Our Fecund Universe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
329
Timothy O’Connor
Probability, Typicality and Emergence in Statistical Mechanics . . . . . . . .
339
Sergio Chibbaro, Lamberto Rondoni, and Angelo Vulpiani
The Metal: A Model for Modern Physics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
361
Tom Lancaster
Spacetime Emergence: Collapsing the Distinction Between
Content and Context? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
379
Karen Crowther
Topological Quantum Field Theory and the Emergence of Physical
Space–Time from Geometry. New Insights into the Interactions
Between Geometry and Physics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
403
Luciano Boi
The Electron and the Cosmos: From the Universe of Fragmented
Objects to the Particle-World . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
425
Leonardo Chiatti
“A Novel Feature of Atomicity in the Laws of Nature”: Quantum
Theory Against Reductionism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
445
Arkady Plotnitsky
Geometric and Exotic Contextuality in Quantum Reality . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
469
Michel Planat

Contents
xxix
Quantum Identity, Content, and Context: From Classical
to Non-classical Logic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
489
J. Acacio de Barros, Federico Holik, and Décio Krause
Contextual Probability in Quantum Physics, Cognition,
Psychology, Social Science, and Artiﬁcial Intelligence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
523
Andrei Khrennikov
Cognitive Science/Computer Science
Nothing Will Come of Everything: Software Towers and Quantum
Towers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
539
Samson Abramsky
The Quantum-like Behavior of Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
553
Thomas Filk
Concepts, Experts, and Deep Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
577
Ilkka Niiniluoto
A Route to Intelligence: Oversimplify and Self-monitor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
587
Daniel C. Dennett
Context is King: Contextual Emergence in Network Neuroscience,
Cognitive Science, and Psychology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
597
Michael Silberstein
From Electrons to Elephants: Context and Consciousness . . . . . . . . . . . . .
641
Michael Tye
When Two Levels Collide . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
653
John Bickle
Biology
Some Remarks on Epigenetics and Causality in the Biological World . . .
675
Luciano Boi
Can Agency Be Reduced to Molecules? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
699
Raymond Noble and Denis Noble
The Epistemology of Life Understanding Living Beings According
to a Relational Ontology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
719
Marta Bertolaso and Héctor Velázquez
Holism and Reductionism in the Illness/Disease Debate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
743
Marco Buzzoni, Luigi Tesio, and Michael T. Stuart
About Context, Fiction, and Schizophrenia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
779
Manuel Rebuschi

xxx
Contents
Humanities and Social Sciences
On the Explanation of Social and Societal Facts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
799
Friedel Weinert
On the Irreversible Journey of Matter, Life and Human Culture . . . . . . .
821
Diederik Aerts and Massimiliano Sassoli de Bianchi
Architecture and Big Data: From Scale to Capacity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
843
Nana Last
Being or Tea? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
861
Annika Döring and José Ordóñez García
Art is Critical . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
875
John D. Barrow

Setting the Context

Are You Content in Your Context?
Jack Cohen
Cover art by dave mooring for cohen (1990).
Science ﬁction readers enjoy performing an intellectual act, a literary contortion,
that isn’t understood, can’t be understood, by nearly everyone they know. That’s not
news. People ask their authors ‘Where do you get those crazy ideas?’. People ask
J. Cohen (Deceased) (B)
Coventry, England
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
S. Wuppuluri and I. Stewart (eds.), From Electrons to Elephants and Elections,
The Frontiers Collection, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-92192-7_1
3

4
J. Cohen
you ‘What do you get out of those crazy, impossible stories?’, don’t they? I’ve got a
new slant on this, and I want to take you round the houses a bit to explain it.
Firstly, let’s have some thoughts about ‘messages’ and their ‘meanings’. There
are two rather different ways of thinking about this, which many of us, and our
authors, mix up. The kind of usage that worries about ‘information content’, about
‘bit-strings’ and other computer jargon, ‘noise’, ‘bandwidth’, and the rest of the
radio-transmitter buzzwords, is very different from the everyday, or the literary, uses
of ‘meaning’. Very often, the obvious technological uses of the ﬁrst kind lead us to
think that the message is the object, or at least the important essence of the object.
Tom Easton’s near-future biotechnology stories1 talk of the genes as if they are the
characters of the animals. He gets a gas-bag shape from a jellyﬁsh genome, pockets
from a kangaroo, and so on, and sticks them together as if he’s playing with Lego™.
Many of our stories talk of the ‘plans for’ a new super-weapon as if they are the
weapon itself, with characters and hit-men striving to get the microﬁlm or the tape.
But it’s important to realise that what’s ‘on’ the tape is really just a sequence of
numbers, expressed as differences in optical density or magnetism. This sequence of
numbers actually doesn’t have any unique meaning: if you don’t know whether to
put the tape in a video-player or a computer or a Walkman2, you don’t know if the
sequence is a ﬁlm of octopuses mating, the digits of √2 from the 108th onwards, or
Beethoven’s Ninth Symphony.
Indeed, with a little imagination you could design players that would produce
each of these from special bits of tape that had a recording made from one of the
others. They would, perhaps, be like an old-fashioned jukebox, where an arbitrary
number resulted in the sound (more rather than less…) of a record; or think of those
computer opening-screens where you have to put in numbers at the keyboard to make
the computer load the program you want to use. (There is no reason in principle why
it shouldn’t be a long sequence of numbers.) This should make the point that the
technical use of a ‘message’ (really ‘data-string’) doesn’t tie meaning to it any less
fuzzily than ordinary usage.
Here are some situations in the ordinary world that demonstrate the same thing.3
You get a letter, which says ‘If I don’t ring you on Monday night, that means Aunt
Minnie will be coming on the 6.18 from London, and you should pick her up and
take her to 6, Orchard Crescent… etc. etc.’ Or someone says ‘You will ﬁnd that
information on pages 1130–67 of the Encyclopaedia Britannica.’ Or someone says
‘Take the train from Canton, change at Hang Chou …’. In all these cases, there is
much more information passage in the background than in the message, more in the
Context than in the Content (ah, he’s getting there now…). In the ﬁrst example, one
bit of information (phone or not) leads you to all the things the letter tells you to do
for Aunt Minnie; in the second example a simple page reference takes you to all the
information on those pages, unambiguously; but the third example, which looks so
simple, is the most informative for my purposes. It assumes a whole lot of context:
that Canton is in China, how to ‘change trains’ (!), what instructions are like in the
English language, the language itself.
Of course, all my examples assume English, and trains, and libraries, books
and numbered pages, without which each message would be as meaningless as our

Are You Content in Your Context?
5
piece of tape with a series of numbers on it. Every message assumes a context, and
‘meaning’ can be got across with a simple message, a trigger, together with much
(immediate) context, as with Aunt Minnie; or it may be spelled out more explicitly
in the message itself, as with an encyclopaedia—but even the encyclopaedia needs
much more context than content. Think about it.
What has this to do with science ﬁction/fantasy/mundane4 literature? Let’s think
of the ‘world of the detective story’. In that world, a country house with upper-class
guests is always the scene of a murder. There are several other contexts, like trains
or police stations or seashores, where the ‘detective story’ context gives the reader
clues. Again, the author’s message can be played out against an assumed, common,
contextualbackgroundknowntobothreaderandauthor(butrarelytothecharacters—
hence some of the humour in Moonlighting5). The ‘message’, the story that is given
to us in this setting, can be very tortuous; for example the detective, or the ﬁrst person
narrator, could be the murderer. But the context is a ‘given’, just as it is in Mills and
Boon (railway bookstore romance) stories, (most) fairy stories, kitchen-sink dramas,
and nearly all mundane literature. The usual terrestrial background, death and taxes,
clothes and kids, money and malingering, are assumed to be common to reader and
author. Westerns are a bit different, in that a common historical setting has been
‘improved’ as a backcloth, but it’s still carefully bedded in a ‘real’ context.
All these mundane stories retain the standard context, and different stories change
only the message, the content. In science ﬁction and fantasy stories, though, it’s the
context that is changed, while the storyline, the message, often has just a simple
mythic structure (how many Cinderellas, how many Frog Princes, have you read?)
This demands much more of the reader, of course: the most difﬁcult action it demands
is to be prepared to change your context, in almost any direction, and then to ﬁnd
interest in the context as much as in the content of the story.
Another digression here, as to our old science ﬁction versus fantasy argument6:
my position in this is (as you might have expected) simple masquerading as subtle.
Fantasy stories seem to me to have a ‘closed’ universe: a simple, describable context
in which everything can be answered by the author, in principle. They are like fairy
stories, in that only the actions and beings of the participants are germane to the story.
It doesn’t matter what g is, or how many days there are in a year, or whether ice ﬂoats
on water, except insofar as it affects decisions by the characters. ‘Spells’, ‘bargains’,
‘oaths’, ‘powers’, are all interpersonal constraints on the systems—characters can
do less because of them.
Science ﬁction, in contrast, has ‘open’ contexts: the real world plus a lot more
thinking about it—Ahead in time, or Away in space, or If something else had
happened. We science ﬁction addicts, readers and authors, assume the common
context (with the scientiﬁc knowledge left in, not taken out as it is in mundane
stories…) and then you are required to take it a fuller, more extended context from
your own knowledge of contexts. That’s why anyone can read Tolkien without having
read anything else; but to read and enjoy science ﬁction, you need to have read a lot…
including science ﬁction, indeed! You need to know a lot more about the universe
as it is; it’s why you get more out of Alice Through the Looking-Glass, or indeed
Gödel, Escher, Bach (Hofstadter, 1979), each further time you read them. But your

6
J. Cohen
closed-minded friends say they don’t see what you see in them. And the same goes
for Brin, Simak, or Heinlein.7
At a recent Con8 this closed/open difference was made absolutely explicit for me
when a group exercise in First Contact, a kind of role-playing game, failed. It failed
because we asked ‘real’ questions: ‘What was the actual message?’ (so we could do
our own cryptography on it—it doesn’t have ‘only one interpretation’, as we were
told); ‘Was the carrier polarized?’; ‘What was the frequency it was sent at?’; ‘FM or
AM or what?’, and so on.9 The organisers couldn’t answer these, as the real universe
would have, because they hadn’t thought of them, or their corollaries. In role-playing
games, which are the purest of fantasy in my sense, you need only what you’re told.
In contrast, in the real world—and when you read science ﬁction—you need to know
everything; in fact, in science ﬁction stories, as in life itself, you don’t know nearly
all of it. What we enjoy is that the real world always answers when you ask the
questions…
So a science ﬁction story demands a lot. It demands a disciplined exercise of an
expanded imagination—just as a good teacher does. (Fantasy, perhaps, exercises a
contracted, a restrained imagination.) It fails if it just sets an undemanding context
(‘Space’ has now become common, no-effort intellectual property) and sets unde-
manding stories in that context. The ‘space soap’ Jupiter Moon10 is mostly that,
with a couple of touches that could not have happened in a small-time college in
Oklahoma11; so are most of the Star Trek episodes of the ﬁrst series (but a few
are truly context-expanding, and perhaps needed the others to set the stage). Annie
McCaffrey’s Pern stories12 read like fantasy, but are actually mind-expanding and
can be set in a real, puzzling world, as we tried to do with Dragonsdawn (McCaffrey,
1988) and its sequels.13 Harrison’s West of Eden series14, or Niven’s Heorot15 (to
take examples at random!)16, demand much more of the reader than to follow the
story—the reader must invent, organise, criticise the contexts. That is why SF17 will
always be a minority pursuit: only a minority can stretch that far out of the ordinary.
Most scientists don’t have this ability, of course, just as most playwrights don’t, or
most people, for that matter. Those few scientists who read SF are notable for their
ideas, their interesting lectures, their success at changing people’s minds. The others
do science, like people do knitting, in the mundane context that isn’t enough for you
lot.
Here’s a very fannish example deriving from a conversation with Al Johnston
and Bernie.18 The Rocky Horror ﬁlm19 is, to us, much more than a simple cinematic
offering. Any of you who’ve been along to a showing at a Con know that there
is a complex ritual involving water-pistols, rice, and a variety of communal and
individual fannish acts, guaranteed to bring despair to the heart and pocket-book of
the most easygoing cinema proprietor. But to the mundane public, it’s a piece of art
to receive, to enjoy, to wonder at, to understand, to recoil from, to hate, to ban.20 We
use it differently: we create a ritual context for it, in which its oddity is contained
within our own even odder rituals. This, as Al saw straight away (straight away when
I had explained my context/content hang-ups) is our SF determination to give our
expanded context to anything the Universe throws at us.21.

Are You Content in Your Context?
7
Our authors challenge us with changes of context all the time. Perhaps, they
suggest, the Wandering Jew22 idea is based in reality, so we get Lazarus Long23
or Boat of a Million Years.24 Sometimes the context-addition is just a grace-note:
an apprentice torturer,25 or a dragon more ethical than his George.26 As soon as I
saw the context-change idea, I understood why I like SF and opera; I hope the idea
gives you pleasure, too. So what is my message to you? You are context people, not
message people; see yourselves as revolutionaries, not make-do-and-mend-aries. If
you are secret-aries, show how you can do it differently, openly; if you are scientists,
think theory—context, paradigm—as well as practice; if you are engineers, engineer
the environment as well as the artefact. Most importantly, if you’re a teacher and/or
parent, a wholesale or retail purveyor of world-views and attitudes, make them other-
world-views and beatitudes.
1
Editorial Notes
Jack Cohen, who died in 2018, originally wrote this essay as a Novacon Special,
published in a limited edition of 450 by The Birmingham Science Fiction Group
in 1990. In that year, Jack was Guest of Honour at the Group’s annual Convention,
Novacon 20. All GoH’s are invited to contribute a special story or essay, printed as
a chapbook (small booklet). Although aimed at science ﬁction fans, with their own
jargon and in-jokes, the essay contains some important thoughts about content and
context; in particular as regards the distinction between information and meaning.
We have therefore reproduced the essay, with the permission of his daughter Rebecca
Cohen and the Birmingham Science Fiction Group, to make it accessible to a wider
audience. We have retained the original style and period ﬂavour, but the text has
been edited slightly to remove material not pertinent to the present volume. For the
beneﬁt of mundanes (see Note 4 below) and those who are too young to know what
a Walkman is, we have added the following explanatory notes.
Notes
1.
Thomas A. Easton wrote a series of magazine stories that led to the novels
Sparrowhawk (1990), Greenhouse (1991), Woodsman (1992), Tower of the
Gods (1993) and Seeds of Destiny (1994). They centre on a biotech revolution
in which genetically modiﬁed animals, ‘genimals’, displace machines.
2.
The Sony Walkman, ﬁrst produced in 1979, was a personal music player using
cassette tapes: an early forerunner of the iPod.
3.
A more extensive discussion of these ideas can be found in Stewart and Cohen
(Stewart & Cohen, 1994, 1997).
4.
‘Mundane’ is the term used in science ﬁction fandom for anything that is not
science ﬁction, or not clued up about it.
5.
Moonlighting is a quirky American TV series of the late 1980s, about a private
detective agency, starring Sybill Shepherd, Bruce Willis, and Allyce Beasley.

8
J. Cohen
6.
Initially the main modern novels in the fantasy genre were J.R.R. Tolkien’s The
Hobbit and Lord of the Rings. After a lengthy gap, the genre began to take off,
starting with the (almost unreadable) books of Stephen Donaldson in the series
The Chronicles of Thomas Covenant, namely Lord Foul’s Bane, The Illearth
War, and The Power that Preserves. As fantasy blockbusters began to displace
SF books in bookshops, SF fans initially went to great lengths to distinguish
the two genres and proclaim the supremacy of SF over fantasy. In 1990, the
controversy was very much alive. Today there has been so much genre-bending
that the distinction has become extremely fuzzy, both genres occupy the same
shelves in shops, and many authors have worked in both—notably George R.R.
Martin with his Game of Thrones book and TV series.
7.
David Brin, Clifford Simak, and Robert A. Heinlein: prominent science ﬁction
authors.
8.
‘Con’ is fannish for ‘convention’.
9.
The technical terms are references to radio transmission.
10.
Jupiter Moon is an SF ‘soap opera’ TV series broadcast in the 1990s, taking
place in the spaceship Ilea orbiting the Jovian satellite Callisto.
11.
Much of the action in Jupiter Moon takes place in a university on the Ilea, and
centres on the daily lives of its students.
12.
‘Annie’ McCaffrey was Jack’s name for SF author Anne McCaffrey, a friend
of his. Her spectacularly successful series of books, set on the planet Pern,
featured a society whose telepathic dragons fought the menace of Thread, a
dangerous plant that fell from the sky when the Red Star made its regular
appearances.
13.
Among many other activities, Jack was a consultant to SF authors, in particular
to Anne McCaffrey, who asked him to come up with scientiﬁcally plausible
explanations of the main features of the Pern setting, starting with Dragons-
dawn. This book, ninth in the series in terms of publication date, is a prequel
that describes the initial colonisation of the planet Pern. The task was tricky
because the earlier books had been based on McCaffrey’s sense of narrative,
rather than any consistent exercise in world-building.
14.
West of Eden (1984) is the ﬁrst of a trilogy written by Harry Harrison, set in a
parallel universe in which the dinosaurs were not wiped out in the Cretaceous-
Palaeogene extinction event, and evolved into the intelligent reptilian Yilané.
The sequels are Winter in Eden (1986) and Return to Eden (1988).
15.
The Heorot series, written by Larry Niven, Jerry Pournelle, and Steven Barnes,
is notable for its focus on ecological issues. The Legacy of Heorot (1987) begins
with the colonisation of Avalon, an island off the coast of a continent. The
colonists discover the existence of grendels, ﬁerce predators able to move with
astonishing speed. A sequel Beowulf’s Children (1995) takes the characters to
the mainland. Shortly before his death in 2018, Jack acted as a consultant for
the third volume Starborn and Godsons (2020).
16.
By a strange coincidence, these ‘random examples’ are also by SF authors who
built on Jack’s biological expertise when plotting them.

Are You Content in Your Context?
9
17.
SF, S-F, and s-f are abbreviations of ‘science ﬁction’ acceptable to fans.27
In the past, the now common ‘sci-ﬁ’ was deﬁnitely not: fans pronounced it
‘skiffy’ and considered its use to be evidence of ignorance of SF, even though
it was ﬁrst proposed by the SF superfan Forrest J. Ackerman in 1954. However,
‘sci-ﬁ’ has now become more acceptable, even to fans. Its use is standard with
reference to the movie industry, and universal in the mundane media.
18.
Al Johnston was a regular attendee at Novacon, the annual convention of the
Birmingham Science Fiction Group. Bernie Evans was a prominent member
of the Group, and a member of the organising committee for Novacons 18,
19, 21, 22, 23 (respectively 1988, 1989, 1991, 1992, 1993). Jack was Guest of
Honour at Novacon 20 (1990).
19.
The Rocky Horror Picture Show is a comedy musical parody of bad horror
movies, released in 1975. The main character, Dr. Frank N. Furter, is an alien
tranvestite.
20.
The Rocky Horror Picture Show was dismissed by critics, but became iconic
when audiences started to take part in 1976—talking back at the screen,
dressing as the characters, even miming the action as the ﬁlm was being shown.
Today its transvestite theme raises fewer eyebrows than it did at the time.
21.
Some typical examples: the biannual Discworld Conventions, based on the
late Sir Terry Pratchett’s bestselling humorous fantasy books, have featured
a specially adapted performance of The Rocky Horror Picture Show, and a
parody of Queen’s Bohemian Rhapsody.
22.
The Wandering Jew is a mythical immortal who taunted Jesus at the cruciﬁxion,
and was punished by being made to wander through the world until the Second
Coming. The myth became widespread in 13th Century Europe.
23.
Several books by Robert A. Heinlein feature the character Lazarus Long,
created by a selective breeding programme aimed at longevity. He eventu-
ally reached the ripe old age of 2000 years, helped by a few rejuvenation
treatments. The books are Methuselah’s Children, Time Enough for Love, The
Number of the Beast, The Cat Who Walks Through Walls, and To Sail Beyond
the Sunset.
24.
The Boat of a Million Years is a 1989 novel by Poul Anderson, featuring eleven
immortals living at various times in history.
25.
In Gene Wolfe’s series The Book of the New Sun and The Urth of the New Sun,
the character Severian, a journeyman in a Torturers’ Guild, has been exiled for
showing mercy to a ‘client’.
26.
The Dragon and the George (1976) is a humorous novel by Gordon R. Dickson,
the ﬁrst of a series of nine. It features a knight and his sidekick, a Minnesota
history professor’s assistant whose mind has been transferred into a dragon’s
body.
27.
The canonical fannish plural of ‘fan’ is ‘fen’, by analogy with man/men.

10
J. Cohen
References
Cohen, J. (1990). Are you content in your context?, Novacon Special, The Birmingham Science
Fiction Group.
Hofstadter, D. (1979). Gödel, Escher, bach—an eternal golden braid. Basic Books.
McCaffrey, A. (1988). Dragonsdawn. Ballantine Books.
Stewart, I., & Cohen, J. (1994). The collapse of chaos. Viking.
Stewart, I., & Cohen, J. (1997). Figments of reality. Cambridge University Press.

The Incremental Chain of Being
John Heil
1
How Came We to This?
Is reality stratiﬁed? Many serious people, including scientists, philosophers, and
ordinary citizens, think so. Talk of higher- and lower-level phenomena is ubiquitous,
so much so that it has taken on the character of an ideology. The cosmos is regarded,
not as a uniform patchwork, but as organised into a hierarchy of autonomous or simi-
autonomous domains, each with its distinctive objects, properties, laws. Explanatory
practices in the various sciences are tailored to these. The levels picture supplanted
conceptions of ‘ﬂat’ universe according to which, when all is said and done, every-
thing is reducible to physics. A multi-tiered universe is an accepted consequence of
arguments against reductionism.
I believe that it is worth asking, especially now, what brought us to this juncture.
The question is of more than historical interest. Revisiting considerations that led
us to take up a particular ideology, can yield a fresh appreciation of the nature
and credibility of that ideology. Ideologies can owe their inﬂuence to their being
deployed unreﬂectively. On reﬂection, something everyone knows can cease to seem
inevitable.
In what follows, I look back on some of the ideas and arguments that led to
the widespread acceptance of the idea that we inhabit a hierarchical cosmos. The
discussion is not meant to be exhaustive, only suggestive. I myself am convinced that
the original arguments for levels were defective, and that they have not improved with
age. Succinctly put: we were duped into drawing robust metaphysical conclusions
from patently linguistic premises. My hope is that I can say enough to persuade you
that the hierarchical, levels picture is, if not ﬂatly wrong, at the very least optional.
J. Heil (B)
Washington University, CB 1073, One Brookings Drive, St. Louis 63130-4899, US
e-mail: jh@wustl.edu
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
S. Wuppuluri and I. Stewart (eds.), From Electrons to Elephants and Elections,
The Frontiers Collection, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-92192-7_2
11

12
J. Heil
2
Broad Brush History
Impressed by advances in physics, many philosophers in the ﬁrst half of the twentieth
century embraced some form of reductionism. The sciences were regarded as uniﬁed
by virtue of being reducible to physics: truths belonging to a higher-level science,
such as biology, could in principle, if not in practice, be extracted from truths of
physics. The truths in question included laws and explanations couched in terms of
these laws. If there are biological laws these are, again, in principle, derivable from
laws governing the fundamental particles. Owing to the complexity of organisms,
the derivations required might be practically unattainable, but scientiﬁc practice is
replete with compromises.
The reductionists’ point was not to encourage scientists to undertake the reduc-
tions. All that was required was their in-principle attainability. As a practical matter,
we treat the various sciences as autonomous, all the while recognising that, in God’s
mind, it all boils down to physics.
The de facto autonomy of the several sciences was bolstered by their being
successful in their own terms, but the autonomy was taken to be de facto only.
Complex things are made up of simpler things that obey their own laws. Laws
applicable to complex things must in some way issue from the fundamental laws.
Reductionist programs in the sciences and in philosophy came under ﬁre
from many quarters. Behaviourists, for instance, had long dreamed of analysing
talk of states of mind into to talk of behaviour. Talk of dodgy unobservable
mental phenomena could be replaced with more respectable talk of behaviour and
dispositions to behave (Wittgenstein 1953; Ryle, 1949).
It became clear, however that barriers to such analyses were not simply matters
of detail or practicality. Proposed analyses had a disquietingly open-ended character.
This suggested that the envisaged reductions were, not simply hard to come by, but
wrong-headed.
Not all reductionist programmes appealed to analytical manoeuvres, however.
Philosophers defending materialism, for instance, did not argue that mental terms
could be analysed in a physical vocabulary, but that mental states are as a matter of
fact nothing but brain states. Mind–brain identity theorists, including U.T. Place and
J. J. C. Smart, regarded the identiﬁcation of mental states with physical states as an
empirical hypothesis, one subject to norms by which any other empirical hypothesis
is evaluated (Place, 1956; Smart, 1959). Start with the idea that we have empirical
evidence of correlations among states of mind and physical, brain states. How might
these be explained?
Dualism affords one kind of answer: mental states, while not themselves identi-
ﬁable with brain states, nevertheless enjoy an especially intimate relation to brain
states. Traditional dualism came in a various ﬂavours. Interactionists held that minds
and brains causally interacted, epiphenomenalist regarded states of mind as by-
products of complex physical mechanisms that, like the shadow cast by a speeding
locomotive, played no part in their operation. Neuroscientists spoke breezily of neural
mechanisms as the ‘substrate’ of consciousness.

The Incremental Chain of Being
13
Smart and Place argued that a much simpler explanation of the empirical data
was available: purported correlations between states of mind and brain states were
artefacts of the way minds and brains are studied. Imagine that a neuroscientist
observes goings-on in your brain while you report your states of mind. What is
correlated are not mental states and brain states, but reports of mental states and
observations of brain states. Nothing stands in the way of identifying what is reported
with what is observed. Under the circumstances, the hypothesis that mental states
are (identical with) states of the brain should be accepted on the grounds that it is
more parsimonious than dualism.
Proponents of various forms of dualism responded to the mind–brain identity
theory in various ways, but, at the time, the most serious challenge came from
functionalism. Functionalists argued that the idea that mental states are brain states
involves a kind of category mistake. The identiﬁcation fails, not because mental
states are nonphysical, as proponents of dualism would have it, but because they are
functional states (Fodor, 1968, 1981; Putnam, 1967).
Functionalism was a response not only to the kind of analytical reduction associ-
ated with behaviourism, but also to the nonanalytical species of reduction offered by
the mind–brain identity theory. States of mind, although likely dependent on brain
states, could not be identiﬁed with brain states, not even manageable disjunctions of
such states. This is where it all becomes murky.
A functional state is a state, the identity of which, is bound up with its causal role.
Your being in pain, for instance, is for you to be in a state with the right input–output
proﬁle. A pain state, for instance, might be a state brought about by tissue damage,
excessive heat or pressure and subsequently produces aversive behaviour. The state
you are in when you are in pain need not be physically anything like the state some
other creature is in when that creature is in pain. A silicon-based creature might
undergo pains provided only that it could be in a state that played the pain role.
Types of mental state, then, like functional states generally, are not identiﬁable
with types of physical state. Many different kinds of physical state could satisfy the
job description of any given mental state. Indeed, if there are nonphysical beings they
could undergo pains provided they were organised in the right way. Functionalism
is compatible with, but does not entail, materialism.
The problem with the identity theory is not simply that there is no one–one, or
even one–many relation between states of mind and brain states, but rather the kinds
of state capable of playing the role deﬁnitive of any mental state are in principle
open-ended. Reduction is not on the cards.
3
Antireductionism and Levels
These kinds of antireductionist argument were expanded to include, not simply
psychology, but to include, as well, the special sciences, the social sciences, along
with many everyday human institutions (Fodor, 1997). Higher-level sciences could
not be reduced to sciences at lower levels. Talk of higher- and lower-levels here is

14
J. Heil
vaguely mereological. Objects at home in a higher-level science are by and large
made up of parts that make up the subject matter of lower-level sciences, and the
higher-level objects are themselves parts of objects making up the subject matter of
still higher-level sciences.
Proponents of levels would agree that this falls well short of establishing a meta-
physics of levels. At best it portends a division of labour in which distinct sciences are
occupied with larger or smaller entities. More is required to move from this relatively
uncontroversial position to a hierarchy of levels of being.
The impetus for the hierarchical scheme came, in large measure, from early
attempts to address the metaphysics of functionalism. Recall that a functional state
is a state that plays a particular causal role. Because many different kinds of physical
state could play the same role, there was no prospect of identifying types of functional
state with types of physical state, hence the slogan, ‘no type–type identity’.
Philosophers advancing these arguments used ‘type’ and ‘property’ interchange-
ably, concluding that, if mental properties, or biological properties, or any other
properties are functional properties, they are not candidates for identiﬁcation with
physical properties.
For many readers this is familiar territory. Familiarity has a philosophical down-
side, however. Too often, we feel comfortable with a familiar doctrine, not because
we understand it and ﬁnd it compelling, but because we can recite it by heart. When
I reﬂect on my own philosophical development, I realise that, when it came to argu-
ments for hierarchies and levels of entity, I could talk the talk, but I really did not
understand what I was talking about. I chalked my lack of understanding up to a
failure on my part to see what everyone else saw. This, together with the fact that no
one was likely to call my bluff enabled me to repress a latent uneasiness and move
on. Eventually I came to appreciate the Socratic point that, without uneasiness,
philosophy dies.
Apologies for waxing autobiographical, but I am leading up to the question, what
is a functional state? Being in a state is a matter of having a particular property, so
to be in a functional state—to be in pain, for instance—is to have (or ‘instantiate’ or
‘exemplify’) a functional property. When you are in pain, when the pain property is
on the scene, you are in a physical state that plays the pain role. You are in pain, you
have the property of being in pain, by virtue of being in that state. Another creature
might be in pain by virtue of being in a very different kind of physical state.
Here, distinct physical states are associated with a single property: the pain prop-
erty. You and that other creature are each in pain. Are your respective pain states iden-
tiﬁable with (reducible to) your respective physical states? How could they be? You
share the property of being in pain, but the physical states responsible for your both
being in pain are different. Thus, the property of being in pain cannot be identiﬁed
with the property of being in a particular kind of physical state.
This line of reasoning spawned the idea that physical states, while not identiﬁable
with functional states, nevertheless ‘implement’ or ‘realise’ functional states. You
and the other creature’s respective physical states realise your respective pain states:
one mental state, many physical realisers. Psychological states are multiply realisable
higher-level states.

The Incremental Chain of Being
15
You can see how this works in the case of computing machines and their programs.
Machines with very different kinds of physical architecture can perform the same
computation:solvingaparticulardifferentialequation,forinstance.Theirperforming
the computation requires transitions among the machines’ hardware states. The
machine’s performing the computation is not identiﬁable with those hardware transi-
tions, however. The very same computation could be implemented in different ways
on machines with different physical architectures. Computational processes, then,
must be higher-level occurrences implemented or realised by assorted lower-level
processes.
Once you accept this point, a whole new way of seeing things opens before
you. You can see that what goes for computational states and processes, goes for
psychological states and processes generally. But why stop there? The same move
extends smoothly to chemical, biological, and endless other higher-level states and
processes. By virtue of being multiply realisable, higher-level items across the board
cannot be reduced to—identiﬁed with—those at lower levels.
This moves us a step closer to the levels picture, but getting all the way there
requiresunderstandinghowphilosopherscametounderstandtherelationhigher-level
items bear to their lower-level realisers. This brings us back to functionalism.
4
The Metaphysics of Functionalism
Earlyon,NedBlockdistinguishedtwodistinctspeciesoffunctionalism(Block,1980;
see also Shoemaker, 1981). One of these, ‘functional state speciﬁer’ functionalism,
was associated with the work of David Armstrong and David Lewis (Armstrong,
1968;Lewis,1966).ForArmstrongandLewis,functionalismincludesbothananalyt-
ical and an empirical component. Mental predicates, they thought, could be given
functional analyses, but discovering what answers to these predicates is an empirical
matter.
So, for Armstrong and Lewis, when you say that Gus is in pain, you are saying that
Gus is in some state with the right input–output proﬁle. To a ﬁrst approximation, a
state counts as a pain state when it is brought about by tissue damage, excessive heat
or pressure and leads to aversive behaviour. So far so good. Armstrong and Lewis,
unlike most other functionalists, held that functional states in general, and mental
states in particular, were to be identiﬁed with whatever physical state played the right
functional role: a mental state is its realiser.
Because states capable of playing a given role could differ across species, and even
across individuals, the upshot is a kind of ‘token identity’ theory: every particular
mental state is identiﬁed with some—presumably physical—realising state or other.
If a state is an object’s having a property (at a time), then this is not property or type
identity. Mental types do not align with physical types, however mental terms—
mental predicates—hold true of individuals by virtue of those individuals’ being in
particular physical states.

16
J. Heil
This is a natural enough way of understanding functionalism, so you might be
surprised to learn that, when it came to functionalists’ metaphysics, Armstrong and
Lewis were a distinct minority. Mainstream functionalists explicitly rejected token
identity, in part because it smacked of reductionism or ‘eliminativism’. If all there is
to being in a mental state is to be in some physical state, then the mental is nothing
but the physical. But, they argued, reductionism is a nonstarter: there are plenty of
reasons to doubt that the mental is reducible to the physical.
What is the alternative? Mainstream functionalists contended that Armstrong–
Lewis style functionalism stemmed from a confusion. A functional state or property
is not identiﬁable with its physical realiser. A functional property is a ‘second order’
property: the property of having a property that plays the right functional role.
A second-order property is not, as the label suggests, a property of a property, but
the property of having a property. (Because referring to mental properties as second-
order properties is potentially confusing, I prefer to speak of higher-level properties.)
Block dubbed this brand of functionalism ‘functional state identity functionalism’,
a somewhat confusing characterisation in the context.
If you found the foregoing hard to follow, that is unsurprising. Sufﬁce it to say
that the resulting picture issued in property levels. To have a mental property, the
property of feeling frightened, for instance, would be to have the property of having
some physical property—to be in a physical state—with the functional proﬁle char-
acteristic of fear. The state might be one caused by occurrences deemed frightening,
for instance, that disposes its possessor to ﬂee the occurrence. The realising state
could vary across individuals and across species.
The question remains, given that mental properties are not identiﬁable with their
realisers, how precisely are the two related? Many philosophers accepted Donald
Davidson’s (1970) contention that the mental ‘supervened’ on the physical and
supposed supervenience to be a relation among property ‘families’ (Kim, 1978,
1979). Thus, if the family of mental properties supervenes on the family of physical
properties, mental properties are distinct from, but dependent on, physical properties.
This is what it is for a physical property to realise a mental property.
Supervenience thus construed was said to be nonreﬂexive—nothing supervenes
on itself –asymmetrical—if the As supervene on the Bs, the Bs do not, indeed could
not, supervene on the As—and transitive—if the As supervene on the Bs, and the Bs
supervene on the Cs, the As supervene on the Cs.
This purely formal characterisation of supervenience encompasses many different
kinds of relation (see Kim, 1990). These included causal relations (as when the Bs
causally sufﬁce for the As), constitution relations (when the As are made up of the
Bs), and cases in which two events are caused by a third event (when the As and Bs
are both effects of Cs).
None of these familiar relations was what proponents of multiple realisability
had in mind, however. The realising relation was something like the causal relation
but synchronic: once a realiser is on the scene, so is whatever it realises. The rela-
tion is evidently sui generus. It is what you have when a higher-level property is
synchronically dependent on, but distinct from some lower-level realising property.

The Incremental Chain of Being
17
Now, however, difﬁculties arise. Suppose your feeling of fear is dependent on,
but distinct from, a physical state with the right causal proﬁle. In that case it would
be the realiser, the physical state, that is brought about and in turn brings about the
relevant physical occurrences. When your fear leads you to ﬂee, it is not your fear
that is responsible for your ﬂeeing, but its physical realiser. And so it is for functional
states generally. Functional states are epiphenomenal, and, given that mental states
are functional states, mental states are epiphenomenal (Jackson, 1996; Kim, 1993;
McLaughlin, 1989).
You might regard epiphenomenalism as unobjectionable when it comes to
conscious states of mind, but the problem generalises in ways most philosophers
and nonphilosophers would ﬁnd unacceptable. Higher-level sciences are concerned
with higher-level states and properties. These ﬁgure centrally in laws and causal
explanations offered by the sciences. Are all these epiphenomenal?
Physics aside, most of what is of interest in the various sciences resides at higher
levels. Trees cast shadows, shed leaves, provide refuge for organisms of all sorts. The
real causal work is in the hands of items at lower levels, however, ultimately in the
hands of the quarks and leptons. Antireductionist arguments aimed at preserving the
autonomy of the several sciences and gave birth to a hierarchy of levels culminated,
ironically, in physics’ being put back in the driver’s seat.
Much has been written about the problem of causal efﬁcacy of higher-level
phenomena, but I will spare you the details (see, for instance, Jackson & Pettit,
1990). Sufﬁce it to say that none of the many attempts to provide for the causal rele-
vance of items at higher-levels has achieved anything close to universal acceptance.
You might have thought that this would send the architects of the hierarchical picture
back to the drawing board. As is so often the case in philosophy, however, rather than
re-examining the foundations of the ediﬁce, philosophers relegated the problems to
the background.
The sense was that this is just a problem we must all learn to live with: what is
a problem for everyone is a problem for no one. After all, the hierarchical, levels
model is mandated by the success of the sciences in getting at the causal structure of
the universe. Philosophers are in no position to challenge the standing of higher-level
sciences. The sciences have paid their dues. If philosophers are unable to account for
the causal efﬁcacy of higher-level items, that is their problem, not one that should
trouble the sciences.
5
Davidsonian Supervenience
This is yet another case in which apparently innocent philosophical presuppositions
turn out to have unwelcome downstream consequences. In this instance, the assump-
tion is that there are higher-level properties required by the sciences that depend
on distinct lower-level properties. The hierarchical picture was largely the product
of philosophers’ tendency to move directly from claims about the non-reducibility
of predicates and explanations, to claims about states and properties. If you look at

18
J. Heil
inﬂuential arguments against reduction, you will ﬁnd that they concern taxonomies.
Biological or psychological taxonomies, for instance, cannot be derived from or
recreated in a taxonomy belonging to physics. That seems right. But what follows?
If talk of Bs cannot be substituted for talk of As, does it follow that the A’s and Bs
belong to distinct categories of entity? Do irreconcilable taxonomic differences call
for distinct levels of being?
Why not suppose, instead, that there is just the one level describable in many
different non-equivalent ways? If you distinguish predicates from properties, what
antireductionist arguments show is that predicates belonging to taxonomies associ-
ated with the various sciences, cannot be replaced by predicates belonging to lower-
level taxonomies without a loss of information. The decisive move is to assume that
distinct families of predicate correspond distinct families of property, an especially
unfortunate consequence of linguisticised metaphysics. ‘The decisive movement in
the conjuring trick has been made, and it was the very one that we thought quite
innocent’ (Wittgenstein 1953/1967: §3.08).
I can illustrate what I have in mind by returning to Davidson and the Davidsonian
precept that the mental supervenes on the physical. Philosophers delving into the
metaphysicsofmentalpropertiesassumedthat,inspeakingofthementalsupervening
on the physical, Davidson must be referring to families of property (or, if he was not,
this was due solely to an unbecoming ambivalence about properties). Were that so,
then, given the irreducibility of the mental to the physical, mental properties must
be distinct from physical properties.
Philosophers occasionally speak of the reducibility of properties as in ‘mental
properties are (or are not) reducible to physical properties’. Reduction is a relation
holding among predicates (or laws, or explanations), however, not a relation among
properties. (What would it be to reduce one property to another property?).
In arguing that the mental supervened on the physical, Davidson was contending
that you could not have a mental difference without having a physical difference.
This is a defeasible substantive thesis, not a product of conceptual analysis. If it is
true that I am in pain and you are not, we must differ in some physical way.
Many of Davidson’s readers followed Kim in interpreting this as a claim about a
dependence relation among properties: mental properties, while distinct from phys-
ical properties, nevertheless depended on physical properties. If I have a mental
property that you lack, we must differ in some nonmental way.
Numberless philosophers, this author included, devoted inordinate amounts of
time and effort to the task of working out the metaphysics of supervenience. The
upshot was a growing sentiment that supervenience was a sui generis relation, not
further explicable. There had to be some kind of dependence relation between mental
properties and physical properties, and supervenience was as good a name for that
relation as any.
As a matter of fact, in invoking supervenience, Davidson was not advancing a
metaphysical doctrine about families of property. Davidson rarely spoke of prop-
erties but, as a student of Quine’s, when he did, he was not using ‘property’ in an
ontologically serous sense. For Davidson, to say that a ball has the property of spheri-

The Incremental Chain of Being
19
cality, is to say no more than ‘is spherical’ applies truly to the ball. A view of this kind
is silent on the implications of the supervenience thesis, if any, for the metaphysics
of properties.
Davidson’s inspiration was R. M. Hare, who contended that there could be no
moral difference without a nonmoral, natural difference (see Hare, 1952). Hare’s
focus was on moral judgements, not properties. Indeed, Hare was an anti-realist
about moral properties. His idea was that, if you judge that one person is good and
another not, there must be some nonmoral difference between the two. This is a defea-
sible substantive thesis about constraints on moral judgements, not a commitment to
distinct families of property.
In similar fashion, Davidson took mental–physical supervenience to express a
constraint on mental and physical judgements or descriptions. When you truly ascribe
a mental state to me, that very state could be picked out using a non-mental, physical
vocabulary. There are not two states, one lower- and the other higher-level. There is
one state describable in conceptually orthogonal ways.
Supervenience amounts to the precept that whatever makes true the ascription of
a state of mind, answers as well to a nonmental, physical description. This not the
thesis that when you are in a position to ascribe a particular mental state to me, you
are also in a position to offer a physical description of that state. All that follows is
that there is some way of picking out the state in a nonmental vocabulary.
This is one aspect of Davidson’s contention that something is mental or physical
‘only as described’ (1970: 215). The mental-physical distinction is not a metaphys-
ical distinction between incommensurable families of property, it is a distinction
between two incommensurable ways of describing the cosmos. For Davidson, the
mental–physical distinction is not what the scholastics called a real distinction, but a
distinction of reasoned reason, what today would be called a conceptual distinction.
Davidson’s motive for embracing supervenience was straightforward. States of
mind—beliefs, desires, intentions—are caused by physical occurrences and ﬁgure
causally in the production of actions. This is a conceptual point. Ascriptions of
states of mind are ascriptions of states that are caused by and cause physical events.
It is true that you perceive a tree only if a tree ﬁgures causally in the production
of your perceptual state. You act on reasons only if those reasons—in the form of
beliefs, desires, and intentions—are causally responsible for your body’s moving
as it does when you act. The identity of a mental state is bound up with its causes
and effects. Mental concepts are causally loaded. This might remind you of func-
tionalism, but, notwithstanding important similarities, Davidson was not committed
to the functionalist tenet that mental concepts could be given exhaustive functional
analyses.
The causally loaded character of ascriptions of states of mind converges with the
fact that we have every reason to think there is, whether we could give it or not, a
physical explanation for your going into perceptual states, entertaining beliefs about
trees, and for your bodily motions. Although there is no prospect of analysing or
paraphrasing mental concepts in nonmental terms, this is no barrier to the idea that,
whenever mental ascriptions are true, their truthmakers could be given nonmental,
physical descriptions.

20
J. Heil
Not only is Davidson’s supervenience not a kind of dependence relation among
properties or property families, it is not even asymmetrical. The mental supervenes
on the physical, and the physical supervenes on the mental. Anything answering
to a mental description answers, as well, to some physical description or other, and
anything that could be given a physical description could, with sufﬁcient ingenuity, be
described in a mental vocabulary. The symmetrical nature of supervenience reﬂects
the fact that ‘mental’ and ‘physical’ designate different ways of characterising one
and the same cosmos.
Owing to the incommensurability of the vocabularies to which the mental and
physical terms belong, there is no one–one, or even one–many, mapping of mental
terms onto physical terms. Davidson calls this anomalous monism: monism because
there is just the one cosmos describable in different ways; anomalous because the
modes of description are incommensurable.
6
Dénoument
Even if Davidson himself did not regard supervenience as a dependence relation
among families of property, why think he is right? Why not think that, whatever
Davidson himself believed, it is useful—perhaps even inevitable—that we take
‘supervenience’ as a name for a relation among property families. Davidson might
eschew the metaphysics of properties, but this saddles the rest of us with the problem
of understanding the relation between mental and physical properties, which are,
after all, distinct species of property.
A better question might be, why imagine that the proponents of the hierarchical
picture are right? Their case rests on arguments that start with plausible taxonomic
premises which are then given a patently metaphysical spin. The conclusions are
not supported by the arguments, and they provide no illumination concerning the
relation between higher- and lower-level entities. In addition, they incur signiﬁcant
metaphysical costs, one of which, the problem of the causal relevance of the mental,
surfaced earlier: how could higher-level properties, mental or otherwise, enter into
the causal fray? Such properties would, instead, be undercut or pre-empted by their
lower-level realisers.
This problem does not so much as arise for Davidson. If every state answering to
a mental description answers to a nonmental, physical description, you would have
one and the same state, differently characterised, making it true that you are afraid
and bringing about your ﬂeeing. To ask whether a state ﬁgured in a causal relation
because it answered to a mental description or because it answered to a physical
description is to court confusion.
The point extends beyond the psychological domain. Biology is not reducible
to physics: biological taxonomies, laws, and explanations are orthogonal to the
taxonomies, laws, and explanations deployed by physicists. Still, whatever could
be given a biological description, answers as well to a description couched in the
language of physics. ‘This is an emu’ is true of a particular creature because that

The Incremental Chain of Being
21
creature has what it takes to be an emu. But that same creature could be described in
a vocabulary mandated by physics. And so it is for other higher-level sciences. This
is not reduction, there is no suggestion that you could recast talk of emus in terms of
quarks and leptons.
In invoking Davidson, my aim has been to illustrate a general point: nothing is
gained by interpreting taxonomic hierarchies as evidence for levels of being. You
can honour antireductionist sentiments without embracing a hierarchical ontology.
Doing so has the advantage of making sense of scientiﬁc practice without incurring
the problems and mysteries accompanying a multi-tiered ontology.
Chemistry, biology, psychology, and economics do not concern distinct realities.
Whattheyaffordaredifferent,largelyautonomouswaysofaddressingasinglereality.
This takes nothing away from the special sciences, the pronouncements of which are
often enough true. To dispense with a tendentious philosophical reconstruction of
relations among the sciences, is not to dispense with the sciences.
References
Armstrong, D. M. (1968). A materialist theory of the mind. Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Block, N. J. (1980). (1980) ‘What is Functionalism.’ In N. J. Block (Ed.), Readings in philosophy
of psychology (Vol. 1, pp. 171–184). Harvard University Press.
Davidson, D. (1970). ‘Mental Events’. In L.Foster, & J. Swanson (eds.) Experience and theory.
University of Massachusetts Press: 79–101. Reprinted in Essays on Actions and Events. Clarendon
Press (1980), 207–225.
Fodor, J. A. (1968). Psychological explanation: An introduction to the philosophy of psychology.
Random House.
Fodor, J. A. (1981). The mind-body problem. Scientiﬁc American, 244, 114–123.
Fodor, J. A. (1997). ‘Special sciences: Still autonomous after all these years’. Philosophical Perspec-
tives 11: 149–63; reprinted in In Critical condition: Polemical essays on cognitive science and
the philosophy of mind. MIT Press (1998), 9–24
Hare, R. M. (1952). The language of morals. Oxford University Press.
Jackson, F. C. (1996). Mental causation. Mind, 105, 377–441.
Jackson, F. C., & Pettit, P. (1990). In defense of folk psychology. Philosophical Studies, 59, 31–54.
Kim, J. (1978). Supervenience and Nomological Incommensurables. American Philosophical
Quarterly, 15, 149–156.
Kim, J. (1979). Causality, identity, and supervenience. Midwest Studies in Philosophy, 4, 31–49.
Kim, J. (1990). ‘Supervenience as a philosophical concept’. Metaphilosophy 12: 1–27. Reprinted
in Supervenience and mind: Selected philosophical essays. Cambridge University Press (1993),
131–60.
Kim, J. (1993) ‘The non-reductivist’s troubles with mental causation’. In J. Heil, & A. R. Mele (eds.)
Mental causation. Clarendon Press: 189–210. Reprinted in Supervenience and Mind: Selected
Philosophical Essays. Cambridge University Press (1993): 336–57.
Lewis, D. K. (1966) ‘An argument for the identity theory’. Journal of Philosophy 63, 17–25.
Reprinted in Philosophical Papers, vol. 1. Oxford University Press (1983), 99–107.
McLaughlin, B. P. (1989). Type epiphenomenalism, type dualism, and the causal priority of the
physical. Philosophical Perspectives, 3, 109–135.
Place, U. T. (1956). Is consciousness a brain process? The British Journal of Psychology, 47, 44–50.
Putnam, H. (1967) ‘Psychological predicates’. In W. H. Capitan, & D. D. Merrill (eds.) Art, mind,
and religion. University of Pittsburgh Press, 37–48. Reprinted as ‘The nature of mental states’ in

22
J. Heil
Mind, language, and reality: Philosophical papers, vol. 2. Cambridge University Press (1975),
429–40.
Ryle, G. (1949). The concept of mind. Hutchinson.
Shoemaker, S. (1981). ‘Some varieties of functionalism’. Philosophical Topics, 12, 83–118.
Reprinted in Identity, cause, and mind: Philosophical essays. Cambridge University Press (1984),
261–86.
Smart, J. J. C. (1959). Sensations and Brain Processes. Philosophical Review, 68, 141–156.
Wittgenstein, L. (1953/1968) Philosophical investigations. G. E. M. Anscombe, trans. Basil
Blackwell.

Does Linguistics Need (Weak)
Emergence?
J. T. M. Miller
There are many different sorts of linguistic objects: words, sentences, paragraphs,
phonemes, morphemes, and many more. There are also linguistic properties. That
is, there are properties that are primarily (perhaps even uniquely) instantiated by
linguistic objects. Such properties include spellings, pronunciations, meanings, and
various different grammatical properties.
Interestingly,someofthesepropertiesseemtoonlybeattributableto‘higher-level’
objects. For example, single words cannot have certain complex grammatical proper-
ties. I have, elsewhere, explored whether some of these linguistic properties instanti-
ated by higher-level objects are ontologically emergent properties (Miller, 2017). In
that paper, I explored whether at certain levels of complexity within linguistic deriva-
tions, new properties come into existence which contribute novel causal powers to
the object that instantiates the property. If they exist, these ontologically emergent
linguistic properties cannot be reduced to patterns of lower-level properties, or to
additive properties that arise due to the nature of the lower-level properties.
This chapter extends the discussion begun in that earlier work. Though I explore
the same phenomena—that of the truth-evaluability of sentences—I hope that
this chapter is readable independently. My aim here is to re-evaluate the failure
of reduction that I argued for previously and consider whether the observations
might support positing an alternative conceptions of emergence, that of weak or
epistemic emergence.
The chapter is structured as follows. In section one I outline the concept of emer-
gence, and in particular the understanding of weak emergence that I will adopt in
this chapter. In section two, I defend the idea that there are ‘levels’ in linguistics such
that different linguistic objects (and the properties they instantiate) might be taken to
be ‘higher’ or ‘lower’ level with respect to other linguistic objects. In section three,
I rehearse some of the claims found in Miller (2017), most centrally the seemingly
J. T. M. Miller (B)
Department of Philosophy, Durham University, 50 Old Elvet, Durham D1 3HN, UK
e-mail: james.miller@durham.ac.uk
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
S. Wuppuluri and I. Stewart (eds.), From Electrons to Elephants and Elections,
The Frontiers Collection, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-92192-7_3
23

24
J. Miller
failure of reductionism to account for the property of truth-evaluability instantiated
by some (but not all) sentences. In section four, I consider whether weak emer-
gence might allow us to solve the problems facing reductionism, thereby avoiding
a commitment to truth-evaluability as being a strongly emergent property. I close in
section ﬁve by reﬂecting brieﬂy on what this means for linguistics more widely.
1
What is Weak Emergence?
Emergence is often understood with reference to a background commitment to reality
being structured hierarchically in levels. This commitment to levels means supporters
of emergence hold that reality is ordered and structured, with different entities at each
of the levels. Different levels of reality then reﬂect the relative fundamentality of the
entities within each level, with those entities at the ‘bottom’ level being the most
fundamental.
Making use of this notion of levels, those that argue that there are emergent
entities (typically, but not always properties)1 hold that emergent entities are higher
levelentitiesthataresomething‘overandabove’thelower-levelentitiesthatcompose
them. Emergent entities are not merely additive entities—not merely the sum of their
parts. Rather, the idea is that emergent entities are ‘both distinct from and novel with
respect to the base phenomena from which they emerge, whilst nevertheless being
dependent upon the base phenomena’ (Carruth, 2019: 87).
Emergent properties are therefore possessed (or instantiated) by ‘higher-level’
complex systems or objects. That is, they are properties that are possessed by higher-
level objects that are themselves composed by lower-level (or more fundamental)
objects that possess (or instantiate) other lower-level properties. For example, one
of the most discussed potential cases of emergence is that of consciousness. The
idea is that consciousness is an emergent property that can be said to ‘arise’ out
of more fundamental properties—such as the neurophysiological properties of the
brain. Consciousness, if it is emergent, is therefore a novel property of the complex
object that is the human brain (or mind), and is irreducible to lower-level properties
of the brain (see O’Connor 2020).
Beyond this very broad characterisation, the precise details of putative cases of
emergence have been understood in multiple different ways.2 One major distinc-
tion relevant to this paper is between ontological (or strong) and epistemic (or
weak) emergence. Again very broadly characterised, and not uncontroversially so,
the difference between ontological and epistemic emergence lies in whether the
emergent entities are (merely) part of our explanatory practices, or are a novel part
1 For some exceptions to this, and further discussion of the plausibility of those arguments, see
Hasker 2017, Nida-Rümelin 2007, O’Connor and Churchill 2010, and Rickabaugh 2018, and
Zimmerman 2010.
2 See Van Gulick 2001, and Gibb, Hendry, & Lancaster (2019) for overviews of the wide range of
topics within the ﬁeld.

Does Linguistics Need (Weak) Emergence?
25
of the ontology of world (in addition to the lower-level entities from which they
emerge), though the precise details have been cashed out in many different ways.
For example, Chalmers understands the distinction through the epistemic notion of
deducibility such that:
a high-level phenomenon is strongly emergent with respect to a low-level domain when
the high-level phenomenon arises from the low-level domain, but truths concerning that
phenomenon are not deducible even in principle from truths in the low-level domain.
(Chalmers, 2006: 244)
And,
‘a high-level phenomenon is weakly emergent with respect to a low-level domain when
the high-level phenomenon arises from the low-level domain, but truths concerning
that phenomenon are unexpected given the principles governing the low-level domain.’
(Chalmers, 2006: 244)
Or, in the words of Bishop and Silberstein:
ontologically emergent entities or properties are thought to be the result of irreducible
bridge laws or causal powers to produce qualitatively new phenomena. Such strongly emer-
gent phenomena are also said by some to possess novel “downward” causal powers that
constrain the behavior of other phenomena at smaller spatial and temporal scales. (Bishop &
Silberstein, 2019: 154).
And weakly emergent entities:
fail to be predictable, derivable, explainable or characterizable in terms of the “more basic”
entities and properties out of which the emergents arise. (Bishop & Silberstein, 2019: 154)3
What is clear about weak emergence understood in these ways is precisely how
weak it is. Weak emergence is epistemic in nature, relating to our ability to predict,
derive, or explain the phenomena we observe. It is about our epistemic capabilities,
and not (necessarily) about the nature of the entities themselves. Indeed, this concep-
tion of emergence is so weak that failure of predictability is often (though not always)
taken to be consistent with some form of ontological reductionism. As Wong puts it,
‘unpredictability, however, is not supposed to introduce any new ontology into the
world; it is merely epistemic’ (2019: 180).
Another example of the consistency of weak emergence and reductionism comes
from Bedau (1997) who argues that an epistemic (or weakly) emergent property (or
state) is a macroscopic or higher-level property that could only be understood when
we understand the nature or behaviours of the lower-level property if we have already
modelled the higher-level property. Under this conception, there is a failure of predic-
tion in epistemic emergence cases as knowledge of the lower-level states would not
allow us to predict the higher-level (or macro) behaviour that we observe. However,
3 Bishop and Silberstein do not accept these characterisations of emergence, favouring instead an
alternative account of what it is for some entity to be emergent that they call ‘ontological contextual
emergence’. See Bishop 2005, 2010; Silberstein 2002, 2012, 2017. It would be an interesting task
to consider that form of emergence to see what it would say about the sorts of cases that arise from
linguistics, but I leave that to future work.

26
J. Miller
there is no irreducibility requirement. Higher-level properties may be reducible to
lower-level ones, but to do this we must ﬁrst study the higher-level properties. A study
of the lower-level alone cannot lead us to understand fully the observed higher-level.
And, again, in the work of Butterﬁeld who understands emergence in the following
way:
properties or behaviour of a system which are novel and robust relative to some appropriate
comparison class. Here ‘novel’ means something like: ‘not deﬁnable from the comparison
class’, and maybe ‘showing features (maybe striking ones) absent from the comparison
class’. And ‘robust’ means something like: ‘the same for various choices of, or assumptions
about, the comparison class’. Often these words are made more precise by the fact that the
system is a composite. So the idea is that its properties and behaviour are novel and robust
compared to those of its component systems (2011: 3)
Butterﬁeld goes on to argue that this notion of emergence is consistent with
an account of reduction as the “deduction of one theory from another”, nor makes
emergence a case of “mere supervenience” (2011: 3–4). The consistency of reduction
and emergence comes from the higher-level showing properties that are novel with
respect to the properties of the component systems, yet following our knowledge of
thehigher-levelpropertieswecanthenlearntodeducethepresenceofthehigher-level
properties given certain arrangements or behaviours of the lower-level components
system. Put an alternative way, the requirement is that we can only know about
the higher-level properties through ﬁrst recognising their existence at the higher
level. Once we have recognised the property at the higher-level, we might be able to
subsequently ‘backwards engineer’ the property and thus deduce the property from
the lower level, thus satisfying Butterﬁeld’s conception of reduction. So understood,
emergence asks very little of the world.
It is this weak conception of emergence that I have in mind what I ask my main
question in this chapter: does linguistics need (weak) emergence? My aim is to argue
that the answer to this question is yes. Thus, in this chapter, I will take a phenomenon
to be weakly emergent, when such entities ‘fail to be predictable, derivable, explain-
able or characterizable in terms of the “more basic” entities and properties out of
which the emergents arise’ (Bishop & Silberstein, 2019: 154), and will argue in the
rest of this chapter that there is at least one case where linguistics should embrace
this sort of emergence, before reﬂecting on what this might mean for linguistics more
widely.
2
Levels in Linguistics
Amongst the various sorts of linguistic entities, there are some that are seemingly
indisputably ‘higher-level’ entities. Sentences, for example, are complex entities,
typically taken to be composed of words. Words are, in this context, ‘lower-level’
entities. They are simpler than sentences, and when put together following various
rules we are able to bring into existence sentences as well as various other even more

Does Linguistics Need (Weak) Emergence?
27
complex higher-level linguistic entities such as paragraphs, chapters, and, possibly,
books.4
This is not to say that words are absolutely or universally to be classiﬁed as being
lower-level. Pre-theoretically, words are the fundamental or atomic elements of our
language system. That is, our pre-theoretic view is normally that the mental lexicon
contains atomic units which are words. What this would mean is that our minds
contain a store of words, available for us to draw down and place into syntactic
arrangements to create sentences and other more complex linguistic entities.
This atomic conception of words, though, is widely rejected in the linguistics
literature. Rather, relative to other entities, words are themselves taken to be higher-
level, complex objects, with the composition of words speciﬁcally studied in the ﬁeld
of morphology. Indeed, it is not unheard in the literature to defend an even stronger
view which denies the existence of words all together. Boeckx, for example, has
called words the ‘phlogiston of linguistics’ (2008: 68): a pre-theoretical posit, that
now that our scientiﬁc understanding has progressed, can be done away with. At the
very least, even if not outright denying the existence of words, it is clear that words
are not the sorts of things ordinary speakers have typically taken them to be—they
are not the atomic elements of language. Though if words are not the atomic elements
of the language faculty, then what are? That is, what are the smallest objects posited
within linguistics?
Sprouse and Lau state that ‘it is fair to say that there is some degree of consensus
that the basic units are bundles of features’ (2013). It is these ‘bundles of features’ that
are the objects stored in the mental lexicon ready to be accessed when required as part
of a linguistic derivation. For our purposes here, we can take the term ‘feature’ to be
synonymous with the more common philosophical term of ‘property’ (and I will use
the two interchangeably throughout). Thus, the consensus position is that the mental
lexiconcontainsunitsthatarebundlesofproperties,wherethosepropertiesdetermine
(at least) the phonological and conceptual information relating to those units and the
ways that those units subsequently behave within a linguistic derivation.5 For ease,
I will follow Borer (2005) and call these units ‘listemes’.
This is of course not to say that all agree about the precise nature of listemes.
For example, whilst there is agreement that the primitive elements are listemes (as
bundles of features/properties), there is disagreement about what features/properties
listemes have. For example, Chomsky (1995) suggests that listemes need to possess
‘formal’ features—roughly speaking, syntactic information that identiﬁes that partic-
ular listemes as being of a certain syntactic category. Borer denies this, at least for
what she calls ‘substantive’ listemes which are category-less in her conception of
the lexicon, only gaining a syntactic category as a result of the process of being
merged within the syntactic processing that results in phrases and other more complex
4 I say possibly not because I am raising some doubts that books exist, but rather that there could
be doubts that books are linguistic entities. Certainly books do not seem to be necessarily linguistic
entities as picture books are books that at least could contain no linguistic entities at all.
5 See Miller (2021) for an extension of this idea to words more generally, arguing that words should
also be characterised as being bundles of properties.

28
J. Miller
linguistic entities. For Borer, leaving aside various complexities, such listemes are
sound-meaning pairs—a combination of some phonological information and some
conceptual information only (Borer, 2005: 15).
These debates over the precise nature of listemes are not my focus here. The
signiﬁcance of this in this paper is that in order to understand emergence claims,
we need to understand levels within the speciﬁc domain under discussion. Words
are, within the domain of language, higher-level entities, and listemes ‘lower-level’.
Indeed, it is plausible that within the language faculty in humans, listemes, and
the properties that they possess, are the lowest-level entities. That is, listemes that
instantiate certain (potentially limited) properties, unlike words, at least have a claim
to be the smallest elements of the language faculty. Or, putting this in the terminology
common in debates about emergence, listemes are lower-level entities, with all other
linguistic entities being relatively higher-level.
An important caveat is needed at this point, before returning to questions of emer-
gence more explicitly. I have suggested that listemes are lower-level entities, with
words, sentences, etc. as being relatively higher-level. This claim is strictly one about
the ontology of the language faculty as it appears in humans, and not a wider claim
about the ontology of the mind. The language faculty is undoubtedly just one part
of a much bigger and more complex cognitive architecture. Minimally, the language
facultymusthaveinterfaceswithbroaderconceptualsystemsandsystemsthatcontrol
sensory-motor functions that ensure that any linguistic structures created within the
language faculty can be suitably externalised. It is possible that the language faculty
interfaces with far more distinct aspects of our cognitive systems too.
For my purposes here, which is solely a discussion about the possibility of emer-
gence within the language faculty, I am interested only in the ontology of the language
faculty. It may be that a full understanding of the entire cognitive architecture of
humans will conclude that listemes and their properties that I have claimed are the
smallest elements of the language faculty are in fact complex outputs of various
other aspects of cognition. Indeed, I think this is likely in some cases, particular for
listemes through which conceptual information enters into the language faculty.
However, as I am interested in properties of linguistic entities, and on the assump-
tion that (at least in humans) only the language faculty produces or functions over
linguistic entities, whether or not listemes are lower or higher-level entities relative
to the wider cognitive architecture is not important. All claims of emergence require
are levels, and the above suggests that at least within the language faculty, such
levels exist, with listemes at the ‘bottom’ and other more complex linguistic entities
at higher levels.
Returning to our main focus, what should we look for when seeing if there are
possible cases of emergence in linguistics? Using our deﬁnition above of (weak)
emergence, we are after cases where higher-level phenomena ‘fail to be predictable,
derivable, explainable or characterizable in terms of the “more basic” entities and
properties out of which the emergents arise’ (Bishop & Silberstein, 2019: 154).

Does Linguistics Need (Weak) Emergence?
29
Applying this to the ontology of language that we have sketched thus far, we
are looking for cases where certain phenomena or properties of higher-level enti-
ties—words, sentences, etc.—fail to be predictable, derivable, explainable or char-
acterizable in terms of the more basic entities—listemes. As already noted, there
are various different properties of listemes, potentially including, depending on the
wider conception of the mental lexicon, semantic features, syntactic features, and
phonetic features. Possible candidates for emergence would therefore be any prop-
erty of a higher-level that cannot be reduced to some such property of a listeme, or
to the interaction of such properties of a listeme.
So understood, there might be various candidates for emergence in linguistics.
Are lower-level properties sufﬁcient to fully characterize the nature of words as they
appear in ordinary language? Might it be the case that there are certain characteristics
that only arise when certain properties of listemes interact, but are unpredictable
from considering those features alone? Depending on the role within our theory of
syntactic processes, it is distinctly plausible that certain properties arise due to the
ways that listemes are affected by syntactic operations. The more properties we posit
listemes as having, the more that we can predict the behaviour of higher-level entities,
though (as I will return to below) positing additional properties purely to account for
otherwise unpredictable characteristics of higher-level entities may be ad hoc.
If we are considering if there is emergence in linguistics we should not focus solely
on features and listemes though. The discussion in this section was only intended to
sketch a broad picture of the ontology of language, and illustrate that there are levels
in our current linguistic theories. That is, that there are at least distinct levels where
we ﬁnd distinct objects—listemes, words, phrases, sentences, etc.—each of which
is ‘higher-level’ with respect to the entity preceding it in that list. Emergence, if it
exists in linguistics at all, may occur between any of these levels.
As it happens, the case that I want to focus the rest of this paper around is not
found at between the levels of features and listemes, but concerns a property of certain
phrases or sentences. But, that I focus on a property of phrases and sentences does
not rule out that there might be other cases of possible emergence. The example I will
outline here is the same property that I discuss in Miller (2017)—the property of truth-
evaluability. I suspect that there are many other properties that are at least plausible
candidates from being emergent between the different levels found in linguistics, but
the discussion of other cases will have to be left for future work.
3
The Case for the Failure of Reduction
We might disagree about which entities can have the property of being true or false.
A list of what entities, linguistic and non-linguistic, can be true or false will depend

30
J. Miller
signiﬁcantly on the results of further disputes, but certain linguistic entities indis-
putablyhavethepropertyofbeingtrueorfalse.6 Sentences,forexample,arelinguistic
entities that can be true or false, as in (1):
(1)
The apple is on the table.
There are of course cases where we do not know if a certain sentence is true
or false. For example, I may not know whether the sentence ‘There are exactly ten
coins in my pocket’ is true or not. Depending on our theory of truth, there might
be various ways that we can work out if a given sentence is true or false. If we
adopt a correspondence theory of truth, we might try to work out whether sentence
corresponds with the world in a suitable way. Other theories of truth will provide
other ways to determine whether a given sentence is true or false.
Some linguistic entities, though, cannot be true or false. Single words (with a
potential exception to be discussed below) cannot be true or false. For example, (2)
cannot, by itself be true or false. Nor can certain sub-sentential phrases, such as
determiner phrases as in (3), or verb phrases as in (4), nor can morphemes, whether
they are free as in (5), or bound as in (6).
(2)
table
(3)
a table
(4)
kicked the ball
(5)
town
(6)
-ing
These examples illustrate the difference between truth, and truth-evaluability. I
am interested in the latter here: the property that results in (1) being truth-evaluable,
while (2)–(6) are not. That is, what makes it the case that we can ask whether (1)
is true or false, irrespective to what the answer to that question is, while we cannot
sensibly ask whether (2)–(6) are true or false. All of them are linguistic entities, thus
we need to understand why only some of them have this property.
Interestingly, truth-evaluability is a property of certain linguistic entities indepen-
dent of our view about how language connects with the world. What I mean by this
is that supporters of all theories of truth should accept that (1) can be true or false,
while (2)–(6) cannot be. This suggests strongly that truth-evaluability is a property
that is internal to the object. By ‘internal’ I mean that it is a property of the linguistic
entity, and not a result of some relation that the linguistic entity stands in to some
further entities (including the world). Certain linguistic entities, such as (1), are truth-
evaluable, independent of whether they are true or false, and those entities have this
property independent of any further relations that we might posit as holding between
6 For example, can pictures be true? Propositions are normally accepted as being able to be true or
false, but propositions are not normally taken to be linguistic entities. These further issues about
what other objects can have the property of being true or false will not be important here; I am only
focusing instead on entities that are clearly linguistic, such as sentences.

Does Linguistics Need (Weak) Emergence?
31
linguistic entities and the world.7 This hopefully sufﬁces to get an initial grasp on
the property I am considering.
What further can we say about the property? First, the examples in (1)–(6) also
suggest that truth-evaluability is a higher-level property. This is because the only
linguistic entity that has the property of is a sentence, and none of the lower-level
entities can possess the property. This is important as it is a requirement for a possible
case of emergence that the putative emergent property is higher-level. We have noted
this above—if emergent properties exist, then they need to be higher-level proper-
ties that are dependent on, but distinct from lower-level properties. (1)–(6) show,
minimally, that truth-evaluability is a higher-level property in that it is instantiated
by (relatively) higher-level linguistic entities (i.e. sentences), and not lower-level
entities (such as words, phrases, or morphemes).
Interestingly, being a sentence is only a necessary condition on being truth-
evaluable, not a sufﬁcient condition as shown by (7) and (8).
(7)
What is on the table?
(8)
Put the apple on the table!
Both (7) and (8) are well-formed grammatical sentences, unlike (2)–(6), and
yet neither can be coherently thought of as true or false. This suggests that truth-
evaluability requires a particular form of structural complexity (see Hinzen, 2009,
2013, 2014), and not merely a well-formed sentence.
Semantic content is also not relevant to truth-evaluability, as shown by certain
nonsense sentences that are still truth-evaluable. For example, (9) is truth-evaluable.
We may not know whether it is true or false, or we might think that the lack of
meaning for the terms mean that we can never know whether it is true of false. But
the requisite structural complexity is present for (9) to be truth-evaluable.
(9)
All mimsy were the borogoves.
Summarising, the above examples show that truth-evaluability is a property only
possessed by certain higher-level linguistic entities, such as sentences.8 However,
not just any sentence is truth-evaluable, and whether a sentence is truth-evaluable is
independent of the coherence of the semantic content expressed by the sentence. We
might think (9) is ultimately meaningless, but it still possesses the property of being
truth-evaluable,9 unlike (7) and (8), neither of which are truth-evaluable.
7 There is a similar notion of ‘truth-aptness’ discussed by some philosophers. Truth-aptness has
often been invoked to make claims about what linguistic structures aim to express facts about the
world, for example in the context of non-cognitivist ethics (see Jackson, Oppy and Smith 1994). I
am not interested in the relation between language and the world in this paper, only in the internal
property of certain linguistic structures to be evaluated for truth, hence I will use the more neutral
notion of truth-evaluability to avoid any confusion with other debates.
8 Or matrix clauses more precisely.
9 Note, the meaningless of (9) might lead some to think that it has no truth value if we hold that
meaningless sentences necessarily have no truth value. However, there is a difference between an
entity lacking a truth-value and being truth-evaluable. I contend that (9) possesses the latter property,
irrespective of our views about whether it is true, false, or has a gappy truth-value.

32
J. Miller
Given that truth-evaluability is a higher-level property, is it a possible case of
emergence? One prima facie way to argue that it is emergent would require showing
the failure of reductionism with respect to truth-evaluability. To do that, there are two
considerations that need to be made. First, does the property ever get instantiated at
the lower-level? And, second, is the property plausibly structural? If the answer to
either of these questions is yes, then there would seem to be no case for emergence
(of any sort). In what remains of this section, I will argue that the answer to both
questions is no.
First, is truth-evaluability instantiated by lower-level entities? From the above
cases,wehaveseenalreadysupportfortheclaimthatthepropertyisnotinstantiatedat
the lower-level as single words, isolated phrases, and morphemes (bound or unbound)
are incapable of instantiating the property. Putting this another way, (2)–(6) are
evidence that no lower-level linguistic entity can be truth-evaluable. The property
only can be instantiated by (relatively) higher-level entities, such as sentences.
Above, I mentioned in passing a possible counter-example to this. The possible
counter-examples are certain single words that may on ﬁrst glance appear to be truth-
evaluable. For example, say that one person asks another what the weather outside
is like, and the response given is ‘Sunny’. In this case, we would appear to have a
single word that is truth-evaluable as it is possible to evaluate the response (‘Sunny’)
to determine whether it is true or false. Thus, we would appear to have single words
that can be truth-evaluable, contra my claim that only higher-level linguistic entities
can instantiate the property.
However, as I argued in previous work (Miller, 2017: 119), such cases are
misleading. This is because the full linguistic analysis of such single word responses
would involve positing anaphoric structure in the response inherited from the ques-
tion. Thus, the linguistic analysis of the response ‘Sunny’ would hold that the
response had the underlying structure present in (10), which, in English, does not
need to be morphologically expressed.
(10)
It is sunny outside.
(10), though, clearly is a sentence, and hence is a higher-level entity. That English
(and other languages) does not require elements to be spoken does not rule out that
such structures are still operating, supporting the claim that truth-evaluability can
only be instantiated by higher-level linguistic entities.
What about the property being structural? By structural, I mean properties that
arise due to the nature of lower-level entities, even when those lower-level entities do
not possess those structural properties themselves. For example, my table is rectan-
gular. However, at an atomic level, its parts likely do not instantiate the property of
‘being rectangular’. Analogous cases come from the weights of composite objects.
No particle instantiates the property of being 10 kg, but the object that the parti-
cles compose may instantiate that property. Such cases are widely accepted as not
being cases of emergence. The reason is that such properties are ‘additive’ in nature
(McLaughlin, 1992:89). While the higher-level entity does appear to have a novel
property, that novelty can be explained by considering the combined effects of the

Does Linguistics Need (Weak) Emergence?
33
lower-level properties—e.g. all of the weights of the particles combined that together
weigh 10 kg.
Is truth-evaluability structural in this sense? Again, the answer is no.10 The
evidence for this comes from the fact that the same structure has different prop-
erties depending on whether it is a matrix clause, or whether it is embedded within
some further structure. To see this, consider the examples, borrowed from Miller
(2017: 123).
(11)
Caesar destroyed Syracuse.
(12)
Mary believes that [Caesar destroyed Syracuse].
(11) is clearly truth-evaluable, and so is (12). But, this case is important as it is
one where we have the same structure appearing once as a matrix clause, and again
embedded within a more complex structure. Language is an ordered and structured
entity, and that ordering and structure is governed by various rules studied by linguis-
tics. Given this, it is reasonable to suppose that the structure instantiated in (11) and
the structure instantiated in the embedded clause of (12) is identical. But, unlike in
(11), that same structure when it appears in (12), is not a truth-functional ingredient
within that larger structure.
This suggests that truth-evaluability is not a structural property. If it were, then the
same structure should be truth-evaluable whenever it exists, but in (11) and (12) we
have a case where that is not true. This is of course not to deny that (12) as a whole
is truth-evaluable. It absolutely is. It is only the claim that the structure that appears
in (11) is identical to the structure that appears in the embedded clause in (12), and
as it is truth-evaluable in one but not the other, that is at least initial evidence that
truth-evaluability cannot be a structural property akin to shape or weight.
These arguments suggest that reductionism fails in the case of truth-evaluability.
In Miller (2017) I argued that this gave us some reason to hold that truth-evaluability
is a strongly emergent property. That is, I argued that this failure of reduction suggests
that the property is a metaphysically novel and irreducible property instantiated at the
higher-level.Inthefollowingsection,Iweakenthisconclusionsomewhat,andinstead
argue that the evidence is also compatible with the conclusion that truth-evaluability
is weakly emergent, in the sense outline in section one.
4
Truth-Evaluability as Weak Emergent
I think that the above arguments are sufﬁcient for us to reject any simplistic reduc-
tionist view. What I mean by this is that I think the above shows that it is unlikely
that we will simply ‘ﬁnd’ (or are justiﬁed in positing) a property at the lower-level
that accounts for, or explains, the property of truth-evaluability as it appears at the
higher-level. In Miller (2017) I argued that this failure of reduction was evidence
10 The case against truth-evaluability as a structural property is more complex than I can summarise
within the word limit here. For the full argument, see Miller 2017: 122–132.

34
J. Miller
for strong emergence in linguistics. In this section, I will instead sketch a view
under which truth-evaluability is weakly emergent, contra the claims I made previ-
ously that the only alternative considering the failure of reductionism was positing
strongly emergent properties.
In section one, weak emergence was characterised as being cases where entities
‘fail to be predictable, derivable, explainable or characterizable in terms of the “more
basic” entities and properties out of which the emergents arise’ (Bishop & Silberstein,
2019: 154). Could truth-evaluability be weakly emergent? I think the answer is yes
(or, at least, possibly yes). To see this, consider one further route of response for the
reductionist: to argue that there is a property instantiated by listemes that accounts for
truth-evaluability. That is, the reductionist could argue that in addition to semantic,
formal, phonetic, and other sorts of features/properties that we might posit as being
instantiated by listemes, there is also a ‘truth-evaluability’ property. This would
then be a property instantiated at the lower-level, undermining any need to posit
emergence.
It is worth pausing to distinguish this possible response from that of whether
truth-evaluability is a structural property. In the structural case, the idea is that the
property is one that comes into existence in line with certain structural complexity.
Such structural properties would not therefore be a property of a listeme. They could
only be a property of certain structures. This is distinct from the claim that there
might be a property of truth-evaluability instantiated by listemes in that this claim
instead posits that truth-evaluability is there all along. The idea being considered is
that truth-evaluability is a property of certain listemes, but one that does not manifest
its causal powers unless in the presence of other properties.
In Miller (2017), I argued that there was a problem with this reductionist response
in that such a posit would appear to be ad hoc. There, I argued that the only reason that
we would posit a lower-level property that accounts for truth-evaluability is because
we want to avoid positing a strongly emergent property. After all, what other reason
could there be? The above examples suggested that there is no independent evidence
of truth-evaluability as a property of lower-level entities, so the only reason that we
might insist that there really is some relevant lower-level property would be because
we do not want to posit strongly emergent properties.
On reﬂection, I think this argument is perhaps a bit too quick. Certainly it is the
case that given the evidence about single words not being truth-evaluable, any truth-
evaluability property posited as being instantiated by listemes certainly cannot be
exactly like other properties instantiated by listemes. Rather this property would need
tobeonethatonlybestowsonthelinguisticentitythatcontainsitapropertyoncethere
is some complexity present. What this means is that it would be a property such that
it is only in the presence of some other feature or some complex set of features that its
existence becomes apparent. The idea that there are certain properties of objects that
only bestow causal powers on objects in the presence of other properties, either of the
same object or distinct objects, is not new. There are many properties that only reveal
themselves in the presence of other properties, or indeed in the absence of certain

Does Linguistics Need (Weak) Emergence?
35
other properties.11 There even seem to be other properties like this in language.
Certain formal (or grammatical) properties that are (not indisputably) taken to be
present in listemes for example. It is clear that many grammatical structures are only
possible given the presence of multiple words, and complex relations between those
words, so any formal properties of listemes can only become apparent once listemes
interact or stand in certain relations to each other. It might be argued that the property
that gives rise to truth-evaluability is similar.
Another way to consider this is to imagine that we had knowledge of only of the
listemes within a language. That is, imagine that we only had knowledge of the lower-
level entities, and had no way to investigate higher-level entities directly. Despite this
limitation, in such a situation, we would know quite a lot about the language. For
example, we would know (much of the) semantic information, as it is generally
agreed that listemes contain semantic features/properties that introduce semantic
information into the language faculty. If Chomsky is right, listemes also contain
‘formal’ features, such that the elements of the mental lexicon are pre-ordered into
syntactic categories. Knowing about such properties would mean that we could derive
solely from our knowledge of listemes some awareness of the syntactic properties
of more complex entities. Knowing solely about the listemes of a language would
therefore result in us knowing quite a lot about how language works and is structured.
However, it is plausible that there are limits to that knowledge in that there might be
properties of the higher-level linguistic entities that cannot be predicted or derived
from knowledge of the lower-level entities. If there are properties of language like
this, then these would be weakly emergent properties under the characterisation
provided above.
Could truth-evaluability be a property like this? Prima facie, the answer seems
to be yes. Truth-evaluability, as already noted, cannot be derived or predicted from
the properties of lower-level objects, but can be easily recognised once we consider
the higher-level objects directly. Truth-evaluability fails to be predictable, derivable,
explainable or characterizable in terms of the ‘more basic’ entities and properties
out of which the property arises. The listemes that are part of the mental lexicon are
the ‘more basic’ entities that properties like truth-evaluability arise from, and yet
complete knowledge of those elements alone would not result in knowledge about
which linguistic entities were truth-evaluable. Truth-evaluability is a highly plausible
candidate for being weakly emergent.
What does this mean for reductionism? As discussed in section one, weak emer-
gence of the sort that I have used here is compatible with a certain form of ontological
reduction. This is because weak emergence is signiﬁcantly epistemic, and requires
only that we can know about the higher-level properties only through ﬁrst recog-
nising their existence at the higher level. We have seen that this could be the case
for truth-evaluability. We can only identify the property at the higher-level—i.e.,
that of sentences (or at least matrix clauses). If the reductionist wants to maintain
11 For example, the property of a match to light on ﬁre cannot be manifested if the match is
underwater. The presence of the water, given the properties of the water, restrict the match’s ability
to light.

36
J. Miller
their opposition to positing truth-evaluability as strongly emergent, then accepting
that the property is weakly emergent is a viable alternative. Certainly this would
not be the same as simply reducing the property, but it would not carry with it the
same sorts of ontological consequences that the reductionist objects to when we posit
strongly emergent properties. Truth-evaluability would not be a wholly novel prop-
erty, existing in addition to the properties posited at the lower-level. Rather, it would
be a property that is grounded in the lower-level properties from which it arises, but
cannot be predicted from an observation of those lower-level properties in isolation.
If this sufﬁces for ontological reduction as some have maintain (e.g. Butterﬁeld,
2011), then the potential for an ontological reduction of truth-evaluability relies on
accepting the weak emergence of truth-evaluability.
Tosummarisethemainpointsofthissection.InMiller(2017)Iarguedthattheonly
alternative to reduction was strong emergence. Given the argued failure of reduction,
I therefore concluded that truth-evaluability must be strongly emergent. This section
has sketched an alternative. If we instead start with the idea that emergence should
be understood in a weak way, we can avoid the conclusions I drew in that prior
work. Under this approach, truth-evaluability is a weakly emergent property in that
it is a property that fails to be predictable or derivable by considering the nature of
the lower-level linguistic entities in isolation. The main beneﬁt of this view is that
it is (at least potentially) compatible with ontological reduction. Therefore, if I am
right, those that want to uphold a form of ontological reduction about language can
do so just so long as they also allow that in linguistics there are weakly emergent
properties.
5
Weak Emergence and Linguistics
Emergence is a topic of great interest in many sciences, but there is little written
about emergence speciﬁcally in the context of linguistics. Perhaps this is because
weak emergence is often taken to be so prevalent. Still, even those things that seem
to be obvious need to be argued for eventually, so here I have tried to sketch the
view. I have suggested that simplistic reductionism does not work in the case of
truth-evaluability, and that taking the property to be weakly emergent at least allows
us to avoid strong emergence in this case.
Answering the further question in the title of this chapter—of how far linguistics
‘needs’ emergence—will depend on how many higher-level properties that are part
of the subject matter of linguistic study can (or must) be analysed in a similar way.
There are a lot of higher-level properties in language. Properties that can only be
rightly attributed to words, phrases, or sentences. There may even properties that can
only be attributed to paragraphs and chapters. To give just one further example of
a higher-level property of language, consider the property of ‘(un)grammaticality’.
This property is central to a lot of linguistic theorising. Many linguistic theories
begin with a consideration of the (un)grammaticality of certain linguistic entities,

Does Linguistics Need (Weak) Emergence?
37
primarily again higher-level entities such as sentences. One aim of linguistics is to
explain that (un)grammaticality in a rigorous and systematic way.
It is likely that any analysis of the property of (un)grammaticality will turn out
to be very complex, and it is certain that it is a multiply realisable property—there
are multiple different structures that can instantiate the property of ‘being grammat-
ical’. But, investigating the underlying lower-level arrangements that give rise to
(un)grammaticality relies on a prior recognition of the property at the higher-level.
As we have seen, at least on some understandings, this is would be in line with taking
the property of (un)grammaticality as being weakly emergent. If such a central prop-
erty to linguistics is weakly emergent then there is a real sense in which positing
weak emergence is required to engage in rigorous and systematic linguistic research.
This lends itself to a (tentative conclusion) that weak emergence may be expected to
be found in many more cases than just truth-evaluability.
This (tentative) conclusion might not be surprising. Much of the data of linguistics
comes from the observation, analysis, and investigation of linguistic entities like
words, phrases, and sentences, and, as we saw in section two, these are higher-level
entities. This focus on macro linguistic entities arises because the central aim of
linguistics is to understand the nature of language which is used (and understood)
by humans at that higher-level—at the level of words, phrases, and sentences. It is
widely agreed that speakers do not have access to their own listemes in anything
like a conscious way. We experience language constantly in our lives, but the vast
majority of that experience (including of our own language use) is experience of
higher-level entities like words, phrases, and sentences. This paper has only directly
argued that truth-evaluability is weakly emergent. The next question in this regard is
‘how unique is truth-evaluability?’. Given the large number of higher-level linguistic
properties and objects, it seems somewhat plausible that the answer to that question
is ‘not very’.
References
Bedau, M. A. (1997). Weak emergence. Philosophical Perspectives, 11, 375–399.
Bishop, R. C. (2005). Patching physics and chemistry together. Philosophy of Science, 72, 710–722.
Bishop, R. C. (2010). Whence chemistry? Reductionism and neoreductionism. Studies in History
and Philosophy of Modern Physics, 41, 171–177.
Bishop, R., & Silberstein, M. (2019). Complexity and Feedback. In S. Gibb, R. Hendry, & T.
Lancaster (Eds.), The routledge handbook of emergence (pp. 145–156). Routledge.
Boeckx, C. (2008). Bare syntax. Oxford University Press.
Borer, H. (2005). In name only. Oxford University Press.
Butterﬁeld, J. (2011). Emergence, Reduction and Supervenience: A Varied Landscape. Foundations
of Physics, 41, 920–959.
Carruth, A. (2019). Strong emergence and Alexander’s dictum. In S. Gibb, R. Hendry, & T. Lancaster
(Eds.), The routledge handbook of emergence (pp. 87–98). Routledge.
Chalmers, D. J. (2006). Strong and Weak Emergence. In P. Clayton & P. Davies (Eds.), The re-
emergence of emergence: The emergentist hypothesis from science to religion (pp. 244–254).
Oxford University Press.

38
J. Miller
Chomsky, N. (1995). The minimalist program. MIT Press.
Gibb, S., Hendry, R., & Lancaster, T. (Eds.). (2019). The routledge handbook of emergence.
Routledge.
Hasker W. (2017). ‘Emergent dualism’. In: Y. Nagasawa, B.Matheson (Eds.) The palgrave handbook
of the afterlife. Palgrave Macmillan.
Hinzen, W. (2009). “Hierarchy, merge, and truth”. In: M. Piattelli-Palmarini, J. Uriagereka, P.
Salaburu (Eds.) Of minds and language: A Dialogue with Noam Chomsky in the Basque Country,
Oxford University Press.
Hinzen, W. (2013). “Naturalism pluralism about truth”. In: N. Pedersen, & C. Wright (Eds.), Truth
and pluralism, OUP.
Hinzen, W. (2014). “Recursion and truth”. In: T. Roeper, P. Speas (Eds.), Recursion: Complexity in
cognition, Studies in Theoretical Psycholinguistics 43, Springer.
Jackson, F., Oppy, G., & Smith, M. (1994). Minimalism and truth aptness. Mind, 103(411), 287–302.
McLaughlin, B. (1992). “The rise and fall of British emergentism”. In: A. Beckermann, H. Flohr, &
J. Kim (Eds.), Emergence or reduction? Essays on the prospects for non-reductive physicalism,
Walter de Gruyter.
Miller, J. T. M. (2017). Language and ontological emergence. Philosophica, 91(1), 105–143.
Miller, J. T. M. (2021). A bundle theory of words. Synthese, 198(6), 5731–5748. https://doi.org/10.
1007/s11229-019-02430-3
Nida-Rümelin, M. (2007). Dualist Emergentism. In B. McLaughlin & J. Cohen (Eds.), Contempo-
rary debates in philosophy of mind (pp. 269–286). Blackwell.
O’Connor, T., & Churchill, J. R. (2010). “Nonreductive physicalism or emergent dualism? The
argument from mental causation”, in The waning of materialism: New essays, R. C. Koons, & A.
George Bealer (Eds.), Oxford University Press, 261–279.
O’Connor, T. (2020). ‘Emergent properties’, The stanford encyclopedia of philosophy, E.N. Zalta
(Ed.).
Rickabaugh, B. (2018). ‘Against emergent dualism’, in The blackwell companion to substance
dualism. J. Loose, A. Menuge, & J. P. Moreland (Eds.). Wiley Blackwell.
Silberstein, M. (2002). Reduction, emergence and explanation. In P. Machamer & M. Silberstein
(Eds.), The blackwell guide to the philosophy of science (pp. 80–107). Blackwell.
Silberstein, M. (2012). Emergence and reduction in context: philosophy of science and/or analytic
metaphysics. Metascience, 21, 627–642.
Silberstein, M. (2017). Contextual emergence. Philosophica, 91, 145–192.
Sprouse, J., & Lau, E. (2013). ‘Syntax and the brain’. In M. den Dikken (Ed.), The handbook of
generative syntax. Cambridge University Press.
Van Gulick, R. (2001). Reduction, emergence and other recent options on the mind/body problem:
A philosophic overview. Journal of Consciousness Studies, 8(9–10), 1–34.
Wong, H. Y. (2019). Emergent dualism in the philosophy of mind. In S. Gibb, R. Hendry, & T.
Lancaster (Eds.), The routledge handbook of emergence (pp. 179–186). Routledge.
Zimmerman, D. (2010). From property dualism to substance dualism. Aristotelian Society
Supplementary, 84(1), 119–150.

Contextual Meaning and Theory
Dependence
Erich H. Rast
1
Introduction
Natural language elicits many forms of context dependence. Many of them are overt.
For example, indexicals depend on the deictic center I-here-now. However, there are
more subtle forms of context dependence in natural language that are less regulated
by meaning rules and more pragmatic. Roughly speaking, hearers arrive at an inter-
pretation of what the speaker said based on what they believe the speaker assumes
in the context of a conversation. I argue in this article that this interpretation process
requires speakers to be able to track other speakers’ theories, and that epistemic
agents generally must have the ability to consider and compartmentalize theories
without necessarily endorsing them.
In Sect.2, a brief overview of select phenomena of linguistic context dependence
is provided and it is argued that these are overall tractable by understanding interpre-
tation in a context as an inference from often truth-conditionally incomplete to more
speciﬁc semantic representations. However, there is a more profound and philosoph-
ically more challenging context dependence that can be described as a dependence
of concepts and lexical meaning on theories. This is laid out in Sect.3, in which
several problems are discussed that result from the interdependence between lexical
meaning and theories. I argue in Sect.4 that these problems can be solved by reject-
ing global meaning holism in favor of local meaning holism and by acknowledging
rational epistemic agents’ ability to compartmentalize and keep track of theories.
2
Semantic Contextualism: a Brief Overview
This section provides a brief overview of linguistic context dependence. Much of the
modeling of context dependence in the philosophy of language and epistemology is
basedonKaplan(1989)’sLogicofDemonstratives,whichleadtodifferentversionsof
E. H. Rast (B)
IFILNOVA Institute of Philosophy, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Av. de Berna 26C, 1069-061
Lisbon, Portugal
e-mail: erich@snafu.de
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
S. Wuppuluri and I. Stewart (eds.), From Electrons to Elephants and Elections,
The Frontiers Collection, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-92192-7_4
39

40
E. H. Rast
‘two-dimensional’ semantics (Chalmers, 2006) and corresponding forms of alethic
contextualism and relativism. These approaches are the topic of the next section.
Section2.2 addresses their shortcomings and promotes the alternative view that many
forms of linguistic context dependence are better described as an inference from
potentially truth-functionally incomplete to more speciﬁc semantic contents instead
of using parameterized modal logics.
2.1
Parameterized Contexts
Indexicals and demonstratives are typical overtly context-sensitive expressions. The
reference of indexicals like here, I, and now depends on features of the utterance
context. Their linguistic meaning partly mandates the resolution of this context
dependence. For example, under normal circumstances, I refers to the speaker of
the utterance, now to the time of the utterance, and here to the place of utterance.
Such a rule ‘picks out’ the respective referent in a given context of utterance, thereby
resolving the context dependence semantically. The result of this enrichment process
is a proposition that is true or false in the given circumstances of evaluation. Absolute
tenses are also often used indexically. To fully understand a use of the present tense
a hearer may have to know the time of utterance, for instance.1
Understanding utterances with indexicals comes to a degree because the corre-
sponding contextually-provided referents may be determined more or less precisely.
In a sense, a hearer understands an utterance of Yesterday, Bob had an accident
without knowing what day of the month or week it is; the accident happened the
day before whatever day is now. However, this minimal understanding may turn out
to be insufﬁcient for a given communicative task. For example, when ﬁlling out an
insurance form, merely knowing that something happened the day before the day
on which the utterance took place might not sufﬁce because a calendrical date is
expected. A more precise understanding of the utterance could be paraphrased as
Bob had an accident on Friday, the 13th of November 2020.2
Every indexical allows for such grades of understanding. Sometimes when inter-
preting a use of I it may sufﬁce to know that someone spoke, whoever that may have
been; in other cases, the hearer must spatiotemporally locate the speaker before they
can rightfully be said to have understood the utterance as a whole. However, the ref-
erence to the deictic center acts as a hard constraint in any of those cases. The deictic
center usually consists of the speaker, the time of utterance, the actual world, and the
place of utterance. It can be shifted in some languages in indirect speech reports and
for certain expressions like local, around, and medical uses of right and left.3 The
1 There are also non-indexical uses of absolute tenses, such as the use of the English present tense
in a generic like Cats are mammals.
2 Cf. Perry (2001) on incremental truth-conditions.
3 See Schlenker (2000, 2003) on shifting ﬁrst person pronouns, and, more generally, Fillmore
(1997), Lyons (1977, p. 579), Levinson (1983, p. 64).

Contextual Meaning and Theory Dependence
41
hearer, and sometimes even the speaker, can be wrong about this reference, and in
that case, they fail to grasp the semantic content of the utterance. This dependence on
a fact about the world that is independent of the speaker’s intentions is characteristic
of indexicals. Other context-dependent expressions need not involve a deictic center
in this way.
In early approaches to indexicals such as Reichenbach (1947), Burks (1949), and
Bar-Hillel (1954) a crucial question was whether these could be eliminated from a
language that would serve as a foundation for all science. Bar Hillel argued that even
though sentences containing indexicals can be substituted with sentences containing
no indexicals, the reference to a conventionally ﬁxed origin of a coordinate system
cannot be eliminated. In tense logic, Prior (1957, 1967, 2003) famously argued
that the logic of becoming and going expressed by operator-based tense logic could
not be replaced without signiﬁcant loss of expressivity by statements that quantify
over points in time or time intervals directly and thereby lead to eternally true or
false propositions. His arguments for this view were metaphysical and partly hinged
on a speciﬁc interpretation of McTaggart’s Paradox (McTaggart, 1908). In the Phi-
losophy of Language the irreducibility of the basic indexicals I, here, and now was
brought up by Castañeda (1967, 1989a,b) and Perry (1977, 1979, 1998a,b), and has
been discussed in numerous follow-up publications. In this debate, the key question
was whether thoughts, corresponding truth-functionally complete propositions, and
broadly-conceived epistemic states that would ordinarily be expressed using indexi-
cals like now and I, could be expressed by expressions only containing third person
referential terms such as proper names and deﬁnite descriptions. There is a certain
consensus in the literature that at least now and I are irreducible in cognition in terms
of their expressive power for explaining behavior, which lead to various theories of
de se belief attributions that take into account the ‘essential indexicality’ of these
indexicals.4
A more recent debate started with Recanati (2004b) versus Cappelen and Lepore
(2004). It addresses the more general question about linguistic context dependence’s
pervasiveness and what this means for literal meaning. Much of this discussion
concerns the extent to which double-index modal logics can adequately represent
linguistic context sensitivity. As part of the philosopher’s toolbox, based on Kaplan
(1989) and Lewis (1980), various modal logics and their interpretations are used
in which contexts and circumstances of evaluation (CEs) are reiﬁed as parameters
relative to which truth-in-a-model is determined. In Kaplan’s two-layered account,
for instance, the linguistic meaning (the character) of an expression is a function that
in a context yields an intension (the semantic content), which is, in turn, a function
that in given circumstances of evaluation yields an extension. Based on such modal
logics with contexts and CEs, various contextualist and relativist positions have been
developed and contrasted with Cappelen and Lepore’s semantic invariantism on the
one hand and Recanati’s more radical contextualism on the other hand.
4 See, for instance, Kaplan (1989), Lewis (1979b), Cresswell and von Stechow (1982), von Stechow
(1984).

42
E. H. Rast
Going into the details of this complex debate would go beyond the scope of
this contribution. Only a brief summary can be given. According to invariantism,
simple clauses are not context-dependent except for the obvious and overt context
dependence of indexicals. Cappelen and Lepore (2005) even go so far as to claim
that a giraffe can be tall simpliciter. Others such as Recanati (2006) and MacFarlane
(2007) found such an approach unsatisfactory. According to the radical contextualism
ofRecanati(2004a),theliteralmeaningonwhichsuchinvariantistpositionsarebased
is an ‘idle wheel’; instead, according to Recanati pragmatic modulation functions
may change linguistic meaning on the ﬂy during semantopragmatic construction of
sentence-level content.
Incontrasttothis,indexicalistslikeStanley(2004, 2005)modelcontext-dependent
expressions with open argument places bound either by semantic or by pragmatic
processes. This use of open argument places makes their accounts slightly different
from two-dimensional moderate contextualists who continue to use double-index
modal logics to model a richer set of contextual variances than those elicited by
overt indexicals. In the approaches based on modal logics with multiple parameters,
these parameters are enriched with whatever additional ingredients are needed to get
the semantics of context-sensitive expressions right that do not overtly depend on
the deictic center. Usually, they are modeled as n-tupels containing all the needed
ingredients.5
Broadly speaking, two-dimensional accounts come in three different varieties.
According to classical contextualism, in a Kaplan-style two-layered modal logic
the semantic content of the expression is ﬁxed by some mechanism that takes into
account features of the context parameter. If a context-sensitive expression is mod-
eled in this way, then varying contexts will yield different semantic contents. This is
the classical model of indexicals. In contrast to this, according to the nonindexical
contextualism of MacFarlane (2009) the extension of an expression may depend on
the context although the semantic content remains context-invariant. This means that
the semantic content—i.e., the proposition expressed by the sentence in a context—is
itself context-sensitive. Finally, according to full-ﬂedged alethic relativism in a two-
dimensional framework, the semantic content may yield different extensions not
depending on the context but depending on non-traditional features of the circum-
stances of evaluation. Tense operators and modalities work in that way in traditional
double-index modal logics because these operators implicitly quantify over time and
possible worlds. In the debate between contextualists such as de Sa (2008, 2009)
and relativists like MacFarlane (2008, 2012, 2014), relativists have argued that many
more expressions may be truth-relative in this sense.
Within this discussion, some authors suggested that certain predicates of per-
sonal taste give rise to faultless disagreement between speakers that only a relativist
semantics can adequately represent. In such a theory, the extension associated with
5 Cresswell (1996) argues that modal logics with ﬁnitely many parameters are not expressive enough
to deal with the indexical context dependence of arbitrarily long sentences. Instead, full quantiﬁca-
tion over reiﬁed contexts is needed. This argument has largely been ignored by the philosophy of
language community.

Contextual Meaning and Theory Dependence
43
a semantic content in given circumstances of evaluation is not just relative to times
and possible worlds, but also relative to very nontraditional constituents of circum-
stances of evaluation parameters such as persons. For example, Lasersohn (2005)
argues that the predicate fun is sensitive to an assessor (or, judge, in his parlance) in
given circumstances of evaluation. Regardless of who is the speaker of an utterance,
in this assessor-relativism an utterance of Roller coasters are fun may be true relative
to one and false relative to another assessor. Consequently, two people may disagree
about an utterance containing such an expression without one being at fault. They
may both be right even when they seemingly contradict each other and one of them
negates the other’s statement. Relative to one assessor the semantic content of the
proposition may be true and relative to another assessor the semantic content of its
negation may be true. To do justice to this position, it is worth noting that each of
the assessors may still be mistaken in such an approach. For example, an assessor
might erroneously believe that roller coasters are fun (relative to her); actually riding
a roller coaster would make her realize that she was wrong right from the start.
The differences between parameter-based traditional contextualism, nonindexical
contextualism, and relativism primarily hinge on the role given to semantic content in
theorizing. The idea behind relativist faultless disagreement is that two assessors who
disagree faultlessly disagree about the same semantic content of an utterance. The
relativist argues against the contextualist that two interlocutors would disagree about
two different contents according to the contextualist two-dimensional semantics. If
the assessor in one context is John and the assessor in another one is Mary, then under
a contextualist semantics the content of Mary’s beliefs would be the proposition
that roller coasters are fun for Mary, and the content of John’s beliefs would be
the proposition that roller coasters are fun for John. According to the relativist, this
cannot count as disagreement because the contents of their beliefs remain compatible
with each other. This relativist standard objection to contextualism will play a role
in the second part of this article and should be kept in mind.
However, if the peculiar notion of semantic content is not available because the
modelisnottwo-layered,ifattitudesaremodeledinanotherway,ifincompatiblecon-
tents are not taken as a necessary condition for disagreement, or if the disagreement
is modeled on the basis of other content—such as content expressed by pragmatic
presuppositions or any other pragmatically derived, non-literal speech act content—
then the differences between parameter-based contextualism and relativism become
less critical. Both theories have in common that they model contextual variance in a
truth-conditional setting. If a context dependence is linguistically mandated like in
the case of the truth-conditions expressed by the use of an indexical, then to some
extent these parameterized approaches to context dependence model the contextual
resolution process. For example, for yesterday the linguistically mandated reference
rule is the day before the day of the utterance. It generally picks out the right ref-
erent and can be formalized in a double-index modal logic in which the date of the
utterance is stored in the context parameter (provided that date calculations are avail-
able). Likewise, a relativist semantics for predicates like being fun and tasty states
that utterances containing these expressions are true or false relative to an assessor

44
E. H. Rast
and the suggested interpretation of the semantic apparatus is that respective assessors
may differ from the speaker of the utterance.
2.2
Semantic Underdetermination and Interpretation
as Inference
Although it is adequate for indexicals at a high level of abstraction, modeling other
context-sensitive expressions as if they were indexicals can be misleading and inade-
quate.Manyformsoflinguisticcontextdependencearepragmatic,andsentence-level
content is often semantically underdetermined. For example, there is no linguistic
rule in the meaning of ready that determines what a person is ready for. The hearer
must ﬁgure out what the speaker means by an utterance of (1) He’s ready. Dubbed
‘contextuals’ by Rast (2014), such expressions require some additional interpreta-
tion; in the case of ready, there is a syntactically optional complement clause that is
not optional from the perspective of sentence-level semantics. This is similar to cases
such as to buy which also has syntactically optional argument places for a seller and
a price, but from a semantic perspective requires these ingredients to differentiate
it from other transfer verbs like to obtain, to pay, and to borrow.6 Other expres-
sions suggest a default interpretation, sometimes very strongly, but neither require
it semantically nor syntactically. For instance, (2) John had breakfast can be meant
to convey that John has had breakfast for the ﬁrst time in his life, but by default it is
taken to express the proposition that John had breakfast at the day of the utterance of
(2). Indexicals are also often contextual in this sense in addition to their dependence
on the deictic center. For instance, the place denoted by a use of here can only be
determined on the basis of what has been said so far and assumptions about what the
speaker wants to convey, as the place denoted by a use of here only needs to contain
the deictic center as a mereological part and may otherwise be almost arbitrarily
small or large. Depending on what has been said so far and the speaker’s intentions,
a use of here may be intended to convey locations such as here in this box (where
the speaker is crouching), here in this room, here in this building, here in this city,
here in this country, here on this continent, here on this planet, and here in this part
of the Milky Way.
Essentially three approaches have been proposed to deal with these forms of
partly conventionalized, yet ultimately pragmatic context dependence. According
to Bach (2005), utterances often express only propositional radicals by virtue of
conventionalized meaning provided by a shared lexicon. What the speaker meant
needs to be inferred from these truth-conditionally incomplete representations by
a Gricean interpretation process. Rast (2014) suggests a variation of this approach
that models the missing contextual factors as open argument places over which
one may existentially quantify to obtain a minimal form of content. For example,
the ‘existential completion’ of (1) is John is ready for something. Based on such
6 See Jackendoff (1987, p. 381/2), Jackendoff (1990, pp. 189–194).

Contextual Meaning and Theory Dependence
45
representations, abductive inference may yield more speciﬁc content such as John is
ready to call a cab. This inference is derived from what has been said so far, from
the topic of the conversation and question under discussion, from the interpreter’s
assumptions about what the speaker believes, and from general common-sense world
knowledge. While the mechanisms laid out by Rast (2010, 2014) are very limited,
the approach in general is based on the idea of considering interpretation as an
inference to the best explanation (IBE). Relevance theory of Sperber and Wilson
(1986, 2004) is a third, psychologically motivated approach to interpretation. It is
based on bounded rationality. Hearers draw inferences about what the speaker wants
to convey but this process competes with economy constraints. As long as logical and
set-theoretic representations of semantic content are used, these three approaches can
be linked up with the modeling of pragmatic context, common ground, and linguistic
score-keeping at discourse level such as Stalnaker (1978), Lewis (1979a), Barwise
and Perry (1983), Stokhof and Groenendijk (1991), Kamp and Reyle (1993), Asher
and Lascarides (2003), and Ginzburg (2012).
The key to making any of these approaches fruitful is to represent semantic under-
determination of conventionalized meaning in a way that allows the interpreter to
infer what the speaker meant based on existing beliefs about the speaker, what has
been said so far, the common ground, general world knowledge, and knowledge about
the particular communication situation. The approaches primarily differ in the extent
to which they are motivated from empirical psychology. Relevance theory strives
for empirical adequacy, whereas the Gricean model describes ideal communication
situations and ideal interpretation. The IBE approach’s degree of idealization lies
in-between. It is based on broadly-conceived logical inference mechanisms from
graded belief representations of common-sense ontologies and situational knowl-
edge. All three approaches can be adopted for varying assumptions about the degree
of conventionalization of meaning in a shared lexicon.
However, existential completions and Bach’s propositional skeletons have to rely
on mechanisms that allow for a ﬁnite number of existing argument slots to be ‘ﬁlled
in’ by the interpretation process. Radical contextualists like Recanati (2004a) do not
believe that such mechanisms sufﬁce in general to adequately describe linguistic
context dependence because they might not capture creative and poetic language
use. Moderate contextualists in turn consider radical contextualism too general and
unconstrained since pragmatic modulation functions can, in theory, turn any mean-
ing into another meaning during semantic composition. The position of moderate
contextualism is that the number of conventionalized contextual factors—those that
are marked in a shared lexicon by semantic argument structures of words—may be
large and require a decent amount of sophisticated semantic analysis, yet their num-
ber is ultimately ﬁnite. Likewise, it is stipulated that the number of rule-governed,
broadly-conceived linguistically regulated pragmatic interpretation patterns is also
ﬁnite.
Speakers and interpreters may occasionally allow contextual shortcuts whose
understanding requires general intelligence instead of ﬁxed, rule-based mechanisms.
For example, a polite speaker of Japanese may leave out almost any part of speech.
Understanding such an utterance and the meaning of not verbalizing part of the

46
E. H. Rast
speech requires more than just linguistic skills and knowledge, and it is doubtful
whether an inference to the best explanation mechanism could adequately explain
such cases in sufﬁcient detail in a rule-based manner. However, the existence of such
phenomena does not speak against moderate contextualism in the same sense as
not understanding someone’s explanation of a mathematical problem does not speak
against semantics. Understanding an utterance often requires intelligent reasoning
that goes far beyond of a speaker’s linguistic competence and what can reasonably
be expected to be dissected by linguistic theorizing.
The problem of linguistic context dependence is thus principally solvable from the
perspective of moderate contextualism. The challenges are in the detail, such as how
to ﬁnd an adequate semantic representation that allows for fruitful descriptions of
the inferences that take place when a hearer interprets an utterance, systematic ways
of cataloging a language’s context-dependent expressions, and how to describe and
model these inferences at a desired level of idealization. However, another potential
source of context dependence is neither modeled by parameterized modal logics nor
by the above mentioned inferential approaches: the possible dependence of mean-
ings and concepts on background theories, opinions, and world views. This context
dependence is the subject of the remainder of this article.
3
The Problems of Theory Dependence
Recently, there has been a renewed interest in philosophical aspects of discussions
about word meaning. Plunkett and Sundell (2013, 2019) and Plunkett (2015) have
argued that disputes are often implicitly about the meaning of words, the adequacy
of using words in context, and the appropriateness of contextual norms. If some such
disputes concern word meaning, then one may ask how speakers can understand each
other if they presume different word meanings from the start. If, in turn, two speakers
defend different theories about a particular topic and these theories characterize or
deﬁne the word under dispute in different ways, then this leads to various problems
of theory dependence. The topic has a long tradition in analytic philosophy. The role
that theory dependence plays for lexical meaning is crucial for assessing Moore’s
thesis of ‘good’ as a primitive and the Paradox of Analysis (Moore, 1903), as well as
for a later debate between Quine and Carnap about the internal/external distinction of
theories and the notion of analyticity in studies by Carnap (1950) and Quine (1960,
1951).
3.1
The Problems
In what follows, the word theory shall be understood in the broadest possible sense
as including all kinds of nonscientiﬁc beliefs, opinions, and world views in addition
to scientiﬁc theories, approaches, models, and hypotheses. Given that broad under-

Contextual Meaning and Theory Dependence
47
standing, the problems of theory dependence may be summarized as follows. Every
theory either directly deﬁnes the meanings of words mentioned in it or indirectly
characterizes the meanings of words used to formulate it by law-like statements in
which those words are used or mentioned. Therefore, a deﬁnitional account of the
meaning of a word central to a theory is directly or indirectly restricted by that theory.
So in the context of two different theories, the meanings of words that are central
to those theories are restricted in different ways, and, in the worst case, cannot even
mean the same because those theories deﬁne or indirectly characterize their meanings
in different ways.7
For example, if it follows from a physical theory that atoms can be split, then
an adequate characterization of the meaning of the word atom cannot attribute the
property of being indivisible to atoms. As another example, Arianism is the Christian
belief that Jesus (God the Son) is not co-eternal with God the Father. Someone
who believes this doctrine cannot at the same time believe in the trinity, that God
the Father, God the Son, and the Holy Spirit are of the same essence. The Arian
doctrine thus affects the possible theological characterizations of both Jesus and
God. Historically, the conﬂict between Arians and Trinitarians led to persecution
and violent clashes during the 4th Century AD, and ultimately the ofﬁcial church
position was to declare Arianism a heresy. As a third example, consider competing
theories of social institutions. According to Searle (1995, 2005), “…an institution is
any system of constitutive rules of the form X counts as Y in C” (Searle, 2005, p. 10).
In contrast to this, Guala (2016) argues that institutions are systems of regulative rules
that lead to game-theoretic equilibria. According to Searle, this thesis is incompatible
with his deﬁnition because, in his account, constitutive rules cannot be reduced to
regulative rules. If Searle is right, then institution cannot mean the same in both
theories.
If the meaning of a central word differs from theory to theory, or at least possible
ways of understanding its meaning are restricted in different and sometimes mutually
incompatible manners, then two follow-up problems occur. First, it is no longer
clear how two competing theories can be about the same topic. For example, why
would a theory according to which atoms are indivisible be about what we nowadays
call atoms? Related to this, if two agents endorse two different theories A and B
and talk about a term central to those theories, then it is no longer clear how they
disagree. The problem is the same as in the relativist critique of contextualism. If two
interlocutor’s beliefs are such that a certain word has a different meaning, because
they endorse different explicit deﬁnitions of it or their beliefs characterize its meaning
in substantially different ways, then the semantic contents of their beliefs also differ.
So why do they not just talk at cross purposes?
Semantic externalists may reply to these worries that only defending a theory
or having opinions cannot directly inﬂuence public language meaning. According
7 Since the discussion in what follows mostly concerns lexical meaning, word is used for the
linguistic entities under consideration. These are usually nouns (general terms) in examples, but
for brevity word is also used in a looser sense as a shortcut for linguistic expressions in general.
This may include compound nouns, nouns with participial phrases, noninﬂected verb phrases, and
phraseologisms, for instance.

48
E. H. Rast
to the most extreme form of externalism, there is no inﬂuence at all. The noun
atom stands for atoms. Whatever theory of atoms we build and whatever beliefs
we hold about atoms does not inﬂuence what atoms are. The problem with this
view is that it conﬂates word extension with meaning and consequently does not
explain meaning change at all. The meaning of atom could only change if atoms
change, yet it seems that this meaning has changed over the past centuries. A more
realistic form of externalism by Cappelen (2018) acknowledges that word meanings
change over time, but not fast and not in a way that is under our control. Instead,
meaning change is governed by hard to understand, long-term processes within a
large speaker community, based on slowly changing patterns of use. These changes
may be triggered by changing world views, theories and opinions of all kind that
come to be believed by larger groups of speakers, but not merely by discussions
between individual speakers.
This lack of direct control thesis is a valid point about public language meaning.
However, it does not touch the problem’s core. Surely, some sort of meanings are
discussed in an explicitly metalinguistic dispute in which words are mentioned. If
so, then at least some implicit metalinguistic disputes discussed by Plunkett and
Sundell (2013) also have to concern word meanings. After all, any such implicit
dispute could be turned into an explicit one at any time simply by mentioning the
disputed word instead of (seemingly) using it. Maybe the meanings in such disputes
are not meanings of public language expressions, and instead the underlying concepts
or the meanings of words of idiolects and sociolects change. For instance, Ludlow
(2014) argues with many examples that interlocutors adapt their ‘microlanguages’ to
each other in conversations. So even if one does not buy into the theory dependence
problemasathesisaboutpubliclanguage,theproblemremainsatthelevelofidiolects
and concept systems that differ between speakers, whether or not these coincide with
public language.
To illustrate this point, consider two early 19th Century physicists discussing and
disagreeing about two wave theories of light that are both derived from Augustin
Fresnel’s theory of luminiferous aether but differ in various details. Neither the
correctness of their theories nor the public language meaning of aether should have
a substantial bearing on the meanings they associate with the word in the context
of this discussion. It remains a problem to explain how they disagree about the
same topic and why they are not just talking at cross purposes, if they indirectly
characterize aether differently or even use different explicit deﬁnitions of aether.
Likewise, consider two ancient ﬁshers discussing whales. Both agree that whales are
ﬁsh. One of them argues that they are the largest ﬁsh of the sea and being the largest
ﬁsh of the sea is the whale’s deﬁning feature. The other one disagrees and claims
to have seen larger ﬁsh; he thinks that being a ﬁsh with a blowhole is the deﬁning
feature of a whale. They have false beliefs about whales, some of which enter their
putative deﬁnitions, and so their concept systems cannot represent public language
meaning from the perspective of semantic externalism. Nevertheless, one might ask
how their disagreement can be spelled out in terms of these ﬂawed concepts, given
that their conceptual systems differ with respect to the concepts they erroneously
associate with the word whale.

Contextual Meaning and Theory Dependence
49
3.2
Deﬁnitional Meaning Does Not Imply an Epistemic
Priority of Analyticity
A popular reply to the problems of theory dependence is to reject any deﬁnitional
account of word meaning. In further support of this position, one might ﬁrst argue
based on externalist arguments by Kripke (1972), Putnam (1975), and Burge (1979)
that both public language meaning and thought contents are individuated externally
by facts of the shared environment. As a classical example, water denotes H2O
because it is a natural kind term whose meaning is ﬁxed indexically by virtue of the
fact that water is mostly composed of H2O. Correspondingly, if someone thinks about
water, then the contents of that person’s thoughts are also individuated externally.
As Putnam’s Twin Earth example is supposed to show, thinking about water is not
the same as thinking about a colorless, odorless, transparent liquid, for instance.
As a bonus, it appears as if such a form of externalism also fared well with Quine’s
arguments against analyticity. I will argue below that this is not the case but let us
consider the argument ﬁrst. It seems to be very popular. In a deﬁnitional theory
of concepts or lexical meaning according to which concepts or word meanings are
characterized by the theories (in a broad sense) to which these are central, it seems
that law-like statements that are taken to be deﬁnitory for a word or concept (whether
in individual cognition or as a thesis about public language meaning) would make
certain statements analytically true that are not. For example, if the property of being
the smallest indivisible building blocks of nature with the characteristic properties
of chemical elements takes part of a deﬁnition of atom, then it seems that Atoms are
indivisible is analytically true. According to Quine (1951) such a notion of analyticity
isill-conceivedandhingesonanotionofmeaning,which,inturn,circularlypresumes
analyticity.
Although this sort of externalism may be appropriate for speciﬁc words of a
public language in a truth-conditional setting, it comes with too many problems
as a general theory of lexical meaning. First, in practice, word meanings are not
always indirectly characterized but also sometimes deﬁned explicitly. In that case,
the meaning of the word under consideration clearly depends on an underlying theory,
namely the one that simultaneously lends credibility and adequacy to the deﬁnition
and uses it. Moreover, there is a gradual scale between the indirect characterization
of word meaning and explicit deﬁnitions. Often a word is used in ways that amount
to deﬁning without making the deﬁnition explicit. One may deﬁne what triangle
means more or less precisely, or one may understand it more intuitively based on
examples. It is hard to say where the supposed externalist individuation starts and
where it ends. Semantic externalists have mostly only provided convincing stories
for everyday nouns for empirical objects such as water, tiger, and pencil, and their
accounts remain mysterious for words like democracy, dark matter, triangle, and
institution.
Second, as mentioned above, the rationality of metalinguistic disputes becomes
questionable without a deﬁnitional approach to word meaning in idiolects (or, theo-
ries) and concepts. If these are externally individuated, then why and how could they

50
E. H. Rast
be disputed? Notice that even though Plunkett and Sundell (2013) argue that metalin-
guistic disputes can be substantive, some of them are also not substantive. Suppose
John and Mary argue about what counts as a chair, and after a while, they agree
that stools with only one leg ought not be called chairs. If the meaning of chair was
externally individuated, then this whole discussion would be irrational and pointless.
However, although it may be pointless and not substantive, it is clearly rational and
concerns the question of which minimal number of legs has an adequately deﬁnitory
quality for chair.
We frequently dispute word meanings and propose various characterizing prop-
erties, which are derived from, and relative to, a supporting background theory. It
is hard to see how this practice could be based on a systematic error. This does not
mean that we should not embrace externalism, it means that we should embrace
externalism and the theory dependence of word meaning and concepts. The under-
lying theories are hopefully about reality and not just about ﬁgments of our mind.
Nevertheless, within each theory words may get their meaning relative to that theory
by indirect characterization or explicit deﬁnition.8 Indexicalist externalism makes
sense for a limited number of natural kind terms because the underlying theories
are particularly well-conﬁrmed. It does not scale to theories about more contentious
topics.
What about the analyticity objection, then? None of Quine’s points against ana-
lyticity show in my opinion that there is something wrong with a deﬁnitional theory
of word meaning and concepts. The lesson to learn from Quine (1951) is rather
to be careful not to give epistemic priority to any allegedly analytic inference. For
even if we appear to arrive at certain conclusions solely by word meaning, this is
never the case. From the present point of view, there is no such thing as ‘the’ mean-
ing of a word. Words get their meanings relative to the theories in which they are
used. If such a theory is based on empirical evidence, then whatever we believe in
having derived solely on the basis of word meaning hinges on the adequacy and
merits of the theory and its supporting evidence. As a pragmatist naturalist, Quine
believed that any theory is revisable and needs to be judged on its scientiﬁc merits
(in proper scientiﬁc contexts). Even mathematics is revisable in that sense. From that
perspective, seemingly analytic judgments are theory-relative and revisable like any
other judgment. If, contrary to this, there was a non-theory dependent word meaning,
then analytic judgment could have some epistemic priority. However, according to
Quine, any such meaning would be a dubious stipulation and presume an equally
dubious notion of analyticity. We cannot attribute any epistemic priority to infer-
ences seemingly derived only on the basis of word meaning because according to the
Quine/Duhem Thesis the underlying theories are conﬁrmed or falsiﬁed holistically.
From all of this it follows that it is possible to consistently deny the usefulness
of analyticity as an epistemic notion without giving up deﬁnitional word meaning
8 By mentioning indirect characterizations and explicit deﬁnitions in this way, I do not want to
presume that these are unique phenomena. There is not only a gradual transition between them,
they are also umbrella terms for many different, yet related practices such as stipulating meaning
postulates, operational deﬁnitions, deﬁnition as abbreviation, deﬁnition by example, deﬁnition by
systems of axioms, providing prototypical information, speciﬁcation, abstraction, and so forth.

Contextual Meaning and Theory Dependence
51
and the thesis that theories characterize the meaning of words that play a central
role in them. We may even continue to speak of analytic judgments (although Quine
would not endorse this), as long as no special epistemic priority is given to them.
For example, it is perfectly ﬁne to contemplate whether bachelor means unmarried
man or whether additional conditions need to be met, and it may even be true that
under the ﬁrst deﬁnition every bachelor is an unmarried man and vice versa. Talk
like this is ﬁne, as long as one keeps in mind that such considerations tell us nothing
about the adequacy of that deﬁnition and its underlying theory, about the existence
of bachelors and unmarried men, and about what other properties bachelors might
have. The truth of the analytic statement hinges on the conﬁrmation or falsiﬁcation
of the supporting theory.
If a complete rejection of explicit deﬁnitions and implicit characterizations of
meanings is implausible for idiolects and concept systems, and if the theory depen-
dence of word meaning and concepts remains compatible with Quine’s arguments
against analyticity, then the problems mentioned above cannot be ruled out that easily.
When are two theories about the same topic or concern the same central words? How
can two speakers advocating competing, mutually incompatible theories or world
views be said to disagree and talk about the same things?
4
Tackling the Problems
There are several ways to tackle the problem of topic equality of theories. First,
there are good reasons to assume we associate some minimal meanings with expres-
sions that are not necessarily truth-functionally complete and represent ‘everyday’,
common-sense word meanings. Rast (2017b,a) suggests the term core meaning for
these and contrasts them with noumenal meaning, which represents what a word
really meansaccordingtoourcurrentbestunderstandingandtheorizing.Forinstance,
even speakers in the past who were not in a position to know that water consists of
H2O associated with it the core meaning of being a transparent, drinkable liquid.
Likewise, we can recognize animals by the way they look under normal circum-
stances. The core meaning of whale is to look like a whale. So if two people disagree
about the noumenal meaning of a word, for example, whether whales should be
classiﬁed as ﬁsh or mammals, they may continue to talk about the same topic as
long as they sufﬁciently agree about the associated truth-conditionally incomplete
core meaning. Second, Rast (2020) lays out that words can also be associated with
measurement operations. Competing theories are about the same topic if associated
measurement operations (which may differ across agents and theories) roughly pick
out the same extension.9 Third, unless a noun is further qualiﬁed and distinguished
from other uses, the same noun in two different theories A and B is supposed to
stand for the same kind of entities in both A and B. Certain words, usually nouns
9 Without emphasizing measurement operations, Cappelen (2018) also advocates such an exten-
sional notion of topic equality.

52
E. H. Rast
plus qualifying adjectives, act as ﬁxed points around which varying theories are con-
structed. Choosing the same words for such alleged ﬁxed points tells speakers that
two theories are supposed to be about the same kind of entities. This nominal topic
equality is a fallible stipulation, but supporting theories are fallible, too, and in a
sense also mere stipulations.
The most important mechanism is measurement because measuring roughly the
same kind of entities warrants topic continuity; the others do not warrant but rather
stipulate it. Taken together, these three mechanisms sufﬁce to explain putative and
real topic continuity. However, having an account of topic equality does not solve
the problem of a potential drift of word meaning and concepts across speakers. How
do we understand each other, if our background theories, opinions, and world views
differ from each other and inﬂuence lexical meaning? I believe that the best answer
to this question is twofold. First, as argued in the next section, it is only pressing
when global meaning and concept holism is assumed. Instead, we should embrace
local meaning and concept holism. Second, at least up to a certain degree we are able
to, and have to be able to, track and entertain different opinions, world views, and
theories without endorsing them. Hence, theory dependence is less of a problem for
mutual understanding than one might think at ﬁrst glance. This topic is addressed in
Sect.4.2.
4.1
The Case for Local Holism
Holism is best understood in opposition to atomism and the arguments that speak
against it. A central thesis of semantic atomism is that the meanings of simple words
are not generally composed of other words’ meanings. A reasonable semantic atom-
ism may acknowledge that there are more complex, morphologically derived words
whose meanings are composed out of their parts’ meanings. For instance, conse-
quential may have a primitive meaning whereas inconsequential may have a mean-
ing derived from the former. However, this must be limited to complex words. If the
meanings of all words are decomposable into logical combinations of the meanings
of other words, then the meaning of every word hinges on the meaning of those other
words, which is a form of holism. So the semantic atomist has to assume primitive,
non-decomposable meanings, or that simple words have no meaning at all and only
serve as syntactic anchoring points in a computational theory of cognition, or—as the
more common, externalist response—allow talk about ‘meaning’ only in a derived
sense, for example by assuming that the extensions of simple words individuate their
meanings. One form of semantic atomism can be found in works by Fodor (1975,
1987), while Fodor and Lepore (1992) thoroughly discuss arguments against holism
without presuming Fodor’s contested theory of cognition.
Atomism would provide an elegant solution to the problems of theory dependence
if there were not such good counter-arguments against it, whether it concerns public
language, idiolects, or concepts. First of all, if the meaning of a word is primitive, then
how does it change? This is a generalized form of the earlier argument against index-

Contextual Meaning and Theory Dependence
53
icalist externalism. Word meanings change within discussions when they are deﬁned
explicitly. Consequently, they should also sometimes change when they are charac-
terized implicitly. Likewise, concepts such as the concept of holy trinity can change
over time even if they do not match the established current public language word
meaning. If they can change over time because our conception of reality changes,
then it seems equally reasonable to assume that they can also differ synchronously
when different theories of reality are considered, defended, and supposed. There are
metalinguistic discussions.
Atomists have a hard time explaining such negotiated concept and meaning
changes because they do not allow for the logical decompositions of lexical mean-
ings under dispute in metalinguistic discussions. Atomism is also questionable from
the perspective of the inferences that can be drawn from word use. Suppose a ﬁxed
number of words has a primitive meaning that cannot be further dissected. Suppose
α is such a word. This word α will have one set of consequences relative to the-
ory A and may have another set of consequences relative to theory B. Shouldn’t
at least some such consequences count as an aspect of the word’s meaning? It is
hard to see how these different consequences could never be the result of different
meanings. Another point against atomism is that some seemingly substantive theses
can be turned into explicitly metalinguistic theses and vice versa, and the difference
between them is only whether speakers quote linguistic material or not; some ways
of talking are even in-between the two. Consider the following examples10:
(3) a. Every atom is indivisible.
b. Atoms are indivisible.
c. Being an atom entails being indivisible.
d. Being indivisible is a deﬁning feature of atoms.
e. An essential aspect of the meaning of atom is that they are indivisible.
f. atom means being a smallest indivisible building block of nature with the
characteristic properties of a chemical element.
Implicit to semantic atomism is the claim that examples like (3a)–(3d) do not
concern the meaning of atom. Is this really plausible? Although only (3e) and (3f)
explicitly mention words, in ordinary conversations the dependence on the natural
language is often irrelevant, and all of the above statements characterize atoms in
similar ways. In practice, we often deﬁne words without mentioning them at all.
Even a simple use of a generic like in (3b) can have a ‘metalinguistic ﬂavor’ in a
context where a characterization, explanation, or deﬁnition of a word is expected.
Neither is an explicitly metalinguistic deﬁnition like in (3f) arbitrary, nor does the
use/mention distinction clearly indicate whether a word is deﬁned or characterized,
or whether a world-level claim is made. This does not mean that the choice between
explicit deﬁnition and indirect characterization is unimportant or that every law-
like statement in which a word is used has a deﬁnitory quality for that word. An
10 Clearly, there are two uses of atom in the text. The examples are about physical theories, whereas
atomism suggests a mereological use. Which one is meant is clear from the context. This is not
another example of theory dependence but merely a case of ambiguity.

54
E. H. Rast
explicit deﬁnition may indicate particular methodological preferences, that it is only
conventional or operational and later to be revised, or that a term is theoretical.
Nevertheless, semantic atomism presumes a too large divide between the explicit
deﬁnitions of complex words and the meaning of supposedly primitive words. There
is no such gap in practice.
So if we reject semantic atomism, how can holism deal with the problem of theory
dependence? To answer this question, holism has to be characterized in more detail.
First, holism can apply to words in public language. In this view, the meaning of
a public language word depends on and is partially constituted by the meanings of
other public language words; if the meaning of a word α changes, then the meanings
of words change that are partly constituted by the meaning of α. This is semantic
holism as the counterpart to semantic atomism. An analogous thesis may be for-
mulated for idiolects and sociolects, which we may call meaning holism in general.
Finally, concept holism concerns individual agents’ concept systems, where a con-
cept is a meaning-like representation that is not necessarily associated with a word.
For instance, a sculptor may have a concept for a particular shape, may be able to
recognize it and use it while sculpting, without naming it and without there being a
name for it in public language. Concept holism is the thesis that a concept c changes
whenever other concepts change that partially constitute c.
Since some externalists deny that concepts exist, and it is also controversial
whether public language meaning can change in the way relevant for the theory-
dependence problem, I will focus in the following discussion on idiolectal meaning
holism and for simplicity sometimes abbreviate it as holism. What can be said about
this type of holism can also be said about the others. The focus shall also be on
meaning change. Most of what can be said about meaning change can be transferred
to the case when two agents disagree. The main difference between the two cases is
that two agents may also differ in other beliefs that are peripheral or unimportant to
the theories under consideration. This complicates matters, but not in a way relevant
for what follows.
Consider the theory change scenario. An agent endorses a theory A but then for
some reason starts to suspect that A is not the right theory and endorses theory B
instead. Provided that A and B are not compatible with each other (they cannot
simultaneously be true), the agent ﬁrst has to retract A from his total belief base K
and then integrate B into K. Although there are well-established formal theories for
modeling these kind of processes such as AGM belief revision (Alchourrón et al.,
1985) and KM update (Katsuno and Mendelzon, 1992), realistically speaking only
some aspects of theory change can be modeled formally. The process is inherently
creativeandinvolvestheorydiscoveryof B.Theretractionof A mightnotbeminimal,
it may be based on a shift in perspective and a massive re-evaluation of more beliefs
in K than merely those required for A. Therefore, we cannot assume that those
beliefs in K which are prima facie independent from A remain constant during such
a revision. In any case, however, some statements involving words used in both K
plus A and K revised by B will likely have different consequences before and after
revision. If the effect can be isolated to only one word, then this word’s inferential
meaning has changed. Whether we are willing to say that its purported idiolectal

Contextual Meaning and Theory Dependence
55
meaning has also changed depends on whether the law-like statements responsible
for the inferential meaning change count as attributing a deﬁnitory quality or are of
a more accidental character.
For the current purposes, two versions of holism have to be distinguished. Accord-
ing to global holism, whenever the meaning of one word changes relative to a belief
base, then the meaning of all other words changes, too. Analogously, in the two-
agent case, every agent associates a slightly different meaning with each word in their
idiolect, or they have slightly different concept systems. Why would this be the case?
Generally, the idea behind this position is that words are only meaningful in larger
units like sentences and discourse fragments, and that their meaning has been learned
and is indirectly constituted by the network of law-like semantic relations and con-
straints between words. As Lepore and Fodor (1993) put it, “…meaning holism says
that what the word ‘dog’ means in your mouth depends on the totality of your beliefs
about dogs, including, therefore, your beliefs about whether Lincoln owned one. It
seems to follow that you and I mean different things when we say ‘dog’; hence that if
you say ‘dogs can ﬂy’ and I say ‘dogs can’t ﬂy’ we aren’t disagreeing.” (Lepore and
Fodor, 1993, p. 638) Correspondingly, each concept in a concept system depends on
other concepts in this view, and no two agents can learn and internalize exactly the
same concept.
Arguments by Davidson (1967, 1973) are sometimes advanced in support of
global holism. As a twist on Quine (1960), Davidson suggests to deﬁne truth-
conditions for a language by Tarski-sentences of the form ‘S’ is true in language
L iff. T, where T speciﬁes the truth-conditions for the sentence mentioned on the
condition’s left hand side.11 In a radical interpretation situation, when a speaker of
L would utter a sentence S and we have to ﬁgure out what this utterance means,
we have to apply the Principle of Charity and assume that this speaker’s beliefs are
mostly true.12 Based on this assumption, we can make sense of another person’s
rationality in a radical interpretation situation by attributing beliefs and desires to
that person and associating them with our assumptions about what their utterances
mean. However, the Principle of Charity can only get one so far. Since the beliefs
of the interpreter and the interpreted person only roughly converge, understanding
of the other person’s language will only ever be a rough approximation in a radical
interpretation situation. Moreover, since beliefs depend on each other just like the
statements of a theory, the recovery of the other person’s language in a radical inter-
pretation situation seems to imply global holism even when the Principle of Charity
is applied.
In contrast to global holism, local holism is the position that a meaning change
of a word may trigger some ﬁnitely many meaning changes but that this does not
imply that the whole idiolect changes. For example, suppose John calls any apple
or pear an apple. He has a persistent misconception that pears were once similar
to peaches but have long gone extinct. John later learns about pears and how to
distinguish apples and pears by taste and shape like most speakers of English. The
11 See Davidson (1973, p. 318).
12 See Davidson (1967, pp. 312–313), cf. Davidson (1973, pp.323–324).

56
E. H. Rast
change affects pear and apple in John’s idiolect, as well as the concepts of being
a pear and being an apple. The incorrect pear concept is eliminated, and a more
adequate one is internalized. In terms of theories, we may say that John learns better
pear and apple theories. According to local holism, this change might affect related
concepts and word meanings such as the meaning of apple pie (it’s not the same as
a pear pie), juice (pear juice exists), and fruit (pears are fruits, they are not extinct,
and taste such-and-such). It will not affect every other word, though. For example,
John’s idiolectal meanings of and, relation, democracy, dog, and greater than are
not affected. They are not just affected in a barely noticeable and neglectable way.
They are not affected at all.
Theory dependence is a huge problem for the global holist. Since people have
different beliefs about all kinds of topics, and every difference of beliefs leads to
differences in idiolects and corresponding concept systems, even with a generous
application of the Principle of Charity two interlocutors will likely talk at cross
purposes and fail to fully understand each other. The farther the theories they endorse
are apart from each other, the less they understand each other when discussing a topic
common to those theories. So it seems at ﬁrst glance. On a closer look, however, it
turns out that the arguments for global holism are relatively weak. There are good
reasons for rejecting global holism and accepting local holism instead.
Fodor and Lepore (1992) lay out in detail why many of the arguments for global
holism based on Quine (1960) and Davidson (1967, 1973) are not conclusive. One of
their points is that language learners and ﬁeld linguists are never in a radical interpre-
tation situation.13 The environment is shared, the agents’ cognition works in similar
ways, and inadequate interpretations of utterances can be corrected over time. Speak-
ers also share common features of their perceptions. For instance, a child learning
the word rabbit from watching a living rabbit sees a rabbit and not rabbit slices like
in the famous Gavagai example of Quine (1960). Radical interpretation scenarios are
radically skeptic from an epistemic point of view, but successful language learners
are not and cannot be radical skeptics. Other arguments by Fodor and Lepore (1992)
also undermine the support that radical interpretation and the Quine/Duhem thesis
seem to lend to global holism, but addressing them here would go beyond the scope
of this contribution.
There is one positive logical argument against global holism that Fodor and Lepore
do not endorse. When speakers adapt idiolectal meaning and related concepts to one
another, only word meanings and concepts central to a given topic need to be revised.
For example, children who learn what pears are and how they differ from apples
only need to revise fruit- and nutrition-related concepts. There is no need or reason
in such a case to revise unrelated concepts like being a tire or being a tiger. There
are essentially two reasons for this locality of revisions and why centrality is not an
arbitrary stipulation in this context.
On the one hand, the common-sense ontologies encoded by concept systems are
hierarchical. An upper ontology represents very abstract concepts such as relations,
counting, mereological notions, physical versus abstract objects, physical movement,
13 See Fodor and Lepore (1992, pp. 73–80).

Contextual Meaning and Theory Dependence
57
processes, information transfer, and so forth. In contrast, a lower ontology represents
speciﬁc knowledge about the world. A change of the beliefs that constitute the lower
ontology is unlikely to require a change of beliefs that constitute the upper ontology
in a reasonable account of belief revision and theory discovery. On the other hand,
theories about speciﬁc topics, identiﬁed by associated measurement operations, are
discernible from other theories and the more general ontology. A lower ontology is
divided vertically into parts that are mostly or entirely independent of each other from
a logical perspective. For instance, there are many (onto-)logical relations between
tires and pears and these objects can interact in many ways, but beliefs about these
relations are regulated by the upper ontology. They might be based on the fact that
both are types of manipulable physical objects that can be carried and moved, for
example. A revision of the pear concept by integrating new pear and fruit theories
does not have to trigger a revision of the tire concept, and likewise for the idiolectal
meanings of pear and tire. So even though there are logical relations between pears
and tires, neither is pear central to the tire theory nor, vice versa, tire central as a
term in pear theories.
Although developing a full-ﬂedged account of centrality as a measure of the
nearness of terms to the measurable topics of a theory would be a major undertaking,
there can be no doubt that pear is not just psychologically but also logically nearer
to apple than tire is. Words whose meanings are directly related to each other by
law-like statements at the same level of ontological speciﬁcity and within the same
theory with measurable topics are close to each other, for instance, whereas words
whose meanings are characterized in a theory about other measurable topics and
whose meanings are only related to each other via law-like statements of the upper
ontology (less speciﬁc, more abstract) are more distant from each other.14
Anyone who accepts these kind of examples and the reasoning behind them ought
to be wary about Quine’s dictum that “[t]he unit of empirical signiﬁcance is the whole
of science” (Quine, 1951, p. 39). Individual theories can be conﬁrmed and rejected
without revising other theories, let alone all of science, and changing individual theo-
ries need not trigger revisions of the upper ontology that supports them. Conﬁrmation
holism is only local. As a consequence of this position, under the indirect meaning
characterization thesis and the assumption that word meaning is (at least sometimes)
deﬁnitional, it follows that a change of idiolectal meanings and concepts only affects
words and concepts closely related to the one that changes. Further changes may
be triggered, but these are usually local, too, since the underlying common-sense
ontology is divided vertically and horizontally.
14 One approach would be to base the account of centrality on a good account of theory revision,
which, in turn, would have to take into account theories and their associated measurement operations
asunitswhenmodelingepistemicentrenchment.Sincethereisnonon-psychological‘logicoftheory
discovery’, however, even such an elaborate approach would remain limited.

58
E. H. Rast
4.2
Tracking Theories
So far, we have talked about beliefs and endorsing theories, and the concept systems
and ontologies related to these beliefs. But how are these notions related to each
other? The way I understand beliefs in this article, these are types of attitudes that
we attribute to agents de re, using belief ascriptions of public language. For instance,
John who calls both apples and pears apples does not believe de re that pears do not
exist. Maybe he believes de dicto that pears don’t exist because he is disposed to
utter sentences like Pears don’t exist any longer, but no corresponding de re belief
can be attributed.
In contrast to de re belief, concepts can be described using public language but
do not necessarily correspond to words of public language or an agent’s idiolect. For
instance, when John considers every pear an apple he possesses a primitive apple-
pear concept. If he uses the word apple to refer to apple-pears (i.e., apples or pears),
then the idiolectal meaning of apple is for him: being an apple-pear.
Other concepts regulate the relations between concepts and, taken together with
the concepts they regulate, constitute a concept system. The ontology that corre-
sponds to such a concept system can be described by the embedded sentences we
would use when ascribing corresponding de re beliefs. Hence, in this way of talking,
endorsing a theory can be described as the revision of existing beliefs by a theory.
The point of the previous section was that even though this process may affect more
beliefs than just those constituting the theory that is replaced, from a logical point
of view the ontology constituted by corresponding background beliefs is vertically
and horizontally divided into parts, and theory revisions will not generally affect all
of an agent’s beliefs. An indirect consequence of this view is that an agent’s concept
system is also usually only affected locally. Thus, we should opt for local holism and
the problem of theory dependence becomes less pressing.
However,thispictureisnotcomplete.Talkingaboutbeliefscanonlybeunderstood
asaﬁrstapproximation.Wenotonlyendorsetheories,wealsoconsiderthem,suppose
them, and deal with them in many other ways that do not imply that an agent fully
believes them. This is another important point for explaining meaning disputes.15
Consider two agents having a dispute that indirectly concerns word meaning.
Speaker g endorses theory A and h defends theory B, which are both about the
same topic with associated measurement operations. Regardless of what has been
said in the previous section, under the local holism thesis the two speakers will
misunderstand each other if the idiolectal meaning of a term α differs relative to
g’s belief base plus A from the idiolectal meaning of α according to h’s belief base
plus B, provided that α is central in one of the theories and some of the inferential
meanings in which α differ between h and g have a deﬁnitory quality for at least
one of the agents, i.e., the speaker considers them constitutive for what it means to
15 Endorsing a theory in this context is understood roughly as believing what the theory states. There
could be attitudes other than belief at play, for example, a true-holding attitude with less epistemic
entrenchment than belief. As long as it can be attributed de re, this does not impact my position.
Resorting to belief should be taken as a simpliﬁcation.

Contextual Meaning and Theory Dependence
59
be (rightly) called an α. How can the speakers then understand each other? Are they
not still only talking at cross purposes insofar as α is concerned?
As hinted above, the answer to this question is that a theory does not have to be
endorsed to create mutual understanding. Instead, speakers can consider a theory,
and this ability sufﬁces to rule out talk at cross purposes under ideal circumstances.
For g to understand theory B, she only needs to consider B’s merits on the basis
of a hypothetical revision with B, but need not integrate theory B and thereby give
up A. Instead of endorsing other persons’ theories, we track them. However, it does
not stop there. We may also track a theory by hypothetically revising by this theory
what we assume that the person(s) who defend the theory believe, i.e., based on our
assumptions about the proponents’ concept systems.
Even this description is incomplete. As even a cursory look at our practices reveals,
humans have the astonishing ability to compartmentalize theories altogether, inde-
pendently of whether these are endorsed or not. Even if a revision is not hypothetical
and a new theory is endorsed, this does not necessarily induce a change of the remain-
ing common-sense ontology. For example, physical theorizing could have triggered
radical changes in the everyday concept systems of physicists. After all, time and
space are no longer constant in modern physics, and quantum mechanics also has
radical implications about the macrophysical world. Nevertheless, the radically dif-
ferent ways modern physics looks at nature have probably not changed phycisists’
common-sense ontologies in any substantial way. Instead, they can designate an area
of ‘theoretical physics’ in which physical theories revise the background ontology,
but this area is compartmentalized from the original common-sense ontology that
stays in place.
This compartmentalization is necessary and inevitable. First, sometimes two the-
ories are worth endorsing even though there are good reasons for believing that
they are incompatible. This point is particularly important since two theories can be
incompatible with each other even when they are not about the same topic. As a typ-
ical example, many theoretical physicists believe that Einstein’s Theory of General
Relativity and Quantum Mechanics are not compatible with each other and that some
more general theory will replace them in the future. Nevertheless, it is perfectly ratio-
nal to endorse both theories at the same time. They are well-conﬁrmed even though
they cannot be combined easily. In this case, physicists endorse both of them until a
better, more unifying framework has been found. Similarly, it would be incorrect to
claim that physicists do not endorse Newtonian Mechanics; they do, they are merely
aware that it does not provide accurate descriptions of objects moving at near light
speed and does also not describe the behavior of extremely small ‘objects.’ Physicists
endorse Newtonian Mechanics although Relativistic Mechanics can replace it. It is
not necessary to use the more complicated relativistic formulas for macrophysical
objects at very low speeds.
Second, it is not irrational to retain information, even when it does not meet the
requirements for being fully integrated into one’s belief system. Whether it is worth
and rational to retain a new theory (opinion, world view) may be a complicated
matter, but the decisive criterion cannot be that it meets the requirements for being
endorsed. Otherwise, learning inductively by corroborating evidence from different

60
E. H. Rast
information sources would be impossible, for instance, in a scenario where each
information source individually does not meet those requirements. A rational agent
needs to keep track of theories and supporting evidence that do not meet the standards
for being endorsed.
Third, the standards for endorsing theories are also context-sensitive. For instance,
it is rational for an agent to endorse a scientiﬁcally well-conﬁrmed theory if that agent
is not very knowledgeable about the theory’s subject matter and domain. Identifying
experts and relying on them is an important skill for any rational epistemic agent,
since learning is largely a social process. However, it is equally rational for another
agent, who is knowledgeable about the theory’s subject matter and domain, not to
endorse the same theory and merely to consider it. A theory worth endorsing on
one occasion may only be worth being aware of in a more skeptical context. It can
even be rational to consider or track a theory in one context and completely ignore
it in another. For instance, a certain amount of knowledge about religious texts and
opinions is needed to understand the world views and motives of religious fanatics.
This does not mean that the same knowledge needs to have any inﬂuence on one’s
own world views or needs to play a role in the evaluation of scientiﬁc evidence.
Tracking theories means keeping their origins and sources in mind and knowing
them well enough for understanding others; it does not imply endorsing them in any
way. Hence, the contextualist objection of talking at cross purposes is ill-conceived
for theory-based disagreement. Theories neither need to be compatible with each
other nor do they need to be co-tenable, believed, or endorsed by speakers in order
for them to disagree about them. It is entirely possible to rationally disagree about an
aspect of a theory, opinion, or world view that neither of the interlocutors endorses.
When we take into account this ability to compartmentalize and track theories,
it is reasonable to also assume that we can deal with the semantic effects of theory
dependence under the assumption of local holism. Take the much-discussed Secre-
tariat is an athlete example from Ludlow (2008, 2014), for instance. Secretariat was
a famous racing horse. Suppose John believes that athlete can only be used to denote
humans. In his view, part of the deﬁnitory properties of athletes is being human.
Mary disagrees with him and believes that horses can be athletes, too. Even though
a prototypical athlete might be human, only physical prowess and success in com-
petitions are deﬁning characteristics for athletes. Their disagreement is discussed by
Plunkett and Sundell (2013) as a typical case of an (implicit) metalinguistic dispute.
Nevertheless, Mary and John can understand each other if they manage to keep
track of each other’s opinions about athletes. If each of them presupposes a different
meaning of athlete in their idiolect, this does not automatically lead to misunder-
standing. It only leads to a linguistic misunderstanding when one of them does not
know the other’s opinions about athletes well enough, and does not keep track of the
other’s athlete theory. Normally, however, speakers are able to keep track of other
theories at least to some extent, which includes an ability to recognize the effects
of local holism on possible candidates for word meaning. To what extent? From an
idealized modeling perspective, precisely to the extent to which their model of the
other’s theory about a given topic in the conversation and words central to it matches
the other’s actual theory.

Contextual Meaning and Theory Dependence
61
5
Summary
This article started with an overview of linguistic context dependence. I argued
that parameterized contexts do not sufﬁce to represent linguistic context depen-
dence adequately. However, combined with the parameterized context dependence
of indexicals and tenses, regarding interpretation as an inference to (usually) more
speciﬁc semantic contents while presuming the semantic underdetermination thesis
leads to a fairly complete account of linguistic context dependence. This is possible
only if moderate contextualism is the right position. I have suggested that this is
the case because the number of linguistically-regulated, rule-based context-sensitive
phenomena in natural languages is ﬁnite.
The problem left open by such an approach is the theory dependence of lexical
meaning. This theory dependence does not need to occur at the level of public lan-
guage meaning to become a problem; it also creates difﬁculties for explaining mutual
understanding at the level of idiolectal meaning and concept systems. Although the
easiest way to address the problem is by rejecting a deﬁnitional approach to meaning
and concepts, I have rejected this solution because it creates numerous problems.
It does not match the reality of overt and implicit metalinguistic discussions and
is forced to draw an inadequately sharp divide between deﬁnitions and externally
individuated meanings. Semantic atomism can evade this problem, but may not be
plausible for other reasons. Especially the meanings of words for abstract objects,
complex verb phrases, and compound nouns are hard to explain from the perspec-
tive of a stringent semantic atomism. However, the problem of theory dependence
remains pressing for semantic holism.
In the ﬁnal part of the article, it was argued that solving the problem of theory
dependence requires two theoretical commitments. First, global holism needs to be
given up in favor of the overall more plausible local holism. Since common-sense
ontologies are horizontally and vertically divided into parts, the effects of theories on
idiolectal meaning are often isolated to these parts. Endorsing or rejecting a theory
does not inﬂuence all concepts or the meaning of all words in an idiolect but only
a select few central to the theory. Second, theory representations of rational agents
need to be compartmentalized, as rational agents need to track theories incompatible
with their beliefs without endorsing them. If this is true, then it is also reasonable to
assume that the requirements of rational theory compartmentalization allow speak-
ers to compartmentalize the effects of theory dependence on concept systems and
meaning. An ideal rational speaker would be able to keep track of all theories and
information sources in a way that takes into account shifts in lexical meaning due to
the different law-like statements with deﬁnitory qualities for concepts and expres-
sions that these theories support. Humans are not ideally rational in this sense, of
course, yet it is reasonable to assume that they can keep track of someone else’s
deﬁnitions and characterizations in the same way they can keep track of their own
theories. Sometimes they succeed, and then there is no misunderstanding, and some-
times they fail, and there will be talking at cross purposes.

62
E. H. Rast
Assembling the parts of the article leads to the following picture. Hearers interpret
semantically incomplete content by drawing inferences from it based on existing
epistemic representations. A model for this process may be Gricean, an inference to
the best explanation, or a more psychological account like Relevance Theory. The
belief base relative to which utterances are interpreted need not solely consist of
the interpreter’s beliefs and endorsed theories. An interpretation may also be based
on assumptions about the respective speaker’s beliefs and theories (opinions, world
views). Endorsing what the speaker said, as well as the underlying theories that need
to be presumed in order for the utterance to be believable to be true, is then a second
step. This step may require a revision of the interpreter’s theories about the topic
and a corresponding change of the interpreter’s idiolect, adapting to the speaker’s
idiolect in that respect. However, both world-level and metalinguistic disagreement
is possible without this second step.
References
Alchourrón, C. E., Gaerdenfors, P., & Makinson, D. (1985). On the logic of theory change: partial
meet contraction and revision functions. Journal of Symbolic Logic, 50, 510–530.
Asher, N., & Lascarides, A. (2003). Logics of conversation. Cambridge University Press.
Bach, K. (2005). Context ex machina. In Z. G. Szabó (Ed.), Semantics versus pragmatics, (page
16–44). Oxford UP.
Bar-Hillel, Y. (1954). Indexical expressions. MIND, 63, 359–76.
Barwise, J., & Perry, J. (1983). Situations and attitudes. MIT Press.
Burge, T. (1979). Individualism and the mental. Midwest Studies in Philosophy IV, page 73–121.
Burks, A. (1949). Icon, index and symbol. Philosophical and Phenomenological Research, 9(4),
673–689.
Cappelen, H. (2018). Fixing language. Oxford University Press.
Cappelen, H., & Lepore, E. (2004). Insensitive semantics. Blackwell.
Cappelen, H., & Lepore, E. (2005). A tall tale: In defence of semantic minimalism and speech act
pluralism. In G. Preyer & G. Peter (Eds.), Contextualism in philosophy: Knowledge, meaning,
and truth. Oxford University Press.
Carnap, R. (1950). Empiricism, semantics, and ontology. Revue Internationale de Philosophie, 4(4),
20–40.
Castañeda, H.-N. (1967). Indicators and quasi-indicators. American Philosophical Quarterly, 4,
85–100.
Castañeda, H.-N. (1989a). Direct reference, the semantics of thinking, and guise theory (constructive
reﬂections on david kaplan’s theory of indexical reference). In J. Almog, J. Perry, & H. Wettstein
(Eds.), Themes from Kaplan, page 105–144. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Castañeda, H.-N. (1989b). Thinking, language, experience. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota
Press.
Chalmers, D. (2006). Two-dimensional semantics. In E. Lepore & C. B. Smith (Eds.), Oxford
handbook of the philosophy of language, chapter 23, page 574–606. Oxford University Press.
Cresswell, M. J. (1996). Semantic indexicality. Kluwer.
Cresswell, M. J., & von Stechow, A. (1982). De re belief generalized. Linguistics and Philosophy,
5(4), 503–535.
Davidson, D. (1967). Truth and meaning. Synthese, 17(3), 304–323.
Davidson, D. (1973). Radical interpretation. Dialectica, 27(1973), 314–328.

Contextual Meaning and Theory Dependence
63
de Sa, D. L. (2008). Presuppositions of commonality: An indexical relativist account of disagree-
ment. In M. Garcia-Carpintero & M. Kölbel (Eds.), Relative Truth. Oxford University Press.
de Sa, D. L. (2009). Relativizing utterance-truth? Synthese, 170(1), 1–5.
Fillmore, C. J. (1997). Lectures on Deixis. CSLI Publ., Stanford. Revised version; ﬁrst publ. 1972
based on a lecture 1971 in Santa Cruz.
Fodor, J. (1975). The language of thought. Harvard University Press.
Fodor, J. (1987). Psychosemantics. MIT Press.
Fodor, J., & Lepore, E. (1992). Holism: A shopper’s guide. Oxford/Cambridge: Blackwell Publish-
ers.
Ginzburg, J. (2012). The interactive stance. Oxford University Press.
Guala, F. (2016). Understanding institutions: The science and philosophy of living together. Prince-
ton University Press.
Jackendoff, R. (1987). The status of thematic relations in linguistic theory. Linguistic Inquiry, 18(3),
369–411.
Jackendoff, R. (1990). Semantic structures. MIT Press.
Kamp, H., & Reyle, U. (1993). From discourse to logic. Kluwer.
Kaplan, D. (1989). Demonstratives: An essay on the semantics, logic, metaphysics, and epistemol-
ogy of demonstratives and other indexicals. In J. Almog, J. Perry, & H. Wettstein (Eds.), Themes
from Kaplan, (page 481–564). Oxford University Press.
Katsuno, H., & Mendelzon, A. O. (1992). On the difference between updating a knowledge base
and revising it. In P. Gärdenfors (Ed.), Belief Revision, (page 183–203). Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Kripke, S. A. (1972). Naming and necessity. In G. Harman & D. Davidson (Eds.), Semantics of
natural language, (page 253–355). D. Reidel Publishing Co.
Lasersohn, P. (2005). Context dependence, disagreement, and predicates of personal taste. Linguis-
tics and Philosophy, 28(6), 643–686.
Lepore, E., & Fodor, J. (1993). Précis of holism: A shopper’s guide. Philosophy and Phenomeno-
logical Research, LII, I(3), 637–640.
Levinson, S. C. (1983). Pragmatics. Cambridge University Press.
Lewis, D. (1979). Scorekeeping in a language game. Journal of Philosophical Logic, 8, 339–359.
Lewis, D. K. (1979). Attitudes De Dicto and De Se. Philosophical Review, 88(4), 513–543.
Lewis, D. K. (1980). Index, context and content. In S. Kanger & S. Öhman (Eds.), Philosophy and
grammar, (page 79–100). D. Reidel Publishing Co.
Ludlow, P. (2008). Cheap contextualism. Philosophical. Issues, 18, 104–129.
Ludlow, P. (2014). Living words. Oxford University Press.
Lyons, J. (1977). Semantics (Vol. 1). Cambridge University Press.
MacFarlane, J. (2007). Relativism and disagreement. Philosophical Studies, 132(1), 17–31.
MacFarlane, J. (2008). Truth in the garden of forking paths. In M. Carcía-Carpintero & M. Kölbel
(Eds.), Relative truth, (page 81–102). Oxford University Press.
MacFarlane, J. (2009). Nonindexical contextualism. Synthese, 166, 231–250.
MacFarlane, J. (2012). Relativism. In D. G. Fara & G. Russell (Eds.), The Routledge companion to
the philosophy of language, (page 132–142). Routledge.
MacFarlane, J. (2014). Assessment relativity: Relative truth and its applications. Clarendon Press.
McTaggart, J. E. M. (1908). The unreality of time. Mind, 18, 457–74.
Moore, G. E. (1903). Principia ethica. Cambridge University Press.
Perry, J. (1977). Frege on demonstratives. Philosophical Review, 86, 474–497.
Perry, J. (1979). The problem of the essential indexical. Noûs, 13, 3–21.
Perry, J. (1998a). Myself and I. In M. Stamm, (Ed.), Philosophie in synthetischer absicht, (page
83–103). Klett-Cotta, Stuttgart. (Festschrift für Dieter Henrich).
Perry, J. (1998b). Rip Van Winkle and other characters. The European review of analytical philos-
ophy, Volume 2: Cognitive dynamics, page 13–39.
Perry, J. (2001). Reference and reﬂexivity. CSLI Publications.

64
E. H. Rast
Plunkett, D. (2015). Which concepts should we use? Metalinguistic negotiations and the method-
ology of philosophy. Inquiry, 58(7–8), 828–874.
Plunkett, D., & Sundell, T. (2013). Disagreement and the semantics of normative and evaluative
terms. Philosophers’ Imprint, 13(23), 1–37.
Plunkett, D. and Sundell, T. (2019). Metalinguistic negotiation and speaker error. Inquiry, page
1–27.
Prior, A. (1967). Past, present, and future. Oxford University Press.
Prior, A. N. (1957). Time and modality. Oxford University Press.
Prior, A. N. (2003). Changes in events and changes in things. In P. Hasle, P. Øhrstrøm, T. Braüner,
& J. Copeland (Eds.), Papers on time and tense, chapter 1. Oxford University Press.
Putnam, H. (1975). The meaning of ‘Meaning’. In H. Putnam (Ed.), Mind, language and reality,
number 2 in philosophical papers, page 215–271. Cambridge University Press.
Quine, W. V. O. (1951). Two dogmas of empiricism. The Philosophical Review, 60(1), 20–43.
Quine, W. V. O. (1960). Word and object. Wiley.
Rast, E. (2017). Metalinguistic value disagreement. Studia Semiotyczne, XXX, I(2), 139–159.
Rast, E. (2017b). Value disagreement and two aspects of meaning. Croatian Journal of Philosophy,
17(51(3)):399–430.
Rast, E. (2020). The theory theory of metalinguistic disputes. Mind and Language, forthcoming
(publ. online ﬁrst):1–19.
Rast, E. H. (2010). Plausibility revision in higher-order logic with an application in two-dimensional
semantics. In X. Arrazola, & M. Ponte, (Ed.), Proceedings of the logKCA-10—Proceedings of the
Second ILCLI International Workshop on Logic and Philosophy of Knowledge, Communication
and Action, Donostia/San Sebastian. ILCLI, University of the Basque Country Press.
Rast, E. H. (2014). Context as assumptions. In F. Lihoreau & M. Rebuschi (Eds.), Knowledge,
context, formalism, (page 9–39). Springer.
Recanati, F. (2004). Deixis and Anaphora. In Z. G. Szabó (Ed.), Semantics vs. pragmatics. Oxford
University Press.
Recanati, F. (2004). Literal meaning. Cambridge University Press.
Recanati, F. (2006). Crazy minimalism. Mind and Language, 21(1), 21–30.
Reichenbach, H. (1947). Elements of symbolic logic. Macmillan.
Schlenker, P. (2000). Propositional attitudes and indexicality: A cross-categorial approach. PhD
thesis, MIT, Massachusetts. Dissertation 1999, MIT; minor changes in 2000.
Schlenker, P. (2003). A Plea for Monsters. Linguistics and Philosophy, 26, 29–120.
Searle, J. (1995). The construction of social reality. Penguin.
Searle, J. (2005). What is an institution? Journal of Institutional Economics, 1(1), 1–22.
Sperber, D., & Wilson, D. (1986). Relevance: Communication and cognition. Blackwell.
Sperber, D., & Wilson, D. (2004). Relevance theory. In The handbook of pragmatics, (page 607–
632). Blackwell.
Stalnaker, R. (1978). Assertion. In P. Cole, (Ed.), Pragmatics, (page 315–332). Academic Press,
New York. (= Syntax and Semantics Vol. 9).
Stanley, J. (2004). On the linguistic basis for contextualism. Philosophical Studies, 119(1–2), 119–
146.
Stanley, J. (2005). Semantics and context. In G. Preyer & G. Peter (Eds.), Contextualism in philos-
ophy: Knowledge, meaning, and truth, (page 221–253). Oxford University Press.
Stokhof, M., & Groenendijk, J. (1991). Dynamic predicate logic. Linguistics and Philosophy, 14(1),
39–100.
von Stechow, A. (1984). Structured propositions and essential indexicals. In F. Landman & F.
Veltman (Eds.), Varieties of formal semantics, (page 385–403). Kluwer.

Scientiﬁc Naturalism and Its Faults
Mario De Caro
According to the most common version of naturalism—called “scientiﬁc naturalism”
or “strict naturalism”—, in matters of ontology and epistemology, natural science
always has the last word. In the second half of the twentieth century, two philosophers
have given the greatest impetus to this concept: Wilfrid Sellars and W.V.O. Quine.
In “Philosophy and the Scientiﬁc Image of Man” (1962), Sellars elaborated a very
inﬂuential distinction between the “manifest image” (the world as it is understood
by ordinary vision) and the scientiﬁc image” (the world as it is understood by natural
science). Sellars’s view is specular to that offered by Edmund Husserl in The Crisis
of European Sciences and Transcendental Phenomenology (1936); nor is this a coin-
cidence since, when he was a student at Buffalo, Sellars was deeply inﬂuenced by
Marvin Farber, a heterodox phenomenologist who had been a student of Husserl:
Marvin Farber introduced me to Husserl. His combination of utter respect for the structure of
Husserl’s thought with the equally ﬁrm conviction that this structure could be given a natu-
ralistic interpretation was undoubtedly a key inﬂuence on my own subsequent philosophical
strategy. (Sellars, 1975, 283).
Like Husserl, Sellars strives to understand the relationship between the ways of
conceiving the world that are characteristic of, respectively, the ordinary worldview
and natural science; and, like Husserl, he aims at elaborating a uniﬁed conception of
the two visions, which he calls “stereoscopic vision”. For Sellars, the two images are
“pictures of essentially the same order of complexity, each of which purports to be a
complete picture of man-in-the-world which, after separate scrutiny, [philosophers]
must fuse into one vision” (Sellars, 1962, 4). Moreover, like Husserl, Sellars recog-
nizes that, from a genetic point of view, the scientiﬁc image of the world derives
from the manifest image and that the normative concepts of the latter image (for
example, the concepts of morality) are not reducible to the descriptive concepts that
M. De Caro (B)
Department of Philosophy, Università Roma Tre & Tufts University, via Ostiense 236, 00144
Roma, Italy
e-mail: Mario.Decaro@tufts.edu
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
S. Wuppuluri and I. Stewart (eds.), From Electrons to Elephants and Elections,
The Frontiers Collection, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-92192-7_5
65

66
M. De Caro
characterize the scientiﬁc image. From an ontological point of view, however, the
unilaterality of Sellars’s conception is antithetical to the unilaterality of Husserl’s
conception (De Caro, 2015). While Husserl is an ordinary realist and an anti-realist
concerning science, Sellars adopts the opposite perspective. That is, he is a realist
concerning the scientiﬁc view and an anti-realist concerning the ordinary worldview:
according to this point of view, in the modern age the scientiﬁc image justiﬁably
gained a monopoly on ontology, and this showed that the world as conceived by the
ordinary view is not the real world. Sellars (1956, 83) expresses this point with a
neo-Protagorean dictum:
Speaking as a philosopher, I am quite prepared to say that the common sense world of
physical objects in Space and Time is unreal—that is, that there are no such things. Or, to put
it less paradoxically, that in the dimension of describing and explaining the world, science
is the measure of all things, of what is that it is, and of what is not that it is not.
Quine’s theoretical perspective is similar to Sellars’s, but with an important differ-
ence: Quine incorporates scientiﬁc realism in an inﬂuential overall conception that
combines the ontological thesis constitutive of scientiﬁc realism, with an epistemo-
logical thesis and a metaphilosophical thesis. In this form, scientiﬁc naturalism has
become the main vehicle by which scientiﬁc realism has spread in the philosophical
world. Its three basic theses are thus as follows:
i.
Ontological thesis: reality consists only of the entities to which the best explanations
of the natural sciences commit us. All other presumed entities, if they are not reducible
to scientiﬁc entities, are entia non grata and therefore should not be accepted in our
ontology (Quine, 1960).
ii.
Epistemologicalthesis:thenaturalsciencesareouronlygenuinesourcesofknowledge.
All other supposed forms of knowledge (such as perception, a priori, introspection,
or intuition) either can in principle be accommodated into scientiﬁc knowledge or are
illegitimate (Quine, 1969).
iii.
Metaphilosophical thesis: philosophy is continuous with science in content, methods,
and purposes. According to Quine (1986a, 430–431), we should pursue “philosophy
rather as a part of one’s system of the world, continuous with the rest of science.” And
elsewhere, with some irony he states that normative epistemology—the philosoph-
ical branch that deals with knowledge, truth, and justiﬁcation—is “a branch of engi-
neering,” that is, it should be understood as an applied natural science (Quine, 1986b,
664).
It is important to emphasize the importance of the latter thesis. With his scientiﬁc
naturalism, Quine does not simply afﬁrm the correctness of scientiﬁc realism and the
primacy of natural science from an ontological and epistemological point of view. He
also argues that philosophy is, in essence, a still underdeveloped natural science—a
thesis that certainly Sellars would not have accepted (nor would the advocates of
more liberal forms of naturalism: see De Caro and Macarthur 2004, 2010, 2022 and
forthcoming).
Incidentally, it may be noted that some scientiﬁc naturalists (including Sellars and
Quine), but by no means all, attribute priority among the natural sciences to physics.
According to this view (called “physicalism”), the entities and processes that physics
deals with are not only the bricks with which the world is built but in principle are

Scientiﬁc Naturalism and Its Faults
67
also sufﬁcient to explain everything that exists. In this framework, then, all other
sciences of nature are reducible to physics. One of the most inﬂuential contemporary
physicalists, Jaegwon Kim (1996, 11), has given voice to this idea, writing that “each
and every property of a thing is either a physical property or is determined by its
physical properties and that there is nothing in the world that is not a physical thing.”
Another champion of this conception is Alex Rosenberg, who goes so far as to claim
for his conception the label of “scientism” (which generally has instead a negative
connotation):
What is the world really like? It’s fermions and bosons, and everything that can be made up
of them, and nothing that can’t be made up of them. All the facts about fermions and bosons
determine or “ﬁx” all the other facts about reality and what exists in this universe or any other
if, as physics may end up showing, there are other ones. In effect, scientism’s metaphysics
is, to more than a ﬁrst approximation, given by what physics tells us about the universe.
The reason we trust physics to be scientism’s metaphysics is its track record of fantastically
powerful explanation, prediction, and technological application. If what physics says about
reality doesn’t go, that track record would be a totally inexplicable mystery or coincidence.
(Rosenberg, 2009).
Other scientiﬁc naturalists disagree, however, because they believe that physics is
notaprivilegednaturalscience.JohnSearle(2004),forexample,believesthatbiology
is irreducible to the sciences that deal with the elementary components of matter,
such as physics and chemistry: in his opinion, therefore, the inventory of the world is
provided by the natural sciences as a whole. Other defenders of scientiﬁc naturalism
believe that geology or meteorology are irreducible to the more fundamental sciences
(Fodor,1997)andstillothersthatnotevenchemistryisreducibletophysics(Weisberg
et al., 2011). In any case, as far as we are interested here, the distinction within
scientiﬁc naturalism between those who defend the thesis of the ontological and
epistemological primacy of physics and those who deny it is not fundamental. What
is important is that, according to all those who adhere to scientiﬁc naturalism, there
is nothing that in principle cannot be investigated with the methods and concepts of
the natural sciences. Reality and knowledge, in short, cannot exceed the scope of
these sciences.
Inthebackgroundofthepresentfortuneofscientiﬁcnaturalism,thereisapowerful
inductive argument. Starting from Galileo, modern natural science has explained
in a more and more complete way wider and wider phenomenal ﬁelds, allowing
us to make extremely accurate predictions and dethroning the presumed explana-
tions that had been developed previously. It is therefore rational to infer—this argu-
ment proceeds—that natural science can explain, in principle, everything that can
be explained, and this even in ﬁelds in which it is not yet very developed. From this
epistemological assertion follows an ontological conclusion: we must assume the
existence only of entities that natural science can in principle account for. And, from
this point of view, philosophy—at least in the case in which it aspires to speak about
reality and not about ﬁctions—can only align itself completely with natural science.
These theses may sound a bit maximalist. And not surprisingly, the main problem
of scientiﬁc naturalism is the so-called “placement problem” (Price, 2004). The terms
of this problem have been well presented by Searle (2007, 4–5):

68
M. De Caro
How can we square a conception of ourselves as mindful, meaning-creating, free, rational,
etc. agents with a universe that consists entirely of mindless, meaningless, unfree,
nonrational, brute physical particles?
The philosopher of science John Earman (1992, 262) expresses a similar idea,
emphasizing the difﬁculty of the task:
If science succeeds in its attempt to explain our nature, then we lose our speciﬁcity as beings
able to determine their own destiny; if science fails in this attempt, then we turn out to be
very mysterious entities within the universe. It seems that the attempt to locate human agents
in nature either fails in a manner that reﬂects a limitation on what science can tell us about
ourselves, or else it succeeds at the expense of undermining our cherished notion that we are
free and autonomous agents.
Simon Blackburn (1993, 49), in turn, clearly declines this problem regarding ethics:
“The problem is one of ﬁnding room for ethics, or placing ethics within the
disenchanted, non-ethical order which we inhabit, and of which we are a part.”
The problem of placement concerns the phenomena constitutive of the ordinary
conception of the world: at least at ﬁrst glance, it would seem that these phenomena
do not conform to the scientiﬁc conception—if they do not oppose it altogether. Think
of free will, moral properties, normativity, meaning, consciousness, or ontologically
elusive phenomena such as ﬁnancial indebtedness or collective intentionality. The
regimentation of these phenomena in the perspective of the natural sciences appears
at least arduous: each of them represents, therefore, a particular case of the problem of
collocation. Nonetheless, the vast majority of scientiﬁc naturalists express no doubt
that the problem of collocation is solvable. In this spirit, for example, Alan Lacey
(2005, 640), has written that “everything is natural, i.e.… everything there is belongs
to the world of nature, and so can be studied by the methods appropriate for studying
that world, and the apparent exceptions can be somehow explained away.”
Scientiﬁc naturalists are presented with three possible strategies for dealing with
the problem of collocation. The ﬁrst strategy is that of reductionism, according
to which one must show that the phenomena just mentioned are, yes, ontologi-
cally genuine, but only because they are identical, or at least reducible, to scientiﬁ-
cally acceptable phenomena. For several decades, reductionism has been an attitude
present in many areas of philosophy: from the attempts of the so-called “neuroaes-
thetics” to reduce aesthetic properties to neurological properties to Penelope Maddy’s
“naturalized Platonism” concerning mathematical properties up to the attempts to
naturalize religious spirituality (Dawkins, 2006; Dennett, 2006).
Let us consider a couple of more detailed examples of the current fortunes of
reductionism. First, many philosophers of mind sympathetic to scientiﬁc naturalism
have attempted to reduce mental property types (beliefs, desires, and so on) to neuro-
logical properties, according to the famous “identity of mind-brain types” thesis.
According to this theory, each type of mental event (such as the belief that Kabul is
the capital of Afghanistan or the desire to eat an apple) is identical to a certain type
of physical event (typically, a neural process). Proponents of this theory recognize,
of course, that we are not yet able to determine such identities: that is, we are not
able to say, for all kinds of mental events, to what kind of physical events they are

Scientiﬁc Naturalism and Its Faults
69
identical. Nonetheless, this identity exists and is the only guarantee of the reality of
mental events (Gozzano & Hill, 2012; Kim, 2007).
Another attempt at reduction by scientiﬁc naturalists concerns moral properties
(Jackson, 1998). The idea here is that moral properties are real, independent of our
minds, and make ethical judgments objective, but are natural properties of the same
kind studied by the sciences. This is the typical reasoning followed in this area by
reductionistically oriented scientiﬁc naturalists:
1.
Moral judgments can be true or false.
2.
The truth or falsity of those judgments depends on the existence of speciﬁc
phenomena: moral properties.
3.
There are no non-natural phenomena.
4.
All real phenomena are therefore natural phenomena, in the sense that they fall
within the purview of the natural sciences.
5.
Moral properties fall within the purview of the natural sciences.
Note that premises 3 and 4 in premise 4 of this reasoning are typical of scientiﬁc
naturalism: the only natural properties are the proper ones studied by the natural
sciences. The most interesting premise, however, is premise 5, because the natural-
ness of moral properties can be conceived in two ways. In a ﬁrst sense, it can be argued
that moral properties are reducible to non-moral natural properties: the property of a
given action to be good, for example, could simply mean that that action conforms to
a system of instructions—hardwired into our brains by natural selection—that results
in a beneﬁt to humanity (FitzPatrick, 2014). In a second sense, however, premise 5
can be interpreted to mean that moral properties can be investigated by the natural
sciences, but that is not to say that they are identical to some non-moral property:
that is, they are natural properties of a speciﬁc kind (Boyd, 1988). Against the latter
conception, however, it has been objected that, while we perceive the usual non-moral
properties (such as whiteness or sphericity), moral properties such as goodness or
generosity cannot be perceived: and this would be an indication of their illusori-
ness or supernaturalness. To this objection, it has been replied that other properties
considered perfectly natural are also not directly perceptible, but are only inferred:
for example, the property of being in good health. In order to take as real properties
such as being generous or being healthy what matters is their causal power: that is,
these properties are considered real because they can cause changes in the world. We
certainly cannot argue that the property of being healthy is supernatural because we
see its effects, but we do not perceive it directly; rather, we consider it as a natural
property of a speciﬁc kind that can be investigated with normal scientiﬁc instruments
(for example, by measuring the homeostasis of an organism). The same, according
to this point of view, should be thought regarding moral properties: they are real
properties because they have causal power (Martin Luther King’s generosity, for
example, caused changes in the world), but that does not mean we should consider
them supernatural. Moral properties, in short, Richard Boyd (1988) and David Copp
(2017) argue, can be studied with ordinary scientiﬁc tools. For example, one can
investigate empirically how, how much, and in what situations generosity affects the
human world; and in this way, one can understand what generosity is.

70
M. De Caro
Other scientiﬁc naturalists oppose the reductionist strategy: that is, they do not
believe that the problem of collocation can be solved with the idea that the contro-
versial phenomena of the ordinary image of the world are investigable by the natural
sciences or that they are reducible to phenomena that can be investigated by these
sciences. In reality, these philosophers argue, such phenomena are constitutively
incompatible with the natural sciences and for these reasons must be eliminated
from our ontology, exactly as in the past happened with phlogiston, with the epicy-
cles of Ptolemaic astronomy, and with the alleged magical properties of witchcraft.
This conception is called “eliminationism”. To give a few examples: Paul and Patricia
Churchland argue that the entire conceptual apparatus of the intentional mind proper
to common-sense psychology (with its references to beliefs, desires, intentions,
rationality, and so on) is nothing more than a completely ﬂawed para-scientiﬁc
theory. In their view, mental phenomena, being immaterial, are not reducible to
brain processes, and therefore one must conclude that they are not real. In the words
of Paul Churchland (1988, 43):
A false and radically misleading conception of the causes of human behavior and the nature
of cognitive activity. On this view, folk psychology is not just an incomplete representation
of our inner natures; it is an outright misrepresentation of our internal states and activities.
In a similar spirit, Derk Pereboom (2014) and Gregg Caruso (2013) deny reality
to free will and moral responsibility; Daniel Dennett (1991) and Georges Rey
(2016) contest the reality of phenomenological properties (the so-called “qualia”);
Hartry Field (1980) and Mark Balaguer (2009) defend mathematical ﬁctionalism,
and Richard Joyce (2005) defends moral ﬁctionalism, following the steps of John
Mackie (1977), who argued that moral properties and values, being constitutively
“queer” (strange, bizarre) with respect concerning o the scientiﬁc worldview, cannot
be included in our ontology. “If there were objective values,” writes Mackie (1977,
38), “they would be entities or qualities or relations of a very strange sort, utterly
different from anything else in the universe.” According to these authors, since values
and moral properties do not exist, it follows that the normative judgments of ethics—
which claim to be objective and presuppose the reality of values—are always hope-
lessly false. In general, then, to solve the problem of collocation, all these authors
propose a very drastic solution: that of eliminating from our ontological repertoire
the properties of the ordinary worldview.
Finally, we must consider another family, smaller but no less resolute, of scien-
tiﬁc naturalists. They reject both reductionism and eliminationism, in the name of
a conception called mysterianism, initially developed by the famous linguist and
philosopher Noam Chomsky. Human beings try to solve two different kinds of ques-
tions, Chomsky (1976) argues, “problems” and “mysteries”. Problems are questions
that we know how to deal with: for example, we generally understand how to inves-
tigate to ﬁnd out if there are still unknown planets in the solar system or to ﬁnd the
cure for diabetes. Moreover, we can also imagine the kind of solution of these ques-
tions (respectively, the possible detection of an unknown celestial body of a certain
size orbiting exclusively around the Sun and a therapy that cures diabetes patients
or makes their condition signiﬁcantly better). In the case of mysteries, instead, we

Scientiﬁc Naturalism and Its Faults
71
don’t have, and never will have, the slightest idea of how they could be solved nor of
what form their solution could have; and, for this reason, Chomsky argues, mysteries
are questions that our species will never solve. And, in this perspective, free will,
consciousness, or the mind–body problem are most likely some of these mysteries:
we cannot conceptualize the world without these phenomena (and therefore they
cannot be eliminated from our ontology), but neither can we reduce them to scientif-
ically explainable phenomena. According to mysterianism, for humans the problem
of the location of phenomena seemingly unrelated to the scientiﬁc worldview will
forever remain a mystery; and this is because, quite simply, our species lacks the
conceptual resources to solve it—in the same sense that dogs lack the resources to
prove the Pythagorean theorem.
British philosopher Colin McGinn (1993) has presented the most ambitious and
detailed version of mysterianism. From a perspective typical of scientiﬁc naturalism,
McGinn (2002, 207) argues that.
nature is a system of derived entities, the basic going to construct the less basic; and
understanding nature is ﬁguring out how the derivation goes... Find the atoms and laws
of combination and evolution, and then derive the myriad of complex objects you ﬁnd in
nature.
This approach is not without philosophical consequences if, in reﬂecting on the
philosophical status of ordinary worldview phenomena (consciousness, ego, free
will, meaning, and knowledge), McGinn (2002, 209) himself acknowledges that.
there are yawning gaps between these phenomena and the more basic phenomena they
proceed from, so that we cannot apply the [scientiﬁc] format to bring sense to what we
observe. The essence of a philosophical problem is the unexplained leap, the step from one
thing to another without any conception of the bridge that supports the step.
According to McGinn, our species is not intelligent enough to bring phenomena such
as consciousness, ego, free will, meaning, and knowledge to a format that can be
handled by the natural sciences. And because of this, McGinn (2002, 207) concludes,
philosophy, because it tries to solve insoluble problems, is a “futile” activity. On the
other hand, we cannot even think of considering these phenomena as illusory, because
they play too important roles in our intellectual lives and practices. Therefore, for
us, they represent insoluble mysteries and will always do.
In sum, scientiﬁc naturalists face the complex challenge posed by the problem
of collocation. This problem concerns phenomena (from freedom to consciousness,
from normativity to morality to signiﬁcation) that for ordinary realism—the kind
of realism encompassed in the commonsense image of the world—are, at the same
time, indubitable and essential to understanding human reality. Within the frame-
work of scientiﬁc naturalism, however, these phenomena appear mysterious because
they do not seem treatable by natural science. Scientiﬁc naturalists attempt, then,
three strategies to account for these phenomena: reductionism, eliminationism, and
mysterianism.
Ordinary realism (which is defended, for example, by Husserl and van Fraassen)
manifests an intrinsic hegemonic tendency to the extent that it projects onto the

72
M. De Caro
whole of reality—including the areas of relevance to science—the idea that percep-
tion (direct or assisted by technological supports) is the only parameter we have to
determinewhattheworldislike.Inotherwords,ordinaryrealistsmakeaverydubious
inference: from the very plausible thesis that perception is a legitimate (though obvi-
ously not infallible) key to access reality, they conclude that perception is the only
key to access reality and that therefore one can deny ontological legitimacy to the
unobservable entities postulated by science (De Caro, 2015 and 2019).
Scientiﬁc realism, which, as we have seen today, is defended with particular vigor
byscientiﬁcnaturalists,tendstobeashegemonicasordinaryrealism,butinaspecular
way. This conception, in fact, in the name of the reality of scientiﬁc ontology, tends to
dismiss the realist attitude of the ordinary worldview, based on the idea that the only
entities that exist are those contemplated by science. In doing so, however, it encoun-
ters a considerable theoretical problem: the problem of collocation. How to account
for the entities and properties (secondary properties, free will, consciousness, values,
and so on) that are of such importance to the ordinary worldview, but which, at least
apparently, do not seem tractable by the natural sciences? The strategies adopted by
scientiﬁc naturalists, we have seen, are of three kinds: reductionism, eliminationism,
and mysterianism. All three, however, present considerable problems: let us see why.
According to the ﬁrst strategy, reductionism, phenomena accepted by the ordinary
worldview are actually identical to more fundamental, scientiﬁcally investigable
properties in the same sense that water is identical to H2O (think, for example, of the
attempts of some moral realists to reduce moral properties to properties that can be
investigated with the tools of the natural sciences). Those attempts at reduction run
into a huge problem, however. An essential aspect of moral properties is that they have
to do not only with the world of being, which concerns the way things are but also with
the world of possibility and obligations—that is, with normativity. The behavior of a
given person is moral when in a given situation that person does something morally
praiseworthy: that is, something that should be praised, not something that is in
fact praised. For example, a generous action by an individual (e.g., when someone
welcomes a politically persecuted person into their home) may be criticized by the
respective community because that community is clouded by prejudice or fear: in
such a case, the community is in error because it should have praised that action, not
criticized it. A natural scientist, however, can only investigate how things are, not
how they should be. The normative aspect of morality escapes attempts at reduction
altogether; and similar criticisms can be made of attempts to reduce other phenomena
proper to the ordinary worldview.
Yet attempts at reduction, or as we sometimes say “naturalization,” continue to
thrive. Thus, some time ago Tyler Burge (1993, 117) described attempts to reduce
mental properties to neuroscientiﬁc properties:
The ﬂood of projects... that attempt to ﬁt mental causation or mental ontology into a ‘natu-
ralistic picture of the world’ strike me as having more in common with political or religious
ideology than with a philosophy that maintains perspective on the difference between what
is known and what is speculated.

Scientiﬁc Naturalism and Its Faults
73
This reductionist “ﬂood of projects” is the result of an ideology that characterizes
all versions of scientiﬁc naturalism: an ideology that does not, however, come to
terms with the articulated ways in which we, as a matter of fact, understand the
world. Referring to cognition, and more generally to thought, Putnam (1992, 18),
for example, wrote:
There is no reason why the study of human cognition requires that we try to reduce cognition
either to computations or to brain processes. We may very well succeed in discovering
theoretical models of the brain which vastly increase our understanding of how the brain
works without being of very much help to most areas of psychology, and in discovering better
theoretical models in psychology (cognitive and otherwise) which are not of any particular
help to brain science. The idea that the only understanding worthy of the name is reductionist
understanding is a tired one, but evidently it has not lost its grip on our scientiﬁc culture.
It will not be surprising, then, that while reductionist ideology is very common today,
there is much less agreement on the value of concrete attempts to reduce the entities
of the ordinary worldview, to the point that, as Putnam (2004, 62) ironically notes,
“none of these ontological reductions gets believed by anyone except the proponent
of the account and one or two of his friends and/or students.”
In this regard, however, a remark is necessary. First of all, as far as the empir-
ical investigation conducted by scientists is concerned, the assumption that a given
phenomenon can be studied by resorting exclusively to the categories of the natural
sciences is obviously legitimate: it is a methodological maxim (not an ontological
principle) that has often been very fruitful for research. The history of science, on
the other hand, teaches us that the most successful research programs have often
involved real leaps in the dark by their proponents: heliocentrism was deﬁnitively
proven only in the nineteenth century and the theory of relativity was conﬁrmed years
after Einstein had proposed it. It could perhaps happen, for example, that one day the
mind will be explained as any physical system, without any other tools than those of
natural sciences (and not also with intentional psychology and introspection); at the
moment, however, we have no elements to conclude that this will happen. Therefore,
at least for now, it is at least adventurous to confer ontological dignity on a maxim
that is methodological in nature.
In essence, we must distinguish between reductionist ideology and concrete scien-
tiﬁc reductions. What is essential for scientiﬁc progress are concrete reductions, when
they succeed: that is, the reduction of a given range of phenomena to a more funda-
mental range. When a reduction is accomplished (such as when it was demonstrated
that water is H2O or that light corresponds to a certain portion of the electromag-
netic spectrum) our knowledge has taken a great step forward. The “reductionism”
instead is an ideology: that is the conception that all phenomena must in principle be
reduced and explained from more fundamental phenomena. This is a philosophical
thesis, not a scientiﬁc one. In their practice, scientists often attempt to make reduc-
tions, but in many cases, they proceed by studying phenomena at their particular
level: for example, biologists generally do not move to the physical–chemical level
for their research. Nor do we have any basis for being certain that reductions are
always possible—as reductionist ideology instead assumes.

74
M. De Caro
Returning to the philosophical discussion, we can therefore say that in general
reductionism is not a winning strategy. This is why many scientiﬁc naturalists take
a bolder route: that of eliminating from our ontology the entities and properties
belonging to the ordinary worldview. Secondary properties, free will, consciousness,
moral properties, normativity, intentionality: no aspect of the ordinary view is spared
from the eliminationist pathos of these authors. The aforementioned Alex Rosenberg
(2009) gives an excellent example of this trend when he writes:
Science forces upon us a very disillusioned ‘take’ on reality. It forces us to say ‘No’ in
response to many questions to which most everyone hopes the answers are ‘Yes’. These
are the questions about purpose in nature, the meaning of life, the grounds of morality, the
signiﬁcance of consciousness, the character of thought, the freedom of the will, the limits of
human self-understanding, and the trajectory of human history.
In this quotation, one notices, moreover, a strange mixture of ideas that no serious
thinker today would consider worthy of consideration (the purpose of nature, the
trajectory of human history) with others that are essential to both the ordinary world-
view and to many philosophical systems as if they were all at the same level of
plausibility. In any case, the fundamental question of eliminationism is this: can we
seriously conceive of a world without the central ideas of the ordinary worldview
and philosophy, such as free will, consciousness, morality, and so on?
Let’s consider, as an example, the attempt, by Paul and Patricia Churchland
and others, to eliminate from our ontology the mental states proper to common-
sense psychology (beliefs, desires, intentions, etc.). As will be recalled, according
to the Churchlands, common-sense psychology is a proto-scientiﬁc theory that is
completely erroneous regarding how the mind works. A ﬁrst objection that can be
made to this idea is that common-sense psychology is not a theory at all (albeit a
proto-scientiﬁc and erroneous one): understanding the mind does not have at all the
structure and function of a scientiﬁc explanation. For example, when we interpret
the minds of others, or even when we reﬂect on ourselves, using common sense
psychology, we frequently refer to normative notions: “My belief was wrong,” “This
desire of yours is absurd,” “Your intention should be another.” And natural science
theories cannot adequately deal with normative notions: thus, equating common-
sense psychology with a scientiﬁc theory, albeit a primordial one, is incorrect. A
second objection is that, even if one were to accept the idea that common-sense
psychology is a theory, then it should also be said that it is a theory that works quite
well, because it helps us to make a large number of correct predictions about other
people’s behavior and, at least at this stage, it does this much better than any alterna-
tive theory (neurological or otherwise): so it is hard to see why we should eliminate it.
Finally, one can also object that the Churchlands’ eliminationism is self-conﬁrming:
if beliefs are not real, it is hard to see how the Churchlands can believe that their
theory is better than common sense psychology, nor how they can try to convince
others to believe in their theory.
Equally convincing arguments can be developed against attempts to eliminate the
other fundamental components of the ordinary worldview. From this perspective,
one must therefore conclude that eliminationist ideology as a whole, like reductionist

Scientiﬁc Naturalism and Its Faults
75
ideology, does not work. For this reason, as we have seen, some scientiﬁc naturalists
have espoused a third conception, “mysterianism.” According to the proponents of
this conception, the phenomena proper to the ordinary image of the world cannot
be banished from our ontology, as the eliminativists claim: such phenomena are
indispensable for giving meaning to many fundamental aspects of our existence.
On the other hand, continue the mysterians, we are not even able to bring back
those phenomena, as the reductionists hope, to the explanatory modalities of science,
which are the only epistemically legitimate: this, however, does not happen because
these phenomena are intrinsically supernatural, but for our insurmountable cognitive
limits. We are simply not an intelligent enough species to give a scientiﬁc explanation
for these phenomena, in the same sense that dogs do not have sufﬁcient cognitive
endowment to understand a mathematical demonstration of Pythagoras’ theorem.
Mysterians consistently draws the consequences implicit in the ontological
premises of scientiﬁc naturalism and has the merit of recognizing that attempts at
reduction are generally vague and the alleged eliminations unfeasible. However, in
doing so, he reaches a conclusion that is very difﬁcult to accept, i.e., that free will,
consciousness, knowledge, meaning etc., are “mysteries” because we will never be
able to understand them. In reality, however, if it is true that we do not know how
to solve problems such as those of free will or consciousness, it is also true that
over the centuries we have made considerable progress in clarifying them. Today we
know much more about these problems than we did in antiquity, the Middle Ages, or
even a few decades ago: conceptions that were thought plausible have been refuted,
conceptually more reﬁned ones have been developed, various facets of the problems
have been clariﬁed, and so on. Philosophy, in short, progresses conceptually (even if
it does not solve its own problems, because a solved problem is ipso facto considered
non-philosophical). And if there is conceptual progress, it means that philosophical
problems are not unfathomable mysteries as Chomsky thinks and that philosophy is
not at all a futile activity, as McGinn thinks. Moreover, it seems intellectually arrogant
to set limits to what our species can do cognitively based on what we now think of our
epistemic limits: Aristotle (perhaps the greatest genius ever to appear on Earth) could
never have conceived of the possibility of sending a human being to the Moon, of
formulating Gödel’s theorem, of calculating the speed of light or of explaining how
sight works (a problem, the latter, which at the time was considered to be the domain
of philosophy). But this proves that those questions were not mysteries: they were,
rather, very difﬁcult problems, still not formulated at Aristotle’s time, but that with
the passing of generations have been solved. And this could happen even with some
of the problems discussed today by many philosophers—even if, for this reason, they
would no longer be considered philosophical problems.
On the other hand, once we assume the perspective of scientiﬁc naturalism, we
have no idea what form the acceptable explanations concerning consciousness, free
will, meaning, etc. might take. In that framework, these phenomena—which within
the ordinary view of reality are not considered so mysterious—become completely
incomprehensible: there is no way, in short, to talk about them in an intelligible way.
However, the fact that scientiﬁc naturalism makes the most important phenomena of
our existence incomprehensible can also be taken as a reductio ad absurdum of this

76
M. De Caro
conception. In other words, a philosophical conception that is not able to account
for some of our fundamental ideas, and cannot reduce or eliminate them, appears
radically unsatisfactory and should be abandoned.
So thought also the late Lynne Baker (2013, 73), who wrote that “We should not
lend faith to metaphysics that render ordinary but signiﬁcant phenomena unintelli-
gible.” It is hard to see, then, why we should accept a conception such as mysteri-
anism,giventhatitmakesitimpossibletothinkmeaningfullyaboutsuchfundamental
issues as freedom, responsibility, consciousness, and meaning.
References
Baker, L. R. (2013). Naturalism and the ﬁrst-person perspective. Oxford University Press.
Balaguer, M. (2009). Fictionalism, theft, and the story of mathematics. Philosophia Mathematica,
17(2), 131–162.
Blackburn, S. (1993). Essays in quasi-realism. Oxford University Press.
Boyd, R. (1988). How to be a moral realist. In G. Sayre-McCord (Ed.), Essays on moral realism
(pp. 181–228). Cornell University Press.
Burge, T. (1993). Mind-body causation and explanatory practice. In J. Heil & A. Mele (Eds.), Mental
causation (pp. 97–120). Clarendon Press.
Caruso, G. (2013). Free will and consciousness: A determinist account of the illusion of free will.
Lexington Books.
Chomsky, N. (1976). Problems and mysteries in the study of human language. In A. Kasher (Ed.),
Language in focus (pp. 281–357). Reidel.
Churchland,P.M.(1988).Matterandconsciousness:Acontemporaryintroductiontothephilosophy
of mind (rev). MIT Press.
Copp, D. (2017). Normative naturalism and normative nihilism: Parﬁt’s dilemma for naturalism. In
S. Kirchin (Ed.), Reading Parﬁt (pp. 28–53). Routledge.
Dawkins, R. (2006). The God delusion. New York Books.
De Caro, M. (2015). Realism, common sense, and science. The Monist, 98(2), 197–214.
De Caro, M. (2019). The indispensability of the manifest image. Philosophy and Social Criticism,
46,, 451–11.
De Caro, M., & David, M. (Eds.). (2004). Naturalism in question. Harvard University Press.
De Caro, M., & David, M. (Eds.). (2010). Normativity and naturalism. Columbia University Press.
De Caro, M., & David, M. (Eds.). (2022). Routledge handbook of liberal naturalism. Routgledge.
De Caro, M., & Macarthur, D. (forthcoming b). Liberal naturalism, Harvard University Press.
Dennett, D. (1991). Consciousness explained. Backbay Books.
Dennett, D. (2006). Breaking the spell: Religion as a natural phenomenon. Viking.
Earman, J. (1992). Determinism in the physical science. In M. H. Salmon, J. Earman, & C. Glymour
et al. (Eds.), Introduction to the philosophy of science. Prentice Hall, 232–268.
Field, H. (1980). Science without numbers. Blackwell.
FitzPatrick, W. J. (2014). Morality and evolutionary biology. In E. N. Zalta (Ed.), Stanford
encyclopedia of philosophy, https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/morality-biology/.
Fodor, J. (1997). Special sciences: Still autonmous after all these years. Philosophical Perspectives,
11, 149–163.
Gozzano, S., & Hill, C. (2012). New perspectives on type identity: The mental and the physical.
Cambridge University Press.
Husserl, E. (1936). The crisis of European sciences and transcendental phenomenology (1970).
Norwestern University Press.
Jackson, F. (1998). From metaphysics to ethics. Oxford University Press.

Scientiﬁc Naturalism and Its Faults
77
Joyce,R.(2005).MoralFictionalism.InM.E.Kalderon(Ed.),Fictionalisminmetaphysics (pp.287–
313). Oxford University Press.
Kim, J. (1996). Philosophy of mind. Westview Press.
Kim, J. (2007). Physicalism, or something near enough. Princeton University Press.
Lacey, H. (2005). Naturalism. In T. Honderich (Ed.), The Oxford companion to philosophy (p. 640).
Oxford University Press.
Mackie, J. (1977). Ethics: Inventing right and wrong. Viking Press.
McGinn, C. (1993). Problems in philosophy. Blackwell.
McGinn, C. (2002). The making of a philosopher. Scribner.
Pereboom, D. (2014). Free will, agency, and meaning in life. Oxford University Press.
Price, H. (2004). Naturalism without representationalism. In De Caro & Macarthur (Eds.) (2004),
71–88
Putnam, H. (1992). Renewing philosophy. Harvard University Press
Putnam, H. (2004). The content and appeal of “naturalism.” In De Caro & Macarthur (Eds.)
Naturalism in question (pp. 59–70). Harvard University Press.
Quine, W. V. (1960). Word and object. MIT Press.
Quine, W. V. O. (1969). Epistemology naturalized. In Ontological relativity and other essays
(pp. 69–90). Columbia University Press.
Quine, W. V. O. (1986a). Reply to Hilary Putnam. In L. E. Hahn & P. A. Schillp (Eds.), The
philosophy of W.V. Quine. Open Court, 427–431.
Quine, W. V. O. (1986b). Reply to Morton White. In L. Hahn, & P.A. Schilpp (Eds.), The Philosophy
of W.V. Quine. Open Court, 663–665.
Rey, G. (2016). Taking consciousness seriously—as an illusion. Journal of Consciousness Studies,
23(11–12), 197–214.
Rosemberg, A. (2009). The disenchanted naturalist’s guide to reality, https://nationalhumanities
center.org/on-the-human/2009/11/the-disenchanted-natura-lists-guide-to-reality/.
Searle, J. (2004). Biological naturalism, https://web.archive.org/web/20060501002411/http://ist-
socrates.berkeley.edu/~jsearle/BiologicalNaturalismOct04.doc
Searle, J. (2007). Freedom and neurobiology. Reﬂections on free will, language, and political power,
Columbia University Press.
Sellars (1956). Empiricism and the philosophy of mind. Reprinted: Harvard University Press, 1997.
Sellars, W. (1962). Philosophy and the scientiﬁc image of man. In R. Colodny (Ed.), Frontiers of
science and philosophy (pp. 35–78). University of Pittsburgh Press.
Sellars, W. (1975). Autobiographical reﬂections. In H. N. Castaneda (Ed.), Action, knowledge, and
reality: Critical studies in honor of wilfrid sellars. The Bobbs-Merrill Company, 277–93.
Weisberg, M., Needham, P., & Hendry, R. (2011). Philosophy of chemistry. In E.N. Zalta (Ed.),
Stanford encyclopedia of philosophy, http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/chemistry/.

Scientiﬁc Emergentism and the Mutualist
Revolution: A New Guiding Picture
of Nature, New Methodologies and New
Models
Carl Gillett
The world we actually inhabit, as opposed to the happy world of modern scientiﬁc mythology,
is ﬁlled with wonderful and important things we have not yet seen because we have not
looked… The great power of science is its ability, through brutal objectivity, to reveal to us
truth we did not anticipate. (Laughlin (2005), p. xvi)
The guiding picture of nature to which we subscribe—what we take the onto-
logical structure of nature to be in a broad sense—conﬁgures not just what kinds
of scientiﬁc models and explanations we offer, but also what phenomena we even
seek, and recognize, in nature. In our opening passage, Robert Laughlin, echoing
other scientiﬁc emergentists like Ilya Prigogine, tells us that we have routinely over-
looked all manner of phenomena that did not ﬁt the guiding picture of nature pressed
by scientiﬁc reductionism. For recent empirical ﬁndings, emergentist like Laughlin
and Prigogine contend, show that the picture of scientiﬁc reductionism is in fact a
misleading “myth”.1
Still more exciting, scientiﬁc emergentism offers a new guiding picture that allows
us to ﬁnally see many natural phenomena and provides novel models/explanations
that potentially allow us to understand them. The result, over the last few decades,
is arguably a revolution in the sciences built around adoption of a new view of the
relation of parts and wholes, and hence of the structure of nature itself. The pioneering
scientists pressing this view, calling themselves “scientiﬁc emergentists”, include
physicists like Laughlin or Philip Anderson, chemists such as Prigogine, biologists
including Denis Noble, neuroscientists like Walter Freeman, and many in systems
biology or the sciences of complexity.2
1 See Prigogine and Stengers (1984), and Prigogine (1997), for Prigogine’s own interesting
discussion of such ontological “myths”.
2 Anderson (1972), Freeman (2000), Laughlin (2005), Noble (2006), and Prigogine (1997).
C. Gillett (B)
Department of Philosophy, Northern Illinois Univ, DeKalb, IL 60115, US
e-mail: cgillett@niu.edu
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
S. Wuppuluri and I. Stewart (eds.), From Electrons to Elephants and Elections,
The Frontiers Collection, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-92192-7_6
79

80
C. Gillett
Fig. 1 The complexity researcher Chris Langton’s famous diagram of the scientiﬁc emergentist’s
Mutualist view of nature. (Redrawn from Lewin (1992))
At the heart of their positions, these researchers endorse what I have elsewhere
termed “Mutualism” whose core idea is framed in Fig. 1. Under the Mutualist picture,
it continues to be the case that certain complex wholes (and their activities and prop-
erties), like the one at the top of the diagram, are taken to be fully composed by
organized parts (and their activities and properties) shown at the bottom—and hence
we have compositional relations upwards from parts (and their activities and proper-
ties) to the whole (and its activities and properties). However, the foundational change
under Mutualism is to accept that sometimes we also have a downward determina-
tive relation from the whole (and its activities and properties) to its parts (and their
activities and properties) depicted by the downward curving arrows. Consequently,
we have both upward and downward determination, and hence mutual determination
between parts and whole—hence the “Mutualist” tag for the position. The result is
a new picture of nature with all manner of exciting implications.
Simply appreciating Mutualism has profound theoretical and practical implica-
tions in the sciences. Elsewhere I have sought to provide a detailed treatment of
Mutualism and the wider debates over reduction and emergence in which it ﬁgures
(Gillett, 2016a). In this paper, my goal is narrower. I simply seek to provide an
accessible account of scientiﬁc emergentism and its key claims. To this end, I brieﬂy
sketch the background to scientiﬁc debates over reduction and emergence, but my
primary focus is on outlining the core ideas of Mutualism, the new guiding picture of
nature that results, and hence the novel methodologies it offers and the new models
its provides in concrete scientiﬁc cases.
To start, I sketch two connected waves of scientiﬁc ﬁndings about compositional
relations that drive our present research as well the debates over reduction and emer-
gence. The ﬁrst wave of ﬁndings, outlined in Part 1, stretching from the Scientiﬁc

Scientiﬁc Emergentism and the Mutualist Revolution …
81
Revolution onwards, was to provide what I term “compositional” models and expla-
nations of wholes (and their properties and activities) using compositional relations to
parts (and their properties and activities). Thus, for instance, we explain the contrac-
tion of a muscle by a compositional relation to moving protein ﬁlaments that compose
it. Or we explain the mass of the muscle using a compositional relation to the masses
of the cell’s that are its parts.
As I highlight, all sides in the sciences accept the need to search for, and provide,
such compositional explanations in what I term “everyday reductionism”. And the
success of this methodology in providing compositional explanations/models, and
the advent of new techniques, has more recently allowed a second wave of usually
quantitative scientiﬁc ﬁndings, outlined in Part 2, about the activities of the parts
we ﬁnd in wholes. This more detailed, and precise, understanding of the behaviors
of parts in wholes has led to a range of what I term “Challenging Compositional
Cases” where we cannot presently understand the behaviors of the parts in various
wholes using existing resources, including accounts and models given of such parts
in simpler systems. Across examples in a range of sciences, from super-conductors
to populations of neurons, Challenging Compositional Cases are now at the cutting
edge of ongoing scientiﬁc inquiry.
Ibrieﬂyoutline,inPart3,howeverydayreductionism,andtheprovisionofcompo-
sitional explanations, has been argued to support the stronger position I term “sci-
entiﬁc reductionism”, espoused by researchers such as the physicist Steven Wein-
berg, biologists like Francis Crick, Richard Dawkins or E.O. Wilson, and many
others.3 Scientiﬁc reductionists provide reasoning that, they claim, shows reﬂec-
tion on compositional explanations leads from everyday reductionism to their more
robust scientiﬁc reductionism position. I detail the guiding picture of nature that
results under scientiﬁc reductionism, one where there are nothing but parts, and
collectives of them, but where higher sciences are needed to study collectives of
parts. I highlight how this a picture under which the ultimate parts are the only
determinative entities in nature and the laws about them are the only fundamental
laws—thus implying only fundamental physics illuminates fundamental phenomena
and fundamental laws of nature.
Against this empirical and theoretical background, in Part 4, we can ﬁnally appre-
ciate the core ideas of scientiﬁc emergentism in its Mutualist position that allows
a whole, and its parts, to be mutually determinative. This picture grows from the
ﬁndings of everyday reductionism, and Challenging Compositional cases, about the
behaviors of the parts in wholes. Crucially, Mutualism accepts that “Parts behave
differently in wholes”, but this then allows the scientiﬁc emergentist to argue that
“Wholes are more than the sum of their parts” because such wholes sometimes down-
wardly determine their parts. Furthermore, I note how appreciating Mutualism shows
the key parsimony argument of scientiﬁc reductionism is invalid, hence blocking the
main theoretical reasons commonly used to dismiss “emergence”.
Perhaps more importantly, I then detail how, as well as theoretical implications,
Mutualism has substantive import for scientiﬁc practice both globally and locally.
3 Crick (1966), Weinberg (1994, 2001) and Wilson (1998).

82
C. Gillett
To begin, in Part 5, I outline how Mutualism globally underpins a new guiding
picture of nature sharply contrasting in its practical import with that of the scientiﬁc
reductionist. For example, I detail how this new Mutualist picture accepts that there
are many compositional levels of parts and wholes in nature to explore, rather than
just parts and collectives of them. And how Mutualism opens up the possibility of
fundamental phenomena, laws and research at many of these levels of nature, and
hence as the focus of many sciences beyond physics, rather than just at the level of
ultimate parts.
Moving from the global to the local, in Part 6, I sketch how Mutualism offers
a new class of “Mutualist” models and explanations positing relations of whole-to-
part determination that offer help in Challenging Compositional Cases and other
ongoing investigations. I highlight how Mutualist models and explanations supple-
ment causal and compositional models, hence adding to everyday reductionism rather
than burning it down. And I note that researchers are now exploring whether such
Mutualistmodelsaresuccessful,oreventhebestmodelsavailable,invariousongoing
cases from superconductors to neural populations.
1
The Wave of Compositional Explanations
from the Scientiﬁc Revolution Onwards
Compositional explanations have been one of the main engines of the sciences since
the Scientiﬁc Revolution, transforming our understanding of nature. Philosophers of
science have used a range of terms for compositional explanation, including “reduc-
tive explanation”, “functional explanation” or “constitutive mechanistic explana-
tion”.4 Let us consider just a few examples of compositional explanation drawn
from physiology, cell biology and molecular biology to appreciate their character.
In response to the question “Why did the muscle contract?” two good answers,
in certain contexts, are based around the model in Fig. 2 and are “The cell ﬁbers
contracted” or “The myosin crawled along the actin”. This is the one species of
compositional explanation widely acknowledged by philosophers of science where
we explain an activity of a whole using a compositional relation to activities of parts
in what are often termed “constitutive mechanistic explanations” and which I term
“Dynamic” compositional explanation.5 We explain the muscle’s contraction at some
time using a compositional relation to the contraction of various cells at that time.
The cells are inter-connected, or “organized”, so as each contracts it pulls on the cells
4 Though neglected, there has been philosophical work on compositional explanation that goes
back at least to early work by Fodor (1968) and Dennett (1969), through Wimsatt (1976), down
to more recent work such as Bechtel and Richardson (1993), Glennan (1996), Machamer, Darden
and Craver (2000) and Craver (2007), amongst many others. See Aizawa and Gillet (2019) for an
outline of some of the various species of compositional explanation.
5 Aizawa and Gillet (2019).

Scientiﬁc Emergentism and the Mutualist Revolution …
83
Fig. 2 A textbook diagram of the sliding ﬁlament model of muscle contraction and a Dynamic
compositional model. (From Betts (2013), Chap. 10, Sect. 10.3, Fig. 1)

84
C. Gillett
to which it is connected and which are also contracting. Hence the contracting cells
compose (or what I term “implement”), and explain, the muscle’s contracting.
There are plausibly other species of compositional explanation. What I have else-
where termed a “Standing” compositional explanation explains a property of a whole
using a compositional relation, what is termed “realization”, to properties of parts.6
For example, in response to the question “Why is the muscle strong?” one could
answer “Because the cell’s each have a certain strength” or an answer focused on
the properties of proteins. For we explain the strength of the muscle, a property of
a whole, using compositional relations of realization to properties of its parts at the
cellular and molecular levels.
Lastly, we should note that when asked “What is a skeletal muscle?” two good
answers (amongst others) in the relevant contexts, are “Bundled muscle ﬁbers”, as
Fig. 3 highlights, or “Organized proteins”. Here the explanadum is a certain whole,
i.e. an individual, the explanans is some group of parts (at a certain “level”) and
the backing relation is the part-whole relation between these individuals. I term this
an “Analytic” compositional explanation where we explain a whole itself using a
compositional relation to individuals that are parts.
All of these explanations are what I shall term “ontic” explanations that work
by representing an ontological relation between entities in the world, the “backing
relation” of the explanation, where the nature of this relation drives these explana-
tions. In addition, these explanations are also all backed by compositional, rather
than causal, relations, since their backing relations all share common ontological
features lacking in causal relations. For example, amongst other singular features,
their backing relations are all synchronous relations, between entities that are in some
sense the same and which involve synchronous changes in their relata.7 So we can
see that these are not causal explanations.
As our examples begin to highlight, all of the species of compositional explana-
tion about a common phenomenon are plausibly systematically integrated with each
other.8 Furthermore, such explanations are systematically integrated with the related
causal explanations, about connected phenomena, that philosophers of science term
“etiological mechanistic explanations”, amongst others. It is important to remember
this point, since it highlights how scientists often seek, and provide, various inte-
grated causal and compositional models/explanations in tandem about a certain state
of affairs in nature.
As researchers piled up compositional explanations of phenomena across all levels
in nature, scientists came to accept that everything in nature is composed by the
entities of physics and hence to endorse this as a guiding picture of the structure of
nature—the view that all individuals, activities and properties are either entities of
fundamental physics or composed by the entities of fundamental physics. Under this
6 Aizawa and Gillet (2019).
7 Elsewhere I have highlighted still further differences between the features of such compositional
and causal relations. See Gillett (2016a), Chap. 2, (2016b), (2020) and (Forthcoming), Chaps. 1–3.
8 See Gillett (Forthcoming) for a more detailed discussion of such integration. We thus have another
example of what Mitchell (2003) terms “integrative pluralism” in multiple, but integrated, models.

Scientiﬁc Emergentism and the Mutualist Revolution …
85
Fig. 3 A textbook diagram of the composition of a skeletal muscle at tissue and cellular levels, and
hence a multi-level Analytic model of it. (From Betts (2013), Chap. 10, Sect. 10.2, Fig. 1)
picture, we have both wholes and their parts, as well as their activities and properties,
which are all compositionally related in various (local) compositional levels down to
the entities of physics. Once we endorse this guiding picture it also entails obvious
methodological guidance–search for compositional explanations of all entities in
nature! Carefully note, however, that such guidance does not exclude the existence
of, or need to provide, other models/explanations as well.
The search for compositional explanations was at the cutting-edge of twentieth
century science and furnished the ﬁrst great wave of empirical ﬁndings I wanted
to highlight in a huge array of compositional explanations across the sciences and
the levels of nature from chemistry on through to neuroscience and physiology.

86
C. Gillett
As I detail below, all working scientists now acknowledge, and seek for, such
compositional explanations/models.
It is therefore important to clarify some terminology. In the sciences, but also
amongst some philosophers, common terms for a compositional explanation are that
it is a ‘reductive’ or ‘reductionist’ explanation and the term ‘reductionist’ is thus often
simply used to refer to someone who seeks compositional explanations (Wimsatt,
2007) who is taken to be pursuing a ‘reductionist methodology’. Unfortunately, as
later sections make plain, on these mundane usages both scientiﬁc reductionists
and opposing scientiﬁc emergentists are all ‘reductionists’ who all explicitly seek
‘reductionist explanations’ and all endorse ‘reductionist methodology’!
We therefore need a better terminology, so I use the neutral term ‘compositional
explanation’ to refer to the explanations both sides acknowledge as important and
which I have highlighted in this section. When I need to refer to the weaker, and
as we shall see universally endorsed, position espousing the search for composi-
tional explanations I shall refer to ‘everyday’ reductionism. I use the term ‘scien-
tiﬁc reductionist’ for the more substantive positions endorsed by writers, like Wein-
berg, Crick, Dawkins, Wilson etc., that I detail in Part 3. As we shall shortly see,
distinguishing everyday reductionism from scientiﬁc reductionism is important for
a variety of reasons, but the most obvious is that each supplies a different “guiding
picture of nature” and hence entails very different guidance on what scientiﬁc
models/explanations, and methodologies, will be successful.
2
A Second Wave of Findings about Parts: Understanding
Challenging Compositional Cases
In the twenty-ﬁrst century, and late twentieth century, with the advent of new exper-
imental and theoretical techniques researchers explored a range of aspects of parts
and wholes. In particular, these new techniques have yielded quantitative accounts
of the behaviors of parts within complex wholes from superconductors to cells or
populations of neurons. It is important to emphasize these are all cases where we
have well conﬁrmed compositional explanations and models. So the relevant wholes,
and their properties and activities, are all known to be fully composed—hence there
are none of the new forces or energies, or uncomposed properties, involved with the
type of “emergence” that ﬁgured in scientiﬁc debates at the end of the nineteenth
century and early twentieth century.
In these cases where we have new quantitative accounts of the behaviors of parts,
a certain kind of situation has become increasingly common. Consider the case of
the proteins that compose a eukaryotic cell discussed in detail by an interdisciplinary
research team consisting of philosophers of science, in Robert Richardson and Achim
Stephan, as well as prominent systems theoretic biologists in Fred Boogerd, Frank
Bruggeman, and Hans Westerhoff (Boogerd et al., 2005). We have a great deal of
evidence about the properties, and behaviors, of such proteins in simple systems

Scientiﬁc Emergentism and the Mutualist Revolution …
87
whether in vitro or elsewhere. In addition, as Boogerd et al. highlight, we have now
also collected quantitative evidence about the activities (and hence properties) of
such proteins when they are actually parts of cells. Researchers like Boogerd et al.
consequently argue that we can now see that the activities of the proteins in cells
cannot be explained using the accounts given for them in simpler systems. That is,
our quantitative account of the behaviors of these parts in cells, combined with our
successful accounts of such proteins in simpler systems, together show that these
parts behave differently than they would if the accounts in simpler systems were
exhaustive in the whole.
Similar arguments have been given across a range of cases. For instance, Robert
Laughlin (2005) plausibly makes such an argument about the behaviors of elec-
trons when they are parts of superconductors. Laughlin takes quantum mechanics to
provide a successful account of the behaviors of electrons in simpler systems and
Laughlin takes us to have quantitative, and highly precise, accounts of the behaviors
of electrons in superconductors. Consequently, Laughlin concludes that electrons
in superconductors behave differently than they would if the accounts in simpler
systems were exhaustive.
The latter are examples of what I will term a “Challenging Compositional Case”
in an example where the following conditions hold:
(i)
we have successful compositional accounts of a certain whole (and its
activities and properties) in terms of various parts (and their activities and
properties);
(ii-a)
we have successful accounts of the relevant parts and their behaviors in
simpler systems;
(ii-b)
we now possess quantitative accounts of the behavior of these parts in the
relevant whole;
and;
(iii)
the behavior of the parts in the relevant whole is apparently different than it
would be if the accounts of this part in simpler systems were exhaustive.
Given (iii), against the background of (i), (ii-a) and (ii-b), such cases pose an obvious
challenge of explaining, or otherwise accounting for, the behaviors of the parts in
the relevant wholes in such.
Such cases also highlight limitations to the guiding picture of nature suggested
by everyday reductionism and it associated methodologies. This guiding picture is
not wrong, since everything in a Challenging Compositional Cases is composed. But
its guidance to seek for compositional explanations no longer provides resources
for moving our understanding of such examples further forward. We already have
compositional explanations for all the relevant entities, but the behavior of the parts
in the relevant wholes still cries out for explanation. So everyday reductionism has
hit a wall in such examples.
Two options for addressing examples like Challenging Compositional Cases loom
large. On one side, one can take the behaviors of parts that are apparently unexplained
by accounts used for simpler systems to be merely apparently problematic in an
epistemic phenomenon—that is, an artifact of our theoretical machinery, rather than

88
C. Gillett
a feature of the world. In the next section, I outline why scientiﬁc reductionism
is forced to adopt this deﬂationary option about Challenging Compositional Cases
given its guiding picture of nature.
On the other side, we ﬁnd the possibility that the world, rather than our theorizing,
underlies the situation in Challenging Compositional Cases because parts really do
have a special kind of behavior. As I outline in Part 4, this is the position of scientiﬁc
emergentism. So let me frame the activities and powers we are assumed to have
under this emergentist position to differentiate them from the scientiﬁc reductionist
alternative. Let us say that we have what I term “differential powers” and “differential
activities/behaviors” when a certain part contributes different powers, and hence
behaves differently, under the condition of composing a certain whole, but where the
part would not contribute these powers, and behave in these ways, if the laws applying
in simpler collectives exhausted the laws applying in the complex collective.9
3
Scientiﬁc Reductionism, its Guiding Picture of Nature
and Practical Import
Scientiﬁc reductionism grew popular in the sciences as everyday reductionism ﬂour-
ished in the twentieth century. For scientiﬁc reductionists, like Weinberg, Crick,
Dawkins, Wilson and others, argue that reﬂection on compositional explanations,
using a type of ontological parsimony argument, leads to their stronger position. Such
arguments have long attracted thinkers. For example, ancient Buddhists reﬂecting
on carts being composed of boards, axle and wheels concluded that we should only
accept such parts and reject the existence of a further whole such as a cart. Why?
Because we can putatively explain everything using the parts alone.
The advent of compositional explanations in the sciences makes such reasoning
especially alluring. Consider such an argument applied in the sciences in what I
term the “Argument from Composition” since it claims to be driven by the nature of
composition alone. As we saw in Part 1, a good compositional explanation allows one
to account for the activities or properties of a whole using the activities or properties
of its parts. As we saw, we compositionally explain the muscles contracting using the
movement of its constituent proteins, but not vice versa. Given the nature of compo-
sitional explanations, the reductionist concludes that our successful compositional
explanations mean that we can now account for all the activities and properties of
both parts and wholes using the components alone. But, given this sub-conclusion,
9 I should note that I have deﬁned differential powers to leave it open whether their contribution is
determined by a composed entity or other component level entities. I also intend differential powers
to include not only extra powers that add to the powers contributed in simpler collectives, but also
contracted sets of powers excluding powers contributed in simpler collectives. There can also be
mixed cases where differential powers are both added and subtracted.

Scientiﬁc Emergentism and the Mutualist Revolution …
89
the scientiﬁc reductionist claims we can then apply the so-called ‘Parsimony Prin-
ciple’ in this case—that is, the principle that when we have two equally explana-
tory hypotheses about some phenomenon, then we should accept the hypothesis
committed to fewer entities.We regularly use the Parsimony Principle in in applica-
tion to scientiﬁc hypotheses and in cases of compositional explanation we have two
hypotheses about what entities they concern. On one side, we have the hypothesis
that we have both a whole and its parts (i.e. a muscle plus the proteins). On the
other side, we have the scientiﬁc reductionist’s favored hypothesis that we have parts
alone (i.e. the proteins alone). But the latter hypothesis is simpler than the former. So,
applying the Parsimony Principle along with the crucial sub-conclusion, the reduc-
tionist concludes that we should only accept that there are parts alone in any case
of compositional explanation or, famously, that there is really nothing but the parts.
Similar reasoning can be run about the activities or properties of wholes to conclude
there are activities and properties of parts alone.10
Scientiﬁcreductionismthusclaimsweshouldadoptamuchstarkerguidingpicture
of nature than that of everyday reductionism. But notice that scientiﬁc reductionism
is not ultimately left committed to nature as a “dust cloud” of isolated, and unre-
lated, fundamental parts. For the reductionist accepts compositional explanations
and concludes we should only endorse the entities used as the explanans at the “bot-
tom” of such explanations which, rather than being isolated and unrelated parts, are
always collectives of inter-related and organized parts—thus organized, inter-related
proteins (and their activities and properties), like myosin and actin in ﬁlaments, are
used to explain the muscle’s contracting. Collectives are not further individuals, since
“collective” is just a name for a group of inter-related parts and parts are thus still the
only individuals. The guiding picture of nature, endorsed by scientiﬁc reductionism,
is thus one of isolated parts and collectives of parts of ever increasing scales.
Appreciating its picture of nature illuminates why scientiﬁc reductionism accepts that
higher sciences and their explanations are indispensable. Using statistical mechanics
as his example of a higher science, Weinberg tells us that:
The study of statistical mechanics, the behavior of large numbers of particles, and its appli-
cation in studying matter in general, like condensed matter, crystals, and liquids, is a sepa-
rate science because when you deal with very large numbers of particles, new phenomena
emerge... even if you tried the reductionist approach and plotted out the motion of each
molecule in a glass of water using the equations of molecular physics…, nowhere in the
mountain of computer tape you produced would you ﬁnd the things that interested you about
water, things like turbulence, or temperature, or entropy. Each science deals with nature on
its own terms because each science ﬁnds something in nature that is interesting. (Weinberg
(2001), p.40)
Crucially, the scientiﬁc reductionist takes higher sciences to coin their own terms
that refer to the larger, and larger, scale collectives of parts that they study. Scientiﬁc
reductionists accept we need such higher sciences to study, and express, the truths
about such collectives that cannot be expressed by lower sciences. But the only
10 Some of Jaegwon Kim’s famous arguments about mental causation have a related structure to
the same conclusion. See Kim (1993b) and other papers in his (1993a).

90
C. Gillett
determinative entities are the parts that form such collectives, and hence the only
determinative laws are still solely about those parts in the simplest systems.
This last point comes into clearer focus if we look at a couple of methodological
differences between everyday and scientiﬁc reductionism. First, note that everyday
reductionism’s mantra to search for compositional explanations applies at every
level of nature using all manner of techniques. In contrast, we can see why scientiﬁc
reductionists argue, under their guiding picture, that fundamental physics and its
experimental machinery, like the supercollider, are specially important (Weinberg,
1994). Under scientiﬁc reductionism, fundamental physics, and its experiments, are
the only one’s exploring the determinative laws of nature, since the only entities that
exist are the fundamental parts and hence these are the only determinative entities.
Furthermore, scientiﬁc reductionism also assumes that the laws holding of such parts
in the simplest systems exhaust the laws holding of such parts. Consequently, the
laws holding of entities, like quarks or mesons, in the simplest systems extend to
all situations and exhaust the laws holding of such entities anywhere (whether in
complex or simple systems)—and hence exhaust the determinative laws of nature
itself. Scientiﬁc reductionists thus conclude that special funding consideration should
be given to experimental machinery of fundamental physics, like the supercollider,
that illuminate these laws.
Second, connected points illuminate what scientiﬁc reductionism has to say about
Challenging Compositional Cases. As we have seen, everyday reductionism offers no
productive guidance to move us forward with such examples, since we have provided
all the compositional explanations that we can in such cases. In contrast, scientiﬁc
reductionism does offer guidance about such cases. Under scientiﬁc reductionism,
the only determinative laws are those in the simplest systems and these laws exhaust
the laws holding of parts in larger and larger collectives. But this means that the
parts in Challenging Compositional Cases, whether electrons in superconductors,
proteins in cells, or neurons in populations, only behave in ways that fall under
the laws holding in simpler systems. Hence the scientiﬁc reductionist must argue
that the presently inexplicable behaviors of parts in various wholes in Challenging
Compositional Cases is merely an appearance in an epistemic artifact of our theo-
rizing. For the guiding picture of scientiﬁc reductionism is committed to the laws of
parts in the simplest systems exhausting the laws holding of the behavior of parts
wherever they are found—and however hard it may be to understand this. Standard
versions of scientiﬁc reductionism are thus left committed to a deﬂationary approach
to Challenging Compositional Cases.
4
The Mutualism of Scientiﬁc Emergentism: The Core Idea
Rather than deﬂating their signiﬁcance, scientiﬁc emergentism has taken our empir-
ical ﬁndings in Challenging Compositional Cases to yield profound insights. As
Laughlin tells us:

Scientiﬁc Emergentism and the Mutualist Revolution …
91
Ironically, the very success of reductionism has helped pave the way for its eclipse. Over
time, careful quantitative study of microscopic parts has revealed at the primitive level at
least, collective principles of organization are not just a quaint side show but everything—
the true source of physical law, including perhaps the most fundamental laws we know.
(Laughlin (2005), p. 208)
In the next section I turn to methodological implications and fundamental laws. But
here we also see the focus of emergentists on quantitative accounts of the behaviors
of parts. Amongst the lessons learned from such empirical ﬁndings by emergentists
like Laughlin are, ﬁrst, that parts can behave differently in wholes, so they really do
have differential behaviors/powers; and, second, that parts behave in these new ways
because the whole (and/or its activities or properties) determines that these parts have
differential powers and the differential behaviors that result.
Here is how Walter Freeman frames the resulting Mutualist picture in the cases in
the neurosciences he focuses upon involving neurons in populations. Freeman tells
us:
An elementary example is the self-organization of a neural population by its component
neurons. The neuropil in each area of cortex contains millions of neurons interacting by
synaptic transmission. The density of action is low, diffuse and widespread. Under the impact
of sensory stimulation, by the release from other parts of the brain of neuromodulatory chem-
icals… all the neurons come together and form a mesoscopic pattern of activity. This pattern
simultaneously constrains the activities of the neurons that support it. The microscopic
activity ﬂows in one direction, upward in the hierarchy, and simultaneously the macroscopic
activity ﬂows in the other direction, downward. (Freeman (2000), pp. 131–132)
Here we have the core idea of Mutualism applied to a concrete case. We have a whole
(and its activities and properties) in a population of neurons upwardly composed by
neurons (and their activities and properties). But at the same time this whole (and
its activities and properties) also downwardly determines (and “constrains”) these
component neurons (and/or their activities and properties) which consequently have
differential behaviors and powers.11
We should mark that the downward determinative relation from whole to parts is
not a compositional relation, since parts (and their activities and properties) together
usually ﬁll the causal roles of a whole (and its activities and properties). But a whole
(and its activities and properties) cannot ﬁll the causal role of its parts (and their
activities and properties), nor hence compose them. This synchronic determinative
relation is also not a causal one, since it again has features that causal relations
lack such as being synchronous relations, holding between entities that are in some
sense the same and involving synchronous changes in their relata. So we have a
novel, downward, synchronic determinative relation, from whole to parts (and/or
their activities and properties), that I have elsewhere dubbed a “machretic” relation.
11 Strictly speaking, it is most plausibly an “emergent” activity or property of a whole that down-
wardly (machretically) determines that a realizing property of some part contributes a differen-
tial power and hence has a differential behavior/activity. However, for ease of exposition I have
throughout the paper talked about wholes downwardly determining parts. The reader should take
me to mean this more nuanced situation involving an activity or property of a whole when talking
of such whole-to-part determination.

92
C. Gillett
It is worth noting that under Mutualism wholes have at least two kinds of causal
relations. At their own levels, wholes productively act “horizontally” on other wholes
in thick causal relations of activity—thus a muscle acts upon sinews and bones when
contracting.But,inaddition,whenwehavesuchmachreticrelationsatatime,wherea
whole (or more precisely one of its properties or activities) determines some property
of a part contributes a differential power, then over time we will have thin causal
relations (such as relations of manipulability) between the whole (and/or its relevant
activity or property) and the differential behavior of the part that results from this
power at some later time.12 Removing the activity or property of the whole will
remove the differential power of the part and hence the differential behavior. So
machresis between whole and parts (or their activities and properties) at a time leads
to thin downward causal relations over time between the whole (or its activities and
properties) and differential behaviors of parts of this whole. Machresis thus always
results in a species of thin downward causation and many scientiﬁc emergentist frame
their views around such “downward causation”.13
At this point, many philosophers object that this kind of situation is incoherent
for various reasons.14 Most commonly, philosophers and scientists seek to use the
Argument from Composition, or related arguments about mental causation (Kim,
1993b), to conclude that we should never accept a whole is both composed and
causally efﬁcacious—and hence should not accept anything like Mutualism under
which wholes are determinative in various ways, including causally. However, once
we appreciate Mutualism, we can see that such arguments are plausibly invalid when
they proceed from the assumption of compositional relations alone, rather than also
assuming stronger claims like the Completeness of Physics.
Recall that the crucial sub-conclusion of the Argument from Composition is that in
cases of comprehensive compositional explanation using parts alone accounts for, or
explains,everythingatthehigherandlowerlevel.However,whenwehavedifferential
behaviors and powers of parts, and Mutualism is true, although all wholes (and their
activities or properties) are the subjects of successful compositional explanations,
we still cannot account for all the behaviors and powers of individuals solely using
parts or their activities/properties. For the differential behaviors and powers of parts
have not been explained. In this type of case, the premise that we have compositional
explanations is true, but the sub-conclusion that we can explain everything with parts
alone is false—so we can see that the Argument from Composition is invalid and
similar points hold for related forms of Kim’s argument about mental causation.
Scientiﬁc reductionists, and other proponents of reasoning like the Argument
from Composition, have locked themselves into the assumptions, ﬁrst, that the parts
in wholes never in principle need explanation beyond that offered in simpler systems.
And, second, that we only ever have upward determination. But these researchers thus
12 Thick causal relations are usually relations of activity. In contrast, thin causal relations are
captured by manipulability or difference-making accounts that require not such relation of activity
between their relata.
13 For more discussion, see Gillett (2020) and (2016a), Chap. 7.
14 Gillett (2016a), Chap. 7, reviews a range of such concerns and offers rebuttals.

Scientiﬁc Emergentism and the Mutualist Revolution …
93
overlook options that scientiﬁc emergentists, like Prigogine, Laughlin, and others,
claim empirical ﬁndings, about Challenging Compositional Cases, bring to the fore—
parts can have differential behaviors/powers and the latter can be machretically
determined downwardly by a whole or its activities/properties.
We can therefore see that a mistaken theoretical reason, in an alluring but invalid
argument, has wrongly been used to dismiss natural phenomena that did not ﬁt the
scientiﬁc reductionist’s reasoning and hence guiding picture. But, as Laughlin puts
it in our opening passage, “The great power of science is its ability, through brutal
objectivity, to reveal to us truth we did not anticipate”.15 And that power of science
has produced empirical ﬁndings that, scientiﬁc emergentists argue, reveal the ﬂawed
assumptions, and invalid reasoning, used to justify the standard versions of scientiﬁc
reductionism.
5
A New Guiding Picture of Nature and its Implications
Scientiﬁc emergentism, through its Mutualist view, offers us a guiding picture of
nature, but is this picture really different from that of “reductionism”? In answering
this question we need to be careful of the ambiguity we have now revealed over
what we mean by “reductionism”, since we actually confront two questions: How is
the guiding picture of scientiﬁc emergentism different from that of everyday reduc-
tionism? And in what ways does it diverge from that of scientiﬁc reductionism? I
take these questions in turn and show we get starkly different answers.
With regard to everyday reductionism, and the search for compositional expla-
nations, we actually ﬁnd overlap. As Laughlin explains about his main emergentist
conclusion:
One might subtitle this thesis the end of reductionism (the belief that things will necessarily
be clariﬁed when they are divided into smaller and smaller component parts), but that would
not be quite accurate. All physicists are reductionists at heart, myself included. I do not wish
to impugn reductionism so much as to establish its proper place in the grand scheme of
things. (Laughlin (2005), p. xv)
Once we understand Mutualism, then we can see why Laughlin thinks scientiﬁc
emergentists are clarifying the proper place of the search for compositional models
and explanations, rather than abandoning that approach.
The guiding picture of scientiﬁc emergentism supplements that of everyday reduc-
tionism. Scientiﬁc emergentists take everything to be composed and they continue to
accept that it is productive to search for compositional models and explanations. For
all Mutualist cases are examples of individuals, and their activities and properties,
that are composed by parts, and their activities and properties. But under Mutualism
we have added the possibility of downward determinative relations of machresis
at a time, and consequent thin downward causal relations over time, alongside the
upward compositional relations endorsed by everyday reductionism.
15 Laughlin (2005), p. xvi.

94
C. Gillett
As I detail in the next section, these additions provide new resources under scien-
tiﬁc emergentism to engage the cases where everyday reductionism hits a wall.
However, let us now consider the differences with the guiding picture of scientiﬁc
reductionism and its methodological advice. One place to highlight such differences
concerns the fundamental laws and fundamental research.
As I outlined above, the nature of everyday reductionism, and compositional
explanations, make parsimony arguments alluring. As the scientiﬁc emergentist
Philip Anderson cautions us, once we accept everyday reductionism:
It seems inevitable… [to accept] what appears at ﬁrst sight to be an obvious corollary of
[everyday] reductionism: that if everything obeys the same fundamental laws, then the only
scientists who are studying anything really fundamental are those working on those laws…
This point of view… it is the main purpose of this article to oppose. (Anderson, 1972, p. 393)
Here we see one of the key contentions of scientiﬁc reductionism that its stronger
conclusions follow from everyday reductionism. But why does Anderson claim this
conclusion is mistaken? Once again focusing on our more detailed empirical ﬁndings
about the behavior of the parts in wholes, Anderson claims that:
The behavior of large and complex aggregations of elementary particles, it turns out, is not to
be understood in terms of a simple extrapolation of the properties of a few particles. Instead,
at each level of complexity entirely new properties appear, and the understanding of the
new behaviors requires research which I think is as fundamental in its nature as any other.
(Anderson, 1972, p. 393)
As we have seen, scientiﬁc emergentists contend that the behaviors of parts in wholes
are not those these parts would have if the accounts, and laws, in simpler systems were
exhaustive. Instead, parts are claimed by scientiﬁc emergentists to have differential
behaviors determined by wholes (and/or their activities or properties) and hence
covered by new fundamental laws applying within certain wholes. Laughlin tells us:
From the reductionist standpoint, physical law is the motivating impulse of the universe. It
does not come from anywhere and implies everything. From the emergentist perspective,
physical law is a rule of collective behavior, it is a consequence of more primitive rules
of behavior underneath (although it need not have been), and it gives one predictive power
over a limited range of circumstances. Outside this range, it become irrelevant, supplanted
by other rules that are either its children or its parent in the hierarchy of descent. (Laughlin
(2005), p. 80)
Under Mutualism, we thus have a complex array of fundamental laws covering
parts and their behaviors: some hold in simpler systems but other fundemental
“organizational” laws only hold of these parts in certain wholes.
Such laws deserve much more discussion which I have pursued elsewhere (Gillett
(2016a), Chap. 7). But for our purposes here we begin to see a stark methodolog-
ical difference that results from the guiding pictures of scientiﬁc reductionism and
emergentism. Under scientiﬁc reductionism, fundamental physics has a monopoly
on fundamental phenomena, research and laws. But under the guiding picture of
scientiﬁc emergentism, as Anderson emphasizes, many sciences, studying nature
at many levels, can be investigating fundamental nature phenomena, exploring the

Scientiﬁc Emergentism and the Mutualist Revolution …
95
“frontiers” of fundamental research and discovering fundamental laws (Laughlin
(2005), pp. 5–8).16
6
New Models and New Explanations: Resources
for Challenging Compositional Cases and Beyond
Finally, let us return to local concerns and concrete scientiﬁc examples. We can now
appreciate how the new guiding picture of nature of scientiﬁc emergentism supplies
novel resources in such examples. As we saw with compositional explanations, we
often give ontic explanations that explain natural phenomena by representing deter-
minative relations in nature that result in the phenomena to be explained. To take
another example, causal explanations represent various kinds of causal relation to
provide ontic explanations. The foundational point is that such explanations work by
representing ontological relations in nature. But Mutualism recognizes novel deter-
mination relations in nature in various kinds of machretic relation. Hence Mutualism
allows a new class of models and explanations representing, and backed by, these
new relations.
For example, under Mutualism one can now offer models and explanations that
posit either machretic relations from wholes (or their activities or properties) to
parts (or their activities or properties) at a time, or that posit thin, downward causal
relations between these entities over time that result from such machretic rela-
tions. We could use the terms “whole-to-part”, “machretic” or “downward causal”
models/explanations for these various scientiﬁc products, but let me here simply dub
them all “Mutualist” models/explanations given their connection to Mutualism.
Such Mutualist models/explanations may take all manner of forms. For instance,
one can posit models representing machretic relations or thin downward causal
relations. And one can construct models which variously take such relations to
have individuals, activities or properties as relata. So these models can vary
in their posited ontology. Furthermore, one can use different representational
formats for such models. Thus one can use non-linear dynamics to articulate such
models/explanations, but one can also use new network models/explanations to do
the same. And a host of other mathematical and representational formats can be used
to the same end.17
It is important to note that all of these representational formats can be used to give
other models/explanations than such Mutualist ones. What is crucial is the intended,
and/or the most plausible, interpretations of such successful applications of non-
linear dynamics, network models, and so on. In each case, and for each application
in this example, it is a substantive task to show either that researchers intend their
16 For a more detailed discussion of the new methodologies under scientiﬁc emergentism se Mitchell
(2009).
17 See Juarrero (1999) for discussion of some of these Mutualist models and their features.

96
C. Gillett
model to be a Mutualist one, or to show that some successful model is most plausibly
interpreted as representing Mutualist relations.
It is therefore very much an ongoing question where Mutualist models/explanation
may be productively applied and also an open issue where recent successful scientiﬁc
work supports the existence of Mutualist scenarios in nature. My goal here is not to
explore or resolve such questions, though elsewhere I have tried to begin to clarify
what is involved in addressing them.18 Instead, my focus has been on illuminating
the Mutualist revolution and how the new guiding picture of scientiﬁc emergentism
offers resources to researchers at the cutting-edge of science. And we have now
found this to be the case. To properly see this, let us brieﬂy return to Challenging
Compositional Cases.
The
key
point
is
that
we
can
supplement
causal
and
compositional
models/explanations
in
Challenging
Compositional
Cases
with
Mutualist
models/explanations in the attempt to account for the behaviors of parts in the relevant
complex wholes. Thus we can offer models positing machretic relations between a
whole (or its activities or properties) and differential behaviors/activities or powers
of a part or its property. Similarly, we can offer associated models positing a variety
of thin, downward causal relations from wholes, or their properties and activities,
to differential behaviors of parts. Machretic, and/or downward causal, relations can
thus offer new models and explanations to understand such differential behaviors of
parts.NotethatsuchMutualistmodels/explanationswillbeintegratedwithcausaland
compositional models/explanations, so these Mutualist models/explanations supple-
ment, rather than supplant, the resources provided by everyday reductionism and
other existing approaches.
Mutualist models thus offer researchers new resources in cases where we saw
everyday reductionism has hit a wall. As Laughlin emphasized in an earlier passage,
scientiﬁc emergentism is thus both broadening our methodological tool-kit and also
putting compositional models/explanations in their proper place as one amongst a
number of useful kinds of ontic model/explanation.
7
Conclusion
It bears emphasis that scientiﬁc research on Challenging Compositional Cases is very
much ongoing. It is an open question whether Mutualist models and explanations,
for example, provide the best accounts of electrons in superconductors, or proteins
in cells, or a host of other cases. And it is a difﬁcult connected, and ongoing, issue of
whether successful approaches in such cases, for example using non-linear dynamics,
network models, and so on, are best interpreted as being examples of Mutualist
models or not. Thus it remains to be established whether we really have differential
behaviors or powers in Challenging Compositional Cases.
18 See Gillett (2016a), Chaps. 8 and 9.

Scientiﬁc Emergentism and the Mutualist Revolution …
97
I should also note that scientiﬁc reductionists can rework their views even if they
accept parts have differential behaviors and powers. Here I have discussed the stan-
dard, or what I term “simple”, version of scientiﬁc reductionism. But elsewhere I
have sketched how one can revise scientiﬁc reductionism in what I term a “condi-
tioned” version that accepts parts have differential behaviors and powers, but takes
such differential behaviors/powers of parts to be determined, and hence explained,
solely by other parts.19 The conditioned variant of scientiﬁc reductionism offers
novel models and explanations that can also potentially be used to gain traction
with Challenging Compositional Cases. Consequently, both simple and conditioned
scientiﬁc reductionist approaches need to be engaged by scientiﬁc emergentists, as
relevant rivals, when they defend their treatments of various concrete cases.20
However, my focus here has not been on the new options for scientiﬁc reduc-
tionism. My goal has been to illuminate the exciting revolution that scientiﬁc emer-
gentists have been working to achieve in so many areas of the sciences. Scientiﬁc
emergentism, through its novel Mutualist guiding picture of nature, broaches new
whole-to-part relations in the natural world, whether machretic relations at a time or
thin downward causal relations over time. Consequently, the scientiﬁc emergentist’s
guiding picture of nature offers fresh resources for researchers in models and expla-
nations backed by these novel relations. One can only be excited to see how, over
coming decades, these new Mutualist models and explanations perform for us at the
frontiers of science.
References
Aizawa, K., & Gillett, C. (Eds.) (2016a). Scientiﬁc composition and metaphysical grounding.
Palgrave MacMillan.
Aizawa, K., & Gillett, C. (2016b). Vertical relations in science, philosophy and the world:
Understanding the New debates over verticality. In Aizawa and Gillett (2016a).
Aizawa, K., & Gillett, C. (2019). Defending pluralism about compositional explanations. Studies
in the History and Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical Sciences, 78, 101202.
Anderson, P. (1972). More is different: Broken symmetry and the nature of the hierarchical structure
of science. Science, 177, 393–396.
Bechtel, W., & Richardson, R. (1993). Discovering complexity. Princeton University Press.
Betts, J.G. et al. (eds.) 2013: Anatomy and physiology. BC Campus. Retrieved from:https://ope
nstax.org/books/anatomy-and-physiology/pages/1-introduction.
Boogerd, F., Bruggeman, F., Richardson, R., Stephan, A., & Westerhoff, H. (2005). Emergence and
its place in nature: A case study of biochemical networks. Synthese, 145, 131–164.
Craver, C. (2007). Explaining the brain. Oxford University Press, USA.
Crick, F. (1966). Of mice and molecules. University of Washington.
Crick, F. (1994). The astonishing hypothesis: The scientiﬁc search for the soul. Scribner.
Dennett, D. (1969). Content and consciousness. Routledge Kegan Paul.
Fodor, J. (1968). Psychological explanation. Random House.
19 See Gillett (2016a), Chaps. 8 and 9, for an exploration of conditioned scientiﬁc reductionism and
its contrasts, and overlap, with the standard version of this position.
20 See Gillet (2016a), Chaps. 9 and 10, for my more detailed take on what this might involve.

98
C. Gillett
Freeman, W. (2000). How brains make up their minds. Columbia University Press.
Gillett, C. (2016a). Reduction and emergence in science and philosophy. Cambridge University
Press.
Gillett, C. (2016b): “Emergence, downward causation and its alternatives: Surveying a founda-
tional issue”. In Gibb, Hendry & Lancaster (Eds.) Handbook on the Philosophy of Emergence.
Routledge.
Gillett, C. (2020). “Why constitutive mechanistic explanation cannot be causal: Highlighting a
needed theoretical project and its constraints”. American Philosophical Quarterly.
Gillett, C. Forthcoming: Compositional explanation in the sciences: Exploring integrative pluralism
and ontic explanation.
Glennan, S. (1996). Mechanisms and the nature of causation. Erkenntnis, 44(1), 49–71.
Juarrero, A. (1999). Dynamics in action: Intentional behavior as a complex system. MIT Press.
Kim, J. (1993a). Supervenience and mind. Cambridge University Press.
Kim J. (1993b). The Nonreductionist’s troubles with mental causation. In Kim (1993a).
Laughlin, R. (2005). A different universe: Reinventing physics from the bottom down. Basic Books.
Lewin, R. (1992). Complexity: Life at the edge of chaos. Macmillan.
Machamer, P., Darden, L., & Craver, C. (2000). Thinking about mechanisms. Philosophy of Science,
67, 1–25.
Mitchell, S. (2003). Biological complexity and integrative pluralism. Cambridge University Press.
Mitchell, S. (2009). Unsimple truths: Science, complexity and policy. University of Chicago Press.
Noble, D. (2006). The music of life: Biology beyond genes. Oxford University Press.
Prigogine, I. (1997). End of certainty. The Free Press.
Prigogine, I., & Stengers, I. (1984). Order out of chaos: Man’s new dialogue with nature. Bantam
Books.
Weinberg, S. (1994). Dreams of a ﬁnal theory. Random House.
Weinberg, S. (2001). Facing up: Science and its cultural adversaries. Harvard University Press.
Wilson, E. (1998). Consilience: The unity of knowledge. Knopf.
Wimsatt, W. (1976). “Reductionism, levels of organization and the mind-body problem”. In
Conciousness and the Brain, in G. Globus, G. Maxwell, & I. Savodnik (Eds.). Plenum Press.
Wimsatt, W. (2007). Re-Engineering philosophy for limited beings. Harvard University Press.

Causation in Buddhist Philosophy
Graham Priest
1
Introduction
Causation, as Mackie puts it in the title of his book,1 is the cement of the universe.
But how it holds the universe together, well, that’s another matter. In particular, do
the causal powers of things reduce to those of their parts, or is causation a more
holistic matter?
The point of this paper is to discuss the Buddhist view of the matter—or better,
Buddhist views. For Buddhist philosophy is no one thing, and though the different
Buddhist schools typically agree on some things, there is a wide divergence of views
on matters physical/metaphysical, causation included. The paper is not a survey of
Buddhist views on the issue at hand. That would required a scholarly and inordinately
longerpaper.WhatIwilldoisdescribetheviewsofsomeimportantBuddhistschools,
which will illustrate the wide variety of views that have been endorsed.
Nor is the point here to try to adjudicate the differences. Again, that would require
a much longer philosophical treatise. My aim is simply to show the variety. In partic-
ular, we will look at three very distinctive views. The ﬁrst is the Indian Abhidharma
view. The second is the Madhyamaka view. This is Indian too, though it had an enor-
mous impact on all subsequent Mah¯ay¯ana views—which include all the Chinese
Buddhist views. The third is the Chinese Huayan view.
1Mackie (1980).
G. Priest (B)
Departments of Philosophy, The Graduate Center, CUNY, 365 Fifth Avenue,
New York, NY 10016, USA
University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia
Ruhr University of Bochum, Bochum, Germany
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
S. Wuppuluri and I. Stewart (eds.), From Electrons to Elephants and Elections,
The Frontiers Collection, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-92192-7_7
99

100
G. Priest
I shall make some comments on the connection between these schools of thought.
But those who seek an account of the history and geography of Buddhist philosophy
must look elsewhere.2
2
Background
2.1
Holism and Reductionism
First, however, somegeneral background. Thenotions of reductionismandholismare
somewhat vague, and tend to be used in different ways. In his article in the Stanford
Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Healey usefully deﬁnes methodological versions of
these notions as follows3:
• Reductionism: An understanding of a complex system is best sought at the level
of the structure and behavior of its component parts.
• Holism: An understanding of a certain kind of complex system is best sought at
the level of principles governing the behavior of the whole system, and not at the
level of the structure and behavior of its component parts.
These glosses, focussing on the notion of understanding, will serve our purpose here.
2.2
Causation
To understand something is to grasp its whys and wherefores. And in the case of the
world of space and time, that means, of course, understanding causation.4
Causation is of many kinds, however. To see this, let us turn, not to Buddhism,
but to Aristotle. As is well known, in his Physics, Aristotle distinguishes between
four kinds of causation. In his own words5:
...we must proceed to consider causes, their character and number. Knowledge is the object
of our inquiry, and men do not think they know a thing till they have grasped the ‘why’
of it (which is to grasp its primary cause). So clearly we too must do this as regards both
coming to be and passing away and every kind of natural change, in order that, knowing
their principles, we may try to refer to these principles each of our problems.
He then proceeds to describe the causes of an object as of four kinds, illustrating
with respect to a bronze statue:
2 A brief account can be found in Priest (2014), pp. xxiii–xxiii. Much fuller accounts can be found
in Carpenter (2014), Mitchell (2002), and Williams (2009).
3 Healey (2016).
4 For Buddhism, the world of space and time is the whole world. Buddhists of all stripes are
nominalists about universals, and accept no abstract objects.
5 Physics 194b16-194b23. Translation from Barnes (1991).

Causation in Buddhist Philosophy
101
• Material cause: the matter of which the thing is made; in this case the bronze.
• Formal cause: the form into which the material is shaped; in this case the form of
a statue.
• Efﬁcient cause: the process by which the statue comes into being; in this case, the
working of the artiﬁcer.
• Final cause: the end for which the statue was made; perhaps, in this case, to produce
an object of worship.
All of these causes are at work in Buddhist philosophy, though only the ﬁrst three
will be part of our story here.6
3
Abhidharma Buddhism
3.1
Prat¯ityasamutp¯ada
These matters clariﬁed, let us now turn Buddhism itself.
Buddhist thought can traced back to the ideas of the Buddha (awakened/
enlightened one), Siddh¯artha Gautama (ﬂ. 6 or 5 c. BCE); and causation is cen-
tral to these. Buddhist thought provides what one might think of as an analysis of the
human condition: its unsatisfactory (duh. kha) nature, the causes of this, and how to
ameliorate things. An important part of the story is that everything is in a causal ﬂux.
Things come into existence when causes and conditions are ripe, maintain them-
selves in a state of causal interaction for a time, and then go out of existence when,
again, causes and conditions are ripe. Everything is impermanent (anitya). As one
of the s¯utras puts the matter of causation7:
When this is, that is.
From the arising of this comes the arising of that.
When this isn’t, that isn’t.
From the cessation of this comes the cessation of that.
The causal ﬂux is termed prat¯ityasamutp¯ada (dependent origination/arising). The
causation involved here is clearly efﬁcient causation.
3.2
Dharmas
Other aspects of causation emerged in detail a little later. In the 500 years after the
Buddha, a number of schools of Buddhist thought arose. These are known as the
Abhidharma (higher teaching) schools.8
6 In Buddhism, there is an appropriate ﬁnal cause, the attainment of nirv¯an. a. But this cause belongs
to Buddhist soteriology, not metaphysics.
7 Thanissaro (2005).
8 On these, see Ronkin (2018).

102
G. Priest
It seems fairly obvious that the things we meet with in the normal course of
events (including people) are composed of parts. My body has arms and legs; my
perception contains sights and sounds; my car has wheels and a chassis. Those parts
can themselves have parts. For example, my arm has a hand, an elbow. And those
parts can themselves have parts. Thus, my hand has ﬁve ﬁngers.
If we take some object, and consider its parts, their parts, the parts of these...
and so on, must we come ultimately to partless parts—things which are simple,
and themselves without parts? The Abhidharma philosophers said ‘yes’. It would
seem that if the parts of parts went on for ever, there would ultimately be nothing
there—which there obviously is.
The Abhidharma philosophers called these ultimate parts dharmas.9 Dharmas are
the ultimate building blocks of reality, its atoms. They do not depend for being what
they are on their parts (obviously) or anything else. They have svabh¯ava. Literally
this means something like self-being, or self-nature. Perhaps the best translation into
English is intrinsic nature, though it is common to see the word translated (somewhat
misleadingly) as essence. Note that the dharmas are in the ﬂux of prat¯ityasamutp¯ada
as much as anything else. They interact causally with other dharmas, and themselves
come into and go out of existence.
All the Abhidharma philosophers agreed that there were different kinds of
dharmas—for example, physical and mental—though there was some disagreement
about their exact nature. Perhaps the most common view was that they are tropes,
that is, particular instantiations of universals, such as the redness of this cherry, or
the painfulness of this experience.10 Whatever they are, however, they are the things
that are ultimately real.
The objects of our normal experience, by contrast, are simply bunches of dharmas
arranged in a certain way. So, a table is just a bunch of atoms “arranged table-wise”;
and a person is a bunch of atoms “arranged person-wise”. Certain bunches of atoms
have a causal continuity which gives them an important role in our lives: trees, houses,
indeed people themselves. It is therefore useful to single those out with particular
concepts, such as house, person, or White House, Donald Trump.
Hence there are two kinds of reality: an ultimate reality (param¯artha satya),
comprising the dharmas, and a conventional reality (sa ˙mvr.ti satya) comprising the
conceptual constructions made from these things.11
9 Note that the word dharma has many different uses in Buddhist philosophy. Literally it means
something like: that which is established or ﬁrm.
10 See, e.g., Ganeri (2001), chap. 4.
11 Further on this picture, see Siderits (2007), Chap. 6. The Sanskrit word satya may be translated
both as reality and truth. ‘Truth’ is the more usual scholarly translation; but in the present case, I
think that ‘reality’ is deﬁnitely better. Note also that a distinction between a conventional reality
and an ultimate reality goes all the way back to the earliest stages of Buddhism. The Abhidharma
philosophers give it a distinctive metaphysical twist, however.

Causation in Buddhist Philosophy
103
The whole situation is summed up by Vasubandhu (ﬂ. 4th or 5th c. CE) in late
Abhidharma text, Abhidharmako´sa-Bh¯as.ya (Commentary on the Treasury of Abhid-
harma) as follows12:
The Fortunate One has...declaredtwotruths,(1)conventional orrelative truth(sam. vr.itisatya)
and (2) absolute truth (param¯arthasatya). What are these two truths?...
If the cognition of a thing disappears when this thing is broken into parts, this thing exists
relatively or conventionally. An example is a pitcher, for when the pitcher is broken into
shards, the cognition of a pitcher disappears, or does not arise.
Ifthe cognitionofa thingdisappearswhenthe [(constituent)factorsofthisthing]are mentally
removed, this thing too should be regarded as existing relatively or conventionally. An
example is water, for when—with respect to water—we [mentally] take and remove the
factors, such as visible form or color, etc., the cognition of the water disappears or does not
arise.
To these things, e.g., pitcher, clothes, etc., water, ﬁre, etc., different names or notions are
given from the relative point of view or in accordance with conventional usage. Thus, if one
says, from the relative or conventional point of view: “There is pitcher, there is water”, one
speaks truly, one does not speak falsely. Hence this is relative or conventional truth.
That which is other than this is absolute truth. Therein, even when a thing is being broken—
or [likewise, even if its (constituent) factors] are mentally removed, and the cognition of
this thing continues, then this exists absolutely. For example, visible form: for, therein,
when a visible [thing] is broken into atoms or inﬁnitesimal particles and when taste and the
other factors have been mentally removed, the cognition of the intrinsic nature [svabh¯ava]
of visible form persists. Sensation, etc., is also to be seen in the same way. As this exists
absolutely, this is absolute truth.
3.3
Reﬂections on Causation
Before we move on the the next Buddhist school of philosophy we will meet (Mad-
hyamaka), let us pause for a few philosophical reﬂections.
First, we have been talking about parts and wholes—mereology. During the last
century, starting with the work of Husserl and Le´sniewski, this has become a well-
developed part of formal logic.13 In this, there is an operation called mereological
sum or fusion. To illustrate: if you take all my parts and fuse them together you get
me. If you take the four movements of Beethoven’s 9th Symphony, you get the whole
symphony. There is a standard debate in mereology as to when a bunch of things have
a fusion. Some philosophers hold that any bunch of objects fuse to form a whole,
though this may be a strange one. Some deny this. Thus, consider an incongruous
bunch of objects such as: the Eiffel Tower, the Buddha’s left earlobe, and Jupiter.
These, it is held, have no fusion. To have a fusion, a bunch of objects must have a
certain coherence—though how best one might understand this, is somewhat unclear.
12 De La Vallée Poussin et al. (2012), Vol. 3, pp. 1891-2. I have removed many of the Sanskrit
glosses. ‘Fortunate One’ is an honoriﬁc for the Buddha. In what follows square brackets contain
translator’s interpolations unless otherwise noted.
13 For a general account, see Varzi (2016).

104
G. Priest
Now, in Abhidharma, the objects of conventional reality may naturally be thought
of as the fusion of their dharmic parts, and the dharmas that fuse to form a whole are
precisely those which fall under some concept, such as person or Graham Priest. The
concepts to be deployed here are those of common sense, or perhaps its theoretical
developments. But it seems clear that there is no natural concept which uniﬁes the
dharmas in our trio of incongruous objects. The Abhidharma philosophers would
therefore have agreed with the modern philosophers who hold that not all bunches
of things have a fusion.
Next, we had already met the notion of efﬁcient causation in Buddhism. We have
now also met the notions of material cause and formal cause. Given an object of
conventional reality, its dharmic parts are its material cause. The concept which
uniﬁes its parts is its formal cause. This is not exactly an Aristotelian form, but it
does the same job of forming the matter into an object of a certain kind.14
Finally, the notion of causation involved in the Abhidharma metaphysics is clearly
reductionist. The only complexes are the objects of conventional reality. Our concepts
pick out their dharmic parts, their matter; and efﬁcient causation works on these. An
understanding of the behaviour of the objects of conventional reality is therefore to
be found at the level of their component parts.
4
Madhyamaka Buddhism
4.1
Emptiness
Let us move to our next Buddhist school.
Around the turn of the Common Era, a new form of Buddhism arose,
Mah¯ay¯ana (Greater Vehicle). This had a quite different metaphysical picture of the
world. In fact, there are several different Mah¯ay¯ana Buddhisms: two major ones in
India, and all of the East Asian Buddhisms. However, it is just one of these on which
we will concentrate here, Madhyamaka (Middle Way).
The basis of this was laid out by N¯ag¯arjuna (ﬂ. 1st or 2nd c.) in his
M¯ulamadhyamakak¯arik¯a (MMK, Fundamental Verses of the Middle Way), which
was to exert a profound inﬂuence on all Mah¯ay¯ana Buddhisms.15 In this, N¯ag¯arjuna
launches an attack on the older metaphysics. In particular, he argues that there are no
such things as dharmas in the sense that the Abhidharma philosophers held, namely,
things with svabh¯ava. Everything is empty (´s¯unya) of intrinsic nature. Everything,
that is, is what it is, not in and of itself, but only in relation to other things.
Of course, for the Abhidharma philosophers, the objects of conventional reality
are what they are only in relation to their parts and our concepts. A central part of
N¯ag¯arjuna’s attack was to broaden this picture by adding efﬁcient causation to the
14 See Priest (2014), Chap. 3. Moreover, if the dharmas are tropes, these are exactly instances of
Aristotelian forms—without any matter.
15 On N¯ag¯arjuna, see Westerhoff (2018). On Madhyamaka in general, see Hayes (2019).

Causation in Buddhist Philosophy
105
list. For the Abhidharma philosophers, the efﬁcient causes of something determine
that it is, but now what it is. In Madhyamaka thought it does. Thus, to illustrate, an
acorn is what it is (in part) because it grows on an oak tree, and generates further oak
trees. If it grew on bicycles and produced, not oak trees, but goldﬁsh, it would hardly
be an acorn. These are matters of efﬁcient cause and effect. In Madhyamaka, then,
everything is what it is in relation to is parts, causes and effects, and our concepts.
Given this picture, it would have been natural, one might think, for N¯ag¯arjuna to
jettison the notion of ultimate reality altogether. But whether because of respect for
his tradition, or for some other reason, he does not. He is as clear as his predecessors
that there are two realities (MMK XXIV: 8-10)16:
The Buddha’s teaching of the Dharma
Is based on two truths:
A truth of worldly convention
And an ultimate truth.
Those who do not understand
The distinction between these two truths
Do not understand
The Buddha’s profound truth.
Without a foundation in conventional truth
The signiﬁcance of the ultimate cannot be taught.
Without understanding the signiﬁcance of the ultimate
Liberation cannot be achieved.
What conventional reality is, for N¯ag¯arjuna, is clear enough. As for the Abhidharma
philosophers, it is the world of our familiar experience. But what the ultimate reality
of an object is, is much less clear.
He refers to this as emptiness (´s¯unyat¯a); and two things about it, anyway, seem
clear. The ﬁrst is that it is as empty as anything else. In perhaps the most famous
verse of the MMK (XXIV: 18), he says:
That which is dependent origination
Is explained to be emptiness.
That, being a dependent designation,
Is itself the middle way.
To give the standard explanation: the (conventional) things in the ﬂux of
prat¯ityasamutp¯ada are empty (of svabh¯ava). Emptiness is, however, itself empty
(dependent for being what it is on other things). Thus all things are neither non-
existent nor are they what they are in and of themselves. The truth steers between
these two extremes.
16 Translations from the MMK are from Garﬁeld (1991). Note that ‘Dharma’ here means Buddhist
doctrine.

106
G. Priest
Of course, this raises the question of what it is that the ultimate reality of some-
thing itself depends on. N¯ag¯arjuna is silent on the matter, but there isn’t much for it
to depend on except conventional reality. Sometimes this relationship between the
conventional reality of an object and its ultimate reality is likened to that between
the two sides or a coin. One cannot have the one without the other. And each, as
it were, delivers a different aspect of the same thing. As Candrak¯irti (ﬂ. 7 c.), the
most inﬂuential commentator on N¯ag¯arjuna in the Tibetan tradition, puts it in his
Madhyamak¯avat¯ara (Introduction to the Middle Way)17:
The Buddhas, who have an unmistakable knowledge of the nature of the two truths, proclaim
that all things, outer and inner, as they are perceived by two kinds of subject (deluded
consciousness on the one hand and perfectly pure wisdom on the other), possess a twin
identity... They say that the object perceived by authentic primordial wisdom is the ultimate
reality, whereas the object of a deluded perception is the relative truth.
The other thing that N¯ag¯arjuna appears to be clear about is that the ultimate reality
of something is ineffable. Thus, he says in the dedicatory verses of the MMK:
I prostrate to the perfect Buddha,
The best of all teachers, who taught that
Whatever is dependently arisen is
Unceasing, unarisen.
Not annihilated, not permanent,
Not coming, not going,
Without distinction, without identity
And free from conceptual construction.
Of course, the whatever in question is the ultimate aspect of something in the causal
ﬂux. Its conventional aspect is clearly dependent on conceptual construction—that
is one of the things that makes it conventional. And given that, it can be described by
those concepts. That concepts are constitutive of conventional reality is, presumably,
the reason why the ultimate cannot be described, though N¯ag¯arjuna is not explicit
on the matter.
It is worth noting, however, that N¯ag¯arjuna’s view that the ultimate is ineffable is
not idiosyncratic. He is just being faithful to the s¯utra literature. Thus, for example,
in the Vajracchedik¯a S¯utra (Diamond S¯utra) one of the most important Mah¯ay¯ana
s¯utras, we have18:
[The Buddha said]: Subh¯uti, words cannot explain the real nature of the cosmos. Only
common people fettered with desire make use of this arbitrary method.
Ultimately, then, things are ineffable.
17 Padmakara Translation Group (2004), p. 192.
18 Price et al. (1990), p. 51.

Causation in Buddhist Philosophy
107
4.2
The Structure of Emptiness
So much for exegetical matters. Again before we turn to the next Buddhists school
we will meet (Huayan), let us pause for some philosophical reﬂections.
The objects of conventional reality are, as we have seen, empty of intrinsic nature.
That is, an object is what it is only in virtue of its relations—mereological, conceptual,
and (efﬁciently) causal—to other things. In other words, anything which bore exactly
those relations to those things would be that very object. Or, to put it another way,
its identity is determined by its locus in a network of relations.
One may illustrate with a diagram. Take some object, and suppose that it is rele-
vantly related to three objects: to a by the relation α, to b by β, and to c by γ . We
may depict matters thus:
a
α
↗
◦
β→b
γ
↘
c
The circle, ◦, marks the locus of the object in this network of relations. And anything
that occupied that locus would be that very thing.19
Of course, what is true of the object located at ◦is true of the objects a, b, and
c themselves, since they, too, are empty. So we may “expand” them in the same
way—taking the number three, again, for the sake of illustration. This time I omit
the labels of the relations, to avoid clutter:
19 Note that relationships have a direction, from subject to object. Thus consider the relationship
of killing. There is a big difference between Brutus killed Caeser and Caesar killed Brutus. I have
indicated the direction of the relationship in the diagram with an arrow. In the diagram, all the
arrows point in the same direction. One can do this for the following reason. Every relation has
a converse, which can be used to express the same thing. Thus, the converse of kill is be killed;
and one can say, indifferently, Brutus killed Caesar, and Caesar was killed by Brutus. Hence one
can always always choose whichever of a relation and its converse it is which points in the right
direction.

108
G. Priest
◦
↗
→
↘
a0
a1
a2
↗
◦→◦
↗
→
↘
b0
b1
b2
↘
◦↗
→
↘
c0
c1
c2
And of course, the same is true of the various as, b’s and cs. So we can repeat the
process, and keep doing so indeﬁnitely. If we do this as often as possible we then
arrive at the following diagram—called by mathematicians a tree.
◦· · ·
↗
◦→◦
↗
→
↘
◦· · ·
◦· · ·
◦· · ·
↘
◦· · ·
Our original object has become the root (i.e., ﬁrst node) of the tree. And any branch
of the tree—that is, any route from the object following a path of arrows all the way
along—is inﬁnite. The structure of the causal relations in the tree gives, as it were,
the metaphysical structure of the original object.
4.3
Reduction and Holism Again
And what does this tell us about reductionism and holism concerning causation in
Madhyamaka?
The ﬁrst thing that might occur to you when you see the metaphysical trees with
the inﬁnite branches is that this is going to generate an inﬁnite regress of explanations,
which is either vicious or makes a reduction impossible.

Causation in Buddhist Philosophy
109
Both of these thoughts would be wrong. There is nothing vicious about an inﬁnite
regress of explanations. Thus, the explanation of the existence of Anna could be the
fact that Betty gave birth to her. The explanation of the existence of Betty could be
the fact that Cathy gave birth to her. The explanation of the existence of Cathy might
be the fact that Dorothy gave birth to her... and so on indeﬁnitely. Of course, one
might not think that actual human history is inﬁnite in this way, but there is nothing
logically impossible about this. In fact, traditionally, Buddhist thought indeed took
the universe to be inﬁnite in time past.
Nor is there anything about the regress which makes reduction impossible. Even
if explanations ultimately cash out in terms of some some fundamental mereological
level, the behaviour of the objects at that level might have a regress backwards in
time of the kind involving Anna, Betty, Cathy, and so on.
Where the causal structure of Madhyamaka is relevant is this. In the reductionism
of Abhidharma, causation is ultimately at the level of dharmas. These are simple. At
this level, there are no wholes, and so there is no question of holistic explanations.
In Madhyamaka, if one talks of explanation, this has to be at the conventional level,
since we can say nothing about the ultimate level. And at the conventional level,
there are complex wholes—the objects of our familiar experience, such as cars and
people. Since there are wholes, there is a possibility of holistic explanation.
And prima facie there do appear to be such explanations. Thus, one might explain
themeltingofapolarcapintermsofchangestotheecosystem,ofwhichthebehaviour
of the polar cap is a part. Or one might explain the fact that someone sold their shares
in terms of the fact that there was a run on the market, of which the person’s behaviour
is a part.20 Of course, it might be that on closer inspection such explanations can be
reduced to non-holistic explanations. However, this is ultimately a matter for scien-
tiﬁc investigation, and not to be settled by abstract metaphysical considerations. The
point is simply that Madhyamaka metaphysics is compatible with both reductionism
and holism. It does not determine which of these features of causation is correct.
5
Huayan Buddhism
5.1
The Net of Indra
The third school of Buddhism that we will look at is the Chinese Huayan (Jap:
Kegon) School.21 (The meaning of the name is not important. It is a translation of
the Sanskrit Avatam. saka meaning ﬂower garland—the name of the s¯utra the school
took to be of most importance.)
20 Further putative examples occur in quantum mechanics, where distinct particles can be entangled.
This means that one particle of a pair has (say) spin up, in terms of the fact that an observation on
the other member of the pair determined it to have spin down.
21 The relevant Chinese characters for the names in this section can be found in an appendix to the
essay.

110
G. Priest
Buddhism (Mah¯ay¯ana) started to go into China around the turn of the Common
Era. There, it met the indigenous philosophies of Confucianism and Daoism. Daoism,
in particular, was to exert a profound inﬂuence on its development. By about the 6th
century, distinctively Chinese forms of Buddhism were developing. Huayan was one
of these.22 Traditionally, the founder and ﬁrst Patriarch of the school is taken to be
Dushun (557–640), but the most inﬂuential thinker is usually reckoned to be the
third, Fazang (643–712). We will also meet the fourth, Chengguan (738–839).
One of the fundamental features of the school—indeed, the one that will be most
important for our purposes—is that it universalises the Madhyamaka claim that any
thing is what it is in virtue of its relationships to some other things. Any thing is
what it is in virtue its relationships to all other things. Indeed, each thing has a very
speciﬁc relationship to all other things. Using the metaphor of coins, Fazang puts the
matter as follows23:
If we take ten coins as symbolizing the totality of existence, and examine the relationship
of existence amongst them, then, according to Huayan teaching, coin one will be seen as
identical with the other nine coins.
The character translated as ‘identical with’ here is ji (Jap: soku). And indeed, in the
vernacular, this means something like ‘is the same as’; but it is clear that the Huayan
philosophers use it in a very speciﬁc and technical sense. I will translate it, as is
sometimes done, as ‘interpenetrate’.
The relationship of universal interpenetration is depicted in more detail by perhaps
the most famous metaphor associated with Huayan: the Net of Indra (Yintuoluo
wang). Fazang puts the matter as follows24:
It is like the net of Indra which is entirely made up of jewels. Due to their brightness and
transparency, they reﬂect each other. In each of the jewels, the images of all the other jewels
are [completely] reﬂected. This is the case with any one of the jewels, and will remain forever
so. Now, if we take a jewel in the southwestern direction and examine it, [we can see] that this
one jewel can reﬂect simultaneously the images of all other jewels at once. It is so with the
one jewel, and is also so with each of all the others. Since each of the jewels simultaneously
reﬂects the images of all other jewels at once, it follows that this jewel in the southwestern
direction also reﬂects all the images of the jewels in each of the other jewels [at once]. It is
so with this jewel, and is also so with all the others. Thus, the images multiply inﬁnitely, and
all these multiple inﬁnite images are bright and clear inside this single jewel. The rest of the
jewels can be understood in the same manner.
The god Indra has spread a net through space. At every joint of the net there is a
brightly polished jewel. Each jewel reﬂects every other jewel; but each jewel reﬂects
every other jewel reﬂecting every other jewel, and reﬂects every jewel reﬂecting every
other jewel reﬂecting every other jewel... and so on to inﬁnity. (Like two mirrors face
to face, each reﬂecting the other ad inﬁnitum.) The jewels are metaphors for the
objects of reality; and the inﬁnite reﬂection is a metaphor for interpenetration.
22 On Huayan, see Van Norden (2019).
23 Huayan wujiao zhang (Treatise on the Five Teachings). Quoted in Cook (1977), p. 2.
24 Treatise on the Five Teachings, quoted in Liu (1982), p. 65.

Causation in Buddhist Philosophy
111
5.2
Li and Shi
But how should one understand this metaphor? To do so we must start by going back
to Madhyamaka. As we saw, according the Candrak¯irti, things have a conventional
aspect and an ultimate aspect which depend on each other.
The notion of the ultimate undergoes an important transformation in Chinese
Buddhism. In Daoist thought, behind the ﬂux of our familiar world there is a single
ultimate ground, dao. The “myriad things” of phenomenal reality are the manifesta-
tions of this. Moreover, dao is ineffable. It cannot be a this, rather than a that, since
it has to become all things. In Chinese thought, the Buddhist ultimate/conventional
distinction becomes identiﬁed with the Daoist distinction between dao and its man-
ifestations.25 Given this, every object of conventional reality has exactly the same
ultimate nature (often called Buddha nature, foxing, Jap: bussh¯o). In his Treatise on
the Golden Lion (Jin shizi) Fazang uses the example of a golden statue of a lion
to explain matters. Ultimate reality is like the gold out of which the lion is made.
Conventional reality is like the shapes that the gold assumes in the various parts of
the lion.
We may put the matter in the language of Huayan as follows. An element of
conventional reality is called a shi (thing, fact, object); and ultimate reality is called
li (principle). Li and shi interpenetrate, lishi wuai (the non-obstruction of li and shi).
Dushun puts the matter as follows in his Meditation on the Dharmadh¯atu (Huayan
fajie xuan jing)26:
Li, the law that extends everywhere, has no boundaries or limitations, but shi, the objects
that are embraced by li, have limitations and boundaries. In each and every shi, the li spreads
all over without omission or deﬁciency. Why? Because the truth of li is indivisible. Thus,
each and every minute atom absorbs and embraces the inﬁnite truth of li in a perfect and
complete manner.
Shi, the matter that embraces, has boundaries and limitations, and li, the truth that is embraced
[by things], has no boundaries or limitations. Yet this limited shi is completely identical [GP:
ji], not partially identical, with li. Why? Because shi has no substance [GP: svabh¯ava]—it is
the selfsameli.Therefore,without causingthe slightest damage toitself,anatomcanembrace
the whole universe. If one atom is so, all other dharmas should also be so. Contemplate on
this.
And in his Treatise on the Golden Lion, Fazang says27:
All phenomena [GP: shi] are in great profusion, and are interfused but not mixed (losing
their identity). The all is [GP: ji] the one [GP: li], for both are similar in being non-existent
in nature [GP: having no svabh¯ava]. And the one is the all for the relation of cause and effect
are perfectly clear. As the power [of the one] and the function [of the many] embrace each
other, their expansion and contraction are free and at ease.
25 There is much more to the matter than this. Various elements of Indian Buddhist thought con-
cerning Yog¯acara and tath¯agata-garba played an important role in this process; but we need not go
into this here. For some discussion, see Priest (2018), 8.2-8.4.
26 Chang (1972), pp. 144-5. The Dharmadh¯atu is the realm of all things. In what follows, the
interpolations with my initials are mine.
27 Chan (1969), p. 410.

112
G. Priest
Universal interpenetration tells us that shi and shi also interpenetrate shishi wuai
(the non-obstruction of shi and shi). Moreover, they do this because of the their
relationship with li. In A Hundred Gates to the Sea of Ideas of the Avatam. saka S¯utra
(Huayan jing yi hai bai men) Fazang puts this as follows28:
[A particle of dust] has the characters of roundness and smallness. This is a fact [GP: shi]. Its
nature is empty and non-existent. This is principle [GP: li]. Because facts have no substance
[GP: svabh¯ava] they merge together in accordance with principle. And because the dust has
no substance, it universally penetrates everything. For all facts are no different from principle
and they are completely manifested in the dust.
As is immediately clear, the lack of substance (svabh¯ava) is playing an important
role in all this. What, exactly, is interpenetration, though? And what has this to do
with the lack of svabh¯ava?
5.3
Interpenetration
A simple way to see this is to go back to our representation of empty objects.29 As we
saw, the doctrine of emptiness implies that the metaphysical structure of an object
is given by a tree, every branch of which is inﬁnite. Now, as an example, consider a
magnet. Let n be its north pole, and let s be its south pole. The north pole, being a
north pole, depends on the south pole. So the tree for n, looks like this:
· · ·
· · ·
↗
↗
n
ρ→s →· · ·
↘
↘
· · ·
· · ·
where ρ is whatever the relationship is between two poles. But of course, the south
pole, being a south pole, depends on the north pole. So if we take account of this in
our diagram, we obtain:
· · ·
· · ·
· · ·
↗
↗
↗
n
ρ→s
ρ→n
ρ→· · ·
↘
↘
↘
· · ·
· · ·
· · ·
28 Chan (1969), p. 36.
29 The matter is discussed in more detail in Priest (2015) and Priest (2018), Chap. 8.

Causation in Buddhist Philosophy
113
The tree for n has the tree for s as a sub-tree, and vice versa. Moreover, as the diagram
makes clear, this feature will repeat itself ad inﬁnitum—just like the images of the
two mirrors facing each other.
n and s intermingle metaphysically in the most intimate fashion. We may take the
way they do so to be interpenetration. That is:
• Two objects interpenetrate [ji] if (the tree for) each is a part of (a tree for) the other.
That two objects interpenetrate is possible only because the branches are inﬁnite—it
could not happen if all branches were ﬁnite—and this is so because every object is
empty.
With this understanding of interpenetration, the Huayan conclusions quickly fol-
low. Let us write l for li and s1 and s2 for two example shi. Then since l is empty,
and interpenetrates with each shi, its metaphysical tree looks like this:
s1 · · ·
↗
s1 →l →s2 · · ·
l ↗
↘
s2 →l →s1 · · ·
↘
s2 · · ·
(1)
That is, lishi wuai. But exactly the same diagram shows that s1 and s2 interpenetrate.
That is, shishi wuai.30
As Chengguan says in his Prolog to Huayan (Huayan jing shu zhu)31:
Because they have no selfhood [GP: svabh¯ava], the large and the small can mutually contain
each other... Since the very small is very large Mount Sumeru is contained in a mustard seed;
and since the very large is the very small, the ocean is included in a hair.
5.4
Reduction and Holism Again
Let us ﬁnish by returning to the question of reductionism and holism again. In the
Huayan picture, every element of reality, whatever it is, causally interacts (in our
various senses of causation) with every other every other element.32 Clearly, this is
30 What is going on here is essentially as follows. This relationship of interpenetration is clearly
symmetric. (If a interpenetrates with b then b interpenetrates with a.) And a little thought shows that
it is transitive too. (If a interpenetrates with b and b interpenetrates with c, then a interpenetrates
with c.) A sub-tree of a sub-tree is a sub-tree. s1 and s2 interpenetrate with l. By symmetry, l
interpenetrates with s2, and so my transitivity, s1 interpenetrates with s2.
31 Chang (1972), p. 165.
32 For a discussion of the holism of Fazang’s speciﬁcally mereological views, see Jones (2009).

114
G. Priest
a very global form of holism. Indeed, the metaphor of the Net of Indra is as striking
a visual depiction of holism as one might wish.
6
Conclusion
Buddhism, as I said at the start, is not one thing. In particular, there are signiﬁcant
disagreements of a metaphysical kind between different schools of Buddhism. The
causal structure of the cosmos is one such difference.
We have seen this to be the case by looking at the relevant parts of three Buddhist
schools of thought: Abhidharma, Madhyamaka, andHuayan. Abhidharmacanbenat-
urally seen as having a reductionist account of causation. Huayan clearly provides
a holist view.33 Madhyamaka is poised somewhere in the middle—appropriately
enough, for the Middle Way School. Its framework accommodates both reductionist
and holist positions, the actual truth of the matter being determined by the investi-
gations of empirical science.
The question of whether causation is reductionist or holist is, of course, a con-
tentious question in Western philosophy. As we have seen, it is no less so in Buddhist
philosophy.
Glossary of Chinese Characters
33 For an explicit contrast of the two schools in this regard, see Jones (2015).

Causation in Buddhist Philosophy
115
References
Barnes, J. (Ed.). (1991). The complete works of Aristotle. Princeton University Press.
Bikkhu, T. (tr.). (2005). Assutav¯a Sutta, https://www.accesstoinsight.org/tipitaka/sn/sn12/sn12.061.
than.html.
Carpenter, A. (2014). Indian Buddhist philosophy. Durham: Acumen.
Chan, W. T. (Ed. and tr.). (1969). A source book in Chinese philosophy. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Chang, G. C. C. (1972). The Buddhist teaching of totality: The philosophy of Hwa Yen Buddhism.
London: George Allen and Unwin Ltd.
Cook, F. (1977). Hua-Yen Buddhism: The jewel net of Indra. University Park, PA: Pennsylvania
State University Press.
De La Vallée Poussin, L., Sangpo, G. L., (trs.). (2012). Abhidharmako´sa-Bh¯as.ya of Vasubandhu.
Motilal Banarsidass Publishers Private Limited.
Ganeri, J. (2001). Philosophy in classical India. London: Routledge.
Garﬁeld, J., (tr.). (1991). The fundamental wisdom of the middle way. New York, NY: Oxford
University Press.
Hayes, R. (2019). Madhyamaka. In E. Zalta (Ed.), Stanford encyclopedia of philosophy. https://
plato.stanford.edu/entries/madhyamaka/.
Healey, R. (2016). Holism and nonseparability in physics. In E. Zalta (Ed.), Stanford encyclopedia
of philosophy. https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/physics-holism/.
Jones,N.(2015).BuddhistreductionismandemptinessinHuayanperspective,pp.128–49ofTanaka
et al. (2015).
Jones, N. (2009). Fazang’s total power mereology: An interpretive analytic reconstruction. Asian
Philosophy, 19, 199–211.
Liu, M. (1982). The harmonious universe of Fazang and Leibniz. Philosophy East and West, 32,
61–76.
Mackie, J. L. (1980). The cement of the universe: A study of causation. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Mitchell, D. (2002). Buddhism: Introducing the Buddhist experience. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Padmakara Translation Group (trs.). (2004). Introduction to the middle way: Candrak¯ırti’s Mad-
hyamak¯avat¯ara with a Commentary by Jamgön Mipham. Boston, MA: Shambala.
Price, A. F., Wong, M. L., (trs.). (1990). The diamond S¯utra and the S¯utra of Hui-Neng. Boston,
MA: Shambala.
Priest, G. (2015). The net of Indra, pp. 113–27 of Tanaka et al. (2015).
Priest, G. (2014). One. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Priest, G. (2018). The ﬁfth corner of four. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Ronkin, N. (2018). Abhidharma. In E. Zalta (Ed.), Stanford encyclopedia of philosophy. https://
plato.stanford.edu/entries/abhidharma/.
Siderits, M. (2007). Buddhism as philosophy. Aldershot: Ashgate.
Tanaka, K., Deguchi, Y., Garﬁeld, J., & Priest, G. (Eds.). (2015). The moon points back. New York,
NY: Oxford University Press.
Van Norden, B. (2019). Huayan Buddhism. In E. Zalta (Ed.), Stanford encyclopedia of philosophy.
https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/buddhism-huayan/.
Varzi, A. (2016). Mereology. In E. Zalta (Ed.), Stanford encyclopedia of philosophy. https://plato.
stanford.edu/entries/mereology/.
Westerhoff, J. (2018). N¯ag¯arjuna. In E. Zalta (Ed.), Stanford encyclopedia of philosophy. https://
plato.stanford.edu/entries/nagarjuna/.
Williams, P. (2009). Mah¯ay¯ana Buddhism: The doctrinal foundations (2nd ed.). London: Routledge.

A Realistic View of Causation in the Real
World
George F. R. Ellis and Jonathan Kopel
1
Introduction: Reduction, Emergence, and Natures
of Causation
“It’s well known that matter that initially consisted of elementary particles under
certain inﬂuence of laws of nature came together, formed life, language and
consciousness, societies, and thereby an ability to question back the matter and
the genesis of all of it.” This is a quite extraordinary process that took place in the
past, going through a series of major evolutionary transitions (Szathmáry & Maynard
Smith, 1995) each associated with changes in the way information is stored and trans-
mitted. In this paper, we will look at key aspects of this process of coming into being
of the present world, via the transitions from cosmological to planetary to cellular,
physiological, social, ecological, and engineering realms.
Reductionism and holistic effects Many scientists have approached investi-
gating the natural world through a reductionistic perspective in which natural laws
and objects are understood through their individual components, and all emer-
gence is believed to be a purely bottom-up process. Such an approach gave rise
to successful scientiﬁc paradigms, including the atomic theory of matter, statistical
physics, quantum chemistry, molecular biology, and neuroscience that allowed for a
comprehensive understanding of much of the natural world (Ellis, 2021). However,
there remains a gulf in scientiﬁc understanding that reductionistic processes cannot
A contribution to From Electrons to Elephants and Elections—Scientiﬁc Saga on the Content and
Context, ed.Shyam Wuppuluri.
G. F. R. Ellis (B)
Applied Mathematics Dept, University Cape Town, Rondebosch 7700, South Africa
e-mail: george.ellis@uct.ac.za
J. Kopel
Health Sciences Centre, Texas Tech University, Lubbock, United States
e-mail: jonathan.kopel@ttuhsc.edu
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
S. Wuppuluri and I. Stewart (eds.), From Electrons to Elephants and Elections,
The Frontiers Collection, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-92192-7_8
117

118
G. F. R. Ellis and J. Kopel
traverse. As Roald Hoffman succinctly wrote, “I would ask the reader who is a
chemist to think of ideas such as aromaticity, acidity, and basicity, the concept of a
functional group, or a substituent effect. Those constructs have a tendency to wilt
at the edges as one tries to deﬁne them too closely. They cannot be mathematicized,
they cannot be deﬁned unambiguously, but they are of fantastic utility to our science”
(Kopel, 2019). As Hoffman correctly notes, there are properties in science that are
caused by the effects of hierarchical structures rather than the individual components
of an object. These holistic effects are enabled by downward causation (Ellis, 2016),
as discussed below.
The nature of life Living systems are open systems that exhibit unique proper-
ties that differentiate them from other material objects: reproduction, development,
metabolism, regulation via homeostasis, and information-based reactivity. These
properties arise from organization in the form of modular hierarchical structures,
which establish interlevel constraints and mutual dependence (Ellis, 2016; Ellis et al.,
2012; Juarrero, 1999; Noble, 2008). Through them they are able to adapt through
variation and selection to perform essential functions for survival. Information use is
key in biology (Nurse, 2008, Davies, 2020) through DNA, RNA, and cell signaling
networks (Berridge, 2012) at the molecular level, and endocrine, sensory, and nervous
systems at the physiological level (Guyton & Hall, 2006), and predicting/planning
at the psychological level. Metabolism enables this all (Peacocke, 1989), and places
limits on what can be accomplished (Brown et al., 2004).
Logical Branching The related key step that separates life from physics is when
logically controlled branching dynamics occurs. This is of the form
IF T(Xi)THEN O1(Yj)ELSE O2(Yj)
(1)
where T(Xi) is a logical operator (perhaps involving mathematical relations based
in equalities or inequalities) depending on the variables Xi, and O1, O2 are alterna-
tive outcome functions for the variables Yi (Ellis & Kopel, 2019; Hoffman, 2012).
Such branching operations can be combined in modular hierarchical structures and
networks to obtain behaviour of arbitrary complexity (Gorjão et al., 2018).
Examples are developmental biology circuits (Manukyan et al., 2020), where for
example in one species of lizard, Timon lepidus, the colour and pattern of its scales
evolve in a manner akin to a discrete rule-based computation (a cellular automaton),
and the way that abstract rules drive adaptation in the subcortical sensory pathways
(Tabas et al., 2020). This branching dynamics is the basis of how information is
used productively in biology, and how adaptive selection takes place. The transition
allowing this kind of dynamic to occur is the most important event in evolutionary
history.
Contexts of emergence In cosmology, emergence took place in a series of succes-
sive steps over time, each one depending on outcomes of the previous one before they
could start. For example ﬁrst generation stars needed to evolve and (by providing
the right internal context) produce heavy elements and then spread these elements
through space before second generation stars surrounded by planets could come into

A Realistic View of Causation in the Real World
119
existence. In biology, there are three main contexts for emergence: it took place
over the evolutionary history of the Earth (evolutionary emergence), it takes place
each time an embryo becomes an adult organism (developmental emergence), and
it takes place minute by minute as our brains function to enable our body and brain
to work due to electrons and protons interacting in immensely complex ways (func-
tional emergence). Your brain has thoughts (“I feel like a pizza”, “That was a tense
election”) that are not implied by the nature of physical forces—although they are
allowed and enabled by them. This is strong emergence: the coming into being of
structures, entities, and functions that cannot be predicted, even in principle, from
the underlying physical interactions (Ellis, 2020a, b). Physics enables all this, but
what actually occurs is determined by higher level functional capacities such as the
capacity for logical thought. Physics per se cannot even explain the existence of a
teapot (Ellis, 2005).
Upward and Downward Causation Upward emergence and downward causa-
tion are deeply intertwined in all aspects of these processes, from cosmology to
galactic structures and stellar and planetary astronomy to microbiology, physiology,
psychology, society, ecology, and engineering. In particular, as biological emer-
gence takes place via developmental processes, the resulting organisms collectively
form ecosystems that provide the context for preferential selection of ﬁttest individ-
uals by evolutionary processes, which choice chains down to preferentially select
genomes leading to emergence of organisms adapted to that environment, which in
turn is modiﬁed by the organisms. Thus one has a highly non-linear EVO-DEVO
process (Carroll, 2005), where interlevel causal closure (Ellis, 2020b; Mossio, 2013;
Mossio & Moreno, 2010) underlies the emergence of the complexities of life. It is the
combination of upward and downward causation that enables same-level behaviour
to emerge at each level. This is due to entities at the higher level setting the context
for the lower level actions in such a way that consistent same-level effective laws
emerges. In physics, this comes about by boundary conditions and contextual deter-
mination of time dependent constraints for local physics, which also enables biology
to emerge from physics (Ellis & Kopel, 2019; Nobel, 2008).
Multiple Realisation The multiple possible realisations of higher level dynamics
at lower levels enables attainment of higher level purposes independent of the
speciﬁcs of lower level interactions. It occurs when a phenomenon can be imple-
mented by different realizers, and is resistant to a uniform physical explanation
at the lower level. Hoyningen-Huene (1997) give as an example the case of sex
pheromones that attract individuals of the opposite sex, triggering the performance
of behaviours related to sexual reproduction. In terms of chemistry, pheromones lack
a common structure, and consequently are not an identiﬁable kind. However from the
perspectiveofbiology,theyconstituteanaturalkindthatelicitsasystematicpatternof
behaviours. These emergent biological regularities would pass undetected if regarded
at the level of chemical implementation, and much more so at the underlying physical
level.
Mechanisms There are several ways these downward effects can happen (Ellis,
2012, 2017, 2020a). They ﬁrstly involve both static and dynamic downward
constraints (Juarrero, 1999), including structural and channelling constraints and

120
G. F. R. Ellis and J. Kopel
homeostasis/feedback control. Secondly they involve downward emergence, alter-
ation, and deletion of lower level elements. Adaptive selection is a key case here,
whereby lower level elements get selected to adapt better to higher level selection
criteria. Downward selection is enabled by randomness (stochasticity) at the lower
level, providing an ensemble of elements or processes to select from (Noble, 2020).
Because of the degeneracy in the way higher level states and processes are real-
ized at lower levels, the effective processes determining what happens cannot be
sensibly characterized at lower levels (Edelman & Gally, 2001). It is an essentially
higher-level dynamic.
This paper This can all be characterised in general terms, but the devil is in the
details: can one give speciﬁc examples of how this chain of emergence occurs in the
real universe? How downward effects occur in cosmology and astrophysics? How
emergent branching dynamics works in real biological systems? In what way is it
controlled by higher level variables, in each case? That is, how does contextual (top
down) dynamics arise?
It occurs everywhere. The aim of this paper is to illustrate this by focusing on a
few speciﬁc cases which gives solidity to generic claims regarding the occurrence of
downward causation, showing how it works in practical terms in speciﬁc contexts,
and thus exemplifying how it underlies the chain of emergence that is the focus of
the book.
As regards cosmology, downwards inﬂuences occur as regards the arrow of time,
nucleosynthesis, the temperature of the night sky, and structure formation (Ellis,
2017). We discuss the latter case in Sect. 2).
As regards biological emergence, we look at how plasma membrane proteins
enable contextual biological responses (Sect. 3), how protein synthesis is related to
natural selection and developmental biology (Sect. 4), feedback control, basins of
attraction, and biological oscillators (Sect. 5), and how downward effects occur in
ecology (Sect. 6).
These are just a fraction of the examples one could use, but they are sufﬁcient
to illustrate how these effects occur in physics, biology, and engineering. We do not
deal with crucial other effects such as downward causation in the brain (Ellis, 2016,
2018) and in social neuroscience (Cacioppo et al., 2002). A fascinating example as
regards the last is given by Ashton et al. (2018): cognitive performance is linked to
group size and affects ﬁtness in Australian magpies.
2
The Inﬂuence of Cosmology on Structure Formation:
Contexts for Lower Level Dynamics
In standard cosmology (Peter & Uzan, 2013), an extremely rapid inﬂationary era of
exponential expansion occurs in the very early universe, driven by an effective scalar
ﬁeld. Quantum ﬂuctuations during this epoch generate primordial inhomogeneities
that then become the seeds for formation of structure by gravitational attraction at

A Realistic View of Causation in the Real World
121
later times. The way this works out depends on the rate of expansion of the universe
at the relevant time, as determined by the scale factor a(t). The context for local
physics is set by the cosmological density parameter ρ(t) which determines the rate
of change with time of the scale factor a(t), which itself determines the rate of change
with time of ρ(t) in a non-linear feedback loop (“Matter tells spacetime curvature
how to change which then tells matter how to move”).
If the universe is static (a(t) = a0), structure formation is exponential with time. If
the universe is exponentially expanding (a(t) = exp H t), no structure formation takes
place. If the universe expands in a power law way, as in the early matter dominated
phase (a(t) = a0 t2/3), structure formation also takes place as a power law with time.
The resultant large scale structure is characterised by its power spectrum P(k) as a
function of wave number k as well as its angular power spectrum, and secondly by its
effect on the Cosmic Microwave Background Radiation (CMB) angular power spec-
trum. Measuring these features is the most sensitive way to determine the parameters
of the background cosmological model (Aghanim et al., 2020).
Thus this represents a downward effect from the largest causally connected scales
in the physical universe to the scales that determine galaxy formation, and hence
set the stage for the existence of the Milky Way galaxy that is the home for the
Solar system. This is an early step in the chain of causation that led to our existence.
It happens by cosmological conditions setting the context for local physics: the
expanding universe is the base around which perturbations lead to structure forma-
tion, and so determines their outcome (Ellis, 2017). This also happens during the
inﬂationary era in the early universe that sets up the seeds for primordial structure
formation, The history of the cosmological expansion rate at that time determines
these smaller scale outcomes.
3
Downward Causation and Plasma Membrane Proteins:
Altering Lower Level Constraints.
In biological systems, a primary mechanism for establishing downward processes
at the molecular level is compartmentalization of biochemical processes through
the plasma membrane (Alberts et al., 2007; Peacock, 1989). Thus this is down-
ward causation via setting constraints on lower level dynamics. Entities need to be
localized in space and time because they need to engage in particular activities at
particular times and places. Among its several functions, the plasma membrane regu-
lates the ﬂow of biochemical substrates into and out of the cells through transmem-
brane protein channels and transporters. As shown in Fig. 1, the cellular organization
in the cell is further sub-compartmentalize into organelles, which perform speciﬁc
biochemical and information processing functions. Once established, the cell is able
to establish complex and overlapping metabolic and information networks (Berridge,
2012; Peacock, 1989). These networks provide the cell the necessary foundation to
increase production of cytosolic and membrane proteins, which can be incorporated

122
G. F. R. Ellis and J. Kopel
Fig. 1 Plasma Membrane creates compartmentalization and hence downward control of ions within
the cell, allowing external signaling molecules to shape metabolic network and signaling network
dynamics within the cell and so allow controlled emergence of tissues and organs to take place
into the plasma membrane. Among the proteins, transport proteins become an essen-
tial means by which the cell accumulates metabolites in the cytosol. The increase
cell metabolites provide regulatory and adaptive alterations to established metabolic
and information networks.
Transport Proteins These adaptive networks are mediated through the actions
of transport proteins in the plasma membrane. Transport proteins are involved in
the movement of several biological molecules both in and out across the plasma
membrane and subcellular organelles (Schumann, 2019). They are divided into two
major groups: ATP-binding cassette (ABC) and the solute carrier (SLC) proteins
(Schumann, 2019). ATP-binding cassette proteins function primarily as efﬂux trans-
portersfortheeliminationofxenobioticsandtoxins(Schumann,2019).ABCproteins
are involved in the absorption, distribution, and elimination of several drugs, which
inﬂuence pharmacological interactions that underly many drug toxicities (Schumann,
2019). In contrast, solute transporters facilitate the transport of several metabolic
substrates, such as amino acids and tricarboxylic acid (TCA) intermediates, that are
essential for metabolic processes involved in energy and synthesis of proteins, lipids,
carbohydrates, and nucleic acids (Schumann, 2019). Without the plasma membrane,
the transporter proteins would cease to function.
The SLC13A5/NaCT (Sodium-Citrate) Transporter. One SLC transporter
that illustrates downward causation enabled by the plasma membrane is the
SLC13A5/NaCT (sodium-citrate) transporter. It uses sodium to transport citrate, an
important metabolite, into the cell, particularly in hepatocytes and neurons. NaCT-
mediated citrate entry in the liver impacts fatty acid metabolism, glycolysis, and
gluconeogenesis. In neurons, it is essential for the synthesis of neurotransmitters such

A Realistic View of Causation in the Real World
123
as glutamate, GABA, and acetylcholine. Thus, the same substrate, namely citrate,
has different functions in the liver and brain in these different contexts, even though
the way a substrate is used once it enters the cell is independent of the transporter. In
brief, citrate is transported into the liver and brain to be used for different purposes,
dependent on context.
Thus NaCT exhibits aspects of top-down causation related to the plasma
membrane through two key observations. First, there are different physiological
and clinical outcomes for NaCT in the liver and brain of both mice and humans.
Second, there are differences in the transport kinetics between mouse and human
NaCT transporters.
Kinetic Differences of Mouse and Human NaCT—Plasma membrane trans-
porters, such as the SLC transporters, are characterised ed by three key properties.
First, the transporter is deﬁned by its saturability, which describes the maximum
transport capacity of a given molecule through a plasma membrane transporter in
the presence of other substrates. We can imagine this like a machine’s maximum
functional capacity for an output given its many functions. For transport proteins,
this is known as the maximum velocity or Vmax. Second, transport proteins select
substrates with a speciﬁc orientation (e.g. D- and L-amino acids); this is known
as stereospeciﬁcity. Third, transport proteins have a speciﬁc binding afﬁnity to indi-
vidual substrates that it transports. This is described by an individual numerical value,
known as the Michaelis-Menton constant or Km. These parameters are summarized
in Eqs. (2) and (3). Figure 2 shows the graph of solutions to these relations.
Velocity = Vmax
[S]
Km + [S]
(2)
Vmax =
1
2

Km
(3)
When comparing the activity of a transporter in different species, the quantities Km
and Vmax are often used for comparison. When comparing mouse and human NaCT,
kineticanalysisestimatedtheMichaelisconstantformouseNaCTwasapproximately
20 μM; in contrast, the human and primate NaCT transporters showed a 30-fold
Fig. 2 Michaelis-Menton Equation solutions

124
G. F. R. Ellis and J. Kopel
higherMichaelisconstant(Gopal,2015;Inoue,2004,2002).Thedifferencesbetween
human and murine NaCT become more apparent at human physiological citrate
concentrations (150–200 μM) in the blood. At this level, the mouse NaCT transport is
completely saturated while the human NaCT transport exhibits sub-saturating levels
of citrate uptake (Gopal, 2015; Inoue, 2004, 2002). Therefore, the mouse NaCT
represent a high-afﬁnity, low capacity citrate transporter while the human NaCT
represent a low-afﬁnity, high capacity citrate transporter. As a consequence, a smaller
amount of citrate is transported into murine cells than human cells. Furthermore,
the murine and human NaCT transporter kinetic can be further differentiated in the
presence of lithium (Li+) (Gopal, 2015; Inoue, 2003). Although neither the human nor
rodent NaCT transport Li+, the mouse NaCT transport is inhibited by Li+, whereas the
human NaCT transport is stimulated by Li+ (Gopal, 2015; Inoue, 2003). Therefore,
NaCT transports can be characterized by their response to Li+.
It seems that the organisms require different levels of citrate, which is reﬂected
in their differing kinetics and responses to Li+. However, this does not explain why
the difference exists in the ﬁrst place. Species differences in the transport attest to
a top-down process. Humans use a greater amount of citrate for their metabolism
and neurotransmitter synthesis while mice do not. This is a physiological need based
in their activity patterns, related to their physical, ecological, and social needs. It
appears to that the organism itself inﬂuences the type of transporter that is necessary
rather than any reductionistic processes.
Functional Differences of Knocking-out NaCT in Mice and Humans—
Although previous biochemical studies showed NaCT was expressed in the cerebral
cortex, hippocampus, cerebellum, and olfactory bulb, it was unknown whether a
homozygous deletion of the transporter would have any clinical effects in humans
(Thevenon, 2014; Yodoya, 2006; Inoue, 2004; Inoue, 2002). Previous studies showed
the expression of NaCT is restricted to neurons whereby extracellular citrate is circu-
lated through release of citrate by astrocytes (Mycielska, 2015; Sonnewald, 1991).
Interestingly, NaCT-null mice did not show any neurological deﬁcits, such as seizures
(Birkenfeld, 2011). In contrast, deletion of NaCT in humans causes severe neonatal
epilepsy, known as SLC13A5-deﬁciency or Early Infantile Epileptic Encephalopathy
25 (EIEE-25), which causes early onset epilepsy within the ﬁrst 24 h of life and persist
throughout childhood (Thevenon, 2014; Yang, 2020). It was hypothesized that the
afﬁnity and citrate transport capacity of the murine and human NaCT transports could
explain this discrepancy (Bhutia, 2017). The murine NaCT is a high-afﬁnity, low-
capacitytransporterwhilethehumanNaCTtransporterisalowafﬁnity,high-capacity
transporter. Murine cells may utilize less citrate for their metabolic needs while
humans require citrate to maintain normal metabolic functions and neurotransmitter
production for our complex central nervous systems.
The different effects of removing NaCT in the mouse and human brain strongly
suggests that it is top-down processes. It is the fact that the dynamics is happening in
these two different contexts that inﬂuences the effects of utilizing the citrate NaCT.
The top down effect is via setting context: the context ﬁrstly of the plasma membrane,
that acts as a container, and then the transporters, which control ingress and egress
of molecules to the cell. In Aristotelian terms, this is formal causation.

A Realistic View of Causation in the Real World
125
4
Adaptive Selection and Developmental Biology: Deleting
or Altering Lower Level Elements
Once life has come into existence, a combination of natural selection and develop-
mental processes occurs (Carroll, 2005), both of which crucially involve downward
causation. At the micro level these are based in protein synthesis governed by gene
regulatory networks and cell signaling networks.
Natural Selection As powerfully stated by Campbell (1974), natural selection
(Darwin, 1859), with it speciﬁc feature of reproduction with heredity featuring
genetic variation, is a crucial case of downward causation. This has to be the case,
because the core process of variation followed by selection tends to select pheno-
types and hence species better adapted to the environment, where “better adapted”
means a superior relative survival rate in that speciﬁc context. Thus natural selection
preferentially selects for the genotypes associated with better adapted phenotypes,
so if the environment is altered, for example by processes of global climate change,
there will tend to be a change in the physiology and behaviour of the species and
associated genomes that survive. This is downward causation in two ways: ﬁrst from
the nature of the environment to preferred phenotypes (an ecological effect), and
second from preferred phenotypes to preferred genotypes (a physiological effect).
Multiple realization Because this is a form of downward causation, multiple
realisation occurs in both steps, as examined by Kuechle and Ríos (2020). They
present a typology of multiple realization that provides a plausible account of the
differences between across- and within-species multiple realization, and perform
a formal analysis of the dynamics of multiple realization that sheds light on the
differences between multiple realization at different levels of organization.
Adaptive Selection Natural selection is a special case of adaptive selection. This
occurs whenever variation followed by selection takes place, and there are numerous
examples in biology apart from natural selection. Stochasticity is key in this process,
as emphasized by Noble and Noble (2018) and Noble (2020): living organisms
harness chance variations in ways that enable them to generate new solutions to
the environmental challenges they meet, as well as to extract order out of chaotic
molecular motion That is how molecular machines such as kinesin work (Hoffmann,
2012).
The adaptive immune system A key instance is the adaptive immune system
(Flajnik & Kasahara, 2010), which is which is based in lymphocytes bearing antigen
receptors generated by somatic recombination. This is enabled by organisms using
stochasticity at all levels to generate new DNA sequences in the immune system,
throughgeneregulatorynetworks.Thoseantibodiesthatapplytotheinvadingantigen
are then preferentially multiplied so as to combat it. This enables circular causation
to occur: “Response to a new antigen can rapidly develop a neutralising antibody
by enhancing the mutation rate in a highly speciﬁc region of the gene coding for
an immunoglobulin The mechanism here has been shown to involve regulating the
error-correction machinery” (Noble, 2020).

126
G. F. R. Ellis and J. Kopel
Neuronal Group Selection Initial neural connections in the developing brain
are random at the microlevel, and then reﬁned through pruning some connections
and strengthening others as the brain learns by interacting with its environment
(Wolpert et al., 2002). Different environments will result in different outcomes, for
example a child recognizes a speciﬁc person as its mother through the “ﬁre together,
wire together” Hebbian process. Additionally, brain plasticity that results in adapta-
tion to the local social environment takes place via the process of “Neural Darwin-
ism” proposed by Changeux et al (1973), Changeux and Danchin (1976), Edelman
(1989). Different environments (e.g. French as a home language rather than English)
result in different patterns of synaptic connections. This is downward causation from
processes in the family environment to microstructure of the neocortex.
In all cases, the key downward effect is deleting lower level elements, thus
controlling what the lower level interacting elements are. In Aristotelian terms, this
is material causation.
Developmental processes A remarkable feature of developmental biology is how
pluripotent cells become specialized so as to become specialized cells that can fulﬁl
speciﬁc physiological functions. This takes place via diffusion of morphogens from
organizing centres (Wolpert et al., 2002), thus large scale axes and domains are set
up that then determine developmental outcomes through controlling gene regula-
tory networks, particularly via the hierarchical structure introduced by HOX genes
(Carroll, 2005). Illari and Williamson (2010) explore in detail how this hierarchical
structuringoccursviafunctionalindividuation,decomposition,andorganization.The
phenomenon of concern (which may be structure or function) is explained by being
decomposed into lower-level components, where the functioning of these lower-level
components may in turn be explained by further decomposition into yet lower-level
components. Thus both mechanisms and their functions come to be hierarchically
nested, which is key to attaining complexity (Simon, 2019). Each level determines
developmental outcomes at the next lower level by setting its context, and overall
environmental conditions such as temperature, humidity, and nutrient availability
can shape these outcomes (for example in plant development).
Higher order principles But other inﬂuences are crucial, for example mechanical
forcesderivingfromthestateofdevelopmentofanembryocanchangedevelopmental
outcomes “Researchers have begun to deﬁne the mechanisms by which cells sense,
respond to and generate forces. … Most researchers are probing mechanical signals
using cells or tissues cultured in a dish. But a few groups are studying whole animals,
and sometimes they ﬁnd different principles at work from those apparent in isolated
tissues. These in vivo studies come with many challenges—such as measuring tiny
amounts of force in complex tissues—but they are key to understanding the role of
force in sculpting life (Dance, 2021). This is downward causation from these macro
structures to gene expression. Again, a range of developmental phenomena can be
explained by the regulation of cell surface tension (Lecuit & Lenne, 2007).
In summary: Modular genetic control of protein synthesis takes place leading
to modular body construction. That then allows hierarchical modular functions to
interlock to produce desired higher level behavior. The downward causation occurs
by signaling molecules switching lower level dynamics by altering the shape of

A Realistic View of Causation in the Real World
127
biomolecules and so allowing regulation of transcription (Monod et al., 1963). It is
a case of altering the nature of lower level elements by molecular binding.
5
Feedback Control, Basins of Attraction, and Biological
Oscillators
Two key ways downward causation takes place in biology can easily be confused.
Both involve higher level structures that have an irreducible dynamic effect at the
macro level. Their function at the macro level then acts down to entrain dynamics at
the micro level.
Homeostasis and Feedback control One key case is the feedback control systems
that underlie cybernetic processes in engineering (Dorf & Bishop, 2011; Wiener,
1948), and homeostasis in biology (Guyton & Hall, 2006). Their function is to
protect the system from disturbances, and keep it in a comfortable operating range.
It functions by a sensor determining the actual value of the relevant variable v, a
comparator determining the difference v: = v−vo from the desired value vo, and a
controller that actuates some system that will tend to return v to the desired value vo.
A. An engineering example is a thermostat controlling room temperature. There is
an extensive literature on feedback control systems detailing the ways that recovery
from perturbations takes place (Dorf & Bishop, 2011). It may be underdamped, oscil-
lating strongly about the desired state, but with gradually decreasing amplitude; it
may be strongly damped, returning in one strong sweep to its stable positionl; or it
may be critically damped, the separatrix between the other two. Biological exam-
ples are physiological systems controlling body temperature, blood pressure, ionic
concentrations, and so on (Guyton & Hall, 2006).
Downward causation A thermostat is a holistic system: if you disconnect the
sensory wire where it enters the thermostat, all the micro components are still there
exactly as before, but it will no longer function because the macro connections
have been changed. Thus it ceases to function if reduced to its parts: the feedback
dynamics is essentially due to a macro level conﬁguration (the connection between
the wire and thermostat). Its operation entails both upward and downward causation
because the micro level dynamics both enables and follows from the macro level
state thereby attained. For example if the temperature setting on the thermostat for a
room is reduced from T1 to T0, at the macro level, the system will operate to as to
attain a temperature in the desired range around T0. At the micro level, the molecules
in the room will move on average at a lower speed than they did before, this speed
corresponding to the temperature T0 entered on the thermostat dial. The dial setting is
the cause of room temperature at the emergent level, as well as of average molecular
speed at the molecular level. That is downward causation from an abstract concept
in the operators mind (the desired temperature) to physical outcomes in the room.
Dynamical Systems and Basins of Attraction The second key case is dynamical
systems, which result from a generic system of interacting particles when suitable

128
G. F. R. Ellis and J. Kopel
constraints are applied, for example if dynamical symmetries occur or channelling
constraints are applied. A well developed mathematic theory shows how dynamical
systems behave (Arnold, 1989). They may have sources, sinks, saddle points, and
limit cycles in phase space, and they may exhibit chaotic dynamics with strange
attractors. Basins of attraction in phase space characterize which orbits end up at or
near these features.
The confusion with feedback control system can occur because there may be basin
of attraction characterising the orbits ending up at a ﬁxed point, with dynamics appar-
ently similar to those of feedback control. But the mechanism is entirely different:
there is no comparator and control device, as there is in the case of feedback control
systems. Rather these patterns occur simply as a result of the constraints shaping the
dynamical system. For example if the dynamical system characterizes a river ending
up in the sea, a range of heights from river pools to the sea level will be attractors
for water molecule height as they ﬂow towards the sea, resulting simply from the
topography that determines the water ﬂow.
Biological Oscillators A key case is biological oscillators, which occur in all
branches of biology (Otero-Muras & Banga, 2016, Forger, 2017, Rydin Gorjão et al.,
2018). Wherever there are oscillators in biology, there are emergent non-linear effects
taking place due to irreducible higher level dynamics that then entrain the component
parts to follow those oscillations In dynamical systems terms, they are limit cycles,
with a basic of attraction: if the system has initial data in that basin, it will tend to
join oscillatory motion described by that limit cycle.
Neural oscillators Churchland and Sejnowski (2016) describe the basic issue
very clearly, discussing the stomatogastric ganglion of the spiny lobster (pages 4–5):
“The basic electrophysiological and anatomical features of the neurons have been
catalogued, so that the microlevel vitae for each cell in the network is impressively
detailed. What is not understood is how the cells interact to constitute a network that
produces the rhythmic pattern. No one cell is responsible for the network’s rhythmic
output: no one cell is itself the repository of properties displayed by the network as
a whole. Where then does the rhythmicity come from? Very roughly speaking, from
the patterns of interactions among cells, and the intrinsic properties of component
cells. …How is it that the network can produce different rhythms under different
biochemical conditions?” This is a classic description of emergent properties of a
network. They state “Microlevel data are necessary to understand the system, but
not sufﬁcient”. The oscillator is a limit cycle, stable to perturbations.
The Heart Denis Noble gives a similar story in his discussion (Noble, 2006:58–
65) of how the heart works: we have a system that operates rhythmically but has no
speciﬁc ‘oscillator’ component (Noble, 2002). The rhythm is driven by a compact
networks of proteins and genes that code for them; it is a systems property, which
chains down to cause rhythmic motions of the parts. The rhythmic activity of the cell
drives the operation of the protein channels, which drive the network oscillations.
Causal closure is a property of the whole interacting set of levels (Ellis, 2020a).
Turning off this interlevel feedback loop causes the oscillations to cease (Noble,
2012).

A Realistic View of Causation in the Real World
129
At the molecular biology level,
• Gene expression oscillators are described in “Developmental function and state
transitions of a gene expression oscillator in Caenorhabditis elegans” (Meeuse
et al., 2020) Metabolic oscillators are described in “Autonomous metabolic
oscillations robustly gate the early and late cell cycle” (Papagiannakis et al.,
2017).
• Biochemical timers The design principles of biochemical timer circuits that
discriminatebetweentransientandsustainedstimulationaredescribedinGerardin
et al. (2019).
6
Examples in Ecology
Ecological systems are hierarchical systems where the availability of suitable niches
determines what ﬂora and fauna will ﬂourish: a clear downward effect. A basic
feature is that metabolism link the biology of individual organisms to the ecology
of populations, communities, and ecosystems (Brown et al., 2004). Consequently
the global biogeochemical cycles (carbon, nitrogen, oxygen, phosphorus, sulfur,
rock, and water) are the basis for ecosystem function at all levels from commu-
nities down to insects and microbes; and conversely microbial engines drive the
geochemical cycles (Rousk & Bengtson, 2014). There is a relatively stable set of core
genes coding for the major redox reactions essential for life and the biogeochemical
cycles (Falkowski et al., 2008). These genes created and coevolved with biogeo-
chemical cycles and were passed from microbe to microbe primarily by horizontal
gene transfer. Thus upward and downward effects intertwine to give causal closure
only when the whole set of such interlevel interactions is taken into account (Ellis,
2020a). Complex autocatalytic effects attract stable, persistent system conﬁgurations
(Ulanowicz, 2009).
However if the global context changes, the conﬁguration changes. An example is
that top predators shape the ecosystem in a topdown way, regulating species diver-
sity (Letnic et al., 2012; Newsome et al., 2017; Sergio et al., 2005). Consequently,
major shifts in ecosystems at lower levels can follow changes in the abundance and
distribution of apex consumers. Estes et al (2011) give a penetrating analysis of how
this downward effect works. The three key elements are, ﬁrstly, an ecosystem may
be shaped by apex consumers. Trophic cascades occur through the downward prop-
agation of impacts of consumers on their prey. Secondly, alternative stable states
occur, and perturbations of sufﬁcient magnitude can push ecosystems from one
basin of attraction to another. Tipping points can occur, resulting in abrupt changes
in ecosystem structure and function related to such transitions between alternative
stable states. Third is the high connectivity of ecosystem interaction webs. Every
species can potentially inﬂuence many other species through biological processes
such as predation, competition, and mutualism, and these interactions are shaped by

130
G. F. R. Ellis and J. Kopel
the supportive or limiting physico-chemical effects of water, temperature, and nutri-
ents. These interactions link species in an array of spatial scales in a highly complex
network.
Taken together, this sets the stage for the idea of trophic downgrading. The loss of apex
consumers reduces food chain length, thus altering the intensity of herbivory and the abun-
dance and composition of plants in largely predictable ways. The transitions in ecosystems
that characterize such changes are often abrupt, are sometimes difﬁcult to reverse, and
commonly lead to radically different patterns and pathways of energy and material ﬂux and
sequestration.
The focus of the paper is how human actions are having an irreversible inﬂuence
through these processes:
[This is] Humankind’s most pervasive inﬂuence on the natural world. This is true in part
because it has occurred globally and in part because extinctions are by their very nature
perpetual, whereas most other environmental impacts are potentially reversible on decadal to
millenial time scales. Recent research suggests that the disappearance of these animals rever-
berates further than previously anticipated, with far-reaching effects on processes as diverse
as the dynamics of disease; ﬁre; carbon sequestration; invasive species; and biogeochemical
exchanges among Earth’s soil, water, and atmosphere.
Thus these are effects occurring because of deletion from the ecosystem of various
higherlevel species, in turn changing the lower level constituent species from which
ecosystem dynamics arise. Including effects at a global scale, they reach down to
affect what happens at micro levels where microbial and chemical interactions take
place, in turn enabled by the underlying physics. But it is the biosphere and ecosystem
levels that provide the context determining what happens.
References
Aghanim, N. et al. (2020). “Planck 2018 results-VI. Cosmological parameters.“ Astronomy and
Astrophysics 641, A6
Alberts, B. et al. (2007). Molecular biology of the cell (Garland Science).
Arnol’d, V.I. (1989). Mathematical methods of classical mechanics (Springer_).
Ashton, B. J., Ridley, A. R., Edwards, E. K., & Thornton, A. (2018). Cognitive performance is
linked to group size and affects ﬁtness in Australian magpies. Nature, 554, 364–367.
Berridge M (2012) Cell signalling biology (Portland Press).
Birkenfeld, A. L., et al. (2011). Deletion of the mammalian INDY homolog mimics aspects of
dietary restriction and protects against adiposity and insulin resistance in mice. Cell Metabolism,
14, 567.
Bhutia, Y. D., et al. (2017). Plasma membrane Na+-coupled citrate transporter (SLC13A5) and
neonatal epileptic encephalopathy. Molecules, 22, 378.
Brown, J. H., et al. (2004). Toward a metabolic theory of ecology. Ecology, 85(7), 1771–1789.
Cacioppo, J.T. et al. (2002). Foundations in social neuroscience (MIT Press).
Campbell,
D.T.
(1974).
“‘Downward
causation
in
hierarchically
organised
biological
systems.“Studies in the Philosophy of Biology (Palgrave), 179–186.
Carroll, S.B. (2005). Endless forms most beautiful. (WW Norton and Company).

A Realistic View of Causation in the Real World
131
Changeux, J. P., Courrège, P., & Danchin, A. (1973). A theory of the epigenesis of neuronal networks
by selective stabilization of synapses. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 70(10),
2974–2978.
Changeux, J. P., & Danchin, A. (1976). Selective stabilisation of developing synapses as a
mechanism for the speciﬁcation of neuronal networks. Nature, 264(5588), 705–712.
Churchland, P.S, Sejnowski, T.J. (2016). The computational brain (MIT Press).
Dance, A. (2021). “The secret forces that squeeze and pull life into shape” Nature 13 January (2021).
Darwin, C. (1859). The origin of species. 6th. Vol. 570. (John Murray).
Dorf, R.C., & Bishop, R.H. (2011). Modern control systems. (Pearson).
Edelman, G. M., & Gally, J. A. (2001). Degeneracy and complexity in biologicalsystems.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 98, 13763–13768.
Ellis, G.F.R. (2012). “Top-down causation and emergence: some comments on mechanisms.
Interface Focus 2, 126–140. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3262299/.
Ellis, G.F.R. (2016). How can physics underlie the mind (Springer).
Ellis, G. F. R. (2018). Top-down effects in the brain. Physics of Life Reviews, 31, 1–30.
Ellis, G. F. R. (2020a). Emergence in solid state physics and biology. Foundations of Physics, 50,
1098–1139.
Ellis, G. F. R. (2020b). The causal closure of physics in real world contexts. Foundations of Physics,
50, 1057–1097.
Ellis, G.F.R. (2021). “Physics, determinism, and the brain” https://arxiv.org/abs/2008.12674.
Ellis, G. F. R., & Kopel, J. (2019). The dynamical emergence of biology from physics: Branching
causation via biomolecules. Frontiers in Physiology, 2019, 9.
Ellis, G.F.R., Noble, D., & O’Connor, T. (2012). “Top-down causation: an integrating theme within
and across the sciences?” Interface Focus.21–3
Flajnik, M. F., & Kasahara, M. (2010). Origin and evolution of the adaptive immune system: Genetic
events and selective pressures. Nature Reviews Genetics, 11, 47–59.
Estes, J. A. et al. (2011). “Trophic downgrading of planet earth” Science 333, 301.
Falkowski, P. G., Fenchel, T., & Delong, E. F. (2008). The microbial engines that drive Earth’s
biogeochemical cycles. Science, 320, 1034–1039.
Forger, D. B. (2017). Biological clocks, rhythms, and oscillations: the theory of biological
timekeeping (MIT Press).
Gerardin, J., Reddy, N. R., & Lim, W. A. (2019). The design principles of biochemical timers:
Circuits that discriminate between transient and sustained stimulation. Cell Systems, 9, 297–308.
Gopal, E., et al. (2015). Species-speciﬁc inﬂuence of lithium on the activity of SLC13A5 (NaCT):
Lithium-induced activation is speciﬁc for the transporter in primates. Journal of Pharmacology
and Experimental Therapeutics, 353, 17–26.
Gorjão, L.R., Saha, A., Ansmann, G., Feudel, U., & Lehnertz, K. (2018). “Complexity and
irreducibility of dynamics on networks of networks”, Chaos: An Interdisciplinary Journal of
Nonlinear Science, 28:106306.
Guyton, A., & Hall, J. (2006). Textbook of medical physiology, 11th edition (Saunders Co)
Hoffmann, P.M. (2012). Life’s ratchet: how molecular machines extract order from chaos. (Basic
Books).
Hoyningen-Huene, P. (1997). “ Comment on J. Kim’s ‘Supervenience, emergence and realization
in philosophy of mind’”, in Mindscapes: Philosophy, Science and the Mind, in M. Carrier & P.
K. Machamer (Eds.) (University of Pittsburgh Press), pp. 294–302.
Illari, P.M., & Williamson, J. (2010). “Function and organization: Comparing the mechanisms of
protein synthesis and natural selection.” Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part C:
Studies in History and Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical Sciences, 41(3), 279–291.
Inoue, K., et al. (2004). Functional features and genomic organization of mouse NaCT, a sodium-
coupled transporter for tricarboxylic acid cycle intermediates. Biochemical Journal, 378, 949–
957.

132
G. F. R. Ellis and J. Kopel
Inoue, K., Zhuang, L., & Ganapathy, V. (2002). Human Na+ -coupled citrate transporter: Primary
structure, genomic organization, and transport function. Biochemical and Biophysical Research
Communications, 299, 465–471.
Inoue, K. et al. (2002). “Structure, function, and expression pattern of a novel sodium-coupled
citrate transporter (NaCT) cloned from mammalian brain,” J Biol Chem 277, 39469–39476.
Inoue, K., et al. (2003). Human sodium-coupled citrate transporter, the orthologue of Drosophila
Indy, as a novel target for lithium action. The Biochemical Journal, 374(Pt 1), 21–26.
Hoffman, P.M. (2012) Life’s ratchet: How molecular machines extract order from chaos (Basic
Books).
Juarrero, A. (1999). Dynamics in action. MIT Press.
Kopel, J. (2019). A note regarding relational ontology in chemistry. Process Studies, 48, 59–66.
Kuechle, G., & Ríos, D. (2020). “Multiple realization and evolutionary dynamics: A ﬁtness-based
account,” Australasian Journal of Philosophy, https://doi.org/10.1080/00048402.2020.1839920,
https://doi.org/10.1080/00048402.2020.1839920
Lecuit, T., & Lenne, P. F. (2007). Cell surface mechanics and the control of cell shape, tissue patterns
and morphogenesis. Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology, 8(8), 633–644.
Letnic, M., Ritchie, E. G., & Dickman, C. R. (2012). Top predators as biodiversity regulators: The
dingo Canis lupus dingo as a case study. Biological Reviews, 87, 390–413.
Lin, L., et al. (2015). SLC transporters as therapeutic targets: Emerging opportunities. Nature
Reviews Drug Discovery, 14, 543–560.
Meeuse, M., et al. (2020). Developmental function and state transitions of a gene expression
oscillator in Caenorhabditis elegans. Molecular Systems Biology, 16, e9498.
Monod, J., Changeux, J. P., & Jacob, F. (1963). Allosteric proteins and cellular control systems.
Journal of Molecular Biology, 6, 306–329.
Mossio, M. (2013). “Causal Closure.” In Dubitzky et al. (Eds) Encyclopedia of Systems Biology
(Springer) pp. 415–418.
Mossio, M., & Moreno, A. (2010). Organisational_closure_in_biological_organisms. Hist Phil Life
Sci, 32, 269–288.
Mycielska, M., et al. (2015). Extracellular citrate in health and disease. Current Molecular Medicine,
15, 884–891.
Newsome, T. M., et al. (2017). Top predators constrain mesopredator distributions. Nature
Communications, 8, 15469.
Noble, D. (2002). Modeling the heart–from genes to cells to the whole organ. Science, 295(5560),
1678–1682.
Noble, D. (2008). The music of life: Biology beyond genes (Oxford University Press).
Noble, D. (2020). “The role of stochasticity in biological communication processes”. Progress in
Biophysics and Molecular Biology 2020.
Noble, R., & Noble, D. (2018). Harnessing stochasticity: How do organisms make choices? Chaos,
28, 106309.
Nurse, P. (2008). Life, logic and information. Nature, 454, 424–426.
Otero-Muras, I., & Banga, J.R. (2016). “Design principles of biological oscillators through
optimization: Forward and reverse analysis,” PLoS One 11, e0166867.
Papagiannakis, A., Niebel, B., Wit, E. C., & Heinemann, M. (2017). Autonomous metabolic
oscillations robustly gate the early and late cell cycle. Molecular Cell, 65(2), 285–295.
Peacocke, A. R. (1989). An introduction to the physical chemistry of biological organization. Oxford
University Press.
Peter, P., & Uzan, J-P (2013) Primordial cosmology, Oxford Graduate Texts.
Rousk J and Bengtson P (2014) “Microbial regulation of global biogeochemical cycles,” Frontiers
in Microbiology, 5, 103.
Schumann, T. et al. (2019). “Solute carrier transporters as potential targets for the treatment of
metabolic disease’. Pharmacological Reviews, 72, 343–379.
Sergio, F., Newton, I., & Marchesi, L. (2005). Top predators and biodiversity. Nature, 436, 192–192.
Simon, H. A. (2019). The architecture of complexity. Sciences of the artiﬁcial, MIT press.

A Realistic View of Causation in the Real World
133
Sonnewald, U., et al. (1991). First direct demonstration of preferential release of citrate from astro-
cytes using [13C]NMR spectroscopy of cultured neurons and astrocytes. Neuroscience Letters,
128, 235–239.
Szathmáry, E., & Maynard Smith, J. (1995). The major evolutionary transitions. Nature, 374(6519),
227–232.
Tabas, A., Mihai, G., Kiebel, S., Trampel, R., & von Kriegstein, K. (2020). “Abstract rules drive
adaptation in the subcortical sensory pathway”. Elife, 9, e64501.
Thevenon, J., et al. (2014). Mutations in SLC13A5 cause autosomal-recessive epileptic
encephalopathy with seizure onset in the ﬁrst days of life. The American Journal of Human
Genetics, 95, 113–120.
Ulanowicz, R. E. (2009). The dual nature of ecosystem dynamics. Ecological Modelling, 220,
1886–1892.
Wiener, N. (1948). Cybernetics or control and communication in the animal and the machine. MIT
Press.
Wolpert, L. et al. (2002). Principles of development, Oxford University Press.
Yang, Q.-Z., et al. (2020). “Epilepsy and EEG phenotype of SLC13A5 citrate transporter disorder.”
Child Neurology Open, 7, 2329048X2093136.
Yodoya, E., et al. (2006). Functional and molecular identiﬁcation of sodium-coupled dicarboxy-
late transporters in rat primary cultured cerebrocortical astrocytes and neurons. Journal of
Neurochemistry, 97, 162–173.

Where is the Top and What Might Go
Down?
Tim Maudlin
Aristotledistinguishedfourdifferent“aitiai”,atermsometimestranslatedas“causes”
but more accurately rendered as “explanatory factors”. The one most familiar in
contemporary discussion is the efﬁcient cause. And there is a sense of “top” and
“bottom” such that macroscopic or other complex objects are at the top and their
microscopic constituents at the bottom. The suggestion that in this sense the “top”
can be an efﬁcient cause of what happens at the “bottom” conﬂicts with the usual
understanding of the relationship between physics and the other sciences. But if
instead of efﬁcient causation one has another sense of explanation in mind, or if
instead of the macro/micro distinction one has in mind the local/non-local distinction,
then “top-down causation” need not conﬂict with the usual understanding of physics.
This is an attempt to sort these issues out.
1
The Four Causes and the Special Sciences
The phrase “top-down causation” is apt to raise the hackles of anyone committed to
a certain form of physicalism. That form—which in fact is not realized by modern
physics!—is best illustrated by Democritian atomism. In Democritus’ pungent
apothogem: “By convention sweet and by convention bitter, by convention hot, by
convention cold, by convention color; but in reality atoms and void”. The punch
comes in the last clause: somehow, at the bottom of everything, all there really is are
atoms moving through the void until they smack into each other and bounce off (or
become hooked together, or whatever). Everything else one thinks of or talks of is
not really real in the way the atoms are.
T. Maudlin (B)
Department of Philosophy, New York University, 5 Washington Place, New York, NY 10003,
USA
John Bell Institute for the Foundations of Physics, Hvar, Croatia
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
S. Wuppuluri and I. Stewart (eds.), From Electrons to Elephants and Elections,
The Frontiers Collection, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-92192-7_9
135

136
T. Maudlin
The possible targets of Democritus’ withering assessment of reality are many.
His own examples call to mind perceptual qualities such as sweet and bitter, for
the obvious skeptical reasons. As Sextus Empiricus noted, what tastes sweet to one
person may taste bitter to another; what is delicious and appealing to one species
may be disgusting and repellant to another. These things are not in themselves either
sweet or bitter or delicious or disgusting, they are only so relative to some perceiver.
If so, then for similar reasons the sweetness of an object cannot really be the cause
of how it behaves, since it is not, in itself, any more sweet than not-sweet.
But from a modern perspective, the rejection of heat as a real cause can be pushed
beyond the realm of subjective perceptions. One and the same room, for example,
can “feel hot” to one person and “feel cold” to another, so that felt quality cannot
be in the room itself. But one might think that there is an objective physical quality
of heat, the one measured by a thermometer without reference to anyone’s feelings,
that can be a cause. But in a sense, the modern kinetic theory of heat denies that as
well.
Suppose we deﬁne the temperature of a gas (at equilibrium) as the average kinetic
energy of the molecules in the gas (as measured in the rest frame of the gas). That
is an objective quantity. But it is still not a quantity that directly causes anything
to happen. The average kinetic energy is a mathematical abstraction: it does not
reside in any particular place in space. The average kinetic energy does not itself
deﬂect a single molecule from its path or cause an ice cube to melt. What does that,
properly speaking, are the individual collisions of individual gas molecules with
individual water molecules in the ice, knocking them free. Without or apart from
those particular collisions in particular places and times the gas could have no effect
at all. In that sense, the heat really does no causal work. It is rather a sort of handy
statistical bookkeeping device, which can be used to make statistical arguments about
the numbers and sorts of actual individual collisions that are likely to occur. In this
sense, one might reasonably say, heat itself cannot cause anything. In this sense
(which one has to be careful about), heat isn’t “really real” physically. All that is
really real are the atoms and the void.
I hope that this fundamental metaphysical picture, adumbrated by Democritus,
is clear enough. It ﬁts as well as anything can the demands of a certain sort of
reductionism. That reductionism consists of two steps. First, certain qualities such
as perceived sweetness are denied physical existence (in the “sweet object”) at all.
And then some physical quantities, such as temperature, are denied fundamental
physical reality because they are merely generic or abstract, rather than the particular
characteristics of particular atomic objects.
The language here gets a bit slippery. One might say, for example, that in one
sense the view is that tables and chairs are not “really real”, in that nothing that
happens in the physical world is caused by “chairness” or “tablehood” per se. Chairs
and tables are nothing but collections of atoms arranged in certain ways, and their
physical behavior is determined without remainder by the physical laws that govern
the atoms individually. At no point in the application of those laws could the property
of “being a table” or “being a chair” even be invoked: there would be no place to
make use of that fact when applying the fundamental physical laws. A physicist who

Where is the Top and What Might Go Down?
137
had no idea even what a chair or table is would not be deterred from analyzing and
predicting the behavior of a table or chair simply from the geometrical disposition
of the atoms within it. In that sense, tablehood and chairhood would be not exactly
“unreal” but more accurately “epiphenomenal”. Yes, there are tables and chairs, but
their being tables and chairs, per se, makes no fundamental difference in the world
to how they behave or what causes what.
This Democritean picture, then, denies “top down causation” in two different
ways. It denies that any non-physical characteristics are really causes of any event.
And it also denies that merely abstract or generic or statistical physical characteristics
cause any event. At the bottom—what is doing all the causing—is physical and
individual and also local: just one atom in a particular location banging into another
atom in a nearby location. The world as a whole, in all its aspects, is really nothing
more than the sum-total of all these local bangings.
Just as some people are rather deeply committed to something like this account
of physical reality and causation being correct, others are equally deeply repelled
and even disgusted by it. One sort of reaction is that it seems to deny the “real
reality” of all the things we take to be important in everyday life: human beings and
mountains and sunsets and beauty and desire and love. None of these would show up
in the physics at the bottom so none are really real, none really causes anything or is
responsible for anything. If all that is really going on is the laws of physics playing
themselves out blindly among atoms, all meaning and signiﬁcance seem leached out
of the world. And this general reaction—like the general Democritean impulse in the
opposite direction—comes in many speciﬁc forms. It is useful to distinguish them.
Perhaps the most intractable objection to the Democritean impulse arises from
the mind–body problem. One thing we are all completely certain about (as Descartes
observed) is the existence of our own subjective mental states, and indeed of ourselves
as conscious beings. That is, from an epistemic standpoint at least, as “really real” as
it gets. Descartes found that he could even doubt the existence of all of physical reality
(res extensa in his scheme) and still be sure of his own existence as a cognitive being.
If so, he argued, the Democritean account of fundamental reality cannot be correct.
Furthermore, in Descartes’ telling there is ultimately a direct causal connection
between the purely mental and the purely physical: purely mental acts of will cause
(somewhere in the brain, most likely in the pineal gland) particular atoms to swerve
in their trajectories in ways not caused by other atoms, and the motions of certain
atoms (in the visual cortex, for example) cause the existence of particular mental
perceptive states. So if we identify the mind as the “top” and the physical brain as
the “bottom”, Descartes postulated both top-down and bottom-up causation. And it
is one consequence of his view that when it comes to understanding the dynamics
of individual atoms in brains, standard physics derived from the study of inanimate
matter would just straightforwardly fail. In the pineal gland sometimes atoms just
would not go where the usual physical laws predict, due to the control or nudging or
whatever of the mental act. This is the assertion of top-down causation in its starkest
form.

138
T. Maudlin
Let me now pause to lay down some markers. First, I regard the mind/body
problem as the hardest problem there is. I do not have a clue how conscious states
arise from, or supervene on, the physical goings-on in the brain. I am convinced
they do because straightforward physical intervention in the brain has predictable
consequences for one’s mental state. But I have not only no idea how this is to be
explained, I have no idea how it even could be explained. The gap between the
physical character of things and the character of conscious states is just too wide
to bridge by any principle I can grasp. So for the hard problem of consciousness, I
simply note it and surrender. I have nothing more to say.
However, I also am very, very, very, very skeptical that the sort of mind-to-brain
causation that Descartes envisages exists. I am ﬁrmly convinced that the atoms and
molecules insideof brains obeytheverysamephysical laws as thoseoutsideof brains,
and indeed those in entirely inanimate matter. I believe that the laws of physics as
derived from the behavior of particles in high-energy accelerators and stars and so on
will be completely adequate to account for all the physical behavior of brains. Given
my view about the intractability of the mind/body problem, one might object here. If
mindsarereal,andyoudon’tknowhowtheyareconnectedtophysicalcharacteristics,
why not think they can straightforwardly inﬂuence physical characteristics? I cannot
detail exactly how my rejection of Cartesian mind-to-body causal inﬂuence ﬁts in
with my mystiﬁcation over the mind/body problem, but simply note that it does. I
do not expect the physics derivable from the behavior of inanimate matter to fail
somewhere in the brain. And that’s all I have to say about that.
At the other end of the spectrum, there is a form of “top-down” causation that I
fully endorse, but the key to that lies in a careful discussion of the term “causation”.
So far, I have only used that term in one sense, the sense that Aristotle denominated
“efﬁcient causation”. Or, to be a little more accurate, Aristotle distinguished four
different sorts of things he called aitiai, a Greek term that is commonly translated
“causes”. But it has been correctly observed that the translation is misleading. A
closer rendition of what Aristotle had in mind would be “explanatory factors”. That
is, when trying to account for, or explain, or create understanding of some event,
there are four different types of factors that are invoked: material explanatory factors,
formal explanatory factors, efﬁcient explanatory factors and ﬁnal (or teleological)
explanatory factors. Each of these can provide a sort of explanation or understanding,
and indeed all of them might be invoked when trying to explain one and the same
event. Where more than one factor exists, we might say that each sheds a different
sort of light on the situation. A full comprehension of what is going on would require
a grasp of all the various levels or sort of explanation available.
The sort of explanatory factor that we most commonly call a “cause” is what
Aristotle called the efﬁcient or moving cause. This cause accounts for why a certain
event happened when it did, in terms of immediately preceding events. For example,
theassassinationofArchdukeFerdinandiscommonlycitedastheimmediateefﬁcient
cause of the First World War: that was the “spark” that “set it off”. Such a judgment
does not conﬂict with the claim that in a sense the “real” cause had to do with big-
power political dynamics, and that the assassination was just an occasion to start
ﬁghting, not the “deep reason”. One could judge, for example, that if it hadn’t been

Where is the Top and What Might Go Down?
139
the assassination it would have been something else that set it off a little later. This
sort of judgment cites a “ﬁnal” or teleological explanation: what were the basic ends
being sought by the agents. It was not to simply avenge the death of Ferdinand. If it
were, then one would judge that without the assassination there would have been no
war at all.
I hope it is clear that identifying the assassination as the efﬁcient cause and
the larger international tensions as the ﬁnal cause, in the sense just outlined, is a
perfectly coherent thing to do. Neither precludes the other. The student of inter-
national affairs can say that the assassination was incidental to understanding the
fundamental reasons for the war, and the military historian trying to account for the
exact details of which units were deployed where and when may ﬁnd that the date
of the assassination plays a critical explanatory role. But these people merely have
different interests, not incompatible causal judgments. Both what is to be explained,
and what sort of explanation is sought, can vary from context to context.
Here is another example. My computer is many things at the same time. It is a
purely physical object that can be analyzed in terms of its physical structure. And
it is also a (pretty good) instantiation of a Turing machine that can be described in
terms of a Turing table. (Or, even more precisely, it instantiates many different Turing
machines “running at different levels”.) Now: suppose a particular event occurs. As
it sits on the table, there is a spinning colored circle that suddenly stops and pixels
in the shape of the Arabic number 8 appear. How is this to be explained?
Well, from a purely physical point of view, the computer is a collection of protons,
neutrons and electrons conﬁgured in a certain way embedded in a physical environ-
ment. In order to directly apply the fundamental laws of physics to it, both it and the
environment would have to be described in precise microscopic detail. We all believe
that such a description is possible in principle, and that the laws of physics applied
to the state just before the colored disc stopped spinning would predict that it would
soon stop spinning and that pixels in the shape of an “8” would light up. Note that in
this explanation the fact that the pixels form the shape of the Arabic numeral “8” is
completely irrelevant. The physical analysis could be carried out without mentioning
or noticing or deriving that. And indeed, it might even be accidental that the result is
the shape of the Arabic “8”: maybe the computer is programmed to work in Korean,
for example, and the symbol only accidentally has the form of an Arabic numeral at
all.
On the other hand, the computer scientist does not know—or even care!—about
the detailed physical description the physicist needs. The computer scientist may ask
not about any of that, but about what program the computer is running. She may be
told that the program is running a particular algorithm. By analyzing that algorithm,
the computer scientist can come to the conclusion that the program will halt and
output the result which is a pixel bitmap in the form “8”.
But a mathematician might not care about the details of the algorithm at all. The
mathematician might want to know what question the algorithm was designed to
answer. And let’s say the answer to that is that the question is the lowest number
of dimensions in which a certain topological shape can exist. The mathematician
might set about investigating that question in a completely different way than the

140
T. Maudlin
computer algorithm does, but still conclude that the correct number is eight. It is then
essential that the mathematician recognize that the output of the program represents
the Arabic numeral for eight. And the mathematician can declare that he understands
why the output was what it was in a different—and more profound—way than either
the physicist or the computer scientist does.
What are we to say of the explanations provided by the physicist, the computer
scientist and the mathematician? They all provide a sort of understanding of the
event. And each can provide their understanding without referencing the other. The
physicist need not even know the object is a computer or describable in terms of a
Turing table; the computer scientist need not ascribe any signiﬁcance to the algorithm
as long and the Turing table is available; the mathematician may not know a thing
about either physics or the algorithm. Each might ﬁnd the facts of interest to the other
as completely irrelevant to their own analysis. But I hope we can agree that there is
no rational grounds for them to ﬁght over whether the “real” cause of the ﬁnal state
of the machine is given by the physical analysis or the algorithmic analysis or the
topological analysis. Each perspective provides its own insight and understanding.
There is only this asymmetry among them. Let’s suppose that each has to provide
a prediction of the outcome on the basis of their own approach. The mathematician
solves the topological problem in whatever way is most convenient and says that
the computer should come up with the answer “eight”. The computer scientist says
that the algorithm should halt and the ﬁnal output be a bitmap in the shape “8”.
The physicist says that the pattern of light coming off the screen should shift from
the rotating colors of the set of pixels in the shape “8”. But what if they were to
disagree in their predictions? What if the topologist concludes the answer is nine, or
the computer scientist that the algorithm will never halt, while the physicist says the
output will be a blank screen?
Well, there is a sense in which—if each has no made a mistake in their own area
of expertise—we ought to trust the physicist.
The computer scientist, for example, simply has to postulate that the physical
machine does, and will continue to, implement a certain Turing table. And the math-
ematician simply has to postulate that whatever algorithm the computer is running,
it will arrive at the correct mathematical solution to the question. If either of these
postulates fails, then their predictions will fail, and not through any fault of their own.
But the physicist makes no such vulnerable postulate. The physicist’s conclusions
are drawn entirely from physical initial conditions, and if those are wrong it is a
failure of physics as such. And if the physicist says the screen will go blank—let’s
say because the computer’s battery is about to run out—then nothing the computer
scientist concludes or the mathematician concludes can override that. Both of those
experts can properly say that the state of the battery lies outside their area of exper-
tise, and of course they could not be expected to take that into account in making
their predictions. We can call this the “Wernher von Braun” defense, after the classic
song of Tom Lehrer: “Once the rockets are up, who cares where they come down?
That’s not my department!” says Wernher von Braun. There are certain important
facts about what will actually show up on the screen that do not fall in the department
of the computer scientist or the mathematician. If their predictions fail because the

Where is the Top and What Might Go Down?
141
battery runs out they have not failed qua computer scientist or qua mathematician.
But if the screen does not go blank—or display the glowing “8”—when the physicist
says it should, then the physicist has made a mistake qua physicist. Either the physical
description was wrong, or the laws of physics employed were wrong. In this sense,
physics holds a fundamental or basic position among these sciences. But that does
not imply that the physical explanation provides the most insight or understanding
among the three, where they all make the right prediction.
It is in this sense that physics is “below” or “more basic” or “more fundamen-
tal” than either mathematics or computer science with regard to the behavior of the
computer. So this provides one sort of direction in which one can distinguish higher
from lower, or top from bottom. And there is a certain sense in which efﬁcient causa-
tion is most accurately and completely described “at the bottom”, by the physics.
Even if the Turing machine table says a certain step should come next in the calcula-
tion, nothing will intervene in the face of the battery running out to bring that about.
And similarly for the topological explanation: it may get us to the answer “eight”, but
the situation of the battery will overwhelm that. So in the sense of efﬁcient causation
and in the sense in which physics lies at the “bottom” of a hierarchy of sciences,
there is no “top-down causation”.
But none of that implies that there is not—in a perfectly good sense—top-
down explanation. The perspective of the computer scientist or the topologist or
the psychologist can be more explanatory, for the purposes at hand, than that of the
physicist. One of the sharpest observations of this fact was made by Socrates as he
waited in prison for his execution.
Phaedo is set in that prison, and Socrates undertakes to explain his approach to
philosophy to Cebes. The relevant passage is this (97b–99b, translation Benjamin
Jowett):
Then I heard someone who had a book of Anaxagoras, as he said, out of which he read that
mind was the disposer and cause of all, and I was quite delighted at the notion of this, which
appeared admirable, and I said to myself: If mind is the disposer, mind will dispose all for
the best, and put each particular in the best place; and I argued that if anyone desired to ﬁnd
out the cause of the generation or destruction or existence of anything, he must ﬁnd out what
state of being or suffering or doing was best for that thing, and therefore a man had only to
consider the best for himself and others, and then he would also know the worse, for that
the same science comprised both. And I rejoiced to think that I had found in Anaxagoras a
teacher of the causes of existence such as I desired, and I imagined that he would tell me
ﬁrst whether the earth is ﬂat or round; and then he would further explain the cause and the
necessity of this, and would teach me the nature of the best and show that this was best; and
if he said that the earth was in the center, he would explain that this position was the best,
and I should be satisﬁed if this were shown to me, and not want any other sort of cause. And
I thought that I would then go and ask him about the sun and moon and stars, and that he
would explain to me their comparative swiftness, and their returnings and various states, and
how their several affections, active and passive, were all for the best. For I could not imagine
that when he spoke of mind as the disposer of them, he would give any other account of their
being as they are, except that this was best; and I thought when he had explained to me in
detail the cause of each and the cause of all, he would go on to explain to me what was best
for each and what was best for all. I had hopes which I would not have sold for much, and
I seized the books and read them as fast as I could in my eagerness to know the better and
the worse.

142
T. Maudlin
What hopes I had formed, and how grievously was I disappointed! As I proceeded, I
found my philosopher altogether forsaking mind or any other principle of order, but having
recourse to air, and ether, and water, and other eccentricities. I might compare him to a person
who began by maintaining generally that mind is the cause of the actions of Socrates, but
who, when he endeavored to explain the causes of my several actions in detail, went on to
show that I sit here because my body is made up of bones and muscles; and the bones, as he
would say, are hard and have ligaments which divide them, and the muscles are elastic, and
they cover the bones, which have also a covering or environment of ﬂesh and skin which
contains them; and as the bones are lifted at their joints by the contraction or relaxation
of the muscles, I am able to bend my limbs, and this is why I am sitting here in a curved
posture: that is what he would say, and he would have a similar explanation of my talking
to you, which he would attribute to sound, and air, and hearing, and he would assign ten
thousand other causes of the same sort, forgetting to mention the true cause, which is that
the Athenians have thought ﬁt to condemn me, and accordingly I have thought it better and
more right to remain here and undergo my sentence; for I am inclined to think that these
muscles and bones of mine would have gone off to Megara or Boeotia—by the dog of Egypt
they would, if they had been guided only by their own idea of what was best, and if I had not
chosen as the better and nobler part, instead of playing truant and running away, to undergo
any punishment which the State inﬂicts. There is surely a strange confusion of causes and
conditions in all this. It may be said, indeed, that without bones and muscles and the other
parts of the body I cannot execute my purposes. But to say that I do as I do because of
them, and that this is the way in which mind acts, and not from the choice of the best, is
a very careless and idle mode of speaking. I wonder that they cannot distinguish the cause
from the condition, which the many, feeling about in the dark, are always mistaking and
misnaming.
Here Socrates invokes a species of teleological explanation, in two quite different
contexts. It is worth our while to tease them apart.
The overall theme that Socrates insists on is that there is a sort of explanation—
and corresponding “cause”—which invokes what is best or, more accurately, what
is thought to be best. To take them in reverse order from that which appears in the
passage, Socrates remarks that to really understand why he is sitting in prison—
given that he had had several opportunities to avoid being condemned to death and
to escape once he had been—one has to understand that he himself judges that
remaining is the best course of action, just as the Athenians judged it to be the best of
their available options to condemn him to death. Both of these cases seek to explain
intentional actions by reference to judgements of the good: what is sometime called
“belief/desire psychology”. The Athenians thought it best that Socrates be put to
death, and believed that conﬁning him to prison would achieve that end, so they
acted to bring it about. Socrates thinks it best to obey the commands of the laws of
the city, so he voluntarily remains. Of course, he could not do so without a physical
body, and his remaining in prison is a physical disposition of that physical body.
Nonetheless, he asserts, true understanding of the situation simply cannot be grasped
via physical analysis. That understanding requires conceptualizing the situation in
terms of beliefs about what is good and actions to achieve that good.
It is notable that this sort of conceptualization transcends physics in a certain
sense. Socrates is an agent with various options available to him. Among these are
agreeing to escape (which his friends try to convince him to do). He refuses because
he deems that that would not be good. It is true, on the one hand, that Socrates must

Where is the Top and What Might Go Down?
143
be a physical being with a physical body to ﬁnd himself in such a situation. But
it is also true that with respect to the psychological description, the details of the
physics become quite irrelevant. Whether his body is ultimately Democritean atoms
or quantum strings is neither here nor there. That will matter greatly to the physicist,
but be irrelevant to the psychologist. As an agent, Socrates must have a body, and
various viable options the body is capable of (such as running off to Megara or
Boeotia), and beliefs about which of those viable options would be best. But beyond
that, the physics provides no insight. It is the psychological per se that does the
explaining.
The explanation is teleological in the sense of being goal- or end-directed.
Socrates—like the Athenians—thinks he knows what is best and acts to achieve it.
Of course, either or both parties could be wrong about what is best, and also wrong
about how to achieve what they desire. So this sort of teleology involves nothing like
backward causation, or the end state literally bringing about the stages that lead to it.
It is rather that the sequence leading to the end state becomes comprehensible when
seen in light of the beliefs and desires of the agents.
In the ﬁrst part of the passage, Socrates states that be was hoping to ﬁnd in
Anaxagoras such a teleological explanation of the cosmos itself: that the stars and
earth and planets are and behave as they do because that is for the best. This sort
of cosmological teleology is something modern science has abandoned entirely. We
don’t think that the universe as a whole was designed or intended to be any way at
all, and so to try to comprehend it in those terms is an error. But even if so, it is not
always an error to seek teleological explanations of this sort, since there are agents
with desires for what they take to be good and beliefs about how to achieve them.
The theory of evolution provides yet another sort of model of scientiﬁc explana-
tion. There, no agent aiming at any end is involved, but still the result is in many
respects as if there were such an agent. Darwin was quite clear about this. The farmer,
as a conscious agent, desires to have fatter pigs, and so chooses the fattest of the pigs
he has to breed the next generation. Such artiﬁcial selection has an actual effect due
to genetics: the pigs become fatter and fatter through time, because the farmer wanted
them to be and acted to bring that about. We can say that later generations of pigs
were designed to be fat. What Darwin realized is that the very same selective mech-
anism could exist—somewhat less efﬁciently—without there being any conscious
agent with beliefs or desires involved. What does the work is just the selection: that
fatter pigs, because they are fatter, have a greater propensity to breed. In the farm,
the farmer and his desires is the mechanism that creates this situation but Nature, all
on its own and without any conscious aims, creates a form of Natural Selection with
the same effect. Hence we understand how living beings could evolve to appear as if
they had been designed for some purpose without there being any designer involved
at all. It was, of course, a brilliant insight.
Darwiniannaturalselectionneithercompeteswithnordisplacesphysicsasascien-
tiﬁc discipline providing understanding. Rather, both physics and evolution provide
different sorts on insight into the very same situation. It was this non-competitive—
and at times even symbiotic—existence of multiple sorts of explanation and under-
standing that Aristotle insisted upon, and that we can also see before him in Plato.

144
T. Maudlin
Insofar as one employs a psychological explanation to account for a physically-
described event—the cup of hemlock was raised against the gravitational potential
because Socrates wanted to drink it—one might regard this as allowing for a sort of
“top-down explanation”, with the special science (psychology) at the top and physics
at the bottom. But once again, this does not interfere with or displace the existence of
a purely physical account of everything that happens using purely physical concepts
and laws. The psychological states do not push the electrons and protons and neutrons
around (as Descartes imagined they would), rather the psychological states are real-
ized by constellations of protons and electrons and neutrons organized in a certain
way.
This account of “top down explanation” invokes a sort of hierarchy, in the sense
that physics “lies at the bottom”. But the special sciences—meteorology and geology
and psychology and computer science and so on—do not form a strict hierarchy in
the sense that each one must be placed either “above” or “below” every other. Rather,
each deploys its own proprietary set of concepts and principles that can create a form
of understanding. There may well be no such thing as “complete understanding” of
any event in the physical world, but if there is it would involve grasping it under the
conceptual categories of all the applicable special sciences in addition to physics.
Have only physical understanding—no matter how complete in its own terms—
would leave one completely ignorant of the most important aspects of the trial and
death of Socrates, to take an obvious example.
There is yet another, distinct, sense in which Aristotle and Plato insist on a sort
of “top-down” structure to explanation. This sense requires understanding “top” and
“bottom” in a different way: the top is a more generic description and the bottom a
more speciﬁc description. These descriptions need not belong to different sciences
or employ different sorts of descriptive resources. But the top and bottom are related
in this way: specifying the lower description logically ﬁxed the higher, but not the
other way around. The higher level omits detail that the lower lever includes.
Here is an example that Aristotle discusses (Posterior Analytics 74a22-75b4,
translation Jonathan Barnes):
Forthisreason,evenifyouprove ofeachtriangle,eitherbyone orbydifferent demonstrations
that each has two right angles--separately of the equilateral and the scalene and the isosceles--
you do not yet know of the triangle that it has two right angles, except in the sophistic fashion,
nor do you know it of triangle universally, not even if there is no other triangle apart from
these. For you do not know it of the triangle as triangle, nor even of every triangle (except
in respect of number; but not of every one in respect of sort, even if there is none of which
you do not know it.)
So when do you not know universally, and when do you know simpliciter? Well, clearly
you would know simpliciter if it were the same thing to be a triangle and to be equilateral
(either for each or for all). But if it is not the same but different, and it belongs as triangle,
you do not know. Does it belong as triangle or as isosceles? And when does it belong in
virtue of this as primitive? And of what does the demonstration hold universally? Clearly
whenever after abstraction it belongs primitively--e.g. two right angles will belong to bronze
isosceles triangle, but also when being bronze and being isosceles have been abstracted. But
not when ﬁgure or limit have been. But they are not the ﬁrst. Then what is ﬁrst? If triangle,
it is in virtue of this that it also belongs to the others, and it is of this that the demonstration
holds universally.

Where is the Top and What Might Go Down?
145
Let’s break this down.
Suppose you have before you an isosceles triangle, and also a perfectly valid proof
that all isosceles triangles have interior angles equal to two right angles, a proof that
makes use of the fact that the triangle is isosceles. Then, according to Aristotle, you
know that the triangle in front of you has interior angles equal to two right angles,
but you do not yet understand why. For the fact that it happens to be isosceles is
merely accidental and irrelevant to the fact to be understood, as accidental as if it
were also made of bronze. This is demonstrated by, for example, Euclid’s proof,
which merely requires that the ﬁgure be a triangle and leaves it unspeciﬁed whether
it is scalene, isosceles or equilateral. The fact that the proof goes through without
need of the more speciﬁc description shows that the speciﬁc distinctions between
triangles are explanatorily irrelevant. Merely being triangular accounts for the sum
of the interior angles, and the additional fact that it is an isosceles is irrelevant. So
long as one does not understand that, one does not really appreciate why the interior
angles are as they are.
Insimilarfashion,mostofthespeciﬁcphysicaldetailofSocrates’bodyandbrainis
irrelevant to understanding why he remains in the cell and does not run away. The laws
of physics require the complete speciﬁc to apply, but the principles of explanation
do not. Even remaining within the vocabulary of physics alone, and not bringing in
psychology, sometimes the explanation of a phenomenon requires conceptualizing it
at a more generic rather than more speciﬁc level. This is the foundation of statistical
mechanics and statistical explanation in general. Appealing to the ideal gas laws or
the laws of thermodynamics to explain the behavior of a box of gas allows one to
abstract away from most of the ﬁne physical detail and to comprehend (in a sense)
what is really going on. As a rough rule of thumb, understanding of a phenomenon
is achieved by rising to the highest level of generic description or of abstraction at
which the phenomenon can be accounted for.
This last suggestion is just a rule of thumb in that one can, in some instances, rise
to too high a level of abstraction. For example, triangles in a Euclidean space form
the class of polygons with interior angles equal to two right angles, and Euclid’s
proof shows why all Euclidean triangles have that property. But if we expand our
scope from Euclidean geometry to all geometries of constant curvature, there will be
some non-Euclidean polygons (quadrilaterals, pentagons, etc.) in negatively curved
spaces that also have interior angles equal to two right angles. Does the inability of
Euclid’s proof to deal with them show that his proof is still not at the correct level of
generality?
The answer to the last question is surely “no”, but the reason is subtle. Euclidean
triangles together with the various non-Euclidean polygons mentioned above really
are a geometrically miscellaneous class, and what shows this is that there is no
natural proof that encompasses them all. These matters are very nicely discussed in
Imre Lakatos’ classic Proofs and Refutations (Cambridge University Press, 1976),
but it would take us too far astray to go into details here. For present purposes, we
need only note that, as Aristotle already remarked, if we understand “causation” in
terms of “explanation” and the “top-to-bottom” direction to be “more-generic-to-
more-speciﬁc”, then there is indeed top-down causation in the sense of explanation

146
T. Maudlin
that must be provided at the more generic level of description. This accounts for
the appeal to more generic levels of description in explanation even within the same
science, such as statistical-mechanical or thermodynamics explanations offered in
physics, even where more detailed and speciﬁc physical descriptions of the system
exist.
2
“Top-Down” Explanation and Locality in Physics
There is a another sort of “top-down” causation and explanation that occurs in modern
physics, speciﬁcally in quantum theory, which is worthy of note. Unlike the examples
in the ﬁrst part of this essay, it does not involve distinguishing physics as a discipline
from other sciences: this is a distinction that occurs within physics itself. Further, it
came as a complete surprise. Einstein, for example, judged that the historical trend
of physics up until the twentieth century had been running in a direction opposite to
this causal structure, which is the source of much of his objection to quantum theory.
The easiest way into this issue is to forget for a moment about the distinction of “top”
and “bottom” and focus instead on the distinction between “local” and “global” (and
eventually between “local” and “non-local”).
Einstein exposited his view with characteristic clarity in a famous letter to Max
Born, which bears repeating here:
If one asks what, irrespective of quantum mechanics, is characteristic of the world of ideas
of physics, one is ﬁrst of all struck by the following: the concepts of physics relate to a real
outside world, that is, ideas are established relating to things such as bodies, ﬁelds, etc.,
which claim “real existence” that is independent of the perceiving subject—ideas which, on
the other hand, have been brought into as secure a relationship as possible with the sense
data. It is further characteristic of these physical objects that they are thought of as arranged
in a space-time continuum. An essential aspect of this arrangement of things in physics is
that they lay claim, at a certain time, to an existence independent of one another, provided
these objects “are situated in different parts of space.” ... This principle has been carried to
extremes in the ﬁeld theory by localizing the elementary objects on which it is based and
which exist independently of each other, as well as the elementary laws which have been
postulated for it, in the inﬁnitely small (four-dimensional) elements of space.1
What Einstein remarks is a historical tendency for physics to become more and more
local in both its ontology and its dynamical laws. He expected that trend to continue.
The basic idea behind locality here is easy to exposit. Take the four-dimensional
space–time manifold (or higher-dimensional if there are compactiﬁed spatial dimen-
sions) and cover it with a collection of small overlapping open patches of the sort
commonly referred to as the local maps in an atlas. It is not really essential that the
maps be open, but rather that they have two features collectively: (1) every point
in the manifold is covered by at least one map and (2) the maps overlap so that in
passing from one to another by a continuous motion there is non-zero length of the
1 Einstein quoted in Born (1971).

Where is the Top and What Might Go Down?
147
trajectory of the motion that lies in both. The second requirement allows statements
to be made about how the maps relate to each other in the overlap region.
We can call a physical fact “local” to a map if it can be speciﬁed in that map without
reference to anything at all outside the region covered by the map. In this sense, the
classical electromagnetic ﬁeld is clearly a local object: in any open region of space–
time, one can specify what the electromagnetic ﬁeld there is without reference to
what it is anywhere outside the region. If the atlas of maps covers the whole space in
the way required, and the electromagnetic ﬁeld is speciﬁed in each individual map,
then the global state of the electromagnetic ﬁeld is speciﬁed completely. That is what
it is for some ontology to count as “local”. Clearly, the disposition of classical point
particles in a space–time is local in this sense.
But Einstein notes something even more. Not only is the ontology of classical ﬁeld
theory local, its dynamics is as well. The explication of this is exactly parallel. Cover
all of space–time with an atlas of maps, where the individual maps can be as small as
you like. Describe the physics in each map without reference to any other. That ﬁxes
the local ontology. But also, in a classical ﬁeld theory whose dynamics is speciﬁed
by differential equations of the local ontology one can ask of each individual map—
irrespective of any other—whether the laws hold there. If the dynamics is local, then
the global satisfaction of the dynamics is nothing but the local satisfaction of it in
every map. That is a feature of Maxwellian electrodynamics, but not of Newtonian
gravity understood as an unmediated action-at-a-distance force.
Consider the latter case. Cavendish famously used a torsion pendulum to test
Newton’s gravitational theory. In that set-up, a dumbbell of lead weights was hung
from the ceiling by a thin wire which would then oscillate around an equilibrium
point. When Cavendish placed larger lead balls near the hanging ones, the gravita-
tional attraction caused the hanging weight to twist and the equilibrium point to shift.
Newton’s law of gravity predicted the angle of shift as a function of the weights of
the lead balls, their distances, and the torsion provided by the wire. But what Newton
famously did not do was provide any hypothesis about exactly how the gravitational
force was produced between the weights. Various different hypotheses are possible.
One hypothesis is that each weight produces a gravitational ﬁeld akin to the later
electromagnetic ﬁeld postulated by Maxwell. One would need some law about how
the value of that ﬁeld is related to the distribution of mass, but the main point for
present purposes is that such a ﬁeld would be a piece of local physical ontology. The
gravitational force felt by any mass would be determined by the local gravitational
ﬁeld. If each map described the local masses and also the local ﬁelds, one could
check whether the equations for them are satisﬁed in that map.
Contrast this with the hypothesis (which Newton positively rejected) that masses
act gravitationally on each other at a distance, with no intervening local ontology. In
that case one could not verify whether the laws of gravity hold by verifying it map
by map. For example, consider a map that covered just the torsion pendulum but not
the rest of the lab. In that map of the experiment, one could verify that at a particular
time the equilibrium point of the oscillation shifts, but there would be nothing that
accounts for the shift that shows up in the map since the introduction of a large lead
weights would occur outside it. The dynamics of the action-at-a-distance Newtonian

148
T. Maudlin
gravitational theory is non-local, while that of the gravitational-ﬁeld variant is local.
By Einstein’s lights, the local theory would be preferable and more in line with the
historical progression of physics.
In a local theory there is a clear sense in which the collection of local facts is
more “basic” or “foundational” than the global facts which follow from them. In an
obvious sense, the global facts are nothing “over and above” the collection of local
facts recorded in the maps. And this is a stronger sense of “nothing over and above”
than is secured by the standard philosophical notion of supervenience. Even in the
action-at-a-distance theory, the global facts—and the holding of the fundamental
dynamical law–supervenes on the collection of local facts. But there, the holding of
the dynamical law requires something quite different from its holding in each local
map separately. In the theory with local ontology and local dynamics, there is a very
strong sense in which the entire physics is local, and the global conditions are nothing
more than the “sum of the local parts”. In such a theory, all efﬁcient causation can
be accounted for locally—by the reaction of local items to other local items in their
immediate neighborhood. So if we characterize the global as the “top” and the local
as the “bottom”, there is no top-down efﬁcient causation in a local physical theory.
The local physics does what it does on its own, and the global states just come along
for the ride, as it were. This was Einstein’s vision, and it illustrates a version of
denying a form of top-down causation: the laws and the ontology exist locally at the
bottom, and the global behavior is an inevitable logical consequence of the local in
that there is no irreducibly non-local ontology or dynamics (nomology).
Quantum mechanics challenges all of that. Everyone is familiar with Einstein’s
complaint of “spooky action-at-a-distance” in the understanding of quantum theory
propounded by Bohn and the Copenhagen school. That complaint was founded on
the “collapse of the wavefunction” as a form of action-at-a-distance. Einstein thought
of the “collapse” as merely epistemic conditionalization, not anything physical at all,
but that required simultaneously rejecting the claim that the wavefunction provides
a complete physical description of a situation (otherwise there could be no new
information to conditionalize on). This dialectic underlies the EPR argument.
An even greater challenge to the “all is local” credo, as Schrödinger recognized,
lies in the structure of the wavefunction itself, quite apart from issues of collapse.
Entangled wavefunctions of spatially separated systems contain more information
than the logical sum of the local descriptions (density matrices) ascribed to the parts.
Unlike the electromagnetic ﬁeld, the wavefunction of one subsystem cannot even
be mathematically speciﬁed without reference to the other, distant system. So if one
takes the wavefunction to describe a piece of physical ontology, that ontology itself
cannot be local in Einstein’s sense. It cannot be speciﬁed local-map-by-local-map.
Einstein, of course, was aware of all this. That’s why he rejected that idea that the
wavefunction describes any individual ontological item at all: he preferred a statis-
tical understanding of it as a description of the statistical properties of a collective of
systems. If such an account could be carried out, then the mathematical non-locality
of the wavefunction would no longer be worrisome since the wavefunction would not
represent any piece of individual physical ontology of a system at all. One problem

Where is the Top and What Might Go Down?
149
with this statistical approach, though, is that the interference effects such as two-
slit interference require the wavefunction to describe something physically effective
at the level of individual experiments. In order to avoid particles ever appearing at
places when both slits are open where they sometimes appear when only one slit or
the other is open, there must be something physically sensitive to the state of both
slits on each individual run. That is the reason that Einstein’s statistical approach to
the wavefunction was destined to fail.
We can therefore now put together two ideas that seem unavoidable in quantum
theory. One is that the mathematical wavefunction used to describe a system repre-
sents an irreducibly global sort of item, which we may call the quantum state of an
individual system. When entangled, the quantum state of a system with spatially sepa-
ratedpartscannotberepresentedasmerelythesumofsomephysicalstatesoftheparts
taken separately. But the everyday world we are familiar with, as John Bell insisted,
is not composed entirely of such a global and non-localized item as the quantum
state. In addition, there must be what he called some local beables, which do inhabit
small localized regions of space–time. There are various hypotheses about what the
local beables might be, including particles, local ﬁelds, and even point-events called
“ﬂashes”. But whatever they are, the familiar shapes and spatial dispositions of table
and chairs and cats and laboratory apparatuses must be determined by the conﬁg-
uration of these local beables. The non-local quantum states only has observable
empirical effects via its inﬂuence on these local beables. That is, the quantum state
must, somehow or other, play a causal role in determining the locations of the local
beables. If it did not, then there could not be any empirical reason to postulate its
existence.
So: if we say that in a certain sense the global is at the “top” and the local at the
“bottom”, that puts the quantum state of a system at the top and the local beables
at the bottom. And what quantum theory suggests, contrary to anything in classical
physics, is that there is fundamental top-down causation: the irreducibly global and
non-spatially located quantum state really does “push the local beables around”,
much as Descartes postulated that the immaterial mind could deﬂect the trajectories
of material particles in the pineal gland. In this quite surprising sense, quantum
physics itself posits a sort of top-down causation that has no analog in classical
physics.
In sum, there are various ways to draw the distinction between a top and a bottom
or a higher and a lower sort of realm. And there are also various meanings that can be
given to a “cause”: it can be a sort of efﬁcient cause, or some other sort of explanatory
principle. In the course of this essay, I have argued for several distinct theses.
First, we can characterize physics as the “bottom” or “most fundamental” empir-
ical science since it provides the most precise and detailed description of an observ-
able item and because its scope is programmatically universal in way no other
science is. The various special sciences—botany, geology, psychology, etc.—then
stand “above” physics. I do not believe in any top-down efﬁcient causation in this
sense: botanical characteristics do not, per se, inﬂuence the physical trajectories of
things. But that does not mean that botany reduces, even in principle, to physics. The
special sciences can provide explanations and understanding of phenomena that

150
T. Maudlin
physics alone cannot. So when the “cause” is understood as an explanation, there
can be top-down causation in this setting.
Even within physics itself, and elsewhere, we can also characterize the more
speciﬁc description of an item as “below” or “more fundamental” than any generic
description that omits information about it. Here too, the generic is never an efﬁcient
cause of the speciﬁc, so there is no top-down causation in that sense. But just as with
the special sciences, there can be a sort of explanation or insight or understanding
of a fact that ﬂows from a more generic description rather than a more speciﬁc one.
In mathematics, this means looking for the most generic characterization of an item
from which a certain feature of interest can be proven. In statistical explanation, it
also involves seeking less detailed, more generic characterizations from which the
behavior of interest can be shown to necessarily or typically follow. So again, we
have no top-down efﬁcient causation, but we do have top-down explanation.
Finally, within fundamental physical ontology we can distinguish the fundamen-
tally local physical items “at the bottom” from the irreducibly global (if any) “at the
top”. This happens in quantum physics, but not in classical physics. And here we
do ﬁnd top-down efﬁcient causation: the quantum state is a cause of the motions of
the local beables in the most concrete and familiar sense of cause. Exactly how that
causation works differs between different “interpretations” of quantum theory, but
that there is some such inﬂuence of the quantum state is held in common by all.
And somewhere mixed up in all of this is the place and role of consciousness in
the physical world. But how exactly that ﬁts in is, at least for the moment, beyond
our ken.
Reference
Born, M. (1971) The Born-Einstein Letters (translated by I. Born, pp. 170−171). Walker.

Multiplicity, Logical Openness,
Incompleteness, and Quasi-ness
as Peculiar Non-reductionist Properties
of Complexity
Gianfranco Minati
In memory of Eliano Pessa
1
Introduction
The purpose of this contribution is to better specify the proﬁle of complexity and
conceptual approaches to be considered for dealing with irreducible, analytically
non-zippable, and theoretical incompleteness and quasi-ness of processes of emer-
gence in complex systems. The dominant theme to have in mind is having to deal
with complex systems requiring approaches involving issues such as logical open-
ness, incompleteness, and quasi-ness. Neglecting or incorrectly approximating these
aspects is a new form of reductionism.
In Sect. 2 we elaborate the concept of Multiple Systems, whose components
interact in multiple ways and play multiple interchangeable roles, such as in
ecosystems.
In Sect. 3 we consider logical openness contrasted with logical closedness, when
modeling may be only partial and the strategy of being able to completely repre-
sent complex phenomena is ineffective rather than just wrong. This is because of the
multiplicitiesofcomplexsystemsacquiringcoherentsequencesofnewpropertiesina
phase-transition-like manner. The properties characterizing complexity and its emer-
gent nature have different aspects, not precisely separable, but indeed often occur-
ring simultaneously, with or without regularity. Precise, well-deﬁned natures are in
reality often simpliﬁcations useful for making complex processes and phenomena
more tractable and for suitably approximating them.
In Sect. 4 we introduce the conceptual framework of theoretical incompleteness
related to equivalences, processes of losing and recovering coherence in Multiple
G. Minati (B)
Italian Systems Society, 20161 Milan, Italy
e-mail: gianfranco.minati@AIRS.it
URL: http://www.gianfrancominati.net/
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
S. Wuppuluri and I. Stewart (eds.), From Electrons to Elephants and Elections,
The Frontiers Collection, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-92192-7_10
151

152
G. Minati
Systems of complex phenomena such as collective behaviors. We discuss the crucial
role of weak forces in breaking equivalences, setting tentative initial conditions and
having long-range effects such as in deterministic chaos. Theoretical incomplete-
ness, already considered in physics, for instance, with uncertainty principles, and in
mathematics, states the multiplicity of non-equivalences in representing phenomena.
Theoretical incompleteness is a property of multiple equivalences of becoming, of
its analytically intractable multiplicity.
In Sect. 5 we consider approaches introduced in the literature, the Dynamic Usage
of Models (DYSAM) and meta-structures suitable for dealing with the logical open-
ness, incompleteness and multiplicity of complexity. Examples of possible applica-
tionsaremultiple,non-equivalentrepresentationsandmodels,clusters,infra-clusters,
statistical properties, and ergodicity.
In Sect. 6 we outline the issue of quasi-ness. Signiﬁcant aspects of quasi-ness
differentiate it from incompleteness. On the one hand, incompleteness is intended
as inexhaustible, incomplete multiplicity, while quasi-ness is intended to relate to
levels of instabilities, irregular alternations of collapse and recovery, when a system
is not always a system, not always the same system, and not only a system.
In Sect. 7 we discuss how considering issues of complexity such as logical open-
ness, incompleteness and quasi-ness reveals new forms of reductionism when such
aspects are neglected or approximated in a non-scientiﬁc attitude.
In Sect. 8 we propose possible further research dealing with regimes of validity
of sub-symbolic properties and processes of transience within complex systems.
We conclude by stressing how the new form of reductionism consisting in
neglecting the properties of complexity considered here often occurs by using
non-complex systemic concepts and properties.
2
Emergent and Non-emergent Multiple Systems
Multiple Systems are fundamentally considered as given by the multiple roles of
their constituting interacting components, such as in the case of multiple interactions
(Minati & Pessa, 2018, pp. 42–45; pp. 166–170). A scheme is presented in Fig. 1; a
classic example is that of ecosystems.
The situation we are considering here is when, for instance, there is:
• interchangeability among components, which take on the same roles at different
times and different roles at the same time, e.g., ergodic behavior. It is matter
of equivalences reducing degrees of freedom and allowing stability in collective
behaviors (see Sect. 2.3);
• multiple mediated ﬂows of information with no direct, linear conveyance of infor-
mation when non-spatially close neighbor nodes in networks and ‘boids’ in collec-
tive behaviors have a suitable topological distance (Ballarini et al., 2008) and
in remote synchronization (Gambuzza et al., 2013; Minati, 2015). In collective
animal behaviors

Multiplicity, Logical Openness, Incompleteness, and Quasi-ness …
153
Fig. 1 Multiple System with simple examples of multiple interactions and multiple roles of
elements
Correlation is the expression of an indirect information transfer mediated by the direct inter-
action between the individuals: Two animals that are outside their range of direct interaction
(be it visual, acoustic, hydrodynamic, or any other) may still be correlated if information is
transferred from one to another through the intermediate interacting animals (Cavagna et al.,
2010).

154
G. Minati
• multiple roles, e.g., in networks the same node interconnects in multiple ways
with other nodes.
The consideration of Multiple Systems corresponds to an attitude of general
respect, that is, taking account of the weak micro-dynamics usually supposed irrel-
evant and ignored as overwhelmed by predominant ones establishing macroscopic
behavior, but signiﬁcant and decisive for emergent behaviors of collective systems.
The macroscopic behavior is erroneously supposed to suitably approximate the sum
of micro-dynamics that are actually non-summable because of their different natures.
Such multiple micro-dynamics are, rather, the source, as we will see below, of
incompleteness, quasi-ness, ﬂuctuations, crucial breaking of equivalences, macro-
scopic irreducibility, continuous environmental trade-offs, microscopic changes of
minimal vector components contextually phenomenologically available and crucial
for metastable or equivalent states.
Examples of non-emergent Multiple Systems include networks where the same
node interconnects in multiple ways with other nodes; the cooperative and multiple
roles of the values of sensors constituting, at one and the same time, safety and
regulatory systems; the multiple reuse of proﬁling data; programs and nodes of the
internet; and values in electrical networks simultaneously establishing control and
regulatory systems.
Such multiplicity allows one to indirectly inﬂuence a system through easier
inﬂuence on one or more elements shared with another system, or on one
or more systems (sub-communities) of the Multiple System under considera-
tion, such as in social Multiple Systems, e.g., shared members simultaneously
belonging to families, corporations, workplaces, passengers on means of trans-
port, customers in supermarkets, and in considerations of advertising, political
inﬂuencing, and information.
2.1
Emergence and Multiple Systems
In the literature there are distinctions among processes of self-organization and
emergence when considering, for instance, how in self-organization the sequence
of new properties (‘new’ compared to those possessed by the interacting compo-
nents) acquired in a phase-transition-like manner (Brovchenko & Oleinikova, 2008;
Brovchenko et al., 2005) has some regularities, repetitiveness, and synchronizations,
e.g., whirlpools, while in emergence the sequence of new properties acquired in a
phase-transition-like manner (Paperin et al., 2011) is not regular, not repetitive, but
coherent, e.g., ﬂocks and swarms (Minati & Pessa, 2018, pp. 65–86; pp. 255–260;
Minati, 2019a). In this view regularities and repetitiveness of self-organization are
particular cases of the coherence of emergence (Minati, 2016a).
Coherence may be understood as diffused correlation, such as long-range, scale-
free correlation. As is well known in probability and statistics, the concept of corre-
lation is very similar to that of covariance measuring levels of dependency between

Multiplicity, Logical Openness, Incompleteness, and Quasi-ness …
155
independent variables. However, it is difﬁcult to compare covariances among data
sets having different scales, when, for instance, a value representing a strong relation-
ship for one data set might represent a very weak one in another. It is then possible
to normalize the covariance as the product of the standard deviations of the vari-
ables and create a dimensionless quantity. In this way correlation can be considered
the scaled version, or standardized form of covariance. Through correlation coefﬁ-
cients, it is possible to measure the similarity between the variation of two entities,
e.g., signals or waves. Synchronization may be regarded as a particular case of corre-
lation, as in physics relating to oscillatory phenomena, such as individual oscillators
being in phase. Quasi-coherence considers, for instance, different variable ranges
of validity within the population of interacting elements under study, oscillations
between coherence and non-coherence, and the occurrence of different coherences
(see Sect. 6).
The phenomenological becoming of processes of emergence requires multiplicity
and, as wewill seebelow, it is not onlytheoretically, i.e., intrinsicallyandunavoidably
incomplete, but also requires incompleteness in order to take place (see Sect. 4.4).
This is related to how emergence emerges (Minati, 2019a) once the process has started
in non-equivalent structural multiplicities. However, the consideration of properties
of emergent phenomena implicitly ignores properties of their generative phenomena.
This is the case of the geometry of a spider’s web, which does not represent the
phenomenological process, the generative mechanisms of web building by the spider,
but a detectable resulting property.
Similarly, long-range correlations, polarization, power laws, fractality and more
are detectable properties, rather than as-yet not understood generative phenomeno-
logical processes, for instance, “Whatever the origin of the scale-free behavior is …
the fact that the correlation is almost not decaying with the distance, is by far the most
surprising and exotic feature of bird ﬂocks. How starlings achieve such a strong corre-
lation remains a mystery to us,” (Cavagna et al., 2010). Furthermore, other detectable
rather than generative properties, such as self-similarity and synchronization, perva-
sively occur in living systems, whether vegetal, e.g., fractals in broccoli and leaves,
or in animals, e.g., fractals in snail and clam shells.
2.2
Emergent Multiple Systems
The concept of Multiple System particularly applies to emergent complex systems
established by collective behaviors, or collective systems.
The dynamics of emergent collective systems refers to the complexity of
the systems continually transforming themselves however coherently or quasi-
coherently.
As examples we may consider (Vicsek & Zafeiris, 2012):
• collective systems emergent from the collective motion of living systems provided
with signiﬁcantly complex cognitive systems, including anthills, ﬂocks, herds,

156
G. Minati
schools, swarms, and trafﬁc. In these cases, the behavioral interactions take place
through cognitive processing.
• collectivesystemsemergentfromthecollectivemotionoflivingsystemssupposed
without cognitive systems, including amoeba, bacterial colonies, cells, macro-
molecules, and composing protein chains. Examples of collective systems emer-
gent from the collective motion of non-living systems include nano-swimmers
(magnetic nano-propellers), nematic ﬂuids (ﬂuids with internal orientational order
of the building blocks, such as liquid crystals), networks, signal trafﬁc, rods
on vibrating surfaces, and interacting communities of simple stimulus-reaction
robots.
• collective artiﬁcial systems emergent from the collective interactions of various
natures (cognitive and non-cognitive) other than physical motion, including
human communities such as companies, hospitals, inhabited housing struc-
tures and schools, communities of mobile phone networks, industrial districts,
markets, cities, networks like the internet, and vehicle queues. Interaction is
given by systems of cognitive processing and physical reactions, such as in
energy exchanges. We discussed the case for Collective Beings in (Minati &
Pessa, 2006, pp. 97–134), understood as constituted by the same elements inter-
acting in different ways to accommodate the acquisition of various non-equivalent
properties and establishing Multiple Systems.
A generic conceptual example of a Multiple System in Fig. 1 relates to multiple
roles taking place when considering multiple, interrelated, almost networked, bio-
chemical and physical properties of composing elements, as in ecosystems.
2.3
Variables to Model Emergent Multiple Systems
Among a large variety of possibilities, the variables considered here are intended to
have an intrinsic collective nature suitable for and compatible with multiplicities of
soft values possibly related to weak forces (see Sect. 4.3).
The complexity we have in mind here pertains to processes of emergence having
non necessary, large numbers of interacting components facilitating and making
evident collective phenomena.
The variables, contextually deﬁned for ongoing processes, are intended to capture
and represent multiplicities related to, for instance:
• Interchangeability due to commensurability, compatibilities, equivalences, and
similarities;
• Multiple roles of the elements when different and multiple regimes of interac-
tion apply. Furthermore, multiple roles of elements allow for variations while
belonging to one system and for having effects belonging to another one, allowing
thus the cross-conveying of partial behavioral properties, as in collective behaviors
(see above).

Multiplicity, Logical Openness, Incompleteness, and Quasi-ness …
157
• Multiple roles due to unintentional or phenomenologically different, superim-
posed roles, such as for elements found to play the same role with different
meaning in simultaneously belonging, for instance, to multiple networks where
the same nodes may belong to different networks simultaneously (Nicosia et al.,
2013), and to different clusters (see Sect. 5.2).
Migration of elements in Multiple Systems from one class to another one and simultaneously
belonging to more than one is not active, but a matter of belonging, i.e. interchangeability
of roles intended as belonging to classes … Interchangeability of roles within collective
behaviours can be considered represented by its ergodicity. This is, of course, an idealistic
simpliﬁed situation. We should, rather, consider different more realistic situations. We may
consider cases of multiple ergodicity related to the ergodicity of the values adopted by
different state variables, e.g. speed, direction and altitude, and by different clusters … The
degree of ergodicity is given by:
Eϕ = 1/[1 + (Xϕ% −Yϕ%)2]
where we may consider Yϕ% as the average percentage of time spent by a single element in
state S and Xϕ% as the average percentage of elements lying in the same state over a given
observational time and considering a system composed by ﬁnite, constant over time number
of elements. The state shows ergodicity when Xϕ% = Yϕ% and the degree Eϕ adopts its
maximum value of 1 (Minati & Pessa, 2018, p. 162, see Section 4.5.1).
In the following Sects. 3, 4, 5, and 6 we introduce concepts and approaches for
dealing with the complexity of Multiple Systems.
3
Logical Openness
A ﬁrst conceptual approach is logical openness, introduced as corresponding to
the thermodynamic and the usual system openness (Minati et al., 1996, 1998) and
elaborated in publications such as Minati (2016a) and Minati and Pessa (2018).
The concept of logical openness takes from thermodynamic openness the admis-
sibility of a conceptual ﬂux of non-equivalent approaches to model a phenomenon.
The logical openness relates to the admissibility of multiple non-equivalent repre-
sentations dealing with the multiplicity of complex systems, rather than using the
approach of looking for the ﬁnal, best, deﬁnitive one (the true one in the reductionist
view).
The subject is introduced here from the opposite concept of logical closedness.
3.1
Logical Closedness
Thermodynamically closed systems are intended as being isolated, that is, without
exchange of either matter or energy with the other systems of the environment. Their
evolutionary paths are internally stated and they can reach their ﬁnal state solely

158
G. Minati
as determined by the initial conditions. It is possible to consider the concept of
logically closed modeling as corresponding to the thermodynamically closed systems
the evolution of which it is suitable to describe.
More precisely, logically closed modeling is deﬁned as having available:
1.
a complete, formal description of the relations between the state variables of
the system;
2.
a complete, analytically describable representation of the interactions between
the system and its environment.
Knowledge of these two points allows deduction of all possible states which the
system can subsequently assume. It is a clockwork, Laplacian world, understood
as functioning rather than emergent. It evokes the concept of computability when a
complete computational procedure, i.e., an algorithm, is available, or more generally,
when a procedure is intended to exhaust the representation of a process.
3.2
Logical Openness
Logical openness takes place in the violation of the above points. Logical openness
(Minati et al., 1998; Minati & Pessa, 2006, pp. 111–112; 2018, pp. 47–51) can
be considered as the inﬁnite or non-depleting number of degrees of freedom for
the system, including the environment (in principle independent), thus making the
system incomplete.
This is the case in complex systems the degrees of freedom (system variables) of
which are not only imprecise and variable in number, but continuously acquired. As
we shall see below (see Sect. 4.1) considering DYSAM, complex systems acquire
n-sequences of new, non-equivalent properties to be dealt with by adopting suit-
able corresponding models and their combinations. The corresponding n-levels of
representation and n-levels of modeling are characterized by:
• their non-equivalence;
• the possibility of adopting a strategy of moving between levels, allowing
simultaneous usage of more than one level.
The incompleteness of logical openness is given by usage of a variable number
of non-equivalent models and by the indeﬁniteness of n due to the abductive
and constructivist (see Sect. 4.3) generation of representations and models by the
observer.
More generally, the concept of logical openness is related to the theory of cognitive
operators (Diettrich, 2001) and uncertainty principles (Minati & Pessa, 2006, pp. 55–
64). This introduces the subject of incompleteness, considered later (see Sect. 4).
Regarding the theory of cognitive operators, we mention the classic situation of the
behavior of a complex system whose subsystems are an observed system, a kind
of environment, and an observing system, for instance the researcher. The observed
system initially inputs its state ϕ to the observing system, perturbing, in turn, the

Multiplicity, Logical Openness, Incompleteness, and Quasi-ness …
159
Fig. 2 Observed and
observing systems
observed system, due to the process or act of observation itself. This perturbation
can be described as the action of an operator R which acts on ϕ and gives rise to a
new state of the observed system Rϕ (see Fig. 2).
The input to the observing system will no longer be ϕ but R ϕ. After another
observation the input will be RR ϕ. After n-observations, we will have Rn ϕ and the
observer will have no possibility of detecting stable feature of their environment. An
interesting case occurs when we have ﬁxed environmental states (ﬁxed points) ϕ* for
which Rϕ* = ϕ* despite the perturbations induced by the observer; then detecting
the environment is in the invariant state ϕ*.
With respect to uncertainty principles, we note how the above arguments gener-
alize experimental cases such as Heisenberg’s well-known uncertainty principle1
and that in signal analysis. The latter can be expressed as ω t ≥1/2, where ω
is the so-called spectral width or the signal or uncertainty in the frequency of its
components, whereas t is the so-called temporal width or the uncertainty in the
time location of its components (Minati & Pessa, 2006, pp. 55–64).
We may consider logical closedness versus logical openness in relation to what
Feynman considered as ‘Greek’ versus ‘Babylonian’ mathematics. The ‘Greek’
approach to mathematics is characterized by the tendency to arrange theories on
an axiomatic basis, whereas Feynman writes.
What I have called the Babylonian idea is to say, “I happen to know this, and I happen to
know that, and maybe I know that; and I work everything out from there. Tomorrow I may
forget that this is true, but remember that something else is true, so I can reconstruct it all
again. I am never quite sure of where I am supposed to begin or where I am supposed to end.
I just remember enough all the time so that as the memory fades and some of the pieces fall
out I can put the thing back together again every day.” (Feynman, 1967, p. 45)
and
In physics we need the Babylonian method, and not the Euclidian or Greek method. (Ibid.,
p. 47)
1 The uncertainty associated with the location of a particle, denoted by x, and associated with its
momentum, denoted by p, are connected by the Heisenberg relationship x p ≥h/4π, where h
is Planck’s constant.

160
G. Minati
4
The Concept of Theoretical Incompleteness
ThissubjectiselaboratedinpublicationssuchasLongo(2011,2019),Minati(2016a),
Minati and Pessa (2018), and Minati et al. (2019).
4.1
Compatibilities, Similarities, Analogies,
Commensurability, and Equivalences
The incompleteness we are outlining here is not due to lack of completeness which
is temporary and recoverable, but intrinsic non-completability that, if not occur-
ring, would at least partially destroy intrinsically incomplete phenomena of self-
organizationandemergenceconstitutingcomplexsystems.Forinstance,hypothetical
complete, analytical representations of emergence, zippable (Minati & Licata, 2013)
inanalyticalequations,wouldbeincompatibleinsofarastheywouldallowregulation,
control and predictability, all properties contradictory to processes of emergence.
Hypothetical complete, analytical representations may be compatible with processes
of multiple synchronizations of self-organization, while being incompatible with the
logical openness of processes of emergence.
Reductionist representations and approaches neglecting such peculiarities and
used to inﬂuence (see the operator ‘R’ in Sect. 3.2) phenomena of emergence are
not only ineffective, but increasingly deprive them of their unpredictable, non-
equivalent multiplicity, between which levels of coherence are continuously dynam-
ically established, interrupted and restored in partial and nonhomogeneous ways.
Inﬂuences based on completeness have the similar invasive, prescriptive nature of
strong forces, while weak forces (see Sect. 4.3) play the role of suggestions to be elab-
orated by the complex system (for instance, deciding among equivalences), rather
than being substitutive, context-less, strong impositions. Incompleteness leaves the
system the possibility to decide among equivalences, eventually acquiring coher-
ence, as in cases of emergence. An interesting case is that of surgery, obviously
invasive but inevitably incomplete, leaving the operated body the role of elaborating
the intervention, adapting or even rejecting it.
We are dealing, according to the levels of complexity of the cases studied, with
ecosystems of interactions, i.e., variably applying, having changing parametrical
values and different temporal durations, partially superimposed, combining
among themselves, and able to mutate.
We may consider, within such conceptual ecosystems, categories of incomplete-
ness suitable to be considered as aggregated and establishing multiple incomplete
dynamics. Such categories may be understood as items aggregated according to
different aspects of incompleteness such as:
• Compatibility, such as ability to share the same environmental conditions, perform
the same or similar roles, have signiﬁcant levels of interchangeability;

Multiplicity, Logical Openness, Incompleteness, and Quasi-ness …
161
• Similarity, such as having equivalences in properties of a different nature, e.g.,
geometrical, material, and behavioral;
• Analogies, the process of making which is not exactly a logical inference, but
a sort of incomplete induction reduced to only some aspects or variables. For
instance, consider the case in which an entity A has all the attributes an. B has
some of the attributes an, for instance not the attributes {ak}, where 1 ≤k < C <
n. C is considered as the level of analogy. However, two analogous entities may
not be equivalent, as in a ﬂock where two birds may be analogues, e.g., in age,
amount of food ingested, dimensions, and weight, but not equivalent on account
of having different speeds, directions and topological positions, e.g., at the center
or at the border;
• Equivalences, when entities or processes not necessarily analogous play similar,
interchangeable roles. Context-dependent equivalence does not require nor imply
analogy, for instance two non-analogous ‘boids’ may play equivalent topological
roles;
• Commensurability, given by measurability or comparability by a common
standard;
• Clustering within the same ranges of values (Aggarwal & Reddy, 2013; Boulis &
Ostendorf, 2004; Minati & Pessa, 2018, pp. 112–114).
The intrinsic incompleteness of such aggregates is given by their very high
dependence on the levels of scale, representation considered and thresholds.
A very well-known approach to dealing with incompleteness in several disci-
plinary ﬁelds, such as bioinformatics, engineering and information theory, is based
on fuzzy sets, fuzzy logic and fuzzy systems. Fuzzy sets are deﬁned as sets whose
elements have membership degrees within the continuous interval between 0 and
1 rather than, as in classical set theory, only 0 or 1. The approach is suitable
for dealing with problems in which information is incomplete or imprecise. In
those cases, however, imprecision relates to the level of membership, the member-
ship function characterizing the fuzzy set. Conversely, the imprecision we are
considering here, incompleteness, pertains to the sets themselves dynamically
composed of same elements, e.g., clusters and related clustering approaches, as
for Multiple Systems, and not only membership functions characterizing the
level of fuzziness.
4.2
The Concept of Theoretical Incompleteness
We distinguish the theoretical aspect of incompleteness from its phenomenolog-
ical ones because in the ﬁrst case, incompleteness is intended as a property, not
necessarily negative and supposed to be recovered into completeness, contrary to
the second case. Cases of theoretical incompleteness include the uncertainty princi-
ples in physics mentioned in Sect. 3.2; the incompleteness theorems introduced by
Gödel; the undecidability of cases where computable algorithms are not available;

162
G. Minati
processes represented by non-analytic models based, for instance, on neural networks
and cellular automata, and natural computing (Brabazon et al., 2015; Mac Lennan,
2004); processes not reducible to procedures, such as workplace safety (Bonometti,
2012).
Incompleteness is considered here as having the non-completeness of represen-
tations for emergence as its necessary, if not sufﬁcient, attribute, manifesting incom-
patibility between phenomena of emergence and their complete representations,
as mentioned above. As we will see, the problem is how to non-contradictorily,
non-destructively represent such incompleteness (for instance with DYSAM and
meta-structures, see Sects. 5.1 and 5.2).
Furthermore, in systems science the topic of incompleteness may be considered
in relation to the multiplicities, however coherent (Mikhailov & Calenbuhr, 2002),
of Multiple Systems regarded with respect to the multiple roles of their constituting
interacting components (Minati & Pessa, 2018, pp. 42–45; pp. 166–170) and inter-
changeabilities, such as ergodic, as stated above. In addition, the various ways of
incompleteness of Multiple Systems are prototypes of the quasi-systems introduced
in Sect. 6.
Focusing on the incompleteness of self-organization and emergence, we stress
that processes of emergence should be considered as a matter of incompletely,
e.g., analytically partially unruled, processes that, if for some reason they become
completely ruled, degenerate, losing their unpredictability and the dynamics among
levels of coherence that are actually continuously dynamically established, inter-
rupted and restored in partial and inhomogeneous ways. In short, a process of emer-
gence cannot be completely represented by a procedure, an algorithm, when any
randomization may simulate, but does not model or theoretically represent, struc-
tural unpredictability of emergence (Minati, 2016a; Minati & Pessa, 2018, pp. 100–
105). In Sect. 4.4. we will consider incompleteness as necessary condition for radical
emergence.
4.3
More on Incompleteness and Weak Forces
We consider here the incompatibility of complexity with reductionist, mecha-
nist understandings and approaches assumed complete and suitable for deciding,
prescribing, and imposing changes upon the system under consideration. Apart from
some admissible, elementary but still necessary interventions supposed to be repar-
ative, this approach to complex systems contains destructive attitudes. It is a matter,
instead, of introducing suitably changed constraints as inputs to be elaborated by
the system, for instance through adaptation.
We need representations suitably open to interface with complex systems,
allowing for the induction or proposal of changes to be subsequently elaborated
by the system supposed to carry out the induced changes. The interventions are not
supposed to reductively replace behavioral aspects of the system, but to be inputs
elaborated by the system itself.

Multiplicity, Logical Openness, Incompleteness, and Quasi-ness …
163
Thisattitudehasadeepconstructivismsimilartoaskingquestions,asexperiments,
of Nature. Nature is intended to respond by making experiments happen. However,
there are no answers if there are no questions. On the other hand, events may be
turned into answers if we invent the appropriate questions. Interfacing with complex
systems derives effectiveness from a non-imposing, respectful approach that lets
complexity work. The understanding of complexity assumed here is suitable for
interfacing and not for forcing, imposing or replacing.
A very interesting case is given by the effectiveness of weak forces capable of
breaking equivalences, equilibria, starting collapses, and setting initial conditions
(Minati, 2016b). As in nuclear physics the effective range of the weak force is limited
to subatomic distances, we characterize forces here as ‘weak’ when they have local
ranges of inﬂuence, that is, involving very few adjacent composing elements—low
intensity, for instance, less than a suitable low percentage of all forces involved at the
moment—and consequently a range of inﬂuence and intensity insufﬁcient to force
changes in the behavior or properties of the composing elements, of the entire system,
and in the properties of the ongoing interactions.
Inthecaseofcollectivebehaviors,itisaquestionofsubstitutingthehighfrequency
of weak, irregular, i.e., signiﬁcantly unpredictable, actions for impossible or unsuit-
able, strong, single actions, with the advantage, moreover, of ﬂexibility to adapt and,
for instance, implement a defensive collective strategy, as in the case of swarms
or low but persistent dosages of drugs. Furthermore, low percentages of scalar
components of vector forces and side effects can be considered as weak forces.
Another case occurs when weak forces are decisive in deterministic chaos. In addi-
tion, simpliﬁed collective, partial, tentative weak interactions may be assumed at ﬁrst
to be incomplete, tentative initial conditions of a self-establishing, quasi-convergent
process. Examples include spontaneous synchronizations, as in applause, objects on
vibrating surfaces, or ﬁreﬂies, until a speciﬁc synchronization becomes predominant
and iterated.
The following topics have been introduced and elaborated in Minati and Pessa
(2018) and pertain to the richness of the incompleteness of matter (Longo, 2019),
understandable as the intelligence of matter (Minati, 2019b):
• Between levels of emergence;
• Levels of quasi-ness;
• Multiple emergence;
• Non-invasiveness;
• Non-prescribable actions;
• Pre-properties;
• Quasi-properties;
• Quasi-systems;
• Recurrence of properties at different levels;
• Theoretical systemics and quantum ﬁeld theory (Blasone et al., 2011).
These are intended as some key topics suitable for soft representations of
complexity and to allow approaches enabling one, for instance, to:

164
G. Minati
• Act on collective emergent phenomena with the purpose of changing, inducing,
regulating, defusing, or maintaining acquired properties;
• Diffuse, propagate, or delimit the propagation of emergent phenomena;
• Induce the emergence of collective behaviors in populations of elements collec-
tively, but not coherently interacting, e. g., Brownian motion;
• Merge different collective emergent phenomena;
• Recognize a phenomenon as emergent.
4.4
Incompleteness as Necessary Condition for Radical
Emergence
Logical openness is the violation of logical closedness, as in the use of cogni-
tive operators unavoidably multiple and related to uncertainty principles. This may
sound in some sense like a limitation, causing us to regret not being able to have
closed, well-deﬁned, stable and deﬁnitive models, as if scientiﬁc research should
have indiscriminately and in every case the goal of logical closure.
As introduced above (see Sects. 4.2 and 4.3), theoretical incompleteness is based
on uncertainty principles, the dual corpuscular-undulatory aspect of matter, the multi-
plicity of complexity when speciﬁc disciplinary approaches and models, possibly
coherent, are not also comprehensive due to structural dynamics (change and multi-
plicity of variable structures among elements, see Sect. 5.1); and on incompati-
bility in phenomena of emergence between radical emergence and their complete
representations.
However, the crucial interest in theoretical incompleteness lies in the fact that the
phenomenological becoming of processes of radical emergence is not only theoret-
ically, i.e., intrinsically and unavoidably, incomplete but also requires incomplete-
ness to take place. Incompleteness is important to ﬁgure out how emergence emerges
(Minati, 2019a).
The concept of radical emergence considers the occurrence of unique multiple
coherences, their changing and crossing, e.g., protein folding, acquisition of super-
conductivity, and superﬂuidity. The incompleteness we have in mind in this contri-
bution relates to radical emergence established by quasi-coherence (see Sect. 6)
among multiple, changing, possibly superimposed, locally modeled processes of
emergence and levels of emergence (Minati & Pessa, 2018, pp. 253–281). We refer
to populations, domains or local, partially properly modeled processes of emergence
establishing ecosystems of domains of validity.
There are properly modeled processes of emergence, for instance, through chaotic
dynamics, power laws, long-range correlations, network properties and suitable
constraints where incompleteness relates to equivalent acquirable values (when one
state is as good as another one). In simulations it is a matter of inserting random
perturbation, avoiding repeatability.
Here, by contrast, we consider systems of regimes of validity, such as the
chaotic, ergodic, correlational, networking, polarization, power laws, and scale

Multiplicity, Logical Openness, Incompleteness, and Quasi-ness …
165
invariance. Systems of regimes of validity are intended as dynamic zones where,
in a simplistic case, a single regime of validity applies, or where multiple regimes
of validity, for instance, superimpose, combine, and alternate, allowing coherence in
the corresponding harnessed system of interacting components.
The processes of acquisition of emergent properties are not intended as given,
as the result of single, applied rules, but rather of their ongoing multiple applica-
tions, similarly to emergent computation, emerging as an acquired ongoing property
rather than as computational result of analytical formulae. In the latter case it is
matter of computational properties of computations in progress, such as for artiﬁcial
neural networks and cellular automata, rather than formal properties of the represen-
tative equations, as for classical mathematics and physics (Licata & Minati, 2016).
Correspondingly, in mathematics, the end of the so-called Bourbaki program (1935–
1998), relying on abstract deﬁnitions and axioms and ﬁnalized to a completely self-
contained treatment of the core areas of modern mathematics, was a manifestation
of the decreasing effectiveness of classical formalist mathematics.
It is a matter of considering the autonomy of computational approaches and
devices sufﬁcient to deal with the structural autonomy of complex systems continu-
ously acquiring properties. The autonomy of computational approaches and devices
should not only be suitable for phenomenological complexity, as in physics and
chemistry, but also respectful of and appropriate for social, medical, environmental,
and economic problems where classical approaches are ineffective, run the risk of
‘breaking the toy’, and only consider how to repeat themselves apart from parametric
variations.
Dealing with ecosystems of properties acquired by the ongoing usage (rather
than sole application) of rules demands representations open to interfacing (Longo,
2011, 2019) with complex systems, allowing one to investigate their nature and to
induce or propose changes to be subsequently elaborated by the system supposed
to carry them out. This attitude has a deep constructivist nature when it is not a
matter of ideologically choosing to be constructivist or objectivist, but of using both
approaches with a learning strategy in mind (see Sect. 5).
5
Approaches: DYSAM and Meta-Structures
Thissectionoutlinestwoapproachesintroducedintheliterature,namelytheDynamic
Usage of Models (DYSAM) as conceptual, methodological framework, and the
search for mesoscopic properties, cluster properties, through cluster analysis in
collectively behaving populations of interacting entities, both usable for modeling
complex systems. The latter approach has been applied also to Big Data.
These may be related to other approaches, such as
• Fuzzy modeling, as a mathematical approach suitable for representing vague-
ness and imprecise information rather than multiple non-equivalent properties
(Miyamoto et al., 2008);

166
G. Minati
• Sloppiness of the models, i.e., models with many, generally more than ﬁve, param-
eters of ﬁt, a matter of models “poorly constrained” when parameters are either
unknown or signiﬁcantly uncertain (Transtrum et al., 2015);
• Converting one problem into another having acceptable levels of equivalence, but
more easily approachable, such as converting military problems into economic
ones, medical problems into chemically treatable unbalances, geometric problems
into more tractable algebraic ones.
5.1
The Dynamic Usage of Models (DYSAM)
After its introduction (Minati, 2001; Minati and Brahms, 2002) the concept, based
on established approaches in the literature such as ensemble learning (Ovelg¨onne &
Geyer-Schulz, 2013) and evolutionary game theory, was further elaborated in Minati
and Pessa (2006, pp. 64–75).
Dynamic modeling is usually understood to consist of temporal representation
through models having time in their equations. A different case is when the dynamics
instead relate to methods and strategies for using more models over time. In simple
cases, it is a matter of empirical approaches, leaving aside the search for the best, most
effective model, just groping, “try and try again” alternatives depending on available
resources, e.g., data and energy, or environmental situations; a more suitable case
relates to learning strategies.
DYSAM relates to multiple model Multiple Systems, where such multiple
modelinginheritstheincompletenessofsinglemodelingandtheinterchangeabilityof
roles of constituent elements. The case of multiple modeling we are considering here
relates to the n-levels of logical openness, when dealing with the multitude of non-
equivalent properties acquired by complex systems over time. Such dynamics relates
to the irreducible multiplicity and non-completeness of complex systems considered
above and is essentially compatible with the logical openness of the constructivist
approach.
This is also the case of the structural dynamics considered above and intended
as change and multiplicity of elements, of their roles, and structures between them
(Minati & Pessa, 2018, pp. 102–130). Examples of complex structural dynamics are
the dynamics of collective behaviors, e. g., ﬂocks and swarms, and of the cytoskeleton
consisting, within the cell cytoplasm, of a network of protein ﬁbers and character-
ized by structural dynamics since its parts are continuously destroyed, renewed or
newly created. Structural dynamics refers to the complexity of systems continually
transforming themselves and keeping levels of coherence constituted by the same
elements interacting, however, in different ways to accommodate interchangeability
and multiple roles, allowing the acquisition of various non-equivalent properties.
Examples of structural dynamics asking for DYSAM-like approaches include
• simultaneous usage of economic, cultural, and religious aspects in sociology;
• biochemical and psychological aspects in medicine;

Multiplicity, Logical Openness, Incompleteness, and Quasi-ness …
167
• classical and quantum models in physics in which concrete cases are given by tran-
sitions from paramagnetic to ferromagnetic phases, the occurrence of supercon-
ductivity and superﬂuidity and order–disorder transitions in some kinds of crys-
tals, cases of very complicated transient dynamics where classical and quantum
aspects mix;
• the learning in childhood of how to use the ﬁve senses, not with the purpose of
choosing the most effective one, but of learning how to use them simultaneously
and in a coherent manner.
5.2
Meta-Structures
The intrinsic incompleteness of aggregates and partially deﬁned sets can be dealt
with, for instance, by considering meta-structures, properties of clustered mesoscopic
variables (Minati & Licata, 2012, 2013, 2015; Minati et al., 2013; Minati & Pessa,
2018, pp. 102–129).
Structures among cluster properties are considered meta because of the incom-
pleteness of clusters, e.g., in number of components over time; in their non-regular,
non-iterative occurrence; in aggregative variables changeable over time, such as
speed, altitude, direction, price, quantity; in number of elements belonging to them.
As discussed below, the term ‘meta’ indicates virtual, dynamic structures as rela-
tionships between cluster properties and also properties of such properties, such as
their recurrence, levels of correlation, and spatial and temporal distribution.
The mesoscopic level, unlike the macroscopic, does not completely ignore the
microscopic, but rather considers some aggregations, i.e., clusters, of the micro-
scopic properties available. Such clustered variables are considered, for instance,
with respect to their number of elements, their change over time, distributions and
infra-cluster properties. Examples include molecules in a solution affected by similar
thermal ﬂuctuations around the average; birds of a ﬂock having similar direction or
speed, whatever their spatial or topological positions; customers buying the same
groups of items or spending a similar amount of money for whatever items; people
living within a building and being on the stairs for determinate periods of time inde-
pendently of their motion; and cars in trafﬁc that cannot increase their speed (the
clusters of cars standing still in the queue, cars slowing down, and cars running at
constant speed in the queue).
The interest lies in the dynamical characteristics, properties of changes of the
partially or fuzzily deﬁned sets, in this case mesoscopic variables and clusters. While
for fuzzy systems, dynamics applies to the levels of belonging of elements, in the
latter cases dynamics pertains to the change in properties of the set as its elements,
their number, and properties not only belong, but vary. The mesoscopic level can be
considered as fuzziness of sets and systems in having properties, replacing degrees
of belonging with values of aggregation and properties (Salgado, 2004).
This approach is based on considering clusters and their intra-properties, rela-
tions and infra-cluster properties as meta-structures, ‘meta’ since clustering may

168
G. Minati
be performed in any way, converging toward more signiﬁcant levels like a moving
magnifying lens. While microscopic interactions establish dynamic structures, for
instance,ofvariableintensityandduration,meta-structuresarerelatedtoinfra-cluster
relations and correlations allowing mesoscopic representation of collective complex
phenomena, by intercepting transversely a large mesoscopic variety of clustered
microscopic aspects. Meta-structures are thus well represented by cluster properties
and cluster analysis. The intrinsic incompleteness of aggregates and partially deﬁned
sets can be dealt with by using meta-structures, properties of clustered mesoscopic
variables (as in Minati & Licata, 2012, 2013, 2015; Minati et al., 2013; Minati &
Pessa, 2018, pp. 102–129). Generic examples of meta-structures (Minati & Pessa,
2018, p. 368) are given by cluster regularities and infra-cluster properties, such
as correlations intended as meta-structures among clusters. Even if less tractable
and more difﬁcult to model, clusters may relate to the interactions in action per
instant and their properties such as intensities, durations, directions, and distributions.
Analogously, in such cases meta-structures are intended as infra-cluster properties.
This mesoscopic, cluster-based approach may be considered also for populations
of data whose possible levels of coherence are neither known nor certain, and for
whichtherepresentationscaleisindeﬁniteandcanhavedifferentlevels,evenmultiple
and superimposed (moving the lens and also using various magnifying glasses). In
this case it is a matter of using multiple tentative scenarios and proﬁles, intended
as non-ideal, data-driven modeling, and their emergent, ongoing properties, such as
correlations and coherences when dealing with Big Data (Minati, 2019c).
6
Quasi-ness
We conclude by referring brieﬂy to the issue of quasi-ness mentioned above and
considered in publications such as Minati (2018, 2019d, 2019e), Minati and Pessa
(2018) and Minati et al. (2019).
The concept of quasi-ness does not completely overlap the concept of incomplete-
ness. Signiﬁcant aspects of quasi-ness differentiate it from incompleteness:
• As introduced brieﬂy in Sect. 3, incompleteness is intended as inexhaustible,
incomplete multiplicity. Incompleteness is considered a necessary, not a sufﬁcient
condition for the emergence of complex systems suitable, for instance, for the
Dynamic Usage of Models (DYSAM) and meta-structural cluster analysis (Everitt
et al., 2011), using cluster and infra-cluster properties. These approaches interface
with complexity to suitably represent multiplicities and the role of critical weak
forces.
• Quasi-ness pertains to levels of instabilities, irregular alternations of collapse and
recovery, for instance of coherences, when a system is not always a system, not
always the same system, and not only a system.
Such an understanding of quasi-ness particularly applies to quasi-coherence of
emergence, irregularly, incompletely, and continuously established and restored at

Multiplicity, Logical Openness, Incompleteness, and Quasi-ness …
169
different levels, rather than considered as a phenomenologically improbable formal
property. This relates to cases when temporary, possibly collapsing incoherencies
occur. This occurrence may be admissible for reasons such as perturbations, irreg-
ularities, instabilities, impurities, untimely choices and mistakes, particularly for
autonomous entities. Environmental and energetic changes are other examples of
reasons for the quasi-ness of coherence-incoherence ﬂuctuations. Such recoverable
incoherencies may be regarded as occasional, irregular and not homogeneous with
respect to constraints, as incomplete application of rules, such as for the regimes of
validity of rules mentioned in Sect. 4.4, whereas Multiple Systems can be regarded
as multiple regimes of validity of rules and models.
Within the dynamics of such ﬂuctuations, we should consider also the inver-
sion of changes, causing changes of situations previously supposed incoherent to
become coherent. In such situations the coherence is repaired, restored by changing
its context. This may be the case for animal behavioral coherences acquired, kept,
lost, and restored as important survival properties in the face of danger. The change
in the context makes local or previous incoherence become coherent. This probably
occurs through a variety of equivalent, rebalancing changes.
On the other hand, temporarily incoherent changes are supposed possible when it
is not necessary to maintain the nature of emergence over iterative, local coherences
not realistically constant, as is predominant in cases of self-organization. An example
is multiply interrelated, networked contexts (Nicosia et al., 2013), environments
such as ecosystems, where collections of external and internally-generated inputs
are intrinsically systemic and non-systemic reactions.
We may say that quasi-ness requires us to better consider the theoretical open-
ness of complex systems, intended as continuous trade-off or exploration, for
instance, between order and disorder, coherence and incoherence, incompleteness
and quasi-ness, levels of emergence, inﬁnitude of betweenness, and collapsing
mechanisms. In complex structural dynamics, the scientiﬁcally necessary Galilean
general repeatability of complete scientiﬁc approaches and models should, on the
contrary, be continuously acquired by contextual, multiple, DYSAM-like populations
of quasi-ness-based approaches.
7
New Reductionism
Reductionism is usually understood as an approach privileging the microscopic,
bottom-up levels of representation where the ultimate, deﬁnitive causes and building
blocks of matter aresupposedtobe. Other, relatedaspects of reductionismshouldalso
be considered, however, for instance, the presumed existence of context-independent
optimum, scalar and disciplinary levels of description, or treating the maximum
level of precision and completeness as a universal goal. The multiplicity of complex
systems is accordingly usually considered as consisting in points of view, rather than
in intrinsically multiple properties. Completeness and exhaustiveness are considered
essential properties of objective knowledge, in contrast, for instance, with logical

170
G. Minati
openness. We consider here how such assumptions are inadequate and counter-
productive, rather than merely wrong, when dealing with emergent systems and
complexity.
Some aspects of complexity are incompatible with reductionistic approaches
neglecting the structural, intrinsic multiplicity of processes of emergence. For
instance, incompleteness, already considered in physics with uncertainty principles
andinmathematics,relatestoprocessesoccurringwhencompletenessdoesnotapply,
such as for phenomena not reducible to procedures, to sequences of uniqueness,
phase-transition-like (Sole, 2011), and for non-symbolic computability. Incomplete-
ness and quasi-ness are incompatible with the search for the ﬁnal, optimal, and ﬁxed.
The concepts introduced here thus make evident new possible forms of reductionism,
such as non-detection, neglect, and disregard of such properties of complexity or,
more plausibly, use of their presumed approximations deprived of aspects such
as multiplicity, incompleteness, and quasi-ness. The neglect of such properties,
however, often occurs in combination with the use of non-complex systemic concepts
and properties assumed, nevertheless, to be sufﬁcient and suitable, such as antici-
pation, controllability, forecasting, growth (instead of development as a property of
systems of growth), non-multiplicity, ﬁxed conﬁgurations of elements and inter-
actions, organization, planiﬁcation, regulation, replicability, reversibility, separa-
bility (ideal, thermodynamically closed systems), and single optimum representation
(Minati, 2018; Minati et al., 2016).
A further case of new reductionism is to consider incompleteness or quasi-ness as
suitably representable and simulated by introducing algorithmic randomness, losing
sight thus of the weak or partial conveying of information, of the forces critical to
the collapsing of equivalences in processes of emergence, and of the loss-recovery
sequences of coherence resumptions.
This increases the scientiﬁc and cultural responsibilities of those who assume,
accept or admit reductionism in its various forms, which are, in reality, deeply
unscientiﬁc.
8
Further Research
Further related research considers the establishment of systemic regimes of validity
of symbolic and sub-symbolic properties and the related occurrence of processes of
transience (Minati & Pessa, 2018, pp. 127–130, pp. 265–266). Suitable simulations
should be implemented.

Multiplicity, Logical Openness, Incompleteness, and Quasi-ness …
171
9
Conclusion
We have considered some approaches introduced in the literature for dealing concep-
tually with complexity, such as collective systems and collective behaviors, in partic-
ular, logical openness, theoretical incompleteness, the Dynamic Usage of Models
(DYSAM), and clustering, all intended as methodological conceptual approaches
suitable for implementation in models such as meta-structures. Such an overview
opens the way to considering quasi-ness as a generic property and as a necessary, even
if non-sufﬁcient, condition for the emergence of complexity. Starting from previous
approaches and quasi-ness, we introduced more general conceptual frameworks
allowing less abstract, more phenomenological modeling and simulations.
While this understanding increases the degrees of freedom in representing and
dealing with complexity, allowing more suitable approaches, modeling and simula-
tions, on the other side it implicitly intensiﬁes the possible reductionism expressing
itself as negation of the properties introduced or, more plausibly, as their approx-
imation, deprived of aspects such as multiplicity, incompleteness, and quasi-ness.
What reductionism sacriﬁces, thus, grows proportionately, enhancing the perception
of reductionism as such as a fundamentally oversimplifying, unscientiﬁc attitude, as
if scientiﬁc research should have as its purpose, indiscriminately and in any case,
logical closure.
References
Aggarwal, C. C., & Reddy, C. K. (2013). Data clustering: Algorithms and applications. CRC Press.
Ballarini, M., Cabibbo, N., Candelier, R., Cavagna, A., Cisbani, E., Giardina, I., Lecomte, V.,
Orlandi, A., Parisi, G., Procaccini, A., Viale, M., & Zdravkovic, V. (2008). Interaction ruling
animal collective behaviour depends on topological rather than metric distance: Evidence from
a ﬁeld study. PNAS, 105(4), 1232–1237.
Blasone, M., Jizba, P., & Vitiello, G. (2011). Quantum ﬁeld theory and its macroscopic
manifestations. Imperial College Press.
Bonometti, P. (2012). Improving safety, quality and efﬁciency through the management of emerging
processes: The Tenaris-Dalmine experience. The Learning Organization, 19, 299–310.
Boulis, C., & Ostendorf, M. (2004). Combining multiple clustering systems. In J. F. Boulicaut, F.
Esposito, F. Giannotti, & D. Pedreschi (Eds.), Knowledge discovery in databases: PKDD 2004.
PKDD 2004. Lecture Notes in Computer Science (Vol. 3202). Springer.
Brabazon, A., O’Neill, M., & McGarraghy, S. (2015). Natural computing algorithms. Springer.
Brovchenko, I., & Oleinikova, A. (2008). Multiple phases of liquid water. ChemPhysChem, 9(18),
2660–2675.
Brovchenko, I., Geiger, A., & Oleinikova, A. (2005). Liquid-liquid phase transitions in supercooled
water studied by computer simulations of various water models. The Journal of Chemical Physics,
123(4), 44515.
Cavagna, A., Cimarelli, A., Giardina, I., Parisi, G., Santagati, R., Stefanini, F., & Viale, M. (2010).
Scale-free correlations in starling ﬂocks. Proceeding of the National Academy of Sciences of
the United States of America, 107, 11865–11870. https://www.pnas.org/content/107/26/11865.
Accessed September 17, 2019.

172
G. Minati
Diettrich, O. (2001). A physical approach to the construction of cognition and to cognitive evolution.
Foundations of Science, 6, 273–341.
Everitt, B. S., Landau, S., Leese, M., & Stahl, D. (2011). Cluster analysis. Wiley.
Feynmann, R. (1967). The character of physical law. The MIT Press.
Gambuzza, L. V., Cardillo, A., Fiasconaro, A., Fortuna, L., Gómez-Gardenes, J., & Frasca, M.
(2013). Analysis of remote synchronization in complex networks. Chaos, 23, 1–8.
Licata, I., & Minati, G. (2016). Emergence, computation and the freedom degree loss information
principle in complex systems. Foundations of Science, 21(3), 1–19.
Longo, G. (2011). Reﬂections on concrete incompleteness. Philosophia Mathematica, 19, 255–280.
Longo, G. (2019). Interfaces of incompleteness. In G. Minati, M. R. Abram, & E. Pessa (Eds.),
Systemics of incompleteness and quasi-systems (pp. 3–55). Springer.
Mac Lennan, B. J. (2004). Natural computation and non-turing models of computation. Theoretical
Computer Science, 317, 115–145.
Mikhailov, A. S., & Calenbuhr, V. (2002). From cells to societies. Models of complex coherent
actions. Springer.
Minati, L. (2015). Remote synchronization of amplitudes across an experimental ring of non-linear
oscillators. Chaos, 25, 123107–123112.
Minati, G. (2001). Experimenting with the dynamic usage of models (DYSAM) approach: The case
of corporate communication and education. In CD-Proceedings of the 45th annual meeting of the
international society for the systems sciences (ISSS). Monterey, California, July 8th–13th 2001;
01-094, pp. 1–15.
Minati, G. (2016a). Knowledge to manage the knowledge society: The concept of theoretical
incompleteness. Systems, 4(3), 1–19. http://www.mdpi.com/2079-8954/4/3/26
Minati, G. (2016b). General system(s) theory 2.0: a brief outline, In G. Minati, M. Abram, & E.
Pessa (Eds.), Towards a post-bertalanffy systemics (pp. 211–219). Springer.
Minati, G. (2018). The non-systemic usages of systems as reductionism. Quasi-systems and Quasi-
systemics. Systems, 6(3). http://www.mdpi.com/2079-8954/6/3/28
Minati, G. (2019a). Phenomenological structural dynamics of emergence: An overview of how
emergence emerges. In Urbani Ulivi Lucia (Ed.), The systemic turn in human and natural sciences.
A rock in the pond. (pp. 1–39). Springer. https://www.springer.com/us/book/9783030007249
Minati, G. (2019b). A controversial issue: The intelligence of matter as residue? A possible under-
standing. Biomedical Journal of Scientiﬁc & Technical Research (BJSTR), 23(1), 17139–17140.
https://biomedres.us/pdfs/BJSTR.MS.ID.003848.pdf
Minati, G. (2019c). Big data: From forecasting to mesoscopic understanding. Meta-proﬁling as
complex systems. Systems, 7(1), 8. https://www.mdpi.com/2079-8954/7/1/8
Minati, G., (2019d), On some open issues in systemics. In G. Minati, A. Abram, & E. Pessa (Eds.),
Systemics of incompleteness and quasi-systems (pp. 317–323). Springer.
Minati, G. (2019e). Non-classical systemics of quasi-coherence: From formal properties to repre-
sentations of generative mechanisms. A conceptual introduction to a paradigm-shift. Systems,
7(4). https://www.mdpi.com/2079-8954/7/4/51
Minati, G., & Brahms, S. (2002). The dynamic usage of models (DYSAM). In G. Minati & E. Pessa
(Eds.), Emergence in complex cognitive, social and biological systems (pp. 41–52). Kluwer.
Minati, G., & Licata, I. (2012). Meta-structural properties in collective behaviours.The International
Journal of General Systems, 41(3), 289–311.
Minati, G., & Licata, I., (2013). Emergence as mesoscopic coherence. Systems, 1(4), 50–65. http://
www.mdpi.com/2079-8954/1/4/50
Minati, G., & Licata, I., (2015). Meta-structures as multidynamics systems approach. Some intro-
ductory outlines. Journal on Systemics, Cybernetics and Informatics (JSCI), 13(4), 35–38. http://
www.iiisci.org/journal/sci/issue.asp?is=ISS1504
Minati, G., & Pessa, E. (2006). Collective beings. Springer.
Minati, G., & Pessa, E. (2018). From collective beings to quasi-systems. Springer.

Multiplicity, Logical Openness, Incompleteness, and Quasi-ness …
173
Minati, G., Penna, M. P., & Pessa, E. (1996). Towards a general theory of logically open systems. In
E. Pessa, M. P. Penna, & A. Montesanto (Eds.), Proceedings of the 3rd systems science European
congress, (Kappa, Rome, Italy, pp. 957–960).
Minati, G., Penna, M. P., & Pessa, E. (1998). Thermodynamic and logical openness in general
systems. Systems Research and Behavioral Science, John Wiley and Sons Ltd., 15(3), 131–145.
Minati, G., Abram, M., & Pessa, E. (Eds.). (2016). Towards a post-Bertalanffy systemics. Springer.
Minati, G., Licata, I., & Pessa, E. (2013). Meta-structures: The search of coherence in collec-
tive behaviours (without physics). In Alex Graudenzi, Giulio Caravagna, Giancarlo Mauri, &
Marco Antoniotti (Eds.), Proceedings Wivace 2013 – Italian Workshop on Artiﬁcial Life and
Evolutionary Computation (Wivace 2013), Milan, Italy, July 1–2, 2013. Electronic Proceedings
in Theoretical Computer Science (Vol. 130, pp. 35–42). http://rvg.web.cse.unsw.edu.au/eptcs/
paper.cgi?Wivace2013.6
Minati, G., Abram, M., & Pessa, G. (Eds.) (2019). Systemics of incompleteness and quasi-systems.
Springer. https://www.springer.com/gp/book/9783030152765
Miyamoto, S., Ichihashi, H., & Honda, K. (2008). Algorithms for fuzzy clustering: Methods in
C-means clustering with applications. Springer.
Nicosia, V., Bianconi, G., Latora, V., & Barthelemy, M. (2013). Growing multiplex networks.
Physical Review Letters, 111(058701), 1–5.
Ovelg¨onne, M., & Geyer-Schulz, A. (2013). An ensemble learning strategy for graph clustering.
In D. A. Bader, H. Meyerhenke, P. Sanders, & D. Wagner (Eds.), Graph partitioning and graph
clustering (Vol. 588, pp. 187–206). American Mathematical Society.
Paperin, G., Green, D. G., & Sadedin, S. (2011). Dual-phase evolution in complex adaptive systems.
Interface, 8, 609–629.
Salgado, & Garrido, P.J. (2004). Fuzzy clustering of fuzzy systems. In IEEE International
Conference on Systems, Man and Cybernetics (Vol. 3, pp. 2368–2373).
Solé, R. V. (2011). Phase transitions. Princeton University Press.
Transtrum, M. K., Machta, B. B., Brown, K.S., Daniels, B. C., Myers, C. R., & Sethna, J. P.: Perspec-
tive: Sloppiness and emergent theories in physics, biology, and beyond. Journal of Chemistry and
Physics, 143, 010901.
Vicsek, T., & Zafeiris, A. (2012). Collective motion. Physics Reports, 517, 71–140.

Micro-Latency, Holism and Emergence
Alexander Carruth
1
The Structure of Inquiry and the Structure of the World
Part of the job of scientiﬁc inquiry is to engage with, make sense of, describe, explain,
and make predictions concerning the wildly varied phenomena which constitute
the world around us. Distinct scientiﬁc disciplines each with their own intellectual
regimes—domains of inquiry, basic assumptions, investigative techniques and so
on—address different groupings of this phenomena. Thus, physics, or at least an
important part of that discipline, is concerned with the properties of and interac-
tions between the relatively small and simple constituents of matter, and of energy.
Chemistry addresses the properties and behaviour of more complexly structured
systems of those constituents that form substances (in the standard, as opposed to
technical metaphysical, sense): elements, compounds, mixtures, suspensions and so
on. Biology treats phenomena which exhibit the characteristics which are criteria
for life, ranging over micro-organisms, ﬂora, fauna etc. Psychology and cognitive
science engage with just those living things which possess mentality, and sociology,
economics, and political science all range over aspects of the interactions between
these thinking agents. These characterisations are somewhat glib, and they surely
fall short of a properly nuanced and comprehensive conception of each discipline,
but hopefully they are ﬁt for the illustrative purpose to which they are employed.
That inquiry has this sort of structure raises a number of interesting philosophical
questions. One set of questions concerns the sorts of relationships that obtain between
the theories put forward by each discipline—questions such as: Can we predict the
behaviour of the more-complex based solely on knowledge of the more-simple?
Can we derive the facts about the more-complex from those concerning the more-
simple? Can theories which refer to the more-complex be translated, without loss of
A. Carruth (B)
Theoretical Philosophy, Department of Philosophy, History, and Art Studies, University of
Helsinki, Yliopistonkatu 3, 00014 Helsinki, Finland
e-mail: alexander.carruth@helsinki.ﬁ
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
S. Wuppuluri and I. Stewart (eds.), From Electrons to Elephants and Elections,
The Frontiers Collection, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-92192-7_11
175

176
A. Carruth
information, into ones which refer only to the more-simple? And so on… Another
set of questions concerns the extent to which the sort of structure described above
is a feature not just of the way we organise our inquiry into the world, but of the
world itself: that is, addressing the sorts of relationships that obtain between the
entities, properties, processes, laws, events (and so on…) with which the various
sciences are concerned—questions such as: Is the more-complex something over and
above the more-simple? Are apparently ‘higher-level’ entities autonomous? Can the
more-complex be identiﬁed with the more-simple? Is the more-complex exhaustively
determined by the more-simple?
This paper is focussed on questions of the latter sort. Speaking in very broad
terms, emergentists of various sorts hold that there is some sense in which the kind
of structure exhibited by inquiry is mirrored in the world itself: there are genuinely
distinct, hierarchically arranged ‘levels of reality’, with entities or phenomena at
higher levels existing separately from and enjoying some degree of causal (or more
broadly determinative) autonomy from those at lower levels, but still being somehow
dependent on those lower-level entities and phenomena. Conversely, reductionism
holds that this structure is merely apparent, and is not mirrored in reality: all genuine
existence and causal/determinative ‘action’ is conﬁned to a single, basic level, and
more complex and apparently higher-level entities can be identiﬁed with or reduced
to or otherwise exhaustively accounted for by the more simple, basic entities.
Both emergentism and reductionism come in various forms. The principal aim of
this paper is to outline and explore a position—let’s call it Flat Holism—regarding
apparently emergent phenomena, which arguably sits somewhere between emer-
gence and reduction. This position preserves some key reductionist commitments,
as it involves no radical ontological novelty, for instance, and is consistent with a
one- or no-level ontology. It also, however, adopts the emergentist idea that the whole
or context plays a crucial, metaphysically determinative role. Whether this position
counts as emergentist or reductionist (or neither) is relatively moot, what is much
more important is (i) how the position compares to related accounts and (ii) how it
stands with regard to the relevant empirical evidence.
This essay focusses on (i); the important work of (ii) must be left for another day.
It begins with an examination of the prima facie case for emergentism, followed by
some discussion of the varieties—and key commitments—of emergence and reduc-
tion (Sects. 2 and 3). In the rest of the essay Flat Holism is introduced, and the
commitments of the position delimited, through comparison with two other posi-
tions: Sydney Shoemaker’s micro-latency account and Carl Gillett’s mutualism. In
Sects. 4 and 5 the micro-latency and mutualist accounts are introduced. Section 4 also
argues that despite Shoemaker labelling the micro-latency view as a form of emergen-
tism, it preserves the key theoretical commitments of the reductionist programme—
indeed, the view can be leveraged to provide a general argument against emergen-
tism. Both Shoemaker’s and Gillett’s accounts are framed in terms of powers, and
Sect. 6 introduces two approaches to the metaphysics of powers: the orthodox view—
brieﬂy, the view that powers are single-track and operate according to the ‘stimulus-
manifestation’ model—and an alternative view which holds that powers are multi-
track and operate according to the ‘mutual manifestation’ model. Section 7 shows

Micro-Latency, Holism and Emergence
177
how the micro-latency and mutualist accounts both tacitly rely on the orthodox view,
and demonstrates how Flat Holism can be generated by adopting both the alternative,
multi-track mutual-manifestation view of powers and some of the motivating insights
of the micro-latency and mutualist accounts. Some advantages of Flat Holism are
explored in Sect. 8.
2
The Prima Facie Case for Emergence
It is worth spending a little time reﬂecting on the conditions that generate the debate
between reductionism and emergentism. Central to this debate are what are referred
to in this essay as ‘E-cases’. We are presented with an E-case when we ﬁnd ourselves
confronted with:
• a complex context C
• the elements of which are composed of basic entities the Bs
• in which some apparently novel phenomenon or behaviour E is present
• and prima facie there does not seem to be a way to account for E based on the
properties or behaviour of the Bs taken either in isolation or in other contexts
which lack the features deﬁnitive of C.
E-cases provide the principal motivation for emergentism, and the principal chal-
lenge to reductionism, because it is precisely such cases which provide us with
examples of apparently novel or distinctive phenomena and behaviour which arise
only in certain complex circumstances and which seem to be in some metaphysically
signiﬁcant sense dependent on (because composed by) but nevertheless not exhaus-
tively accounted for or determined by the more-simple elements which compose
the entities or system in question. Take for example questions concerning reduc-
tion and emergence in the philosophy of mind: here anti-reductionism is motived by
appeal to the idea that it is only in certain highly complex and speciﬁc circumstances
(those involved in there being a living human person, say) that certain phenomena
are present (such as conscious experience and agency), and that despite the fact that
persons are composed of more basic entities (organs, tissues, cells and ultimately
micro-physical entities) there is no clear way to account for conscious experience
and agency in terms of quarks and electrons and so on, either taken in isolation or in
other complexes which are not constitutive of a living human person (even in simpler
collectives which are both partially constitutive of and clearly highly relevant for the
target phenomena, such as populations of neurons or synaptic structures). E-cases
nevertheless provide only a prima facie motivation for emergentism because they
are defeasible—the appearance that the Bs do not fully account for E may turn out,
on further investigation or reﬂection, to be just that: an appearance.
It is probably fair to say that the dominant—perhaps even the default—attitude
in philosophical and scientiﬁc circles towards the relationship between the more-
and less-complex over the past several decades has been broadly reductionist in
spirit. Inspired by the impressive and ongoing successes of scientiﬁc analysis, this

178
A. Carruth
has led to a kind of temperamental preference for reductionism. Despite the fact
that we are sometimes confronted with apparent E-cases for which explicit reduc-
tionist analyses are not forthcoming, temperamental reductionism is bolstered by an
often-tacit optimistic meta-induction of roughly the following form: as our scien-
tiﬁc understanding has developed, various E-cases have been shown to be merely
apparent, as previously-unknown underlying mechanisms, features and behaviours
of the more basic elements have been identiﬁed which show that E can in fact be
accounted for by the Bs, and so any support such cases gave to emergentism was in
fact illusory. We should anticipate that this trend will continue as our scientiﬁc under-
standing develops further, such that remaining E-cases will eventually be uncovered
as also merely apparent. Perhaps some E-cases are so complex and difﬁcult that
limited rational agents such as ourselves may never have sufﬁcient understanding to
comprehend how the Bs account for E, but this is an ‘in practice’ rather than ‘in prin-
ciple’ concern, and thus doesn’t tell against the truth of (ontological) reductionism.
Thus, E-cases do not provide any signiﬁcant challenge to reductionism.
To give a concrete example, consider how life acted as an E-case supporting
vitalism—the view that life involves some distinctive and novel phenomena and is
governed by distinctive principles which are not instanced in non-living matter—for
centuries. However, advances in biology and chemistry have shown that vitalism has
little credibility, and life can be accounted for—not just epistemically, but metaphys-
ically—in terms of various underlying mechanisms: life just is the presence of such
mechanisms suitably related to one another and embedded in a sufﬁciently stable
context. As it went for life and vitalism, so it will go for the E-cases with which we
are currently presented, or at least so the optimistic meta-induction of the temper-
amental reductionist has it. Whilst such reasoning is often tacit, something at least
close to it is sometimes made explicit (see for example Churchland, 1981). Alongside
that generated via the preceding reasoning, temperamental reductionism may also be
motivated by general theoretical considerations—for instance by considerations such
as that reductionism, if true, is a more parsimonious and more unifying perspective
than anti-reductionist alternatives.
It should be noted that although the immediately preceding discussion is couched
partially in epistemic terms—about the development of scientiﬁc understanding and
so on—the issue at stake here is not a matter of epistemology. What is at stake is
whether E-cases are, or are not, evidence of the existence of novel entities, proper-
ties, processes (and so on) which are distinct from, albeit dependent on, the enti-
ties of which they are composed; the properties these entities are characterised by,
and the processes in which they participate. The relevant advancements in scien-
tiﬁc understanding are therefore those which support the establishment of meta-
physically signiﬁcant relationships between apparently-higher-level and more basic
phenomena, that support claims such as ‘life just is the presence of such-and-such
mechanisms…’ or ‘temperature is identical with mean kinetic energy’ and so on
(one oughtn’t to assume that there is no controversy surrounding these examples, but
hopefully they are sufﬁciently clear for the illustrative purposes for which they are
deployed here).

Micro-Latency, Holism and Emergence
179
The temperamentally reductionist dominant viewpoint is coming under increasing
pressure and scrutiny, both within science and philosophy. Recent consideration of an
ever-increasing number of case studies from a range of scientiﬁc disciplines seems to
suggest that we are confronted with a host of recalcitrant E-cases which resist reduc-
tionist analysis. These include, but are not limited to: cases from physics including
critical behaviour in phase transitions (Batterman, 2011), the Fractional Quantum
Hall effect (Lancaster & Pexton, 2015); quasi-particles (Franklin & Knox, 2018)
and superconductivity (Morrison, 2012); cases from chemistry including tempera-
ture (Bishop, 2010) and molecular structure (Bishop, 2010; Hendry, 2010); biolog-
ical cases including protein assembly and gene expression (McLeish, 2017), and
examples from the social sciences including macroeconomic properties (Hoover,
2009) and group cognition (Theiner & O’Connor, 2010). These cases stand alongside
familiar and difﬁcult examples such as those mentioned earlier from the philosophy
of mind. The diversity, range and recalcitrance of these cases seem to undermine the
optimistic meta-induction and place temperamental reductionism—especially where
the envisaged reductionism is of a relatively simplistic form which we’ll call straight-
forward reductionism, according to which all E-cases can in principle be accounted
for in terms of just the attributes and behaviours displayed by the relevant basic
entities in simpler, non-E cases—under signiﬁcant pressure, as the envisaged reduc-
tive accounts have rarely been forthcoming. This has revived interest in alternative
anti-reductionist viewpoints, and especially in emergentism. This renewed interest is
evidenced for instance by the signiﬁcant number of monographs and collections on
the topic published in the last decade or so (not to mention vast numbers of articles).1
3
Varieties and General Features of Emergence
and Reduction
One result of the recent vigorous activity surrounding issues concerning emergence
and reduction is a proliferation of accounts of what each position might involve and be
committed to. Indeed, I’ve heard it said (although, regrettably, I no longer remember
by whom) that there are as many accounts of emergence as there are emergentists,
and, what’s more, the same is nearly true of reduction. In the contemporary debate
concerning these two competing standpoints on the relationship between the more-
and less-complex or basic, distinctions are drawn between varieties of emergence that
are metaphysical and epistemological; weak and strong; synchronic and diachronic;
supervenience-preserving and supervenience-violating, and doubtless more besides.
1 A non-exhaustive list of recent, relevant monographs and collections: Baggio & Parravicini (eds.)
(2019); Baysan & Sartenaer (eds.) (2021); Bedau & Humphreys (eds.) (2008); Bigaj & Wüthrich
(eds.)(2015);Bishop(2019);Bishopetal.(forthcoming);Carruthetal.,(2017a;2017b);Corradini&
O’Connor (eds.) (2010); Falkenburg & Morrison (eds.) (2015); Gibb et al. (2018); Gillett (2016);
Hohwy and Kallestrup (2008); Humphreys (2016); Macdonald and Macdonald (2010); Paolini
Paoletti (2017); Paolini Paoletti and Orilia (2017); Wilson (2021)—and of course, this volume
itself.

180
A. Carruth
Furthermore, these distinctions can be cross-combined, leading to a proliferation of
potential positions—not all of which, of course, will enjoy equal prior plausibility
or support from the empirical evidence. This essay is not the place for a detailed
examination of all these different options, but see for instance Baysan and Sartenaer
(eds.) (2021); Chalmers (2006); Sartenaer (2015); Silberstein (2001); van Gulick
(2001); Wilson (2015) and (2021) for discussion.
The comment with which this section opened could be taken to express some
measure of exasperation, and perhaps with good reason. Where the available posi-
tions in a debate proliferate in the manner just discussed, there is, for instance,
the danger of discussants talking past one another, especially if ‘emergentism’ and
‘reductionism’ are often treated as relatively monolithic positions. However, if the
debate concerning emergence is to be sensitive to empirical ﬁndings, then careful
exploration of the various positions that can be occupied and a detailed examination
of their various commitments, entailments and relative merits are crucial—especially
as pluralism remains a live option in this area of debate. Drawing on some of the
E-cases mentioned earlier for illustrations sake, it could for example turn out that
both conscious experience and superconductivity are emergent, but in very different
ways; and that chemical structure and protein folding can both be reduced to more
basic phenomena, but again in different ways. The world might well turn out to
be such that in different contexts, different forms of emergence and reduction are
present, and thus developing a nuanced appreciation of the different forms that each
position might take is a crucial task for those involved in this debate.
Notwithstanding the ways in which the varieties of emergence and reduction
mentioned above can differ from one another, some central commitments or general
themes of each position can be identiﬁed. Key reductionist notions include:
a.
That the basic entities enjoy special ontic status not enjoyed by non-basic entities
(if there are any)
b.
That the ‘action’ is all at the base level: basic entities alone determine how things
are
c.
That apparent non-basic phenomena can be exhaustively accounted for in terms
of basic phenomena.
And key emergentist notions include:
d.
That there are non-basic entities which enjoy some metaphysical autonomy,
putting them on a par, ontologically speaking, with basic entities
e.
That the non-basic can play a determinative role, so at least some of the ‘action’
is not at the base level
f.
That there are some non-basic phenomena that cannot be exhaustively accounted
for in terms of basic phenomena—in this sense, ‘higher level’ entities/goings-on
are something ‘over and above’ the bases upon which they depend.
(a)–(c) and (d)–(f) aren’t intended here as an analysis of reductionism and emer-
gentism respectively, but rather as a very broad outline of the core characteristics
of each family of positions, which can help us to identify where various positions
in this debate are located. Although it is perhaps most common to see claims like

Micro-Latency, Holism and Emergence
181
(b) and (e) couched in terms of causation, they are stated in terms of the broader
notion of determination here, because it seems plausible that causation is not the
only metaphysically signiﬁcant manner in which something might play a role in
‘how things go’ such that if some non-basic entity were to play such a role this
would be good reason to take it to be challenging to the reductionist viewpoint (note
that Gillett (2016) uses the term ‘determination’ in a narrower sense than I do here,
just for cases where a difference is made to which powers are had by one or more
individuals).
4
The Micro-latency Hypothesis
Sydney Shoemaker outlines an intriguing position in the debate concerning reduc-
tion and emergence, which has been the subject of relatively little discussion (2002,
2007).Shoemaker’saccountisformulatedintermsofpowers.CentraltoShoemaker’s
accountisadistinctionbetweentwodifferentkindsofpowerspossessedbybasicenti-
ties: what he calls micro-manifest and micro-latent powers. Micro-manifest powers
are powers which basic entities display in both simple and complex contexts and
which play a determinative role in both simple and complex contexts. For instance,
supposing electrons to be amongst the fundamentalia, ‘having a mass of 9.10938356
× 10–31 kg’ or ‘having -e charge’ would be candidate micro-manifest powers: these
features of electrons are plausibly considered to be, or at least to involve, powers (to
exert a certain gravitational force and resist acceleration, say, or to repel like charges
and attract opposite charges); are displayed by electrons in the simplest contexts in
which they can be situated and play a role in determining the behaviour of the elec-
tron, and the behaviour of a system or complex of which the electron is a component.
Micro-manifest powers are arguably one of the key explanatory resources of scientiﬁc
analysis, through identifying these powers and showing how they can be combined to
form mechanisms which account for apparently novel, non-basic/complex behaviour
or phenomena. One potentially fruitful way of thinking about recalcitrant E-cases
and why they provide support for emergentism, then, is as cases in which no such
analysis is forthcoming. This leaves E in need of some explanation, and if the micro-
manifest powers of the Bs are not sufﬁcient to the task, then one alternative is that we
need to posit some novel, distinctive, non-basic power or powers which do account
for E—and such powers would be emergent.
Micro-latent powers, according to Shoemaker, are powers of basic entities which
only play a determinative role—and thus manifest—in certain complex contexts, but
which supervene on micro-manifest powers. Thus, a basic entity B1 possessed of a
micro-latent power P1 would only display P1 in very speciﬁc circumstances and in
many contexts or systems in which B1 could be situated P1 would be completely idle,
and thus undetectable, only making itself manifest in the relevant complex context.
Novel phenomena or behaviour of some complex system, according to Shoemaker,
can then be accounted for in terms of what he calls a Type-2 micro-structural property,

182
A. Carruth
that is, the property of having basic constituents arranged thus-and-so which possess
certain micro-manifest and certain micro-latent powers:
...Type-2 micro-structural properties, will be properties speciﬁed in terms of all of the powers,
micro-latent as well as micro-manifest, of the constituent micro-entities. Such a property
will be the property of being composed of particles that have certain micro-latent and micro-
manifest powers and are related in certain ways.
Type-2 micro-structural properties, although they are micro-structural, will be emergent
properties. For they are speciﬁed partly in terms of the micro-latent powers of the constituent
micro-entities that account for the emergence (2016: 74).
Adopting Shoemaker’s micro-latency view allows one to accommodate E-cases
not by positing novel, distinctive non-basic powers (and perhaps non-basic individ-
uals which are the bearers of these powers), but rather by exclusive appeal to the
powers of basic entities. As the second half of the quotation above demonstrates,
Shoemaker takes the fact that this approach to E-cases involves something other
than the micro-manifest powers of the basic entities to show that the view is a form
of emergentism. But it isn’t clear that this is the case. Whilst this establishes that
the micro-latency view is not a form of straightforward reductionism (according to
which all E-cases can in principle be accounted for in terms of just the attributes
and behaviours displayed by the relevant basic entities in simpler, non-E cases),
the micro-latency view nevertheless has all the hallmarks of a broadly reductionist
metaphysic.
First, a Type-2 micro-structural property—which, according to Shoemaker, is
an emergent—is a second-order property of having parts arranged thus-and-so
which instantiate properties F, G, H and so on… It can be questioned whether such
second-order ‘properties’ are genuine properties at all, but more importantly, it is
clear that a second-order property of having some ﬁrst order property/properties
does not have the same ontic status as the ﬁrst-order property/properties to which
it relates; upon which it depends and by which it is determined: there is nothing
more to a Type-2 micro-structural property than the arrangement and nature of the
basic, micro-structural entities. Thus, the micro-latency view satisﬁes (a): basic enti-
ties enjoy special ontic status not enjoyed by non-basic entities. Second, Type-2
micro-structural properties do not play any novel or distinctive determinative role on
this account. As discussed above, in an E-case, the novel phenomena or behaviour
which are characteristic of the case are exclusively the result of powers (both micro-
manifest and micro-latent) of the basic, micro-physical components involved in the
case. Thus, the micro-latency view satisﬁes (b): basic entities alone determine how
things are. Finally, as the instantiation of a Type-2 micro-structural property just is
having components arranged thus-and-so and which possess certain ﬁrst-order prop-
erties, and it is exclusively these components which are determinative, then it seems
clear that Type-2 microstructural properties (and thus the distinctive behaviour or
phenomena present in E-cases for which they are posited as explanation) are fully
accounted for by basic, micro-physical entities and their natures. Thus, the micro-
latency view also satisﬁes (c): the non-basic can be exhaustively accounted for in
terms of the basic. As the micro-latency view satisﬁes (a)–(c), the view is a form of

Micro-Latency, Holism and Emergence
183
reductionism, albeit not straightforward reductionism. For further discussion of how
the micro-latency view is not an emergentist position, see Gillett (2016:230 fn17) or
Shrader (2010).
We’ve just seen that the micro-latency view appears to accommodate E-cases
without appeal to an emergentist metaphysic. As the need to accommodate E-cases
provides the principal motivation for adopting emergentism, the micro-latency view
can be leveraged to generate an anti-emergentist argument (note that this is not a use
to which Shoemaker himself puts the view) of the following form:
P1: Emergentism is plausible only if E-cases cannot be accommodated by non-
emergentist metaphysics
P2: The micro-latency view, if plausible, demonstrates that E-cases can be
accommodated by non-emergentist metaphysics
P3: The micro-latency view is plausible
C: Emergentism is not plausible.
P1 is supported both by general principles of parsimony and because it is a conse-
quence of the crucial link between the need to accommodate E-cases and motivating
emergentism outlined in Sect. 2. P2 asserts the non-emergentist interpretation of
the micro-latency view argued for earlier in this section. P3 is obviously contro-
versial but will be granted for the sake of discussion here. That C follows from
P1–P3 shows that the micro-latency view, at least as interpreted here, is hostile
to emergentism. Note that this might make the view particularly attractive to the
temperamental reductionist, as it provides her with a general schema by which to
deﬂate the apparent support given to emergentism by the prevalence of E-cases which
is independent of the optimistic meta-induction discussed in Sect. 2. This gain, of
course, comes at a cost: abandoning straightforward reductionism and embracing
the micro-manifest/micro-latent distinction.
5
Gillett’s Mutualism
Carl Gillett (2016) has developed a genuinely emergentist, scientiﬁcally informed
approach which is designed to be both consistent with and illuminating with regard
to the success of the compositional explanations typical of scientiﬁc analysis. The
resulting position is thus less ‘radical’ than forms of ontological emergence which
posit causally active, uncomposed, non-physical higher-level entities, whilst never-
theless including higher-level composed entities which play a distinctive determina-
tive role. Like Shoemaker’s view, Gillett formulates his mutualist approach in terms
of powers, introducing the notion of a differential power:
components have some powers in complex collectives that they would not have if the laws or
principles applying in simpler collectives exhaustively applied in the complex aggregation
(2016: 18).

184
A. Carruth
Differential powers, like micro-latent powers, are powers of component enti-
ties. And it is these differential powers—which are present only in certain complex
circumstances—that account for the novel behaviour or phenomena characteristic
of E-cases. Crucially, on the mutualist view the presence of one or more differential
powers in a given complex collective will be attributable to the determinative nature
of the whole or complex itself. Thus, the whole plays an ineliminable determina-
tive role, by determining which powers the basic, component entities of which it is
composed have when they compose it.
On the mutualist view there are, in at least some complex collectives, therefore two
simultaneous forms of determination in operation: the familiar ‘upward’ composi-
tional determination of the nature of the whole by the components, and a less familiar
‘downward’ determination of the differential powers of the components by the whole.
Gillett calls this downward determination machresis:
Combining the Greek words ‘macro’ and ‘chresis,’ where the latter is roughly the
Greek for ‘use,’ we get the terms ‘machresis,’ and ‘machretic determination,’ for the
general phenomenon of composed, or ‘macro,’ entities that non-productively, and non-
compositionally, determine the nature of their components through productive role-shaping
(2016: 207).
On this view, productive determination—that is, the manifestation of powers—
may occur only at the level of basic, component entities. But what productive role a
given component or set of components plays is (at least sometimes) determined by
the composed, ‘higher-level’, ‘macro’ entity. Thus, composed entities play a crucial
and distinctive determinative role, as their parts wouldn’t do what they in fact do if
they weren’t parts of these wholes. As this determinative role is not itself productive,
familiar concerns regarding exclusion (and the like) by which more ‘radical’ forms
of emergence are beset, can be avoided.
The mutualist account takes composed, ‘higher-level’, ‘macro’ entities to be
elements of the ontology with the same ontic status as the basic parts of which
they are composed. As composed entities are non-basic, the mutualist account satis-
ﬁes (d): it holds that some non-basic entities are on a par, ontologically speaking,
with basic entities. Through machretic determination, these composed entities shape
the productive role of the parts of which they are composed by determining which
differential powers these parts possess, and thus the mutualist view clearly satis-
ﬁes (e): the non-basic plays a determinative role and at least some of the ‘action’
is not at the base level. Finally, in recognising the simultaneous and mutual forms
of ‘upward’ compositional and ‘downward’ machretic determination, the account
shows how although composed entities depend on their components, nevertheless
there are some non-basic phenomena that cannot be exhaustively accounted for in
terms of basic phenomena, and thus satisﬁes (f).

Micro-Latency, Holism and Emergence
185
6
Powers
Like much of the metaphysically focused discussion of emergence and reduction,
both Shoemaker’s and Gillett’s views are couched in terms of powers.2 I’ve argued
elsewhere that this focus in the debate is both appropriate and means that the debate
is importantly sensitive to issues in the metaphysics of powers (see Carruth, 2019
and 2020). Whilst this latter point might seem obvious, it’s often been missed—
or at least not discussed explicitly. Where Carruth, 2020 offers general arguments
demonstrating this sensitivity, one way of thinking about the material presented in
this essay, as should become clear over the following sections, is as a speciﬁc case
study supporting the sensitivity claim. This section gives a very brief introduction to
powers, and outlines two ways of conceiving of how they are directed and how they
operate: the orthodox view according to which powers are single-track and operate
according to the ‘stimulus-manifestation’ model, and an alternative view which holds
that powers are multi-track and operate according to the ‘mutual manifestation’
model. This will form the basis for outlining Flat Holism in Sect. 7.
Powers are features of individuals in virtue of which the individuals that bear these
powers interact and behave in the manner that they do. Individuals with just the same
powers will behave in the same way when placed in exactly similar circumstances
(or, if some powers are stochastic, will have the same objective probabilities assigned
to the same range of possible behaviours—henceforth I will omit qualiﬁcations of
this sort, as it should usually be clear how the relevant claims can be modiﬁed to
accommodate the possibility of stochastic powers). Individuals with different powers
will behave differently, and this difference in behaviour will be due to their instan-
tiating different powers. Views such as strong versions of dispositional essentialism
hold that all fundamental properties are causal powers (see Shoemaker, 1980). Others
take causal powers to depend on or reduce to a combination of non-causal properties
and the laws of nature (e.g. Armstrong, 1997). Others still take some fundamental
properties to be powers, and others not to be (e.g. Molnar, 2003). This essay will not
aim to settle this dispute.
Powers are essentially powers to something or other. That is, their nature involves
being directed towards some manifestation or set of manifestations; and they bring
about these manifestations in suitable circumstances. Canonical examples include
fragility, which could be roughly characterised as ‘the power to break when struck’,
or solubility, ‘the power to dissolve when in contact with a suitable solvent’. Whilst
these canonical examples are non-basic, it’s plausible to think of ‘having a mass of
9.10938356 × 10–31 kg’ or ‘having -e charge’ similarly. We can roughly capture
these features using conditional statements of the form:
2 For instance, Jaegwon Kim argues that emergent entities must have distinctive powers (1999).
Timothy O’Connor and Hong Yu Wong characterise emergent properties as basic properties of
composites; and take ‘basicness’ to involve conferring novel powers (2005). Jessica Wilson says
that strongly metaphysically emergent entities have “fundamentally novel powers” (2015, p.356).
For further discussion of the role of powers in the emergence/reduction debate, see Carruth (2019)
and (2020).

186
A. Carruth
P: x has the power to ϕ if it is the case that were x to be placed in suitable
circumstances C, then x would ϕ.
I don’t offer P as an analysis of what it is to have a power, although some philoso-
phers have attempted to analyse powers in terms of the truth of conditional statements
(e.g. Lewis (1997); such analyses are plagued by familiar counterexamples, however,
see Martin (1994) and Bird (1998)). But conditional statements such as P, even if
they fail to analyse what it is to have a power, capture the central features of powers
mentioned above: their directedness and their sensitivity to circumstance.
There are several controversies in the debate concerning the nature of powers.
One concerns whether powers are ‘single-’ or ‘multi-track’; that is, whether a given
power only ever disposes its bearer towards a single manifestation or whether an
object can be disposed towards a range of manifestations just in virtue of a single
power it instantiates. Whenever a single-track power manifests, and in whatever
circumstances it does so, the manner in which it manifests is the same. Conversely,
multi-track powers are directed towards a range of different manifestations. Heil
describes multi-tracking as follows3:
Consider a simple case, the sphericity of a particular ball. The ball’s sphericity, in concert
with incoming light radiation, structures outgoing radiation in a deﬁnite way. The very same
property of the ball disposes it to produce a concave depression in a lump of clay or to roll…
one disposition, many different kinds of manifestation (2003: 198–199).
Thus, on two different occasions, when such a power manifests, it may manifest
in different ways, depending on the circumstances in question.
Another controversy concerning powers involves how it is that they come to
manifest, that is, how they operate. One view has it that powers operate through
being ‘triggered’ by some stimulus, which then leads to the power producing the
manifestation. According to this ‘stimulus-manifestation’ model, a power will only
give rise to a manifestation when it is galvanised into action by some trigger or
stimulus. For instance, in the case of the fragility of a vase, the stimulus might
be ‘being struck with a force greater than X’, or in the case of the solubility of a
sample of salt, ‘being submerged in water’. Crucially, the manifestation is produced
by the target power alone, although it will not be produced until the occurrence of
the stimulus. Matthew Tugby (2010) has argued that stimuli needn’t themselves be
powers, and that stimuli may belong to a variety of categories (e.g. events, states,
actions and so on).
An alternative account is the ‘mutual manifestation’ model, which holds that there
must always be two or more powers working together to bring about a manifestation.
When powers work together, there is no sense of priority such that one power could be
considered the ‘operative power’, whilst the other is held to have merely stimulated
or triggered it. For instance, in the case of the production of a particular vase’s
shattering, this view would hold that this is not the result of the ‘fragility’ of the vase
alone, but rather of a whole host of powers of the vase, of the object that struck it,
3 Heil talks in terms of ‘dispositions’ here, which for the sake of the current discussion can be
treated as synonymous with the way this paper uses the term ‘power’.

Micro-Latency, Holism and Emergence
187
and perhaps more besides. Likewise, the dissolution of a sample of salt is a result of
the mutual action of both the particular crystalline structure of the salt and the dipole
moment typical of H2O molecules (and perhaps more besides).
Inspired by something like P, what could reasonably be regarded as the orthodox
view of powers holds that powers are single-track—each power is directed towards
justonemanifestation—andthattheyoperateaccordingtothestimulus-manifestation
model—a power will only give rise to a manifestation when it is galvanised into action
by some trigger or stimulus (e.g. Bird, 2007). One important outcome of this view for
ourpresentdiscussionisthateachdistinctmanifestationtypeimpliesadistincttypeof
power. Thus, apparently novel and distinctive manifestations (including those exhib-
ited as novel behaviours or phenomena displayed in E-cases) are evidence of novel
and distinctive powers. This evidence is defeasible, because the apparently novel
and distinctive manifestation might be shown to be either illusory or, alternatively,
nothing over and above an aggregation or collection of more basic manifestations
(and thus be attributable to the powers already associated with such manifestations).
However, where apparently novel and distinctive manifestations themselves resist
such analyses, they stand as strong evidence in favour of novel powers. Another
important outcome is that on the orthodox view a manifestation occurs as a result of
the determinative action of the target power alone, although it will not be produced
until the occurrence of the stimulus.
An alternative view, defended by for instance C. B. Martin (e.g. 2008) and John
Heil (e.g. 2003) holds that powers are multi-track—a single power is directed towards
a (possibly very wide and diverse) range of qualitatively distinct manifestations—
and that they operate according to the mutual manifestation model—in order for
some manifestation to occur, there must always be at least two powers working
together, and there is no sense of priority such that one power (or some subset
of the powers involved) could be considered the ‘operative’ or ‘active’ power(s),
whilst the other(s) are merely a stimulus or trigger. Note that this is distinct from the
view (often associated with Aristotle) that powers come in active/passive pairings,
where the active power plays the determinative role, and the passive power is a mere
liability to be subject to changes associated with the manifestation of the active power.
One important outcome of this alternative view is that different mutual partnerships
between different sets of powers will lead to different manifestations, and thus that
apparently novel and distinctive manifestations do not necessarily indicate novel and
distinctive powers, as they might merely indicate novel groupings or arrangements (or
perhaps better partnerings) of powers associated with other manifestations. Another
important outcome of the view is that a manifestation never occurs as a result of the
determinative role of a single power but is always attributable to a set of powers in
a partnering relationship with one another.

188
A. Carruth
7
Flat Holism
Although one is committed to a reductionist metaphysic and the other an emergentist
metaphysic, one thing that the micro-latency and mutualist accounts have in common
is that both approaches accommodate E-cases by appeal to the idea that parts behave
differently in wholes (a notion that Gillett identiﬁes as a core concept amongst scien-
tists who endorse emergentist outlooks e.g. 2016:42–43). The micro-latency view
does so by holding that parts possess powers which only ever come to manifest
when that part is embedded in certain kinds of whole. The mutualist view does so
by holding that parts gain new powers when they are embedded in certain kinds of
whole. These are not the only options, however, for an approach to the relationship
between the more- and less-complex, and to E-cases, which make use of this idea.
Both the micro-latency and the mutualist approaches seem to be driven, at least
in part, by an acceptance of the orthodox view of powers—that is, by the idea that
powers are single-track and operate according to the stimulus-manifestation model.
Confronted with E-cases and observing that the prospects for accommodating the
apparently novel phenomena or behaviour that typify them using only the resources
of micro-manifest powers, Shoemaker is moved to posit additional, micro-latent
powers of basic entities. Likewise, mutualism holds that components in E-cases
possess distinctive powers which are responsible for the apparently novel phenomena
or behaviour that typify such cases, but attributes the origin of such powers (which
are bestowed on the components via machresis) to the whole. The underlying logic
here is that distinctive manifestations imply distinct powers, and as explained above,
whilst this holds true on the orthodox view, it is not licenced by the alternative
view—that is, the view that powers are multi-track and operate according to the
mutual manifestation model.
Adopting this alternative view, however, seems in some ways particularly
amenable to the idea that parts behave differently in wholes and to the notion—
implied by Shoemaker’s, but not by Gillett’s view—that the potential to bring about
the distinctive phenomena or behaviour which typiﬁes a given E-case was already
present in the components. This is because commitments of the alternative view
with regard to the nature of powers in general include that a given set of powers can
produce a range of qualitatively varied manifestations in different complex circum-
stances—that is, when engaged in different partnering relationships. Thus, it should
come as no surprise that certain complex contexts (such as E-cases) exhibit distinc-
tive, novel phenomena or behaviour. The alternative view does not need to deploy any
distinction between species of powers (such as Shoemaker’s micro-manifest/micro-
latent distinction, or Gillett’s differential/non-differential distinction), as whilst it
allows for manifestations which will only be produced in certain complex contexts—
becauseonlythesecontextshavetherightreciprocalpartneringrelationshipsbetween
powers—the powers responsible for these manifestations are the very same powers
which produce (different) manifestations in simpler contexts.
Crucially, however, the mutual, reciprocal and non-prioritised manner in which a
population of powers involved in a given partnering operate means that, on the view

Micro-Latency, Holism and Emergence
189
under consideration here, there is an ineliminable determinative role for the whole
to play: it is the complex of powers, which operate together to produce the relevant
phenomena or behaviour, which should be seen as the entity which determines the
outcome.4 Where we have a genuine E-case, there is no prospect of analysing away
these complexes into individual powers or simpler complexes of powers (of course,
apparent E-cases might in the end be amenable to such analysis, but this is equally
true with regard to the theoretical posits employed in the micro-latency and mutualist
views—an E-case might appear to require micro-latent or differential powers, but
eventually be shown to be accountable for in terms of just micro-manifest or non-
differential powers).
Let’s call the resulting account of the relationship between the more- and less-
complex, and the approach it implies with regard to E-cases, Flat Holism. According
to this view, when basic powers enter into the appropriate forms of partnering rela-
tionships with each other, they bring about qualitatively distinctive, novel manifes-
tations of the sort which typify E-cases. Because these manifestations are mutually
produced, they can only be attributed to the structured complex of powers that is
operative in the case, and not to particular individual powers or to simpler complexes
of powers. Thus, the resulting view is holistic in the sense that the behaviour of
the system can only be accounted for by the complex of partnered powers taken
as a whole, which determines how the parts behave not by bestowing new powers,
or by triggering otherwise latent powers, but by bringing to fruition manifestations
which require the collaborative, mutual and reciprocal contribution of all the powers
involved in the complex. This needn’t, however, imply that whole is something more
than the sum of the parts (a notion which is often associated with holism) hence the
‘Flat’. Furthermore, whilst it is consistent with the kind of ‘universal’ holism—asso-
ciated for instance with certain versions of conﬁrmation or semantic holism, in their
respective domains—that takes every power to be in some important sense dependent
on every other power, or the totality of powers taken as a whole, Flat Mutualism does
not necessarily imply that this is the case.
Is Flat Holism a form of reductionism or emergentism? The crucial metaphysical
posit of the view are basic powers possessed by basic individuals, which are multi-
track and operate according to the mutual manifestation model. It isn’t clear that, in
addition to these powers, Flat Holism is required to posit additional, metaphysically
autonomous non-basic entities, and so it seems to satisfy (a): basic entities enjoy
special ontic status not enjoyed by non-basic entities. Nevertheless, because of the
crucial and ineliminable determinative role played by complexes of powers, Flat
Holism also seems to satisfy (e): the non-basic plays a determinative role and at
least some of the ‘action’ is not at the base level. These complexes needn’t be seen
as something over-and-above the powers which participate in them (arranged thus-
and-so), for their distinctive determinative role comes not from there being some
4 Note that the form of mutuality at play here is ontologically distinct from that which is a central
feature of Gillett’s Mutualism, which involves mutual ‘upward’ compositional and ‘downward’
machretic determination within a system. Flat Holism involves the ‘sideways’ mutual action of
complexes of powers.

190
A. Carruth
novel entity or individual on the scene, but rather from the collaborative, mutual
and reciprocal manner in which the participant powers come to manifest. Thus, Flat
Holism plausibly also satisﬁes (c): the non-basic is accounted for in terms of the
basic. As it satisﬁes (a) and (c), Flat Holism thus maintains some key reductionist
notions: it doesn’t require novel, distinct higher-level entities; it takes basic entities to
enjoy special ontic status, and it is thus consistent with a one- or no-level ontology.5
However, in attributing an ineliminable determinative role to complexes of powers,
it also satisﬁes a central emergentist notion: that the non-basic plays a determinative
role and at least some of the ‘action’ is not at the base level. Importantly, unlike the
Micro-latency view Flat Holism thus doesn’t allow one to generate a general anti-
emergentist argument of the form set out in Sect. 4, as it isn’t clear that the relevant
analogue of the second premise in that argument:
P2* Flat Holism, if plausible, demonstrates that E-cases can be accommodated
by non-emergentist metaphysics
would be true—because in satisfying (e), Flat Holism cannot be said to straight-
forwardly embrace a non-emergentist metaphysic (and so a forteriori cannot demon-
strate that E-cases can be accommodated by such a metaphysic). Flat Holism thus
seems to sit somewhere between canonical conceptions of reduction and emergence.
Ultimately, whether the view is classiﬁed as one, the other or neither is less impor-
tant than how the view performs in comparison to competing theories. It is to this
question the next section will turn.
8
Flat Holism, Micro-latency and Mutualism
One noteworthy difference between Flat Holism, on the one hand, and both the
Micro-latency and Mutualist accounts, on the other, can be seen by considering
how each view accommodates E-cases. Arguably, both the Micro-latency and Mutu-
alist accounts are principally reactive. That is, faced with the challenge that E-
cases present—to provide a suitable framework for accommodating the apparently
novel and distinctive phenomena or behaviour that typify such cases—these views
introduce novel theoretical posits and ontological commitments. The Micro-latency
account introduces the distinction between micro-latent and micro-manifest powers
and commits to the existence of at least some powers of the former kind. Mutualism
introduces both the distinction between differential and non-differential powers, and
the notion of machretic determination and it commits to the existence of ‘higher-
level’,‘macro’wholeswhicharethesourceofsuchdeterminationandtotheexistence
5 Note that whilst a one- or no-level ontology would typically be taken to exclude the possibility of
emergence, Sartenaer (2018) has argued that there is conceptual space for forms of ‘ﬂat emergence’.
There isn’t space in this paper to explore the extent to which Sartenaer’s conception accords with
the view under discussion here.

Micro-Latency, Holism and Emergence
191
of at least some differential powers. In both cases, some of these posits or commit-
ments enjoy limited motivation or support that is independent of the requirement
to accommodate E-cases—the principal reason to accept micro-latent powers, or
machresis and differential powers, is precisely in reaction to the need to accommodate
E-cases.6
In contrast, Flat Holism follows naturally from the alternative view of powers,
which is motivated independently of discussions concerning the relationship between
the more- and less-complex, of emergence and reduction, and of E-cases. Key propo-
nents of the multi-track mutual manifestation view, such as C. B. Martin and John
Heil simply are not concerned with these sorts of issues when they outline the argu-
ments in favour of this account of the nature of powers (see e.g. Heil, 2003 ch. 8 or
Martin, 2008). Flat Holism does not react to E-cases and modify the way in which
powers are conceived in order to accommodate them; rather, the potential for such
cases is predicted by and naturally follows from the alternative view of powers which
is at the centre of the account. Arguably then, Flat Holism represents a signiﬁcantly
more uniﬁed account than it’s nearby neighbours.
Furthermore, Flat Holism gets by without positing the various novel distinctions;
powers and higher-level entities that are introduced by both the Micro-latency and
Mutualist accounts. This means it seems to have a theoretical advantage in terms
of qualitative simplicity: it posits only one kind of powers, where both the other
views posit two; and it does not need to introduce a novel form of determination
as the Mutualist view does with machresis. A critic might respond that Flat Holism
doesn’t really have such an advantage, as it introduces the posit of powers as multi-
tracking. But such a criticism fails to hit home: all three views under consideration
are framed in terms of powers, and any account of powers has to give some answer
or other regarding whether powers are single- or multi-track. That the single-track
view is the orthodox one doesn’t make it somehow simpler than the alternative. In a
similar vein, the critic might also respond that Flat Holism, in adopting the mutual
manifestation model, is committed to a proprietary notion of determination, just
as Mutualism is with machresis. But again, such a response fails to hit the mark:
Flat Holism’s claim that complexes can play an ineliminable determinative role
(due to the mutual, reciprocal operation of the powers which participate in them) is
just a part of its account of how powers operate in general. Again, all three views
accept powers, and any account of powers will have to have some view about how
it is that powers operate—and that Flat Holism adopts the alternative rather than
orthodox view doesn’t imply any loss in terms of simplicity. Indeed, if Tugby (2010)
is correct that the stimulus-manifestation account of how powers operate implies the
existence of stimuli in other ontological categories, the orthodox view might actually
be the more complex when taken in isolation—notwithstanding the fact that we may
6 Gillett (2016 ch. 7) does provide an argument that machresis is necessary for the existence real
compositional levels, and so it should be noted that if this argument is sound, then any independent
reasons we might have for taking such levels to exist would equally count in favour of both machresis
and differential powers. Whilst E-cases surely account for much of the motivation for taking there
to be real compositional levels, perhaps there are other grounds as well.

192
A. Carruth
well have reasons to accept entities such as actions, events and states which are
independent of considerations concerning how powers operate.
9
Concluding Thoughts
Let me be clear: the discussion in the preceding section of this essay is not intended
to demonstrate that Flat Holism is in some absolute sense a superior position to
either the Micro-latency or the Mutualist accounts; or that these accounts should
be abandoned in favour of Flat Holism; or that they suffer from fatal ﬂaws. The
principal aim of this essay has been much more humble: to introduce the basic form
and ontological commitments of Flat Holism, and to try to establish that the view has
some distinctive merits—in terms of being relatively more uniﬁed and simple—such
that it should be taken at least as seriously as closely competing views such as the
Micro-latency view and Mutualism. It is worth bearing in mind, as mentioned earlier
in this essay, that a pluralistic approach remains a live option in this debate, such
that it could be the case, for instance, that some E-cases involve micro-latent powers;
some differential powers and some qualitatively novel manifestations produced by
the mutual partnerings of multi-track powers (and of course, some apparent E-cases
could be open to reductive analyses of various kinds). Such a pluralism remains a
live option because none of the accounts under discussion here are, strictly speaking,
mutually exclusive of one another. Given the possibility of pluralism, discussions
concerning these three accounts are thus not a zero-sum game—but it is crucial is to
engage with and appreciate the manner in which each account approaches E-cases;
the similarities between them; the points of difference and any distinctive merits each
account might have.
A secondary aim of this essay has been to lend support to the general claim
that the way in which certain issues in the metaphysics of powers are resolved has
ramiﬁcations for the debate between emergentists and reductionists. This paper has
argued that adopting the alternative view, as opposed to the orthodox view, of powers
allowsustorecogniseanovelmannerinwhichtoaccommodateE-cases:FlatHolism.
But the orthodox and alternative views aren’t the only possible accounts of powers,
and so one important focus for future work in this area of debate is to consider what
other approaches to the metaphysics of powers might be theoretically fruitful in the
discussion of the relationship between the more- and less-complex.
Finally, although not addressed in this essay, it should be noted that an examination
of how concrete cases ﬁt (or fail to ﬁt) each of the three accounts is crucially important
(see e.g. the ﬁnal two chapters of Gillett (2016)): the relevant debates should not
be settled by abstract discussion alone. Of course, in order to be in a position to
engage with concrete cases, one needs a clear idea of the relevant commitments and
entailments of each account, hence this paper’s focus on outlining and exploring
how Flat Holism might address E-cases and how it relates to relevant alternative
accounts. Hopefully this essay has contributed to laying the groundwork such that
the important task of engaging the empirics can more be undertaken more easily.

Micro-Latency, Holism and Emergence
193
References
Armstrong, D. M. (1997). A world of states of affairs. Cambridge University Press.
Baggio, G., & Parravicini, A. (eds.), (2019). Special Issue on pragmatism and theories of emergence.
European Journal of Pragmatism and American Philosophy, XI(2).
Batterman, R. (2011). Emergence, singularities and symmettry breaking. Foundations of Physics,
41, 1031–1050.
Baysan, U., & Sartenaer, O. (eds.). (2021) Special issue: Non-standard approaches to emergence.
Synthese.
Bedau, M. A., & Humprheys, P. (Eds.). (2008). Emergence: Contemporary readings in philosophy
and science. The MIT Press.
Bigaj, T., & Wüthrich, C. (Eds.). (2015). Metaphysical emergence in contemporary physics. Rodopi.
Bird, A. (1998). Dispositions and antidotes. The Philosophical Quarterly, 48, 227–234.
Bird, A. (2007). Nature’s metaphysics. Oxford University Press.
Bishop, R. (2010). Whence chemistry? Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part B: Studies
in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics, 41, 171–177.
Bishop, R. (2019). The physics of emergence. Morgan & Claypool.
Bishop, R., Silberstein, M., & Pexton, M. (forthcoming). Emergence in context. Oxford University
Press.
Carruth,A.D.(2019).StrongemergenceandAlexander’sdictum.InGibbetal.(eds.),TheRoutledge
handbook on emergence. Routledge.
Carruth, A. D. (2020). Emergence, reduction and the identity and individuation of powers. Topoi,
39, 1021–1030.
Carruth, A. D., Miller, J. T. M., & Pexton, M. (eds.) (2017a). Special issue on strong emergence
(Vol. 1). Philosophica, 91.
Carruth, A. D., Miller, J. T. M., & Pexton, M. (eds.), (2017b). Special issue on strong emergence
(Vol. 2). Philosophica, 92.
Chalmers, D., (2006). Strong and weak emergence. In Davies & Clayton (eds.), The Re-emergence
of emergence. Oxford University Press.
Churchland, P. M. (1981). Eliminative materialism and the propositional attitudes. The Journal of
Philosophy, 78(2), 67–90.
Corradini, A., & O’Connor, T. (Eds.). (2010). Emergence in science and philosophy. Routledge.
Falkenburg, B., & Morrison, M. (Eds.). (2015). Why more is different: Philosophical issues in
condensed matter physics and complex systems. Springer.
Franklin, A., & Knox, E. (2018). Emergence without limits: The case of Phonons. Studies in
History and Philosophy of Science Part B: Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics,
64, 68–78.
Gibb, S. C., Hendry, R. F., & Lancaster, T. (Eds.). (2018). The Routledge handbook of emergence.
Routledge.
Gillett, C. (2016). Reduction and emergence in science and philosophy. Cambridge University
Press.
Heil, J. (2003). From an ontological point of view. Oxford University Press.
Hendry,R.(2010).Ontologicalreductionandmolecularstructure.StudiesinHistoryandPhilosophy
of Science Part B: Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics, 41, 183–191.
Hohwy, J., & Kallestrup, J. (Eds.). (2008). Being reduced: New essays on reduction, explanation,
and causation. Oxford University Press.
Hoover, K. D. (2009). Microfoundations and the ontology of macroeconomics. In D. Ross, & H.
Kincaid (eds.), The Oxford handbook of philosophy of economics. Oxford University Press.
Humphreys, P. (2016). Emergence: A philosophical account. Oxford University Press.
Kim, J. (1999). Making sense of emergence. Philosophical Studies, 95, 3–36.
Lancaster, T., & Pexton, M. (2015). Reduction and emergence in the fractional quantum hall state.
Studies in the History and Philosophy of Science Part B: Studies in History and Philosophy of
Modern Physics, 52, 343–357.

194
A. Carruth
Lewis, D. (1997). Finkish dispositions. The Philosophical Quarterly, 47, 143–158.
Macdonald, G., & Macdonald, C. (Eds.). (2010). Emergence in mind. Oxford University Press.
Martin, C. B. (1994). Dispositions and conditionals. The Philosophical Quarterly, 44, 1–8.
Martin, C. B. (2008). The mind in nature. Oxford University Press.
McLeish, T. (2017). Strong Emergence and Downward Causation in Biological Physics. Philo-
sophica, 92, 113–138.
Molnar, G. (2003). Powers: A study in metaphysics. Oxford University Press.
Morrison, M. (2012). Emergent physics and micro-ontology. Philosophy of Science, 79(1), 141–166.
O’Connor, T., & Wong, H. Y. (2005). The metaphysics of emergence. Noûs, 39, 659–678.
Paolini Paoletti, M. (2017). The quest for emergence. Philosophia.
Paolini Paoletti, M., & Orilia, F. (Eds.). (2017). Philosophical and scientiﬁc perspectives on
downward causation. Routledge.
Sartenaer, O. (2015). Synchronic vs. diachronic emergence: A reappraisal. European Journal for
Philosophy of Science, 5, 31–54.
Sartenaer, O. (2018). Flat Emergence. Paciﬁc Philosophical Quarterly, 99, 225–250.
Shoemaker, S. (1980). Causality and properties. In P. van Inwagen (Ed.), Time and cause: Essays
presented to Richard Taylor (pp. 109–135). Reidel.
Shoemaker, S. (2002). Kim on emergence. Philosophical Studies, 108, 53–63.
Shoemaker, S. (2007). Physical realisation. Oxford University Press.
Shrader, W. (2010). Shoemaker on emergence. Philosophical Studies, 150, 285–300.
Silberstein, M. (2001). Converging on emergence: Consciousness, causation and explanation. The
Journal of Consciousness Studies, 8, 61–98.
Theiner, G., & O’Connor, T. (2010). The emergence of group cognition. In: A. Corradini, & T.
O’Connor (eds.) Emergence in science and philosophy. Routledge.
Tugby, M. (2010). Simultaneity in dispositional interactions. Ratio, 23(3), 322–338.
van Gulick, R. (2001). Reduction, emergence and other recent options on the mind/body problem:
A philosophic overview. Synthese, 8, 1–34.
Wilson, J. (2015). Metaphysical emergence: Weak and strong. In: Bigaj & Wuthrich (eds.) Meta-
physics in contemporary physics: Poznan studies in the philosophy of the sciences and the
humanities. Brill.
Wilson, J. (2021). Metaphysical emergence. Oxford University Press.

Enactive Realism. A First Look at a New
Theoretical Synthesis
Arturo Carsetti
Cognitive activity is rooted in reality, but at the same time represents the necessary
means whereby reality can embody itself in an objective way: i.e., according to an in-
depth nesting process and a surface unfolding of operational meaning. In this sense,
the objectivity of reality is also proportionate to the autonomy reached by cognitive
processes.
Within this conceptual framework, reference procedures thus appear as related
to the modalities providing the successful constitution of the channel, of the actual
link between operations of vision and thought. Such procedures ensure not only a
“regimentation” or an adequate replica, but, on the contrary, the real constitution of
a cognitive autonomy in accordance with the truth. A method thus emerges which is
simultaneouslyproject,telos andregulatingactivity:acodewhichbecomesaprocess,
positing itself as the foundation of a constantly renewed synthesis between function
and meaning. In this sense, reference procedures act as a guide, mirror and, canaliza-
tion for primary information ﬂows and involved selective forces. They also constitute
precise support for the operations which “imprison” meaning and “inscribe” the “ﬁle”
considered as an autonomous generating system. In this way, they offer themselves
as the actual instruments for the constant renewal of the code, for the invention and
the actual articulation of an ever new incompressibility. Hence the possible deﬁnition
of new axiomatic systems, new measure spaces, the real displaying of processes of
continuous reorganization at the semantic level. Indeed, it is only through a complete,
ﬁrst-order “reduction” and a consequent non-standard second-order analysis that new
incompressibility will manifest itself. Therefore, the reference procedures appear to
be related to a process of multiplication of minds, as well as to a process of uniﬁ-
cation of meanings which ﬁnally emerges as a vision via principles. Here also the
possibility emerges of a connection between things that are seen and those that are
unseen, between visual recognition of objects and thought concerning their secret
interconnections. Hence, for instance, according to Boccioni: “la traduzione in forme
A. Carsetti (B)
University of Rome, Rome, Italy
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
S. Wuppuluri and I. Stewart (eds.), From Electrons to Elephants and Elections,
The Frontiers Collection, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-92192-7_12
195

196
A. Carsetti
plastiche dei piani atmosferici che legano ed intersecano le cose”. In other words,
this is the connection between the successive opening of the eyes of the mind and
the metamorphoses of meaning, a meaning which is progressively enclosed within
generative thinking and manages to express itself completely through the body’s
intelligence.
This functional analysis reveals even more clearly, if possible, the precise aware-
ness that, at the level of a cognitive system, in addition to processes of rational
perception (categorial intuition), we also face speciﬁc ongoing processes of semantic
categorization. It is exactly when such processes unfold in a coherent and harmo-
nious way that the “I” not only manages to emerge as an observation system but is
also molded by the simultaneous display of the structures of intentionality. Through
the intentional vision, I comes to sense the Other’s thought-process emerging at the
level of its interiority. The drawing thus outlined, however, is meant for the Other,
for the Other’s autonomy, for its emerging as objectivity and action. This enables me
to think of the autonomy of the Nature that “lives” (within) me.
At the level of intuition-based categorization processes, the ﬁle is “selected” from
the ongoing morphogenesis. When the original meaning manages to express new
lymph through a renewed production of forms, the self-inscribing ﬁle might express
its uniﬁcation potentialities through the successive individuation of concepts which,
however, are selected and molded at an intuitive level. Hence the possibility of an
actual “inscription” to the same extent as the morphogenesis, but also the realization
of a reduction process, the very laying down of an original creativity within a mono-
dimensional and dynamic framework. It is exactly when the reduction is carried out,
though, that the procedures of reﬂection, the identiﬁcation of limits and completion
can be performed on the basis of the constant support to the telos activity, of the
primary regulation activities proper to the organism taken as ongoing projectuality.
The uniﬁcation procedures inherent in the nesting process, effected in accordance
with precise conceptual constraints depending on the self-inscription of the ﬁle,
then ﬁt, ﬁnding their foundation, in attractors which operate at the level of speciﬁc
correlation-patterns and organic instrument-systems of measure. These gradually
grow up and multiply, giving rise to natural self-organizing modules, activated by
an inner-code, which materialise over a period of time as based on precise measure
operations encoded in a speciﬁc project. The result is an autonomous (and selec-
tive) production of forms modulated according to concepts and connected through
the telos, thereby becoming vision via principles, a production able to articulate
according to a speciﬁc and unifying intelligence. There thus emerges a “body” acting
in conjunction with its intelligence:
“my” body which at the same time manages to transcend itself and blend with itself in the
Other. Hence the very possibility of the “presentation” as Forma formata of an original
meaning which will simultaneously blend with itself and sub-divide itself in time. While the
eyes of the mind manage to observe a Natura naturata populated by observers, the brain
with its measure operations and net connections manages to “think”, moving beyond itself
into the Other, a Forma formata interwoven by works.
In a context of this kind, the forms of intuition (as well as, on the other hand, the
categorial apparatus) cannot be considered impermeable to the conditions of external

Enactive Realism. A First Look at a New Theoretical Synthesis
197
evolution. In the meantime, it appears increasingly necessary to recognize that the
Darwinian external selection will co-exist with an internal selection connected to
the successive deep-level unfolding of meaning. It then becomes mandatory to refer
back to the procedures of categorial intuition as postulated by Husserl, but also to
anchor these procedures to a particular conception of the relation between organism
and environment which is both dialectical and co-evolutive. The reference proce-
dures, like those of simulation, are never neutral, and never regard the human realm
alone, but are able to act as a guide, mirror, and canalization for the primary informa-
tion ﬂuxes which gradually inscribe themselves in the form of codices, constraints,
and modules-forms in action: natural simulation modules which govern, at the basic
level, the structuration processes articulating at the level of the living (and cognitive)
organism. In this sense, the operational logic of intellect and simulation must also
be considered in combination with a deeper logical level concerning the articulation
of life itself, also requiring us to map out their co-operative and functional interde-
pendence. The procedures of reference, far from being external to reality, lead, on
the basis of an ongoing interdependence with the evolutionary paths in action, to the
progressive (inner) constitution of individuals who ﬁnally act as autonomous entities
and posit themselves as the real source of neural creativity (at the level of knowl-
edge construction). The reference procedures thus give rise to a complex dialectical
exchange between action, thought, and meaning, producing, in particular, an evalu-
ation and exploration of the contents and limits of the original information-ﬂuxes.
This exchange leads to new forms of autonomy, and the extension and recovery of
the conditions of primitive creativity: hence the primary source of that continuous
“addition” of new nuclei of creativity characterising the logic of the living (being)
which Bergson speaks of.
True invariance, life, can exist only within the framework of ongoing autonomous
morphogenesis and vice versa. Concepts would thus appear to be linked to the inven-
tion and a continuous activity of selection and “anchorage” realized on semantic
grounds. It is the work of invention and generation (in invariance), linked with the
“rooting” of meaning, which determines the evolution, the leaps and punctuated
equilibria, the conditions related to the unfolding of new modalities of invariance,
an invariance which is never simple repetition and which springs on each occasion
through deep-level processes of renewal and recovery. The selection perpetrated by
meaning reveals its autonomy above all in its underpinning, in an objective way, the
ongoing choice of these new modalities. As such it is not, then, concerned only with
the game between the possible and the actual (F. Jacob), offering itself as a simple
channel for pure chance, but with providing a channel for the inscription of the ﬁle
in the humus of meaning, to prepare the necessary conditions for continuous renewal
and recovery of original creativity. In effect, it is this autonomy in inventing new
modules of incompressibility which determines the emergence of new (and true)
creativity, which also takes place through the “narration” of the effected construc-
tion. Pace Kant, sensibility is not a simple interface between absolute chance and an
invariant intellectual order. In this sense, the reference procedures, if successful, are
able to modulate canalization and create the basis for the appearance of new frames
of incompressibility through morphogenesis. This is not a question of discovering

198
A. Carsetti
and exploring (according, for instance, to Putnam’s conception) new “territories”,
but of offering ourselves as the matrix and arch through which they can spring
autonomously in accordance with ever-increasing levels of complexity. There is
no casual autonomous process already in existence, and no possible selection and
synthesis activity via a possible “remnant” through reference procedures considered
as a form of simple regimentation. These procedures are in actual fact functional to
the construction and irruption of new incompressibility: meaning considered as the
promoter of Forma formans, offers the possibility of creating a holistic anchorage,
and is exactly what allows the categorial apparatus to emerge and act according to
a coherent “arborization”. In this way a time of invention can be assured, but not a
time of repetition: a time characterized by speciﬁc processes of renewal and recovery
which continuously reveal themselves as possible in proportion to the effective real-
ization of the “work”. What determines the ongoing selection each time (at the level
of the primary informational ﬂuxes) is the new incompressibility that arises. This
requires that the reference procedures posit themselves as arch between the two
selections: between invariance on the one hand, and autonomous morphogenesis on
the other. In other words, they are only able to nurture new incompressibility where
there exists a process of nesting of pure virtuality’s original space. The important
aspect is not, then, the remnant in itself but the successful “narration”. It is effective
inscription giving rise to new incompressibility which necessarily bypasses me. I
will, then, ultimately be able to observe a new incompressibility which reveals itself
as the ongoing fusion of emergent nuclei of creativity within the unity of an operant
signiﬁcation. The new invention which is born then shapes and opens the (new) eyes
of the mind: I see as a mind because new meaning is able to articulate and take root
through me (and only proportionately as this occurs).
I must transform myself into an arch and then offer the arch (and myself) to other
through multiplication. I will thus be able to fulﬁll myself as a form of new creativity
and achieved autonomy. This is the means to step outside myself while afﬁrming my
objectivity as creator-artiﬁcer: the donation of the drawing-thought to the other, an
assimilation of the other for the other, to make it, too, a creator again in his coming
out of self-abandonment. It is this that will then reveal itself as true possession, to
merge with the inner broadening of the basis of creativity. I neither capture nor order
nor replicate simply: I simulate to allow the advent of a new life, but to do this I must
pass through the arch of creation and “disincarnation”, effecting the link between
the two ongoing selections and managing to close the circle by opening and laying
down myself as a grid (Tiziano, The Martyrdom of St. Lawrence, Venice).
As a collating mechanism I must give voice to the two selection-processes (at the
two different levels of vision (the mind) and revisable thought (the brain)), becoming,
in my turn, a creator and a source of life and coagulum for the Other and in the Other,
at the same time as the Other posits itself as a source of meaning and truth for me.
Hence the need to shape-create the drawing and offer it up for the realization-thought
process of the other. I offer up the vision of myself (which is ultimately the result
of a self-organizing process) for the thought-process of the other: for the measure
operations effected by the other, to allow it. To posit itself again as a creative and
autonomous being.

Enactive Realism. A First Look at a New Theoretical Synthesis
199
As W. Dean correctly remarks, Tennenbaum’s Theorem can be understood to
illustrate that: “although in classical mathematics we can demonstrate that non-
standard models of arithmetic exist, the theorem intervenes to show that we can
never hope to go beyond linguistic descriptions such as ‘let M be a model of T0’ so
as to characterize the structure of M explicitly”.1 Actually, given that M is countable
we can characterize the substructure ⟨M, < M⟩constructively up to isomorphism as
the order type ω + (ω ∗+ω) · η.
However: “the fact that we have still gone on to develop a rich theory of such
structures and their interrelationships is testament to the fact that the development
of model theory often does not require us to fully extensionalize descriptions of
models which we have introduced by such means”.2 In fact, we can easily realize
that our ability to refer to non-standard models must be understood as mediated by
descriptions which are not only indeﬁnite but which we know can never be made
fully constructive. In other words, we are obliged to adopt a different understanding
of ‘model’ inspired by Constructivism. Hence a possible conﬂuence, at ﬁrst, of the
computationalist view with Putnam’s ‘nonrealist’ semantics, with the attempt, that
is to say, to identify the reference of an expression with its sense understood as an
appropriate type of veriﬁcation procedure. ‘Objects’ in constructive mathematics
are given through descriptions. Those descriptions do not have to be mysteriously
attached to those objects by some non-natural process … Rather the possibility of
proving that a certain construction (the ‘sense’, so to speak, of the description of the
model) has certain constructive properties is what is asserted and all that is asserted by
saying the model ‘exists’. In short, reference is given through sense and sense is given
through veriﬁcation procedures and not truth conditions.3 (Putnam, 1980, p. 479)
(emphasis original). According to the theoretical perspective proposed here, let us
remember that according to Benacerraf any set of objects with the ω-type ordering
can be a model for arithmetic. However, next to this property we must also consider
other important properties: actually, a basic feature of natural numbers is given by the
fact that humans normally utilize them to count. Speciﬁcally we learn what natural
numbers are while learning to count. But learning in the case of an autonomous
agent (the Minotaur) is necessarily linked to the realization of an embodiment, an
embodiment that, in turn, presupposes the encounter of the Minotaur with Ariadne as
well as the full unfolding of his imagination. The agent must also take into account
the use and the conditions of the exercise concerning his very self-identiﬁcation: the
properties relative to ω-ordering alone are not enough to identify the real exercise on
themathematics.Inotherwords,themodelisintended(andexists)whenitadequately
reﬂects our intuitions. “We learn what are natural numbers while learning to count.
Consequently, we argue that an intended model for arithmetic should be such that one
can perform basic arithmetical operations (addition and multiplication) on elements
of this model (numbers from this model)”.4
In this sense the model does not present itself simply as a construction charac-
terized by certain properties: the model must also allow speciﬁc operations to be
performed on its own elements and must have a privileged relationship with the use
of certain abilities as operated by the autonomous agent at the level of the embodi-
ment process at play. It is only if I prove myself capable of operating successfully on

200
A. Carsetti
elements of the model that I come to understand: i.e. to exercise a speciﬁc skill such
as that, for example, relative to counting. It is in this way that Ariadne can illuminate
and that the construction of I, in its turn, can be pursued.
We are far beyond Putnam: the model not only exists because it is identiﬁed
through abstract structures, constructive properties and veriﬁcation procedures, but
also because it refers to the conditions proper to an actual embodiment of which,
for instance, a speciﬁc learning process is an integral part. Thus, at the level of the
intended model for arithmetic we have the convergence of recursivity, ﬁrst-order
induction and ω-type ordering (Tennenbaum theorem): the intended model neces-
sarily takes shape in reference to speciﬁc recursive processes, to what is, from a
general point of view, the landscape of Reﬂexivity. A convergence, in any case, that
takes place in the context of the detachment operated by the Minotaur. What happens,
however, when we enter the arena of metamorphosis in all its breadth? When, that
is to say, we take into account the entire journey of the Minotaur. In such a case, as
Picasso clearly shows in the painting “The ﬂute of Pan” (Museum Picasso, Paris), a
further element enters the scene: the score relating to the inheritance of Pan, i.e. the
original set of the eigenvalues on the carpet. We are now in the realm of non-standard
models where the reference to the ordering is to vary as shown by Henkin in 1950.
We will no longer only be faced with ω-ordering but, for instance, also with the order
type ω + (ω ∗+ω) · η and so on. The imagination at work at the level of the embodi-
ment (as, indeed, shown by Picasso in his painting) is guided by eigenvalues and not
by eigenforms. Let’s imagine now to recover, in the footsteps of Carsetti (1989),5 a
suitable model for a given process of metamorphosis and self-organization. Having
to refer, initially, to a set of eigenvalues, it will be necessary to refer not only to
recursive processes and standard models but also to both non-standard models and
simulation and invention procedures. Hence the entry into the scene of a new theo-
retical perspective: the perspective related to set-theoretic Relativism. Now, we must
adopt, as Skolem does, a different understanding of ‘model’ inspired by Construc-
tivism and set-theoretic Relativism. The object-construction to which Putnam refers
is now replaced by a process of self-organization, by the very decline of a metamor-
phosis process such as that so well illustrated by Picasso or Ovid. We are faced with
a dialectic at play between imagination and invention and not only with the presence
of speciﬁc relations between objects. In the light of this new perspective, we should
maintain that to ﬁnd out which algorithms really correspond to the references relative
to some speciﬁc constructive operations it should mean for the autonomous agent
that undergoes the metamorphosis to be able to make Nature speak (constructing
in the right way the oracle as a new Oedipus) in order to come to feel the solution
of the problem in its coming to ﬂow at the level of his own veins. In this sense,
only an effective renewed embodiment can, therefore, tell us what the algorithms in
question should be. It is the new life and with it the new arising mathematics that
will come to condition the self-organizing ﬁbers of the Minotaur along the course
of his own evolution starting from the actual giving of the irruption as it arises from
the sacriﬁce of Marsyas. A life, in particular, that will, then, extend itself along the
proﬁles of a new invariance (up to the self-organizing of a Road, but in the silence,
a silence interrupted only by the ﬂowing and fading away of the sound related to

Enactive Realism. A First Look at a New Theoretical Synthesis
201
the stiletto heels of Echo). The reference for an autonomous self-organizing agent is
given by the achievement and veriﬁcation (but on his own ﬂesh) of his autonomy, the
autonomy proper to an agent that manages to handle the algorithmic schemes at work
in accordance with his inner transformation thus resulting able to prove that he exists
to the extent that he places himself at the root of the fulﬁlment of metamorphosis.
The new autonomous agent who will thus be born will therefore be able to look at
the ancient remains of the ﬁrst observer thus realizing, as Skolem himself states, that
many ancient ﬁgures which inhabited the theoretical universe of the ﬁrst observer
(such as the ancient inﬁnities) no longer show themselves in accordance with their
original characteristics (i.e. as true inﬁnities) with respect to the new arising horizon
(the horizon relative to the new observation that is born). We are, in effect, faced
with a new embodiment and the conditions relating to the model will now undergo a
radical change. If we set ourselves from the point of view of a radical Constructivism,
an effective semantic anchorage for an observer system such as the one, for example,
represented by the non-trivial machine as imagined by H. von Foerster, can come to
be identiﬁed only to the extent that the evolving system itself proves able to change
the semantics. This, however, will result in our being able to realize an expression of
ourselves as autonomous beings, as subjects, in particular, capable of focusing on the
same epistemological conditions relating to our autonomy. A creative autonomy that
expresses itself above all in the observer’s ability to govern the change taking place.
Only the Minotaur operating in these conditions will actually come to undergo the
new embodiment. Here is the passage on one’s shoulders to which Skolem refers,
namely that continuous passage from the ﬁrst to the second observer that marks the
very course of natural evolution.
We will then be able to place ourselves as witnesses (but at the level of the new
embodiment) of what in the past has been the ability on the part of the ﬁrst observer
to govern his own growth process. Here is the ﬂourishing of an intentional logic
based on the ineliminable relationship with other. At the outset there is no ability to
count, in fact the eyes of the Minotaur as painted by Picasso are not open from the
beginning: they come to open as genuine eyes only to the extent of the construction
in progress of those structures of imagination that allow the correct articulation of the
schemes and, therefore, the same birth in the round, but by bricolage, of the activity
of counting. Biological and cognitive activity is always in reference to the evolution
at work and the construction of a Temple intersected by perceptual acts (within the
framework of the ongoing dialectic between incompressibility and meaning).
The reference for an autonomous self-organizing agent is given by the achieve-
ment and veriﬁcation (but on his own ﬂesh) of his autonomy, the autonomy proper
to an agent that manages to handle the algorithmic schemes at work in accordance
with his own transformation thus resulting able to prove that he exists to the extent
that he places himself at the root of the construction of the properties that identify
his very creativity: true existence is given by creativity at work (but in the agent’s
awareness of this same creativity).
The categorial is in me, in the inwardness of my being, in my own coming to
mould myself as a creator: Noli foras ire. Here is a categorial that emerges at the
level of Nature (Pan) and that manifests itself, then, following the conception of

202
A. Carsetti
Marsyas, along with the giving of a simulation activity which occurs in the kingdom
of Culture according to the dictates of a speciﬁc DNA. On the opposite side, the God
(the environment, the reality that surrounds me as a craftsman and that selects me,
the S. V. Mountain that every time upsets me as a Painter and craftsman (Cezanne)
following what is the manifestation of its apparently inviolable complexity) is the one
who arouses, who proceeds with the selection and who consoles, the one who gives
impressions of excruciating beauty and who, however, open to the possibility for the
craftsman to manage his own conceptual apparatus in order to grasp the meaning of
such impressions. Hence the encounter between the craftsman and his environment,
but in dependence on a coupled metamorphosis. Apollo and Marsyas: creativity and
simulation. There is a creativity in Apollo expressing itself through an inspiration
that is declined for subsequent impressions involving the subject and there is a simu-
lation activity in Marsyas that comes to be expressed through successive exposures
of his DNA. Apollo expresses himself as creativity in life through an inspiration
that emanates, Marsyas instead gives rise to a Work in accordance with the truth.
Apollo inspires the craftsman’s activity, while Marsyas, for his part, allows the God
to express his selective activity. Pan is the Mountain that through Syringe transmits
its inheritance thus opening to the birth of the M. Marsyas is the conceived that
opens to the Painter of abstraction, to Cezanne as craftsman and Painter. Cezanne,
coming to undergo the impressions, develops that conceptual network that will lead
him by means of the categorial intuition, to hear the speech of the Mountain ﬂowing
in his veins. Pan as creativity and Nature which then gives rise to new conception
and Marsyas, instead, as the Lord of the Garlands which comes to decline himself
as simulation and Work, thus determining the new irruption. If there were not the
Minotaur who, at ﬁrst, is added to the Temple in determining each time the right ﬁxed
points and if there were not, therefore, Marsyas who presides over his extroversion,
thus coming to undergo the selection by the God, there cannot be that co-evolution
which alone can allow the meeting between creativity and simulation to take place.
A co-evolution which, in any case, will be tailored to the channeling of the God at
the level of what is the subsequent emergence of impressions. Here is the Mountain
which will accompany the Muse and here is the Painter who will come to inhabit
his brain. Here is a DNA that will express itself in a fabric of actions coordinated by
a brain and here is a web-network that will be channeled through the emergence of
impressions synthesized in themselves by operating intentionality. When I grasp the
reality of the web (when I contribute to “making” the environment) I offer the neces-
sary support, at the biological level, for the establishment of ever new intentionality.
When I contribute to “model” from the inside the craftsman, I offer the necessary
support at the intentional level (not at the level of function, that is to say, but of the
meaning) for the constitution of a cognitive organism. From Nature to Culture: from
the Minotaur to Marsyas-Painter (through conception). Once we start from a thought
(creativity) considered as the matrix of an emerging Nature (and, therefore, from
Pan) and once we start from a pure simulation activity on a cultural level (and from
Marsyas). From Apollo’s own creativity to impressions, from Marsyas to a computa-
tional and simulation activity through concepts. Indeed, I can only grasp impressions
through the proper construction of concepts. Here is the simulation-creativity circle

Enactive Realism. A First Look at a New Theoretical Synthesis
203
but preceded by the function-meaning circle. If the concepts do not come to express
themselves in the right way along with the construction of the ﬁlters, the impressions
will not be able to come to reveal their (hidden) meaning. If impressions do not come
to work properly, concepts cannot come to articulate in depth in harmony with oper-
ating self-organization. Here is the backbone of the process of categorial intuition.
The channeling by the Mountain represents the channeling of Nature itself as a func-
tion (but together with its meaning). The channeling by Marsyas represents, in turn,
the channeling by Culture as simulation at work (but together with its creativity).
Nature (Pan) as thought and as the arena of the function-meaning dialectic versus
Culture (Marsyas) as simulation and as the arena of simulation-creativity dialectic.
Apollo speaks by impressions (at the level of semantic categorization), Marsyas
expresses himself by computations (at the level of categorial intuition). On the one
hand, impressions + concepts, on the other, an intellectual vision in the God. The
God thinks in (and through) the craftsman, the craftsman feels in (and through) the
God. I feel the God ﬂowing in my veins. The craftsman contemplates the God sensing
him in his own light by making himself light. Here is Kitano Takeshi leading the
Ecclesia into the light although he is no longer able to see (cf. the ending of the
ﬁlm: Zatoichi). The function is carried out by ﬁxed points, the intentionality by the
carving operated at the level of the Work. Once the constellation in the sky and once
the nesting of Eurydice in the abyss. Apollo (the Mountain) speaks by impressions,
Marsyas elaborates his inner vision by computations and models. When this happens
it is because speciﬁc ﬁlters have allowed the DNA of Marsyas to “expose” itself in
the appropriate way, in adherence, that is to say, to the information content present
in the original “impressions” that characterize the mysterious message of the Moun-
tain (Apollo). That’s when Clio can appear. Hence, then, the fractal articulation of
Pan. Marsyas-Painter has brought his work to completion and his DNA has proved
capable of exposing itself in the right way (the way, that is to say, that allows the
content of the impressions to be represented and channeled at the craftsman’s level)
thus allowing the craftsman to explore new forms of incarnation. The God, in other
words, thinks in the craftsman to the extent that the craftsman himself reconstructs
the message of God in himself, making it operative at the level of the exposure of
his DNA and the consequent incarnation. In other words, the Painter, by painting
the very presence of the God (in Clio), comes to represent, at the level of the Work,
the impressions that characterize this very presence and reconstructs in himself the
selection put in place by the God having identiﬁed the correct software. Extroversion
> selection > reconstruction at the genetic level > incarnation. Marsyas dies but in
the meantime, he comes out of absence thus preparing for a renewed realization of
the enthusiasm and for the new irruption. If the God comes to think in him he comes
to fully feel his presence at the level of the Work of art. Hence the new break-in and
the emergence of Pan. Hence, again, the detachment, the journey of the new Mino-
taur, the function-meaning dialectic up to the very giving of the new conception of
Marsyas and the new dialectical relationship between creativity and simulation but
in a new ambient. When the categorial proper to Marsyas gives rise to new forms
of incarnation (thus embodying the Other), when the Painter feels the new presence
of the God in the Muse (at the same time that he paints this very enthusiasm), this

204
A. Carsetti
means that he has captured in himself the creativity (Thought) of the God himself
and can, therefore, die by the very hand of Apollo and following what is the conse-
quent irruption. The Silenus now comes to contemplate the God through the action
of Painting: the artist feels the God, contemplates him in his own light, the light that
now also emanates from him to the extent that he was added to himself by the God
as a creator. He who, as a Painter, reveals himself capable of embodying the Other
through the action of Painting (cf. Lucien Freud) comes to feel the presence of God
(in the Other) by coming himself to be added as creator (as Painter in truth). Cezanne
who realizes himself as a Painter by dying on his battleﬁeld (the clearing in front of
the S. V. Mountain he had chosen as location) comes to be illuminated through the
Work by the very light of the God. His DNA came to “expose” itself in harmony with
the software which animates the creativity of the God. The impressions bring into
play their informational (and intentional) value by means of the ﬁlters, thus inducing
those changes at the level of the exposure of the DNA of the craftsman that mark that
metamorphosis of Marsyas that occurs when he comes to be added to himself by the
God The impressions now speak in his ﬂesh, in his own veins: God thinks in him in
his own metamorphosis. Cezanne tracing the very archaeology of the Mountain and
placing himself as a stool for it in view of the renewed expression of its creativity will
come to be added as a creator by realizing himself as a Painter in truth. He will come
to reconstruct in himself the paths relating to the incarnation in him of the original
impressions. He will become ﬂesh and renewed computation for a God who will
thus be able to come to think in him. Cezanne will act as software for the hardware
represented by the God. The Father recovers himself through the Son but following
the sacriﬁce put in place by the Son himself as well as following the help he gave to
the Father who fell prey to the self-abandonment. Marsyas will thus be able resurrect
as an added creator. Here is the action of Painting and here is the real presence of the
God in Clio as Work and as Muse of History. Cezanne-Vermeer to the extent that he
embodies his Muse-model according to the truth, recovers in himself the creativity
of the God by coming to be added as a Painter but in his own death and in his exit
from absence along with his coming to become pure light in the God. The impres-
sions will now come to speak from his own bosom, he will feel them articulated
in himself: Noli foras ire. Here is the sense of the Simulation- Creativity dialectic.
From the Simulation- Creativity dialectic to the renewed dialectic between Function
and Meaning. From the irruption to the conception. When Vermeer paints the Muse
again, his DNA will have come to expose itself in harmony with the impressions
coming from the Mountain: he will, therefore, added, but only to the extent of his
success, of the success, that is to say, of the very action of Painting, an action he
tenaciously pursued. The meeting between creativity and simulation takes place in
the arena of Schematism and is articulated through the construction of speciﬁc ﬁlters.
Marsyas receives the message of the Mountain to the extent that he reveals himself
capable of inspiring and channeling his own growth on a biological level according
to the impressions coming from the Mountain itself to the point of coming to feel
the original creativity (the God) coming to dictate to him in what are his own veins.
Here is the miracle operated by the ﬁlters but on the basis of the ongoing process of
self-organization.

Enactive Realism. A First Look at a New Theoretical Synthesis
205
Apollo and Marsyas, creativity and simulation. Apollo (the S. V. Mountain) thinks
of the craftsman (Cezanne), engraves it, and selects it for excruciating impressions
on the basis of his mysterious creativity. The moment in which the Painter dies, thus
sanctioning the victory by Apollo, (his success in truth) is the presence of the God
(the enthusiasm of which Clio bears witness) that comes to afﬁrm itself through the
action of Painting. The God thus comes to think in the Silenus but at the cost of the
Painter’s exit from absence. The Silenus, however, to the extent that he will have
had the opportunity to witness Clio’s emerging enthusiasm, will be able to identify
(and determine) the same coming to “ﬂash” of new Nature. Hence, in fact, Pan’s
scream. Pan comes to be born because the Painter through the action of Painting
has become pure software, leaving the absence but in the very manifestation of the
presence of the God (in Clio). The Painter consumes himself in the praxis of art, he
hears the God speaking in him but by resorting to his own brush. He becomes a stool
for the God and for his resurrection, and in this way comes to be added. Here is the
dialectic between software and incarnation. It is the action of the software which, by
embodying the subject of Painting (to the point of identifying, at the limit, the very
presence of the God in Clio) allows the Painter who becomes a stool for the divinity
to be added in creativity. Here is the one who paints in the creativity thus opening
to new Nature. Hence a Nature that comes from a Work of art. Hence, then, the new
emerging Minotaur. The realization of the software is always within the boundaries
of a sensibility and of the ever renewed dialectic between Simulation and Creativity.
Both the God and the creator participate in this sensibility. Without these limits
and without the passage preached by Skolem there is, therefore, no real life. In this
sense, the passage for disembodiment as advocated by Chaitin is fundamental, just as
it is fundamental the recourse to the identiﬁcation of the software’s path. However,
it is necessary to open, at the same time, to the dialectic between Simulation and
Creativity, as well as to the procedures of a real self-organization process, to the
passageeachtimetonewNature,etc.Equallyfundamentalistherelationshipbetween
Nature and Culture, just as the intuitions of Skolem regarding the metamorphoses of
the observer. Moreover, we must always open up to new Semantics. All this, however,
would not be possible without recourse to that Theory of complexity created by
Chaitin and without the connection of this theory with the doctrine of morphogenesis
as identiﬁed by Turing and with the theory of self-organization (cf. H. Atlan, S.
Kauffman, A. Carsetti etc.). Only a careful exploration in the regions of Chaos like
the one carried out by Chaitin, by Turing etc. can help with that. In particular, it is
Chaitin’s studies on Omega that have led to the possibility of a better understanding
of the rules of engagement of the software at the level of the constitution of those
peculiar skills that intersect life.
The procedures of extroversion and the identiﬁcation of the software are in sight
of a new and deeper incarnation. I must not only optimize the software, I must, ﬁrst
of all, submit myself to the selection by Apollo in view of an opening on his part
to new Nature and new possible forms of creativity. This is the key role played by
the simulation activity and the consequent extroversion, the role that Marsyas plays
starting from his conception. The path of Marsyas is that relating to the construction
and use of new software but in view of the opening up to new creativity. The Painter

206
A. Carsetti
of Abstraction poses himself as Lucien Freud, like a Hermes, that is to say, who
reveals himself capable of embodying his subjects to the extent that he has become
the conscious master of the software relating to the praxis of art he has put in place.
I have to offer (in extroversion) my cortex, the software as it has materialized in my
body, for the incision by the knife of the God until it is shaken. Hence, then, the rising
of a new Minotaur in view of the new conception of Marsyas as Prince of simulation
and the successive constitution of the Painter of abstraction. From the Minotaur to the
Painter, from Pan to Marsyas. When I identify the software through the extroversion
operated, I come to ﬁx a body as hardware allowing the God to affect and dictate me
inside. This is the way to get the God into my veins. In other words, this does not open
only to the possibility of a better organization at the level of the existing software but
also to the opening itself relating to the ﬂow of new creativity. Here is the creative
song of Apollo, here is the enthusiasm of the God which manifests itself in me, in
my own passing away but through Clio. This is the Work (the action of Painting)
with which I assure my inheritance and my ascent (my exit from absence), the ﬁnal
recognition that annihilates and exalts me (cf. Picasso’s sculpture that compares with
the conception by the Goddess and does so through poor materials and the result of
recycling). Here is the Other who returns to life in me but through my work, the
Other in which I “enlighten”. It is starting from the irruption of the God that it will
therefore be possible for a new categorial to come to rise; here is the very emergence
of Pan as new Nature from which the path relative to the new incarnation along the
detachment will spring. From the wild ferinity of Pan to the opening of the eyes of
the Minotaur but in truth. Hence the wayfarer and natural evolution but in view of
a renewed cultural evolution and the role that the new Painter will play in it. The
new incarnation thus appears linked to the realization as existence and autonomy of
a new body, a body inhabited by a renewed (visual) cognition and which constitutes
itself as prelude to the subsequent revelation of a soul. The Minotaur that is born is
new compared to the ancient observer. He makes reference to the climbing on his
very shoulders by the ancient observer but to the extent that cultural evolution and
the passage for the Painter will be given (with consequent irruption). This is the path
that is missing in Chaitin, the path, in fact, concerning the reality of a biological
being that is both life and truth, life and cognition (in truth). Without via there is no
new incarnation and vice versa: the absence of real development actually hibernates
life, freezes every possible emergency. God speaks only through the praxis of art,
only with reference to my Work, to my making myself a stool. Therefore, the mere
offering of my body is not enough, intelligent preparation is needed. Oedipus-M
needs to prepare for his death so that there can be the resolution of the labyrinth.
Hence the importance of the studies on omega but also the role played by the taking
charge of the meaning, by the love (intellectual yet embodied) that in Caravaggio
wins everything, by the emotion that if guided by the intellect illuminates with its
light every aspect of reality. Here is a God who is reborn from his own viscera because
the Painter (De Nittis) has revealed himself able to know all the secrets of the air and
has conquered the arena of the intellect. The real optimization is the one that opens
to the scream of Pan passing through Clio and the renewal of the primeval emotion
itself but through the Work and the autonomous creation by the Painter, that creation

Enactive Realism. A First Look at a New Theoretical Synthesis
207
that is balm and gift for the exit by the God from self-abandonment. Father, can’t
you see that I burn? Why have you forsaken me? Why have you, in fact, abandoned
yourself? Accept the ﬂames that surround me in order to regain your creativity. If Clio
excites me, the God is at work. The success of the Work is the way to salvation. The
hand of the Painter that portrays Clio is the hand that opens to the new mathematics
of the emerging world. The creativity that overwhelms everything is creativity that
operates in the viscera of the nucleus, changing the very way of being of the rules.
Here are rules that change the rules: God comes to speak in me as he plays the role
of Vermeer, Caravaggio, Cezanne etc. So I must not only promote Pan’s scream but
also the new detachment starting from the Sylva. A new language will therefore be
necessary with the invention of new words at the level of the vernacular (Dante). I am
reborn to myself according to my story but in view of conception and following the
irruption linked to the presence of the God in the Muse (Clio), a presence that passes
through my hand (the hand of a Painter) but that transcends me, that I cannot contain
in me and by which I cannot limit myself to being contained where the irruption is
to be true. The life that talks about you is still too short if it contains you (if it only
contains you). If it is true it can only shake you up and it will be with reference to the
grammar of the new irruption that you will only be able to ﬁnd possible information
on what your (new) emerging being is. It is only starting from the broken mirrors that
you can now proceed to identify yourself in the imagination and in the simulation in
accordance with the arts and tools of poetry (Painting). Here is the necessity every
time of conception. Only if, starting from the broken mirrors, the right cypher comes
to the surface, can you continue your path in metamorphosis. Optimization is only
one of the possible consolations along such a harsh journey. Each time you will have
to complete the circle: from the Minotaur to the Painter and from the Painter to the
Minotaur. Here are the two steps necessary for conception and irruption. Here is via
(as evolution and metamorphosis) and the two senses of it: natural and cultural. It
is the natural evolution that leads to Marsyas in truth and it is the cultural one that
leads to Pan and the detachment of the new observer. Marsyas simulates and extrudes
himself by unraveling his software and ﬁxing it as hardware on which the God’s knife
will come to operate. Hence the emergence of new creativity, but from within. It is
what is required in order to awaken the God from self-abandonment. Here is the cry
(see Antonioni’s ﬁlm: Il Grido) of the Son to the Father, the last invocation on the
cross before the crash. In the ﬁlm, the cry is of the woman who witnesses the death of
her Son, of the one who had been her husband and who has come to be replaced by the
new infant. In reality, the cry accompanies the groom’s ﬂight from the tower and his
coming to smash. It constitutes the last word-expression of the traveller reﬂected in
the one who as a woman had abandoned him. The invocation of the Son to the Father
is translated into the cry of the ancient bride. Once you are added to the meaning
and once you come to be added by the creativity in action to itself. Function and
meaning, on the one hand, and simulation and creativity, on the other. By adding
myself I make a precise carving with reference to the Temple, coming to be added it
is my being, instead, that is carved and dictated inside. The sense of software as a gift
(or the sense of dance as a gift, of choreography as a thought) is to open myself to
new creativity and new evolution. The God who thinks in the craftsman who is added

208
A. Carsetti
comes, therefore, to be contemplated and intuited by the very craftsman (as shown
by Beato Angelico). The Goddess, in turn, comes to be categorized and calculated
by the hero who comes to join the Temple (by intuition). Here is the stone Temple
of Poussin. The God who dictates to me inside comes to be categorically intuited,
but it is only by grasping his voice that I can therefore realize my metamorphosis in
conception. Marsyas as the result of the metamorphosis and as the hero who, later
on, will be added, will only be able to show himself as the one who has climbed onto
his shoulders, thus opening up to a new possible observer along the course of the
metamorphosis. This is the sense itself of the ongoing metamorphosis, but within
the framework of a double dialectic: the dialectic between surface and depth and the
dialectic between hardware and software. It is through this double dialectic that the
passage Skolem speaks of can really come to be realized in all the complexity of its
actual articulation.
According to an ancient intuition by Braque the emotion must be corrected
according to the rule if we want to ensure a subsequent intentional extension by
the emotion itself and, therefore, through this, the achievement of true invariance,
albeit in the change. The rule, in turn, must be nourished by emotion if we wish
to ensure a full development of the rule itself and, therefore, a real morphogenesis,
albeit in continuity. Here is Life and Truth coupled, and with them via, albeit in
accordance with its two directions. Hence the limit but also the value of the theses
advocated by Chaitin: the great scholar is unable to grasp all the valences of the role
played by meaning at the level of evolution, but carries out an analysis of the “arti-
ﬁcial” connected to the emergence of Nature, thus individuating the conditions for
the creating of an effective opening to new possible break-in. Setting himself up as a
new Marsyas and undertaking the journey to the columns of Hercules, Chaitin really
sets the conditions for a paradigm shift, thus opening up (albeit in nuce) to a new
Semantics and the new cries of future detachment. The journey into invention begins
here, and it is precisely here that the role played by the “verses” takes shape at the
beginning. No longer pure determinations of the Form but tools capable of inventing
the very way of articulating things to say and think from within: that is, tools that
open up to the new arising function. The extroversion and semantic clariﬁcation
represent the ﬁrst step in view of the irruption taking place. It is necessary, however,
to feed the omega-related pyre in order to be able to ensure the correct modalities
for the change of semantics: in other words, to be able to truly face that onerous
passage constituted by the passage on one’s shoulders by the hero as suggested by
Skolem. The artiﬁcial must be reﬂected in itself and must reﬂect the imagery in
place, with a view to preparing for a correct irruption. It is in this sense that, by
linking Goedel, Turing, and Darwin, Chaitin offers a versatile and important contri-
bution to that complex analysis that right now is progressively preparing the ﬁrst
foundations of a new science: Metabiology. Hence the ﬁrst emergence of artiﬁcial
but not trivial machines as imagined by von Foerster: biological machines able to
self-organize and to stay in symbiosis with man in view of his becoming a new creator
through his coming to be added to himself by the God (in accordance with Bergson’s
metaphor, later taken up by Monod). These are unheard worlds which come to open
and expand before our eyes. At the artiﬁcial level we can invent only by means of

Enactive Realism. A First Look at a New Theoretical Synthesis
209
successive simulations, while on the natural level we can only imagine what form
successive illuminations will take. Here is the light of Grace which in Caravaggio
comes to illuminate the cheat who plays with the Chaos of his life leading him to the
metamorphosis-conversion. This is what happens to the mathematician who comes
to change semantics by opening up to that onerous journey corresponding to the
overcoming of himself as well as of his own vision of the world as an autonomous
observer in action. The metamorphosis in other, and the opening up to a new world
of thought and observation (together with the entry on the scene of new inﬁnities)
emerge necessarily to the extent of a radical transformation on the part of man, a
transformation for which the right compass is not easily found. This is the challenge
that life presents to us every day. Just think of the enormous load that as humans
we carry on our shoulders: that load which every time requires the artist to work for
the overcoming of his own Work as well as of what constitutes his inheritance as
man and craftsman. Life grants no insurance in this sense; it cannot, in effect, give
assurances to itself if it truly wants to succeed in ensuring the necessary renewal of
its original creativity. Turing and Chaitin focus on the role played by the grid relative
to pure software with reference to extroversion and disembodiment, the way is open
to the identiﬁcation of Omega. This identiﬁcation, however, turns out to be linked to
a conception (and previous petrifaction) possessing a precise historical character. In
this sense, therefore, omega has no absolute character: when, in effect, a real meta-
morphosis takes place, centered on the passage by the hero on his own shoulders, the
coming into being of a new observation and, therefore, the very onset of new petrifac-
tion come to enter the ﬁeld. When the irruption occurs there is openness in depth, and
unprecedented actors appear, albeit in the necessary context of an inheritance. Hence
the proper sense of a natural evolution that can never come to be separated from the
dialectic in place between Simulation and Creativity. The software leads, each time,
to the opening from within of the hardware (with the birth of new intensities and
the consequent outcrop of the God). The hardware leads, in turn, to the nesting in
depth (in the swirls of meaning) of the software. The hardware opens on its abysses
while also gifting incarnation to the point of surfacing as Nature. The software lurks
deep within the sky of abstraction in successive increments of complexity (and its
Methods) to outline the ever renewed contours of a kingdom of Culture. The pressure
we will be under will not be of algorithms alone but also of meanings in action. The
disembodiment must be pursued not only with a view to optimizing the evolutionary
pressures on the table but also in view of a more ambitious goal: a complex system for
living such as that represented by Ulysses-Marsyas appears to be the tool itself (ﬁrst
of all in overcoming the Pillars of Hercules), for an in-depth opening of its own hard-
ware with the continuous birth of new meanings and with a continuous (but organic)
remodulation of the ongoing evolutionary pressures. As Bergson states, complex
living systems that act as autonomous agents come to enter the scene in function of
ever new creativity, of the continuous realization of a renewed evolution. The way in
which this happens is that which passes for the identiﬁcation, each time, of the grid
related to the martyrdom of St. Lawrence as masterfully illustrated by Titian. In the
painting by Picasso “The ﬂute of Pan” (Paris, Musée Picasso, Paris) the eigenvalues
in action at the level of the score played by Pan are, in effect, the way to realize the

210
A. Carsetti
trigger and the possible multiplication of the ﬁrst cries of the Minotaur, that is to say
of the ﬁrst steps of the incarnation process. In this context, the eye of the mind, as well
as the eye of Horus, son of Isis, appears, precisely, as one of the engines of natural
evolution. But Horus is not only a name or a concept or an imagination that lives: he
is, ﬁrst of all, a universal Form (cf. Picasso’s sculpture), that soul of itself and that
guides and points to every possible vision. It is the eye that in Reﬂexivity becomes
an eigenform to itself, a matrix of real invariance and autonomy. When we are faced
with works that come to be worn by the Muse through an ideal seam for ﬁles, we ﬁnd
ourselves faced with the offer of a particular inheritance from a piece of hardware
that has come into being as an autonomous agent and that allows the new software
(Marsyas as conceived) to come to light through the support offered by the cypher.
Creativity along the path pursued by the Minotaur has turned into petrifaction, thus
offering a legacy and while allowing the Goddess to conceive. Marsyas represents
the new software that is born, but the hero is, in his turn, marked by a cypher, by a
secret Rule that lives him in ﬁligree: the robe relative to his sacriﬁce will be woven
into the ﬁle of Reﬂexivity to the point of determining the giving of extroversion.
At that moment the God will come to select opening to the new irruption (and new
hardware). By following Horus we have the effective possibility of fully entering
the realm of dialectics between function and meaning that allows us not to close
ourselves into the enclave of the ﬁrst-order structures but to range in a much broader
realm of functions also featured in accordance with the tools offered by non-standard
mathematics. Choosing non-standard model theory really ‘introduces’ a new general
semantics. Hence the possibility of fully exploring the arena relating to non-standard
models as indicated, ﬁrst and foremost, by Skolem but taking advantage of the latest
acquisitions achievedat thelevel of themost recent theoryof self-organisingmodels.6
At the level of a natural, biological self-organising system that is characterised by its
cognitive activities, the objectives are set from within. The origin of meaning is an
emergent property within the organisation of the system itself, and this is connected
to precise linguistic and logical operations as well as distinct procedures of observa-
tion and self-observation. These operations stimulate continuous processes of inner
reorganisation. In the light of the new scientiﬁc paradigm represented, today, by
Enactive Realism7 Nature appears to ‘speak’ by means of mathematical forms: we
can observe these forms, but they are, at the same time, inside us as they populate
our organs of cognition. In this sense, in such a scenario, natural evolution also scans
the effective growth of our tools of participatory knowledge of the world around us,
our own coming to recognise ourselves as a stage within a path concerning a real
development of creativity but on a co-evolutive level and in accordance with a seman-
tically pregnant perspective. Paraphrasing Galileo, normally regarded as the father of
modern science, we can afﬁrm that Nature is speaking by computations, thus causing
Nature to be embodied. However, such natural computations cannot be articulated
only on a purely syntactic level nor can they be ﬂattened on disembodied crystalliza-
tions. Actually, at the biological level we are continuously challenged by semantic
information and semantic phenomena thus coming to be involved in an effective
process of self-organization. Real ‘extroversion’ is in function of the activation of
new selection procedures capable of ensuring a metamorphosis (from within) of the

Enactive Realism. A First Look at a New Theoretical Synthesis
211
system: a metamorphosis that will necessarily involve the mathematician who builds
the model. In this context, the system’s pursuit can really offer the opportunity to
trigger more sophisticated levels of embodiment only by changing semantics.
According to Monod, Nature appear as a tinkerer characterized by the presence
of precise principles of self-organization. However, while Monod was obliged to
incorporate his brilliant intuitions into the framework of ﬁrst-order cybernetics and a
theory of information with an exclusively syntactic character such as that deﬁned by
Shannon, research advances in recent decades have led not only to the deﬁnition of
a second-order cybernetics but also to an exploration of the boundaries of semantic
information. We have already seen how for H. Atlan, on a biological level “the
function self-organizes together with its meaning”. Hence the need to refer to a
conceptual theory of complexity and to a theory of self-organization characterized
in an intentional sense. However, there is also a need to introduce, at the genetic
level, a distinction between coder and ruler as well as the opportunity to deﬁne
a real software space for natural evolution. The recourse to non-standard model
theory, the opening to a new general semantics, and the innovative deﬁnition of
the relationship between coder and ruler can be considered, today, among the most
powerful theoretical tools at our disposal in order to correctly deﬁne the contours
of that new conceptual revolution (that new worldview) increasingly referred to as
Metabiology. A conceptual revolution that appears primarily to refer to the growth
itself (at the co-evolutive level) of our instruments of participatory knowledge of
the world. A work at whose level the entropy conditions change continuously also
depending on the decline of Clio as the Muse of History. Hence the very possibility
of considering Nature also as a Work of Art as advocated by P. Feyerabend.
Notes
1.
Cf. Dean (2013).
2.
Cf. Dean (2013).
3.
Cf. Putnam (1980).
4.
Cf. Quinon and Zdanowski (2006).
5.
Cf. Carsetti A. (1989) “Self-organizing models”, T.R. (La Nuova Critica).
6.
Cf. Carsetti A. (1989) “Self-organizing models”, T.R. (La Nuova Critica).
7.
Carsetti A. (1993) “Meaning and complexity: the role of non-standard models”,
La Nuova Critica, 22, 57–86.
Bibliography
Atlan, H. (1992). Self-organizing networks: Weak, strong and intentional, the role of their
underdetermination. La Nuova Critica, 19–20, 51–71.
Bell, J. L., & Slomson, A. B. (1989). Models and ultraproducts.
Benacerraf, P. (1965). What numbers could not be. The Philosophical Review, 74, 47–73
Carnap, R., & Bar Hillel, Y. (1950). An outline of a theory of semantic information. Technical
Report. N. 247, M.I.T.

212
A. Carsetti
Carsetti, A., (ed.) (1999). Functional models of cognition. Self-organizing dynamics and semantic
structures in cognitive systems. Kluwer A. P.
Carsetti, A. (ed.) (2004). The embodied meaning. In Seeing, thinking and knowing (pp. 307–331).
Kluwer A.P.
Carsetti, A. (2010). Eigenforms, natural self-organization and morphogenesis. La Nuova Critica,
55–56, 75–99.
Carsetti, A. (2011). The emergence of meaning at the co-evolutionary level: An epistemological
approach. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amc.2011.08.039
Chaitin, G. (1987). Algorithmic information theory.
Chaitin, G. (2010). Metaphysics, metamathematics and metabiology. APA News, 10(1), 11.
Chaitin, G. (2013). Proving Darwin: Making biology mathematical.
Chaitin, G., & Calude, C. (1999). Mathematics/randomness everywhere. Nature, 400, 319–320.
Dean, W. (2013). Models and Computability. Philosophia Mathematica (III), 22(2), 51–65.
Henkin, L. (1950). Completeness in the theory of types. Journal of Symbolic Logic, 15, 81–91.
Herken, R. (Ed.) (1988). The universal turing machine. A half century survey.
Hintikka, J. (1970). Surface information and depth information. In J. Hintikka, & P. Suppes, (Eds.),
Information and inference (pp. 298–230).
Husserl, E. (1964). Erfahrung und Urteil.
Jaynes, E. T. (1965). Gibbs vs Boltzmann entropies. American Journal of Physics, 33, 391.
Kauffman, S. A. (1993). The origins of order.
Kauffman, L. H. (2003). Eigenforms—objects as tokens for eigenbehaviours. Cybernetics and
Human Knowing, 10(3–4), 73–89.
Kauffman, L. H. (2009). Reﬂexivity and eigenforms. Constructivist Foundations, 4(3), 120–131.
Kauffman, L. H. (2018). Mathematical themes of Francisco Varela. La Nuova Critica, 65–66, 72–83.
Kauffman,S.A.,Logan,R.K.,Este,R.,Goebel,R.,Hobill,G.,&Shmulevich,I.(2008).Propagating
organization: An enquiry. Biology and Philosophy, 23, 34–45.
Martin-Delgado, M. A. (2011). On quantum effects in a theory of biological evolution. arXiv:1109.
0383v1.
Maynard Smith, J. (2000). The concept of information in Biology. Philosophy of Science, 67,
177–194.
Mayr, E. (2001). What evolution is.
Nicolis, G. (1989). Physics in far-from-equilibrium systems and self-organisation. In P. Davies (ed.).
The new Physics.
Nicolis, G., & Prigogine, I. (1989) Exploring complexity.
Piaget, J. (1967). Biologie et Connaissance.
Popper, K. (1959). Logic of scientiﬁc discovery.
Prigogine, I. (1980). From Being to Becoming.
Prigogine, I. (1993). Les lois du Chaos.
Putnam, H. (1965). Trial and error predicate and the solution to a problem of Mostowski. Joural of
Symbolic Logic, 30.
Putnam, H. (1980). Models and reality. The Journal of Symbolic Logic, 45, 464–482.
Putnam, H. (1983). Representation and reality.
Quinon, P., & Zdanowski, K. (2006). The intended model of arithmetic. An argument from
Tennenbaum’s theorem (p. 2). http://www.impan.pl/_kz/_les/PQKZTenn.pdf
Skolem, T. (1941). Sur la portée du théorème de Löwenheim-Skolem. In Les Entretiens de Zurich,
6–9 Dec.1938: 25–47. Reprinted in (Skolem 1970, pp. 455–482).
Skolem T. (1955). Peano’s axioms and models of arithmetic. In Mathematical interpretation of
formal systems (pp. 1–14).
Skolem, T. (1970). Selected works in logic. Universitets for Laget, Oslo,. Fenstad, J. E. (ed.)
Turing, A. M. (1952). The chemical basis of morphogenesis. Philosophy Transactions of the Royal
Society of London, 237, 641, 32–72
Varela, F. (1982). “Self-organization: Beyond the appearances and into the mechanism. La Nuova
Critica, 64, 31–51.

Enactive Realism. A First Look at a New Theoretical Synthesis
213
Varela, T. E., & Rosch, E. (1991). The embodied mind. The MIT Press.
Varela,F.(1975).Acalculusforself-reference.InternationalJournalofGeneralSystems;Kauffman,
L. H. (2005). Eigenform. Kybernetes, 34, 129–150.
von Foerster, H. (1981). Objects: Tokens for (eigen-) behaviors. Observing systems, The systems,
inquiry series (pp. 274–285). Intersystems Publications.
Wuketits, F. M. (1992). Self-organization, complexity and the emergence of human consciousness.
La Nuova Critica, 19–20, 89–109.

Holism and Pseudoholism
Sven Ove Hansson
1
Introduction
Since Jan Smuts introduced the term “holism” in his 1926 book Holism and Evolu-
tion (Smuts, 1926), the term has been widely used in many ﬁelds of knowledge and
speculation (Michaelson et al., 2019). However, the concept is much older than the
term. The ideas of present-day holism can be traced back at least to early nineteenth
century Romanticism, with its widespread resistance to the fragmentation and reduc-
tion of human belief systems that was claimed to follow with new scientiﬁc theories
(Harrington, 1996, p. 4). Other words, such as “wholeness” and “unity” have been
used to express the same ideas as “holism”.1
At ﬁrst sight, it might seem almost impossible to be critical of holism. If we are
discussing or investigating some entity, what reasons could there be not to include
all of it and to treat all aspects that pertain to it? However, like many other seemingly
self-evident notions, that of holism is much more problematic than what ﬁrst catches
the eye. One major reason for this is that many if not most of our objects of study and
reﬂection have so many aspects that it is impossible to cover them all. For instance,
there are so many factors that can potentially affect a person’s health that is practically
impossible to consider them all. A selection has to be made.
1 I will not spend much effort on the common claim that holism means that the whole is more than its
parts and their relations. As noted by Richard Healey, this is an empty criterion since “one relation
among the parts is what we might call the complete composition relation–that relation among the
parts which holds just in case they compose this very whole with all its properties” (Healey, 1991,
pp. 400–401). A better delimitation, proposed by Healey, explicates holism as the claim that “the
whole has features that cannot be reduced to features of its component parts”. (ibid., p. 397) The
meaning of this explication will depend much on whether this reduction is conceived as being
ontological or epistemological.
S. O. Hansson (B)
Department of Philosophy and History, KTH Royal Institute of Technology, SE-100 44
Stockholm, Sweden
e-mail: soh@kth.se
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
S. Wuppuluri and I. Stewart (eds.), From Electrons to Elephants and Elections,
The Frontiers Collection, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-92192-7_13
215

216
S. O. Hansson
Furthermore, there is usually more than one overarching perspective that can be
applied to one and the same topic. More often than not, it is impossible to combine
all of those overarching perspectives into a single, uniﬁed perspective that covers
them all. This means that there are competing holistic perspectives on one and the
same topic. A claim that there is only one truly holistic perspective or approach that
can be applied to a topic is nothing else than an attempt to monopolize the topic.
However, not all overarching perspectives are presented or recognized as holistic.
It turns out that only some such perspectives are in general called “holistic”. The
following four examples should make this clear.
First: Charles Darwin’s theory of evolution gave rise to a much broader and more
interconnected understanding of biology than what was previously available. Inves-
tigations of a biological species can now be extended to how it was evolutionarily
adapted to its whole environment in all its complexity. Fossil ﬁndings are directly
connected with our knowledge of living plants and animals. (Salgado, 2019, p. 2)
However, the theory of evolution has seldom been described or promoted as “holis-
tic”. In contrast, creationist ideas are commonly called “holistic”, although they
deny all these connections and thereby fragmentize biological knowledge. (Andrews,
1984).
Secondly, animal experiments still have an essential role in the early phases of drug
testing. A major argument used by proponents of animal experiments is that studies
on isolated cells or tissues cannot provide a credible picture of what will happen when
the drug is introduced into the body as a whole, with all its complex interactions. This
is clearly a holistic argument, but we seldom hear animal experimentation called a
“holistic” approach.
Thirdly, the climate models used for instance in the IPCC reports on climate
change include a large number of natural and anthropogenic factors that inﬂuence the
climate, such as solar irradiance, clouds, precipitation, biological processes in plants,
animals, soils, and oceans, geological processes, emissions of various greenhouse
gases from a large variety of sources, etc. Complex interactions between these and
other processes are taken into account, and regional differences are calculated along
with global averages. This approach is certainly holistic, but that word is not often
heard in connection with these models.
Finally,so-called“personalizedmedicine”makesuseoflargeamountsofgenomic
and biochemical information about a patient in order to put together treatments that
are better adjusted to the individual patient than what is possible with traditional
methods. This is clearly a holistic approach, although it is seldom described as
such. (Vogt et al., 2016) In most discussions on “holistic medicine”, the term refers
either to the use of unproven therapies based on implausible theories about health
and disease (Widder & Anderson, 2015) or (much better) to clinical practices that
combine medical science with humanistic ideals. (Ferry-Danini, 2018; Thibault,
2019).
These examples reveal a considerable tension in common usage of the term
“holism”. On the one hand, the term is usually conceived as denoting the unas-
sailable idea that when studying or reﬂecting on some object, we should consider
it in its entirety, and in particular not restrict our deliberations to the properties

Holism and Pseudoholism
217
of its parts. On the other hand, the designation “holistic” is in practice commonly
reserved for only some of the many approaches that attempt to cover “the whole” of
something. Obviously, if only some of the many overarching perspectives that can
be applied to an object of study are recognized as holistic, then holism becomes a
highly contestable ideal.
From the fact that different overarching approaches or perspectives can be
constructedforthesamesubjectmatteritdoesnotfollowthatthesedifferentconstruc-
tions are all of equal value. A “holistic” perspective can be misleading in various
ways. I will focus on three major categories of failing holistic approaches:
Over-inclusive holism contains elements that should not be there.
Incomplete holism excludes elements that should be included in the intended
whole.
Dogmatic holism is unable to revise its claims in response to new circumstances
or insights.
These three categories of failure are largely overlapping in the sense that many
deﬁcient holisms have two or all three of them. However, from a conceptual point of
view, it is clarifying to treat them as distinct types of shortcomings. The following
three sections exemplify and further specify each of them.
2
Over-Inclusive Holism
Holism can fail by including claims that lack factual support. For instance, if someone
wants to provide a holistic account of the fauna of Loch Ness, it would be most
inappropriate to include a claim that the mythical Loch Ness monster is a real animal,
living in that lake. Such a component would be superﬂuous, and it would detract from
the value of the account by making its holism over-inclusive.
Unfortunately, over-inclusion is a common problem in allegedly holistic accounts.
Sometimes, the superﬂuous component is the underlying motivation for constructing
the account in question. This applies for instance to many cases of “holistic comple-
mentary medicine”, in which the “whole” is said to consist of a combination of
conventional medicine and some additional, “alternative” intervention. The purpose
of the whole construction is usually to gain acceptance for that addition. However, if
the addition is a worthless method with no positive effects beyond the placebo effect,
then the whole construction is just a deceptive way to introduce an inferior therapy
into healthcare in the name of holism.
Let us consider three examples of over-inclusive holism in somewhat more detail.

218
S. O. Hansson
2.1
Gaia
In the early 1970s, James Lovelock worked for the oil company Royal Dutch Shell.
He was deeply involved in the oil industry’s early responses to research indicating that
CO2 emissions could have far-reaching impacts on the earth’s climate. (Aronowsky,
2021) In 1971 he published an article entitled “Air pollution and climatic change”,
in which he introduced what was to become an important part of the fossil fuel
industry’s defence against these concerns: the claim that the planet possesses stabi-
lizing mechanisms that counteract the effects of CO2 emissions and keep atmospheric
temperatures within fairly strict limits.
It is known that this substance [carbon dioxide] directly stimulates the growth of vegetation
and consequently the output of the products of vegetative growth such as terpenes, ammonia
and hydrogen sulphide. As already stated, these are aerosol precursors. If this is the direct
cause of the increase of haze-forming substances, it could be looked on as a regulatory
response of the ecosystem to combustion emissions for it tends to neutralise the effect
(temperature increase) of the perturbing stimulus (the accumulation of carbon dixode [sic]),
thereby restoring the status quo. If this biological-cybernetic explanation is correct, the
outlook will not be as gloomy as that predicted by direct extrapolation of past trends…
We may ﬁnd in the end that the direct aspects of combustion are the least harmful of
all the major disturbances by man of the planetary ecosystem, for the system may have the
capacity to adapt to the input of combustion gases (Lovelock, 1971, pp. 409–410).
In an article published the following year, he further developed these ideas, and
presented what he called the “Gaia hypothesis”. He now claimed to have found strong
evidence that the total biosphere of the earth acts as an organism, which is capable
of controlling the atmospheric gases and the climate.
The purpose of this letter is to suggest that life at an early stage of its evolution acquired the
capacity to control the global environment to suit its needs and that this capacity has persisted
and is still in active use. In this view the sum total of species is more than just a catalogue,
“The Biosphere”, and like other associations in biology is an entity with properties greater
than the simple sum of its parts. Such a large creature, even if only hypothetical, with the
powerful capacity to homeostat the planetary environment needs a name; I am indebted to
Mr. William Golding for suggesting the use of the Greek personiﬁcation of mother Earth,
“Gaia”….
In fact a close examination of the composition of the atmosphere reveals that it has
departed so far from any conceivable abiological steady state equilibrium that it is more
consistent in composition with a mixture of gases contrived for some speciﬁc purpose…
Life is abundant on Earth and the chemically reactive gases almost all have their principal
sources and sinks in the biosphere. This taken with the evidence above is sufﬁcient to justify
the probability that the atmosphere is a biological contrivance, a part and a property of Gaia.
If this is assumed to be true then it follows that she who controls the atmospheric composition
must also be able to control the climate (Lovelock, 1972).
In a follow-up article two years later, Lovelock and a co-worker further elaborated
the idea that early in the development of life, Gaia acquired the ability to “secure the
environment against adverse physical and chemical change”, so that “unfavourable
tendenciescouldbesensedandcountermeasuresoperatedbeforeirreversibledamage
had been done.” This included “the presence of an active process for thermostasis”,

Holism and Pseudoholism
219
i.e. for keeping the temperature close to a desirable, constant level (Lovelock &
Margulis, 1974, p. 8). In another article they reafﬁrmed their picture of Gaia as a
“control system” that regulates the earth’s temperature and other crucial variables
and is able to “keep these variables from exceeding limits that are intolerable to all
terrestrial species” (Margulis & Lovelock, 1974, p. 486). They expressed their belief
in this mechanism in no uncertain terms:
We believe that Gaia is a complex entity involving the earth’s atmosphere, biosphere, oceans
and soil. The totality constitutes a feedback or cybernetic system which seeks an optimal
physical and chemical environment for the biota... (Margulis & Lovelock, 1974, p. 473).
We conclude from the fact that the temperature and certain other environmental conditions
on the earth have not altered very much from what is an optimum for life on the surface, that
life must actively maintain these conditions (ibid, p. 475).
The Gaia notion reached a wider public through an article, published in 1975,
that Lovelock wrote jointly with a senior Shell manager (Aronowsky, 2021, p. 316).
They claimed that Gaia had kept the surface temperature of the Earth within the
bounds required for life “in spite of drastic changes of atmospheric composition and
a large increase in the mean solar ﬂux”. Against this background, “[m]an’s present
activities as a polluter is trivial by comparison and he cannot thereby seriously change
the present state of Gaia let alone hazard her existence” (Lovelock & Epton, 1975,
pp. 304 and 305).
The Gaia construct served the purposes of the fossil industry in whose service it
was originally developed. The alleged self-regulating stability of the earth’s climate
became one of major themes in their attempts to downplay the seriousness of the
greenhouse effect. For instance, in one advertisement in 1995, Exxon talked about
“Mother Nature”, describing her as “one strong lady, resilient and capable of rejuve-
nation”, with the consequence that “nature, over the millennia, has learned to cope”
(Supran & Oreskes, 2017, p. 9). But at the same time, the “holistic” nature of the Gaia
construct has connected with certain strands of environmentalism, and the construct
has attracted considerable following for instance among proponents of so-called deep
ecology (Bartkowski & Swearingen, 1997; Clarke, 2017; Haig, 2001). It has even
given rise to a New Age-related religious movement called Gaianism.
In later publications, Lovelock has modiﬁed his Gaia construct, but without giving
up the basic assumption of an organism-like entity that regulates the physical and
chemical conditions on earth to retain its inhabitability. From a scientiﬁc point of
view, the Gaia construct is an unnecessary and misleading assumption.2 Biological
mechanisms that counteract the greenhouse effect should be studied carefully, one
by one, and so should biological mechanisms that aggravate the greenhouse effect.
The introduction of an unproven fantasy creature that regulates these mechanisms
adds nothing to our understanding. The Gaia construct is therefore a clear example
of over-inclusive holism.
2 It is highly doubtful whether it can serve as a scientiﬁc hypothesis. (Kirchner, 1989) I therefore
call it a construct rather than, as Lovelock does, an “hypothesis”.

220
S. O. Hansson
2.2
Anthroposophy
Some of the best examples of over-inclusive holism can be found in esoteric move-
ments that include extensive supernatural claims in their “holistic” accounts of the
natural world and human life. One such movement is anthroposophy, which was
founded by the German Rudolf Steiner (1861–1925), originally as a splinter group in
the theosophical movement. Anthroposophy is best known for its Steiner schools, its
deviant version of medicine, and a variant of organic farming called “biodynamical”.
Claims about holism form an important part of the anthroposophical rhetoric. For
instance, the introduction to biodynamical agriculture at the website of the Anthro-
posophical Society begins: “To understand and shape agriculture as a living whole
belongs to the most important principles of the biodynamic impulse”.3 Similarly,
their introduction to anthroposophical medicine describes it as responding to “the
human’s need of a holistic treatment.”4
Probably, most people who encounter statements like these will interpret them as
referringtoagriculturetakingthewholeecosystemintoaccountandmedicineconsid-
ering the patient’s social and psychological situation in addition to the bodily issues.
But anthroposophical holism goes far beyond that. Its focus is on spiritual beings and
on a large collection of esoteric claims in which astrology plays a signiﬁcant role.
Although its adherents do not see it as a religion, the teachings of anthroposophy
include belief in reincarnation and in a large number of supernatural beings, including
elemental beings such as gnomes, sylphs and nymphs, various spirits, angels, and
archangels, and an assortment of demons. Many of these beings are claimed to be
connectedforinstancewithspeciﬁcplanets,astrologicalsigns,ornaturalphenomena.
Belief in a spiritually predetermined destiny for humanity, described in Rudolf
Steiner’s writings and lectures, is an essential component of the anthroposophical
belief system. Since the anthroposophical “holism” includes all this, it differs radi-
cally from holistic approaches not associated with the movement. In a recent article
in the ofﬁcial journal of the Anthroposophical Society, Das Goetheanum, the promi-
nent anthroposophist Andreas Neider accused environmentalists of not seeing “the
whole”:
Ecocentrism sees no spiritually developing I in the human being, and it wishes to arouse
consciousness of the connections between all living beings and of their mutual dependence
in their coming to be and passing away. But it has no answer to the question what is the
meaning of human existence on Earth and why man at all arose in evolution. The meaning
of the whole remains in the dark5 (Neider, 2019, p. 12).
3 “Die Landwirtschaft als lebendige Ganzheit zu erfassen und zu gestalten gehört zu den wichtigsten
Prinzipien des biodynamischen Impulses”. https://www.sektion-landwirtschaft.org/grundlagen/bio
dynamische-landwirtschaft. Accessed 21-01-04.
4 “dem Bedürfnis der Menschen nach einer ganzheitlichen Behandlung”. http://www.anthromed.
de/Dateien/Downloads/Anthroposophische_Medizin.pdf. Accessed 21-01-04.
5 “Der Ökozentrismus sieht kein sich geistig entwickelndes Ich im Menschen und möchte das
Bewusstsein von der Zusammengehörigkeit aller Lebewesen und ihres Entstehens und Vergehens
in gegenseitiger Abhängigkeit wecken. Er kann aber keine Antwort auf die Frage geben, was

Holism and Pseudoholism
221
Thus, Neider rejects the holism of ecocentric environmentalists who see the
ecosphere as a whole, in which humans do not have a special pre-determined destiny.
He describes their view as non-holistic since they have a naturalistic explanation of
the emergence of the human species and do not subscribe to the supernatural claims
of anthroposophy.
Another article in Das Goetheanum further exempliﬁes how anthroposophical
holism differs from that of ecocentric environmentalists. The author of this article
expressed worries that the gnomes living inside the Alp Mountains would react
negatively to the construction of a new railway tunnel. He took the existence of such
entities for granted, and quoted Rudolf Steiner as an authoritative source for the
claim that gnomes are much inconvenienced by light from the full moon. (Bock-
emühl, 2007) This is of course a very different perspective from that of ecocentric
environmentalists, who would focus on the effect of the tunnel on the groundwater
level and other parameters that can have negative impact on living organisms.
Anthroposophy also includes beliefs that strongly connect the history of humanity
with astrological claims. Human history is claimed to proceed in a series of cultural
epochs. Each of them lasts 2160 years, which is the time it takes for the sun to pass
through one of the twelve signs of the Zodiac (the precession of the equinox). We
are now said to live in the Germanic-Anglosaxon cultural period, which is associated
with the astrological sign Pisces. It began in the year 1413 and will end in the year
3573. It will be followed by the Slavic cultural period, which is associated with the
Aquarius. It will begin in 3573 and be replaced in 5733 by the American cultural
period, which is associated with the Capricorn and ends in the year 7893.
These are only a few examples from the extensive system of esoteric beliefs
introduced by Rudolf Steiner and still cherished by today’s anthroposophists. These
beliefs are all parts of the “whole” of the “holistic” anthroposophical worldview.
For obvious reasons, only a small selection of the more palatable constituents of this
worldview is presented to the public. For instance, anthroposophical healthcare prac-
titioners discourage parents from having their children vaccinated against the measles
and other deadly diseases, but they do not tell them the origin and basis of their antag-
onism towards vaccines. Its origin can be found in Rudolf Steiner’s pronouncements
on infectious childhood diseases. He claimed that the causes of measles can be found
in personality defects in previous lives, making measles “the physical-karmic effect
of a previous life”.6 The disease has a positive role in correcting these defects: “And
when then such a personality enters existence, it will wish to make corrections in this
area as soon as possible and in the time between birth and the usual appearance of
childhood diseases, in order to work through the measles as organic self-education”.7
für einen Sinn die menschliche Existenz auf Erden hat und warum der Mensch überhaupt in der
Evolution entstanden ist. Der Sinn des Ganzen bleibt im Dunklen”.
6 “der die physisch-karmische Wirkung ist eines früheren Lebens”.
7 “Und wenn dann eine solche Persönlichkeit ins Dasein tritt, wird sie so schnell wie möglich
Korrektur üben wollen auf diesem Gebiet und in der Zeit zwischen der Geburt und dem gewöhn-
lichen Auftreten der Kinderkrankheiten, um organische Selbsterziehung zu üben, die Masern
durchmachen”.

222
S. O. Hansson
The disease becomes “a spiritual process”,8 leading to “what is enormously impor-
tant namely that when this process is taken up in the soul as a maxim of life, it will
engender a conception that has a healing effect on the soul”9 (Steiner, 1992, pp. 103–
104). The soul, notably, is supposed to reappear after death in coming reincarnations.
Therefore, said Steiner, it is wrong even to wish that a child will not contract measles:
For instance, it is no good thing to say: This child has the measles; I wish it had not contracted
the measles! – You cannot know all that would have happened to the child if it had not caught
the measles. Because thereby that came out that was sitting deep in the child and was trying
to ﬁnd its redemption10 (Steiner, 1980, p. 340).
Thus, the true nature of the “holism” of anthroposophy explains its resistance
to vaccination against childhood diseases: These diseases are supposed to have a
positive “karmic” function in a perspective that sees the child as just one in a series
of reincarnations of the same person. From the viewpoint of medical science and
medical ethics, these other reincarnations, as well as the claimed positive effects
of diseases such as measles, constitute unproven and unjustiﬁed considerations in
healthcare. Their inclusion has the tragic effect of contributing to the spread of the
measles and other deadly childhood diseases.
2.3
Certain Approaches to Patient-Centred Care
Patient-centred care (PCC) is a collection of approaches to healthcare that share
“a holistic paradigm, which suggests that people need to be seen in their bio-
psychosocial enti[re]ty.” (Olsson et al., 2013, p. 456) As a general principle, this is
clearly a laudable approach, and many positive developments in healthcare in the last
few decades have taken place under the banner of patient-centredness. (Hansson &
Fröding, 2021) However, like most other broad churches, it contains problematic
elements. In parts of the PCC movement, health care personnel are encouraged to
engage in all kinds of difﬁculties that patients encounter, including those that do not
fall within the traditional concerns of healthcare. (Stewart, 2001) This can include
personal relationships, conﬂicts with family members, relatives and acquaintances,
economic problems, etc. This is surely a holistic practice in the sense of engaging
with “the whole person”, but weighty arguments can be raised against an extension
of the tasks of healthcare to issues for which healthcare personnel have no special
qualiﬁcations. Warnings have been raised that this can lead to “a kind of medicali-
sation, whereby domains of life previously not considered relevant to health, or as
8 “einen geistigen Prozeß”.
9 “das ungeheuer Bedeutsame, daß wenn dieser Prozeß in die Seele als Lebensmaxime
aufgenommen wird, er eine Anschauung erzeugt, die gesundend auf die Seele wirkt”.
10 “Man wird zum Beispiel gar nicht gut tun, wenn man sagt: Das Kind hat die Masern; hätte es
doch diese Masern nicht bekommen! - Man kann nicht wissen, was alles über das Kind gekommen
wäre, wenn es die Masern nicht gekriegt hätte. Denn darin kam das heraus, was immer tief in dem
Kinde saß und seinen Ausgleich suchte”.

Holism and Pseudoholism
223
appropriately falling within the structures of healthcare, are newly seen through a
medical lens” (Brown, 2018, p. 1000).
One example of this is the proposal, sometimes advanced within PCC, that health
care personnel should attend to the patients’ “spiritual well-being” (Mezzich, 2012,
p. 8). This goes far beyond the traditional practice in healthcare, which is to help
patients by connecting them with persons or organizations that can provide them
with religious or spiritual services that they ask for. Healthcare personnel are not
in general educated to provide such services themselves, and mixing them up with
medical and nursing activities is bound to be problematic, given that patients tend to
differ in what—if any—such services they prefer to receive.
3
Incomplete Holism
As mentioned in Sect. 1, any account of a complex phenomenon will have to be
incomplete. It is impossible to cover everything that has bearing on an intricate
real-world issue. In that sense, all forms of holism are incomplete. However, some
omissions are worse than others. For instance, issues of diet cannot be excluded
from a reasonable account of obesity as a health problem—in particularly not an
account claimed to be holistic. Similarly, a “holistic” account of climate change that
leaves out the known facts about the anthropogenic greenhouse effect, or a “holistic”
account of Nazism that leaves out the Holocaust, would be severely incomplete.
Unfortunately, such incompleteness is not uncommon. As we have already seen,
severe cases of over-inclusiveness tend to also involve the exclusion of essential
aspects of the object of study or reﬂection. For instance, the literature on the Gaia
construct usually leaves out the destabilizing biological mechanisms that amplify,
rather than mitigate, the greenhouse effect. Unfortunately, the total effect of the
various biological mechanisms seems to be amplifying, contrary to assumptions
made by proponents of the Gaia construct (Kirchner, 2003, pp. 26–28). Similarly,
anti-vaccination propaganda within “holistic medicine” tends to leave out the scien-
tiﬁc knowledge about of the death toll of measles and the protective effects of
immunization.
Another example of glaringly incomplete holism is iridology, which is usually
claimed to be “holistic” since its practitioners claim that they can determine the
health status of all organs in the body by careful inspection of the iris. This practice
neglects the unequivocal scientiﬁc evidence, available since more than four decades,
that the “diagnoses” of iridologists are no better than random guesses. Furthermore,
due to their focus on spurious signs in the colour pattern of the iris, iridologists miss
the signs of diseases in other organs that ophthalmologists can ﬁnd. Such signs are
mostly seen in other parts of the eye than the iris. (Ernst 2000; Knipschild, 1988;
Münstedt et al., 2005; Noworol, 2020; Simon et al., 1979) The iridologists’ failure
to inspect the whole eye is a quite remarkable example of an unholistic practice
promoted as holistic.

224
S. O. Hansson
This is by no means an isolated phenomenon. As Joshua Freeman pointed out, it is
notuncommonforallegedly“holistic”healingpracticestobemuchmorereductionist
than conventional, science-based medicine. This is because these practices tend to
be based on a limited view of the causes of disease, and on a very small arsenal of
treatments. (Freeman, 2005).
Another interesting example of “unholistic holism” can be found in an evaluation
report on an anthroposophical clinic that was recently closed down in Sweden. Since
2011, the Stockholm Regional Council had a contract with the anthroposophical
Vidar clinic, to which some patients were sent for rehabilitation and treatment. In
preparation for a possible extension of the contract, two physicians were tasked with
evaluating the clinic. They found severe deﬁciencies, not least in the patient records,
which were so incomplete that concerns arose on patient safety. The documentation
of drug prescriptions was also inadequate. From the viewpoint of holism, the most
remarkable criticism in the report was the following:
Discharge records from day care and outpatient care exist to a large extent, but do not contain
multimodal summaries, since each profession writes its own summary (Holmberg & Vallin,
2016, p. 3).
In other words, the different professions involved in patient rehabilitation did not
coordinate to make joint assessments and to document these assessments. Although
it described itself as “holistic” and “integrative”, the clinic did not satisfy the require-
ments of seeing the whole patient and integrating the different interventions that are
standard in conventional rehabilitation care. Belief in unproven therapies is not what
it takes to make healthcare holistic in the sense of seeing the whole person. Co-
operation between the different healthcare professions and specializations, on the
other hand, is essential for achieving it.
Based on the report, the Stockholm Regional Council decided in 2016 not to
prolong its contract with the anthroposophical clinic. The clinic was subsequently
closed down.
4
Dogmatic Holism
Our knowledge develops. The major advantage of science over non-scientiﬁc
doctrines about the world is the ability of science to accommodate new informa-
tion and correct its mistakes. Treating something as a “whole” does not decrease the
need to learn from new information; it may even increase that need. In other words:
holistic accounts of a subject matter have to be open to criticism, and they should
be revised or given up if new information provides sufﬁcient reason to do so. But
unfortunately, there are many examples of alleged holism that do not satisfy these
requirements.
Homeopathy is a highly illustrative example of this. It is an “alternative” phar-
macology, developed in the 1790s by the German physician Samuel Hahnemann. It
is based on the supposition that if a substance causes certain symptoms in a healthy

Holism and Pseudoholism
225
person, then very small amounts of that substance will cure a disease with those same
symptoms. Furthermore, the curative effects of the substance are supposed to increase
as the administered amount is decreased. Therefore, homeopathic drug companies
produce what they market as highly potent drugs by performing a long series of
dilutions of a solution containing the supposedly efﬁcient drug. In the 1970s, when
“holism” became a catchword in healthcare (Whorton, 1985, p. 29), homeopaths
were quick to pick up the new word as a designation of their own activities (Clover,
1979; Twentyman, 1973; Whitmont, 1974). The terminology is still frequently used
by homeopaths (Attena, 2016; Prousky, 2018; Schmidt, 2020).
A modern example of a homeopathic drug is “Berlin wall”, which is used by some
homeopaths to cure patients with a long list of symptoms, including “depression,
sense of blackness, total isolation, aloneness, despair” and also “oppression (political,
family, abuse-sexual, religious, being bullied) and perceiving themselves as victims”
(Dam, 2006). The preparation is made from a piece of the Berlin Wall, which is
repeatedly diluted in lactose to the “potency C200”. This means that a dilution 1:100
has been done 200 times in a row. The resulting total dilution is 1:10400. A simple
calculation (based on molar concentration) shows that already after 15 dilution steps,
when the concentration is 1:1030, it is virtually certain that no single molecule from
the Berlin Wall is left in the preparation. The remaining 185 dilutions are therefore
just dilutions of lactose into lactose. Provided that the dilutions are reported correctly,
the vial contains 100% lactose. However, its label does not mention lactose. Instead,
it mentions Berlin wall, although there is no trace of the Berlin wall in the product.
Obviously, Hahnemann did not have access to Berlin wall, but he made similarly
extreme homeopathic dilutions, starting from a wide variety of other materials. In
the 1790s, when he ﬁrst proposed homeopathic drugs, it was not known that his
preparations contained no trace of the substance supposed to induce the therapeutic
effect. It was not even known that substances consist of molecules. Nevertheless,
the idea that the effects of a drug would increase with decreasing dose was difﬁcult
to believe since it contradicted everyday experience. One German journal wrote in
1810:
How can Mr. Hahnemann ask us to believe something like this although it contradicts reason
and experience? So a glass of wine should have a larger effect if divided into four parts and
consumed during a longer period, mixed with a larger amount of water, than if it is consumed
undiluted in a short period of time? Nevertheless, the author basis his doctrine on the use of
drugs on this basic idea11 (Kendl, 2017, p. 17).
In the 1830s, new evidence convinced scientists that substances consist of a
large number of small units, called molecules. This made the claims of home-
opathy extremely implausible. Since then, new scientiﬁc insights have repeatedly
conﬁrmed this. At the same time, scientiﬁc pharmacology has been transformed
11 Wie kann Herr Hahnemann verlangen, daß man ihm, der Erfahrung und Vernunft zum Trotze,
so etwas glauben soll! Ein Glas Wein wirkt also kräftiger, wenn es in vier Theile getheilt und mit
einer guten Quantität Wasser vermischt in längeren Zeiträumen konsumiert wird, als wenn man es
unvermischt in kurzer Zeit trinkt? Gleichwohl baut der Verf. auf diesen Grundsatz seine Lehre von
der Anwendung der Heilmittel.

226
S. O. Hansson
by a long series of discoveries and innovations, including active substances, dose–
response relationships, a multitude of mechanisms of action, and—not least—the
use of clinical trials to determine the effects of drugs and other treatments. However,
homeopaths have adopted none of this. Instead, they have continued to base their
“remedies” on principles that were developed in the 1790s and thoroughly refuted a
few decades later.
Thus, to the extent that homeopathy is at all a “holistic” approach, it exempliﬁes all
our three characteristics of failed holism. Its holism is over-inclusive since it contains,
as crucial and deﬁning elements, fallacious theories about effects of excessively
diluted “drugs”. Its holism is also remarkably incomplete since it excludes almost
all the knowledge needed to successfully cure, prevent, and relieve diseases with the
help of drugs. Finally, it is an exceptionally dogmatic form of holism since it holds
on to theories that were thoroughly disproven almost two centuries ago, and refuses
to learn from the scientiﬁc progress that has taken place during these two centuries.
5
Conclusion
The many failed examples of holism reported in Sects. 2, 3 and 4 may perhaps give the
impression that holism is a failed endeavour. But that would be a too rash conclusion.
What these examples show, however, is that strivings for holism have many pitfalls
and stumbling blocks. Much too often has the term “holism” been appropriated as a
means to promote and justify claims that are unproven or outright false. The result
has often been accounts of an alleged “whole” that is so misleading and misconceived
that it is better described as pseudoholism than as holism in the proper sense.
We need to take back the term “holism” from the charlatans. This means for
instance that the impressively inclusive climate models of the IPCC should be recog-
nized as a prime example of (scientiﬁc) holism. It also means that “holistic” theories
that disregard most of what is known about their subject matter should be disclosed
as pseudoholistic.
Our strivings for holism have to be open, critical and pluralistic. We must always
be open to the possibility that we have missed something important, and then we
should include it. We have to be critical to what we have already included, and
willing to discard components that have turned out to be irrelevant or misleading.
Finally, we need to be pluralistic in the sense of recognizing that there can be more
than one legitimate overarching perspective on a topic. For instance, one holistic
approach to mental disease can have its focus on each affected person as a whole
individual, whereas another holistic approach to the same topic has its focus on
social conditions and society as a whole. There may be good reasons to pursue these
perspectives in parallel, rather than trying to merge them into a single larger and
possibly unwieldy account.

Holism and Pseudoholism
227
References
Andrews, E. H. (1984). Creationism in confusion? Nature, 312(5993), 396–396.
Aronowsky, L. (2021). Gas guzzling Gaia, or: A prehistory of climate change denialism. Critical
Inquiry, 47(2), 306–327.
Attena, F. (2016). Limitations of Western medicine and models of integration between medical
systems. The Journal of Alternative and Complementary Medicine, 22(5), 343–348.
Bartkowski, J. P., & Scott Swearingen, W. (1997). God meets Gaia in Austin, Texas: A case study
of environmentalism as implicit religion. Review of Religious Research, 38(4), 308–324.
Bockemühl, A. (2007). Und was sagen die Elementarwesen zum Tunnelbau? Das Goetheanum, 38,
5.
Brown, R. C. (2018). Resisting moralisation in health promotion. Ethical Theory and Moral
Practice, 21(4), 997–1011.
Clarke, B. (2017). Rethinking Gaia: Stengers, Latour, Margulis. Theory, Culture & Society, 34(4),
3–26.
Clover,A.M.(1979).Anotherlookattheprinciplesofhomoeopathy.BritishHomoeopathicJournal,
68(1), 14–20.
Dam, K. (2006, April). Berlin Wall. Interhomeopathy. www.interhomeopathy.org/berlin_wall
Ernst, E. (2000) Iridology: Not useful and potentially harmful. Archives of Ophthalmology, 118(1),
120–121.
Ferry-Danini, J. (2018). A new path for humanistic medicine. Theoretical Medicine and Bioethics,
39, 57–77.
Freeman, J. (2005). Towards a deﬁnition of holism. British Journal of General Practice, 55(511),
154–155.
Haigh, M. J. (2001). Constructing Gaia: Using journals to foster reﬂective learning. Journal of
Geography in Higher Education, 25(2), 167–189.
Hansson, S. O., & Fröding, B. (2021) Ethical conﬂicts in patient-centred care. Clinical Ethics,
16(2), 55–66.
Harrington, A. (1996). Reenchanted science: Holism in German culture from Wilhelm II to Hitler.
Princeton University Press.
Healey, R. A. (1991). Holism and nonseparability. The Journal of Philosophy, 88(8), 393–421.
Holmberg, P., & Vallin, M. (2016, June 27) Granskning av Vidarklinikens avtalsefterlevnad.
Uppdrag från Hälso-och sjukvårdsförvaltningen. Helseplan.
Kendl, A. (2017) Scepticismus 1793–1812. Das Journal der Erﬁndungen, Theorien und Wider-
sprüche in der Natur- und Arzneiwissenschaft”, Der Skeptiker, 2017(1), 13–19.
Kirchner, J. W. (1989). The Gaia hypothesis: Can it be tested? Reviews of Geophysics, 27(2),
223–235.
Kirchner,J.W.(2003).TheGaiahypothesis:Conjecturesandrefutations.ClimaticChange,58(1–2),
21–45.
Knipschild, P. (1988). Looking for gall bladder disease in the patient’s iris. British Medical Journal,
297(6663), 1578–1581.
Lovelock, J. E. (1971). Air pollution and climatic change. Atmospheric Environment, 5, 403–411.
Lovelock, J. E. (1972). Gaia as seen through the atmosphere. Atmospheric Environment, 6, 579–580.
Lovelock, J. E., & Epton, S. (1975, February 6). The quest for Gaia. New Scientist, 304–306.
Lovelock, J. E., & Margulis, L. (1974). Atmospheric homeostasis by and for the biosphere: The
Gaia hypothesis. Tellus, 26(1–2), 2–10.
Margulis, L., & Lovelock, J. E. (1974). Biological modulation of the Earth’s atmosphere. Icarus,
21(4), 471–489.
Mezzich, J. (2012). The construction of person-centered medicine and the launching of an
international college. International Journal of Person Centered Medicine, 2(1), 6–10.
Michaelson, V., Pickett, W., & Davison, C. (2019). The history and promise of holism in health
promotion. Health Promotion International, 34(4), 824–832.

228
S. O. Hansson
Münstedt, K., El-Safadi, S., Brück, F., Zygmunt, M., Hackethal, A., & Tinneberg, H.-R. (2005).
Can iridology detect susceptibility to cancer? A prospective case-controlled study. Journal of
Alternative and Complementary Medicine, 11(3), 515–519.
Neider, A. (2019). Belastet unsere Existenz die Erde? Das Goetheanum, 43, 10–15.
Noworol, A. M. (2020). What is the value of iridology as a diagnostic tool? Medicine and Clinical
Science, 2(3), 1–6.
Olsson, L.-E., Ung, E. J., Swedberg, K., & Ekman, I. (2013). Efﬁcacy of person-centred care as
an intervention in controlled trials–a systematic review. Journal of Clinical Nursing, 22(3–4),
456–465.
Prousky, J. E. (2018). Repositioning individualized homeopathy as a psychotherapeutic technique
with resolvable ethical dilemmas. Journal of Evidence-Based Integrative Medicine, 23, 1–4.
Salgado, J. (2019). We are reductionists. Should we care? Bioﬁsica 15, Sep–Dec, 1–5. https://www.
uv.es/biophys/sbe/15/PDFsite/WeAreReductionists.pdf
Schmidt, J. M. (2020). The need for multidisciplinary research within the history and theory of
homeopathy. Homeopathy. https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0040-1714740
Simon, A., Worthen, D. M., & Mitas, J. A. (1979). An evaluation of iridology. JAMA, 242(13),
1385–1389.
Smuts, J. C. (1926). Holism and evolution. Macmillan.
Steiner, R. ([1910] 1992) Die Offenbarungen des Karma. Ein Zyklus von elf Vorträgen gehalten in
Hamburg zwischen dem 16. und 28. Mai 1910. Rudolf Steiner Gesamtausgabe, (Vol. 120). Rudolf
Steiner Verlag.
Steiner, R. ([1915] 1980) Das Geheimnis des Todes. Wesen und Bedeutung Mitteleuropas und die
europäischen Volksgeister. Fünfzehn Vorträge, gehalten 1915 in verschiedenen Städten. Rudolf
Steiner Gesamtausgabe, (Vol. 159). Rudolf Steiner Verlag.
Stewart, M. (2001). Towards a global deﬁnition of patient centred care. BMJ, 322, 444–445.
Supran, G., Oreskes, N. (2017). Assessing ExxonMobil’s climate change communications (1977–
2014). Environmental Research Letters, 12, 084019.
Thibault, G. E. (2019). Humanism in medicine: What does it mean and why is it more important
than ever? Academic Medicine, 94(8), 1074–1077.
Twentyman, L. R. (1973). Natrum muriaticum and our convulsive age. British Homoeopathic
Journal, 62(3), 186–190.
Vogt, H., Hofmann, B., & Getz, L. (2016). The new holism: P4 systems medicine and the
medicalization of health and life itself. Medicine, Health Care and Philosophy, 19(2), 307–323.
Whitmont, E. C. (1974). Psycho-physiological reﬂections on Lachesis. British Homoeopathic
Journal, 63(4), 234–243.
Whorton, J. C. (1985). The ﬁrst holistic revolution: Alternative medicine in the nineteenth century.
In D. Stalker & C. Glymour (Eds.), Examining holistic medicine (pp. 729–748). Prometheus
Books.
Widder, R. M., & Anderson, D. C. (2015). The appeal of medical quackery: A rhetorical analysis.
Research in Social and Administrative Pharmacy, 11, 288–296.

Explanatory Emergence, Metaphysical
Emergence, and the Metaphysical
Primacy of Physics
Terry Horgan
Are there emergent phenomena in the world, over and above those describable and
explainable by an ideally completed physics? This question is only as clear as is the
expression ‘emergent phenomenon’. I will distinguish three distinct notions of emer-
gence, and three distinct emergence theses that respectively invoke these notions. I
will call these theses strong metaphysical emergence, weak metaphysical emergence,
and physicalist explanatory emergence. I also will articulate a thesis I call the meta-
physical primacy of physics, and a thesis I call the trans-theoretic uniformity of
explanation. I will describe the logical connections among these ﬁve theses, and I
will discuss some considerations for and against each of them.
Some principal morals will be the following. (1) Strong metaphysical emergence
and weak metaphysical emergence both are incompatible with the metaphysical
primacy of physics. (2) Physicalist explanatory emergence is not at all incompat-
ible with the metaphysical primacy of physics; on the contrary, the former actually
presupposes the latter. Hence (3) considerations that count against strong meta-
physical emergence, and/or against weak metaphysical emergence, do not count
against physicalist explanatory emergence (from (1) and (2)). (4) Physicalist explana-
tory emergence is incompatible with the trans-theoretic uniformity of explanation.
Hence (5) considerations that count against strong metaphysical emergence, and/or
against weak metaphysical emergence, do not favor the trans-theoretic uniformity
of explanation over physicalist explanatory emergence (from (1)–(4)). (6) Physi-
calist explanatory emergence is considerably more plausible than the trans-theoretic
uniformity of explanation.
T. Horgan (B)
Department of Philosophy, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721-0027, USA
e-mail: thorgan@email.arizona.edu
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
S. Wuppuluri and I. Stewart (eds.), From Electrons to Elephants and Elections,
The Frontiers Collection, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-92192-7_14
229

230
T. Horgan
1
LaPlace’s Demon as a Philosophical Trope
The recent and current literature in metaphysics and in philosophy of mind contains
a bewildering panoply of proposed formulations—often employing specialized and
somewhat technical philosophical vocabulary—of various theses whose underlying
spirit is essentially the same as the several theses I will formulate here.1 I propose
to avoid deploying such vocabulary, and thereby to avoid internecine debates in
philosophy about which technical formulations best capture the ideas they seek to
explicate. Instead I will articulate the theses of interest by harnessing some varia-
tions on a vivid thought experiment that was used, by the early nineteenth century
scholar and polymath Pierre-Simon, marquis de LaPlace, to articulate in a vivid and
suggestive way the thesis of determinism. In a famous passage of his 1820 book A
Philosophical Essay on Probabilities, he said:
An intelligence knowing, at a given instant of time, all forces acting in nature, as well
as the momentary positions of all things of which the universe consists, would be able to
comprehend the motions of the largest bodies of the world and those of the smallest atoms in
one single formula, provided it were sufﬁciently powerful to subject all the data to analysis.
To it, nothing would be uncertain, and both future and past would be present before its eyes.2
LaPlace’s hypothetical super-intelligent being—who presumably is not supposed to
be a part of the cosmos that she is contemplating—nowadays is commonly called
LaPlace’s demon. I will adopt that usage here, with no derogatory connotation
attached to the word ‘demon’.
2
The Metaphysical Primacy of Physics
Traditional LaPlacean determinism is a special case of the thesis I will call the meta-
physical primacy of physics. LaPlacean determinism really involves two separable
components—although LaPlace himself did not acknowledge the second component
explicitly. One is the idea that the demon is able to calculate the universe’s entire
physical history from a speciﬁcation of its total physical state at any single moment
in time—the physical history being a speciﬁcation, in terms of the language and
concepts of physics, of the universe’s total physical state at every moment in time.
(LaPlace had in mind that the demon could do the calculation by appeal to funda-
mental physical laws, e.g., the laws of Newtonian mechanics.) Second is the idea
that the demon would somehow be able to know everything about the universe—i.e.,
all the truths, as speciﬁable in terms of any applicable concepts whatever—on the
basis of knowing the universe’s physical history.
Consider the claim that LaPlace’s demon can ascertain the universe’s entire phys-
ical history on the basis of the conjunction of (1) the laws of physics and (2) a
speciﬁcation of the universe’s total physical state at a single moment in time. This
is a (time-symmetrically) deterministic version of a thesis that I will call physical
dynamical closure. I use the word ‘closure’ to capture the idea that no factors other

Explanatory Emergence, Metaphysical Emergence, and the Metaphysical …
231
than those describable by physical dynamical laws ever “intrude from outside,” so
to speak, on the dynamical evolution of one total physical state of the universe to
another.
A more general version of physical dynamical closure is wanted, in order to allow
for the possibility that the actual fundamental laws of physics are non-deterministic.
(On some competing contemporary interpretations of quantum mechanics—though
not all—quantum theory is non-deterministic.) Here is generalized formulation,
expressed in terms of the capabilities of LaPlace’s demon:
Physical dynamical closure: For any moment in time t, and any pair of possible total-universe
physical states  and , if  is the universe’s total physical state at t, then the LaPlacean
demon can ascertain, solely on the basis of this fact together with the fundamental laws of
physics, the probability (at t) that  will be universe’s total physical state at the next instant
after t.
If the fundamental laws of physics are deterministic in the past-to-future direction,
then the special case of physical dynamical closure arises in which the demon always
ascertains that probability of  being immediately followed by  is 1. And if the
fundamental physical laws are time-symmetrically deterministic, then the yet-more-
special case arises in which the demon also ascertains that the probability of  having
been immediately preceded by  is 1.
What about the second component of LaPlacean determinism, the idea that the
demon can ascertain all truths about the universe—however those truths are charac-
terized, and regardless of which concepts might ﬁgure in these characterizations—on
the basis of knowing the whole physical history of the universe as characterized via
the concepts of fundamental physics? I suggest that what is needed here is to explic-
itly stipulate the following about the LaPlacean demon: she has unlimited conceptual
competence. In particular, she has full and complete competence for deploying any
concepts that human beings ever do deploy or ever could deploy. Let me give this
LaPlaceandemonaname,withtheunderstandingthatdoingsorecordsmystipulation
of her unlimited conceptual competence; I will call her Demonea.
Demonea’s conceptual competence includes, inter alia, full mastery of all the
concepts that ﬁgure in any of the “special sciences” that humans invoke to under-
stand and explain their world, sciences other than fundamental physics—chemistry,
geology, biology, psychology, sociology, and so forth. Importantly, however, her full
mastery of the concepts that ﬁgure in the various special sciences does not by itself
give her knowledge any substantive truths involving such concepts. On the contrary,
any such substantive truths are among the body of truths which, according to the
second component of LaPlacean determinism, she is able to ascertain, on the basis
of her knowledge of the universe’s full physical history, by exercising her mastery of
special-science concepts. For example, she can ascertain that—and explain why—a
particular collection of atoms, structurally interconnected in a speciﬁc way that she
can describe in terms of the concepts of fundamental physics, constitutes a cell, or
a multi-cellular organism, of an elephant, or an economic transaction, etc. Like-
wise, she can ascertain that—and explain why—various entities of the kinds posited
by the various special sciences instantiate the various kinds of properties invoked

232
T. Horgan
by those various special sciences—e.g., a given cell’s subdividing, a given multi-
cellular organism’s degree of ﬁtness, an elephant’s occupying an ecological niche,
an economic transaction’s being a monetary exchange, etc. The only knowledge she
needs in order to ascertain and explain all such phenomena, over and her knowl-
edge of the full physical history of the universe (as characterizable via the concepts
of fundamental physics), is the kind of knowledge that constitutes full conceptual
competence in the deployment of special-science concepts. Roughly, the latter is
knowledge about what it takes to be a cell, or an elephant, or an ecological niche,
etc.
So the second component of LaPlacean determinism, which I will call strong
physical cosmic determination, can now be formulated as a thesis about the capacities
of the LaPlacean demon Demonea, this way:
Strong physical cosmic determination: Demonea can ascertain, solely on the basis of her
unlimited conceptual competence together with knowledge of the total physical history of
the universe, all truths about the cosmos.
And the thesis I will call the metaphysical primacy of physics is the conjunction of
two theses: physical dynamical closure and strong physical cosmic determination.
As a thesis about Demonea, it is this:
The metaphysical primacy of physics: (1) For any moment in time t, and any pair of possible
total-universe physical states  and , if  is the universe’s total physical state at t, then
Demonea can ascertain, solely on the basis of this fact together with the fundamental laws of
physics, the probability (at t) that  will be universe’s total physical state at the next instant
after t; and (2) Demonea can ascertain, solely on the basis of her unlimited conceptual
competence together with knowledge of the total physical history of the universe, all truths
about the cosmos.
Henceforth I will call this the MPP thesis, for short.
Traditional LaPlacean determinism is a special case of the MPP thesis, comprising
both strong physical cosmic determination and a thesis about the universe’s phys-
ical history that is logically stronger than—and therefore entails—physical dynam-
ical closure: viz., the thesis that universe’s physical history is time-symmetrically
deterministic, in a manner that accords with deterministic laws of physics.
Although the latter thesis is controversial because of the vexed issue of
whether quantum theory is deterministic, many contemporary philosophers—myself
included—would be very sympathetic to a thesis in the spirit MPP, and would contend
that such a thesis is well supported by contemporary scientiﬁc knowledge. I suspect
that the same goes for many scientists.
3
Strong Metaphysical Emergence
The thesis I call strong physical emergence (for short, SME) rejects both components
of the MPP thesis. Contrary to the thesis of strong physical cosmic determination,
SME asserts that there are some phenomena in the cosmos that Demonea could

Explanatory Emergence, Metaphysical Emergence, and the Metaphysical …
233
not ascertain simply on the basis of her unlimited conceptual competence and her
knowledge of the universe’s physical history. And, contrary to the thesis of physical
dynamical closure, SME asserts that such phenomena sometimes intrude upon the
universe’s dynamical evolution from one total physical state to another—so that it is
not always the case that if Demonea knows that the universe is in total physical state
 at a time t, then Demonea can correctly ascertain, on the basis of knowing this and
knowing the laws of physics, the actual probabilities (at t) of the various potential
total physical states to which the universe might evolve at the next moment of time.
Are there phenomena in the world that might plausibly be regarded as strongly
metaphysically emergent? One candidate is rational human mental activity, and the
potential contributions of such activity to physical phenomena in the brain which
themselves causally instigate action. For instance, the early twentieth century British
philosopher C. D. Broad entertained strong emergentism about mentality—without
overtly embracing it—in his 1925 book The Mind and Its Place in Nature. Here is a
representative passage:
[T]he facts…suggest that what the mind does in voluntary action, if it does anything, is to
lower the resistance of certain synapses and to raise that of others. The result is that the
nervous system follows such a course as to produce the particular movement which the mind
judges to be appropriate at the time. On such a view the difference between reﬂex, habitual,
and deliberate actions for the present purpose becomes fairly plain. In pure reﬂexes the
mind cannot voluntarily affect the resistance of the synapses concerned, and so the action
takes place in spite of it. In habitual action it deliberately refrains from interfering with the
resistance of the synapses, and so the action goes on like a complicated reﬂex. But it can
affect these resistances if it wishes, though often only with difﬁculty; and it is ready to do
so if it judges this to be expedient. Finally, it may lose the power altogether. This would be
what happens when a person becomes a slave to some habit, such as drug-taking (Broad,
1925, pp. 112–113).
On this conception of mentality, Demonea will not be able to ascertain what judg-
ments are being made at a time t by a creature with mentality, even if she knows the
whole physical history of the universe and therefore knows everything physical that is
going (at t) in the creature’s brain. (This goes contrary to the thesis of strong physical
cosmic determination.) And, if the creature is making a judgment (at t) in a way that
voluntarily lowers the electrical resistance of certain neural synapses and/or raises the
electrical resistance of others, then this external mental intrusion into the universe’s
physical dynamical evolution will prevent Demonea from being able to ascertain
the actual probability that accrues (at t) to the neural motor-controlling processes
that will next occur in the creature’s brain and will then generate a particular bodily
movement. (This goes contrary to the thesis of physical dynamical closure.)
But in the absence of any direct positive evidence from neuroscience that neurons
insitueverbehaveinwaysnotfullyexplainablebyphysico-chemicallaws—andthere
is no such evidence!—many contemporary scientists and philosophers (including
myself) will consider very implausible the idea that conscious mentality can intrude
and intervene in this way, or in any other physical-closure violating way, upon
the physico-chemical workings of the central nervous system.3 Vastly less radical
is the alternative possibility that reasons-responsive cognition is physically imple-
mented by nervous-system processes which, although much more complex than those

234
T. Horgan
subserving pure reﬂexes, nonetheless always operate in ways that are explainable, at
least in principle, by physico-chemical laws.
This point generalizes. Strong metaphysical emergence is quite a radical doctrine,
and does not mesh well with contemporary science.
4
Weak Metaphysical Emergence
ThethesisIcallweakmetaphysicalemergence(forshort,WME)departslessradically
from MPP than does SME. Like MPP and unlike SME, WME afﬁrms physical
dynamical closure. Like SME and unlike MPP, WME denies strong physical cosmic
determination. WME also includes a sub-thesis I will call weak physical cosmic
determination, which I will formulate presently.
The leading idea of WME is that even though physical dynamical closure obtains,
nevertheless there are certain phenomena in the cosmos that Demonea would not be
able to ascertain and explain just by exercising her unlimited conceptual competence
together with her knowledge of the universe’s complete physical history. One candi-
date phenomenon is what philosophers call “phenomenal consciousness,” involving
those kinds of experiences such that there something it is like, for the experiencing
subject, to undergo such experiences. The nineteenth century physician and physiolo-
gist Emil Heinrich du Bois Reymond, the co-discoverer of nerve-action potential and
the developer of experimental electrophysiology, expressed well why phenomenal
consciousness can easily seem to elude physico-chemical explanation. He wrote:
What conceivable connection is there between certain movements of certain atoms in my
brain on one side, and on the other the original, indeﬁnable, undeniable facts: ‘I feel pain,
feel lust; I taste sweetness, smell the scent of roses, hear the sound of organ, see redness’…
It is entirely and forever incomprehensible why it should make a difference how a set of
carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen, oxygen, etc. atoms are arranged and move, how they were
arranged and moved, how they will be arranged and will move. It is in no way intelligible
how consciousness might emerge from their coexistence.4
An advocate of WME concerning phenomenal consciousness is apt to claim that
the full class of fundamental, unexplainable, laws of nature includes not only the
fundamental laws of physics, but also certain “bridge laws” asserting that when-
ever a creature instantiates a certain speciﬁc complex physical property P, the crea-
ture simultaneously instantiates a certain speciﬁc phenomenal mental property M.
If indeed there are such fundamental and unexplainable physical-to-phenomenal
bridge laws, then Demonia would need to know these laws, in addition to knowing
the fundamental laws of physics, in order to ascertain all the truths about the cosmos
on the basis of its total physical history. Otherwise, she would not be able to ascertain
where and when various phenomenal-consciousness properties are instantiated in the
cosmos.
Claims about morality are another candidate phenomenon. For example, the
British philosopher G. E. Moore, in the inﬂuential book Moore (1903), argued that
there are certain fundamental and unexplainable principles asserting that whenever a

Explanatory Emergence, Metaphysical Emergence, and the Metaphysical …
235
certain speciﬁc non-normative “natural” property P is instantiated, a certain moral-
normative “non-natural” property M (e.g., the property intrinsic goodness) is then-
and-there instantiated as well. Moore held that such natural-to-moral connection
principles could not possibly be false—not even in a cosmos in which the prevailing
laws of nature are different from the natural laws that prevail in our own cosmos.
But he also held that these connection principles are not mere conceptual truths,
i.e., truths (e.g., “All bachelors are unmarried”) that are knowable purely by virtue
of understanding the concepts they deploy. Rather, he maintained, knowledge of
the connection principles requires a special cognitive faculty of “moral intuition,”
possession of which goes beyond mere conceptual competence in deploying the
concepts that ﬁgure in these principles. If indeed there are such fundamental and
unexplainable natural-to-moral connection principles, then Demonia would need to
know these principles, in addition to knowing the fundamental laws of physics, in
order to ascertain all the truths about the cosmos on the basis of its total physical
history. Otherwise, she would not be able to ascertain where and when various moral
properties are instantiated in the cosmos.
So the existence of fundamental, unexplainable, laws or principles beyond those
of physics would undermine the thesis of strong cosmic determination. Nevertheless,
the following thesis of weak physical cosmic determination might still be true:
Weak physical cosmic determination: Demonea, solely on the basis of the combination of
(i) her unlimited conceptual competence, (ii) knowledge of the total physical history of the
universe, and (iii) knowledge of whatever fundamental and unexplainable laws or principles
there are (if any) beyond those of physics, can ascertain all truths about the cosmos.
Thesis WME, then, is the conjunction of the following three sub-theses: (1) physical
dynamical closure, (2) weak physical cosmic determination, and (3) the denial of
strong cosmic determination.
WME departs from MPP considerably less radically than does SME. Neverthe-
less, the many contemporary philosophers (myself included) who are sympathetic to
a thesis like MPP will be inclined to resist WME. Concerning phenomenal conscious-
ness, for example, one potential line of resistance is to argue (1) that although
experience-based phenomenal-property concepts are very different from scientiﬁc-
theoretical concepts, nevertheless the properties that are designated by experience-
based phenomenal-property concepts are identical to properties that are designated
by certain scientiﬁc-theoretical concepts, and (2) and that these property-identity
facts neither need, nor are susceptible to, explanation.5 And concerning matters of
morality, for example, one potential line of resistance is to argue that moral judgments
arereallyakindofaction-guidingattitudethatdoesnotactuallypositmoralproperties
at all—much less moral properties that are weakly metaphysically emergent.6

236
T. Horgan
5
Trans-theoretic Explanatory Uniformity Versus
Physicalist Explanatory Emergence
Scientiﬁc explanations are given not just by physics, but also in the various “special
sciences”: chemistry, biology, psychology, sociology, etc. How are special-science
explanations related to explanations in physics? I will now set forth two competing
general answers to this question; I call these alternative theses, respectively, trans-
theoretic explanatory unity (for short, TTEU) and physicalist explanatory emergence
(for short, PEE). Importantly, both theses presuppose the MPP thesis. This means
that any considerations that might favor MPP over either SME or WME should be
neutral regarding TTEU versus PEE.
Each of the sciences posits certain proprietary kinds of entities and properties
that ﬁgure centrally in its explanations—e.g. (depending on the science) subatomic
particles, atoms, molecules, planets, stars, cells, multicellular organisms, animals
of various species, democratic social systems, etc. And each science also posits
certain proprietary properties (including relational properties), instantiable by the
proprietary entities in its domain. In philosophy of science, such proprietary entities
and properties are often called “natural kinds”—an expression I will adopt here.
Using this terminology, thesis TTEU can be formulated this way:
Trans-theoretic explanatory uniformity: Every special-science natural kind is identical to
some natural kind of physics, and hence every special-science explanation is reformulable,
at least in principle, as a physics-level explanation.
On the conception of inter-theoretic relations embodied in TTEU, the pertinent
physics-level natural kinds that are identical to special-science natural kinds need not
be fundamental natural kinds of physics, and typically will not be. Rather, the natural-
kind entities posited by the special sciences typically will be physically complex,
composed of numerous fundamental physics-level natural-kind entities that are inter-
connected in some way that is speciﬁable in terms of physics-level natural-kind prop-
erties. Similarly, the pertinent natural-kind properties posited by the special sciences
typically will be physically complex too, while also being speciﬁable in terms of
how various fundamental physics-level natural-kind properties are instantiated by
the various fundamental physics-level entities that compose a given special-science
natural-kind entity. (These physics-level natural-kind properties will be like temper-
ature as a property of gases—only typically much more complex. The temperature
of a gas is the mean kinetic energy of its composite molecules.)
On this conception of explanation, special-science explanations do not afford
an explanatory understanding of phenomena that differs, in principle, from the
kind of explanatory understanding that could be achieved, in principle, via purely
physics-level explanations. However, the qualiﬁer ‘in principle’ is quite important
here, because of human cognitive limitations. An ordinary human could not begin
to hold in mind—to “cognitively survey”—purely physics-level speciﬁcations of the
various natural-kindentities andnatural-kindproperties that arepositedbythespecial
sciences. Special-science concepts have the advantage of leaving out the physics-
level details, thereby allowing the explanatory connections among phenomena to be

Explanatory Emergence, Metaphysical Emergence, and the Metaphysical …
237
characterized in less speciﬁc, albeit cognitively surveyable, ways. Special-science
explanations are “dumbed-down” versions of physics-level explanations that are
available in principle but not in practice to creatures like ourselves.
It would be quite different, of course, for Demonea. Given her enormous intellec-
tual prowess, she would have no trouble at all in understanding the pertinent expla-
nations that invoke special-science natural kinds under their fundamental-physics
characterizations rather than invoking those natural kinds under their dumbed-down
special-science characterizations. For her, therefore, special-science explanations
deploying special-science natural-kind concepts would provide no extra, no distinc-
tive, explanatory understanding at all. She simply would have no need for special-
science concepts—even though her unlimited conceptual mastery would include
mastery of these concepts. And she would understand why, perforce, these concepts
are explanatorily useful to mere humans.
I turn now to thesis PEE, physicalist explanatory emergence. This conception of
how explanations in the special sciences relate to those of physics presupposes thesis
MPP, the metaphysical primacy of physics. (The modiﬁer ‘physicalist’ is used here
to indicate this.) Beyond that, what PEE asserts is that TTEU is false. So PEE can
be formulated this way:
Physicalist Explanatory Emergence: (1) Thesis MPP is true; furthermore, (2.i) it not the case
that every special-science natural kind is identical to some natural kind of physics, and hence
(2,ii) it is not the case every special-science explanation is reformulable, at least in principle,
as a physics-level explanation.
The philosopher Jerry Fodor, in his important 1974 paper “Special Sciences (Or:
The Disunity of Science as a Working Hypothesis),” gave a vigorous defense of a
conception of inter-theoretic relations among the sciences that amounts in essence
to PEE. Here is the key passage (which also displays Fodor’s rhetorical verve):
The reason it is unlikely that every natural kind corresponds to a physical natural kind
is just that (a) interesting generalizations can often be made about events whose physical
descriptions have nothing in common, (b) it is often the case the whether the physical
descriptions of the events subsumed by these generalizations have anything in common
is, in an obvious sense, entirely irrelevant to the truth of the generalizations, or to their
interestingness,ortotheirdegreeofconﬁrmation,of,indeed,toanyoftheirepistemologically
important properties, and (c) the special sciences are very much in the business of making
generalizations of this kind.
I take it that these remarks are obvious to the point of self-certiﬁcation; they leap to
the eye as soon as one makes the (apparently radical) move of taking the special sciences
at all seriously. Suppose, for example, that Gresham’s ‘law’ really is true. (If one doesn’t
like Gresham’s law, then any true generalization of any conceivable future economics will
probably do as well.) Gresham’s law says something about what will happen in monetary
exchanges under certain conditions. I am willing to believe that physics is general in the sense
that it implies that any event which consists of a monetary exchange (hence any event that
falls under Gresham’s law) has a true description in the vocabulary of physics and in virtue
of which it falls under the laws of physics. But banal considerations suggest that a description
which covers all such events must be wildly disjunctive. Some monetary exchanges involve
strings of wampum. Some involve dollar bills. And some involve signing one’s name to a
check. What are the chances that a disjunction of physical predicates which covers all these
events…expresses a physical natural kind? In particular, what are the chances that such a

238
T. Horgan
predicate forms the antecedent or consequent of some proper law of physics? The point is
that monetary exchanges have interesting things in common; Gresham’s law, if true, says
what one of these interesting things is. But what is interesting about monetary exchanges
is surely not their commonality under physical description. A natural kind like a monetary
exchange could turn out to be co-extensive with a physical natural kind; but if it did, that
would be an accident on a cosmic scale.
In fact, the situation…is still worse than the discussion thus far suggests…. [The physical
natural-kind predicate] P would have to cover not only all the systems of monetary exchange
that there are, but also all the systems of monetary exchange that there could be; a law must
succeed with the counterfactuals. What physical predicate is a candidate for ‘P’…? (Fodor,
1974, 103-104).
To my mind, Fodor’s argumentation in this passage is quite compelling. A key
point he was stressing is that that there are numerous, physically highly diverse, ways
in which a physical event can instantiate a special-science natural-kind property like
being a monetary exchange—that is, numerous ways in which that property can be
physically realized by some complex property that is characterizable in the language
of physics. The phenomenon of multiple, highly diverse, physical realizability of
special-science natural kinds appears to be ubiquitous in the special sciences. And
the ubiquity of this phenomenon appears to be an excellent reason to reject TTEU
and instead embrace PEE.
Return again to Demonea. Suppose that she contemplates a hypothetical scenario
that is described solely in certain special-science terminology, without any details
about physical realization being speciﬁed—say, a hypothetical scenario involving
numerous monetary exchanges within a money-supply situation involving the avail-
ability of both “bad money” (i.e., money in a form that is not intrinsically valuable,
likepapercurrency)and“goodmoney”(i.e.,moneyinaformthatisintrinsicallyvalu-
able, like gold bars). Suppose that in this hypothetical scenario, the economic transac-
tions increasingly deploy the bad money, whereas the good money increasingly gets
hordedratherthanbeingusedinexchanges.AccordingtoGresham’slaw,“badmoney
drives out good money” in an economic system. So if Gresham’s law is true, then
its applicability to the envisioned hypothetical situation explains why the economic
transactions increasingly employ the bad money. Demonea thereby acquires some
genuine explanatory understanding of what is happening in the scenario. Neverthe-
less, since no details have been provided or stipulated about matters like how, in
the scenario, natural kinds like bad money, good money, and hording behavior get
physically realized, Demonea simply lacks adequate information about this situation
to possess any particular physics-level explanation of what is going on. Thus, the
special-science explanation in terms of Gresham’s law gives her a distinctive and
autonomous kind of explanatory understanding, because the explanation at hand is
not itself reformulable as a physics-level explanation.
Fodor did not use the terms ‘emergent’ or ‘emergence’ in his defense of the
explanatory autonomy of the special sciences. But one thinker who does, and whose
usage is very much in the spirit of PEE, is the theoretical biologist and complex
systems researcher Stuart Kauffman. Here is a compendium of pertinent remarks
from Kauffman (1995), with some added boldfacing by me:

Explanatory Emergence, Metaphysical Emergence, and the Metaphysical …
239
I suspect that the fate of all adaptive systems in the biosphere—from single cells to
economics—is to evolve to a natural state between order and chaos, a grand compromise
between structure and surprise… (p. 15).
The hope…is to characterize classes of properties of systems that…are typical or generic
anddonotdependonthedetails….Notknowingthedetailsweneverthelesscanbuildtheories
that seek to explain the generic properties… (p. 17).
After all, what we are after here is not necessarily detailed prediction, but explanation.
We can never hope to predict the exact branchings of the tree of life, but we can uncover
powerful laws that predict and explain their general shape. I hope for such laws. I even dare
to hope that we can begin to sketch some of them now. For want of a better general phrase,
I call these effects a search for a theory of emergence…. (p. 23)
I believe that life itself is an emergent phenomenon, but I mean nothing mystical
by this…. [S]ufﬁciently complex mixes of chemicals can spontaneously crystallize into
systems with the ability to collectively catalyze the network of chemical reactions by which
the molecules themselves are formed. Such collective autocatalytic sets sustain themselves
and reproduce…. A set of molecules either does or does not have the property that it is
able to catalyze its own formation and reproduction from some simple food molecules. No
vital force or extra substance is present in the emergent, self-reproducing, whole. But
the…collective system is alive. Its parts are just chemicals (p. 24).
Whether we are talking about organisms or economies, surprisingly general laws govern
adapative processes on miltipeaked ﬁtness landscapes. These general laws may account for
phenomena ranging from the burst of the Cambrian explosion in biological evolution, where
taxa ﬁll in from the top down, to technological evolution, where striking variations arise
early and dwindle to minor improvements…. The best exploration of an evolutionary space
occurs at a kind of phase transition between order and disorder, when populations begin to
melt off the local peaks they have become ﬁxated on and ﬂow along ridges toward distant
regions of higher ﬁtness (p. 27).
Kauffman, in saying that he means nothing “mystical” by his talk of emergence,
that “no vital force or extra substance” is present in an emergent whole, and that
parts of the whole “are just chemicals,” presumably means to eschew theses like
SME or WME. And in saying that emergent laws governing adaptive systems invoke
properties that are “typical or generic and do not depend on the details,” and that such
laws are “surprisingly general” and “may account for phenomena ranging from the
burst of the Cambrian explosion…to techological evolution,” he presumably means
to invoke the idea that the properties he calls “emergent” are radically multiply
realizable physically and hence are not identical to any physics-level natural-kind
properties. So in effect, he is advocating physicalist explanatory emergence.
In light of Sects. 1, 2, 3 and 4, the upshot of the present section is this: (1) PEE
is much more plausible on its face than TTEU, because of the apparent ubiquity of
special-science natural kinds that are multiply physically realizable in signiﬁcantly
divergent ways; (2) advocates of TTEU over PEE therefore bear a very heavy burden
of proof; and (3) since PEE not only is compatible with MPP but actually presupposes
it, considerations that might be given in favor of MPP (and thus, against SME and
WME) evidently do not provide support for TTEU over PEE.

240
T. Horgan
6
Strong Reduction, Weak Reduction, and the Unity
of Science
Are the special sciences all reducible to physics, perhaps in a hierarchical manner
with some special sciences being progressively reducible to others which themselves
are reducible in turn, with the whole hierarchy ultimately being reducible to physics?
This question is only as clear as the intended meaning of the expressions ‘reduction’
and ‘reducible’. On the basis of Sects. 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5, I will here distinguish two
distinct notions of inter-theoretic reduction, which I will call strong reducibility and
weak reducibility, respectively.
Let strong reducibility of a theory T2 to a theory T1 be the thesis that every
natural-kind entity or property posited by T2 is identical to some natural-kind entity
or property posited by T1. And let weak reducibility of a special-science theory T
to physics be the thesis that whenever there is an instance of natural-kind entities or
properties posited by T, (1) there is a physics-level explanation (perhaps enormously
complex) of why this is so, and (2) there also is a physics-level explanation (perhaps
enormously complex) of why, in this instance, the pertinent natural-kind entities and
properties conform to the laws of T.
Suppose—as I myself believe—that thesis MPP (the metaphysical primacy of
physics) and thesis PEE (physicalist explanatory emergence) are both true. Then the
special sciences all are weakly reducible to physics, because MPP entails that condi-
tions (1) and (2) of my deﬁnition of weak reducibility to physics are both satisﬁed.
(Demonea could always provide the physics-level explanations required for weak
reducibility, even if such explanations would often be too complex to be tractable for
humans.) But the special sciences are not, in general, strongly reducible to physics,
because the heterogenous physical multiple realizability of special-science natural-
kind entities and properties prevents these natural kinds from being identical to
physics-level natural kinds.
In philosophy of science, the notion of inter-theoretic reduction typically has been
understood as being essentially what I am calling strong reducibility.7 The doctrine
that the special sciences all are ultimately reducible to physics is often called “the
unity of science”; it was articulated and defended in the inﬂuential article Oppenheim
and Putnam (1958). Jerry Fodor was overtly attacking this hypothesis in his 1974
paper cited and quoted above (indeed, he was negatively rifﬁng on Oppenheim and
Putnam with his subtitle “The Disunity of Science as a Working Hypothesis”).
But the words ‘reduction’ and ‘reducibility’ also can be used—not inappropri-
ately—to advert to what I am calling weak reducibility, and to sometime efforts in
science to spell out physical details about how certain special-science natural kinds
are physically realized in certain speciﬁc individuals—e.g., how certain psychology-
level natural kinds are physically realized in human brains. Consider, for instance,
these remarks in Fodor’s paper, with some added boldfacing by me:
It seems to me (to put the point quite generally) that the classical construal of the unity of
science has really misconstrued the goal of scientiﬁc reduction. The point of reduction is
not primarily to ﬁnd some natural kind predicate of physics co-extensive with each natural

Explanatory Emergence, Metaphysical Emergence, and the Metaphysical …
241
kind predicate of a reduced science. It is, rather, to explicate the physical mechanisms
wherebyeventsconformtothelawsofthespecialsciences.Ihavebeenarguingthatthereisno
logical or epistemological reason why success in the second of these projects should require
success in the ﬁrst, and that the two are likely to come apart in fact whenever the physical
mechanisms whereby events conform to a law of the special sciences are heterogenous
(Fodor, 1974, p. 107).
The scientiﬁc project that Fodor here dubs ‘scientiﬁc reduction’ involves what I am
calling weak reducibility. In effect, Fodor was saying in this passage that the classical
construal of the unity of science has mistakenly supposed that the pertinent kind of
unity involves strong reducibility, when it really involves only weak reducibility.
So, are the special sciences all reducible to physics? The answer I favor is “Yes
and no.” Yes, because they are all weakly reducible to physics. But no, because it’s
not the case that they are all strongly reducible to physics; instead, a crucial feature
of the special sciences is physicalist explanatory emergence.
Notes
1.
See, for instance, Horgan (1982, 1984, 1993), McLaughlin (1995, 2008), and
further references cited in these papers.
2.
LaPlace (1820). The quoted translation is from Ducasse (1958).
3.
There is also an intelligibility problem looming here, not unlike the one about
mind–body interaction that Descartes confronted (because of his conception of
the mind as a non-physical “substance” lacking spatial location). Broad himself
seems to have come to think that the kind of mental/physical agentive control
he had gestured at is not really intelligible. Cf.Broad (1934). The Mind and Its.
4.
Emil du Bouis-Remond (1872), quoted in translation by Bieri (1995).
5.
See, for instance, McLaughlin (2007), Horgan (forthcoming).
6.
See, for instance, Horgan and Timmons (2006).
7.
Sometimes reducibility to physics is described not as involving identities
between special-science natural kinds and physics-level natural kinds, but rather
as involving “bridge laws” each of which asserts nomic coextensiveness (rather
than outright identity) between a special-science natural kind and a speciﬁc
physics-level natural kind. But if such nomic-coextension bridge laws are
supposed to be fundamental and unexplainable, then the resulting picture would
be a version of weak metaphysical emergentism—which is surely not intended
by advocates of strong reducibility of the special sciences to physics. And if the
so-called bridge laws are not supposed to be fundamental and unexplainable,
then considerations of theoretical parsimony strongly suggest that these “laws”
are best construed as expressing outright natural-kind identities.
If one claims that the identity construal should be resisted because the actual
relation between special-science natural kinds and physical natural kinds is
physical realization (rather than identity), then the contention that special-
science natural kinds are nomically coextensive with physical natural kinds
faces exactly the same problem as does the contention that special-science

242
T. Horgan
naturalkindsareidentical withphysicalnaturalkinds—viz.,thefactthatspecial-
science natural kinds, ubiquitously, seem to be multiply and heterogeneously
physically realizable.
References
Bieri, P. (1995). Why is consciousness puzzling? In T. Metzinger (Ed.), Conscious experience
(pp. 45–60). Imprint Academic Schoningh.
Broad, C. D. (1925). The mind and its place in nature. Harcourt, Brace, and Company.
Broad, C. D. (1934). Determinism, indeterminism, and libertarianism: An inaugural lecture.
Cambridge University Press.
du Bouis-Remond, E. (1872). Uber die Grenzen Des Naturerkennens (About the limits of natural
knowledge). In his Vortrage uber Philosophie und Gesellschaft. Meiner, 1974.
Ducasse, C. J. (1958). Determinism, freedom, and responsibility. In S. Hook (Ed.), Determinism
and freedom in the age of modern science (pp. 160–169). Collier
Fodor, J. (1974). Special sciences (or: The disunity of science as a working hypothesis). Synthese,
28, 97–115.
Horgan, T. (1982). Supervenience and microphysics. Paciﬁc Philosophical Quarterly, 63, 29–43.
Horgan, T. (1984). Supervenience and cosmic hermeneutics. Southern Journal of Philosophy,
22(Supplement), 19–38.
Horgan, T. (1993). From supervenience to superdupervenience: Meeting the demands of a material
world. Mind, 102, 555–586.
Horgan, T. Forthcoming. Physical grounding and the intrinsic nature of phenomenal consciousness.
In G. Rabin (Ed.), Grounding and consciousness. Oxford University Press.
Horgan, T., & Timmons, M. (2006). Cognitivist expressivism. In T. Horgan & M. Timmons (Eds.),
Metaethics after Moore (pp. 255–298). Oxford University Press.
Kauffman, S. (1995). At home in the universe: The search for the laws of self-organization and
complexity. Oxford University Press.
LaPlace, P. Simon, de Marquis (1820). Theorie analytique des probabilities (3rd ed.). Coursier.
McLaughlin, B. (1995). Varieties of supervenience. In E. Savellos, & S. Yalcin (Eds.), Superve-
nience: New essays (pp. 16–59). Cambridge University Press.
McLaughlin, B. (2007). Type materialism for phenomenal consciousness. In M. Velmans, & S.
Schneider (Eds.), The Blackwell companion to consciousness (pp. 431–444). Blackwell.
McLaughlin, B. (2008). Supervenience. Stanford encyclopia of philosophy.
Moore, G. E. (1903). Principia ethica. Dover Publications.
Oppenheim, P., & Putnam, H. (1958) Unity of science as a working hypothesis. Minnesota Studies
in the Philosophy of Science, 2, 3–36.

Contextual Emergence: Constituents,
Context and Meaning
Robert C. Bishop
1
Ontological Reductionism or Radical Emergence?
When confronted with order and novel phenomena we experience in the world,
scientists will be inclined to invoke some combination of laws, constraints, and
mechanisms among other determining factors. Scientiﬁc explanations typically rely
on the already established order that scientists have worked out. Hence, it’s not
unusual to ﬁnd some scientists and philosophers endorsing reductionism: The belief
that elementary particles and forces determine everything in the world (e.g., biology,
geology, or your reactions to this chapter).
Of course, it’s the case that elementary particles and forces underlie everything in
the material world.1 Without them you wouldn’t be here reading this! Reductionism,
however,isastrongerthesisthanjustremarksaboutwhatliesatthebottomofphysical
reality, so to speak. It’s a claim about the ultimate structure of nature being completely
determined by the complex play of elementary particles and forces. This strong claim
has troubling implications: What is the status of ethics, moral responsibility, free
will, creativity, meaning? Are these merely subjectively experienced effects of the
underlying action of particles and forces?
Underreductionism,it’sfarfromclearthereisroomforgenuinequalitiesofhuman
agency and ethics if nature is structured reductively (Bishop, 2010). This is because
reductionism presupposes the causal closure of physics, where all physical effects
are fully determined by elementary particles and forces–the arrow of determination
points from the bottom up, so to speak. However, some of the necessary conditions for
a behavior to qualify as an action that might be described as responsible or free are:
1Or, for quantum mechanics, ﬁelds and forces since particles are thought to be excitations in ﬁelds
in quantum ﬁeld theory. For ease of exposition, I’ll stick with particles instead of ﬁelds but this will
affect nothing I say going forward.
Based on a talk given at ETH Zurich for the ETH Critical Thinking initiative.
R. C. Bishop (B)
Wheaton College, 501 College Avenue, Wheaton, IL 60187-5501, USA
e-mail: robert.bishop@wheaton.edu
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
S. Wuppuluri and I. Stewart (eds.), From Electrons to Elephants and Elections,
The Frontiers Collection, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-92192-7_15
243

244
R. C. Bishop and W. College
• A person has an immediate awareness of their activity (physical or mental) and of
that activity’s aim or goal.
• A person has some from of direct control over or guidance for their behavior.
• A person’s behavior must be seen as intentional under some description.
• A person’s actions are explainable in terms of their intentions, desires and beliefs.
If the causal closure of physics is true, then people’s actions do not genuinely ﬂow out
of reasons, motives, beliefs, and so forth. Instead, all behaviors ﬂow ultimately from
the play of forces on elementary particles. This implies that none of the conditions
for action–much less some form of free action–can be satisﬁed. Under reductionism,
all behaviors are ultimately mapped onto the dynamics of elementary particles and
forces whether these behaviors are taking place in human societies or not. What we
think of as human “free choice”or “responsible action” is simply the law-like play
of elementary particles and forces.
These consequences for human morality, agency, and meaning can be made vivid
by thinking about mathematician John Conway’s Game of Life.2 The game involves a
grid of squares, where some are colored black (living) while others are colored white
(dead). It uses one simple rule determining under what conditions black squares will
switch to white and vice versa along with an initial state to be speciﬁed at t = 0
(the initial conﬁguration or pattern of black/white squares). Then, let the system
evolve according to the rule and whatever happens happens. The rule plus the initial
condition for a conﬁguration of black and white squares determines when and where
every pattern arises in the game, how patterns behave, how long they persist, and
so forth. Beautiful patterns such as gliders that ﬂock like birds can appear and “ﬂy”
across the screen. Yet, all the patterns are simply the result of the one rule plus the
initial condition. In the actual world under reductionism, the particles and forces of
elementary particle physics play the role of the one rule. Given the initial start of the
universe and this rule, everything—including your choice to read this essay—is just
the product of the forces and the initial conﬁguration of the particles at the beginning.
On the other hand, it’s not unusual to ﬁnd some scientists and philosophers endors-
ing emergence: The belief that physics, chemistry, biology, geology, physiology and
(by implication at least) human behavior are more than just the action of elementary
particles and forces. However, there are two basic kinds of emergence usually dis-
cussed in the reduction/emergence debates. The ﬁrst is radical emergence. This is the
belief that novel laws, properties and processes come from nowhere in the sense that
they aren’t based on elementary particles and forces. The second kind is epistemic
emergence. This is the belief that chemical, biological and social phenomena, say,
are not explainable or derivable from elementary particles and forces. This failure
could be due to some kind of epistemic limitation such as a lack of computational or
descriptive power.
Epistemic emergence is rather banal because it’s ubiquitous. As a matter of sci-
entiﬁc practice and necessity we are often forced to use higher-level descriptions
for chemical, biological and social phenomena because elementary particle physics
2 https://playgameoﬂife.com/.

Contextual Emergence: Constituents, Context and Meaning
245
descriptions make no sense of higher-level situations (Anderson, 1972). Neverthe-
less, this means that ontologically, nature can be reductively structured while we’re
still forced to use higher-level descriptions. Epistemic emergence is consistent with
a reductively structured world. Human morality and freedom are ontologically still
just the play of the elementary particles and forces.
While epistemological emergence is uncontroversial, radical emergence is very
problematic as it’s irrelevant to the sciences. Much of our scientiﬁc work is aimed
at unifying and connecting phenomena. But radical emergence implies that nature is
disuniﬁed and disconnected. Apparently, there are some kinds of brute laws bridg-
ing between elementary particles and forces, on the one hand, and biological and
physiological phenomena on the other. Or there are brute novel properties and pro-
cesses independent of elementary particles and forces. Consciousness, free will and
morality might be some of these brute entities.
For scientists, and many philosophers this kind of radical ontological emergence
is a dead end. It’s useless for making sense of the order and stability of our world as
well as being irrelevant to the sciences. Radical emergence is both mysterious and
prima facie inconsistent with our experience of a coherent, ordered world and seems
more like giving up on the project of understanding our experience and making sense
of how human agency and meaning ﬁts into an ordered picture of reality.
2
A False Forced Choice
In trying to understand nature as far as we can scientiﬁcally, reductionism may appear
to be the only viable alternative between these two options for an ontological picture
ofnature.Thecandidateforontologicalreductionisrelativelyclearinthedebates:our
most fundamental theory of physics. In contrast, radical emergence as an alternative
for an ontological account of the world’s order is obscure, mysterious or irrelevant.
Ontological reduction appears to win by default. Yet, this “win by default” leaves
us with troubling questions about human morality and agency as mentioned earlier.
Some physicists, such as Weinberg (1993), Laughlin (2005) and Anderson (2011),
don’t appear to be particularly troubled by these questions.
This “win by default” situation is an example of a forced choice fallacy. Such a
fallacy occurs whenever the options for choice are reduced so that viable options for
debate are left out. If you’ve ever been in an argument that amounted to “I’m right,
so you must be wrong!”, then you’ve likely experienced a forced choice. There may
be viable alternatives left out of the argument, one of which is that both people are
wrong!
One reason the false forced choice in reductionism debates seems so compelling
is the basic assumptions that both reductionism and strong emergence share. One of
these assumptions is that nature is organized in a ﬁxed hierarch. There are clearly
deﬁned layers from lower-level laws and entities to higher levels. This hierarchical
structuring is often treated as something pre-given or ontologically ﬁxed. So, the
hierarchy from elementary particles to atoms to molecules to stars and planets to

246
R. C. Bishop and W. College
galaxies, or from physics to chemistry, to geology to biology to animals to societies,
has somehow always been ﬁxed.
A further shared assumption is foundationalism, the belief that only elementary
particle physics contains rock-bottom fundamental laws and entities. This implies
the physical facts of elementary particle physics are fully ontologically autonomous
because they depend on nothing else for their existence and are determined by nothing
else.
Combinedtogether,thesetwoassumptionsentailtheworldexhibitsawell-ordered
objective hierarchy ranging from elementary particle physics on up to larger spatial
and temporal scales. The arrow of determination moves upward from the smallest
spatial and temporal scales to the larger. Hence, the reductionist view that elementary
particles and forces ultimately determine geology, biology, and politics. The only
difference between reductionists and radical emergentists is that the latter think new
(physical or metaphysical) laws, causal powers or entities must be added to the set
of fundamental or basic lowest-level facts to explain the existence of novel emergent
phenomena.
What if there is a viable account of ontological emergence that clariﬁes the order
and structure of the world while illuminating the genuine emergence of chemical,
biological and social phenomena, an account that is missing from most of the typical
reduction/emergence debates? Such an account would need to satisfy the following
three desiderata:
1. No violations of the inherent unity of the world.
2. Never appeal to new brute laws or causes when ﬁnding that no reductive expla-
nation exists.
3. Assume neither foundationalism nor that the world is an ordered hierarchy of
reiﬁed levels.
3
Contextual Emergence: Between Ontological
Reductionism and Radical Emergence
Although physics is often thought of as being a reductionistic science, it actu-
ally offers an exemplary pattern for interlevel relations that is a viable alternative
to the forced-choice framing just described. This pattern has been called contex-
tual emergence by those of us developing this account (Bishop, 2005; Bishop and
Atmanspacher, 2006; Bishop, 2019). This account of emergence has its roots in
the work of chemical physicist Primas Primas (1977, 1983, 1998), and has been
developed with an eye towards complexity and quantum mechanics.
Contextual emergence’s distinctiveness can be seen in the following framework
organizing the three alternatives:
• Ontological Reduction: Properties and behaviors in a lower level or underlying
domain (including its laws) offer by themselves both necessary and sufﬁcient
conditions for properties and behaviors at a higher level.

Contextual Emergence: Constituents, Context and Meaning
247
• Contextual emergence: Properties and behaviors in a lower level or underlying
domain (including its laws) offer some necessary but no sufﬁcient conditions for
properties and behaviors at a higher level. Higher levels or target domains provide
the needed extra conditions.
• Radical emergence: Properties and behaviors in a lower level or domain (includ-
ing its laws) offer neither necessary nor sufﬁcient conditions for properties and
behaviors at a higher level.
Contextual emergence focuses on the most crucial conditions for making the exis-
tence, stability, and persistence of phenomena and systems possible termed stability
conditions. It’s too often the case that these stability conditions are taken for granted
though we can see them when we know how to look for them. Such conditions often
are involved in or imply inherently irreducibly multiscale relations. So in this sense,
it’s not surprising that scientiﬁc explanations often are multiscale (Bishop et al., in
press).
Contextual emergence describes situations where the constituents and laws
belonging to the supposed fundamental level or underlying domain of reality con-
tribute some necessary but no sufﬁcient conditions for entities and properties in the
target domain, or higher level. It’s the stability conditions that provide the needed suf-
ﬁciency, yet these latter conditions are never found at the underlying level or domain
(Atmanspacher and Bishop, 2007; Bishop, 2019). For instance, the domain of ele-
mentary particles contributes some of the necessary conditions for the existence of
the properties and behaviors of water parcels, collections of roughly an Avogadro’s
number of H2O molecules. Nonetheless, the existence of elementary particles and
their laws do not guarantee that large-scale phenomena such as wine ﬂowing from a
bottle or Rayleigh-Bénard convection will exist. The basic laws of elementary parti-
cles and forces establish the possibilities for there to be ﬂuids of many kinds, motions
of many kinds, and so on. Yet, by themselves the laws and forces of elementary par-
ticle physics don’t enable the existence of speciﬁc ﬂuids and motions. These laws
and forces only ﬁx the total set of possibilities.
For wine to ﬂow from a bottle requires the selection of a speciﬁc bottle, the
opening of the bottle, the tilting of the bottle for the wine to ﬂow into a glass (not to
mention the process of cultivating soil and grapes, fermenting, aging in barrels under
controlled conditions, etc.) To get convection requires several contingent conditions:
a speciﬁc type of ﬂuid, a physical space the ﬂuid occupies, a temperature differential
in the presence of gravity, action of all ﬂuid molecules acting on all ﬂuid molecules,
and so forth. It’s among the latter where the needed stability conditions exist bringing
about convection and none of these conditions are ﬁxed by elementary laws, particles
and forces.3
Lasers are another example of phenomena that are physically possible, yet are
never naturally realized in the actual world apart from appropriate stability con-
ditions. Einstein was the ﬁrst to propose the physical possibility of the stimulated
3 For details, see (Bishop, 2019), Sect. 4.1. For worked out examples of the contextual emergence
of temperature and molecular structure, see Sects. 4.2 and 4.3, respectively.

248
R. C. Bishop and W. College
coherent emission process among atoms that would eventually lead to lasers (Ein-
stein, 1916, 1917). He demonstrated the possibility that a large number of atoms
in identical excited states producing a single photon of the right energy can stim-
ulate one atom to emit another photon which stimulates another atom which emits
another photon which stimulates another atom, and so forth, leading all the atoms
to release their excess energy in a sustained cascade. Nevertheless, the stability con-
ditions for this process (e.g., preparation of a collection of atoms all in the relevant
excited states, precise triggering of the population inversion returning the atoms to
their ground states producing photons, a designed optical cavity trapping the pho-
tons and enhancing the stimulation of more photons, appropriate isolation from the
wider environment), although physically possible, aren’t given by elementary parti-
cles and forces (nor are these stability conditions given by the atoms, photons and
their interactions alone).
This is the pattern of contextual emergence in physics. There are no new forces
that come out of nowhere. Everything can be explained in terms of physics and
engineering that we understand, so no radical emergence. Nonetheless, the under-
lying domain of particles and forces don’t contain all the conditions necessary and
sufﬁcient for ﬂowing wine, convection or lasers to actually happen in our world.
4
A Broad Pattern
The contextual emergence pattern of relationships extends beyond physics. Chemists
recently created a novel hydrocarbon structure that can be useful to quantum com-
puting applications (Ma et al., 2017). Creating this compound required both con-
trolled laboratory conditions and bringing together particular chemical compounds
that would only happen intentionally with the goal of producing a novel sp2-carbon
lattice material.4 In other words, an intentionally designed chemical environment
provides the stability condition to form the carbon lattice and defects (similar to the
case for lasers).
The creation process allows for manipulation of topological defects resulting in
superior spintronic performance for quantum computing applications. Such inten-
tional large-scale control allows qubits designed by this process to be put into any
arbitrary superposition desired, for instance. Moreover, by changing the chemical
environment for the creation of the carbon lattice and defects, chemists can remove
compounds one at a time that lead to destruction of the superposed state, another
example of contextual emergence (Lombardi et al., 2019).
Consider an example from biology. The placement of hair and feather follicles
on animal bodies is highly ordered. However, the genome doesn’t direct location
of individual follicles. It turns out that the genetics controlling follicle generation
is shaped by larger-scale mechanical forces determining typical distance between
neighboring follicles (Shyer et al., 2017).
4 An sp2 bond is between one s-orbital with two p-orbitals.

Contextual Emergence: Constituents, Context and Meaning
249
The developing skin has two layers, an epithelial layer forming the epidermis lying
on top of the dermis. The underlying dermis contracts locally causing the epithelial
cells to bend forming slight dome shapes where follicles form. These dermal con-
tractions cause compressive stress in the overlying epithelial cells. Two interesting
things happen from this compressive stress. First, the dermal contractions break the
symmetry of the random distribution of the overlying epithelial cells ordering them
spatially. Second the mechanical forces activate the genetic machinery producing
follicles. Otherwise, the genetic machinery for follicle production never turns on.
The upshot is that larger-scale mechanical forces provide a stability condition
sufﬁcient to trigger follicle formation in an ordered array. The underlying genetic
machinery provides some of the necessary conditions for patterned follicle formation.
The larger-scale dermal contraction provides the additional necessary and sufﬁcient
stability condition for patterned follicle formation.
Fromthisexample,youmightbethinkingthatgenebehavioriscontext-dependent.
This fact has been well established (Buchberger et al., 2019; Javierre et al., 2016;
Lübbe and Schaffner, 1985). Hence, more generally, the stability conditions for gene
behavior isn’t found in the individual genes themselves. The latter only contribute
some of the necessary conditions for their own behavior.
The same contextual emergence pattern can be found in ecology. For instance, in
the open ocean, theories focusing only on the body size of marine animals predict
that marine ecosystems should be bottom-heavy with more plants and animals at
the lowest levels than the highest. We indeed see many such bottom-heavy struc-
tured marine ecosystems. In contrast to these theories, observations reveal that many
marine ecosystems are top-heavy. What makes the difference is that complex food
webs function as stability conditions for maintaining top-heavy marine ecosystems
(Woodson et al., 2020). One implication is that bottom-heavy marine ecosystems
appear to be the adverse effect of human activity (e.g., overﬁshing) which has dis-
turbed the complex food web in these ecosystems leading to a loss of top-heavy
structure. Destroy the complex food web stability condition and the ecosystem suf-
fers a devastating reordering.
Turning to cognitive science, we ﬁnd the same contextual emergence pattern.
Work on modeling insect motion shows that neural-network models for motion based
on vision require an environmental context for coherent, meaningful motion to be
possible (Webb, 2020). In other words, the presence of stable large-scale objects in
an environment are a stability condition for the possibility of meaningful motion.
Neural-network models of insect motion track fast-moving small objects (e.g., for
predation) through the rise and fall of stimulus intensity with respect to a ﬁxed
background of large-scale objects. Even estimates of speed depend on the larger-scale
environmental surroundings. This includes the sky as a stability condition for insect
navigation (Homberg et al., 2011). Nonvisual cues for avoidance in mosquitoes,
for example, also depend on surfaces of the larger-scale environment as a stability
condition for changes in ﬂuid ﬂow patterns to indicate an object or surface is nearby,
sensing and responding to minute pressure changes in that ﬂow induced by coming
near an object or surface (Toshiyuki et al., 2020). One sees something similar in bird
ﬂocking behavior. For instance, Jackdaws change their ﬂocking behavior—the rules

250
R. C. Bishop and W. College
they use to organize group behavior—based on the larger environmental context and
self-propelled particle models can only reproduce this behavior by taking the external
environment into account (Ling et al., 2019).
Finally, let’s consider machine learning, a particular sub-branch of artiﬁcial intel-
ligence that has generated a lot of recent interest. Machine learning typically involves
designing a neural network model and training that model on a set of data relevant
for a speciﬁc application such as facial recognition. The training data set represents
an environment the machine learning model is exposed to and is to “learn” from.
What research shows is that the performance of machine learning models is very
sensitive to their training data sets. The type and quality of the learning environment
greatly determines the model performance in its target environment. A particularly
concerning example of machine learning systems trained on a large data set of faces
is the failure to recognize the faces of black females in the actual world (Hardesty,
2018). The lack of a sufﬁciently representative sample of faces in the training data
set led to failure in the target task of facial recognition. In machine learning, the
architecture of the neural network provides some of the necessary conditions for its
performance. The data environments for learning and target tasks provide the rest of
the necessary and sufﬁcient conditions for actual performance of machine learning
models.
This is a particularly interesting example because there are actually three different
interrelated levels: (1) The hardware level that provides some necessary but no sufﬁ-
cient conditions for its own functionality. (2) The software level at which the neural
network model is implemented providing the rest of the necessary and sufﬁcient
stability conditions for speciﬁc hardware function. And (3) the learning and target
environments that provide the needed necessary and sufﬁcient stability conditions
for performance of the machine learning model.
5
Does Contextual Emergence Do the Job?
What about the three desiderata for a viable form of ontological emergence? Earlier
I stipulated that such an emergence account should have the following features:
1. No violations of the inherent unity of the world.
2. Never appeal to new brute laws or causes when ﬁnding that no reductive expla-
nation exists.
3. Assume neither foundationalism nor that the world is an ordered hierarchy of
reiﬁed levels.
How does contextual emergence fulﬁll these criteria? In all of the examples I
have given, the contextual emergence pattern does’t invoke any new mysterious brute
forces that come out of nowhere. Nor does the pattern depend on some pre-given
ordered hierarchy of levels of reality. For instance, in Rayleigh-Bénard convection
some of the stability conditions arise from the emergence of a dynamics on a larger
spacial and temporal scale than that of the individual interactions of ﬂuid parcels with

Contextual Emergence: Constituents, Context and Meaning
251
their nearest neighbors. Nor does the contextual emergence pattern rely on smaller-
scale factors determining the outcomes at larger scales. Again, Rayleigh-Bénard
convection illustrates that the smaller-scale factors can’t even determine their own
behaviors apart from larger-scale conditions, particularly the emergent larger-scale
dynamics (Bishop, 2019).
Contextual emergence doesn’t ﬁt reductionism, nevertheless every example ﬁts
our expectations for scientiﬁc explanations in terms of known phenomena. For
instance, in the case of the patterning of feathers and fur, contextual emergence
shows us how the smaller-scale genes and the larger-scale dermal contractions work
together to produce astounding phenomena such as the striking pattern of the Pere-
grine Falcon or the mundane covering of the human body by hair.
Note as well that the contextual emergence of the phenomena in all the examples
doesn’t arise from some underlying set of “governing laws” in contrast to the Game
of Life. Whether it’s convection, novel hydrocarbon structures, follicle formation,
complex food webs, insect vision or facial recognition, the phenomena along with
their explanations and predictions have no dependence on fundamental laws other
than as providing some of the necessary conditions for the existence of said phenom-
ena. Furthermore, there is no dependence on some pre-existing ordered hierarchy.
Hence, we have an ordered world without the need to posit any new brute laws or
causes aside from the starter kit for the universe and we have no need of either foun-
dationalism or a reiﬁed hierarchy of levels–the spatial and temporal scales can arise
contingently.
One might still wonder if everything is actually already built into this initial
starter kit just like in the Game of Life. This is the reductionist intuition. Yet, the
universe’s starter kit is more subtle and interesting than the reductionist intuition
allows. There is a universal stability condition formed by the set of Kubo-Martin-
Schwinger (KMS) conditions on stable states that have the property of temperature.5
This stability condition is part of the universe’s starter set and means that once
particles are around, such as quarks and gluons, they necessarily conform to this
stability condition. The KMS conditions aren’t part of elementary particle physics,
butcharacterizeacontextintowhichelementaryparticlephysicscomestoexpression.
Basically all of elementary particle physics dynamics is shaped by these universal
KMS conditions.
As another example, consider the electromagnetic ﬁeld from our most fundamen-
tal theory: quantum electrodynamics. As soon as a quantum electromagnetic ﬁeld
emerged in the early universe, it had what is called a far-ﬁeld stability condition
structuring the ﬁeld and its related electromagnetic force. This far-ﬁeld stability con-
dition guarantees that there will be both quantum and classical electromagnetic ﬁelds
and forces with the properties physicists study.6
Both the KMS and far-ﬁeld stability conditions are well understood by physicists.
There are no mysteries, here; rather, in the beginning there was contextual emergence
with some important stability conditions in the universe’s starter set. These stability
5 For details, see Bishop (2019).
6 For details, see Gervais and Zwanziger (1980); Buchholz (1982) and discussion in Bishop (2019).

252
R. C. Bishop and W. College
conditions are just as fundamental to everything that happened in the universe’s
history as the most “fundamental” laws, particles and forces. Even at the beginning
of the universe there is no genuine analog to the foundationalism and reiﬁed hierarchy
of levels found in the Game of Life. One of the beautiful things is that the starter set
of stability conditions led to the contextual emergence of new stability conditions
that led, in turn, to more contextual emergence and so forth. This is why we ﬁnd the
contextual emergence pattern to be pervasive in the world on multiple scales.
The ontological pattern looks like this. Elementary particles and forces provide
some necessary conditions for molecular structure, while the concrete chemical con-
text provides the rest of the necessary and sufﬁcient conditions for the molecules
chemists explore and work with in the laboratory. In turn, molecular chemistry pro-
vides some of the necessary conditions for the behavior of cells, while the concrete
cellular context provides the rest of the necessary and sufﬁcient conditions for exis-
tence and behavior of cells. Likewise, cells provide some of the necessary conditions
for organs and their function, while the concrete context of the organs in an organism
and their environments provide the rest of the necessary and sufﬁcient conditions for
the existence and function of organs. And so forth, where the emergence of stability
conditions deﬁning new contexts become part of the set of necessary conditions of
a domain or level underlying a newly emergent domain or level.
This is the interleaving or interlevel pattern we saw in all the examples given
earlier. Such an interlocking pattern can be described somewhat more formally as
relative onticity (Atmanspacher and Kronz, 1999). As just described, an underlying
level or domain provides some the necessary conditions for higher levels or target
domains. The former provide an ontological basis for the epistemic access of the
phenomena and properties at the higher levels or target domains. In turn, the latter
levels and target domains provide an ontological basis for epistemic access to even
higher levels and target domains. In this way we can make sense of the autonomy
of the special sciences (e.g., biology, geology, social science) and the fact that our
epistemic access and explanatory purchase in the special sciences is in terms of the
properties and processes made possible by the emergent contexts and the stability
conditions deﬁning their domains.
Hence, there is no “absolutely fundamental” ontology at rock bottom providing
the reductive key to the structure of our world and explanations in the sciences. This
absence of a reductive bedrock isn’t because there are in-practice difﬁculties with
working out scientiﬁc explanations based on such a bedrock level (e.g., elemen-
tary particles and forces). Rather, it’s because of the ineliminable role of stability
conditions deﬁning contexts.
Someone might object that this all amounts to smuggling everything in through
background conditions. This kind of objection comes from how physicists and math-
ematicians solve the equations we use to model the physical world. We can’t solve
our equations without specifying some initial conditions—the initial conﬁguration
of particles and forces, say—and some boundary conditions—constraints on the
particles and forces. The invoking of such conditions—particularly the boundary
conditions—are thought of as just background to the “real action.” What contextual
emergence teaches us is that the constraints represented in stability conditions aren’t

Contextual Emergence: Constituents, Context and Meaning
253
“background” that we can stuff into boundary conditions and forget about. Instead,
stability conditions and the contexts they deﬁne are just as important to the action as
the particles and forces. We don’t put things into the background because they are
irrelevant in scientiﬁc investigations. We put things in the background to focus on
the question at hand. Such a distinction between background and question at hand
doesn’t imply that what is relegated to background at the moment is unimportant to
questions we’re currently exploring.
The upshot is this: The only sense in which elementary particles and forces are
‘fundamental’ is two-fold. First, the domain of elementary particle physics con-
tributes some necessary conditions for the existence of molecules, moles and moun-
tains in a way that is universal. If there were no elementary particles and forces there
would be no molecules, moles or mountains.
Second, the laws of the elementary particle physics domain are fundamental in
the sense that they delimit the space of physically possible events.7 The most ‘funda-
mental’ laws function as constraints on what can possibly happen, but it’s contexts
through stability conditions that structure or determine the particular conditions for
speciﬁckindsofeventstohappen(e.g.,convection,winepouringfrombottles,feather
patterns). Think of laws as establishing the physical space of possibilities and sta-
bility conditions as gatekeepers in the space of physical possibilities for concrete
events to occur in the world. No new laws “pop out of nowhere” as the underlying
laws of elementary particle physics contribute some of the necessary conditions for
any emergent laws. There is unity and order to the world.
This means there is no sense in which elementary particles and forces provide
sufﬁcient conditions for molecules, moles, or mountains to exist and act as they do,
or for wine pouring from bottles, and feather patterns. The concrete contexts and
constraints into which elementary particles and forces come to expression are just
as important as elementary particles and forces. Instead of the Game of Life picture,
where there is a set of basic building blocks at the lowest level driving everything
else that happens, you can think of the contextual emergence picture as one where
wholes and “parts” are the fundamental furniture of the world. There is “bottom up”
and “top down” as well as “in between” and “all around.” 8
6
The Big Picture and Meaning
Now let’s return to the framing of reduction-emergence debates as a forced choice
between plausible-sounding reductionism and implausible-sounding radical emer-
gence. This framing leaves out the important role stability conditions deﬁning con-
texts play in the origin and existence of phenomena. In other words it leaves out at
least one viable alternative for ontological emergence: Contextual emergence! The
7 For more technical discussion, see Bishop (2019); Bishop et al. (in press).
8 Further discussion of contextual emergence, examples and objections can be found in Bishop
(2019); Bishop et al. (in press).

254
R. C. Bishop and W. College
general pattern of contextual emergence is a combination of bottom-up and top-down
features—more generally interlevel relations—through which complex phenomena
arise. This is a pattern of interlevel or interrelational inﬂuence that isn’t captured in
reductionism or radical emergence. If a debate is framed in such a way that a viable
alternative is missing, then we will not be able to think well about the issues involved
in the debate. Nor is the debate capable of being concluded in a sound fashion.
Why is contextual emergence missing? It’s a pattern for the structuring of reality
that often goes unnoticed until we make explicit what is typically left implicit: The
role of contexts and the stability conditions characterizing those contexts providing
the constraints for how elementary particles and forces come to concrete expression
in the world. The more we are aware of all the factors that go into the concrete
actualization of the wide range of possibilities provided by the basic laws of nature,
the more we can see that the ontological structure of reality is more subtle than the
reductionist claims as well as more interesting!
Moreover, the forced choice between reductionism and radical emergence not
only leaves out important possibilities, it also has consequences for bigger questions
and concerns we have regarding consciousness, free will, ethics, creativity and mean-
ing. For instance, as noted earlier in a reductively structured world human activity,
thought, and consciousness turn out to be effects of the complex play of elemen-
tary particles and forces. There is no genuine morality, just the consequences of
elementary particle physics. Consciousness and motivations are just the accidental
byproduct of the complex play of elementary particles and forces, nothing more.
The causal closure of physics rules out any impact conscious awareness, intention-
ality and ethical commitments can have on human action. Even the creative thought
and work to develop the standard model of elementary particle physics—something
physicists think is very meaningful—is just the effect of the very physics of that
model!
On the other hand, a radical emergence world would leave us with consciousness,
thought and morality as totally separate from the material world. Not only would
there be no discernible relationship between thought and meanings and the material
world, it would be an absolute mystery as to why there is any coherence between
thought and action that has an impact on material objects! How is it that the thoughts
of the physicist about the world move her pencil and paper in meaningful ways? How
is it that school district busing plans constrain metal buses to move accomplishing
purposeful ends?
Neither ontological reductionism nor radical emergence represent meaningful
homes for the kind of open and responsive intellectual engagement exhibited by the
theorizing of scientists and philosophers in our attempts to understand the world of
our experience. To formulate and contemplate the standard model of particle physics
or a reductionist understanding of the world requires human intellectual engage-
ment and creativity as well as the realization that these are meaningful activities—in
other words, our thoughts and motives genuinely make a difference in the world.
Neither ontological reductionism nor radical emergence make sense of the human
search for truth and meaning, the exercise of genuine choice, moral reﬂection or even
the creative effort that went in to formulating ontological reductionism and radical

Contextual Emergence: Constituents, Context and Meaning
255
emergence in the ﬁrst place. Advocates of these two ontological positions think that
their own position is meaningful and that engaging in debate about these positions is
meaningful activity even though the implication of both positions is that such activity
ultimately isn’t meaningful or understandable.
In contrast to both reductionism and radical emergence, a contextual emergence
world is one full of signiﬁcance, an ordered world where scientiﬁc investigation
and the ordinary business of living ﬁnd a meaningful home. There is no causal
closure of physics in a contextually emergent world; as we’ve seen, even elementary
particle physics is subject to contextual constraints that aren’t part of elementary
particle physics. Moreover, a contextually emergent world is a more uniﬁed and
understandable world than that of radical emergence while making room for genuine
consciousness, thought, free will, moral responsibility and meaning that is connected
totherestoftheworld.Thismakesacontextualemergenceworldameaningfulworld,
aworldwhichwecanunderstandlittle-by-little,thatwecannavigateinsensibleways,
and where our experience of both order and novelty are at home rather than being
foreign interlopers or meaningless riders on elementary particles and forces. All the
creative thought and hard work physicists put into developing the standard model of
particle physics—one of the great human achievements—was the meaningful and
worthwhile activity they took it to be all along.
References
Anderson, P. W. (1972). More is different: Broken symmetry and the nature of the hierarchical
structure of science. Science, 177(4047), 393–396.
Anderson, P. W. (2011). More and different: Notes from a thoughtful curmudgeon. Singapore:
World Scientiﬁc.
Atmanspacher, H., & Bishop, R. C. (2007). Stability conditions in contextual emergence. Chaos
and Complexity Letters, 2(2/3), 139–150.
Atmanspacher, H., & Kronz, F. (1999). Relative onticity. In H. Atmanspacher, A. Amann, & U.
Müller-Herold (Eds.), On quanta, mind and matter. Hans Primas in context. Fundamental The-
ories of Physics series (pp. 273–294). Kluwer.
Bishop, R. C. (2005). Patching physics and chemistry together. Philosophy of Science, 72, 710–722.
Bishop, R. C. (2010). Free will and the causal closure of physics. In R. Y. Chiao, M. L. Cohen, A. J.
Leggett, W. D. Phillips, & C. L. Harper, Jr., (Eds.), Visions of discovery: New light on physics,
cosmology, and consciousness (pp. 601–611). Cambridge University Press.
Bishop, R. C. (2019). The physics of emergence. IOP Concise Physics Series, San Rafael: Morgan
& Claypool Publishers.
Bishop, R. C., & Atmanspacher, H. (2006). Contextual emergence in the description of properties.
Foundations of Physics, 36(12), 1753–1777.
Bishop, R. C., Silberstein, M. D., & Pexton, M. (in press). Emergence in context: A science-ﬁrst
approach to metaphysics. Oxford University Press.
Buchberger, Elisa, Reis, Micael, Ting-Hsuan, Lu., & Posnien, Nico. (2019). Cloudy with a chance
of insights: Context dependent gene regulation and implications for evolutionary studies. Genes,
10(7), 492. https://doi.org/10.3390/genes10070492
Buchholz, Detlev. (1982). The physical state space of quantum electrodynamics. Communications
in Mathematical Physics, 85, 49–71.

256
R. C. Bishop and W. College
Einstein, A. (1916). Strahlungsemission und -absorption nach der quantentheorie. Verhandlungen
der Deutschen Physikalischen Gesellschaft, 18, 318–323.
Einstein, A. (1917). Quantentheorie der strahlung. Physikalische Zeitschrift, 18, 121–128.
Gervais, J.-L., & Zwanziger, D. (1980). Derivation from ﬁrst principles of the infrared structure of
quantum electrodynamics. Physics Letters, 94B(3), 389–393.
Hardesty, L. (2018). Study ﬁnds gender and skin-type bias in commercial artiﬁcial-intelligence
systems. MIT News, 11 February 2018. https://news.mit.edu/2018/study-ﬁnds-gender-skin-type-
bias-artiﬁcial-intelligence-systems-0212. Accessed on January 5, 2020.
Homberg, U., Heinze, S., Pfeiffer, K., Kinoshita, M., & el Jundi, B. (2011). Central neural coding
of sky polarization in insects. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B, 366, 680–687.
https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2010.0199
Javierre, B. M., Burren, O. S., Wilder, S. P., Kreuzhuber, R., Hill, S. M., Sewitz, S., Cairns, J.,
Wingett, S. W., Várnai, C., Thiecke, M. J., Burden, F., Farrow, S., Cutler, A. J., Rehnström, K.,
Downes, K., Grassi, L., Kostadima, M., Freire-Pritchett, P., Wang, F., & The BLUEPRINT Con-
sortium, (2016). Lineage-speciﬁc genome architecture links enhancers and non-coding disease
variants to target gene promoters. Cell, 167(5), 1369–1384. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2016.
09.037
Laughlin, R. B. (2005). A different universe: Reinventing physics from the bottom down. New York:
Basic Books.
Ling, H., Mclvor, G. E., Westley, J., van der Vaart, K., Vaughan, R. T., Thornton, A., & Ouel-
lette, N. T. (2019). Behavioural plasticity and the transition to order in jackdaw ﬂocks. Nature
Communications, 10, 5174. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-13281-4
Lombardi, F., Lodi, A., Ji, M., Junzhi, L., Michael, S., Akimitsu, N., Myers, W. K., Müllen, K.,
Xinliang, F., & Lapo, B. (2019). Quantum units from the topological engineering of molecular
graphenoids. Science, 366(6469), 1107–1110. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aay7203
Lübbe, A., & Schaffner, W. (1985). Tissue-speciﬁc gene expression. Trends in Neuroscience, 8,
100–104. https://doi.org/10.1016/0166-2236(85)90046-3
Ma, J., Liu, J., Baumgarten, M., Fu, Y., Tan, Y.-Z., Schellhammer, S. K., Ortmann, F., Cuniberti,
G., Komber, H., Berger, R., Müllen, K., & Feng, X. (2017). A stable saddle-shaped polycyclic
hydrocarbon with an open-shell singlet ground state. Angewandte Chemie International Edition,
56, 3280–3284. https://doi.org/10.1002/anie.201611689
Nakata, T., Phillips, N., Simoes, P., Russell, I. J., Cheney, J. A., Walker, S. M., & Bomphrey, R. J.
(2020). Aerodynamic imaging by mosquitoes inspires a surface detector for autonomous ﬂying
vehicles. Science, 368(6491), 634–637. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aaz9634
Primas, H. (1977). Theory reduction and non-Boolean theories. Journal of Mathematical Biology,
4, 281–301.
Primas, H. (1983). Chemistry, quantum mechanics and reductionism: Perspectives in theoretical
chemistry. Number 24 in Lecture Notes in Chemistry. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, second, corrected
edition.
Primas, H. (1998). Emergence in exact natural sciences. Acta Polytechnica Scandinavica Ma, 91,
83–98.
Shyer, A. E., Rodrigues, A. R., Schroeder, G. G., Kassianidou, E., Kumar, S., & Harland, R. M.
(2017). Emergent cellular self-organization and mechanosensation initiate follicle pattern in the
avian skin. Science, 357(6353), 811–815. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aai7868
Webb, B. (2020). Robots with insect brains: A literal approach to mechanistic explanation provides
insight in neuroscience. Science, 368(6488), 244–245. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aaz6869
Weinberg, S. (1993). Dreams of a ﬁnal theory. New York: Pantheon Books.
Woodson, C. B., Schramski, J. R., & Joye, S. B. (2020). Food web complexity weakens size-based
constraints on the pyramids of life. Proceedings of the Royal Society B, 287(20201500), 1–7.
https://doi.org/10.1098/rspb.2020.1500

Mathematics/Theoretical Physics

Contents, Contexts, and Basics
of Contextuality
Ehtibar N. Dzhafarov
1
Contents, Contexts, and Random Variables
The word contextuality is used widely, usually as a synonym of context-dependence.
Here, however, contextuality is taken to mean a special form of context-dependence,
as explained below. Historically, this notion is derived from two independent lines
of research: in quantum physics, from studies of existence or nonexistence of the so-
called hidden variable models with context-independent mapping (Bell, 1964, 1966;
Clauser et al., 1969; Clauser & Horne, 1974; Cabello, 2008; Cabello et al., 1996;
Fine, 1982; Kurzynski et al., 2014; Kochen & Specker, 1967; Klyachko et al., 2008),1
and in psychology, from studies of the so-called selective inﬂuences (Dzhafarov,
2003; Dzhafarov & Gluhovsky, 2006; Dzhafarov & Kujala, 2010, 2016; Kujala &
Dzhafarov, 2008; Sternberg, 1969; Townsend, 1984; Zhang & Dzhafarov, 2015). The
two lines of research merged relatively recently, in the 2010s (Dzhafarov & Kujala,
2012a,b, 2013a,b, 2014a,b),toformanabstractmathematicaltheory,Contextuality-
by-Default(CbD),withmultidisciplinaryapplications(Bacciagaluppi,2015;Basieva
et al., 2019; Cervantes & Dzhafarov, 2017a, b, 2018, 2019, 2020; de Barros et al.,
2016; Dzhafarov, 2016, 2017, 2019, in press; Dzhafarov & Kujala, 2014c, 2015,
2016, 2017a,b, 2018, 2020; Dzhafarov et al., 2015a,b, 2016a, 2017, 2020a,b,
1Here, I mix together the early studies of nonlocality and those of contextuality in the narrow sense,
related to the Kochen-Specker (1967) theorem. Both are special cases of contextuality.
E. N. Dzhafarov (B)
Department of Psychological Sciences, Purdue University, 703 Third Street, West Lafayette, IN
47907-2081, USA
e-mail: ehtibar@purdue.edu
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
S. Wuppuluri and I. Stewart (eds.), From Electrons to Elephants and Elections,
The Frontiers Collection, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-92192-7_16
259

260
E. N. Dzhafarov
2021; Kujala & Dzhafarov, 2015, 2016, 2019; Kujala et al., 2015; Jones, 2019;
Zhang & Dzhafarov, 2016).2
The example I will use to introduce the notion of contextuality reﬂects the fact
that even as I write these lines the world is being ravaged by the Covid-19 pandemic,
forcing lockdowns and curtailing travel.
Suppose we ask a randomly chosen person two questions:
q1 : would you like to take an overseas vacation this summer?
q2 : are you wary of contracting Covid-19?
Suppose also we ask these questions in two orders:
c1 : ﬁrst q1 then q2
c2 : ﬁrst q2 then q1
To each of the two questions, the person can respond in one of two ways: Yes
or No. And since we are choosing people to ask our questions randomly, we cannot
determine the answer in advance. We assume therefore that the answers can be rep-
resented by random variables. A random variable is characterized by its identity (as
explained shortly) and its distribution: in this case, the distribution means responses
Yes and No together with their probabilities of occurrence.3
One can summarize this imaginary experiment in the form of the following system
of random variables:
R1
1
R1
2
c1 = q1 →q2
R2
1
R2
2
c2 = q2 →q1
q1 = "vacation?" q2 = "Covid-19?"
system C2(a)
.
(1)
This is the simplest system that can exhibit contextuality (as deﬁned below). The ran-
dom variables representing responses to questions are denoted by R with subscripts
and superscripts determining its identity. The subscript of a random variable in the
system refers to the question this random variable answers: e.g., R1
1 and R2
1 both
answer the question q1. The superscript refers to the context of the random variable,
the circumstances under which it is recorded. In the example the context is the order
in which the two questions are being asked. Thus, R1
2 answers question q2 when this
question is asked second, whereas R2
2 answers the same question when it is is asked
ﬁrst.
The question a random variable answers is generically referred to as this variable’s
content.Contentscanalwaysbethoughtofashavingthelogicalfunctionofquestions,
but in many cases other than in our example they are not questions in the colloquial
2 The theory has been revised in two ways since 2016, the changes being presented in Dzhafarov
& Kujala (2017b) and Dzhafarov et al. (2017).
3 I set aside the intriguing issue of whether responses Yes and No may be indeterministic but not
assignable probabilities.

Contents, Contexts, and Basics of Contextuality
261
meaning. Thus, a q may be one’s choice of a physical object to measure, say, a stone
to weigh, in which case the stone will be the content of the random variable Rc
q
representing the outcome of weighing it (in some context c). Of course, logically,
this Rc
q answers the question of how heavy the stone is, and q can be taken to stand
for this question.
Returning to our example, each variable Rc
q in our set of four variables is iden-
tiﬁed by its content (q = q1 or q = q2) and by its context (c = c1 or c = c2). It is
this double-identiﬁcation that imposes a structure on this set, rendering it a system
(speciﬁcally, a content-context system) of random variables. There may be other vari-
able circumstances under which our questions are asked, such as when and where
the questions were asked, in what tone of voice, or how high the solar activity was
when they were asked. However, it is a legitimate choice not to take such concomi-
tant circumstances into account, to ignore them. If we do not, which is a legitimate
choice too, our contexts will have to be redeﬁned, yielding a different system, with
more than just four random variables. The legitimacy of ignoring all but a select set
of contexts is an important aspect of contextuality analysis, as we will see later.
The reason I denote our system C2(a) is that it is a speciﬁc example (the speciﬁcity
being indicated by index a) of a cyclic system of rank 2, denoted C2. More generally,
cyclic systems of rank n, denoted Cn, are characterized by the arrangement of n
contents, n contexts, and 2n random variables shown in Fig.1.
Fig. 1 A cyclic system of rank n

262
E. N. Dzhafarov
A system of the C2-type is the smallest such system (not counting the degenerate
system consisting of R1
1 alone):
R1
1
context c1
R1
2
content q2
R2
1
content q1
R2
2
context c2
.
What else do we know of our random variables? First of all, the two variables
within a context,

R1
1, R1
2

, or

R2
1, R2
2

, are jointly distributed. By the virtue of being
responses of one and same person, the values of these random variables come in pairs.
So it is meaningful to ask what the probabilities are for each of the joint events
R1
1 = +1 and R1
2 = +1,
R1
1 = +1 and R1
2 = −1,
R1
1 = −1 and R1
2 = +1,
R1
1 = −1 and R1
2 = −1,
where+1and−1encodetheanswersYesandNo,respectively.Onecanmeaningfully
speak of correlations between the variables in the same context, probability that they
have the same value, etc.
By contrast, different contexts, in our case the two orders in which the questions
are asked, are mutually exclusive. When asked two questions, a given person can
only be asked them in one order. Respondents represented by R1
1 answer question q1
asked ﬁrst, before q2, whereas the respondents represented by R2
1 answer question
q1 asked second, after q2. Clearly, these are different sets of respondents, and one
would not know how to pair them. It is meaningless to ask, e.g., what the probability
of
R1
1 = +1 and R2
1 = +1
may be. Random variables in different contexts are stochastically unrelated.
2
Intuition of (non)contextuality
Having established these basic facts, let us consider now the two random variables
with content q1, and let us make at ﬁrst the (unrealistic) assumption that their distri-
butions are the same in both contexts, c1 and c2:

Contents, Contexts, and Basics of Contextuality
263
value
probability
R1
1 = +1
a
R1
1 = −1
1 −a
and
value
probability
R2
1 = +1
a
R2
1 = −1
1 −a
.
(2)
If we consider the variables R1
1 and R2
1 in isolation from their contexts (i.e., disre-
garding the other two random variables), then we can view them as simply one and
the same random variable. In other words, the subsystem
R1
1
c1 = q1 →q2
R2
1
c2 = q2 →q1
q1 = "vacation?"
C2(a)/only q1
appears to be replaceable with just
R1
q1 = "vacation?" ,
with contexts being superﬂuous.
Analogously, if the distributions of the two random variables with content q2 are
assumed to be the same,
value
R1
2 = +1 R1
2 = −1
probability
b
1 −b
and
value
R2
2 = +1 R2
2 = −1
probability
b
1 −b
,
(3)
and if we consider them in isolation from their contexts, the subsystem
R1
2
c1 = q1 →q2
R2
2
c2 = q2 →q1
q2 = "Covid-19?"
C2(a)/only q2
appears to be replaceable with
R2
q2 = "Covid-19?" .
It is tempting now to say: we have only two random variables, R1 and R2, whatever
their contexts. But a given pair of random variables can only have one joint distribu-
tion, this distribution cannot be somehow different in different contexts. We should
predict therefore, that if the probabilities in system C2(a) are
Pr

R1
1 = +1, R1
2 = +1

= r1 and Pr

R2
1 = +1, R2
2 = +1

= r2,
then

264
E. N. Dzhafarov
r1 = r2.
Suppose, however, that this is shown to be empirically false, that in fact r1 > r2.
For instance, assuming 0 < a < b, suppose that the joint distributions in the two
contexts of system C2(a) are
context c1 R1
2 = +1 R1
2 = −1
R1
1 = +1
r1 = a
0
a
R1
1 = −1
b −a
1 −b
1 −a
b
1 −b
(4)
and
context c2 R2
2 = +1 R2
2 = −1
R2
1 = +1
r2 = 0
a
a
R2
1 = −1
b
1 −a −b 1 −a
b
1 −b
.
(5)
Clearly, we have then a reductio ad absurdum proof that the assumption we have
made is wrong, the assumption being that we can drop contexts in R1
1 and R2
1 (as
well as in R1
2 and R2
2), and that we can therefore treat them as one and the same
random variable R1 (respectively, R2). This is the simplest case when we can say
that a system of random variables, here, the system C2(a), is contextual.
This understanding of contextuality can be extended to more complex systems.
However, it is far from being general enough. It only applies to consistently connected
systems, those in which any two variables with the same content are identically
distributed.4 This assumption is often unrealistic. Speciﬁcally, it is a well-established
empirical fact that the individual distributions of the responses to two questions do
depend on their order (Moore, 2002). Besides, this is highly intuitive in our example.
If one is asked about an overseas vacation ﬁrst, the probability of saying “Yes, I would
like to take an overseas vacation” may be higher than when this question is asked
second, after the respondent has been reminded about the dangers of the pandemic.
In order to generalize the notion of contextuality to arbitrary systems, we need to
develop answers to the following two questions:
A: For any two random variables sharing a content, how different are they when
taken in isolation from their contexts?
B: Can these differences be preserved when all pairs of content-sharing variables
are taken within their contexts (i.e., taking into account their joint distributions
with other random variables in their contexts)?
4 The term “consistent connectedness” is due to the fact that in CbD the content-sharing random
variables are said to form connections (between contexts). In quantum physics consistent connect-
edness is referred to by such terms as lack of signaling, lack of disturbance, parameter invariance,
etc.

Contents, Contexts, and Basics of Contextuality
265
For our system C2(a) with the within-context joint distributions given by (4) and (5),
our informal answer to question A was that two random variables with the same
content (i.e., R1
1 and R2
1 or R1
2 and R2
2) are not different at all when taken in isolation.
The informal answer to question B, however, was that in these two pairs (or at least
in one of them) the random variables are not the same when taken in relation to other
random variables in their respective contexts. One can say therefore that
The contexts make R1
1 and R2
1 (and/or R1
2 and R2
2) more dissimilar than when they
are taken without their contexts.
This is the intuition we will use to construct a general deﬁnition of contextuality.
3
Making It Rigorous: Couplings
First, we have to agree on how to measure the difference between two random vari-
ables that are not jointly distributed, like R1
1 and R2
1. Denote these random variables
X and Y, both dichotomous (±1), with
Pr [X = +1] = u and Pr [Y = +1] = v.
Consider all possible pairs of jointly distributed variables

X′, Y ′
such that
X′ dist
= X, Y ′ dist
= Y,
where
dist
= stands for “has the same distribution as.” Any such pair

X′, Y ′
is called
a coupling of X and Y. For obvious reasons, two couplings of X and Y having the
same joint distribution are not distinguished.
Now, for each coupling

X′, Y ′
one can compute the probability with which
X′ ̸= Y ′ (recall that the probability of X ̸= Y is undeﬁned, we do need couplings to
make this inequality a meaningful event). It is easy to see that among the couplings

X′, Y ′
there is one and only one for which this probability is minimal. This coupling
is deﬁned by the joint distribution
Y ′ = +1
Y ′ = −1
X′ = +1
min (u, v)
u −min (u, v)
u
X′ = −1 v −min (u, v) min (1 −u, 1 −v) 1 −u
v
1 −v
,
(6)
and the minimal probability in question is obtained as
(u −min (u, v)) + (v −min (u, v)) = |u −v| .

266
E. N. Dzhafarov
This probability is a natural measure of difference between the random variables X
and Y 5:
δ (X, Y) =
min
all couplings
(X′, Y ′) of X and Y
Pr

X′ ̸= Y ′
= |u −v| .
(7)
If X and Y are identically distributed, i.e. u = v, the joint distribution of X′ and Y ′
can be chosen as
context c1 Y = +1 Y = −1
X = +1
u
0
u
X = −1
0
1 −u
1 −u
u
1 −u
,
yielding
δ (X, Y) =
min
all couplings

X′, Y ′ of X and Y
Pr

X′ ̸= Y ′
= 0.
Let us apply this to our example, in order to formalize the intuition behind our
saying earlier that two identically distributed random variables, taken in isolation,
can be viewed as being “the same.” For R1
1 and R2
1 in (2),
δ

R1
1, R2
1

=
min
all couplings

S1
1, S2
1

of R1
1 and R2
1
Pr

S1
1 ̸= S2
1
	
= 0,
and, analogously, for R1
2 and R2
2 in (3),
δ

R1
2, R2
2

=
min
all couplings

S1
2, S2
2

of R1
2 and R2
2
Pr

S1
2 ̸= S2
2
	
= 0.
4
Making It Rigorous: Contextuality
What is then the rigorous way of establishing that these differences cannot both be
zero when considered within their contexts? For this, we need to extend the notion of
a coupling to an entire system. A coupling of our system C2(a) is a set of corresponding
jointly distributed random variables
5 It is a special case of the so-called total variation distance, except that it is usually deﬁned between
two probability distributions, while I use it here as a measure of difference (formally, apseudometric)
between stochastically unrelated random variables.

Contents, Contexts, and Basics of Contextuality
267
S1
1 S1
2
S2
1 S2
2
(8)
such that

S1
1, S1
2
 dist
=

R1
1, R1
2

,

S2
1, S2
2
 dist
=

R2
1, R2
2

.
(9)
In other words, the distributions within contexts, (4) and (5), remain intact when we
replace the R-variables with the corresponding S-variables,
S1
2 = +1 S1
2 = −1
S1
1 = +1
a
0
a
S1
1 = −1
b −a
1 −b
1 −a
b
1 −b
and
S2
2 = +1 S2
2 = −1
S2
1 = +1
0
a
a
S2
1 = −1
b
1 −a −b 1 −a
b
1 −b
.
(10)
Such couplings always exist, not only for our example, but for any other system
of random variables. Generally, there is an inﬁnity of couplings for a given system.6
Thus, to construct a coupling for system C2(a), one has to assign probabilities to all
quadruples of joint events,
S1
1 S1
2 S2
1 S2
2
probability
+1 +1 +1 +1
p++++
+1 +1 +1 −1
p+++−
...
...
...
...
...
−1 −1 −1 −1
p−−−−
so that the appropriately chosen subsets of these probabilities sum to the joint prob-
abilities shown in (10):
p++++ + p+++−+ p++−+ + p++−−= Pr

S1
1 = +1, S1
2 = +1

= a,
p+−++ + p+−+−+ p+−−+ + p+−−−= Pr

S1
1 = +1, S1
2 = −1

= 0,
p++++ + p+−++ + p−+++ + p−−++ = Pr

S2
1 = +1, S2
2 = +1

= 0,
etc.
This is a system of seven independent linear equations with 16 unknown p-
probabilities, subject to the additional constraint that all probabilities must be non-
negative. It can be shown that this linear programming problem always has solutions,
6 One need not have separate deﬁnitions of couplings for pairs of random variables and for systems.
In general, given any set of random variables R, its coupling is a set of random variables S, in a
one-to-one correspondence with R, such that the corresponding variables in R and S have the same
distribution, and all variables in S are jointly distributed. To apply this deﬁnition to R representing
a system of random variables one considers all variables within a given context as a single element
of R. In our example, (8) is a coupling of two stochastically unrelated random variables,

R1
1, R1
2

and

R2
1, R2
2

.

268
E. N. Dzhafarov
and inﬁnitely many of them at that, unless one of the probabilities a and b equals 1
or 0 (in which case the solution is unique).
Unlike in system C2(a) itself, in any coupling (8) of this system the random vari-
ables have joint distributions across the contexts. In particular,

S1
1, S2
1

is a jointly
distributed pair. Since from (9) we know that
S1
1
dist
= R1
1 and S2
1
dist
= R2
1,

S1
1, S2
1

is a coupling of R1
1 and R1
2. Similarly,

S1
2, S2
2

is a coupling of R1
2 and R2
2.
We ask now: what are the possible values of
Pr

S1
1 ̸= S2
1

and Pr

S1
2 ̸= S2
2

across all possible couplings (8) of the entire system C2(a)? Consider two cases.
Case 1 In some of the couplings (8),
Pr

S1
1 ̸= S2
1

= 0 and Pr

S1
2 ̸= S2
2

= 0.
We can say then that both δ

R1
1, R2
1

and δ

R1
1, R2
1

preserve their individual (in-
isolation) values when considered within the system. The system C2(a) is then con-
sidered noncontextual.
Case 2 In all couplings (8), at least one of the values
Pr

S1
1 ̸= S2
1

and Pr

S1
2 ̸= S2
2

is greater than zero. That is, when considered within the system, δ

R1
1, R2
1

and
δ

R1
1, R2
1

cannot both be zero. Intuitively, the contexts “force” either R1
1 and R2
1 or
R1
2 and R2
2 (or both) to be more dissimilar than when taken in isolation. The system
C2(a) is then considered contextual.
We can quantify the degree of contextuality in the system in the following way.
We know that
δ

R1
1, R2
1

+ δ

R1
2, R2
2

=
min
all couplings

S1
1, S2
1

of R1
1 and R2
1

Pr

S1
1 ̸= S2
1
	
+
min
all couplings

S1
2, S2
2

of R1
2 and R2
2

Pr

S1
2 ̸= S2
2
	
= 0.
This quantity is compared to
δ

R1
1, R2
1

,

R1
2, R2
2

=
min
all couplings

S1
1, S1
2, S2
1, S2
2

of system C2(a)

Pr

S1
1 ̸= S2
1
	
+ Pr

S1
2 ̸= S2
2
	
,

Contents, Contexts, and Basics of Contextuality
269
which can be interpreted as the total of the pairwise differences between same-content
variables within the system. The system is contextual if this quantity is greater than
zero, and this quantity can be taken as a measure of the degree of contextuality. This
is by far not the only possible measure, but it is arguably the simplest one within the
conceptual framework of CbD.
5
Generalizing to Arbitrary Systems
Consider now a realistic version of our example, when
Pr

R1
1 = +1

= a1, Pr

R1
2 = +1

= b1,
Pr

R2
1 = +1

= a2, Pr

R2
2 = +1

= b2,
with a1 allowed to be different from a2, and b1 from b2. The within-context joint
distributions then generally look like this:
context c1 R1
2 = +1
R1
2 = −1
R1
1 = +1
r1
a1 −r1
a1
R1
1 = −1
b1 −r1
1 −a1 −b1 + r1 1 −a1
b1
1 −b1
(11)
and
context c2 R2
2 = +1
R2
2 = −1
R2
1 = +1
r2
a2 −r2
a2
R2
1 = −1
b2 −r2
1 −a2 −b2 + r2 1 −a2
b2
1 −b2
.
(12)
Let us call the system in (1) with these within-context distributions C2(b). We
clearly have context-dependence now (unless the two joint distributions are identi-
cal), but can we also say that the system is contextual? If we follow the logic of the
deﬁnition of contextuality as it was presented above, for consistently connected sys-
tems, the answer cannot automatically be afﬁrmative. The logic in question requires
that we answer the questions A and B formulated in Sect.2. By now we have all
necessary conceptual tools for this.
To answer A we look at all possible couplings

S1
1, S2
1

and

S1
2, S2
2

of the content-
sharing pairs

R1
1, R2
1

and

R1
2, R2
2

, respectively, and determine
δ

R1
1, R2
1

=
min
all couplings

S1
1, S2
1

of

R1
1, R2
1

Pr

S1
1 ̸= S2
1
	
,

270
E. N. Dzhafarov
and
δ

R1
2, R2
2

=
min
all couplings

S1
2, S2
2

of

R1
2, R2
2

Pr

S1
2 ̸= S2
2
	
.
To answer B, we look at all possible couplings
S1
1 S1
2
S2
1 S2
2
of the entire system C2(b), and determine if we can ﬁnd couplings in which
Pr

S1
1 ̸= S2
1

= δ

R1
1, R2
1

and
Pr

S1
2 ̸= S2
2

= δ

R1
2, R2
2

.
If such couplings exist, we say that the system is noncontextual, even if it exhibits
context-dependence in the form of inconsistent connectedness.
Recall that consistently connected systems are those in which any two variables
with the same content are identically distributed, as it was in our initial (unrealistic)
example. For such systems δ

R1
1, R2
1

= 0 and δ

R1
2, R2
2

= 0. However, if
R1
1
dist
̸= R2
1,
then δ

R1
1, R2
1

> 0, and analogously for δ

R1
2, R2
2

. In fact, we know from (6) and
(7) that if the within-context distributions in the system are as in (11) and (12), then
δ

R1
1, R2
1

= |a1 −a2| , δ

R1
2, R2
2

= |b1 −b2| .
This means that system C2(b) is contextual if and only if
δ

R1
1, R2
1

,

R1
2, R2
2

=
min
all couplings

S1
1, S1
2, S2
1, S2
2

of system C2(b)

Pr

S1
1 ̸= S2
1
	
+ Pr

S1
2 ̸= S2
2
	
> |a1 −a2| + |b1 −b2| .
Indeed, this inequality indicates that in all couplings either
Pr

S1
1 ̸= S2
1
	
> δ

R1
1, R2
1

,
or

Contents, Contexts, and Basics of Contextuality
271
Pr

S1
2 ̸= S2
2
	
> δ

R1
2, R2
2

,
or both. The intuition remains the same as above: the contexts “force” the same-
content variables to be more dissimilar than they are in isolation. The difference
δ

R1
1, R2
1

,

R1
2, R2
2

−δ

R1
1, R2
1

−δ

R1
2, R2
2

is a natural (although by far not the only) measure of the degree of contextuality.7
6
Other Examples
The system C2(b) of the previous section, with the within-context distributions (11)
and (12), is not a toy example, despite its simplicity. Except for the speciﬁc choice of
the questions, it describes an empirical situation one sees in polls of public opinion,
with two questions asked in one order of a large group of participants, and the same
two questions asked in the other order of another large group of participants (Moore,
2002; Wang & Busemeyer, 2013).
In quantum physics, system of the C2-type can describe the outcomes of successive
measurements of two spins along two directions, encoded 1 and 2, in the same spin-
1/2 particle (e.g., electron). Without getting into details, in such an experiment the
spin-1/2 particles are prepared in one and the same quantum state, and then subjected to
two measurements in one of the two orders. Each measurement results in one of two
outcomes, spin up (+1) or spin down (−1).
R1
1
R1
2
c1 = q1 →q2
R2
1
R2
2
c2 = q2 →q1
q1 = "is spin in direction 1 up?" q2 = "is spin in direction 2 up?" system C2(c)
.
(13)
The computations in accordance with the standard quantum-mechanical rules yield
the following two results (Dzhafarov et al., 2015b). First, the system is inconsistently
connected, i.e. generally the probability of spin-up in a given direction depends on
whether it is measured ﬁrst or second,
Pr

R1
1 = +1
	
̸= Pr

R2
1 = +1
	
and Pr

R1
2 = +1
	
̸= Pr

R2
2 = +1
	
.
7 Forothermeasuresofcontextuality,seeCervantes&Dzhafarov(2020),Dzhafarovetal.(2020a,b),
Kujala & Dzhafarov (2019).

272
E. N. Dzhafarov
Second, the system is noncontextual,8 i.e., it is always the case that
δ

R1
1, R2
1

,

R1
2, R2
2

≤δ

R1
1, R2
1

+ δ

R1
2, R2
2

.
As we see, systems of the C2-type may be of interest in both physics and behavioral
studies.
However, in both these ﬁelds, the origins of the research of what we now call
contextuality are dated back to another cyclic system, in which the arrangement
shown in Fig.1 specializes to
R1
1
context c1
R1
2
content q2
R4
1
content q1
R2
2
context c2
R4
4
context c4
R2
3
content q3
R3
4
content q4
R3
3
context c3
.
Figure2 illustrates the empirical situation described by this system, and the ﬁrst for
which contextuality was mathematically established (Bell, 1966; Bohm & Aharonov,
1957; Clauser & Horne, 1974; Clauser et al., 1969; Fine, 1982). Two spin-1/2 particles
are prepared in a special quantum state making them entangled, and they move away
from each other. The “left” particle’s spin is measured along one of the two directions
(encoded 1 and 3) by someone we will call Zora, and simultaneously the “right”
particle’s spin is measured along one of the two directions (encoded 2 and 4) by
a Nico.9 The outcomes of the measurements are spin-up or spin-down, and each
random variable R j
i answers the question
qi : is the spin in direction i up? (i = 1, 2, 3, 4).
8 For those familiar with CbD, this follows from the fact the expected values

R1
1 R1
2

and

R2
1 R2
2

are
always equal to each other, whereas the criterion for contextuality of a cyclic system (Kujala & Dzha-
farov, 2016), when specialized to n = 2, is

R1
1 R1
2

−

R2
1 R2
2
 >

R1
1

−

R2
1
 +

R1
2

−

R2
2
.
9 For no deep reason, I decided to deviate from the established tradition to call the imaginary
performers of the measurements in this task Alice and Bob.

Contents, Contexts, and Basics of Contextuality
273
Fig. 2 A schematic representation of the EPR/Bohm experimental set up. Explanations in the text
In the form of a content-context matrix the system can be presented as
R1
1
R1
2
c1
R2
2
R2
3
c2
R3
3
R3
4
c3
R4
1
R4
4
c4
q1
(Zora’s 1)
q2
(Nico’s 2)
q3
(Zora’s 3)
q4
(Nico’s 4)
C4(a)
.
(14)
The measurements by Zora and Nico are made simultaneously, or at least close
enough in time so that no signal about Zora’s choice of a direction can reach Nico
before he makes his measurement, and vice versa. Because of this, the system is
consistently connected,
R j
i
dist
= R j′
i
for any content qi and two contexts c j and c j′ in which qi is measured. Following
the logic of contextuality analysis, we ﬁrst establish that (because of the consistent

274
E. N. Dzhafarov
connectedness)
δ

R1
1, R4
1

= δ

R1
2, R2
2

= δ

R2
3, R3
3

= δ

R3
4, R4
4

= 0.
Then we compute
δ

R1
1, R4
1

,

R1
2, R2
2

,

R2
3, R3
3

,

R3
4, R4
4

=
min
all couplings

S1
1, S1
4, S2
1, S2
2, S3
2, S3
3, S4
3, S4
4

of system C4(a)

Pr

S1
1 ̸= S4
1

+ Pr

S1
2 ̸= S2
2

+ Pr

S2
3 ̸= S3
3

+ Pr

S3
4 ̸= S4
4

.
The system is noncontextual if and only if this quantity is zero. As it turns out [and
this is what was established by John Bell in his celebrated papers in the 1960s (Bell,
1964, 1966)], the directions 1, 2, 3, 4 can be chosen so that, by the laws of quantum
mechanics, this quantity is greater than zero, making the system contextual.
In psychology, systems of the same C4-type have been of interest as representing
the following empirical situation (Dzhafarov & Kujala, 2014a; Dzhafarov, 2003;
Dzhafarov & Kujala, 2010, 2016; Kujala & Dzhafarov, 2008; Sternberg, 1969;
Townsend, 1984; Zhang & Dzhafarov, 2015). Consider two variables having two
values each, that can be manipulated in an experiment. Think, e.g., of a brieﬂy pre-
sented visual object that can have one of two colors (red or green) and one of two
shapes (square or oval), combined in the 2 × 2 ways. In the experiment, an observer
responds to the object by answering two Yes-No questions: “is the object red?”
and “is the object square?”. If we simply identify these questions with contents, the
resulting system of random variables looks like this:
R1
1
R1
2
c1 : red and oval
R2
1
R2
2
c2 : green and oval
R3
1
R3
2
c3 : red and square
R4
1
R4
2
c4 : green and square
q1 : red? q2 : square?
R
,
(15)
withthecontextsdescribingtheobjectbeingpresented,andthecontentsthequestions
asked.
Although possible, this is not, however, an especially interesting way of concep-
tualizing the situation. It is more informative to describe the contents of the random
variables as color and shape responses to the color and shape of the visual stimuli,
respectively:
q1 : does this red object appear red?
q2 : does this square object appear square?
q3 : does this green object appear red?
q4 : does this oval object appear square?
With the contexts remaining as they are in system (15), the experiment is now
represented by a system of the C4-type:

Contents, Contexts, and Basics of Contextuality
275
R1
1
R1
2
c1
R2
2
R2
3
c2
R3
3
R3
4
c3
R4
1
R4
4
c4
q1
(red)
q2
(square)
q3
(green)
q4
(oval)
C4(b)
Compared to system C4(c) in (14), the physical situation described by C4(b) is,
of course, very different: e.g., instead of R j
1 and R j
3 being outcomes of spin mea-
surements by Zora along two different directions, these random variables represent
now responses to the color question when the color is red and when it is green,
respectively. However, the logic of the contextuality analysis does not change. If this
system turns out to be consistently connected and noncontextual, the interpretation
of this in psychology is that the judgment of color is selectively inﬂuenced by object’s color
(irrespective of its shape), and the judgment of shape is selectively inﬂuenced by object’s
shape (irrespective of its color). Deviations from this pattern of selective inﬂuences,
whether in the form of inconsistent connectedness or contextuality, or both,10 pro-
vide an interesting way of classifying (and quantifying) the ways object’s color may
inﬂuence one’s judgment of its shape and vice versa.
7
What if the System Is Deterministic?
A deterministic quantity r is a special case of a random variable: it is a random variable
R that attains the value r with probability 1:
Pr [R = r] = 1.
It is convenient to present this as
R ≡r.
8A deterministic system is one containing only deterministic variables. For instance,
r1
1 r1
2
r1
4
c1
r2
1
r2
3
c2
r3
2 r3
3 r3
4 r3
5
c3
r4
3
r4
5
c4
q1 q2 q3 q4 q5
D
(16)
10 System C4(d) is almost certainly inconsistently connected (guessing of an imaginary experiment
based on the results of many real ones).

276
E. N. Dzhafarov
is a deterministic systems in which r j
i represents a random variable R j
i ≡r j
i . The
system can be consistently connected (if the value of r j
i does not depend on j) or
inconsistently connected (otherwise).
It is easy to see, however, that a deterministic system is always noncontextual.11
Indeed, any two content-sharing R j
i ≡r j
i and R j′
i
≡r j′
i in this system have a single cou-
pling (S j
i ≡r j
i ,S j
i ≡r j
i ), consisting of the same deterministic quantities but considered
jointly distributed.12 It follows that
δ

r j
i ,r j′
i

=
⎧
⎨
⎩
1 if r j
i ̸= r j′
i
0 if r j
i = r j′
i
.
The entire deterministic system in (16) also has a single coupling, one containing the
same deterministic quantities as the system itself, but considered jointly distributed.
Clearly, the subcoupling

S j
i ≡r j
i , S j′
i
≡r j′
i

extracted from this coupling is precisely
the same as the coupling of R j
i ≡r j
i and R j′
i
≡r j′
i taken in isolation, and
δ

r j
i ,r j′
i

: all such pairs

=

all such pairs
δ

r j
i ,r j′
i

.
One might conclude that deterministic systems are of no interest for contextuality
analysis. This is not always true, however. There are cases when we know that a
system is deterministic, but we do not know which of a set of possible deterministic
systems it is, because it can be any of them. Let us look at this in detail, using as
examples systems consisting of logical truth values of various statements.
Consider ﬁrst the following C4-type system:
R1
1 ≡+1 R1
2 ≡−1
c1
R2
2 ≡+1 R2
3 ≡−1
c2
R3
3 ≡+1 R3
4 ≡−1
c3
R4
1 ≡−1
R4
4 ≡+1
c4
q1
q2
q3
q4
C4(c)
,
(17)
11 This fact was ﬁrst mentioned to me years ago by Matthew Jones of the University of Colorado.
12 Thereisasubtletyhere,ﬁrstpointedouttomebyJanneKujalaofTurkuUniversity.If R j
i ≡r j
i and
R j′
i
≡r j′
i , one may be tempted to say that the joint event

R j
i ≡r j
i , R j′
i
≡r j′
i

has the probability
one, and this would create an exception from the principle that random variables in different contexts
are not jointly distributed. This is wrong, however, because

R j
i ≡r j
i , R j′
i
≡r j′
i

can only be
thought of counterfactually, as it involves mutually exclusive contexts. In fact, the only justiﬁcation
(or, better put, excuse) for the intuition that

R j
i ≡r j
i , R j′
i
≡r j′
i

is a meaningful joint event is that
R j
i ≡r j
i and R j′
i
≡r j′
i
have a single coupling, and in this coupling Pr

S j
i ≡r j
i , S j
i ≡r j
i
	
= 1.
More generally, use of couplings is a rigorous way of dealing with counterfactuals (Dzhafarov,
2019).

Contents, Contexts, and Basics of Contextuality
277
where +1 and −1 encode truth values (true and false), and the contents are the state-
ments
q1 : "my name is Zora" q2 : "my name is Nico"
q3 : "my name is Max" q4 : "my name is Alex"
.
Equivalently, the contents could also be formulated as questions, “is my name Zora?”
and “is my name Nico?”, in which case +1 and −1 would encode answers Yes and
No. In the following, however, I will refer to the q’s as statements, and the values of
the variables as truth values. The contexts justifying the truth values in (17) are
c1 : the statements are made by Zora c2 : the statements are made by Nico
c3 : the statements are made by Max c4 : the statements are made by Alex
.
This is a situation when the truth values are determined uniquely, the system is
deterministic, and consequently it is noncontextual (even though context-dependence
in it is salient in the form of inconsistent connectedness).
Consider next another system of the C4-type,
R1
1
R1
2
c1
R2
2
R2
3
c2
R3
3
R3
4
c3
R4
1
R4
4
c4
q1 : "q2 is true" q2 : "q3 is true" q3 : "q4 is true" q4 : "q1 is false" C4(d)
,
with contents/statements of a very different kind, and the contexts which here (at least
provisionally) can simply be deﬁned by which statements they include: c1 includes
(q1, q2), c2 includes (q2, q3), etc.
One can recognize here a formalization of the quadripartite version of the Liar
antinomy: one can begin with any statement, say q3, assume it is true, conclude
that then q4 is true, then q1 is false, then q2 is false, and then q3 is false; and if one
assumes that q3 is false, then by the analogous chain of assignments one arrives to
q3 being true. There is no consistent assignment of truth values in this system. In the
language of CbD, the truth values of the statements in C4(d) can only be described by
an inconsistently connected deterministic system.
We come to the main issue now: C4(d) is certainly a deterministic system (because
truth values of statements within a context are ﬁxed), but which deterministic system
is it? There are 16 possible ways of ﬁlling this system with truth values:

278
E. N. Dzhafarov
+1 +1
+1 +1
+1 +1
−1
+1
,
+1 +1
+1 +1
−1 −1
+1
−1
,
+1 +1
−1 −1
+1 +1
−1
+1
,
+1 +1
+1 +1
−1 −1
+1
−1
,
etc.
The only constraint in generating these systems is that
1. in the ﬁrst three contexts (rows) the truth values of the two variables coincide
(because the ﬁrst statement in them says that the second one is true, and the
second one does not refer to the ﬁrst one);
2. in context c4 (the last row) the truth values of the two variables are opposite
(because q4 says that q1 is false, and q1 does not refer to q4).
We see that although random variability in C4(d) is absent, we have in its place epistemic
uncertainty. This opens the possibility of attaching epistemic (Bayesian) probabilities
to the 16 possible deterministic variants of C4(d), and obtaining as a result a system
of epistemic random variables. Mathematically, such a variable is treated in precisely the
same way as an ordinary (“frequentist”) random variable. For instance, we can say
that an epistemic variable R can have values +1 and −1 with Bayesian probabilities
p and 1 −p. This means that R in fact is a deterministic quantity that can be either
+1 or −1, and the degree of rational belief that R is +1 (given what we know of it)
is p. In all computational respects, however, R is treated as if it was a variable that
sometimes can be +1 and sometimes −1.
Ifwechooseequalweightsforall16deterministicvariantsof C4(d) (simplybecause
we have no rational grounds for preferring some of them to others), the resulting
system will have the following Bayesian distributions:
context ci,
i = 1, 2, 3
Ri
i+1 = +1 Ri
i+1 = −1
Ri
i = +1
1/2
0
1/2
Ri
i = −1
0
1/2
1/2
1/2
1/2
(18)
and
context c4 R4
1 = +1 R4
1 = −1
R4
4 = +1
0
1/2
1/2
R4
4 = −1
1/2
0
1/2
1/2
1/2
.
(19)
This system is clearly contextual. Indeed, since it is consistently connected,

Contents, Contexts, and Basics of Contextuality
279
δ

R1
1, R4
1

= δ

R1
2, R2
2

= δ

R2
3, R3
3

= δ

R3
4, R4
4

= 0.
(20)
At the same time,
δ

R1
1, R4
1

,

R1
2, R2
2

,

R2
3, R3
3

,

R3
4, R4
4

=
min
all couplings

S1
1, S1
4, S2
1, S2
2, S3
2, S3
3, S4
3, S4
4

of system C4(d)

Pr

S1
1 ̸= S4
1

+ Pr

S1
2 ̸= S2
2

+ Pr

S2
3 ̸= S3
3

+ Pr

S3
4 ̸= S4
4

> 0.
(21)
This is easy to see. This quantity could be zero only if, in some coupling of C4(a), the
equalities in the ﬁrst row below all held with probability 1:
S4
1 = S1
1

S1
2 = S2
2

S2
3 = S3
3

S3
4 = S4
4

S1
1 = S1
2
t
t
t
t
t
t
t
t
t
S2
2 = S2
3
t
t
t
t
t
t
t
t
t
S3
3 = S3
4
t
t
t
t
t
t
t
t
t
S4
4 ̸= S4
1
.
But in any coupling of C4(a), the equalities in the second row also hold with probability
1, because they copy (18) and (19). Reading now all the equalities above from left
to right along the arrows as a chain
S4
1 = S1
1 = S1
2 = S2
2 = . . . ,
one arrives at a contradiction
S4
1 ̸= S4
1.
In essence, this is the same reasoning as that establishing the unremovable con-
traction in the Liar antinomy. However, this time it merely serves the purpose of
establishing that our system is contextual. In fact, the degree of contextuality here,
computed as the difference between (21) and the (zero) sum of the deltas in (20), is
maximal among all possible systems of the C4-type.
We could use other multipartite versions of the Liar paradox, with three or ﬁve
or any number of statements, all leading to the same outcome. A special mention
is needed of the bipartite version. In this system it is no longer possible to deﬁne
the contexts simply by the contents of the variables they include. Instead we once
again need to use the order of the contents, this time interpreted as the direction of
inference: q →q′ means that we assign truth values to q and infer the corresponding
truth values for q′.13 The resulting system is
13 The interpretation of contexts in terms of the direction of inference is the right one also in systems
with larger number of statements. It is merely a coincidence that for n > 2 in the systems depicting
the n-partite Liar paradox the direction of inference in a context is uniquely determined by the pairs
of contents involved in this context.

280
E. N. Dzhafarov
Fig. 3 “Ascending-Descending” by M. C. Escher. The four ﬂights of stairs are enumerated
q1, q2, q3, q4. The epistemic random variables have values ascending and descending, and in each
of the the ﬁrst four contexts they are perfectly correlated. The ﬁfth context is a mixture of the
quadruples of values precisely two of which are ascending (so that travelers always end up in the
same place from where they started). The resulting epistemic system is contextual (Cervantes &
Dzhafarov, 2020)
R1
1
R1
2
c1 : q1 →q2
R2
1
R2
2
c2 : q2 →q1
q1 = "q2 is true" q2 : "q1 is false"
C2(d)
,
with four possible deterministic variants:
+1 +1
−1 +1 ,
+1 +1
+1 −1 ,
−1 −1
−1 +1 ,
+1 +1
+1 −1 .
Mixing them with equal epistemic probabilities creates a consistently connected and
highly contextual system (maximally contextual among all cyclic systems of rank
2).
Logical paradoxes are not, of course, the only application of contextuality analy-
sis with epistemic random variables. It seems that many “strange” or “paradoxical”
situations can be converted into contextual epistemic systems (Cervantes & Dzha-
farov, 2020; Dzhafarov, in press). Among other applications are such objects as the
Penroses’ “impossible ﬁgures” and M. C. Escher’s pictures (as in Fig.3).

Contents, Contexts, and Basics of Contextuality
281
8
The Right to Ignore (or Not To)
I will mention now some aspects of the Contextuality-by-Default theory (CbD) that
seem to pose difﬁculties for understanding. Questions about them are being asked
often and in spite of having been repeatedly addressed in published literature.
The most basic aspect of CbD is double indexation of the random variables. The
response to a given question q is a random variable Rcq whose identity is determined
not only by q but also by the context c in which q is responded to. This looks innocuous
enough, but it puzzles some when a system being analyzed is consistently connected,
i.e. when changing c in Rcq does not change the distribution. And the puzzlement may
increase when our knowledge tells us there is no possible way in which different
contexts c can differently inﬂuence the random variables Rcq.
Consider again the system C4(a) in (14), from which we date contextuality studies.
I reproduce it here for the reader’s convenience:
R1
1
R1
2
c1
R2
2
R2
3
c2
R3
3
R3
4
c3
R4
1
R4
4
c4
q1
(Zora’s 1)
q2
(Nico’s 2)
q3
(Zora’s 3)
q4
(Nico’s 4)
C4(a)
In this system, Nico’s choice between directions 2 and 4 can in no ways affect Zora’s
measurements of spin along direction 1. Nevertheless, when Nico switches from
direction 2 to 4, the random variable describing the outcome of Zora’s measurement
of spin along direction 1 ceases to be R1
1 and becomes R4
1. It looks like Nico has
inﬂuenced Zora’s measurements after all. Isn’t it an example of what Albert Einstein
famously called a “spooky action at a distance”?
The answer is, it is not. Nico’s choices are undetectable by Zora. Whether he
chooses direction 2 or direction 4, Zora can see no changes in the statistical properties
of what she observes when she measures spins along direction 1. “Action” means
information transmitted, and no information is transmitted from Nico to Zora (and
vice versa). The fact that in at least one of the pairs

R1
1, R4
1

,

R1
2, R2
2

,

R3
3, R4
3

,

R3
4, R4
4

the two random variables cannot be viewed as being the same can be established by
neither Zora nor Nico. It can only be established by a Max who receives the choice
of directions and outcomes of measurements from both Zora and Nico and computes
the joint distributions in contexts c1, c2, c3, c4.
An important point here is that compared to Max, Zora does not misunderstand
or miss anything when she sees no difference between R1
1 and R4
1 or between R3
3 and
R4
3. Her understanding is no less complete or less correct. Zora and Max simply deal
with different systems of random variables. In the same way Max’s understanding
is no less complete or less correct than that of an Alex who, in addition to knowing

282
E. N. Dzhafarov
what Max knows, observes whether solar activity during the measurements is high
or low. In Alex’s system, each context of system C4(a) is split into two contexts, e.g.,
c1 is replaced with
R1,high
1
R1,high
2
c1,high
R1,low
1
R1,low
2
c1,low
q1
q2
q3 q4
C4(a)/c1 only
.
In studying a system of random variable one always can ignore any of the cir-
cumstances that do not affect the distributions of the variables.14 Or one can choose
not to ignore such circumstances, to systematically record them and make them part
of the contexts. If a circumstance is irrelevant (as it may be in the case of Alex’s
recording of solar activity), one will ﬁnd this out by considering couplings of the
system. Thus, one may establish that the contextuality analysis of the system does
not change if all couplings are constrained by
Pr

S j,high
i
= S j,low
i
	
= 1,
for any R j
i in the original system C4(a). This would mean that R j,high
i
and R j,low
i
can be
viewed as being one and the same random variable (assuming, of course, that solar
activity is indeed irrelevant).
This reasoning fully applies to the issue often raised by those who enjoy shallow
paradoxes. If one records values of a random variable R in, say, chronological order,
and simultaneously records the ordinal positions of these values in the sequence (as
part of their contexts),
r1 r2 . . . rn . . .
1
2 . . . n . . . ,
would not this transform all these realizations of a single random variable into
pairwise stochastically unrelated random variables
R1, R2, . . . , Rn, . . .
with a single realization each? The answer is yes, if one so wishes (one may also
choose to ignore the ordinal positions of the observations altogether), but then a
standard view is immediately restored when one considers couplings of these ran-
dom variables. For instance, the iid coupling (corresponding to the standard statistical
concept of independent identically distributed variables) has the structure
14 This statement can even be extended to ignoring circumstances when distributions do change
(inconsistent connectedness). However, this issue has more complex ramiﬁcations, and we will set
it aside.

Contents, Contexts, and Basics of Contextuality
283
R1
R2
. . .
Rn
. . .
S1
r1
1 = r1
r1
2
. . .
r1n
. . .
S2
r2
1
r2
2 = r2
. . .
r2n
. . . ,
...
...
...
...
...
...
Sn
rn
1
rn
2
. . .
rn
n = rn
. . .
...
...
...
...
...
...
where the boxed values are those factually observed, whereas all other values are
independently sampled from the distribution of R. More details are available in Dzha-
farov (2016) and Dzhafarov & Kon (2018).
Finally, does the double-indexation in CbD lend any support to the holistic view
of the universe, the view that “everything depends on everything else”? The answer
is that the opposite is true, CbD supports a radically analytic view. First, as we have
established, unless distributions of two given content-sharing variables are found to
be different (which is ubiquitous but not universal) one can ignore the difference
between their contexts, i.e., disregard all other variables in these contexts. This will
redeﬁne the system, but will not be wrong. Second, the difference in the identity
of two content-sharing variables in different contexts (whether their distributions
are the same or not) involves no change in the colloquial meaning of the word.
The notion of a change implies that something that preserves its identity (e.g., a
moving body) changes some of its properties (e.g., position in space). However, R1
2
and R2
2 (having the same content in different contexts) are simply different random
variables, stochastically unrelated because they occur in mutually exclusive contexts.
Thedifferencebetweenthemispreciselythesameasthatbetween R1
2 and R1
1 (different
contents in the same context). By choosing a different question to ask, one switches
to considering another random variable rather than “changes” the previous one.
The same happens when one chooses a different context: one simply switches to
considering a different random variable. If I see Max and then see Alex, it does not
mean that Max has changed into Alex.
The core of these and other problems with understanding CbD, it seems to me, is
in the tendency to view random variables as empirical objects. They are not. Random
variables are our descriptions of empirical objects. They are part of our knowledge
of the world, and the same as any other knowledge, they can appear, disappear, and
be revised as soon as we adopt a new point of view or gain new evidence.
References
Bacciagaluppi, G. (2015). Einsten, Bohm, and Leggett-Garg. In E. N. Dzhafarov, S. Jordan, R.
Zhang, & V. Cervantes (Eds.), Contextuality from quantum physics to psychology (pp. 63–76).
New Jersey: World Scientiﬁc.

284
E. N. Dzhafarov
Basieva, I., Cervantes, V. H., Dzhafarov, E. N., & Khrennikov, A. (2019). True contextuality beats
direct inﬂuences in human decision making. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 148,
1925–1937.
Bell, J. (1964). On the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen paradox. Physics, 1, 195–200.
Bell, J. (1966). On the problem of hidden variables in quantum mechanics. Review of Modern
Physics, 38, 447–453.
Bohm, D., & Aharonov, Y. (1957). Discussion of experimental proof for the paradox of Einstein,
Rosen and Podolski. Physical Review, 108, 1070–1076.
Cabello, A. (2008). Experimentally testable state-independent quantum contextuality. Physical
Review Letters,101, 210401.
Cabello, A., Estebaranz, J., & García-Alcaine, G. (1996). Bell-Kochen-Specker theorem: A proof
with 18 vectors. Physics Letters A, 212, 183–187.
Cervantes, V. H., & Dzhafarov, E. N. (2020). Contextuality analysis of impossible ﬁgures. Entropy,
22, 981. https://doi.org/10.3390/e22090981.
Cervantes, V. H., & Dzhafarov, E. N. (2017). Exploration of contextuality in a psychophysical
double-detection experiment. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 10106, 182–193.
Cervantes, V. H., & Dzhafarov, E. N. (2017). Advanced analysis of quantum contextuality in a
psychophysical double-detection experiment. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 79, 77–84.
Cervantes, V. H., & Dzhafarov, E. N. (2018). Snow Queen is evil and beautiful: Experimental
evidence for probabilistic contextuality in human choices. Decision, 5, 193–204.
Cervantes, V. H., & Dzhafarov, E. N. (2019). True contextuality in a psychophysical experiment.
Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 91, 119–127.
Clauser, J. F., & Horne, M. A. (1974). Experimental consequences of objective local theories.
Physical Review D, 10, 526–535.
Clauser, J. F., Horne, M. A., Shimony, A., & Holt, R. A. (1969). Proposed experiment to test local
hidden-variable theories. Physical Review Letters, 23, 880–884.
de Barros, J. A., Dzhafarov, E. N., Kujala, J. V., & Oas, G. (2016). Measuring observable quantum
contextuality. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 9535, 36–47.
Dzhafarov, E. N. (in press). The contextuality-by-default view of the sheaf-theoretic approach to
contextuality. To be published. In A. Palmigiano & M. Sadrzadeh (Eds.), Samson Abramsky on
logic and structure in computer science and beyond, in series outstanding contributions to logic.
Springer Nature. (available as arXiv:1906.02718).
Dzhafarov, E. N., & Kujala, J. V. (2010). The joint distribution criterion and the distance tests for
selective probabilistic causality. Frontiers in Psychology: Quantitative Psychology and Measure-
ment,1, 151. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2010.0015
Dzhafarov, E. N., & Kujala, J. V. (2013). All-possible-couplings approach to measuring probabilistic
context. PLoS ONE,8(5), e61712. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0061712
Dzhafarov, E. N., & Kujala, J. V. (2014). Contextuality is about identity of random variables. Physica
Scripta T,163, 014009.
Dzhafarov, E. N., & Kujala, J. V. (2016). Probability, random variables, and selectivity. In W.
Batchelder, H. Colonius, E. N. Dzhafarov, & J. Myung (Eds.), The new handbook of mathematical
psychology (pp. 85–150). Cambridge University Press.
Dzhafarov, E. N., & Kujala, J. V. (2020). Systems of random variables and the Free Will Theorem.
Physical Review Research, 2, 043288; https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevResearch.2.043288.
Dzhafarov, E. N., Kujala, J. V., & Cervantes, V. H. (2020). Contextuality and noncontextuality
measures and generalized Bell inequalities for cyclic systems. Physical Review A,101, 042119.
Dzhafarov, E. N., Kujala, J. V., & Cervantes, V. H. (2020). Erratum: Contextuality and noncontex-
tuality measures and generalized Bell inequalities for cyclic systems [Physical Review A, 101,
042119 (2020)]. Physical Review A, 101, 069902.
Dzhafarov, E. N., Kujala, J. V., & Cervantes, V. H. (2021). Epistemic odds of contextual-
ity in cyclic systems. European Physics Journal-Special Topics, 230, 937–940. (available as
arXiv:2002.07755).

Contents, Contexts, and Basics of Contextuality
285
Dzhafarov, E. N. (2003). Selective inﬂuence through conditional independence. Psychometrika, 68,
7–26.
Dzhafarov, E. N. (2016). Stochastic unrelatedness, couplings, and contextuality. Journal of Math-
ematical Psychology, 75C, 34–41.
Dzhafarov, E. N. (2017). Replacing nothing with something special: Contextuality-by-Default and
dummy measurements. In A. Khrennikov & T. Bourama (Eds.), Quantum foundations, probability
and information (pp. 39–44). Berlin: Springer.
Dzhafarov, E. N. (2019). On joint distributions, counterfactual values, and hidden variables in
understanding contextuality. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A, 377, 20190144.
Dzhafarov, E. N., Cervantes, V. H., & Kujala, J. V. (2017). Contextuality in canonical systems of
random variables. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A, 375, 20160389.
Dzhafarov, E. N., & Gluhovsky, I. (2006). Notes on selective inﬂuence, probabilistic causality, and
probabilistic dimensionality. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 50, 390–401.
Dzhafarov, E. N., & Kon, M. (2018). On universality of classical probability with contextually
labeled random variables. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 85, 17–24.
Dzhafarov, E. N., & Kujala, J. V. (2012). Selectivity in probabilistic causality: Where psychology
runs into quantum physics. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 56, 54–63.
Dzhafarov, E. N., & Kujala, J. V. (2012). Quantum entanglement and the issue of selective inﬂuences
in psychology: An overview. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 7620, 184–195.
Dzhafarov, E. N., & Kujala, J. V. (2013). Order-distance and other metric-like functions on jointly
distributed random variables. Proceedings of the American Mathematical Society, 141, 3291–
3301.
Dzhafarov, E. N., & Kujala, J. V. (2014). Selective inﬂuences, marginal selectivity, and Bell/CHSH
inequalities. Topics in Cognitive Science, 6, 121–128.
Dzhafarov, E. N., & Kujala, J. V. (2014). A qualiﬁed Kolmogorovian account of probabilistic
contextuality. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 8369, 201–212.
Dzhafarov, E. N., & Kujala, J. V. (2015). Conversations on contextuality. In E. N. Dzhafarov, S.
Jordan, R. Zhang, & V. Cervantes (Eds.), Contextuality from quantum physics to psychology (pp.
1–22). New Jersey: World Scientiﬁc.
Dzhafarov, E. N., & Kujala, J. V. (2016). Context-content systems of random variables: The
contextuality-by-default theory. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 74, 11–33.
Dzhafarov, E. N., & Kujala, J. V. (2017). Probabilistic foundations of contextuality. Fortschritte der
Physik, 65, 1–11.
Dzhafarov, E. N., & Kujala, J. V. (2017). Contextuality-by-Default 2.0: Systems with binary random
variables. Lecture Notes Computer Sciences, 10106, 16–32.
Dzhafarov, E. N., & Kujala, J. V. (2018). Contextuality analysis of the double slit experiment (with
a glimpse into three slits). Entropy, 20, 278.
Dzhafarov, E. N., Kujala, J. V., & Cervantes, V. H. (2016). Contextuality-by-Default: A brief
overview of ideas, concepts, and terminology. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 9535, 12–
23.
Dzhafarov, E. N., Kujala, J. V., Cervantes, V. H., Zhang, R., & Jones, M. (2016). On contextuality
in behavioral data. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A, 374, 20150234.
Dzhafarov, E. N., Kujala, J. V., & Larsson, J. -Å. (2015). Contextuality in three types of quantum-
mechanical systems. Foundations of Physics, 7, 762–782.
Dzhafarov, E. N., Zhang, R., & Kujala, J. V. (2015). Is there contextuality in behavioral and social
systems? Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A, 374, 20150099.
Fine, A. (1982). Joint distributions, quantum correlations, and commuting observables. Journal of
Mathematical Physics, 23, 1306–1310.
Jones, M. (2019). Relating causal and probabilistic approaches to contextuality. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society A, 377, 20190133.
Klyachko, A. A., Can, M. A., Binicioglu, S., & Shumovsky, A. S. (2008). A simple test for hidden
variables in spin-1 system. Physical Review Letters,101, 020403.

286
E. N. Dzhafarov
Kochen, S., & Specker, E. P. (1967). The problem of hidden variables in quantum mechanics.
Journal of Mathematics and Mechanics, 17, 59–87.
Kujala, J. V., & Dzhafarov, E. N. (2019). Measures of contextuality and noncontextuality. Philo-
sophical Transactions of the Royal Society A, 377, 20190149. (available as arXiv:1903.07170).
Kujala, J. V., Dzhafarov, E. N., & Larsson, J. -Ã. (2015). Necessary and sufﬁcient conditions for
extended noncontextuality in a broad class of quantum mechanical systems. Physical Review
Letters,115, 150401.
Kujala, J. V., & Dzhafarov, E. N. (2008). Testing for selectivity in the dependence of random
variables on external factors. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 52, 128–144.
Kujala, J. V., & Dzhafarov, E. N. (2015). Probabilistic contextuality in EPR/Bohm-type systems with
signaling allowed. In E. N. Dzhafarov, S. Jordan, R. Zhang, & V. Cervantes (Eds.), Contextuality
from quantum physics to psychology (pp. 287–308). New Jersey: World Scientiﬁc.
Kujala, J. V., & Dzhafarov, E. N. (2016). Proof of a conjecture on contextuality in cyclic systems
with binary variables. Foundations of Physics, 46, 282–299.
Kurzynski, P., Cabello, A., & Kaszlikowski, D. (2014). Fundamental monogamy relation between
contextuality and nonlocality. Physical Review Letters,112, 100401.
Moore, D. W. (2002). Measuring new types of question-order effects. Public Opinion Quarterly,
66, 80–91.
Sternberg, S. (1969). The discovery of processing stages: Extensions of Donders’ method. In W. G.
Koster (Ed.), Attention and performance II. Acta Psychologica, 30, 276–315.
Townsend, J. T. (1984). Uncovering mental processes with factorial experiments. Journal of Math-
ematical Psychology, 28, 363–400.
Wang, Z., & Busemeyer, J. R. (2013). A quantum question order model supported by empirical
tests of an a priori and precise prediction. Topics in Cognitive Science, 5, 689–710.
Zhang, R., & Dzhafarov, E. N. (2015). Noncontextuality with marginal selectivity in reconstructing
mental architectures. Frontiers in Psychology: Cognition,1, 12. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.
2015.00735
Zhang, R., & Dzhafarov, E. N. (2016). Testing contextuality in cyclic psychophysical systems of
high ranks. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 10106, 151–162.

Content, Context, and Naturalism
in Mathematics
Otávio Bueno
1
Introduction
Mathematics is often presented as being necessary: its results, if true, are necessarily
true. It is not a contingent fact about prime numbers that there are inﬁnitely many of
them: this is required by what these numbers are, by the content of the principles that
characterize them. This would entail that the very content of mathematical theorems
guarantees that their truth holds in any context, irrespectively of any vicissitudes. This
leads, in turn, to the formulation of what can be called the traditional conception of
mathematics as a body of necessary, immutable truths.
Despite its ubiquitous adoption (see, e.g., Hale, 2013), the traditional conception
faces signiﬁcant difﬁculties (see also Bueno, 2020, and, 2021, for further discussion).
Mathematical theorems are extremely sensitive to context in, at least, three distinct
ways:
(a)
Assumptions: theorems in mathematics crucially depend on the assumptions
that are built into them. If the assumptions are violated, the result in the
theorem’s statement need not go through. For instance, in real analysis (Rudin,
1976, p. 32), a limit point of a set E is one for which every neighborhood of
that point contains a different point that is a member of E. It then follows that
if p is a limit point of E, then every neighborhood of p contains inﬁnitely may
points of E. Clearly, the consequent of the theorem need not hold if p is not a
limit point of the set E, given that, in this case some, some neighborhood of p
may not have any points of E at all.
(b)
Logic: mathematical results depend on the underlying logic. A change in logic
may undermine the validity of the theorem. Certain results in classical analysis
cannot be obtained constructively, given the shift to an intuitionistic logic.
This is the case, for example, of the least-upper-bound principle, according
O. Bueno (B)
Department of Philosophy, University of Miami, Coral Gables, FL 33124, USA
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
S. Wuppuluri and I. Stewart (eds.), From Electrons to Elephants and Elections,
The Frontiers Collection, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-92192-7_17
287

288
O. Bueno
to which each nonempty subset of real numbers that is bounded above has
a least upper bound (Bridges, 1999, p. 99). As Douglas Bridges notes, the
result has a suitable constructive version. However, the latter does not have the
same content as the classical theorem, given the nonconstructive nature of the
classical continuum.
(c)
Interpretation: when applied to the world, mathematical theorems depend on
the interpretation of the concepts that are used in their formulation, and the
resulting interpretation may turn out to be empirically inadequate. For instance,
the negative energy solutions of the Dirac equation can be interpreted as corre-
sponding to “holes” in space–time (an interpretation initially advanced by
Dirac himself). Yet such interpretation leads to the conclusion that electrons
and protons have the same mass, which, clearly, is not empirically adequate
(see Bueno, 2005, for references and further discussion; I will return to this
case below).
Given their dependence on assumptions, on the underlying logic, and on the
interpretations used in applied contexts, mathematical theorems do not hold either
in general or necessarily. At best, they hold conditionally—on the assumptions, the
underlying logic or the interpretations that are invoked. Given that none of these
parameters (the assumptions, the logic, and the interpretations) are necessary either,
since each can, and have, failed in some context (see Bueno, 2021), mathematical
results are fairly constrained, restricted, and dependent on the context under consid-
eration. Hence, as opposed to the traditional conception, these results are ultimately
contingent (Bueno, 2020).
Given the shifting contexts that mathematics is involved with, how should the
content of mathematical statements be understood? In this paper, I examine this
issue by considering three features of such content: (i) Mathematical content has an
inferential component given that it is meant to allow one to infer suitable properties
and relations regarding the objects under study. (ii) Mathematical content has a
phenomenological component given the role that intuition seems to have in the
speciﬁcation of some such content. (iii) Mathematical content has a signiﬁcant role in
the application of mathematics, especially regarding the representation of empirical
phenomena.
In order to focus the discussion, I will consider each of these three components in
a particular context. The inferential component will be examined in the context of a
recent reassessment of if-thenism in the philosophy of mathematics (Yablo, 2017).
The phenomenological component will be considered in the context of a particular
perceptualist view of intuition (Chudnoff, 2003). Finally, the application component
will be discussed in the context of a particular account of the use of mathematics in
scientiﬁc representation (Pincock, 2012). In each case, I will examine critically the
proposals and, where appropriate, indicate ways in which a suitable alternative can
be offered. The result, as will become clear, is a broadly empiricist, contingentist,
and, given the role played by mathematical practice, naturalist approach to content.

Content, Context, and Naturalism in Mathematics
289
2
Content: If-Thenism
As a view in the philosophy of mathematics, if-thenism states, in the words of Hilary
Putnam, that:
if there is any structure which satisﬁes such-and-such axioms (e.g. the axioms of group
theory), then that structure satisﬁes such-and-such further statements (some theorems of
group theory or other). (Putnam, 1979, p. 20)
And as long as the axioms (or, more generally, the principles) in question are
consistent (or, at least, nontrivial), if-thenism can be used to capture a signiﬁcant
feature of mathematical practice: the fact that mathematicians are in the business of
ﬁguring out what follows from the axioms or principles they introduce. In this way,
the content of mathematical theorems is established.
Yablo (2017) critically discusses how exactly if-thenism should be formulated,
and argues that, at its best, its crucial conditional ψ →ϕ should be understood to
mean whatever is left when ψ is subtracted from ϕ, in symbols: ϕ ~ ψ. He notes
three signiﬁcant motivations for such an approach—all of them bear on philosophy of
mathematics issues: (a) Independence: Mathematics is independent from the physical
processes that can be described in terms of it. (b) Content: The content of certain
statements that are couched in terms of mathematics need not concern mathematics,
but some other subject matter the statements address (especially in the context of
applied mathematics). (c) Explanation: In some cases, one may obtain a better, more
intrinsic, explanation of physical phenomena by not invoking mathematics. To make
sense of each of these traits of mathematics, it is crucial to provide a strategy to take
back (subtract) some parts of what is said. However, Yablo notes, an if-thenist face
difﬁculties if an attempt is made to implement the subtraction approach to arithmetic,
given that “the prospects for subtracting Peano Arithmetic’s consistency from its truth
seem fairly dim” (Yablo, 2017, 131).
There is, however, a perfectly straightforward way of capturing if-thenism without
the difﬁculties that Yablo identiﬁed in it by noting that the troublesome ontolog-
ical commitments that we are invited to avoid—the “subtraction” part that Yablo
discusses—are better resisted not at the level of the conditionals—as Yablo’s strategy
recommends—but at the level of the quantiﬁers. If ontologically neutral quantiﬁers
areinvoked—thatis,quantiﬁersthatdonotrequiretheexistenceofthatwhichisquan-
tiﬁed over (Azzouni, 2004, and Bueno, 2005)—if-thenism can indeed be formulated
as a straightforward conditional, but none of the unwanted ontology is presupposed:
quantiﬁcation over Peano Arithmetic structures does not require the existence of the
corresponding structures any more than quantiﬁcation over ﬁctional characters does.
The if-thenist is then not settled with the unwelcome task of “subtracting Peano
Arithmetic’s consistency from its truth”, but can simply assert that: if there are Peano
Arithmetic structures (that is, structures that satisfy the axioms of Peano Arithmetic),
then such structures also satisfy the relevant theorems of the theory. However, no
claim about the existence of the structures that are quantiﬁed over is ever made, since
quantiﬁcation does not require the existence of that over which one quantiﬁes. The

290
O. Bueno
result is then a clean, defensible version of if-thenism without qualms or tears. But
how can we make sense of neutral quantiﬁers?
3
Neutral Quantiﬁcation
Ontologically neutral quantiﬁers—or neutral quantiﬁers, for short—are exactly like
the usual existential and universal quantiﬁers, except that they avoid doing double
duty of (i) specifying the range of objects that are quantiﬁed over (all of the objects
in the domain, in the case the universal quantiﬁer, or only some of these objects,
in the case of the existential one) and (ii) asserting the existence of the objects
that are quantiﬁed over. Range speciﬁcation (role (i)) and ontological commitment
(role (ii)) implement very different functions of the quantiﬁers, and it is unclear that
quantiﬁcation is the proper way of marking ontological commitment anyway. One
thing is to assert that all objects in the domain are F, or that some of these objects are
G, and quite another is to claim that Fs exist, or that Gs exist. Rather than indicating
what exists, ontologically neutral quantiﬁers simply specify the range of the objects
that are quantiﬁed over: all or some. Existence is marked by the introduction of an
existence predicate E (Azzouni, 2004, and Bueno, 2005).
Consider, for instance, the following claim:
(*) Some sets—such as those that are too large—don’t exist.
If in (*) the quantiﬁers are interpreted as ontologically loaded—that is, as having
ontological import—then the resulting statement would be contradictory, since it
would amount to the claim that there exist sets that don’t exist. With ontologically
neutral quantiﬁers, and an existence predicate E, (*) can be expressed consistently
and without trouble as follows—where ‘S’ stands for the predicate is a set:
(**) ∃x (Sx ∧¬Ex).
What does fall under the existence predicate? The answer is just as simple as
hopelessly uninformative: the existing things. Figuring out what exists is, of course,
no straightforward or uncontroversial matter, nor is it a matter of logic or quantiﬁ-
cation. What exists is ultimately a matter of ontology. Different ontological views
provide different answers to this question; each offers a distinctive criterion for what
is taken to exist. Idealists, for instance, typically insist that (only) mind-dependent
things exist. Realists often argue that existence is ultimately a matter of ontological
independence from our linguistic practices and psychological processes (Azzouni,
2004). Platonists are realists who take abstract objects to be ontologically indepen-
dent from us. Nominalists are realists who take abstract objects not to be so: these
objects are ontologically dependent on our relevant practices and processes.
Part of the difﬁculty of settling ontological disputes emerges from the difﬁculty
to determine, in non-question-begging ways, which criterion for what is taken to
exist is adequate. Even if the relevant parties agree on the signiﬁcance of ontological

Content, Context, and Naturalism in Mathematics
291
independence for existence, they may still disagree about which things are ontolog-
ically independent. And in trying to settle this issue, one ends up invoking precisely
the things that are under dispute. For example, platonists do take abstract objects to
be things that exist independently of our mental processes and linguistic practices.
Thus, given their realism, they take abstract objects to exist. Nominalists demur.
They argue that, since abstract objects depend on us, they lack the ontological inde-
pendence required for them to exist: they are similar to ﬁctional objects—which
also do not exist. Non-spatiotemporal and causally inactive objects are just not the
kind of thing that exists, nominalists argue. Platonists rightly complain that this just
begs the question against their view; just as the platonists’ insistence that abstract
objects exist, given their ontological independence from us, begs the question against
nominalism.
Quantiﬁcation, however, should not depend on any of these metaphysical disputes.
Quantiﬁcation is needed in order to conduct such debates in the ﬁrst place, and so it is
crucialthatitdoesnotrelyonwhatexists(ornot).Ontologicalneutralityisacherished
feature of logic—albeit one that is not easily reached, but which can be assisted by
ontologically neutral quantiﬁers. Once it is in place, quantiﬁcational neutrality allows
for ontological debates to be carried out. Ontologically neutral quantiﬁers are crucial
for this task, since one need not require the existence or the nonexistence of the
contentious ontological items (numbers, functions, sets, properties, universals) in
order to conduct the debate.
The semantics for these quantiﬁers is exactly the same as the semantics of usual
quantiﬁers.Itisenoughthatthequantiﬁersinthemetalanguage—inwhichtheseman-
tics is provided—be similarly ontologically neutral (Azzouni, 2004). In this respect,
the situation is entirely analogous to what goes on when the usual semantics is
offered. Ontological commitment is marked by the existence predicate even in the
metalanguage.
4
Content Revisited: If-Thenism with Ontologically
Neutral Quantiﬁers
If properly characterized, if-thenism provides an interpretation of mathematical
statements that preserves their objectivity without an unnecessary layer of ontolog-
ical commitment. The content of mathematical claims can then be speciﬁed. With
ontologically neutral quantiﬁers, if-thenism can be formulated directly as follows:
(I) If there were structures satisfying the mathematical principles of a theory M, the theorems
of M would be true in those structures.
Moreover, it is possible that there are such structures. This is required in order
to prevent the trivialization of the formulation in the case of inconsistent (or trivial)
theories, since the conditional (I) above would be satisﬁed in case no such structures
were possible, even if the negation of the theorems were plugged in the consequent.

292
O. Bueno
(Hellman, 1989, building up on Putnam, 1979, Chap. 3, offers a similar strategy, but
invokes, as does Putnam, ontologically committing quantiﬁers.)
This highlights, more generally, the broader issue of the consistency of mathe-
matical theories, which is a concern not only for the if-thenist, but also for platonists
and nominalists alike, who are similarly concerned about the potential inconsis-
tency, or triviality, of mathematical principles. If mathematical theories are (taken
to be) true, as platonists insist, they had better be consistent, on pain of platonists
becoming dialetheists (Priest, 2006). If mathematical theories are not (taken to be)
true, but are conservative, as certain nominalists would have it (Field, 1980), then
the theories had better be consistent, since conservativeness is formulated in terms of
consistency with every internally consistent body of claims about the world. In either
case, consistency is required. (Of course, in light of Gödel’s second incompleteness
theorem, the consistency of such theories cannot be generally proved in the theories
themselves, assuming they are consistent—and this fact impinges, once again, on all
of these views, whether they invoke if-thenism or not.)
However, the existence of none of the structures referred to in (I) is ever asserted,
given the ontologically neutral quantiﬁers: just because one quantiﬁes over certain
structures it does not follow that such structures exist, even if they are indispensable
to the formulation of the theories in question. Quantiﬁcation is one thing; ontological
commitment is another.
It may be objected that if ontologically neutral quantiﬁers are introduced, there is
noneedtoadopt if-thenism. Whybother withthelatter if theformer does all thework?
But this is not right. Neutral quantiﬁcation provides no account of philosophical
issues about mathematics. It is simply an account of the quantiﬁers. It does not
specify how mathematical discourse should be interpreted or evaluated. It does not
determine the status of that discourse: whether it is objective, factual, or conceptually
constrained. These are issues that need to be addressed as part of an interpretation of
mathematical language—and ontologically neutral quantiﬁers per se have nothing
to say about them.
But if-thenism does. On this interpretation of mathematics, mathematical
discourse is fundamentally the result of what follows from certain principles—the
mathematical principles that characterize a certain domain of mathematical objects.
Mathematical concepts are introduced and relations among these concepts—spec-
iﬁed in the relevant mathematical principles—are advanced. Once these principles
are put forward, it is often inferentially opaque what follows from them. According
to the if-thenist, trying to determine what these inferential relations are (among
mathematical principles and their consequences) is a key feature of mathematics.
Of course, mathematical practice involves a number of activities, including
reﬁning concepts, changing deﬁnitions, selecting axioms, focusing on interesting
mathematical theories, and ignoring uninteresting ones. All of this is ultimately
achieved by establishing suitable inferential relations among the relevant mathe-
matical principles and statements. Deﬁnitions are changed and reﬁned in light of
counterexamples and theorems; new axioms are introduced in light of the results
that can (or cannot) be inferred from them, and the discrimination of interesting
from uninteresting mathematics is tied to what can (or cannot) be inferred from the

Content, Context, and Naturalism in Mathematics
293
mathematical theories in question and the connections that can be established (or not)
with other mathematical results. Typically, the more unexpected such connections
among different areas of mathematics are, the more interesting the theorems become.
Mathematical practice is rigorous but informal (Azzouni, 2004), and axioma-
tization is not a requirement. In fact, if-thenism is not committed to mathematics
being axiomatized. Mathematics has been developed quite independently of any such
constraint. But a clear, rigorous formulation of the objects in a given mathematical
domain is needed in order for their investigation to go through. But there is no difﬁ-
cult for the if-thenist to accommodate this aspect of the practice either. Indeed, the
relations among concepts—as they are expressed via mathematical principles—and
what follows from such principles are crucial features of if-thenism itself.
Once mathematical principles are introduced, and a logic is adopted—which is
typically, although not always, classical—it is no longer up to us, or to the relevant
mathematical community, what follows or not from such principles. This is an objec-
tive fact about the principles and the relevant theorems—or the relevant statements
that are not consequence of the principles. Logical relations among statements hold
or fail to hold depending on their content; they do not depend on us. The existence
of the objects that are quantiﬁed over in the relevant statements plays no role in this
process. What matters are the logical relations that hold, or fail to hold, among the
statements in question: what follows from what, or what does not follow from what.
ThatitfollowsfromPeanoArithmeticthatthereareinﬁnitelymanyprimenumbers
is a fact about numbers, how they have been formulated in the theory, and why it
would be inconsistent with the principles of the theory if there were only ﬁnitely
many of them. Nothing is said about whether such numbers exist, whether they
exist independently of the Peano Arithmetic principles, whether they are abstract
objects, concrete objects, tropes, properties, aggregates, or entities of some other
kind. Mathematical discourse is just silent about these issues. And ontologically
neutral quantiﬁers provide a way of achieving this neutrality, since quantiﬁcation
over objects, including those that are posited in a mathematical theory, does not
require their existence.
Coupled with ontologically neutral quantiﬁers, if-thenism provides a philosophi-
callysuggestiveinterpretationofmathematicaldiscourse.Ithasanumberofattractive
features: It preserves the objectivity of mathematics without requiring the commit-
ment to the existence of mathematical entities (something that is also emphasized
by Putnam, 1979, and Hellman, 1989; for a discussion, see Bueno, 2018, 2013).
It meshes naturally with the inferential role played by mathematical principles in
mathematical practice. The objectivity of mathematics emerges from the objectivity
of the logical consequence relation itself, independently of the whims of reasoning
agents. The lack of ontological commitment can be achieved directly by separating
quantiﬁcation from existence. It does not depend on any subtraction procedure, in
contrast with Yablo’s (2017) proposal. The inferential role played by mathematical
principles is accommodated via the very formulation of if-thenism—highlighting the
importance of inferring theorems from mathematical principles.
Moreover, given the lack of ontological commitment, it is also easy to accom-
modate the three motivations Yablo (2017) introduced for his subtraction approach:

294
O. Bueno
(a) The independence of mathematics from physical processes emerges straightfor-
wardly from the fact that, except for cardinality considerations, mathematics doesn’t
constrain the physical world. (b) With neutral quantiﬁers, the content of statements
is also accommodated: certain statements couched in terms of mathematics need not
concern mathematics, but whatever the statements refer to, since no commitment
to the existence of mathematical objects is ever made—even when such objects are
quantiﬁed over. (c) Finally, more intrinsic explanations can be provided once neutral
quantiﬁers are in place, since no explanation, even those couched in mathematical
terms, is committed to the existence of mathematical objects. The result is a clean,
simple characterization of if-thenism, within a broadly deﬂationary view.
5
Content and Intuition: Intellectual Perceptions
Perhaps specifying the content of mathematical theories by the relevant principles
and the logical relations among them may not be enough. Some argue that an addi-
tional phenomenological constraint needs to be met for at least some mathematical
principles: they are apprehended via intuition. But what exactly does this amount to?
Elijah Chudnoff (2013) offers an insightful answer to this question by defending a
perceptualist account of intuition. On this view, intuitions are thought of as a form of
intellectual perception. They are experiences (that is, conscious states) that are seem-
ings and possess presentational phenomenology. On Chudnoff’s account, intuitive
justiﬁcation is possible, and thus intuitions can be a source of reliable justiﬁcation.
More generally, they provide intuitive knowledge, in which a key role is played by
veridical presentationalism. In what follows, I will raise some concerns.
Chudnoff’s account of intellectual perceptions is characterized, in broad terms,
by the articulation (i.e., the reﬁnement and defense) of ﬁve theses: the ﬁrst three
emphasize the similarities between intuition and perceptions; the last two highlight
the differences between them (Chudnoff, 2013, p. 3; see also pp. 6–13, and pp. 226–
228).
(IP1)
Intuitions are experiences: in them the mind “sees, feels and handles”.
(IP2)
Intuitions immediately justify beliefs: the justiﬁcation they provide is
independent of “reasoning or information passed on to you by teachers”.
(IP3)
Intuitions are similar to sensory perceptions in that they purport to, and
sometimes do, put us in a position to gain knowledge by making us aware of
their subject matter: again, “this knowledge” is “something that your mind
sees, feel and handles”. […]
(IP4)
The subject matter of intuition is not the subject matter of sensory perception:
it is not to be found among the “objects you can see”.
(IP5)
Thoughintuitionexperiencecaninvolvesensoryexperience,itisadistinctive
experience and can also occur autonomously—it can present a truth without
“trying to clothe it with shapes” (Chudnoff, 2013, p. 3).

Content, Context, and Naturalism in Mathematics
295
In the context of intuitions, talk of the mind seeing, feeling and handling (IP1)
is, of course, metaphorical, given that the mind alone cannot literally perform these
activities. Of course, part of Chudnoff’s case is to provide support for the conclusion
that there is more in common between our sensory and intellectual modalities than
we may have initially thought (at least vis-à-vis our perceptual experiences and our
intellectual intuitions).
The contrast between (IP1) and (IP4) is, thus, very telling. Although intuitions are
experiences in which the mind “sees, feels and handles” (IP1), the subject matter of
intuition is distinct from the subject matter of sensory perception. After all, intuition’s
subject matter is not supposed to be among “the objects you can see” (IP4) since
it involves abstract objects. But then the sense in which the mind “sees, feels and
handles” when having intuitions becomes somewhat opaque.
Later on (2013, Chap. 7), Chudnoff highlights a point that supports one way
in which intuitions are like perceptions: just as to have a sensory perception of an
object one needs to distinguish that object from its background, in order to have an
intuition, one also has to differentiate the relevant object from its background. The
foreground–background contrast is a common trait of both perceptual experiences
and intuitions.
It is unclear, however, that the concepts of foreground and background have the
same meaning when applied to perceptual experiences and when applied to abstract
objects (in the case of intuitions). With regard to perceptual experiences, foreground
and background involve a visual perspective (the point of view of the subject); with
regard to intuitions, what is involved is attention to salient properties, which are in
general formulated independently of any visual perspective. In fact, in many instances
of intuition, there is literally no perspective from which to establish the differentiation
of an object to its foreground or background.
Consider one formulation of the axiom of choice (Jech, 1973): any collection
of nonempty sets has a choice function (that is, if A is a collection of nonempty
sets, a choice function is a map f with domain A such that f (x) ∈x, for every x ∈
A). In this case, what are the background and the foreground? We are considering
a collection of nonempty sets, but this is an arbitrary collection, of indeterminate
cardinality. With no particular speciﬁcation, it is difﬁcult to consider what would be
the relevant background. We then consider a function deﬁned on that collection, but
again that function is extremely general, the only constraint is that given an element
of the domain (a given nonempty set) it generates as a value a member of that set.
The function, however, itself not particularly well speciﬁed, does not specify at all
how that set is determined or deﬁned. In fact, it is precisely this lack of speciﬁcity
that generated so much controversy when Ernest Zermelo formulated the axiom of
choice explicitly for the ﬁrst time in 1904. Is the background of the choice function
f all other functions? But in many cases, there are too many choice functions for the
differentiation from a background even to make sense. The alternatives are too open-
ended. As a result, it is unclear what would be the background (or the foreground)
in these instances.
Given these considerations, should we say that one does not have an intuition
regarding the axiom of choice? If so, the concern is that signiﬁcant amounts of

296
O. Bueno
mathematics—perhaps some of the most important parts of classical mathematics,
given the role that the axiom of choice plays in it—are not amenable to a treatment
based on intuition. This is a signiﬁcant limitation of the approach.
6
Perceptual Knowledge
As noted, a crucial feature of Chudnoff’s account of intuitive knowledge is its
similarity to perceptual knowledge. On his view:
the conditions in virtue of which a perceptual experience representing that p puts you in
a position to know that p are already intimated by the phenomenology of that perceptual
experience. More precisely: I argue that if a perceptual experience representing that p puts
you in a position to know that p, then it does so because it has presentational phenomenology
with respect to the proposition that p and this phenomenology is veridical—i.e. it is true that
p and your perceptual experience really makes you aware of the chunk of reality that makes
it true that p. (Chudnoff, 2013, p. 21; see also pp. 174–180, in particular p. 177, in which
this condition is formulated in terms of truth-makers)
There are a few difﬁculties here. First, the account presupposes knowledge. As
Chudnoff (2013, p. 21) notes: “if a perceptual experience representing that p puts
you in a position to know that p, then it does so because it has [veridical] presenta-
tional phenomenology”. Clearly, a perceptual experience alone is not sufﬁcient for
knowledge, since it may be a hallucination. To qualify as a source of knowledge,
the perceptual experience needs to put the subject in a position to know the relevant
proposition p. But this assumes that the subject already knows. The relevant ground
is, of course, provided by veridical presentational phenomenology: not only is p true,
but also the subject’s perceptual experience makes the subject “aware of the chunk of
reality that makes it true that p” (Chudnoff, 2013, p. 21). As a result, Gettier cases can
be avoided (Chudnoff, 2013, pp. 181–194). But Gettier cases become particularly
relevant only if one is trying to provide a reductive analysis of knowledge; if the
concept of knowledge is already presupposed, the fact that justiﬁed true beliefs do
not amount to knowledge is far less troublesome.
Perhaps the relevant conditions can be stated without presupposing knowledge.
This can be done, by readjusting Chudnoff’s formulations, as follows:
(VPP) We say that a perceptual experience representing that p has veridical presentational
phenomenology with respect to the proposition that p if, and only if, (i) it is true that p,
and (ii) the subject’s perceptual experience really makes the subject aware of the chunk of
reality that makes it true that p (that is, the experience makes the subject sensorily aware of
a truth-maker for the proposition that p).
(K) If a perceptual experience representing that p has veridical presentational
phenomenology with respect to the proposition that p, then the subject knows that p.
Chudnoff, nevertheless, is interested in establishing that veridical presentational
phenomenology grounds knowledge rather than in establishing a sufﬁcient condition
for knowledge. Clearly, veridical presentational phenomenology is not necessary

Content, Context, and Naturalism in Mathematics
297
for knowledge, since presumably one can have knowledge independently of such
phenomenology—by memory, reasoning, or testimony.
Moreover, on Chudnoff’s view, even though A may be a ground for B, in the
sense that B obtains entirely in virtue of A, this does not entail that A is a sufﬁcient
condition for B. This is due to Chudnoff’s discussion, and ultimately his rejection, of
what he calls Necessitation: “if Q obtains wholly in virtue of P, then P is a sufﬁcient
condition for Q to obtain” (2013, p. 182; see pp. 182–194).
It seems that given (VPP) and (K), one does have a sufﬁcient condition for knowl-
edge. After all, if one has a perceptual experience representing that p has veridical
presentational phenomenology, one is in a position to rule out those situations that
would undermine one’s knowledge, such as, the presence of fake barns and Gettier
cases. Clearly, if you see a fake barn and think it is a real one, you do not thereby
have knowledge that there is a real barn in front of you. Seeing a fake barn does
not have veridical presentational phenomenology: only seeing a real barn does. A
similar remark goes through for the Gettier case. If you see a hairy dog and think
it is a wolf, you do not thereby have knowledge that there is a wolf near you (even
if, unbeknownst to you, there is indeed such a wolf nearby). To have a perceptual
experience that has veridical presentational phenomenology as of a wolf requires the
existence of a wolf near you and that you are perceptually aware of the wolf. As a
result, the Gettier case is similarly undermined.
One may complain that such a purely externalist account of knowledge is ulti-
mately inadequate. One needs to have access to whatever grounds one’s knowledge
in order to be in a position to preserve that knowledge against potential challenges.
In response, it may be argued that it depends on whether the awareness in (VPP) and
(K) is conscious or not. If it is unconscious, the objection does stand: the awareness,
being unconscious, provides the subject with no access to the relevant grounds of
the knowledge in question. But if the awareness is conscious, the subject may satisfy
an internalist knowledge requirement. Being aware of the real barn that makes it
true there is a real barn in front of the subject not only provides the subject with
knowledge, but it also gives access to the relevant grounds, namely, the veridical
presentational phenomenology.
But is this correct? How can the subject be aware that the perceptual experi-
ence is of a real barn rather than of a fake one? Fake barns and real barns are
perceptually indistinguishable, after all. It seems that the subject needs to have some
previous knowledge to be able to determine which barns are real and which are fake.
Having the perceptual experience of a real barn, which has veridical presentational
phenomenology, will give the subject knowledge of the existence of a real barn, but
the perceptual experience would be phenomenologically the same if the subject were
seeing a fake barn. So, more is needed for the subject to be able to know that what is
being experienced is a real barn: what needs to be known (or what one needs to be
aware of) is that the perceptual experience is of a real barn. But since this is precisely
what we are trying to establish, this would make the account otiose. No wonder
Chudnoff talks only of grounds rather than sufﬁcient conditions for knowledge.

298
O. Bueno
7
Intuitive Knowledge
The next step is to develop an account of awareness that is meant to support the
conclusion that intuitions can be a source of knowledge. The central problem to be
addressed is how we can be aware of abstract objects. More precisely: “how can we
really stand in awareness relations to the portions of reality that make propositions
about abstract matters such as mathematics true?” (Chudnoff, 2013, p. 21).
On Chudnoff’s view, awareness needs to satisfy two constraints (Chudnoff, 2013,
p. 22; and Chap. 7):
(i)
First, there is a dependence constraint, according to which if an experience
makes its subject aware of an object, then the experience depends on that
object. Chudnoff argues that intuition experiences depend non-causally on
abstract objects.
(ii)
Second,thereisadifferentiationconstraint,accordingtowhichifanexperience
makes its subject aware of an object, then the experience’s phenomenology
differentiates the object from its background. Chudnoff argues that intu-
ition experiences provide a background-foreground structure in the subject’s
phenomenal state in which certain abstract objects (and their properties) are
foregrounded against the background of distinct abstract objects (and their
properties).
I registered above, in the context of the discussion of the axiom of choice, the
concern that for signiﬁcant parts of mathematics it is unclear how to work out the
differentiation of background and foreground. There is an additional concern here.
Let us grant that the veridical presentational phenomenology of a certain intuition
allows one to differentiate an abstract object from its background. Consider now a
naïve comprehension principle such as the one according to which every property
determines a set (namely, the set of objects that have that property). Suppose that
one is able to differentiate the relevant objects (properties and corresponding sets)
from their background. In this case, it seems that, if one were guided by the presen-
tational phenomenology, one would be led to believe in an inconsistency, given the
inconsistency of such naïve comprehension principle.
It may be argued that, in this case, the presentational phenomenology clearly is
not veridical. If it were veridical, however, one would believe in the existence of a
true contradiction (Priest, 2006). Without begging the question against the dialetheist,
whoinsiststhattherearetruecontradictions,itisunclearhowwecandeterminewhich
of these options is the case—namely, whether the presentational phenomenology
of the intuition of a naïve comprehension principle is veridical or not. Whichever
option turns out to be the case, problems emerge, though. If the account allows for the
intuition of inconsistent objects, the view would be unreliable if these objects turn out
not to be inconsistent after all despite seeming to be so. Alternatively, if the intuition
of the naïve comprehension principle has a veridical presentational phenomenology,
the resulting account, although reliable, would then lead one to dialetheism.

Content, Context, and Naturalism in Mathematics
299
Despite the important connections to perceptual experiences that Chudnoff’s
account provides, there are concerns regarding the account’s ability to provide knowl-
edge both in the case of perceptual experiences and when intuitions of mathematical
objects are at stake. More is needed, in the end, to articulate the content of mathemat-
ical statements based on intuition. Until this point is reached, mathematical content
is better formulated in terms of logical connections among mathematical principles
as suggested above.
8
Context: Applying Mathematics, Models
and Representations
Once the speciﬁcation of the content of mathematical statements is achieved, it is
crucial to understand the role played by such content in the context of the applications
of mathematics, especially in the representation of empirical phenomena (for further
examination of this issue, see Bueno and French, 2018). In what follows, I consider
critically the important approach to this issue offered by Christopher Pincock (2012),
contrasting it with the one I support.
I focus on two issues. Part of Pincock’s case involves the development of an
accuracy-based account of mathematical scientiﬁc representation that he contrasts
with an inference-based account (which I favor). He also provides a searching critique
of some forms of ﬁctionalism in the philosophy of mathematics (which I also favor).
I argue that, despite Pincock’s objections, it is still possible to remain an inference-
based ﬁctionalist, and that there are some advantages to do so. In light of the consid-
erations made so far, I start with the issue of the content of a mathematical scientiﬁc
representation, and will then move to ﬁctionalism.
Pincock distinguishes, as he should, theories, models and representations. This is
done as follows:
A theory for some domain is a collection of claims. It aims to describe the basic constituents
of the domain and how they interact. A model is any entity that is used to represent a
target system. Typically we use our knowledge of the model to draw conclusions about the
target system. Models may be concrete entities or abstract mathematical structures. Finally,
a representation is a model with a content. Contents provide conditions under which the
representation is accurate. (Pincock, 2012, pp. 25–26)
My concern is that a model is characterized in terms of representation, and a repre-
sentation, in turn, is characterized in terms of models. As things stand, the formu-
lations are clearly circular. It is unclear why models are characterized in terms of
their use rather than formulated directly, as is usually done, in terms of what satisﬁes
the conditions speciﬁed by a theory. This would allow for the possibility of models
being either concrete entities or abstract mathematical structures, as Pincock rightly
intends, but without presupposing a tight circle between models and representations.
Without proper clariﬁcation of this issue, the crucial notion of content, as condi-
tions for the accuracy of a representation (Pincock, 2012, p. 26), becomes unclear.

300
O. Bueno
Pincock tells us that in order to determine the content of a mathematical scientiﬁc
representation, we need to answer three questions:
(1) What mathematical entities and relations are in question? (2) What concrete entities and
relations are in question? (3) What structural relation must obtain between the two systems
for the representation to be correct? (Pincock, 2012, p. 27)
In other words, to specify the content of a mathematical scientiﬁc representation,
we need ﬁrst to determine the relevant mathematical entities and relations as well
as the relevant concrete entities and relations. We then specify the appropriate struc-
tural relation between the mathematical system and the physical system, so that the
resulting representation is correct. As Pincock rightly acknowledges (2012, p. 27),
the crucial work is done by the determination of the appropriate structural relation,
such as: isomorphism, homomorphism, etc. It is in terms of this structural relation
that the accuracy of a representation is ultimately determined. Note that the notion
of content presupposes that a representation is already in place. For condition (3)
of the content of a mathematical scientiﬁc representation asks us to determine what
“structural relation must obtain between the two systems for the representation to be
correct” (Pincock, 2012, p. 27). However, if a representation is a model with a content,
and the content presupposes a representation, it is unclear how a representation can
ever be determined. We have, once again, a circle. Moreover, it is also unclear how to
specify the accuracy of a representation given that in order to have a representation
(a model with a content) we need to have already determined its content, and the
content, in turn, presupposes the accuracy of the representation (which is speciﬁed
by the appropriate structural relation).
What is needed here is the formulation of the content of a scientiﬁc representation
that is characterized independently of its accuracy. After all, presumably we should
ﬁrst have access to the content of the representation (what it is about and how it is
implemented) in order then to determine how accurate (or not) it turns out to be.
The point is not just a quibble, since it affects one of the central features of
Pincock’s approach: in order to make sense of the way in which mathematics
contributes to scientiﬁc success (such as by producing accurate representations of
the physical world), it is important to identify different contributions, which are, in
turn, individuated via the contents of mathematical scientiﬁc representations (see
Pincock, 2012, p. 21). So, a proper speciﬁcation of such contents is crucial. But it
is unclear how to specify the contents given the way in which the relevant concepts
have been introduced.
There are approaches, however, to mathematical scientiﬁc representations in
which accuracy conditions are not placed on the central stage. In fact, Pincock notes
that the main competitor to the accuracy-based approach he favors emphasizes the
central role played by inferential relations in mathematical scientiﬁc representation.
This is the case of the inferential account developed in Bueno and Colyvan (2011)
and Bueno and French (2018). According to Pincock:
Inferential approaches must explain the scientiﬁc practice of evaluating representations in
terms of their accuracy. Although there does not seem to be any barrier to doing this, I have
found it more convenient to start with the accuracy conditions. On my approach, inferential

Content, Context, and Naturalism in Mathematics
301
claims about a given representation follow immediately from its accuracy conditions: a valid
inference is accuracy-preserving. (Pincock, 2012, p. 28)
However, the accuracy-based approach has a signiﬁcant cost in this context. As
opposed to what Pincock maintains, it is unclear that this approach can regain infer-
ential claims from its accuracy conditions. Consider, for instance, a single application
of modus ponens involving a vague predicate, such as ‘rich’:
(P1)
To have 1 dollar in one’s bank account does not make one rich.
(P2)
If to have 1 dollar in one’s bank account does not make one rich, then to have
2 dollars in one’s bank account does not either.
Therefore, to have 2 dollars in one’s bank account does not make one rich.
Clearly, this inference preserves accuracy. But after a sufﬁciently large number of
applications of it (e.g., one million), the accuracy is entirely lost, since having one
million and one dollars in one’s bank account presumably does make one rich. This
is, in a sense, one of the lessons of the Sorites paradox. Valid inferences need not be
accuracy-preserving. It is, thus, better to start from inferential relations, and specify
accuracy conditions via them, rather than the other way around.
There is an additional difﬁculty one faces to specify the content of a mathematical
scientiﬁc representation in terms of mathematical structures, which are typically
thought of as being set-theoretic in nature. Since mathematical structures are (taken
to be) abstract—they are causally inert and are not located in space–time—they
raise the issue of how to explain the connection between them and concrete physical
structures in the world. As opposed to abstract structures, concrete structures are
causally active and spatiotemporally located. This is a major problem for all realist
views about mathematics. After all, it is indeed deeply puzzling how structures of
fundamentally different kinds can be related in such a way that one is used to represent
the other. Acknowledging the gap, Bas van Fraassen posed the problem as follows:
How can an abstract entity, such as a mathematical structure, represent something that is not
abstract, something in nature? (van Fraassen, 2008, p. 240)
After quoting this passage, Pincock notes that he intends to take a less ambitious
route, by invoking the notion of instantiation:
Suppose we have a concrete system along with a speciﬁcation of the relevant physical
properties. This speciﬁcation ﬁxes an associated structure. […] [W]e can say that the system
instantiates that structure, relative to that speciﬁcation, and allow that structural relations are
preserved by this instantiation relation […]. This allows us to say that a structural relation
obtains between a concrete system and abstract structure. (Pincock, 2012, p. 29)
The problem with this suggestion is that it is unclear how a concrete system along
with the relevant physical properties can specify an associated mathematical struc-
ture. After all, presumably the physical system is ﬁnite, and since the mathematical
structures that are typically used in scientiﬁc practice are inﬁnite (containing at least
the natural, the real or the complex numbers), it is unclear how an associated (inﬁ-
nite) mathematical structure can be ﬁxed by a (ﬁnite) concrete system. Given any
such concrete system, there is a plurality of different mathematical structures that

302
O. Bueno
may overlap with the ﬁnite segment but differ signiﬁcantly after that. Which of these
structures (if any) is instantiated in this case? In fact, the point applies even if the
mathematical structures are ﬁnite, but the cardinality of their domains is larger than
that of the concrete system. In that case, there are several mathematical structures
that will do the same trick.
In the end, it is unclear how the notion of instantiation helps to solve the problem
raised by van Fraassen. How can the natural number structure be instantiated by a
concrete system if there is no largest natural number and (presumably) there are only
ﬁnitely many physical objects? The natural number structure is, strictly speaking,
inconsistent with the ﬁniteness of the concrete system. It may be argued that it is only
a fragment (a segment) of the natural number structure that is used in this case. But
which fragment is that? To specify the fragment in question is to assume that there
is already a relation between the relevant mathematical structure and the concrete
system. But this is precisely what the notion of instantiation was supposed to do in
the ﬁrst place. In the end, it is not apparent how exactly instantiation helps to solve
the problem at hand. It is advisable then not to rely on it.
9
Fictionalism Defended: Naturalism
Pincock also raises signiﬁcant objections to some forms of ﬁctionalism in the philos-
ophy of mathematics. According to these views, the content of mathematical theories
need not correspond to an ontology of independently existing mathematical objects
and structures. Some of these views (such as those discussed in Balaguer, 1998, and
Yablo, 2001) aim to draw a distinction between the ﬁctional (platonistic) content and
the representational (nominalistic) content, and it is only the latter that carries any
ontological weight. The idea is that the representational (nominalistic) content is that
part of the ﬁctional (platonist) content that is only concerned with physical, concrete
objects.
Pincock’s main objection is that these ﬁctionalist views are unable to specify
the representational (nominalistic) content so that they can accommodate the role it
is supposed to play in scientiﬁc representation (Pincock (2012), pp. 150–156; see,
in particular, pp. 154–156). For what exactly ﬁxes the representational content? It
may be argued that in order to determine which features of the ﬁctional content
are exported to characterize the representational content, we need to focus on the
beliefs of the relevant speakers. But beliefs about what is physical or concrete are
unlikely to be clear and settled enough to be used to ﬁx the representational content.
Alternatively, it may be argued that the actual facts in the world could be used to ﬁx
the content. But without access to what these facts are, the ﬁctionalist would end up
in the awkward position of having to endorse the representational content without
having evidence for the resulting commitments. In either case, the ﬁctionalist is in
trouble.
The situation, however, need not be as bleak as Pincock suggests. Although I
cannot speak for Mark Balaguer or Stephen Yablo, it seems to me that the form of

Content, Context, and Naturalism in Mathematics
303
ﬁctionalism I favor (Bueno, 2009) is not open to this objection. Initially, the ﬁctional
content, in light of the discussion of the ﬁrst portion of this paper, is provided by the
speciﬁcation of suitable mathematical (comprehension) principles that characterize
the mathematical domain under consideration. Studies are then developed of what
follows from such principles. In many cases, it will be unclear whether a certain result
obtains (that is, whether it can be proved from the relevant comprehension princi-
ples) or whether its negation obtains. The concepts originally introduced may not be
reﬁned enough to settle certain questions about the domain. In response, new, more
reﬁned concepts are introduced, with correspondingly more reﬁned comprehension
principles. The domain is reconﬁgured, and the process of trying to ﬁnd proofs or
counterexamples continues. Overtime this process leads to the introduction of signif-
icantly different concepts and comprehension principles within mathematics. Rather
than a simple accumulation of mathematical facts, we experience a richer, more
interesting variety of mathematical concepts, theories, and theorems. (Imre Lakatos
described this process in vivid detail in Lakatos (1976) and Lakatos (1978).) We do
have a form of ﬁctionalism, since no claim is ever made about the independent exis-
tence of the mathematical objects that are speciﬁed via the various comprehension
principles: ontologically neutral quantiﬁers are used throughout.
So far, except perhaps for issues about the cardinality of the domain, mathe-
matical principles, strictly speaking, do not state anything at all about the phys-
ical world. After all, functions, numbers, and sets, which are typically taken to be
abstract, are entirely independent of concrete spatiotemporal objects. Even if, in
some cases, problems that prompted the development of a mathematical theory may
have emerged from the need to accommodate particular issues in a physical domain,
the developments of pure mathematics are not constrained by these needs. In such
cases, the motivation may come from a physical domain, but the development of the
resulting mathematical theories is autonomous. Physical interpretations and mathe-
matical simulations can be used as aids to conceptualize certain aspects of a mathe-
matical domain, but they should not be confused with what that domain ultimately
is. In fact, if anything it is the other way around: the mathematical domain needs to
be characterized ﬁrst so that one can then have a clear picture of how mathematical
theories, which may be relevant to that domain, can be applied.
In other words, in order for the mathematics to have any relevance to the world,
it needs to be interpreted in a physically adequate way (see Bueno and Colyvan
(2011), and Bueno and French (2012) and (2018)). But this process of interpretation
is radically underdetermined by the mathematics, given that the same mathematical
theory is compatible with very different interpretations. This is the case, for instance,
with Paul Dirac and the famous equation that now bears his name (see Bueno (2005),
and the references therein). When Dirac initially identiﬁed the equation he noted that
it had negative energy solutions. As is common in classical mechanics, he simply
ignored these solutions, indicating that they have no physical interpretation. A few
years later, as I noted above, Dirac devised an interpretation in terms of “holes” in
space–time. However, it was pointed out to him, by Werner Heisenberg, Hermann
Weyl and others, that this interpretation was empirically inadequate, given that it
entailed that electrons and protons have the same mass. As a result, Dirac abandoned

304
O. Bueno
it. A couple of years later, he devised yet another interpretation, according to which
there was a new particle that had the same mass as the electron but the opposite
charge. And for that interpretation Carl Anderson was able to collect evidence that,
in retrospect, could be reconstructed as supporting such a particle, which is now
called ‘positron’.
As this case indicates, the same piece of mathematics, a certain differential equa-
tion, is compatible with three entirely different interpretations: one in which nothing
is said about the equation’s negative energy solutions; one which is empirically inad-
equate, and one for which there seems to be some empirical evidence. The process
of forging interpretations to certain pieces of mathematics is no easy task. But it
provides the central trait of how mathematics is ultimately applied (for further details,
see Bueno and Colyvan (2011) and Bueno and French (2012) and (2018)).
The resulting proposal emphasizes the role of the interpretation of mathematics
in the application process. In fact, this is one of the key components of the inferential
conception (see Bueno and Colyvan (2011) and Bueno and French (2018)). As a
result, the inferential proposal is not open to the challenge raised by Pincock to
other forms of ﬁctionalism. For to devise an interpretation is not a matter of tracking
the beliefs of the relevant mathematicians and physicists: some of Dirac’s beliefs
involving “holes” in the space–time turned out to be empirically false. The relevant
interpretations are also not simply ﬁxed by the world: one needs to have evidence for
their adequacy. In Dirac’s case, the evidence emerged, as it should, from experimental
physics. In the end, ﬁnding adequate interpretations of mathematics is what matters.
This form of ﬁctionalism is also able to accommodate the openness of the concep-
tual developments in mathematics, since it is not tied to an understanding of concepts
as monolithic. Thus, it is able to respond to the charge that Pincock made against
the ﬁctionalist approaches developed by Azzouni (2004) and Rayo (2009). After
granting that his objection against Balaguer’s and Yablo’s ﬁctionalisms do not apply
to Azzouni’s and Rayo’s views (Pincock, 2012, pp. 261–263), Pincock argues that
both Azzouni’s nominalism and Rayo’s trivialism fail, since “they link the under-
standing and the truth of mathematical claims too closely” (2012, p. 278). In partic-
ular, according to Pincock, they rely on an understanding of concepts that is unable
to explain how shifts in mathematical concepts can take place. Whether this objec-
tion applies to their views or not is not for me to say, but it should be clear that
it does not undermine the form of ﬁctionalism I favor, since, as suggested above,
conceptual change is something this ﬁctionalism deﬁnitely makes room for (see also
Bueno, 2000, and 2007). As it should be clear by now, given that the proposal is
sensitive to details of mathematical and scientiﬁc practice, it involves a minimal
form of naturalism (for additional constraints on naturalism, formulated as “second
philosophy”, see Maddy (2007); the contrast between the view I favor and Maddy’s
will be examined in another occasion).

Content, Context, and Naturalism in Mathematics
305
10
Conclusion: Content and Context in Mathematical
Practice
For the reasons indicated, the form of mathematical ﬁctionalism that uses the infer-
ential conception of the application of mathematics is able to resist the objections that
Pincock has raised. In fact, given the difﬁculties faced by Pincock’s own accuracy-
based account, indicated earlier, this ﬁctionalism provides an interesting alternative
to Pincock’s own proposal. In the end, despite Pincock’s challenge, there is still room
for an inferential form of ﬁctionalism.
Given the previous critical discussion of the role of intuition in characterizing
mathematical content, in the context of Chudnoff’s (2013) proposal, more needs to
be done by those who intent to defend such role, and a characterization of content
via ontological neutral quantiﬁers is to be preferred. Similarly, there is something to
be said for a form of if-thenism via neutral quantiﬁers, without relying on Yablo’s
(2017) subtraction approach. The various contexts in which mathematical theories
are then applied need to be carefully speciﬁed, since they involve different empir-
ical interpretations of mathematical formalisms, as the Dirac case illustrates. The
result is a deﬂationary, empiricist, and ﬁctionalist view that, given its sensitivity to
mathematical practice, is also broadly naturalist.
Acknowledgements My thanks go to Eli Chudnoff, Mark Colyvan, Steven French, Chris Pincock,
and Steve Yablo for helpful discussions on the issues examined in this paper. Thanks are also due
to Shyam Wuppuluri for all the support during the writing of this work.
References
Azzouni, J. (2004). Deﬂating existential consequence. Oxford University Press.
Balaguer, M. (1998). Platonism and anti-platonism in mathematics. Oxford University Press.
Bridges, D. (1999). Constructive mathematics: A foundation for computable analysis. Theoretical
Computer Science, 219, 95–109.
Bueno, O. (2000). Empiricism, mathematical change and scientiﬁc change. Studies in History and
Philosophy of Science, 31, 269–296.
Bueno, O. (2005). Dirac and the dispensability of mathematics. Studies in History and Philosophy
of Modern Physics, 36, 465–490.
Bueno, O. (2007). Incommensurability in mathematics. In B. Van Kerkhove & J. P. Van Bendegem
(Eds.), Perspectives on mathematical practices (pp. 83–105). Springer.
Bueno, O. (2009). Mathematical ﬁctionalism. In O. Bueno & Ø. Linnebo (Eds.), New waves in
philosophy of mathematics (pp. 59–79). Palgrave MacMillan.
Bueno, O. (2013). Putnam and the indispensability of mathematics. Principia, 17, 217–234.
Bueno, O. (2018). Putnam’s indispensability argument revisited, reassessed, revived. Theoria, 33,
201–218.
Bueno, O. (2020). Contingent abstract objects. In J. L. Falguera & C. Martínez-Vidal (Eds.), Abstract
objects (pp. 91–109). Springer.

306
O. Bueno
Bueno, O. (2021). Revising Logics. In J.-Y. Béziau, J.-P. Desclés, A. Mokteﬁ, & A. Pascu (Eds.),
Logic in question: Talks from the annual Sorbonne logic workshop (2011–2019). Birkhäuser
(forthcoming).
Bueno, O., & Colyvan, M. (2011). An inferential conception of the application of mathematics.
Noûs, 45, 345–374.
Bueno, O., & French, S. (2012). Can mathematics explain physical phenomena? British Journal
for the Philosophy of Science, 63, 85–113.
Bueno, O., & French, S. (2018). Applying mathematics: Immersion, inference, interpretation.
Oxford University Press.
Chudnoff, E. (2013). Intuition. Oxford University Press.
Field, H. (1980). Science without numbers. Princeton University Press.
Hale, B. (2013). Necessary beings: An essay on ontology, modality, and the relations between them.
Oxford University Press.
Hellman, G. (1989). Mathematics without numbers: Towards a modal-structural interpretation.
Clarendon Press.
Jech, T. (1973). The axiom of choice. North Holland.
Lakatos, I. (1976). Proofs and refutations: The logic of mathematical discovery. (Edited by J. Worrall
and E. Zahar.). Cambridge University Press.
Lakatos, I. (1978). Mathematics, science and epistemology. Philosophical Papers, volume 2. (Edited
by J. Worrall and G. Currie.). Cambridge University Press.
Maddy, P. (2007). Second philosophy: A naturalistic method. Oxford University Press.
Pincock, C. (2012). Mathematics and scientiﬁc representation. Oxford University Press.
Priest, G. (2006). In contradiction (2nd ed.). Clarendon Press.
Putnam, H. (1979). Mathematics, matter and method (2nd ed.). Cambridge University Press.
Rayo, A. (2009). Toward a Trivialist account of mathematics. In O. Bueno & Ø. Linnebo (Eds.),
New waves in philosophy of mathematics (pp. 239–260). Palgrave MacMillan.
Rudin, W. (1976). Principles of mathematical analysis (3rd ed.). McGraw-Hill.
van Fraassen, B. C. (2008). Scientiﬁc representation: Paradoxes of perspective. Clarendon Press.
Yablo, S. (2001). Go ﬁgure: A path through ﬁctionalism. Midwest Studies in Philosophy, 25, 72–102.
Yablo, S. (2017). If-thenism. Australasian Philosophical Review, 1, 115–132.

Shared Mathematical Content
in the Context of Complex Systems
Hildegard Meyer-Ortmanns
1
Introduction
Usually methodological reductionism is understood as a reduction to more funda-
mental degrees of freedom on a more microscopic level. Zooming into matter from
macroscopic bodies to molecules to atoms to electrons and nuclei, to protons and
neutrons inside the nuclei, one ﬁnally ends up at quark and gluon degrees of freedom
as constituents of protons and neutrons. Pushed to the extreme, this kind of method-
ological reductionism would be an attempt to describe macroscopic dynamics in
terms of electrons, quarks and gluons, or explaining biophysics in terms of particle
physics. From a practical point of view this appears immediately to be absurd. From
a principal perspective the question should be allowed how far one can reconstruct
emergent phenomena on macroscopic levels from the knowledge of the interaction
rules on more microscopic levels or even the fundamental one if “fundamental” refers
to the basic elementary constituents of matter.
Less ambitious but very worthwhile may be attempts to explain material properties
in terms of underlying constituents on a lower level. Material science, technical and
medical applications proﬁt enormously from this kind of reductionism, as materials
or equipments can be designed, based on a deeper understanding of what the essential
control parameters are on underlying levels. Curing diseases on the genetic level in
cases where they can be traced back to failures on this level erases the macroscopic
symptomsfromtheroot.Thisiswhatisusuallyunderstoodasreductionisminphysics
and its applications. Nowadays this approach is often criticised, as deﬁnitely not all
emergent features on the macroscopic level can be captured by a reduction to the
more microscopic level.
However,thisisnotthetypeofreductionismthatisthetopicofthisarticle.Werefer
to a reduction to the mathematical content rather than to the material constituents.
H. Meyer-Ortmanns (B)
Physics and Earth Sciences, Jacobs University Bremen,
P.O.Box 750561, 28725 Bremen, Germany
e-mail: h.ortmanns@jacobs-university.de
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
S. Wuppuluri and I. Stewart (eds.), From Electrons to Elephants and Elections,
The Frontiers Collection, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-92192-7_18
307

308
H. Meyer-Ortmanns
Such a reduction strives for the relevant degrees of freedom.1 What deserves to be
termed relevant depends on the problem of interest. What is relevant for one aspect
may be irrelevant for another.
Why should one identify the mathematical content? Occasionally, measurements
are made which lead to almost identical results in quite different substances, materials
or dynamical systems. In these cases, the similarity goes far beyond a superﬁcial
analogy, but refers to quantitative agreement, not only in some individual numbers,
but in functional dependencies, such as the strength of the response with respect to
perturbations, the approach of transitions into other (aggregate) states of matter, or
the distribution of ﬂuctuations on the surface of a growing blob. The experimental
realizations are so different that one may think of a mere coincidence at ﬁrst. On
the other hand, such coincidences are so unlikely and contradict so much to the fact
that the agreement is reproducible in repeated experiments that one gets curious and
wants to disclose the causation behind these observations. What are the mechanisms
that are responsible for strong similarities between seemingly unlinked problems?
To ﬁnd the answer may be quite challenging and often takes not only years, but even
decades of extensive research, both on the experimental and theoretical side.
In the examples which we have selected for this contribution, we completely
skip any steps of derivation. Thus we cut really long stories short and only confront
the compact mathematical content with some of the diverse contexts, for which the
content explains the shared observations in terms of a common mechanism behind
them.
We will distinguish between four cases of increasing mathematical complexity
to illustrate how the same mathematical content is realized in different contexts
from physics and beyond. The ﬁrst case is a differential equation that describes
pattern formation in animal coats and in density ﬂuctuations of air caused by a
vibrating membrane (Sect. 2). The second case is a set of numbers, termed critical
exponents, to classify the asymptotic behavior when singularities are approached in
the vicinity of critical points. These exponents serve to classify singular behavior
near phase transitions. Models sharing the critical exponents constitute universality
classes (Sect. 3), a concept of much interest in statistical physics. In our third exam-
ple, the common mathematical structure is a set of stochastic (chemical) reactions,
representing predator-prey dynamics that is used to predict the lifetime statistics and
phenomenology in the transition from laminar to turbulent ﬂow. What sounds like
a metaphoric wording at a ﬁrst view turns out to be the appropriate mathematical
reduction that is able to reproduce a certain set of measurements of transitional tur-
bulent ﬂow in a quantitative way (Sect. 4). Finally we focus on the Tracy-Widom
probability distribution and an associated third-order phase transition which pop
up in widely different contexts. The identiﬁcation of the underlying mathematical
1 A standard example from classical mechanics is a rigid body with idealized ﬁxed distances between
its mass points, it has six degrees of freedom to move in three-dimensional space, since six param-
eters are needed to describe its translational and rotational motion, although the body may consist
of more than 1023 molecules.

Shared Mathematical Content in the Context of Complex Systems
309
content explains their universal occurrence, ranging from abstract problems in math-
ematics to ﬂuctuations in growth processes of bacteria to (an approximation of) a
phase transition in cosmology, to name just a few (Sect. 5). We conclude in Sect. 6.
2
Differential Equations for Pattern Formation
Pattern formation in animal coats is about how the zebra gets its stripes and the
leopard its spots. Murray (1981a, 1981b) proposed that a single mechanism may be
responsible for generating the variety of patterns in animal coats. His proposal was
based on a hypothesis of Searle (1968) that a Turing mechanism of pattern formation
may be behind the chemical concentrations. One starting point is a set of equations
for two chemical species A(r, t), B(r, t) of the form
∂A
∂t = F(A, B) + DA∇2 A
∂B
∂t = G(A, B) + DB∇2B ,
(1)
where F and G determine the nonlinear kinetics, DA ̸= DB are two diffusion con-
stants, r, t denote the coordinates in space and time. According to A. Turing, spatially
inhomogeneous patterns can evolve by diffusion driven instability if DA ̸= DB. If
the full reaction diffusion system is linearised about the (homogeneous) steady state,
it leads (after some intermediate steps, going to dimensionless quantities and speci-
fying the reaction kinetics) to an equation for the time dependence of the deviation
w from a homogeneous state of species concentrations. It is given as
∂w
∂t = γ J w + D∇2w
(2)
with Jacobian matrix J, γ a constant parameter, D the diffusion matrix. Its solution
w(r, t) can be expanded in terms of eigenfunctions Wk(r) of the spatial eigenvalue
problem with time-independent solutions, deﬁned by
∇2W + k2W = 0
(3)
with (n∇)W = 0 for r on the boundary ∂C of the given diffusion domain C with
normal vector n, k being the eigenvalue of the spatial problem, so the full solution
is w(r, t) = 
k ckeλt Wk(r), with λ the eigenvalue that determines the temporal
growth. Therefore, which spatial patterns evolve is determined by Eq. 3, by the spatial
domain B and the boundary conditions. The spatial domain can have any shape, in
particular the shape of a square, a rectangular, a cylinder or that of an animal coat.
Varying this form leads to a variation of the patterns which are compatible with

310
H. Meyer-Ortmanns
solutions of this eigenvalue equation. Thus Wk(r) denotes the spatial eigenmode of
wavelength 1/k contributing to the deviations from the homogeneous solution.
In view of the stripes of zebras or the spots of leopards one may be tempted
to interpret the patterns Wk(r) as pigment densities in the animal coats. However,
the pattern generation mechanism takes place during morphogenesis of the embryo.
What actually matters should be the conditions on the embryo’s surface at the time
of patterns activation. Therefore, the mechanism captured in Eq. 3 refers to the mor-
phogen prepatterns for the animal coat markings, and according to Murray (1981b), it
seems far from trivial to understand how the subsequent cell differentiation produces
melanin in a way as to reﬂect the spatial prepatterns of morphogen concentrations, so
that the zebra, for example, after full development, comes to its stripes. For a careful
discussion about these topics we refer to Murray (1993).
So far we referred to Eq. 3 as the mathematical content of pattern formation, as
its solutions (patterns of concentrations in space) vary with the boundary conditions
on the reaction-diffusion domain C. Obviously there is no direct way of demonstrat-
ing this mechanism being at work during morphogenesis in mammalian embryos.
Instead, it is much easier to visualize the impact of the geometric shape on the forma-
tion of patterns via a vibrating membrane, a drum, or a thin plate. The reason is that
the initial2 pattern formation by reaction diffusion mechanisms pose the same kind
of eigenvalue problem as posed by the vibration of membranes, surfaces of drums,
or thin plates. The difference is only in the interpretation of the variables W(r),
representing now the time-independent amplitudes of the vibration as a function of
the spatial coordinates r.
To illustrate how the form and the scale of the vibrating plate determine the
density ﬂuctuations of the air at the surface of the plate, the ﬂuctuations have been
visualized in time-average holographic interferograms.3 In this case, increasing the
frequency of the sound waves at constant plate size is equivalent to increasing the
plate size at constant frequency. This way the inﬂuence of the plate size can be easily
controlled. When the plate size is too small, it does not sustain vibrations, they decay
quickly. (Note that animals of small size usually have uniform coats.) When the plate
size is effectively increased by increasing the frequency, more complex patterns of
vibrations are sustained, ranging from simple and few domains to many structured
spots resembling the spots of a leopard, see Xu et al. (1083) for nice visualizations.
In summary, the shared content was reduced to the eigenvalue equation Eq. 3
together with its initial and boundary conditions. Its very derivation depends already
on the context. In case of pattern formation of animal coats the hypothesis was
an underlying reaction-diffusion mechanism `a la Turing, where the corresponding
original equations have been reduced to Eq. 3 within a linear stability analysis.
Eq. 3 as an equation for a vibrating membrane is derived in classical mechanics, in
2 “initial” means as long as departures from uniformity are small such that the linear stability
analysis applies.
3 Time-average holographic interferometry involves recording a hologram with an exposure long
compared to the period of vibration. The reconstructed image is then covered with fringes that can
be used to map the vibration amplitude (Encyclopedia of Materials, 2001).

Shared Mathematical Content in the Context of Complex Systems
311
particular suited to illustrate the important role of boundary conditions on the solution
of differential equations. Depending on the context, the meaning of the variables, here
W(r), represent variations in pigment densities (after development of the animal),
or density ﬂuctuations of the air at the surface of the vibrating membrane.
The type of insight gained from the reduction to the mathematical content in form
of an eigenvalue equation is an explanation of what controls the type of patterns in
the absence of any external interference. After all, also the patterns in the wings of
a butterﬂy have the same origin, though two “species” (kind of colors) would not be
sufﬁcient to distinguish the variety of colors, but no external painting is needed for an
explanation. These patterns are self-organized and depend on the availability of ﬁnite
domains on coats, wings, plates, and membranes. If complex pattern formation is
explained in terms of a set of differential equations, referring to structural complexity,
one may try to extrapolate and wonder which equations explain the emergence of
functional complexity as observed in living systems. How far can the concept of
self-organization be pushed? These are deﬁnitely open questions to date.
3
Critical Exponents
Phasetransitionsareeventssuchaswaterevaporatingintosteam,metalstransforming
intosuperconductors,laminarintoturbulentﬂow,solidsintoliquids.Ingeneral,phase
transitions are visible as a sharp change in the macroscopic properties of a system,
when a certain driving parameter like the temperature T is smoothly changed. Similar
behavior to the change of a liquid as a function of the temperature is observed in
magnetic phase transitions, for example in a ferromagnet, in which the magnetization
at zero external ﬁeld spontaneously takes a non-vanishing value ±M(T ) below some
critical temperature Tc and vanishes above Tc.
Phase transitions are by far not restricted to condensed matter physics. They
are discussed in particle physics if the temperature or the density of matter are
increased to extreme values, such that even protons and neutrons inside the nuclei
of the atoms melt into their constituents, which are the so-called quarks and gluons.
And also outside physics, phase transitions have been identiﬁed, for example in the
context of computer science if algorithms diverge as a function of the system size:
logarithmically, power-like at the critical point, or exponentially fast, depending on
the parameter choice.
What makes phase transitions in general interesting is the drastic change in the
macroscopic properties that usually comes as a surprise from the naive perspective
of smooth and linear extrapolations.
In mathematical terms and in the language of thermodynamics, a phase transition
occurs when a thermodynamic potential like the free energy is non-analytic, so that
one of its derivatives has a kink or diverges. Usually ﬁrst and second order transitions
are considered, and more recently—as we shall see in Sect. 5—also third-order

312
H. Meyer-Ortmanns
transitions. The order of the transition stands for the derivative of the thermodynamic
potential which has a kink or divergence.
Of particular interest are critical points at which second-order phase transitions
occur. They are characterized by diverging response functions such as the speciﬁc
heat or the susceptibility. As the name suggests, the susceptibility describes how
susceptible a system is to perturbations. The divergencies that occur at the critical
point and strictly speaking only in the thermodynamic limit are further described
by critical exponents which characterize the nature of the singularities in various
measurements.
In this contribution, we do not present a full list of them, but just a few prototypical
ones for systems in equilibrium. If we denote the critical parameter Tc (representing
here a critical temperature) and introduce as normalized distance from Tc the quantity
t = T −Tc
Tc
,
(4)
the critical exponents α, β, γ, ν are deﬁned as follows. The exponent α characterizes
the divergence of the heat capacity C (C ∼|t|−α), the exponent β the divergence of
the order parameter M, that is the magnetization in case of a magnetic system or the
liquid-gas density difference in a ﬂuid (M ∼|t|β), the exponent γ the divergence of
the susceptibility χ at zero magnetic ﬁeld, or the isothermal compressibility in case
of a ﬂuid (χ ∼|t|−γ ), and the exponent ν the divergence of the correlation length ξ
(ξ ∼|t|−ν). The assumed forms are based on the assumption that (thermodynamic)
quantities can be decomposed into a regular part (which remains ﬁnite) and a singular
part that may be divergent or has diverging derivatives.
The reason why these critical exponents are of more interest than the critical tem-
peratures (or critical driving parameters) is that they are universal. From experiments
it is known that widely different systems with critical temperatures differing by orders
of magnitude and possibly completely different material composition approximately
share the critical exponents, which depend only on a few fundamental parameters
such as the dimension of space and the symmetry of the order parameter.
To be more concrete, striking ﬁrst evidence came from a plot of coexistence curves
between gas and liquid phases of eight rather different ﬂuids when T/Tc was plotted
over ρ/ρc with ρ the density of the substance in the liquid (ρL) and gas (ρG) phase,
respectively. As early as 1945, Guggenheim (1945) presented the measured data, and
assumed an exponent β = 1/3 for the ﬁt. The data collapsed to this ﬁt and satisﬁed
almost perfectly the relation ρL−ρG
ρc
= 7
2(1 −T
Tc )1/3. The branch to the right of the
critical density refers to the liquid phase, the left one to the gas phase. The branches
come together at T = Tc and ρ = ρc. The critical temperature itself varies from
Tc = −228.7 ◦C in Ne to 16.6 ◦C for Xe, to mention two out of eight substances.
Moreover, the exponent β = 1/3 is also shared in phase transitions in completely
different systems, not just in diverse liquids. According to a classic experiment
by Heller and Benedek (1962), β = 0.335(5) is found for a magnet (with uniaxial
anisotropy in spin space) such as MnF2 (manganese ﬂuoride). The result for a binary
ﬂuid mixture (CCl4+C7F16) is β = 0.33(2) (Thompson & Rice, 1964). Numerical

Shared Mathematical Content in the Context of Complex Systems
313
results for the three-dimensional Ising model on a cubic lattice give β = 0.327 (Liu
& Fisher 1989).
The only reason why we mention such concrete numbers and materials is to
demonstrate that measurements of almost identical critical exponents (the mathe-
matical content) in widely different substances (the physical context) calls for an
explanation and makes the numbers interesting beyond their immediate context.
What we have reported so far is the mere observation that the mathematical content
apparently coincides for a number of systems near critical points.
To cut a long theoretical development short, the critical exponents, the shared
universal behavior, can be derived in the framework of the renormalization group.
In this framework, the dynamics on a coarse scale is mathematically derived from
the dynamics on a more microscopic scale, in iterated steps, going from small to
large scales. An important ingredient there is the distinction between relevant and
irrelevant degrees of freedom. In particular, the singular behavior close to a critical
point is determined by a few relevant degrees of freedom. This give at least a hint
on why widely different substances (with many diverse degrees of freedom on the
microscopic scale) may share the singular behavior, determined by the few relevant
ones which remain relevant under iterated coarse graining.
It is instructive to see how the functional form of the singular behavior in terms of
critical exponents, characterizing the divergence, can be alternatively obtained from
a simple but strong assumption with far reaching implications. It is an assumption
that can be derived within the renormalization group approach. When it is used
as starting point, it appears ad hoc, but working it out, it reﬂects the experimental
observations of the scaling behavior of observables at and near the critical point. The
assumption concerns a scaling hypothesis to hold. It deals with the change of various
quantities under a change of length scale. Usually, quantities with dimensions such
as the volume change according to their dimensions. Near the critical point, so the
hypothesis, the correlation length ξ is the only characteristic length of the system in
terms of which all other lengths must be measured. Combined with the experimental
observationthatthecorrelationlengthdivergesatthecriticalpointinthelarge-volume
limit, the system has no distinct length and must therefore be invariant under scale
transformations. Magnifying a small part of the system to the original full system
size, the magniﬁed part cannot be distinguished from the original one. What is the
corresponding mathematical manifestation?
Mathematically, scale invariance is reﬂected by the fact that thermodynamic (in
case of temperature driven transitions) functions such as the correlation function 
are homogeneous functions, that is
(x) ∼x−p
(5)
with p the dimension of (x). This means when the length unit is increased by a
factor b, the new coordinates x′ have to be rescaled according to x′ = x/b to refer
to the new unit of length. As a homogeneous function, the correlation function then
transforms according to
(x/b) = bp (x).
(6)

314
H. Meyer-Ortmanns
This homogeneous transformation behavior would not be possible if  contained
a length scale determined by an exponential decay, for example. More generally, a
homogeneous function scales according to f (q′) = bD f f (q) for q′ = bDqq if Dq
is the dimension of q and D f the dimension of f . As it then turns out, based on
the scaling hypothesis, all critical exponents can be derived and expressed in terms
of only two dimensions Dh and Dt with Dt read off from the correlation length
ξ ∼t−ν, so that Dt = 1/ν, and Dh the dimension of h = H/kT = (2 + d −η)/2
with H theexternalmagneticﬁeld, T thetemperature,k theBoltzmannconstant,d the
spatial dimension and η the anomalous dimension associated with the pair correlation
function. It should be noticed that the realization of the scaling hypothesis in terms
of homogeneous functions is intimately related to the observed power-law behavior
in the critical regime. It is power laws which realize scale-free behavior.
One may wonder how universal the critical exponents are. The claim is not that a
single set of critical exponents characterizes all kind of singular behavior of second-
order phase transitions. The ones for which we quoted concrete numbers refer to the
Ising universality class, named after the simplest representative of the class of models
sharing this set of critical exponents. Other universality classes exist, in which one
collects models with the same set of critical exponents. However, even within the
same universality class, the material composition of the respective models may be
widely different, as most of the microscopic details do not matter for the behavior
close to a critical point.
In summary, the mathematical content in relation to critical behavior (typically
observed at second-order phase transitions) refers to scaling laws in terms of crit-
ical exponents. These laws can be derived along different routes with the scaling
hypothesis as an essential ingredient. Based on experimental observations, the scal-
ing hypothesis is very plausible. However, more satisfactory in terms of a deeper
understanding would be a derivation (rather than an assumption) of scale invariance
in terms of more basic premises. This is indeed achieved in the renormalization group
approach.
The reduction to scaling laws explains the coalescence of macroscopic measure-
ments in quite different substances. What is measured is the shared singular behavior
that coincides, not the microscopic behavior. Here a remark is in order in which sense
we refer to singularities in real experiments, as the volume there is always ﬁnite, no
correlation length gets ever inﬁnitely large in the strict sense. Taking the thermody-
namic limit, in which phase transitions occur according to their very deﬁnition, is a
matter of convenient description. Already their precursors in the ﬁnite volume show
characteristic signatures of the order of the phase transition in a ﬁnite-size scaling
analysis. Therefore, there is no contradiction between singular behavior and real
experiments. It is only for convenience that we reported on the critical exponents in
the thermodynamic limit rather than in the corresponding ﬁnite-size scaling analyses.

Shared Mathematical Content in the Context of Complex Systems
315
4
A Set of Stochastic Reactions
In this section the mathematical content will be a set of stochastic reactions in terms of
birth, death, predation and motion. As we shall see, this set explains the quantitative
resultsofcertainmeasurementsnearatransitionfromlaminartoturbulentﬂow,which
happen to be the same as those near the extinction of a species in a predator-prey
dynamics of ecological systems. Both transitions are said to belong to the universality
class of directed percolation, so they share the critical exponents of this universality
class when the respective transition is approached. Anticipating the outcome that
zonal ﬂow in a pipe behaves like a predator of turbulent puffs in the laminar phase
may sound like superﬁcial metaphorical wording. As we shall see, this formulation
may be taken literally in a certain sense, in which sense will be answered below.
Let us ﬁrst describe the ﬂuid close to turbulence in little more detail, although we
have to refer to the original reference for a precise description of the experiments.
Consider the ﬂow of a ﬂuid in a cylindric pipe of diameter D. Depending on the
ﬂuid’s viscosity ν, its velocity u and the diameter D, the ﬂow will be laminar as long
as the velocity is low, more precisely as long as the Reynold’s number Re ≡uD/ν is
below a critical value. The Reynold’s number serves as a control parameter. Above its
critical value, the formerly laminar ﬂow becomes turbulent with eddies of different
size. Flow velocity and pressure rapidly vary in space and time. The focus now is on
how the transition to turbulence proceeds, thus we zoom into the transition region.
Close to the transition, zonal ﬂow emerges at large scales at the boundaries of the
cylinder, which is activated by anisotropic turbulent ﬂuctuations, but the zonal ﬂow
suppresses small-scale turbulence as long as the ﬂow is in the laminar phase. For
small Reynold’s number, turbulence is only metastable, turbulent puffs decay with
lifetime τd. For larger Reynold’s number, the lifetime of these puffs increases and
clusters of puffs split. The main observables (experimentally and numerically) are
the lifetimes until the puffs decay τd, or until they split τs.
When H.-Y. Shih, T.-L. Hsieh and N. Goldenfeld performed direct numerical sim-
ulations of the Navier-Stokes equations in a pipe geometry to explore the transitional
behavior (Shih et al., 2016), they identiﬁed a predator-prey like dynamics. The focus
there was on a decomposition of large-scale modes that indicate some collective
behavior (the zonal ﬂow) as well as small-scale modes that are representative of
the turbulent dynamics (the turbulent puffs). A careful analysis of the time series
for the energy of the zonal ﬂow, compared with the energy of the turbulent puffs,
reveals oscillations, modulated by long-wavelength modes with a phase difference
between zonal and turbulent energies of π/2. This observation suggests that the oscil-
lations result from an activator-inhibitor mechanism, well known from predator-prey
ecosystems.
In predator-prey ecosystems, the prey mode activates the predator which then
grows. At the same time, the predator inhibits the prey. Less prey leads to the star-
vation of the predator. Its inhibition allows the resumed growth of the prey, which
then activates the predator again, and the cycle restarts.

316
H. Meyer-Ortmanns
Table 1
Dictionary between a ﬂuid and an ecosystem close to their respective phase transitions
Abstraction
Fluid
Ecosystem
Driving parameter
Reynold’s number Re
Birth rate
Species A
Zonal ﬂow
Predator
Species B
Turbulent puffs
Prey
Species E
Laminar ﬂow
Nutrient
The observed oscillations led to the conjecture that a stochastic description in
terms of predators and preys (rather than in terms of the Navier Stokes equations)
might reproduce the results for the decay and splitting times τd, τs, obtained from
the numerical simulations of the Navier Stokes equations. Note that this amounts
to a reduction of the relevant degrees of freedom just to predators and preys (and
nutrients, as we shall see).
According to Goldenfeld and Shih (2017), Shih et al. (2016), the map between
the ﬂow and the ecological system close to their respective transitions amounts to a
dictionary that is shown in Table 1. The left column represents the abstract notation,
with corresponding realizations in the ﬂuid (middle column) and in the ecosystem
(right column). Thus the role of the driving parameter is the Reynold’s number in
the ﬂuid and the birth rate in the ecosystem. The zonal ﬂow (species A) preys on
turbulent ﬂow (species B), while the laminar ﬂow (species E) acts as nutrient of
B. Stated differently, zonal ﬂow is the collective mode, important in the transition
region, it is generated by turbulent ﬂuctuations and regulates turbulence by shearing
it, thus acting as its predator.
To adequately describe the oscillations in “population” concentrations of zonal
ﬂow and turbulent zones, a description in terms of a set of stochastic predator-prey
reactions with birth, death, and predator activity is required (since a description on
the mean-ﬁeld level would fail to reproduce the observed oscillations). If one lists
all possible interactions between zonal ﬂows as predator (A), turbulence as prey (B),
with E representing the laminar ﬂow, based on the dictionary of Table 1, one ends
up at the following set of stochastic reactions (Goldenfeld & Shih, 2017):
B + E
b−→B + B (a)
B + B
c−→B + E (b)
A + B
p−→A + A (c)
A + B
p′
−→A + E (d)
A
dA
−→E
(e)
B
dB
−→
E
( f )
B
m−→A
(g).
(7)
These relations may be read as follows: Turbulent ﬂow B is generated from laminar
ﬂow E (acting as “nutrition”) with rate b (a), it decays into laminar ﬂow with rate
c (b), so the reaction with rate c can be absorbed in a modiﬁed rate b. Zonal ﬂow
A preys on turbulent ﬂow B with rate p by generating more zonal ﬂow (c), or more
laminar ﬂow E with rate p′ (d). Again the reaction with rate p′ can be absorbed into a

Shared Mathematical Content in the Context of Complex Systems
317
modiﬁed rate p. Furthermore zonal and turbulent ﬂow can change into laminar ﬂow
with “death” rates dA (e) and dB (f), and turbulent ﬂow can mutate to zonal ﬂow with
rate m (g). If the predators, preys, and nutrients are assigned to a spatial grid and
allowed to move to neighboring sites ⟨i j⟩with hopping rate D, the set of reactions
can be summarized as
Bi + E j
b
−−→
<i j> Bi + B j (a)
Ai + B j
p
−−→
<i j> Ai + A j
(b)
Ai + E j
D
−−→
<i j> Ei + A j (c)
Bi + E j
D
−−→
<i j> Ei + B j
(d)
Ai
dA
−→
Ei
(e)
Bi
dB
−→
Ei
( f )
Bi
m−→
Ai
(g).
(8)
The former reactions ((a), (b)) and ((c), (d)) have now been summarized to (a) and
(b) with modiﬁed rates b and p. This set of stochastic reactions, deﬁned for species
A, B, E, assigned to a spatial grid and speciﬁed by reaction rates of death dA, dB,
predation rate p, birth rate b, mutation rate m and diffusion (or hopping) rate D,
deﬁne the mathematical content that is supposed to be shared between the ﬂuid close
to the transition to turbulence (with turbulent zones, laminar ﬂow and zonal ﬂow as
the relevant degrees of freedom) and an ecological system of species A, B, E with
respective reaction rates, moving in space, here on a spatial grid.
Toquantitativelyverifythehypothesisaboutthesharedcontent,thesetofreactions
(8) can be either numerically simulated via Gillespie simulations or analytically
evaluated by deriving a master equation from (8) and solving the master equation
approximately in certain limits. Shih et al. (2016) performed stochastic simulations
and measured for various birth rates b the (logarithm of) the survival probability of a
cluster of prey as a function of time. The survival here refers to the time until decay
td or until the splitting ts of the cluster. Vice versa, they also measured the survival
probability of a cluster of prey as a function of b for various time instants td or ts,
where time is measured in units of τ0 with τ0 ∼D/U with D the pipe diameter
and U the average velocity of the ﬂuid. Now, while td/τ0 or ts/τ0 are varied, the
same survival probabilities P(b, td), P(b, ts) can be achieved if the birth rate b is
varied accordingly, and vice versa. The striking result is that in the so-called scaling
regime, all data collapse to two universal scaling functions, one for τ0/τd and one
for τ0/τs, with τd, τs the lifetime and splitting time of a cluster, respectively, plotted
as a function of the birth rate.
These scaling relations hold in the critical regime and tell us how a change of
the survival or splitting time can be compensated by a change of the birth rate.
The measured scaling relations correspond to a superexponential dependence of the
inverse decay and splitting times τd and τs as a function of the birth rate b. This agrees
remarkably well with the superexponential scaling behavior in real transitional pipe
turbulence experiments (Hof et al., 2008) and in numerical simulations (Avila et al.,
2011). Note that the superexponential scaling behavior here has been derived by
modeling the transition to turbulence in terms of predator-prey dynamics.

318
H. Meyer-Ortmanns
Moreover, when the world-lines x(t) of the clusters of prey (representing turbulent
ﬂow, being species in the ecosystem) are plotted as a function of time such that the
color codes the local density of prey, the time evolution shows a branching tree on
a spatial grid. This branching tree resembles the branching pattern that is observed
in the spreading of turbulence in the numerical simulations of Avila et al. (2011),
which analyzes the onset of real turbulence in pipe ﬂow.
As we have seen in Sect. 2, critical behavior is characterized by critical exponents,
and critical exponents serve to classify systems into universality classes. What is the
universality class to which the transition to turbulence belongs to? The patterns
of world-lines, which are nothing but space-time diagrams, just mentioned as an
observation in the predator-prey dynamics, are a typical signature of a well-known
universality class. This class comprises many models and is named after one of its
members, that is directed percolation.
Directed percolation itself represents various versions of a process that mimics
ﬁltering of ﬂuids through porous media along a given direction. At a critical per-
meability pc, a transition happens to a phase in which a path can percolate through
the whole lattice. Less abstract, this happens when a ﬂuid ﬁnds its path through the
entire sponge when the permeable channels become connected.
At this point one may indeed become skeptical what the connection should be
if it really exists: the connection between percolation processes on grids, transient
turbulent ﬂow in the spatial continuum of a pipe, and predator-prey dynamics close
to the extinction of one species.
Being again rather brief and skipping any derivation, the answer is a shared contact
process that amounts to one realization of a directed percolation process. It is shared
between the dynamics in the vicinity of the onset of turbulence and the predator-
prey dynamics close to extinction. Numerical support of this result comes from work
by M. Sipos and N. Goldenfeld, who simulated a directed percolation process in
the geometry of a pipe (Sipos & Goldenfeld, 2011). An occupied site on the lattice
corresponds to a turbulent correlation volume, an empty site to a laminar region, while
turbulent intensity may diffuse into nearby laminar regions. Starting with a localized
puff of turbulence, the directed percolation region fades away below the critical
percolation threshold, whereas it spreads out over the pipe above the threshold. The
lifetimes of puffs are measured and reproduce the superexponential behavior for the
decay rate below pc and the splitting rate above pc.
Analytical support of this result should be obtained from the basic set of reactions,
Eq. (8), which we identiﬁed as the mathematical content of transitional turbulence.
Thus it remains to reduce the set of reactions (8) to those of a contact process
with diffusion. According to a heuristic argument, the prey population (species B,
representing turbulent regions) is very small near the transition to prey extinction,
no predator (species A, zonal ﬂow) can survive, so the set of reactions (8) reduces to
Bi
dB
−→Ei;
Bi + E j
b
−−→
<i j> Bi + B j;
Bi + E j
DAB
−−→
<i j> Ei + B j.
(9)

Shared Mathematical Content in the Context of Complex Systems
319
Turbulent regions decay into laminar ﬂow with rate dB, they are born from laminar
ﬂow at neighboring site with rate b and diffuse into neighboring sites with diffusion
rate DAB = DB (more precisely, they exchange their place with a laminar neighbor-
ing site). These reactions are exactly those of a contact process with diffusion as a
model for directed percolation.
If one does not want to rely on the heuristic argument in view of the strong result, a
longer analytical detour amounts to the following steps: A master equation is assigned
to the set of reactions (8). The Doy-Peliti path integral formalism is employed to
arrive at an action that simpliﬁes to that of Reggeon ﬁeld theory near the extinction
transition, which is known to be in the universality class of directed percolation. For
details we refer to Mobilia et al. (2007), Täuber (2012) and references therein.
Let us summarize the line of arguments and comment on the procedure. Before the
work of Goldenfeld and Shih (2017), Shih et al. (2016), which was in our main focus,
experimental measurements in particular of decay and splitting times of turbulent
puffs were available. In the critical region the results showed a superexponential
scaling of these times as a function of the Reynold’s number, whose change drives the
transition from laminar to turbulent ﬂow. These results were conﬁrmed by numerical
simulations of the Navier-Stokes equations in Shih et al. (2016). A closer look at the
transition region showed that an activator-inhibitor mechanism is at work which is
familiar from ecological predator-prey systems. In a next step, degrees of freedom
were selected that were supposed to be the relevant ones both for the transition to
turbulence and to an extinction in ecosystems. These degrees of freedom are shared
in the mathematical structure that was the set of stochastic reactions (8) and termed
the mathematical content in the context of this article. When the stochastic set of
reactions was simulated in Shih et al. (2016), it reproduced the phase diagram for
transitional pipe turbulence from the laminar (nutrient only) phase to the phase of
expanding turbulent puffs (population), respectively. Particularly in the transition
region from laminar to turbulent ﬂow, the relevant degrees of freedom were further
reduced to those of a contact process that is representative for directed percolation
processes.
Why all this effort of establishing mathematical maps and dictionaries between
highly diverse experiments? What kind of insight is here gained from this mapping
between the ﬂuid and the ecosystem, or of both to a contact process? The point is
that the reduction to the mathematical content explains the striking experimental
observations of superexponential scaling relations in terms of a simple mechanism
thatleadsinother(material)realizationstothesame(heresuperexponential)behavior
of lifetimes with branching patterns familiar from directed percolation. Merely in
words, this mechanism reads as follows: In the transition region, the turbulent puffs
actaspreyofzonalﬂowinthepresenceofnutrition(laminarﬂow).Thecorresponding
set of reactions capture the lifetime statistics and the phenomenology of the pipe ﬂow.
It should be noticed that the set of reactions in terms of birth, death or decay,
interaction (via predation) and mutation reminds to a set of fundamental reactions
between elementary particles: Also there the basic processes refer to creation, decay,

320
H. Meyer-Ortmanns
annihilation, transition 4, however with one drastic difference, that is the material
composition. In the context of particle physics, the set of reactions involves the basic
constituents of matter such as electrons interacting via gauge bosons, which mediate
the interaction. In the context of ﬂuid dynamics or ecology, the material composition
of the “species” A, B, E is widely different and anything but elementary: In an
interpretation from ecology, A, B, E represent three trophic levels within a food
chain with A and B differing in their nutritional relationship to the primary energy
source E. Species A plays the role of a predator, B of a prey and E the nutrient of
the prey, realized, for example, in a population of competing species of bacteria. In
comparison, in transitional turbulence, A represents a macroscopic collective long-
wavelength mode, the zonal ﬂow of the ﬂuid, while B denotes the turbulent puffs.
More precisely, it is the ﬂuctuations of large scale zonal ﬂows A and small-scale
turbulent regions B in the laminar ﬂow E that are modelled in the set of stochastic
reactions. (The ﬂuctuations are actually essential, as the corresponding mean-ﬁeld
dynamics does not lead to oscillations.) The material composition of A, B, E is the
same type of ﬂuid molecules and not their conclusive in view of the question of
interest.
It should be further noticed that in spite of the big difference of the material
realization in the ecosystem, the turbulent ﬂuid, or a set of reactions in particle
physics, (the latter not further considered here), the mathematical formulation is
very similar across the scales. It makes use of stochastic reactions, which lead to
the generation, deletion, decay, composition, fragmentation, or mutation of entities;
therefore, a formalism or a framework that evaluates these basic stochastic processes,
should uncover common mechanisms on fairly different scales if the processes on
an abstract level are the same. The framework and the language it uses are suited to
bridge the scales from electrons to living (elephants) and social (elections) systems.5
In the spirit of “standard” reductionism to underlying, more microscopic degrees
of freedom, it is still natural to wonder whether the predator-prey dynamics can
be derived (rather than assumed) from the underlying Navier-Stokes equations. As
argued in Goldenfeld and Shih (2017) such a derivation would involve hardly control-
lable approximations without providing further insights into the relevant mechanism
that explains the experimental measurements. It should be emphasized that here the
experimental results have been solely predicted from the predator-prey dynamics,
without any reference to the Navier-Stokes equations. Thus this kind of standard
reductionism to a more microscopic description is not even needed for providing a
deeper understanding.
A further comment may be added on the attribute “relevant”, assigned to the
selected degrees of freedom. Being relevant is not a universal attribute, but depends
on the question addressed. The predator-prey dynamics according to Eq. (8) predicts
4 The authors of Goldenfeld and Shih (2017) actually assign graphs to these reactions which are
reminiscent to Feynman graphs.
5 In view of elections, the species may be human individuals of a population, whose elections of a
representative are based on rules of a “game” that is formulated in terms of stochastic reactions for
taking decisions.

Shared Mathematical Content in the Context of Complex Systems
321
the lifetime statistics and the phenomenology of the pipe ﬂow correctly. It does not
(neither is it supposed to) provide an explanation in terms of nonlinear dynamics.
For example, it does not identify the bifurcations in a more microscopic description
which cause the ﬁrst generation of turbulent puffs when the Reynold’s number is
varied, nor does it explain their decay or splitting as a result of more microscopic
nonlinear interactions between the ﬂuid molecules and their physical properties of
them. Therefore, the reduction to a few degrees of freedom should not be mixed up
with an oversimpliﬁcation, as long as their relevance is referred to a speciﬁc problem
of interest.
5
The Tracy-Widom Distribution and a Third-Order Phase
Transition
From the 18th and 19th century on, it was the Gaussian probability distribution with
its symmetric bell shape which was in the focus of interest and whose universal
appearance was later explained by the central limit theorem. The central limit the-
orem holds for independent and identically distributed random variables. It states
that the properly normalized sum of random samples of size N tends to a normal
or Gaussian distribution for N →∞even if the original variables themselves are
not normally distributed. In this section we consider another probability distribution,
which nowadays attracts much attention. It is the Tracy-Widom (TW-) distribution,
named after C. Tracy and H. Widom, who calculated exactly the probability dis-
tribution of the largest eigenvalue of a certain set of random Gaussian matrices in
the large-N limit (Tracy & Widom, 1994; 1996). In contrast to the Gaussian distri-
bution, it is lopsided and encountered in cases with strongly correlated variables,
thus it is clearly more challenging to deal with it than with a Gaussian distribution.
We will identify the TW-distribution along with a third-order phase transition as
the mathematical content behind a large number of seemingly completely unlinked
problems. Our summary is based on work of S. N. Majumdar and G. Schehr (2014)
and references therein.
One way to encounter the TW-distribution is to ask for the probability distribution
of the maximal eigenvalue of a certain set of Gaussian random matrices, along the
lines of Tracy and Widom. This question seems peculiar and particular and at best
of interest for mathematicians. Before we come to the distribution in more detail, a
short excursion to a problem of ecosystems should motivate why the spreading of
maximal eigenvalues may be of interest from the physics perspective.
Random matrix theory (Wishart, 1991) is known to have applications in statistical
physics, mesoscopic physics, particle physics, but also in ﬁnance and telecommuni-
cations, to name just a few of them. Using random matrices for interactions, it may
be an expression of “not knowing better”, that is, lack of knowledge what the real
interactions are, or even if they are known in principle, they may effectively amount
to random ones. It was R. M. May (1972), who used a random real and symmetric

322
H. Meyer-Ortmanns
matrix of size N × N to describe the pairwise interactions between N species in an
ecosystem. The model is named after him as the May-model. The largest eigenvalue
of this matrix then decides about the stability of the system when interactions are
turned on, given a concrete interaction matrix. This eigenvalue ﬂuctuates with the
realization of the random matrix. Thus the probability that the ecosystem remains
stable under the inclusion of pairwise random interactions of strength α amounts to
the cumulative distribution function of the largest eigenvalue λmax to remain below
the threshold 1/α. As noticed already by R. M. May, this probability undergoes a
sharp transition in the N →∞- limit. In this limit, the system is for sure (with prob-
ability 1) stable if α < αc and unstable for α > αc. This was the ﬁrst indication that
actually a sharp phase transition may be associated with the cumulative distribution
function of the maximal eigenvalue λmax.
If one has to deal with a phase transition, it is natural to ask for an analytical
description of how the transition is washed out into a crossover for large but ﬁnite N,
as one expects from phase transitions in a ﬁnite volume. A second natural question
is about its order. The order of a phase transition is determined by the order of the
derivative of a suitable thermodynamic potential like the free energy that has a kink or
jump at the transition point. In the context of the ecosystem, it should be kept in mind
that at a ﬁrst place the critical coupling strength signals only a bifurcation point at
which a ﬁxed point gets unstable. Therefore the relation to a thermodynamic language
with a phase transition and non-analytical behavior of a thermodynamic potential has
to be ﬁrst established. How can one assign a free energy to the cumulative probability
distribution of the maximal eigenvalue of an abstract set of random matrices, and
what is the analytical form of the crossover region for ﬁnite, but large N?
Both questions have been answered by Majumdar and Schehr (2014). Now we
have to cut a rather long development of theoretical work short and directly present
their result for the cumulative probability distribution FN(w) of the maximal eigen-
value λmax for taking a value w, given a ﬁnite ﬁxed value of N. It is given as
FN(w) ≈
⎧
⎨
⎩
exp (−βN 2−(w))
w <
√
2 and |w −
√
2| ∼O(1),
Fβ(
√
2N 2/3(w −
√
2)),
|w −
√
2| ∼O(N −2/3),
1 −exp (−βN+(w)),
w >
√
2 and |w −
√
2| ∼O(1).
(10)
First of all, it is obvious that we have to distinguish between small and typical ﬂuc-
tuations of order O(N −2/3) about the mean ⟨λmax⟩=
√
2, and large ﬂuctuations of
O(1). For small ﬂuctuations, the cumulative probability function is described by the‘
β-Tracy-Widom distribution Fβ which is explicitly known for β = 1, 2, 4, labelling
respectively the Gaussian orthogonal (1), unitary (2), and symplectic (4) ensemble of
random matrices. This part describes the crossover region. The respective functions
−(w) and +(w) to the left and right of λmax =
√
2, have been explicitly calculated
as the large-deviation functions in (Dean and Majumdar, 2008), (Majumdar and Ver-
gassola, 2009), respectively. The left and right large-deviation tails look different, the
left one dropping off steeper than the right one, accordingly the physical mechanism

Shared Mathematical Content in the Context of Complex Systems
323
on both sides of the distribution must be different. At this point one may wonder
what the physical interpretation of this peculiar probability distributions should be.
To get at least a hint on why the physical mechanism is expressed in terms of a
pushed (left) and pulled (right) Coulomb gas, it should be mentioned that FN(w) can
be written as a ratio of partition functions
FN(w) = Z N(w)/Z N(w →∞)
(11)
with
Z N(w) =
w

−∞
dλ1...
w

−∞
dλN exp
⎡
⎣−β/2
⎛
⎝N
N

i=1
λ2
i −

i̸= j
ln |λi −λ j|
⎞
⎠
⎤
⎦.
(12)
Here the integrand is proportional to the joint probability density function of the
eigenvalues of the respective random matrices. Now it should be noticed that for-
mally exp [−βE({λi})] with E({λi}) ≡N/2 N
i=1 λ2
i −
i̸= j ln |λi −λ j| can be
interpreted as the Gibbs-Boltzmann measure of an interacting Coulomb gas of
charged particles on a line: λi, the former eigenvalues, denoting the position of the
i-th charge on a line in this interpretation, β the inverse temperature, not necessarily
restricted to the values 1, 2, 4, and two competing interaction terms: the ﬁrst one an
external conﬁning parabolic potential, and the second one a logarithmic repulsion
(corresponding to a Coulomb repulsion in two dimensions, while the set of charges
is restricted here to a one-dimensional line). The meaning of w, which appears as
argument in the cumulative probability distribution and refers to the probability for
the maximal eigenvalue being smaller or equal this value w, translates to the maximal
position on the one-dimensional line that a Coulomb charge can take; w acting there-
fore like the position of an inﬁnitely high wall which the cloud of Coulomb charges
can at most touch, but not penetrate. It should be emphasized that this interpretation
is merely based on the formal coincidence between the contributed weights of the
probabilities of eigenvalues and a Coulomb gas restricted to a line.
However, this interpretation is rather useful as it allows to formulate the basic
abstract mechanism, shared by many occurrences of the TW-distribution and an
associated phase transition, in simple terms of what is going on in the corresponding
Coulomb gas. To the right of
√
2, in the stable regime of weak coupling α in the May-
model, mentioned initially, the cloud of charged Coulomb particles, the “ Coulomb
droplet”, has a soft edge with density vanishing as the square root of the edge at
b < w, and a hard wall at w, both being still separated by a gap. When the control
parameter is tuned, the gap between the cloud and the wall shrinks and is zero at
wc =
√
2. For smaller parameters w = 1/α (stronger coupling α), on the left of
√
2,
the Coulomb droplet is squeezed by the wall. This costs an energy of order O(N 2),
while the energy of pulling one charge out of the droplet for weak coupling α (large
w) is only of order O(N).
Moreover, in the formulation of a Coulomb gas it makes sense to talk about a
thermodynamic phase transition, as the position of the wall approaches a critical

324
H. Meyer-Ortmanns
value wc =
√
2 = 1/αc. The value of αc was already determined by May (1972).
Furthermore, it is shown in Majumdar and Schehr (2014) that
lim
N→∞−1
N 2 ln FN(w) =
−(w)
w <
√
2,
0
w >
√
2
(13)
with −(w) the large-deviation function to the left of
√
2 as before and −(w) ∼
(
√
2 −w)3 for w →
√
2 from below. Since ln FN(w) is proportional to the free
energy of the Coulomb gas, its third derivative has a discontinuity at the critical
point, identifying the phase transition as being of third-order by the usual deﬁnition
of the order of a phase transition.
Both interpretations related to the Coulomb gas and the maximal eigenvalue distri-
butions in random matrices may still appear rather peculiar, based on a formal coinci-
dence and anything but universal. However, as pointed out in (Majumdar and Schehr,
2014), meanwhile third-order phase transitions with the “Coulomb-gas mechanism”
have been identiﬁed in a number of other systems. Here we mention only one of
them, a phase transition in two-dimensional U(N)-lattice quantum chromodynamics
(QCD) when the coupling is increased from weak to strong. This transition runs under
the name Gross-Witten-Wadia transition and is known since quite some time (Gross
& Witten, 1980; Wadia, 1980). In the large-N limit, the free energy per plaquette
there also undergoes a third-order transition at a critical coupling constant. Here,
limiting angles ±π play the role of hard walls for the eigenvalues. The coupling g
corresponds to the coupling α in the May-model.
Just to indicate what this other phase transition actually refers to: Quantum chro-
modynamics is the gauge theory of strong interactions, one of the four fundamental
interactions apart from gravity, electromagnetism and the weak force. It is respon-
sible for the binding of quarks via gluons inside protons and neutrons of the atomic
nuclei. At extremely high densities and/or temperatures, phase transitions or rapid
crossovers are expected between the state of matter in which quarks and gluons are
conﬁned inside protons and neutrons, and a kind of quark-gluon plasma, where they
are free. For realistic parameters, this transition or crossover is not too exotic to have
happened once in the early universe when the hot and dense quark-gluon plasma
cooled down below the critical parameters, or to happen nowadays in collisions at
large hadron colliders. However, due to the strong interaction strength, this transition
is intrinsically hard to describe analytically (Meyer-Ortmanns & Reisz, 2007).
The Gross-Witten-Wadia transition was one among a number of attempts to
approximate this transition, by considering its counterpart in two dimensions on
a space-time lattice as approximation to the three-dimensional space continuum.
Independently of its relevance for the “true” phase transition in the early universe,
the mathematical structure of this U(N)-lattice QCD transition strongly resembles
the one in the May-model, although it should be noted that the interpretation of the
exponential factors in relation to QCD are weights, contributing to paths in a multi-
dimensional path integral, while they are joint probability density functions in the
May-model.

Shared Mathematical Content in the Context of Complex Systems
325
It is fascinating to see where else in physical models third-order phase transitions
have been identiﬁed together with a TW- distribution in the crossover regime. Here
it is not the place to give a complete review on early work preceding the discovery
of a third-order transition in relation to the TW-distribution according to (Majumdar
and Schehr, 2014). In the following we mention just two earlier (classes of) results,
referring to stochastic growth models on the one side, and the Ulam process on the
other. Less exotic than an application to QCD in the early universe are irregularly
growing bacterial colonies. A new colony on the surface of a nutrient medium will
grow into a roughly circular blob with an outer edge that gets increasingly rough in the
course of time. An accurate description of the irregular ﬂuctuations in space and time
is provided by the KPZ-equation, named after Kardar et al. (1986). It predicts two
exponents associated with the width of the distribution of ﬂuctuations and describes
also surface growth and interface ﬂuctuations in irregular growth. Initially its intimate
relation to the TW-distribution was not recognized. However, models of the KPZ-
type were later exactly mapped to the Ulam problem, named after the mathematician
S. Ulam, and the relation to the TW-distribution was established this way (Prähofer
& Spohn, 2010).
What is the Ulam problem about? Consider Npermutations of the ﬁrst N integers.
and assume they are all equally likely. The Ulam problem is to determine, for given
N, the distribution of the length lN of the longest increasing subsequence (out of all
possible increasing subsequences). It is obvious that as a function of N, this length
will ﬂuctuate, depending on the permutation. As a surprise, the ﬂuctuations about the
average of this length, ⟨lN⟩, are determined by the TW-distribution (Baik et al., 1999).
Moreover, an exact mapping between variants of the Ulam problem and models of the
KPZ-type have been established. This means that also a number of discrete models
of the KPZ-type follow the exact TW-distribution as does the Ulam problem.
KPZ-type models themselves show already a remarkable universality between
quite different realizations; their equivalence to variants of the Ulam problem and
their relations to random matrices that showed up in shared TW-distributions inspired
further search for a common mechanism underlying all these linkages. The subse-
quent analysis of Majumdar and Schehr (2014) and their identiﬁcation of the third-
order transition together with the TW-distribution in the crossover regime have been
a quite important step toward an explanation for their ubiquitous occurrence. Uni-
versal features of phase transitions are familiar in statistical physics and refer to the
approach of singularities, as indicated earlier. This approach contains characteristic
precursors at ﬁnite but large N of the limiting case (N →∞).
As the common mechanism behind the third-order transition here was formulated
in terms of a Coulomb gas, this was the simplest physical interpretation which is
compatible with the mathematical content, though the same mathematics describes
a wide variety of contexts as we have indicated. Our examples covered a range
from pure mathematical abstractions like random matrices and the Ulam process, to
ecosystems (the May-model), to surface growth ﬂuctuations (KPZ-models), to phase
transitions in strongly interacting matter in cosmology. Here, a reduction to smaller
material compositions would be obviously meaningless once we deal with purely
mathematical constructions of our mind such as the Ulam process.

326
H. Meyer-Ortmanns
6
Summary and Conclusions
The reduction to the mathematical content, often initiated by common observations
in widely different contexts, does not pretend to explain the complex world in all its
facets. The dynamics is reduced to those degrees of freedom, which turn out to be
relevant for the aspect of interest. These are often only a few, orders of magnitudes
less than those suggested by the material composition, and in terms of these few,
the explanations become simple and mechanistic. From a practical point of view,
this kind of understanding allows to control the processes as a function of a few
parameters; from a theoretical perspective, it tells us about the basic mechanisms that
are responsible for the striking similar observations in seemingly unlinked situations.
The more systems share a certain behavior, the more universal the mechanism is.
From the background of theoretical physics it is not surprising that such universal
behavior often shows up when singularities are approached, in particular, in relation
to phase transitions, and phase transitions are ubiquitous in natural and artiﬁcial
systems.
References
Avila, K., Moxey, D., de Lozar, A., Avila, M., Barkley, D., & Hof, B. (2011). Science, 333, 192.
Baik, J., Deift, P., & Johansson, K. (1999). Journal of the American Mathematical Society, 12, 1119.
Dean, D. S., & Majumdar, S. N. (2006). Physical Review Letters,97, 160201; Dean, D. S., &
Majumdar, S. N. (2008). Physical Review Letters,77, 041108.
Encyclopedia of Materials: Science and Technology. (2001).
Goldenfeld, N., & Shih, H.-Y. (2017). Journal of Statistical Physics,167, 575.
Gross, D. J., & Witten, E. (1980). Physical Review D21, 446.
Guggenheim, E. A. (1945). Journal of Chemical Physics, 13, 253.
Heller, P., & Benedek, G. B. (1962). Physical Review Letters,8, 428.
Hof, B., de Lozar, A., Kuik, D. J., & Westerweel, J. (2008). Physical Review Letters,101, 214501
(2008).
Kardar, M., Parisi, G., & Zhang, Y. C. (1986). Physical Revie Letters, 56, 889.
Liu, A. J., & Fisher, M. E. (1989). Physica A,156, 35.
Majumdar, S., & Schehr, G. (2014). Journal of Statistical Mechanics: Theory and Experi-
ment,P01012, 1–32.
Majumdar, S. N., & Vergassola, M. (2009). Physical Review Letters,102, 060601.
May, R. M. (1972). Nature, 238, 413.
Meyer-Ortmanns, H., & Reisz, T. (2007). Principles of phase structures in particle physics, World
Scientiﬁc lecture notes in physics (Vol. 77). World Scientiﬁc.
Mobilia, M., Georgiev, I. T., & Täuber, U. C. (2007). Journal of Statistical Physics, 128, 447.
Murray, J. D. (1993). Mathematical Biology II: Spatial Models and Biomedical Applications.
Springer.
Murray, J. D. (1981a). Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B, 295, 473.
Murray, J. D. (1981b). Theoretical Biology, 88, 161.
Prähofer, M., &Spohn, H. (2000). Physical Review Letters,84, 4882 (2000); Gravner, J., Tracy, C.
A., & Widom, H., Journal of Statistical Physics,102, 1085; Majumdar, S. N., & Nechaev, S.,
Physical Review E,69, 011103; Imamura, T., & Sasamoto, T. (2004). Nuclear Physics B,699,
503; Sasamoto, T., & Spohn, H. (2010). Physical Review Letters104, 230602.

Shared Mathematical Content in the Context of Complex Systems
327
Searle, A. G. (1968). Comparative Genetics of Coat Color in Mammals. Academic.
Shih, H.-Y., Hsieh, T.-L., & Goldenfeld, N. (2016). Nature Physics, 1, 245.
Sipos, M., & Goldenfeld, N. (2011). Phys. Rev. E,84(3), 035304.
Täuber, U. C. (2012). Journal of Physics A: Mathematical and Theoretical, 45, 405002.
Thompson, D. R., & Rice, O. K. (1964). Journal of the American Chemical Society,86, 3547.
Tracy, C. A., & Widom, H. (1994). Communications in Mathematical Physics,159, 151.
Tracy, C. A., & Widom, H. (1996). Communications in Mathematical Physics,177, 727.
Wadia, S. R. (1980). Physics Letters, 93B, 403.
Wishart, J. (1928). Biometrika 20, 32; Wigner, E. (1951). Proceedings of the Cambridge Philo-
sophical Society47, 790; Mehta, M. L. (1991). Random matrices (2nd ed.). Academic.
Xu, Y., Vest, C. M., & Murray, J. D. (1083). Applied Optics,22, 3479.

United but not Uniform: Our Fecund
Universe
Timothy O’Connor
The sciences collectively depict a diversiﬁed but uniﬁed universe: one populated by
a great many diverse kinds of organized structures that, while built of the same basic
constituents, engage in distinctive processes described by domain-speciﬁc explana-
tory principles and laws. All scientiﬁc theories are tentative, and we may be conﬁ-
dent that signiﬁcant revisions await us in every ﬁeld of inquiry—and not least in
basic physics, which has yet to deliver a uniﬁed understanding of small-and large-
scale dynamics. Nonetheless, the very general picture of my opening sentence is a
permanent ﬁxture of scientiﬁc understanding.
Yet this general picture admits of two importantly different variations, still
remaining at a high level of generality. On a broadly reductionist vision, every-
thing that occurs is fully determined by the unfolding dynamics of fundamental
physical structures throughout space and time, with precisely the same dynamics
operative in every context. To be sure, the sundry organized systems and their char-
acteristic behavior can be described only by using special-science concepts, but even
so they are ontologically derivative. They are one and all coarse-grained structures
and patterns embedded in a mosaic that is entirely painted by the elements. On the
other, emergentist vision, at least some organized structures manifest fundamental
causal powers of their own, not supplanting but supplementing the collective powers
of their composing elements. Whatever the fundamental dynamical principles of
physics prove to be, they are not complete. When caught up in and around emergent
structures, basic physical entities are subject to macroscopic as well as microscopic
causal inﬂuences, which only together determine their trajectories.1
1 The following three paragraphs, with some modiﬁcation, are taken from my “The Emergence
of Personhood: Reﬂections on The Game of Life,” in Malcolm Jeeves, ed., The Emergence of
Personhood: A Quantum Leap?, Eerdmans Press, 2015, 143–162.
T. O’Connor (B)
Department of Philosophy, Indiana University, Sycamore 026, Bloomington, IN 47405, US
e-mail: toconnor@indiana.edu
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
S. Wuppuluri and I. Stewart (eds.), From Electrons to Elephants and Elections,
The Frontiers Collection, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-92192-7_19
329

330
T. O’Connor
To better grasp the difference in these two visions, consider mathematician John
Conway’s cellular automaton, the Game of Life. Life is a dynamic and spatially and
temporally discrete two-dimensional inﬁnite grid. One sets an arbitrary initial state
by assigning one of two basic properties, live or dead, to each of the square cells,
which one can represent by different colors. Each subsequent state of the grid is
wholly determined by applying the following three rules to every cell (which has
eight ‘neighbors’ in every direction, including diagonally):
Birth: A dead cell with exactly three live neighbors becomes a live cell.
Survival: A live cell with two or three live neighbors stays alive.
Death: In all other cases, a cell dies or remains dead.
Surprisingly, over time, stable clusters of various kinds arise and exhibit macro-
level patterns of activity and interaction with other cluster types. (Apt names have
been given to certain recurring sorts, such as ‘oscillator’, ‘glider’, ‘puffer’, and
‘eater’.) Once these clusters appear, their macro-level behavior can be studied in
ignorance of the three micro-level rules that underlie them. More surprising still,
different sorts of high-level patterns are observed in games with different initial
conditions.
If we think of Conway’s 2-D grid as a toy world (there are 3-D versions of it
as well), the three basic rules and its initial state constitute its general ‘physics,’
and the high-level dynamical patterns exhibited by parts of it can be thought of as
its ‘chemistry’ or ‘biology.’ Life vividly illustrates how high-level patterns can be
distinctive in form, underwriting similarly distinctive causal explanations—if we
intervene in a Life world by manipulating the value of one higher-level variable and
holding other relevant factors constant, we can change the value of another higher-
level variable in very predictable ways and in a variety of contexts—while not in any
way altering or supplementing the basic dynamics that drive the world’s evolution.
The ‘physics’ of a standard Life world is causally closed, with each total conﬁguration
of the grid at a time t1 (and so also the state of every stable cluster) being strictly
determined by its state at the previous time t0 in accordance with the three basic
rules. What is more, the micro-level causation asymmetrically determines the macro-
level causation. For this reason, while macro-level rules of interaction in Life worlds
cannot be deduced from micro-level rules, macro-level behavior is ontologically and
causally derivative.
Now consider the following variation on Life, which, for reasons that will become
apparent,wemaycallFecund-Life.(IwillhereafterrefertotheoriginalversionofLife
as Lego-Life, to mark its emphasis on the sufﬁciency of the most basic units for deter-
mining the features and arrangement of everything composed of them.) Imagine that
you are handed a tall stack of (very large!) numbered sheets of graph paper. On them
are changing snapshots of a Life world (with shaded squares signifying ‘live’ cells).
Your job is to ﬁgure out the most compact transitional rules capturing change/stasis in
every cell between adjacent sheets. After ﬂipping through many pages, you hit upon
the Birth, Survival, and Death rules. Continuing to check subsequent pages to verify
that the rules hold without exception, you hit upon a page where the result departs in a

United but not Uniform: Our Fecund Universe
331
small way from what the rules predict. The divergence is restricted to a complex star-
shaped cluster that ﬁrst appeared on the previous page. Flipping ahead, you observe
that as more of these star-shaped clusters appear, their subsequent evolution, too,
departs from what the three basic rules predict. Further investigation reveals that the
form the divergence takes is identical in each case. As a result, you may once again
predict what the future world-states will be, using modiﬁed, disjunctive forms of the
original rules that invoke the star-shaped conﬁguration. The new Birth rule, e.g., has
the form: a dead cell with exactly three live neighbors becomes a live cell, except
when occurring within the bounds of, or immediately adjacent to, a star cluster, in
which case…. Imagine that as star clusters come into contact, new modiﬁcations of
the original rules are required to fully capture the way stars interact. You ﬁnd that
the most compact way to capture star-associated behavior is to assign primitive new
properties (‘bright’, ‘golden’) to star clusters and then to describe the precise impact
of these properties on the basic cellular dynamics via additional laws. These laws
are no less fundamental—even though they come into play only in particular kinds
of structured contexts.
Reduction-minded thinkers often suggest that such a fundamentally new kind
of macroscopic behavior would be inexplicable or ‘unintelligible’, something whose
analogue in our physical world we therefore rightly set our face against when engaged
in empirical investigation of the mechanisms of nature. However, to understand such
novel phenomena as woven into a causally uniﬁed whole, we need only enrich our
conception of the properties of the fundamental elements of a world. Staying with
the Fecund-Life analogue, we would be led to suppose that, in addition to live and
dead, whose dispositional proﬁles are largely captured by the original unmodiﬁed
rules, the cells contain a further set of dispositions towards cooperatively contributing
to macroscopic-but-fundamental properties, a disposition that is merely latent until
triggered by the requisite conﬁgurational context. As we may say, the elements of
such a world are fecund, the dispositional ‘seeds’ of the very structured unities
that exert kinds of causal inﬂuence that extend beyond that of the elements. In
this understanding, the world is fully causally uniﬁed without being operationally
uniform.
Do we live in (a more complex and higher-dimensional analogue of) a Lego-
Life world or instead a Fecund-Life world? By standard empirical measures, this
remains an open question. Notice that I described the emergent powers of Fecund-
Life by imagining the failure of the basic rules to fully capture the dynamics in
particular structured contexts. Such a scenario is easy to conﬁrm or disconﬁrm
in a simple cellular automaton, whose elemental behavior is simple and discrete,
turning on the value of a single variable within a small number of cells. In the real
world, the richer features of trillions of subatomic particles in continuous trajecto-
ries underlie any macroscopic phenomena. While we have been able to steadily push
past previous limits on measurement and computation, no one imagines that we will
ever be able to monitor in situ the totality of quantum-theoretic underpinnings of
any large-scale composed systems and assess the theory’s descriptive/explanatory
completeness. It’s testable ‘in principle,’ but only in principle, requiring something
akin to a disembodied Laplacian super-intelligence. Short of that, the best we might

332
T. O’Connor
hope for would be to demonstrate the success or failure of certain explanatory reduc-
tions, under necessary simplifying assumptions, within localized areas in a step-
wise manner (neural activity to constituting chemical activity, and psychologically
described activity to neural activity), and also (crucially) at the system’s boundary
conditions. We’re just not there yet, if ever we shall be. Furthermore, if attempted
reductions fail, one also has to reckon with the persistent possibility that we have
simply gotten the underlying theory wrong in some respects.
Given the present undecided state of the question on ordinary empirical grounds,
whence the faith of some in physics fundamentalism? Neuroscience is ground zero
for our question as it bears on human beings and other sentient animals, the complex
systems of keenest interest and also the most plausible loci of the kind of strongly
emergent behavior that is modeled in Fecund-Life. The neuroscientists I know tell
me that they can’t imagine conducting their science without the working assumption
that all large-scale neural processes are entirely the outworking of the processes
of excitation and communication within and among the vast array of constituent
neurons (while allowing that our pretty good understanding of such processes is
not complete). Call this stance ‘methodological reductionism.’ I have no quarrel
with it. For it seems to me necessary to theoretical advancement, even if ontological
reductionism is false. We need to understand thoroughly the nature of the causal
inﬂuences contributed in every context by underlying elements and their associated
mechanisms before we can precisely characterize the form and magnitude of the
inﬂuence of emergent features in the special contexts in which they are generated
and sustained. (That form and magnitude is given by the difference between what
is observed in the organized emergent context from what would be predicted by
the application of a correct theory of non-emergent mechanisms.) Thus, the way
to understand strongly emergent phenomena of the sort modeled by Fecund-Life
(if such there be) is to be a methodological reductionist until you bump up against
hard limits, and then take stock.2 But a well-motivated methodological stance is not
evidence for, or even a rational presumption in favor of, an ontological thesis on a
question that is straightforwardly empirical. (Unlike the philosopher, your typical
scientist does not spend much time thinking about what will turn out to be true at the
end of scientiﬁc inquiry. Rather, she is thinking about what working hypotheses are
most useful in advancing current understanding. For one with such immediate aims,
it is all-too easy but mistaken to slide from the quite proper methodological stance
of looking for reducing explanations to drawing an evidential conclusion.)
If anything, a stance toward strong emergence might be the rationally necessitated
default. The universal context necessary to making sense of all forms of scientiﬁc
inquiry is the cooperative agency of scientists themselves. For this reason, the effec-
tive and purposive activity of experimentalists and theorists is an ineliminable part
of our being rationally justiﬁed in accepting their theories. We tacitly believe that
those involved in constructing a scientiﬁc theory and marshalling evidence for it
2 A nice description of such an imagined process and its practical challenges is given in Richard
Corry, Power and Inﬂuence: The Metaphysics of Reductive Explanation (Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 2019), Chap. 10.

United but not Uniform: Our Fecund Universe
333
were generally aware of what they were doing and effectively guided by reasons,
practical and theoretical, for so acting. Rescind that assumption and our reasons for
thinking the theory to be well-supported by evidence collapse, as the entire collec-
tive activity must be seen as mere phenomena, physically uniﬁed but not rationally
guided. It would be to saw off the large and sturdy branch supporting the smaller
branches that are the individual theories. I draw attention to this universal context of
science because it is at least doubtful that the assumption of consciously self-aware
and reasons-guided agents is consistent with ontological reductionism. According
to the latter, all fundamentally efﬁcacious causal processes are the interplay of non-
conscious and non-rational forces, ﬁlling out a pointillist mosaic across the fabric
of spacetime. Coarse-grained patterns including human behavior are present in the
mosaic, but they are consequent upon, not prior constraints to, its microphysical
completion.
Philosophers who argue that there is no inconsistency between reductionist funda-
mental ontology and reasons-driven human action urge that it is enough that the
psychological processes of human beings are ‘weakly’ emergent: a manifestation of
regular patterns that sustain distinctive kinds of causal explanation. All that is neces-
sary to ground causal-rational explanations, they contend, is that our behavior is
preceded by particular beliefs, desires, and intentions and would not have occurred
without them. Such psychological patterns are consistent with the basic physical
domain’s being causally ‘complete’ or self-contained, sufﬁcient to determine psycho-
logical and all other complex phenomena. However, this weakly emergent under-
standing of reason-governed action secures only the predictive usefulness of psycho-
logical concepts and principles in categorizing families of complex neural conﬁgu-
rations and relations among them. It doesn’t show what is needed, viz., that conﬁg-
urations manifest a distinctive kind of productive efﬁcacy by virtue of their falling
under such concepts—that an agent’s grasping of her reasons for acting is a salient
factor in bringing about her acting as she does.3
Some philosophers see a way out here by endorsing a skeptical doctrine advanced
by David Hume. Hume argued that our notion of causal production is empty, a folk-
theoretic idea that dissolves under critical scrutiny. In reality, any kind of causal
process, whether micro or macro, is only a recurring pattern of one sort of thing
followed by another. There are the many individual pixels of paint—localized events
such as particle accelerations or ﬁeld excitations in tiny spatiotemporal regions—
that collectively exhibit both small- and large-scale patterns, and that is all. Nothing
produces the events, as there are no natural agents inherently ‘disposed’ to mani-
fest themselves in certain ways. The idea of natural agents exercising causal powers
is jettisoned in favor of entities exhibiting mere causal regularities. Forces don’t
produce particle accelerations, as ‘force’ is just a term encapsulating observed regu-
larities in the changing spatial coordinates of particles over time. If causation in
3 For a thorough of overview of the varieties of accounts of both weak and strong emergence, see
my “Emergent Properties” Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, (Fall 2020 Edition), Edward N.
Zalta (ed.), URL = < https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2020/entries/properties-emergent/ > .

334
T. O’Connor
general reduces to recurring patterns of a particular kind, there is no difﬁcult ques-
tion to confront regarding where in physical reality productive efﬁcacy resides (it’s
nowhere!). Psycho-behavioral causation is then secure, as the requisite patterns are
readily discerned in everyday life as in psychological science, no less real than the
patterns in the elements composing them. Hume’s austere and deﬂationary meta-
physics is driven ultimately by an impoverished account of sensory perception (and
an implausible associated account of concept formation), and it is hardly the way
forward here. As Hume himself recognized more clearly than his latter-day followers,
it creates a severe epistemological problem: if the natural causal patterns scientists
have actually observed in tiny fragments of reality do not reﬂect the stable propensi-
ties of matter but are instead brutely contingent matters of fact, then our conﬁdence
that they hold constant through the vast reaches of unobserved reality, stretching to
the distant past and future, can be no more than an animal faith. If physical events
do not literally constrain one another—if they are, in Hume’s phrase, ‘loose and
separate’—then all bets would be off: we might just be inhabiting a temporarily
stable patterned phase within a larger whole in which a different pattern, or many
different patterns, or no intelligible pattern at all, occur in other regions. On Hume’s
metaphysical vision from which all causal power is banished, the only constraint
on the global distribution of events is logical consistency. There are vastly many
distributions of events consistent with all observations to date, and just one in which
the deep patterns tracked by our physical theories hold throughout.—Yes, but good
scientiﬁc practice bids us to favor the ‘simplest’ generalization consistent with the
data. Indeed. However, the assumptions of scientiﬁc practice, as Hume recognized,
plausibly rest on the further unreﬂective assumption that observable patterns are
not brute happenstance, not a cosmic coincidence, but instead are grounded in the
causal capacities of physical individuals and systems, capacities that are uncovered
(at least approximately) by scientiﬁc inquiry. That is why the reductionist’s bid to
save psychological agency by embracing Hume’s neutered metaphysics of causation
is such a desperate measure. It’s deeply incongruent with a fundamental conception
that animates science.
There is a further reason to think the question of whether the shape of our world
is Fecund-Life or Lego-Life is an important one: it plausibly bears on the value of
persons as well as the value of other sentient animals. You might reasonably suppose
that some dynamically changing conﬁgurations of the Lego variety are more valuable
than other kinds of conﬁgurations, but it is hard to credit the thought that they have a
deeper kind of value altogether, in the way that we commonly suppose living persons
to have a deeper kind of value than any non-sentient dynamical system, no matter
how interesting the latter from a physical or mathematical point of view. Destroying
a non-sentient dynamical system may be a bad thing in certain contexts, but it is not
a disvalue comparable to the wanton killing of an innocent person. (We do judge the
destruction, whether intentional or not, of certain artifacts or features of a natural
landscape or ecosystem to be a serious loss. But such judgments typically are partly
a function of their impact on human communities or animal populations, and so the
value at issue is partly instrumental, rather than intrinsic.) Our assigning high value
to the lives of conscious creatures, and especially of conscious persons, plausibly

United but not Uniform: Our Fecund Universe
335
reﬂectsatacitbeliefthatconsciousnessandotherperson-levelattributeshaveintrinsic
qualities that sharply set them apart from other intrinsic attributes of physical things.
Whether an overarching moral commitment might properly (rationally) constrain
our vision of the causal structure of reality, or instead should only be consequent
upon it, whose character is independently determined, is an interesting philosophical
question, and I do not mean here to be expressing an opinion it. My point is simply
that the reductionist’s ontological vision of things is plausibly at odds with a pervasive
moral vision that he presumably shares.
I turn now to the question of whether it is possible to give plausible general condi-
tions on any possible instances of strong emergence in nature. This question is most
fruitfullyaddressedbylookingforcluesintherangeofplausiblecandidates.Consider
ﬁrst a widespread phenomenon that some regard as the most straightforward candi-
date for emergentist analysis, because it appears in the quantum domain itself. Indi-
vidual particles or particle systems become ‘entangled’ when they interact in certain
ways, such that thereafter measurable features such as position and momentum are
correlated in a way that cannot be accounted for in terms of separate states of the
individuals. Such pluralities are treated as coupled systems, certain of whose intrinsic
properties are irreducibly holistic. Counterintuitively, they retain this coupled status
when the individuals are widely (even space-like) separated. But notice that here
the holism is limited to the value or magnitude of a feature that is also had by its
components. (Correlated “spin” values, e.g., are permutations on the fundamental
feature of spin, also had by non-entangled particles.) Thus, it does not involve a
fundamentally new type of basic property at a systemic level. Even so, it is a very
low-level, ubiquitous indicator of a non-Lego character to our world.
One step up from quantum entanglement, it has been argued (more controver-
sially) that the structure of chemical molecules is not wholly determined by the
properties of and dynamics between their subatomic constituents.4 Here the sugges-
tion seems to be that a kind of structure spontaneously emerges, partly constraining
subsequent constituent dynamics. More complex candidate cases occurring in the
biological domain also link emergence to structure: e.g., the interplay of bottom-up
andtop-downprinciplesinsystemsbiologyandtheconscious,intentional,andpurpo-
sive character of human and animal psychology. As Jonas (1966) and Maturana and
Varela (1980) emphasize, life in all its forms, beginning with the simple cell, imposes
a boundary maintained through an unceasing process of the loss and acquisition of
parts. This suggests that careful exploration of the formation of resilient boundaries
and the nature of their effects, on a case-by-case basis for distinct general kinds
of biological entities, is the best means for understanding the dynamics of strong
emergence in our fecund world. Spontaneous, weakly emergent organizational prin-
ciples of the sort modeled by cellular automata adequately explain some dynamical
systems. But concluding that these principles are adequate to all cases of interest is
hasty, reﬂecting an anti-empirical ideology more than good science. It also ﬂies in
the face of our own lived experience as conscious, purposive agents. We don’t merely
track information in neural networks; we consciously grasp some of what is thereby
4 See Woolley (1978, 1998), Primas (1981), and for philosophical analysis, Hendry (2010, 2019).

336
T. O’Connor
registered. We don’t merely act in ways that reliably co-vary with our changing
perceptions and psychological attitudes; we sometimes consciously form goals and
choose from among possible ways to implement them. As the needed qualiﬁer ‘some’
signals, we are curiously hybrid creatures. Our richer representational and action-
directing capacities overlay the older mammalian machinery that neuroscience has
begun to reveal. The chaotic interplay of, e.g., conscious reason and hormones
results in behavior and individual and cultural evolution that is highly unpredictable
(sometimes wonderfully creative, sometimes distressingly foolish).5 Ultimately, we
must look to future developments both in the understanding of largescale network
dynamics in neuroscience and its wider context in the organism as a whole to under-
stand the structured conditions under which collective mechanisms are activated,
giving rise to the panoply of qualities in virtue of which we are subjects and knowers
and purposive doers.
The preceding may suggest that I think merely weakly emergent phenomena
to be of little theoretical signiﬁcance. In reality, I think only that enthusiasts have
misplaced their signiﬁcance. The many varieties of weakly emergent structure have
importance within the overall architectonic of the world, ﬁrst, by providing a stable
platform for strongly emergent structure (in some cases, as with the emergence of
persons), and second (and much more generally) by providing a structured, middle-
sizedworldforstronglyemergentstructurestoengage,includingmakingpossibleour
own scientiﬁc activity and theorizing. Students of abstract structure explore Lego-Life
worlds and other cellular automata as conscious knowers, ‘hovering over the deep’,
grasping the varied macroscopic patterns that weakly emerge and their underlying
basis. Remove such consciously intelligent Laplacian observers altogether, and the
signiﬁcance of intermittent coarse-grained macroscopic patterns wholly determined
by the fundamental dynamics recedes. It is signiﬁcance to ourselves and any other
conscious knowers there may be—which knowers we implicitly take to transcend
such patterns.
I suspect there is a ﬁnal source of resistance to accepting that our world includes
sentient knowers who are strongly emergent. If our world is so, its elemental building
blocks are partly latent seeds whose complete fruition in the fullness of time is
something altogether new and valuable, unlike imaginable alternative worlds with
ﬂat and ‘sterile’ physics. To some, the latent-seed physics of strongly emergent
worlds looks implausibly ‘rigged’, giving too strong an appearance of having been
designed. It is similar to the way that exquisitely ﬁne-tuned numerical constants
in the laws and initial conditions of contemporary physics give the appearance of
being rigged for life, motivating theorists to develop deeper theories that curb the
appearance.6 But whatever force we attribute to ‘the appearance of design’ we may
5 This theme is developed nicely by anthropologist Ian Tattersall in his contribution to Jeeves (2015),
op cit., 37–50.
6 Themostpopularstrategyinvolves‘multiverse’hypothesesonwhichouruniverseisbutoneofvery
many, the result of a mechanism for generating new ‘Big Bangs’ (universe-initiating singularities)
that differ in the values of the constants in the laws and initial conditions. Theories that implement
this strategy purport to turn the suspiciousness of our world’s ﬁne-tuning into a mere observer
selection effect in a mostly lifeless sea of chance distribution over possible values.

United but not Uniform: Our Fecund Universe
337
ﬁnd in fundamental physics, we ought not to let our sympathies for or against the
conclusions that some will draw from philosophical design arguments to drive our
assessment of the evidence itself. We have direct evidence of just this one, apparently
ﬁne-tuned-for-life universe, and the existence within it of consciously purposive
and self-aware knowing agents is a fundamental datum presupposed in all scientiﬁc
inquiry. We ought to reason from this datum rather than seeking to explain it away.
Contemporary philosophy of mind and action is littered with hand-waving attempts
at reductive analyses of consciousness, of intentionality, and of purposive agency.
All have proven inadequate, and for fundamental reasons, with no hope of adequate
successor accounts in sight.
However, it is possible to see such proposals in a more positive light, by recon-
ceiving their ambitions. The currently popular integrated information theory (IIT) of
consciousness, while it fails utterly to analyze or explain the qualitative and subjec-
tive character of conscious experience, might prove to be an important insight into the
kind of neural architecture that is necessary for conscious experience to arise. And
the varieties of ‘functional role’ and ‘tracking’ theories of the intentional (or directed)
character of mental states are undoubtedly pointing at important and at least prevalent
relational characteristics of our intentional states, such that identifying their purely
information-theoretic neural analogues will again double as guides to uncovering the
mechanisms sustaining the genuine articles. As I emphasized earlier, getting clear
on the precise character of strongly emergent phenomena starts with a comprehen-
sive and well-conﬁrmed theory of the underlying mechanisms. So let the reductive
methods of normal science proceed apace, while not seeing its successes as somehow
indicating an inevitable outcome of the still far-off endgame. That success is what
both the emergentist and reductionist predict, while the emergentist retains all lived
experience on his side.
References
Corry, R. (2019). Power and inﬂuence: The metaphysics of reductive explanation. Oxford University
Press.
Hendry,R.(2010).Ontologicalreductionandmolecularstructure.StudiesinHistoryandPhilosophy
of Modern Physics, 41, 183–191.
Hendry, R. (2019). Emergence in chemistry. In S. Gibb, R. Hendry, & T. Lancaster (Eds.), The
routledge handbook of emergence (pp. 339–351). Routledge.
Jonas, H. (1966). The phenomenon of life: Towards a philosophical biology. Harper & Row.
Maturana, H., & Varela, F. (1980). Autopoiesis and cognition. D. Reidel.
O’Connor, T. (2015). “The emergence of personhood: Reﬂections on The Game of Life,” in M.
Jeeves (Ed.) The emergence of personhood: A quantum leap?, Eerdmans Press, pp. 143–162.
O’Connor, T. (2020). “Emergent properties,” Stanford encyclopedia of philosophy, (Fall 2020
Edition), E. N. Zalta (Ed.) https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2020/entries/properties-eme
rgent/.
Primas, H. (1981). Chemistry, quantum mechanics and reductionism. Springer.

338
T. O’Connor
Woolley, R. G. (1978). Must a molecule have a shape? Journal of the American Chemical Society,
100, 1073–1078.
Woolley, R. G. (1998). Is there a quantum deﬁnition of a molecule? Journal of Mathematical
Chemistry, 23, 3–12.

Probability, Typicality and Emergence
in Statistical Mechanics
Sergio Chibbaro, Lamberto Rondoni, and Angelo Vulpiani
1
Introduction
Statistical mechanics originates in the study of the properties of macroscopic bod-
ies, i.e. of objects made of very large numbers of microscopic particles (atoms or
molecules) whose dynamics follows mechanical laws, that are classical or quantum,
depending on the case (Landau & Lifshitz, 1980; Ma, 1985). One may formally
write these equations for all the particles in the system, and may in principle solve
them. However, the number of degrees of freedom, hence of equations to solve, is
huge and, in addition, the initial conditions are not known, therefore the solution
of this problem is impossible in practice. At the same time, knowledge of positions
and velocities of all the particles, which amounts to endless tables of numbers, is
not particularly informative, if one is interested in temperature, pressure, elasticity,
magnetization etc. This impossibility is hardly any concern.
On the other hand, whether the microscopic motions are very complicated or not,
whether they are known or not, we observe that the macroscopic behaviours are
relatively simple and understandable in terms of a reduced number of “observables”
following relatively simple laws. In SM, the observed macroscopic simplicity, in spite
of the expected complexity of the microscopic motions, is attributed to the statistical
nature of the macroscopic laws, which reduces the complexity by averaging over the
many degrees of freedom. The result is not purely mechanical (Castiglione et al.,
2008; Ma, 1985; Landau & Lifshitz, 1980), and qualitatively differs from merely
mechanical laws. That is why probabilities constitute the fundamental tool of SM.
S. Chibbaro
LISN Université Paris-Saclay, Rue du Belvedère, 91405 Orsay cedex, France
e-mail: sergio.chibbaro@universite-paris-saclay.fr
L. Rondoni
Dipartimento di Scienze Matematiche, Politecnico di Torino, Corso Duca degli Abruzzi, 24,
10129 Torino, Italy
e-mail: lamberto.rondoni@polito.it
A. Vulpiani (B)
Dipartimento di Fisica Universitá degli studi di Roma “La Sapienza”,
Piazzale A. Moro, 5, 00185 Roma, Italy
e-mail: angelo.vulpiani@roma1.infn.it
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
S. Wuppuluri and I. Stewart (eds.), From Electrons to Elephants and Elections,
The Frontiers Collection, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-92192-7_20
339

340
S. Chibbaro et al.
Their usage in physics has been pioneered by the founding fathers of SM, Maxwell,
Boltzmann and Gibbs, who changed the very idea of the term prediction in physics
and, as a consequence, in philosophy as well.
Given that this subject is one and a half century old, why should we discuss it
today? In our opinion there are at least three good reasons for that:
1. The subject is of interest by itself, both for scientists and philosophers, since it it
exempliﬁes how a new phenomenon may emerge from the typical behaviour of a
lower level one. In particular, the relation between microscopic and macroscopic
laws is paradigmatic of how reductionist approaches to complex phenomena in
many branches of science are prone to failure (Batterman, 2002; Berry, 1994;
Chibbaro et al., 2014a,b).
2. The subject is pedagogically relevant: with respect to other appealing but rather
speculative frameworks, like ecology or cosmology, it allows a concrete discus-
sion of the main conceptual issues concerning the link between different levels
of description of a given reality.
3. The subject is important in the development of current technology: for instance,
challenging frontiers for the applications of statistical physics are provided by
systems with a small number of degrees of freedom, far from the thermodynamic
limit, such as those of interesting in bio- and nano-technologies. Another frontier
is given by non Hamiltonian models, which are considered appropriate in the
description of granular materials, active matter, epidemics, etc. In these cases,
one or both of the original assumptions of SM, namely the very many degrees of
freedom and the Hamiltonian dynamics, are absent. Therefore the foundations
and applicability of the theory have to be scrutinised (Ma, 1985), in the light of a
presumably even higher relevance of probabilities than in the original framework
of SM (Zanghì, 2005).
TherelevanceofprobabilitytheoryforSMstemsfromtheoriginalideaofBoltzmann,
who associated macroscopic (thermodynamic) quantities to averages of mechanical
observables of the microscopic constituents of matter. In particular, he adopted fre-
quency of events as the basic notion of probability (Goldstein, 2001; Vulpiani et al.,
2014). In Boltzmann’s SM, probability has no relation to measures of ignorance or
uncertainty,1 and it does not make any use of collections of identical objects.
This is part, instead, of Gibbs approach to SM, in which averages are computed
with respect to probabilities that represent how the microscopic phases of large
ensembles of identical objects are distributed in their phase spaces. This corresponds
to the classical notion of probability, which differs from the frequentist notion, but it
is commonly expected be equivalent to that. As computations of time-averages are
much harder than ensemble calculations, one commonly accepts ergodic hypothesis,
which amounts to such equivalence, and proceeds as prescribed by Gibbs. Therefore,
a question arises about the link between the probabilistic computations of SM, and
1 This inspired a whole branch of mathematics, known as ergodic theory, which represents one
way of introducing probabilities in the analysis of the otherwise rigidly deterministic dynamical
systems.

Probability, Typicality and Emergence in Statistical Mechanics
341
the results of laboratory experiments, which are conducted on a single realization of
the macroscopic object under investigation.
In our opinion, the main theoretical issue to be addressed, in order to answer
this question is the justiﬁcation of typicality, i.e. of the fact that time averages of
macroscopic quantities in the evolution of a single system are very close to averages
of that quantity over ensembles of microscopically distinct but otherwise identical
replicas of that system (Goldstein, 2012). This fundamental property can be seen as
emergent in the proper limits.
To convince ourselves that this is not a hopeless project, we may refer to one of
the best propositions used to link probability and physics, the Cournot’s principle:
An event with very small probability will not happen.
Actually, this statement may be associated with the one in Jakob Bernoulli’s cele-
brated book Ars Conjectandi (1713), which reads:
Something is morally certain if its probability is so close to certainty that shortfall
is imperceptible.
We do not enter the debate about the validity of such a principle, see (Shafer & Vovk,
2001) for a nice analysis of it. However, we recall that eminent mathematicians, such
as P. Levy, J. Hadamard, and A. N. Kolmogorov, considered the Cournot’s principle
as the only sensible connection between probability and the empirical world. That
connection granted, Levy stressed the concrete character of probability, arguing that,
at the ontological level:
Probability is a physical property just like length and weight
In this chapter, we shall explain how macroscopic laws emerge as statistical laws
from the microscopic ones: in passing from the microscopic realm to the macroscopic
one, novel properties arise, which are alien to the microscopic realm. In summary: (i)
we ﬁrst illustrate the main ideas of Boltzmann, and the entailing ergodic hypothesis
for systems made of very many degrees of freedom. Then, we will analyse some
examples with regard to irreversibility and typicality: (ii) to this purpose, the Ehren-
fest model will be used. This is a stochastic process concerning N non-interacting
particles, and it can be rigorously analysed, showing that, in the N →∞limit, irre-
versible behaviours characterize almost all realizations of the process; this will be
followed by (iii) numerical simulations of single systems made of many particles,
showing their irreversibility.
We note that conceptually a stochastic process is fundamentally different from the
deterministic reversible dynamics of Hamiltonian particle systems. Nevertheless, it
can be rigorously proven that particular deterministic systems can be mapped into
stochastic processes, and when that is not the case, the presence of chaos in interacting
particle systems effectively amounts to a certain degree of dynamical randomness.
Assuming that this is the case for systems of interest, as it has been repeatedly
demonstrated in the literature, and as we will also show, the stochastic process we
consider turns useful because it allows a pregnant quantitative analysis of the onset
of typicality in the large N limit.

342
S. Chibbaro et al.
2
Probability and Real World
Discussing the foundations of SM necessarily starts with the two seminal contribu-
tions given by Boltzmann (Cercignani, 1998; Goldstein, 2001):
1. the use of probabilities in the calculation of physical quantities;
2. the link between microscopic dynamics (mechanical laws) and macroscopic
properties (thermodynamics).
The second is formalised by Boltzmann’s celebrated relation
S = k ln W .
(1)
where S is the entropy of a given state, and W is number of possible micro-
scopic conﬁgurations corresponding that macroscopic state. In the Hamiltonian
dynamics picture, this number is then identiﬁed with the phase space volume
occupied by the relevant microscopic phases. For a system of N particles each
with d degrees of freedom, a microscopic phase is a 2dN-dimensional vector,
 = (Q1, P1; Q2, P2; ...; QN, PN), whose components are the d-dimensional coor-
dinates Qi and momenta Pi, i = 1, ..., N of all particles. The volume in the phase
space is thus deﬁned for a ﬁxed energy as
W(E, V, N) =
1
N!h3N

δ(H(Q, P) −E)d3NQd3NP ,
(2)
where h is the 2d-dimensional volume of a small cell, that we may think refers to a
single particle (Landau & Lifshitz, 1980).2
From a philosophical standpoint, Eq. (1) plays the role of a bridge law (Chibbaro
et al., 2014a), connecting the atomic level to the macroscopic one, and constitutes the
fundamental ingredient of SM, that justiﬁes all its applications to condensed matter
physics and chemistry.
Linked to point I is the ergodic hypothesis, which connects dynamics and prob-
ability. This is done as follows. Consider a macroscopic object of N interacting
particles each with 3 degrees of freedom, and let the microscopic state be described
by X ∈R6N. A measurement of some macroscopic quantity, for instance the pres-
sure, is supposed to last much longer than the molecular time scales, and the result
of the measurement is taken to be the time average over the measurement time T , of
some mechanical property that is function of X. The measurement tool is therefore
said to effectively compute the following quantity:
¯AT = 1
T
T

0
A(X(t))dt .
(3)
2 The use of the symbol h should not lead to believe that quantum effects are taken into consideration.
In the present picture, quantum mechanics plays no role.

Probability, Typicality and Emergence in Statistical Mechanics
343
In principle, the computation of ¯AT requires the initial condition X(0), and the
determination of the time evolution following from that initial phase, X(t). Given
that X(t) represents the complete microscopic motion, this is surely beyond any
human capability.
Boltzmann’s ingenious idea to overcome this difﬁculty, i.e. the ergodic hypothesis,
is to replace the time average with a suitable average on the the phase space. He
assumed that
lim
T →∞
1
T
T

0
A(X(t))dt =

A(X)ρ(X)dX ,
(4)
where ρ(X) is the suitable probability density. The sense of this hypothesis is that the
physically relevant but impossible computation of the time-average can actually be
turned into a (generally exceedingly simpler) probabilistic computation. In particular,
if the ergodic hypothesis is assumed to be valid, it is easy to derive also the canonical
Boltzmann-Gibbs distribution for a system which exchanges energy with an external
environment, and then deduce the corresponding thermodynamics. If successful, this
process achieves the goal of SM.
The issue is now whether the ergodic hypothesis is valid or not in the cases
of physical interest. Unfortunately, many numerical investigations, starting from
the FPUT (Fermi, Pasta, Ulam and Tsingou) work (Gallavotti, 2007) on chains of
non linear oscillators, as well as rigorous mathematical results, notably the KAM
(Kolmogorov, Arnold and Moser) theorem on non integrable systems (Dumas, 2014),
show that the ergodic hypothesis does not hold rigorously in the form given above,
if generic functions of phase A are considered. One could, thus, naively conclude
that ergodicity cannot be taken as central in the foundations of SM, and that it could
even be misleading. As a matter of fact, one ﬁnds that the ergodic hypothesis cannot
be so lightly discarded. Indeed, it turns out that:
1. the Boltzmann-Gibbs probability distributions (the classical ensembles) are
valid;
2. molecular dynamics gives correct results, being generally based on the ergodic
hypothesis.
To understand these facts, one may recall the original Boltzmann’s reasoning, that
has since been considered the standard explanation of the success of the ergodic
hypothesis (Landau & Lifshitz, 1980; Ma, 1985), even though it has been variously
challenged in time (Bricmont, 1996; Gaspard, 2005). That reasoning has been made
mathematically rigorous by Khinchin (1949). In a nutshell, Khinchin’s argues that the
ergodic hypothesis is “practically” true, as far as physical phenomena are considered,
if
• N ≫1;
• suitable observables are selected;
• one allows for failure of (4) in a small region of the phase space.
Khinchin proved that, for the class of separable sum functions deﬁned by

344
S. Chibbaro et al.
f (X) =
N

n=1
fn(qn, pn),
(5)
where each fn represents a single particle contribution, the following holds
Prob
|δf (X)|
N
≥
c1
N 1/4

≤
c2
N 1/4
(6)
where c1, c2 are constants, and δf (X) is the difference between the time average
starting at X and the average value computed in the microcanonical ensemble. It is
worth noting that many interesting microscopic functions of phase are sum functions,
like kinetic energy, the momentum etc. Then, Khinchin considered non interacting
systems, whose energy (Hamiltonian) is expressed as
H =

n
h1(qn, pn).
(7)
where each h1 term is the energy of one particle. That is a serious limitation of
the approach, but Mazur and van der Linden generalised Khinchin’s result to the
physically more interesting case of (weakly) interacting particles (Mazur & van der
Linden, 1963), whose hamiltonian can be written as
H =

n
h1(qn, pn) +

n,n′
V (|qn −qn′|) .
(8)
In brief, it has been proven that, although the ergodic hypothesis as formulated above
is not generally rigorously true for physically interesting systems, it remains valid
for physically relevant observables of a wide class of systems made of very many
particles. Indeed, in this case, violations of the hypothesis are restricted to negligibly
small regions of phase space, in which the system may fall with a probability of order
O(N −1/4), that vanishes in the N →∞limit, but is deﬁnitely irrelevant “already”
for 1024 particles.
The main ingredients of this reasoning are the large value of N, together with the
fact that one only needs to consider a special class of phase functions. This makes
by and large marginal the role of the details of the microscopic dynamics, apart from
the fact that it must preserve phase space volumes, like Hamiltonian dynamics does.
One consequence of having a restricted set of observables and and very large
N, is that one may separate different space and time scales. The fact that N ≫1
implies that particles are much smaller than the macroscopic body they constitute.
Moreover, when these particles are allowed to move almost freely in space, thanks
to their weak interactions, their mean-free path λ has also to be much smaller than
the characteristic macroscopic length L of the object they belong to. Such distances
can then be associated with the corresponding time-scales, i.e. the times needed to
cross them with the particles average velocity.

Probability, Typicality and Emergence in Statistical Mechanics
345
The separation of scales is fundamental for the emergence of novel phenomena,
when passing from one level of description to another (Berry, 1994; Kadanoff, 2013;
Drossel, 2015). Indeed, it is required for spatial correlations to be negligible over dis-
tances that are very small on the macroscopic scale, which is the basis for quantities
such as the internal energy, the entropy etc. to be extensive, as observed in ther-
modynamics. Moreover, the separation of time scales allows the realization of local
thermodynamic equilibrium in sufﬁciently short times, that the average performed
by a measurement appears to account for all the possible values the observable of
interest can take. Consequently, the initial condition is irrelevant, and the ergodic
hypothesis is vindicated.
That is the content of the condition known as typicality, which states that extensive
observables will stay close to their mean value; and we now see that such a condition
is better established if the number of particles is larger. Therefore, in this framework,
the “atypical” behaviours can be considered of vanishing probability when dealing
with macroscopic objects, in agreement with thermodynamics, that is deterministic
and excludes them.
We conclude this section noting that while the approach illustrated above provides
a convincing basis for the applicability of SM to the description of macroscopic
objects, it does not cover the whole spectrum of relevant problems. In particular, given
a generic initial condition, and an observable O, estimates of the minimum value of
the measurement time T , such that ¯OT ≃⟨O⟩, are hardly available. This problem
has been widely investigated since the FPUT numerical experiment, in which the 1-
dimensional nature of the system hinders the decay of various kinds of correlations,
making the local thermodynamic equilibrium hard to establish (Gallavotti, 2007).
While this does not allow a direct connection with thermodynamics, it does not
prevent the use of SM, which in this respect generalizes the macroscopic theories to
small systems, like 1-dimensional systems must be.
2.1
Statistical Mechanics as Statistical Inference?
As argued above, we believe that Boltzmann’s justiﬁcation of SM, based on the large
number of degrees of freedom and on typicality, is conceptually satisfactory when
dealing with the emergence of macroscopic phenomena from microscopic dynamics.
Nevertheless, there exists a radical anti-dynamical point of view which takes SM as a
mere form of statistical inference, and not like a theory of objective physical reality.
This view is philosophically pragmatic and anti-realistic, and it implies that prob-
abilities measure the degree of truth of a logical proposition, rather than describing
the state of a given material object. This approach has become quite fashionable in
the framework of “complex systems”, and can be traced back to the work of Jaynes
(1957), who expressed this idea through the maximum entropy principle (MaxEnt): a
general rule for ﬁnding the probability of a given event when only partial information
is available. In a nutshell, the principle proceeds as follows: given the expected values
ci of m independent functions fi, deﬁned on a space of coordinates x, a probability

346
S. Chibbaro et al.
distribution ρ is constructed, in such a way that
ci =

fi(x)ρ(x)dx ≡⟨fi⟩
i = 1, ..., m .
(9)
As the name anticipates, the construction proceeds by maximisation of a formal
entropy function H, under the constraints (9), which is thought to generalize the
Gibbs entropy (Castiglione et al., 2008; Gibbs, 1906). In practice, using the Lagrange
multipliers procedure, the probability density ρ is obtained maximising
H = −

ρ(x) ln ρ(x)dx,
(10)
under the constraints ci = ⟨fi⟩. One then obtains:
ρ(x) = 1
Z exp
m

i=1
λi fi(x) ,
(11)
where the parameters λ1, .., λm depend on the values c1, ..., cm. This approach may
indeed be applied to the statistical mechanics of systems with a ﬁxed number of
particles; for instance, ﬁxing the value of the mean energy leads to the usual canonical
Gibbs distribution in a very simple and elegant fashion (Peliti, 2011; Ufﬁnk, 1995).
Therefore, the MaxEnt appears as a cornucopia, out of which one can extract in a
straightforward way the main results of SM.
This conceptual issue deserves a critical discussion. Indeed, the interest of such
an approach comes from the fact that most phenomena of scientiﬁc interest, notably
the biological phenomena, lack a reliable theory, while there is good amount of data
concerning them. Two difﬁculties immediately arise:
1. the ancient saying “ex nihilo nihil” continues to be appealing;
2. unperformed experiments have no results.
In this respect, a caustic, but insightful example was conceived by Ma (1985):
“How many days a year does it rain in Hsinchu?” 3 One might reply “As there are
two possibilities, to rain or not to rain, and I am completely ignorant about Hsinchu,
therefore it rains six months in a year.”
The important point Ma wants to make is that it is not possible to infer something
about a real phenomenon, thanks to our ignorance. As recalled in the previous section,
probability in SM is used in relation to objective frequencies, it is the ratio of numbers
extracted from concrete observations. In the MaxEnt framework, it is instead related
to the degree of uncertainty or of our ignorance about an event: lack of knowledge
is used to produce knowledge.
Apart from these very general considerations, the weakest technical aspect of the
MaxEnt approach is its dependence on the choice of the variables needed to represent
3 Hsinchu is a chinese city on the Paciﬁc ocean.

Probability, Typicality and Emergence in Statistical Mechanics
347
a given phenomenon. Tis fact can be understood as follows. Given a property X,
whose values x are distributed according to the probability density ρX, one realizes
that the “entropy” HX = −

ρX(x) ln ρX(x)dx is not an intrinsic quantity of the
phenomenon X, hence it is unclear how H can characterize X. For instance, changing
parametrisation, i.e. using the coordinates y = f (x) in place of x, where f is an
invertible function, the entropy of the same phenomenon turns:
HY = −

ρY(y) ln ρY(y)dy = HX +

ρX(x) ln | f ′(x)|dx .
(12)
Therefore the MaxEnt gives different solutions if different variables are adopted to
describe the very same phenomenon. In order to avoid this unacceptable condition,
Jaynes later proposed a more sophisticated version of the MaxEnt, in terms of the
relative “entropy":
H ∗= −

ρ(x) ln
ρ(x)
q(x)

dx ,
(13)
where q is a known probability density. H ∗at variance with the entropy H, does not
depend on the choice of variables. Nonetheless, H ∗now depends on the distribution
q, hence the problem is merely shifted toward the selection of such a probability
density, which is analogous to the problem of choosing the proper variables.
For instance, knowledge of the mean energy and taking a uniform distribution,
say q = const, leads to the correct Gibbs distribution, but this q is, in principle,
either a totally arbitrary choice, or it amounts to an a priori knowledge of the correct
result. Analogously, while the correct variables for the description of equilibrium
thermodynamic systems are well known, because they concern comparatively very
simple phenomena, which have been investigated for very long, the same cannot
be stated about generic systems, such as the complex ones for which the MaxEnt
principle is supposed to provide a theoretical framework.
In conclusion, even the second, more elaborate method, is not truly predictive.
Therefore, although the MaxEnt principle can be considered a neat and elegant way
of deriving Gibbs-like probability distributions, when they are known to apply, we
see no reason to found SM on it. Presumably, it may be useful to gain insight on
a given phenomenon, in the absence of informed guiding principles, to be tested
together with other alternatives, but one should keep in mind that it may lead into
error, since Gibbs-like probability distributions are not generic, not even in relatively
simple physical phenomena (Auletta et al., 2017).
3
The Old Debated Problem of Irreversibility
Typicality, which we have ﬁrst discussed in the case of equilibrium systems, plays
an important role also in the case of irreversible non-equilibrium phenomena. To
illustrate this fact, let us begin with two simple observations:

348
S. Chibbaro et al.
1. microscopic mechanical laws are invariant under time reversal:
t →−t , q →q , p →−p .
(14)
2. the macroscopic world is described by irreversible laws, e.g. the Fick equation
for the diffusion of a scalar concentration C
∂tC = DC ,
(15)
where D is the diffusivity of the scalar.
The question thus arises: is it possible to derive macroscopic (irreversible) equations
starting from a microscopic (reversible) description (Lebowitz, 1993)?
This fundamental question constitutes the core of the objections raised by Loschmidt
and Zermelo about Boltzmann’s celebrated H-theorem, which describes an irre-
versible evolution from non-equilibrium toward equilibrium states (Huang, 2009).
Loschmidttackleddirectlytheissueofreversibility,whileZermeloappliedPoincaré’s
recurrence theorem, that shortly earlier had been demonstrated. The theorem states
that, given a conservative system, like the newtonian ones we consider, and an initial
condition in its phase space, the entailing evolution will sooner or later come back
arbitrarily close to the starting point. In other words, there is “recurrence”. Therefore,
if a function of phase increases for a while,4 sooner or later it has to decrease; which
apparently means that the second law of thermodynamics cannot be derived from
the newtonian dynamics of a system made of N particles.
Beside technical points, Boltzmann rapidly understood and refuted Zermelo’s
mathematically correctly formulated paradox, explaining the physical content of
his theory. First of all, one must realize that physics, like all measurements one
can perform, is about speciﬁc space and time scales. Then, Boltzmann’s point of
view was masterly summarised by Smoluchowski as follows: A process appears
irreversible when the initial state has a recurrence time which is long compared to
the time of observation In fact, Zermelo’s paradox is physically irrelevant because,
as rigorously proven by Kac (1957) for ergodic systems with N degrees of freedom,
the recurrence-time goes like
⟨TR⟩= τoC N ,
(16)
where τo is a typical time, and C > 1 depends on the desired precision of recurrence.
Therefore, the mathematically correct Zermelo’s argument is physically irrelevant
because, given N for a macroscopic system, the corresponding recurrence time is
unphysically and ridiculously huge: well beyond many ages of our universe for just
a cubic centimetre of air.
Loschmidt raised a subtler criticism, that requires more elaborate analysis, see
Sect. 3.2 below.
4 Most notably the opposite of the H-functional taken by Boltzmann to mirror the entropy of an
isolated system.

Probability, Typicality and Emergence in Statistical Mechanics
349
3.1
Use and Abuse of Probabilities (Ensembles)
and Entropies
Gibbs ensembles are one of the cornerstones of SM, yet we believe that they are
often introduced in very unfortunate fashions. For instance, in standard textbooks []
one can ﬁnds rather obscure statements, such as
“an ensemble is an inﬁnite collection of identical systems”
Gibbs’ goal, who acknowledged Maxwell and Boltzmann for introducing ensem-
bles (Gibbs, 1906), was to use them in order to reformulate the Boltzmann’s prob-
abilistic approach based on the ergodic hypothesis. He then deﬁned an ensemble as
an inﬁnite (imaginary) collection of macroscopically identical systems, that differ in
their microscopic phases. Mathematically, such a collection could be intuitively and
efﬁciently represented by a distribution of points in the phase space. The physical
reasons behind the applicability of this idea have been outlined e.g. by Fermi (1956).
He explained that an ensemble represents the microscopic states explored by the
dynamics of a single system, in the time taken by a measurement, but only under
some conditions. In particular, the transitions from microscopic state to microscopic
state must be much faster than the measurement.
Therefore, from the thermodynamic perspective, which is a deterministic descrip-
tion of single systems, taking too seriously statistical ensembles may be misleading
and, in fact, a source of errors. Different is the case of systems that are not of ther-
modynamic interest, for which probabilities may be the only sensible information,5
which however we do not treat here.
Let us consider, for example, the entropy of a given system, and let ρ(X,t) be a
probability distribution of its microscopic states in the phase space. The so called
Gibbs-entropy is then deﬁned as:
SG(t) = −kB

ρ(X,t) ln ρ(X, t) dX = SG(0) .
(17)
One may be tempted to think of the dynamics of the collection of ensemble members
described by ρ(X,t) as of the molecules of a certain system, and their evolution in
phase space as the diffusion of molecules in real-space. However, one should note
that phase space is an abstract, exceedingly high-dimensional space, that is totally
different fro the 3-dimensional real space. Phase points are not molecules,6 hence
the evolution of their density has in general no physical content at all. In fact, if the
N particles of the system obey the Hamilton equations of motion, the celebrated
Liouville Theorem states that volumes in phase space are conserved by the time
5 When dealing with non-macroscopic systems, thermodynamics does not strictly apply. This is the
case, for instance, of Brownian particles immersed in a liquid. In this case, only a probabilistic,
ensemble, description appears interesting and feasible.
6 For instance, they have no extension and do not interact, while molecules occupy a certain volume
and interact with each other. Moreover, one phase point represents a whole N-particles system,
which something totally different from one of the N particles.

350
S. Chibbaro et al.
evolution. An immediate consequence of which is that the Gibbs entropy SG is
constant in time (Huang, 2009). In other words, while the Gibbs entropy correctly
yields the equilibrium thermodynamic entropy of the system, it does not represent
the growing entropy of an isolated nonequilibrium system: the Gibbs entropy is not
a suitable SM counterpart of the thermodynamic entropy.
To overcome this difﬁculty, many authors have introduced a coarse-graining of
the phase space, i.e. a partition of phase space made of cells of given small size, say
ϵ, and a corresponding coarse-grained version of the probability density and of the
Gibbs entropy. The probability for the microscopic phase to lie in the i−the cell at
time t is expressed by:
Pϵ(i, t) =


ϵ(i)
ρ(X, t) dX ,
(18)
and the corresponding coarse grained Gibbs entropy is deﬁned by:
SG,ϵ(t) = −kB

i
Pϵ(i, t) ln Pϵ(i, t) .
(19)
Then, unlike SG, the quantity SG,ϵ is not constant in time: it grows monotonically,
if ρ is not invariant, till a maximum is reached. But this success in describing an
evolving “entropy” is only apparent, and not real. One of the main, far from unique,
difﬁculties that this method faces is that the evolution of SG,ϵ is not intrinsic, but
depends on ϵ. Also, it has been proven that SG,ϵ does not grow for a while: it remains
constant up to a crossover time t∗∼ln(1/ϵ), which grows without bounds, when ϵ
decreases (Castiglione et al., 2008; Falcioni et al., 2007). Physically this makes no
sense; it is analogous to state that the heat generated by burning one litre of gasoline
depends on how accurately we observe the phenomenon, and if we observe it very
accurately, no heat is generated...
3.2
The H Theorem
A physical framework in which macroscopic irreversibility emerges out of micro-
scopic reversible dynamics is afforded by the celebrated H-Theorem, which Boltz-
mann derived within the kinetic theory of gases. Here, one starts from the one par-
ticle distribution function f (q, p, t), which represents the mass density in the so-
called μ- space, i.e. the space of a single particle coordinates and momenta, which 6-
dimensional for particles with 3 degrees of freedom. In the limit of dilute monoatomic
gas, with rather subtle assumptions, Boltzmann derived the time evolution equation
of f , which takes the form:
∂
∂t f (q, p, t) +

j
p j
m
∂
∂q j
f (q, p, t) +

j
˙p j
∂
∂p j
f (q, p, t) = C( f, f ) ,
(20)

Probability, Typicality and Emergence in Statistical Mechanics
351
where C( f, f ) is a bilinear integral term which accounts for the (weak) interactions
among the particles. This equation implies that the quantity:
SB(t) = −H(t) = −kB

f (q, p, t) ln f (q, p, t) dq dp
(21)
constantly increases, until an equilibrium state is reached (Huang, 2009):
dSB(t)
dt
≥0 ,
where “ =′′ holds only at equilibrium
(22)
Boltzmann could then identify his entropy SB with the thermodynamic entropy of
an isolated dilute gas. Equation (22) is called “H-theorem”. The physical content is
that the second law of thermodynamics is obtained via SB, (21), casting the laws of
classical mechanics, which are reversible, into a suitable probabilistic framework.
In addition to the recurrence paradox formulated by Zermelo, which we have
observed to be physically irrelevant, another paradox has been devised to contra-
dict Boltzmann’s approach and his H-theorem: the reversibility paradox, usually
attributed to Loschmidt.7 In fact, this paradox is mathematically justiﬁed, like Zer-
melo’s paradox, and can be equally dismissed, as irrelevant for the physics of macro-
scopic systems.
To understand that, let us recall the assumptions underlying the Boltzmann theory.
First of all, the number of particles N is very large. Then, the one particle distribution
function f (q, p, t) that is the main theoretical object in the theory, can be seen as
an empirical distribution function, concerning the positions and velocities of the N
particles, formally expressed by:
f (q, p, t) = 1
N
N

n=1
δ[q −qn(t)]δ[p −pn(t)] .
(23)
Therefore,
1. f (q, p, t) is a well deﬁned macroscopic observable: the number density of par-
ticles;
2. f (q, p, t) can be measured (e.g. in numerical simulations) and such a measure-
ment concerns the single system under investigation, made of the N particles:
there is no need to refer to the statistical ensembles.
It has then been proven by Lanford that the microscopic Hamiltonian, reversible,
dynamics is not incompatible with the H-theorem (Lanford, 1981). Indeed, given a
hard-sphere system; considering the Boltzmann-Grad limit, i.e. N →∞, σ →0 so
that Nσ 2 →constant, where σ is the diameter of the particles; and starting from
7 The content of the paradox is the following. Given that microscopic dynamics is reversible in
time, if we were able to reverse time, the dynamics should trace back its trajectory, and therefore
also SB should decrease.

352
S. Chibbaro et al.
an initial condition in a “good set”, one obtains that f (q, p, t) evolves as prescribed
by the Boltzmann equation, hence the H-theorem holds. In other words, Lanford
proved that
f (q, p, t)≃fB(q, p, t) ,
(24)
where fB(q, p, t) is the solution of the Boltzmann equation. This result holds for
a short time, which is a fraction of the mean-collision time, for N ≫1 and a typ-
ical X(0); but it is enough to prove rigorously that Hamiltonian dynamics, in the
proper limit, does not violate the Boltzmann equation, and one obtains an irreversible
behaviour from a microscopic reversible dynamics (Castiglione et al., 2008; Cerino
et al., 2016; Chibbaro et al., 2014a; Lebowitz, 1993).
It is further worth noting that the validity of the H-theorem does not rest on the
details of the particles interactions, as long as they exert a short range repulsion. This
is important, from a physical point of view, since it means that the result is quite
general.
3.3
Again About Entropies and Probability
Although at ﬁrst glance the Gibbs and the Boltzmann entropies look similar, their
dynamical conceptual and physical meaning, hence their behaviours are totally dif-
ferent. Both entropies correctly describe equilibrium states, but the Gibbs entropy is
deﬁned in terms of the very abstract notion of phase space probability density or of
ensemble, while the Boltzmann entropy is derived from the very material property
which is the number of particles of one concrete system occupying a given spa-
cial volume, with velocity in a given cube of the velocity space. Therefore, some
understanding of the connection between such diverse entropies is desirable.
Roughly speaking, two main points of view are generally adopted: the subjective
and the objective interpretation of probability. According to the subjective inter-
pretation, probability is a degree of belief in something. One of the most inﬂuential
followers of such a view is Jaynes, who claimed that the entropy of a physical system
depends on the observers’ knowledge of it, or on their (informed) belief concern-
ing the phenomenon of interest. In the objective interpretation, the probability of an
event is instead determined by the the physics of the system of interest and not by
the available or missing information.
This difference allows us to distinguish between thermodynamic irreversibility,
and the relaxation of a phase-space probability distribution ρ(X, t) to an invariant
(constantintime)distribution,furtherclarifyingthatanabstractensemblemustnotbe
confused with a given macroscopic system. Indeed, for dynamical system exhibiting
a good degree of chaos, one commonly observes that ρ(X, t) converges in time to an
invariant probability distribution, ρ(X, t) →ρinv(X). In other words, the ensemble
averages of all phase functions “irreversibly” converge to given values.
This is not the irreversibility the second law of thermodynamics speaks about! In
the thermodynamic case, the observables of interest of systems prepared in the same

Probability, Typicality and Emergence in Statistical Mechanics
353
way, evolve in the same fashion. If an ensemble average converges, the different
elements of the ensemble, hence their observables, may evolve in totally different
and inconsistent ways. Again, this is a consequence of the fact that phase-space
points are not particles, and their probability density is not a mass distribution. In the
phase space, a single system is represented by just one point and an actual experiment
follows a single trajectory, not a cloud of points from which a collection of different
trajectories arises.
The physically relevant issue is that a single macroscopic system behaves irre-
versibly and in a unique fashion, starting from a generic initial microscopic state.
In summary, contrarily to some perhaps fashionable claims (Prigogine & Stengers,
1979), there is no direct link between the convergence process of probabilities in
phase space, and the thermodynamic irreversibility. For this reason, the only way to
pursue the program of SM for macroscopic objects is to take an objective approach
to probability, which is the Boltzmann framework. That does not diminish in any
way the importance of dynamical system theory in other problems (Castiglione et al.,
2008), even when the number of degrees of freedom is large (Bohr et al., 1998).
4
Typicality and Irreversibility
The above discussion introduces the question of typicality, which is related to the one
raised by various philosophers of science, regarding the role of the microcanonical
distribution (ensemble) in the description of constant energy (isolated) systems. We
argue that there are very good reasons to assign a privileged role to the microcanonical
ensemble,comparedtootherprobabilitydistributions,thatareequallyinvariantunder
the Hamiltonian evolution. This rather technical subject concerning deterministic
dynamics, can be cast in a suggestive framework, once it has been shown that the
dynamics of interacting particles does commonly and effectively result in a certain
kind of randomness. We thus illustrate the notion of typicality, and the connection
between deterministic and stochastic evolution with some examples.
4.1
Typicality in Stochastic Models
A popular model whose simplicity allows a neat discussion of typicality is the well
known Ehrenfest ﬂea model (Baldovin et al., 2019), that is jokingly referred to the
ﬂeas that jump back and forth between two dogs. The model consists of a Markov
chain (Gnedenko, 2018) representing N “particles”, each of which can either be in
a box called A, or in another box called B. The state of the Markov chain at time
t is identiﬁed by the number nt of particles in A, and the evolution is ruled by a
stochastic law, with given transition probabilities:

354
S. Chibbaro et al.
Pn→n−1 = n
N , Pn→n+1 = 1 −n
N .
dictating how the state nt = n changes in one time step to become nt+1 = n ± 1. In
our SM language, the state nt can be seen as the “macroscopic” state of the system
of interest, while the the corresponding “microscopic” conﬁguration is deﬁned by
the list of the particles lying in box A, considered as distinguishable particles. The
equilibrium (macroscopic) state is expressed by neq = N/2.
The evolution of an ensemble of initial conditions starting from a given state n0
can be described computing not only the mean population ⟨nt⟩but also its variance
σ 2
t = ⟨n2
t ⟩−⟨nt⟩2. One obtains:
⟨nt⟩= N
2 +

1 −2
N
t
0 , σ 2
t = N
4 +

1 −4
N
t
2
0 −N
4

+

1 −2
N
2t
2
0 ,
(25)
where 0 = n0 −N/2. The main result is that ⟨nt⟩→neq = N/2, exponentially
fast with a characteristic time τc = −1/ ln(1 −2/N) ≃N/2 and a standard devia-
tion σt that goes to its equilibrium value
√
N/2 with a characteristic time O(N).
These results for ⟨nt⟩and σt are obtained at the level of the ensemble, i.e. as
averages over the behaviour of all possible single N-particles (macroscopic) systems
obeying Eq. (25). What about a single macroscopic object, i.e. a single realization
of the process?
Figure1 illustrates the result of numerical simulations, showing that for large N,
the single object behaves “typically”. In more mathematical terms, one has:
Prob

nt ≃< nt > for any t ∈[0, T ]

≃1 where T = O(N) ,
(26)
which means that nt practically behaves as the average ⟨nt⟩in almost all cases.
Consider now a far from equilibrium initial condition, e.g. n0 ≃N. It is possible
to show that, for N ≫1, up to a time O(N/2), i.e. as long as nt remains far from
 0.5
 0.6
 0.7
 0.8
 0.9
 1
 0
 0.5
 1
 1.5
 2
 2.5
 3
N=106
nt / N
t / N
 0.614
 0.618
 0.622
 0.6  0.61  0.62
N=106
(nt-〈nt〉) / N
t / N
-0.002
-0.001
 0
 0.001
 0.002
1
10
10-2
10-1
Fig. 1 Several realisations of the time evolution of the state of the Ehrenfest ﬂea model, nt, for
N = 106. The coloured region corresponds to three standard deviations from the running mean:
⟨nt⟩−3σt < nt < ⟨nt⟩+ 3σt, from (Baldovin et al., 2019)

Probability, Typicality and Emergence in Statistical Mechanics
355
neq, each single realization of nt stays “close” to the time dependent average ⟨nt⟩.
Indeed using tools of probability theory, one can show (Baldovin et al., 2019):
Prob
|nt −⟨nt⟩|
N
< ϵN for any t ∈[0, T ]

≥1 −aN ,
(27)
with the quantities ϵN →0, and aN →0 as N →∞. Taking ϵN ∼N −B with 0 <
B < 1/3, one has aN ∼N −A with A > 0. For instance, B = 0.2 implies A ≥0.2
That means that the overwhelming majority of realisations of the stochastic pro-
cess nt remains close to ⟨nt⟩for a long time, if N is sufﬁciently large. In other words,
every macroscopic measurement on the systems has a very low probability of result-
ing sensibly different from the expected value. This is the conceptual meaning of
“typicality” in SM.
4.2
Typicality in Large Deterministic Systems
The above, exactly solvable stochastic model, neatly quantiﬁes the notion of typi-
cality, but it may appear inappropriate in one investigation concerning the statistical
properties of particle systems obeying deterministic equations of motion. The gap
between the stochastic and the deterministic realm is however bridged by standard
deterministic particle systems, whose properties evolve as erratically as they do in
random processes.
Consider, for instance, a channel containing N particles of mass m, closed by a
ﬁxed vertical wall on the left, and by a frictionless piston of mass M on the right
(Cerino et al., 2016). The piston motion is determined by a constant force F and by
its collisions with particles inside the channel, see Fig.2.
Fig. 2 Sketch of a
deterministic (Hamiltonian)
model of a gas conﬁned by a
piston
F
L
ˆx
ˆy

356
S. Chibbaro et al.
The Hamiltonian of this system reads:
H = P2
2M +

i
p2
i
2m +

i< j
U(|qi −q j|) + Uw(q1, ..., qN, X) + F X ,
where U is the interacting potential among the particles, and Uw denotes the inter-
action of the particles with the wall. In the case of point particles, U = 0 and Uw
yields elastic collisions. Then, the dynamics is not chaotic, and it is easy to ﬁnd
the “equilibrium” position of the piston, ⟨X⟩, and its variance σ 2
X. In presence of
interactions, e.g. for interaction potentials like:
U(r) = Uo
r12
,
Uw = Uo

i
1
|xi −X|12
the equations of motion can be solved numerically, and reveal one positive Lyapunov
exponent, i.e. chaos.
Figure3 illustrates the irreversible behavior of the states X(t) of one chaotic and
of one non-chaotic instances of the piston model. Their initial conditions X(0) are
typical assuming a ﬁxed X(0) which is far from equilibrium, which are determined
by the models parameters. In particular, the positions of the particles are initially
distributed uniformly in the interval [0, X(0)], while the velocities initially follow a
Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution at a temperature T different from the equilibrium
temperature Teq, so that |X(0) −Xeq| ≫σeq, where the subscript eq refers to the
equilibrium state.
The result is that the single trajectories are typical: although far from equilibrium,
ﬂuctuations about the corresponding ensemble averages are small compared to such
averages, as in the case of the stochastic Ehrenfest model. This supports the antic-
ipated analogy between stochastic and deterministic systems, both in the presence
and in the absence of chaos, demonstrating that positive Lyapunov exponents are
not required for the randomness associated with a many particles system irreversible
behaviour. As a matter of fact, the numerical results for our deterministic reversible
dynamics look rather similar to those for the stochastic Ehrenfest model, explicitly
showing why irreversibility can be understood as an emergent property of a single
system under proper initial conditions, when N turns sufﬁciently large (Cerino et al.,
2016).
TheseresultsshouldbecontrastedwiththoseofFig.4,whichreportsthebehaviour
of a small N system starting from an initial condition close to equilibrium. It is well
evident the absence of irreversible behaviour.

Probability, Typicality and Emergence in Statistical Mechanics
357
 300
 400
 500
X
(a)
 200
 300
 400
 500
0
2
4
6
8
10
X
t (x 103)
(b)
 5
 15
 25
0
2
4
6
8
10
σX
 5
 15
 25
0
2
4
6
8
10
σX
Fig. 3 X(t) versus t for N = 1024, M = 50, m = 1, F = 150 and X(0) = Xeq + 10σeq in a
chaotic piston (a), and in a non chaotic piston (b). Red lines represent X(t) for a single realization;
black lines refer to the ensemble average ⟨X(t)⟩, (Cerino et al., 2016)
Fig. 4 X(t) versus t, for
initial condition
X(0) = Xeq + 3σeq;
N = 1024, M = 50, m =
1, F = 150 X(t) vs t in (a)
and (b); N = 4, M =
50, m = 1, F = 150 in (c),
from (Cerino et al., 2016)
72
77
82
X
(a)
time
72
77
82
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
X
t
(b)
time
1.0
3.0
5.0
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
X
t
(c)

358
S. Chibbaro et al.
5
Summary and Conclusion
In this contribution we discussed the notion of irreversibility and its relation to typi-
cality, intheframeworkof theSMof macroscopicsystems madeof classical particles.
We pointed out the dangers associated with an uninformed use of probabilities in
phase space, i.e. of statistical ensemble. The fact is that the thermodynamic laws
ruling the behaviour of macroscopic objects are deterministic and, for a given initial
macroscopic state, always lead to the same evolution. Therefore, there is no need
to average over ensembles of differently evolving objects: in the case one really
wants to perform such an average, the results will be equal to that given by one of
those objects. We then formalized this fact with the notion of typicality which, for a
macroscopic observable M, may be expressed as:
Prob

M(t)≃⟨M(t)⟩

≃1 when N ≫1
(28)
where Prob represents the fraction of phase space trajectories enjoying a given prop-
erty, and the property considered is that almost all trajectories separately behave as
their average.
In our investigation, two examples have been analysed, in order to illustrate how
typicality and irreversibility arise in the evolution of systems made of many particles.
The ﬁrst is a stochastic process, known as the Ehrenfest ﬂea model, which is exactly
solvable hence allows us to obtain analytical expressions of the quantities of interest.
While this is not a particle system like the Hamiltonian systems considered by Boltz-
mann, it gives a clear picture of the emergence of irreversibility in its large N limit.
We have then investigated two versions of a gas conﬁned by a moving piston, which
are in fact Hamiltonian particles systems, and we have then shown that the stochastic
and the deterministic systems have totally analogous behaviours, conﬁrming the rel-
evance of the stochastic description, in the case of large N. Finally, we have shown
that for small N irreversibility in a single system, in the sense of Eq. (28), does not
hold. Therefore, this is indeed and emergent property of the macroscopic realm.
Our results have been obtained under the following conditions:
1. the system is made of a very large number of particles, i.e. N ≫1;
2. the initial condition is very far from equilibrium, meaning
• |n0 −N/2| ≫
√
N in the Ehrenfest model
• |X(0) −Xeq| ≫σeq in piston model.
As a ﬁnal remark, let us observe that the notion of typicality we have associated
with the thermodynamic laws, pertains also to the Boltzmann approach. It consists
of an objective operation: counting the cases of interest, and realizing that, with no
exception, they behave in the same prescribed way. However, counting requires a
ﬁnite number of objects. Ensembles, on the other hand, refers to the probability of a
continuum. This is one of the technicalities that requires further investigation.

Probability, Typicality and Emergence in Statistical Mechanics
359
References
Auletta, G., Rondoni, L., & Vulpiani, A. (2017). On the relevance of the maximum entropy principle
in non-equilibrium statistical mechanics The European Physical Journal Special Topics, 226,
2327.
Baldovin, M., Caprini, L., & Vulpiani, A. (2019). Irreversibility and typicality: A simple analytical
result for the Ehrenfest model. Physica A, 524, 422.
Batterman, R. W. (2002). The Devil in the Details: Asymptotic Reasoning in Explanation, Reduction,
and Emergence. Oxford University Press.
Berry, M. V. (1994). Asymptotics, singularities and the reduction of theories (p. 597). Methodology
and Philosophy of Science, IX: Logic.
Bohr, T., Jensen, H. M., Paladin, G., & Vulpiani, A. (1998). Dynamical systems approach to turbu-
lence. Cambridge University Press.
Bricmont, J. (1996). Science of chaos or chaos in Science? Annual New York Academy Science,
775, 131.
Castiglione, P., Falcioni, M., Lesne, A., & Vulpiani, A. (2008). Chaos and coarse graining in
statistical mechanics. Cambridge University Press.
Cercignani, C. (1998). Ludwig Boltzmann: The man who trusted atoms. Oxford University Press.
Cerino, L., Cecconi, F., Cencini, M., & Vulpiani, A. (2016). The role of the number of degrees of
freedom and chaos in macroscopic irreversibility. Physica A, 442, 486.
Chibbaro, S., Rondoni, L., Vulpiani, A. (2014). Reductionism, emergence and levels of reality.
Springer.
Chibbaro, S., Rondoni, L., & Vulpiani, A. (2014). On the foundations of statistical mechanics:
Ergodicity, many degrees of freedom and inference. Communications in Theoretical Physics, 62,
469.
Drossel, B. (2015). On the relation between the second law of thermodynamics and classical and
quantum mechanics. In B. Falkenburg & M. Morrison (Eds.), Why more is different (p. 41).
Springer.
Dumas, H. S. (2014). The KAM story. World Scientiﬁc.
Falcioni, M., Palatella, L., Pigolotti, S., Rondoni, L., & Vulpiani, A. (2007). Initial growth of
Boltzmann entropy and chaos in a large assembly of weakly interacting systems. Physica A, 385,
170.
Fermi, E. (1956). Thermodynamics. Dover Publications.
Gallavotti, G. (Ed.). (2007). The Fermi-Pasta-Ulam problem: A status report. Springer.
Gaspard, P. (2005). Chaos, scattering and statistical mechanics. Cambridge University Press.
Gibbs, J. W. (1906). The scientiﬁc papers of J. Willard Gibbs (Vol. 1). Longmans, Green and
Company.
Gnedenko, B. V. (2018). Theory of probability. Routledge.
Goldstein, S. (2012). Typicality and notions of probability in physics. In Y. Ben-Menahem & M.
Hemmo (Eds.), Probability in physics (p. 59). Springer.
Goldstein, S. (2001). Boltzmann’s approach to statistical mechanics. In J. Bricmont et al. (Eds.),
Chance in physics (p. 39). Springer.
Huang, K. (2009). Introduction to statistical physics. CRC Press.
Jaynes, E. T. (1957). Information theory and statistical mechanics. Physical Review, 106, 620.
Kac, M. (1957). Probability and related topics in physical sciences. American Mathematical Soc.
Kadanoff, L. P. (013). Relating theories via renormalization. Studies in History and Philosophy of
Science Part B, 44, 22.
Khinchin, A. I. (1949). Mathematical foundations of statistical mechanics. Dover.
Landau, L. D., & Lifshitz, E. M. (1980). Statistical physics. Butterworth-Heinemann.
Lanford, O. E. (1981). The hard sphere gas in the Boltzmann- Grad limit. Physica A, 106, 70.
Lebowitz, J. L. (1993). Boltzmann’s entropy and time’s arrow. Physics Today, 46, 32.
Ma, S. K. (1985). Statistical mechanics. World Scientiﬁc.

360
S. Chibbaro et al.
Mazur, P., & van der Linden, J. (1963). Asymptotic form of the structure function for real systems.
Journal of Mathematical Physics, 4, 271.
Peliti, L. (2011). Statistical mechanics in a nutshell. Princeton University Press.
Prigogine, I., & Stengers, I. (1979). La nouvelle alliance: métamorphose de la science. Gallimard.
Shafer, G., & Vovk, V. (2001). Probability and ﬁnance. Wiley.
Ufﬁnk, J. (1995). Can the maximum entropy principle be explained as a consistency requirement?
Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part B, 26, 223.
Vulpiani, A., Cecconi, F., Cencini, M., Puglisi, A., & Vergni, D. (Eds.). (2014). Large deviations in
physics. The legacy of the law of large numbers. Springer.
Zanghì, N. (2005). I fondamenti concettuali dell’approccio statistico in ﬁsica. In V. Allori, M.
Dorato, F. Laudisa & N. Zanghì (Eds.), La natura delle cose: Introduzione ai fondamenti e alla
ﬁlosoﬁa della ﬁsica (p. 202). Carocci.
Zurek, W. H. (2018). Eliminating ensembles from equilibrium statistical physics: Maxwell’s demon,
Szilard’s engine, and thermodynamics via entanglement. Physics Reports, 755, 1.

The Metal: A Model for Modern Physics
Tom Lancaster
1
Introduction
When atoms combine to form a solid, the quantum-mechanical interaction of elec-
trons causes new states of matter to emerge. Condensed matter physics (Anderson,
1985) is the ﬁeld that investigates these states and it has made contributions to our
knowledge that are every bit as fundamental as those arising from the study of particle
physics or cosmology. Central to modern condensed matter physics is the metal: a
state of matter that owes its properties to the interactions between electrons. Despite
the study of metals being a key part of the history of science, and their application in
technology being of immense importance to human civilisation, it is only relatively
recently that we have developed a detailed understanding of this phase of matter. This
understanding involves a shift in our world view from regarding the metallic state as
built from individual particles, to a view where we must consider the many-particle
metallic solid as a whole. In this modern, contextual, viewpoint, the notion of an
electron is replaced by that of a quasiparticle, where the electron effectively dresses
itself in its interactions with the rest of the system. Despite this, it is still possible
to discuss individual electrons, and this mixture of single-particle and whole-system
properties lies at the heart of our understanding of metals. Here we discuss the mod-
ern conception of a metal and its place in condensed matter physics, the ingredients
of a model to describe it and its consequences, not just for condensed matter, but also
for our view of the Universe more widely.
The ability to manipulate metal has been central to the development of human
civilization. We are taught at school about metals being lustrous, relatively soft (that
is, ductile and malleable), and being good conductors of electricity and heat. These
properties are initially explained to us in terms of a lattice of ionic cores of atoms
ﬁxed in a sea of mobile electrons (Rosenberg, 1988). The electrons interact with the
T. Lancaster (B)
Department of Physics, Durham University, South Road, Durham DH1 3LE, UK
e-mail: tom.lancaster@durham.ac.uk
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
S. Wuppuluri and I. Stewart (eds.), From Electrons to Elephants and Elections,
The Frontiers Collection, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-92192-7_21
361

362
T. Lancaster
ion cores and with each other via the electrostatic interaction, which is enshrined in
Coulomb’s law. This classical view of a metal is the sort of thing that Paul Drude
(1863–1906) had in mind in his original model of a metal, formulated three years
after the electron’s discovery (Ashcroft & Mermin, 2003; Coleman, 2015; Singleton,
2001). Drude’s model had some very impressive successes, explaining electrical
resistance in particular, but its failures to describe the metal in detail led physicists
to become uneasy. Work on this model coincided with the development of quantum
mechanics (QM), which provides a rather different view of the world compared to the
one behind Drude’s model, which relied on classical notions of how the particles in a
gas interact (Schiff, 1968). In fact, the application of QM to the problem of metallic
behaviour provided some of the most signiﬁcant tests of quantum theory in its early
days. QM does a very good job of describing the properties of a metal (Ashcroft
& Mermin, 2003; Singleton, 2001), but this in itself is curious in that QM is most
successful at describing single, non-relativistic particles. (This is, particles moving
a speeds much less than the speed of light.) Although the velocities of particles (and
energies of the processes) in a metal put it within the non-relativistic domain, the
metal is built from something like Avogadro’s number (≈6 × 1023) of atoms, and so
it is surprising how well quantum mechanics does in describing it.
Non-relativistic quantum mechanics was developed in parallel with quantum ﬁeld
theory (QFT), a version of quantum theory that is capable of describing relativistic
effects (Lancaster & Blundell, 2014; Peskin & Schroeder, 1995; Zee 2003) and also
the physics of many particles (Coleman, 2015), and by the middle of the twenti-
eth century the methods of QFT were being applied to metals with great success
(Abrikosov et al., 1963). What QFT showed was that the physics of metals is closely
bound up in the physics of many particles and, in a sense we shall discuss, the prop-
erties of metals rely on considering all of the particles in the metal at some level.
Modern condensed matter physics (Anderson, 1985) was shaped by this success and
the description of the metal is now seen (along with the description of phase transi-
tions, also discussed below) as being a key foundational part of the subject. In fact,
our picture of the metal is probably the closest thing we have to a standard model
(Halzen & Martin 1984; Penrose, 2004; Peskin & Schroeder, 1995) in condensed
matter physics. It provides a set of concepts and methods that we use in many areas
of the physics of solids. Where it breaks down, it does so for interesting reasons
that lead to further insights into matter. Its limitations guide us towards new ways of
treating problems in matter.
The rest of this chapter is constructed as follows. We shall start by outlining the
quantum mechanical model of a metal, and its successes, before going on to examine
how whole-system interactions have become increasingly important in how we view
the behaviour of metals. We also discuss how scale and dimensionality allow us to
treat more exotic physical systems based on metals. We shall see how the content
of the metal (electrons) is very much shaped by context. Speciﬁcally, we seek to
describe a macroscopic piece of matter compatible with the relatively low-energy
conditions in which we experience this state.

The Metal: A Model for Modern Physics
363
2
Electrons in a Box
It might be imagined that a simple and successful description of a metal would
involve building it from atoms. We would take the model of an atom (iron say) whose
properties we know, and then build a model of a speck of matter by combining the
model atoms, calculating the properties as we go. This might seems a sensible start
in that we know Schrödinger’s equation that governs the behaviour of the electron,
and so building a metal out of electrons and atoms seems like a reasonable prospect.
However, our progress is rapidly arrested by the scale of the problem. The metal is
a three-dimensional object, comprising N ≈1024 electrons, so we need a quantum
mechanical wavefunction that describes the 3N-dimensional system of the electronic
coordinates. Owing to the size of this task it is not something that is practically
possible with current computational technology, nor likely with any technology in
the coming decades.
In fact, to model a metal we do something rather different from building it from
atoms: we simply ﬁll an empty box with identical electrons (Ashcroft & Mermin,
2003; Rosenberg, 1988; Singleton, 2001). That is, we forget that a metal is built
from atoms and we ignore them. We also ignore the fact that electrons are charged
and should therefore interact (strongly) with each other via electrostatic repulsion.
What we do retain in our model of electrons in a box is some of the rules of quantum
mechanics. The ﬁrst is that the quantum wavefunctions of the individual electrons
have ﬁxed momenta that must be compatible with the size and shape of the box. The
second, which follows from electrons being identical Fermi particles (or fermions),
is that the Pauli exclusion principle (Schiff, 1968) prevents fermions from occupying
the same quantum state in the box. The electrons being identical is key: there is no
in-principle way to tell if two electrons have been swapped. A detail here is that
electrons have a spin, an arrow-like magnetic property that can be described as being
up or down, with the result that two electrons can sit in each energy level: one with
spin-up and one with spin-down. This state of affairs causes the electrons to ﬁll up
the available quantum states, with two electrons (spin up and spin down) at each
energy. This is shown in Fig. 1a. Since a macroscopic mass of metal will contain
something like 1024 electrons, the electrons in the top energy level (known as the
Fermi level) have a high energy, compared to those in Drude’s model, at least. This
basic model of the metal, comprising a stacked up set of electrons, is known as the
Fermi gas.
It is well known that Heisenberg uncertainty puts a limit on our ability to know
both the position and momentum of a particle (Schiff, 1968). An important point
here is that, although we speak of the electrons being stacked up, in that they have
unchanging values of energy, they are not sitting in unique points in real space inside
the box. In fact, each energy corresponds to a unique value of momentum and so
the electrons can be thought of as having precise values of momentum, but as being
completely delocalized in space. Alternatively, we can think of electrons as being
well-described as stationary waves stretching out across the box that represents the
metal such that the wave pattern doesn’t alter in time. The distribution of electrons

364
T. Lancaster
Fig. 1 a Non-interacting
electrons stack up in energy
levels to a maximum known
as the Fermi energy EF. b At
zero temperature all of the
states below the Fermi
energy are occupied. c When
electron-electron interactions
are included, some electronic
matter can be promoted to
higher-energy states, but
there is still a discontinuity at
the Fermi level
in the momentum states of the metal is shown in Fig. 1b, where we see all of the
states are occupied up to the Fermi energy, and then none of the states are occupied.
The discussion so far has implied that the metal is being held at a very low
temperature (T = 0, formally). Once we raise the temperature, we give the electrons
thepossibilityofbeingexcitedintonewstates.AnimportantpropertyoftheFermigas
is that, owing to the exclusion principle, if an electron is going to change its energy,
it must jump into an energy level that is not occupied. This costs the least energy for
those electrons near the Fermi level, where there are lots of unoccupied states close
in energy, and so is most likely for these electrons. As a result, the electrons close to
the Fermi level are responsible for most of the measurable properties of the metal.
Those electrons at energies far below the Fermi energy don’t often change their states
and so exist in the background, at least in our model. When an electron in a ﬁlled
state jumps up above the Fermi level it leaves behind it an unoccupied state. There
is a symmetry between (1) the negatively-charged electron in an unoccupied above
the Fermi level, surrounded by other unoccupied states, and (2) the now-unoccupied
state below the Fermi level that the electron previously occupied, surrounded by
states occupied by negatively charged particles. There is nothing preventing us from
treating the unoccupied state below the Fermi level as a particle in it own right and
so we do so. This particle is known as a hole and has an effective positive charge.
The hole is analogous to the antiparticles in the standard model of particle physics,
which share many of the properties of the particles, but have a reversed charge.1
Using the physicist’s penchant for simpliﬁcation, we can abstract the model down
to its bare bones. The ground state of the system (i.e. the lowest energy state) is
comprised of all of the electrons stacked up in energy (Fig. 1b). If a small amount of
energy is injected into the system then we create excitations in the form of particles
above and below the Fermi energy, called electrons (above the Fermi energy) and
positively-charged holes (below the Fermi energy). The other electrons, stuck in the
energy levels they had in the ground state, play a structural role in the model, but are
1 This picture is very much like Dirac’s original picture of particles and antiparticles. For a discussion
see Lancaster and Blundell (2014).

The Metal: A Model for Modern Physics
365
Fig. 2 a A metal is
characterised by having a
half-ﬁlled energy band with
ﬁlled states next to empty
ones. b An insulator has a
completely ﬁlled band, with
an energy gap separating the
highest occupied level from
the next available one
not the important ones in determining the properties of the metal. (Note however,
the excitations rely on the motion of all of the electrons in their different momentum
states.) We therefore often ignore the electrons in the ground state and refer to this
as a vacuum. Clearly it is not a vacuum in the traditional sense of there being no
particles present. The particle excitations are regarded as excitations of this vacuum.
We shall return to this picture later.
The Fermi gas model does a good job in describing the properties of metals
(Ashcroft&Mermin,2003;Singleton,2001),providingadescriptionmoreconsistent
with experiment than is found with Drude’s model. The existence of the excitations
near the Fermi level allows us to understand electrical conduction, heat conduction
and several other properties of metal. Electrical conductivity, for example, involves
those electrons near the Fermi level being promoted into vacant states by an electric
ﬁeld which causes electric charge to be transported throughout the metal. However,
the model doesn’t yet explain why some materials are metallic and some insulating.
3
Energies and Bands
So far our electrons have not interacted with each other, nor with their environment.
In order to explain the existence of insulating material we now allow the electrons to
interact with the ions that form the material. In Drude’s classical model the electrons
collide with all of the ion cores, but this is not borne out in the quantum-mechanical
treatment. In fact, the wave-like properties of the electrons allow most of the elec-
tronic wavefunctions to naturally avoid any collisions. However, there are particular
values of momentum for which electrons do collide with the ionic cores, with their
resulting scattering altering their behaviour. The result is that electrons cannot exist at
those energies where they scatter strongly. These energies are forbidden and we there-
fore have bands of allowed energies separated by gaps of forbidden ones (Rosenberg,
1988; Singleton, 2001).

366
T. Lancaster
With the structure of the bands ﬁxed by the scattering of the electronic waves,
we again put electrons into the crystal. As before, they stack up in energy with two
electrons per energy state. There are two possible scenarios, shown in Fig. 2. If
the Fermi level sits in the middle of a band then an electron near the Fermi energy
can change its state with little energy cost. This gives metallic conduction and the
material is a metal. If, on the other hand, the Fermi energy coincides with the top
of the band, then there will be a large number of forbidden energies before the next
accessible states are found. It is therefore impossible for the electrons to change their
states without a sizeable input of energies. We don’t have electronic conductivity in
this case and the material is an insulator. Whether a material conducts electricity or
not in this simple model can therefore be thought of as a sort of housing crisis for
electrons: unﬁlled states nearby the Fermi energy leads to conduction, no unﬁlled
states nearby and the electrons must stay put leading to insulating behaviour.
This story of how metallic or insulating properties of a material emerge is one that
rests much of the explanation on the motions of single electrons. It is the scattering of
single electrons from the regular array of ions that creates the structure of allowed and
forbidden energy levels. The Pauli principle (and the presence of the other electrons
in forming the ground state) then forces us to stack up the particles in the available
energy levels and the metallic or insulating properties follow. Although we have
come a long way using only these simple models, what we have not included in our
description of the metal is the interaction of electrons with each other. (As a result this
simpliﬁed model is often called single-particle band theory.) Once we allow electrons
to interact with each other our picture of what is happening in the metal changes rather
profoundly. At this point, we are forced to start taking interactions of the whole of
the system into account in order to continue to reﬁne our description of a metal.
4
Quasiparticles and Field Theory
A simple way of understanding the interactions of electrons in a metal is provided by
the work of physicist Lev Landau (1908–1968), who invites us to consider the follow-
ing thought experiment (Anderson, 1985; Coleman, 2015). We start with the Fermi
gas and imagine a knob we can turn that slowly turns on the interactions between
electrons. That is, the knob controls the strength of the electrostatic (Coulomb) inter-
action between the electrons. As we turn the knob, Landau argues that the particles
interact, and might be expected to shift up and down a little in energy, as shown in
Fig. 3. This shift can be accounted for by changes in the mass of the electron: we
say that interacting electrons have an effective mass by virtue of their interactions.
However, the electronic energy levels do not cross over each other in energy, and so
we can keep track of which non-interacting electron in the Fermi-gas becomes which
interacting electron as the knob is turned. (Since the electrons are identical, crossing
energy levels would mean we lose track of which one is which.) The ability to follow
the system as the interactions are dialled up is known as adiabatic continuity (Ander-
son, 1985) and is often summarised by saying that, as we turn on the interactions, a

The Metal: A Model for Modern Physics
367
Fig. 3 Left: Turning on the interactions causes the energy levels to shift, but they never cross if the
process if adiabatic. a The Fermi gas with a single excited electron and hole. b On turning on the
interactions, the Fermi gas turned into the Fermi liquid, with gas states occupied by electrons and
holesturningintoliquidstatesoccupiedbyquasi-electronsandquasi-holes. AdaptedfromLancaster
and Blundell (2014). Reproduced by permission of Oxford University Press (global.oup.com)
ﬁlled state in the non-interacting gas becomes a ﬁlled state in the interacting system
(Fig. 3).
The state of matter that emerges from a Fermi gas on inclusion of the interacting
electrons is known as a Fermi liquid (Anderson, 1985; Coleman, 2015; Lifshitz
& Pitaevskii, 1980), in analogy with the difference between the weakly interacting,
occasionally colliding molecules in a gas and the more strongly interacting molecules
of the liquid phase. Once we introduce interactions, there is a sense in which the
electron is no longer strictly a single particle, but instead is a single particle that
carries around a cloud reﬂecting the inﬂuence of the other particles in the system
on it. In the presence of interactions, the electrons in the liquid therefore change
their properties and become quasiparticles (Anderson, 1985; Lancaster, 2019). We
can think of these as the original particles “dressed” in a cloud of interactions.
Conceptually we can write
(quasiparticle) = (bare particle) + (interactions),
(1)
where “bare particle” is a shorthand for referring to a non-interacting particle.
The interactions with other electrons can cause the electrons to be removed from
their energy levels and scattered into other levels. This gives a quasi-electron a ﬁnite
time to survive before its state is changed. However, this does not happen equally for
all electrons. Those with energies close to the Fermi energy survive the longest, while
those with energies far from the Fermi energy are most susceptible to scattering and
so have a much reduced lifetime. If the lifetime of a particle is small compared, say, to

368
T. Lancaster
the time we needed to turn on the interactions, then it is not meaningful to say that an
electron quasiparticle even exists. As a result, it is really only meaningful to talk about
individual quasiparticles existing close to the Fermi energy. The rest of the particles
are still there as part of the makeup of the metal, but have ceased to be describable
in terms of the properties we usually ascribe to particles: that is, of their persisting
for a reasonably length of time with their speciﬁc properties. This gives us another
insight into why these electrons close to the Fermi energy are the ones that determine
the properties of the system: they survive long enough to be meaningfully described
as particles (Anderson, 1985). The distribution of electrons for an interacting Fermi
liquid is shown in Fig. 1c. Compared to the non-interacting case of Fig. 1b we see
that some matter is now found above the Fermi energy and some is missing below.
However, there is still a sharp discontinuity at the Fermi energy. Curiously, this sharp
discontinuity is probably the deﬁning feature of a metal, identifying the metal far
more precisely than the properties of conducting electricity or heat, for example. In
cases where this discontinuity is not observed (such as in one-dimensional systems,
discussed below) there are no quasiparticles.
Landau’s Fermi liquid model is enormously useful in understanding why inter-
acting electrons in a metal act the way they do. However, we can also apply a more
formal approach to the interacting electron problem that brings out some similari-
ties with other parts of physics. It was realized in the 1950s, particularly among the
Russian school that grew around Landau, that the methods of quantum ﬁeld theory
(QFT) could be used to model the physics of solids (Abrikosov et al., 1963; Lifshitz
& Pitaevskii, 1980). In QFT, every particle (and antiparticle) is an excitation in a
ﬁeld, deﬁned over all space and time (Lancaster & Blundell, 2014). The ﬁeld with
no particle/antiparticle excitations is referred to as the vacuum. In the absence of
interactions, excitations in the vacuum do not interact. Once we include interactions
then the excitations scatter from each other, but it is also possible to have processes
where particles and antiparticles are spontaneously excited from the vacuum state
and then fall back into it. These are known as vacuum ﬂuctuations. Applied to the
metal, QFT says that there is an electron ﬁeld that ﬁlls the metal whose excitations
are particle-like and hole-like states. There is also the unexcited, vacuum state and,
although in most applications of QFT this would involve there being no particles in
the system, in a metal we have the curious situation where the vacuum state contains
electrons stacked up to the Fermi energy. (Slightly confusingly, therefore, we must
keep distinct the idea of a particle and the idea of an excitation/excited particle.) Vac-
uum ﬂuctuations involve electrons being spontaneously lifted from the vacuum state,
creating an electron and hole pair. This can interact with any other other particles in
the vicinity, before being returned to the vacuum.
QFT allows the properties of the metal to be computed by treating the electron’s
interactions with vacuum ﬂuctuations as perturbations to the motion of the elec-
tron that would take place in the absence of ﬂuctuations. These interactions change
the properties of the electron, such as its mass and charge, in a process known as
renormalization. In practice the calculations are often done with the help of an efﬁ-
cient process of drawing Feynman diagrams (Mattuck, 1967) (an example of which is
shown in Fig. 4) which encode the details of the the interactions between the electron
and the vacuum and function as a shorthand for terms in the equations that describe

The Metal: A Model for Modern Physics
369
Fig. 4 A Feynman diagram showing how an interaction between two electrons is mediated by a
phonon. This causes an attractive force between the electrons that leads to them becoming Cooper
pairs, which are the building blocks of the superconducting state.Taken from Lancaster and Blundell
(2014). Reproduced by permission of Oxford University Press (global.oup.com)
the interactions. Although renormalization sounds mysterious, it can be described in
physical terms. For example, the fact that the electron will be dressed in interactions
that can be expressed in terms of electron and hole pairs, allows us to picture the
electronic charge being screened by these electrons and holes, reducing its value.
The description of the metal in terms of QFT allows us to compare it with quan-
tum electrodynamics (QED) (Feynman, 1990; Penrose, 2004), which is the QFT that
describes the workings of electrons, their antiparticles (positrons) and their interac-
tions with light in free space. QED describes the relativistic properties of electrons
and the interactions that they can undergo at very high energy (far larger than those at
play in the metal). However, the interactions between electrons and positrons are still
electromagnetic. They are mediated by the photon, the particle of light that mediates
the electromagnetic interaction. Renormalization of the electron’s properties also
occurs in QED where the mass and charge of the electron are shifted by the presence
of the interactions drawn out of the vacuum. Despite the metal being non-relativistic
and interactions occurring effectively instantaneously, the Feynman diagrams found
to describe the metal and to describe QED resemble each other closely. This close
analogy allows us some insight into electrons that exist outside of the metal, as
described by QED. We conclude that electrons in free space are never observed
alone; they come with a cloud of interactions between the electron and the ground
state vacuum ﬂuctuations. From this point of view, all electrons, whether conﬁned
to a metal or free, are quasi-electrons whose properties (their mass and charge) are
determined from many-particle considerations. Once renormalization is taken into
account, we can regard the electrons as particles with fairly ﬁxed properties, as long
as we engage them with relatively low energies, so that we don’t disrupt the interac-
tions that have renormalized their properties. For example, if we choose to interact
with electrons by probing them at very high energy (by bombarding them with high-
energy probe particles, for example), the charge of the electron will appear to change.
This can be thought of as a consequence of our disrupting the ﬂuctuations that shield
the electron charge, altering the many-particle nature of the electron in QED. The
message here is that so-called constants of Nature, like electronic charge, can be
shown not to really be constant at all, when many-particle processes are considered!

370
T. Lancaster
5
Phase Transitions
Another way to engage with the many-particle aspect of metals is via the physics of
waves, which we often use to characterize a quantum-mechanical system in terms
of its coherence. A system that maintains ﬁxed phase relationships between its com-
ponents is characterized as being highly coherent and having long-lived correlations
between different observable properties (Rae, 1992; Weinberg, 2013). In quantum
mechanics, this translates into a system being able to maintain a quantum superposi-
tion over a signiﬁcant length of time or over a signiﬁcant distance (where signiﬁcant
here means compared to the time/distance over which we expect random ﬂuctua-
tions). Superpositions are often described in terms of the quantum entanglement of
the different parts of the system. Although our model of a metal is a many-particle
state of matter, it does not come ready-prepared as a highly-coherent superposition
of electronic states. That is to say that the simplest quantum-mechanical model of the
metal involves a multiplication of all of the wavefunctions of the different electrons:
which is the most incoherent quantum state that it’s possible to build (Ashcroft &
Mermin, 2003). Once we introduce the Pauli principle and the interactions between
the electrons, we begin to recover some correlations. However, this suggests that
the many-particle, correlated nature of the metal is limited, and might be relatively
modest when compared against other states of matter. This turns out to be the case.
Many states in condensed matter are characterized by their coming into being via a
phase transition (Anderson, 1985). A phase transition occurs, for example, when the
underlying state of matter changes discontinuously as a function of temperature. A
solid, for instance, condenses out of a liquid state when temperature is reduced below
a critical value that characterizes the solid (i.e. the melting point). Phase transitions
of this kind generally involve a reduction in the symmetry of a state. In the liquid, we
have translational symmetry: on average, there is the same chance of ﬁnding a particle
at any point in the material. In the solid, we have lost this symmetry: if we locate a
particular atom, then we know equivalent positions can be found only at those regular
intervals deﬁned by lattice vectors. In order to locate a phase transition in a model
of a state of matter such as a metal, we can perform our thought experiment from
the previous section again. We again turn on the interactions between the parts of the
system (e.g. the electrons) and we watch the system evolve from a non-interacting
one to an interacting one, with each particle dressing itself in interactions to form a
quasiparticle. Recall that the important point in constructing the metal was adiabatic
continuity: ﬁlled states evolve into ﬁlled states and the energy levels of the states never
cross, allowing us to keep track of states. However, if we encounter a case where the
levels do cross, this tells us something: the symmetry of the underlying state of matter
has changed. The breakdown of adiabatic continuity is therefore exactly what tells
us that we have a phase transition. The crystalline solid itself comes into being from
one of these phase transitions and once a symmetry-breaking phase transition occurs,
the resulting phase of matter develops some new properties (Anderson, 1985):
1. One is rigidity: the solid, for example, cannot be deformed the way a liquid can
(e.g. stirred) without costing a lot of energy.

The Metal: A Model for Modern Physics
371
2. We ﬁnd that the solid has walls (or crystal defects) that separate regions where
the symmetry has been broken in a slightly different way.
3. The solid also hosts new excitation not present in the liquid: these are quantized
vibrations known as phonons.
These new excitations are often characterized as being like particles. However,
they are collective excitations of the whole of the solid, involving the change in the
coordinates of all of the atoms in the system, usually by small amounts. This variation
of the position of atoms away from their special, translationally invariant positions,
can be thought of as the excitation undoing a little of the symmetry breaking that
brought the solid into being. However, this macroscopic motion creates an excitation
that is, in many respects, functionally equivalent to a particle on the microscale.
Phonons have a well-deﬁned momentum and can interact with each other and with
particles like electrons, exchanging energy and momentum. (Although it is notable
that the conservation law for their momenta is slightly different from that of particles
in free space.) In fact, just as for the electrons in a box, phonons are best thought of
as being well localized in momentum, but delocalized in position. As far as quantum
mechanics is concerned though, such a state qualiﬁes as a particle. However, given
their reliance on the coordinates of all of the atoms in the crystal, phonons are
termed collective excitations, and we distinguish them from excited electrons, which
we call single-particle excitations as these are more like single particles in terms of
their origin, although we must remember they are dressed by interactions with their
surroundings (Lancaster & Blundell, 2014).
Turning now to the metal, if we start with non-interacting electrons in a box,
then the interacting metallic state does not involve a phase transition to come into
being. That is, it is connected, adiabatically to the non-interacting state of electrons.
We turn on the interactions between the electrons and the ﬁlled electronic states
evolve into ﬁlled quasiparticle states, with the states never crossing. The metal does
not have any new form of rigidity and does not form domains. As we’ve said, this
contrasts with the case of creating a solid from a liquid, where there is a phase
transition and the emergence of new phonon particles. We’ve also seen how the
slightly more sophisticated model of a metal, taken as a gas of electrons inside the
(broken-symmetry) crystal system, generally interacts weakly with the atoms of the
solid. (We discussed before that in a model of a metal involving the electron gas and
ion cores, most electrons don’t interact with the ion cores.) The exception is that the
electronsdointeractstronglywiththecrystallatticewhentheyhaveparticular,special
values of momentum (as we discussed above), but also with anything that breaks the
translational symmetry of the crystal. One example might be an impurity atom (or
piece of dirt) in the metal, another is a phonon. The interaction with the phonon results
because the phonon certainly breaks the translational symmetry (in that it involves
all of the atoms moving away from their translationally-symmetric positions). This
interaction of electrons with phonons and with impurities is the reason that metals
have resistance to the transport of electrical charge. An electrical current leads to
the dissipation of energy (causing wires to feel warm when carrying currents). The

372
T. Lancaster
linear relationship between voltage across and current through a metallic sample is
Ohm’s law (Rosenberg, 1988; Singleton, 2001) and we return to it below.
The electron-phonon interaction can have a dramatic consequence: the scattering
ofelectronsandphononsleadstoaninstabilityinthemetalwhichitselfcausesaphase
transition. In other words, the metallic Fermi liquid can, given the right condition,
fall apart. The falling apart involves each electron being linked to a partner electron
by interactions with the phonon. We think of this as one electron emitting a phonon
and another absorbing it, as shown in the Feynman diagram in Fig. 4. This pairing
interaction causes the electrons, previously strongly repelling each other owing to
Coulomb’s law, to start to feel a weak attractive interaction (Coleman, 2015). This,
in turn, leads to the formation of a composite electronic state known as a Cooper
pair of electrons. At this point the metal becomes highly unstable and these electron-
electron Cooper pairs then condense into a highly-coherent state of matter known as
a superconductor (Annett, 2004). That is, the wavefunction becomes a very highly-
structured superposition, rather than resembling the large multiplication of energy
levels that formed our starting point for understanding the metal. Remarkably, the
superconducting state allows current to be transported with no electrical resistance. It
also forms a state of matter which a magnetic ﬁeld cannot penetrate. These unusual
properties have led to superconductors being very thoroughly studied in the 20th
century.
Finally we mention that metals can also undergo another class of phase transition:
one that is not driven by changes in temperature. These quantum phase transitions
(Sachdev, 2011) occur at zero temperature where quantum mechanical uncertainty
again gives is ﬂuctuations. Here, both quantum ﬂuctuations (i.e. time dependence
in the wavefunctions deriving from uncertainty relations) and thermal ﬂuctuations
are equally important and it is impossible to describe the excitations in terms of
quasiparticles. In this region the phase of the wavefunctions are as incoherent as
Nature allows, realising an (almost) ideal ﬂuid. Quantum critical behaviour continues
to be an area of much experimental and theoretical interest.
6
Scale, Ohm’s Law and Dimensionality
A fact of Nature is that the microscopic properties of electrons, described by quan-
tum mechanics, are time reversible. That is, it is impossible to tell the difference
between a description of the interactions at the microscale and the same descrip-
tion played backwards in time. However, Ohm’s law (that relates the current and
voltage of a conductor) tells us that the behaviour of the metal involves dissipation
of energy, which spoils this property of time-reversal invariance. Such a situation
where the macroscale is seen to break time-reversal invariance occurs quite gener-
ally in physics and is often referred to as the arrow of time problem (Penrose, 2004).
This is because the dissipation of energy (and the associated increase in the entropy
of a system) give us an unambiguous direction of time that we can identify as being
“forward”. With respect to this forward direction, entropy always increases as energy

The Metal: A Model for Modern Physics
373
is dissipated. While the origin of the arrow of time is hotly debated, some insight into
the state of affairs in the metal is provided by considering the scale at which Ohm’s
law is experienced. The key here is that Ohm’s law is something we measured in
the laboratory, which means that relative to the underlying dynamics of electrons, it
occurs over very long times and very long distances. In relating microscopic proper-
ties to the macroscopic behaviour of Ohmic conductors, we are therefore forced to
examine the limiting behaviour of the metal. That is, we are forced to engage with
the whole system in the sense of sending lengths and times to large values, such that
we capture the way in which we engage with the metal.
We have two limits to consider here, and it turns out the order in which we consider
them is crucial (Coleman, 2015; Zee, 2003). The limit we are taking says that we
will interact with the system over lengths L and times T that tend to large values.
Speciﬁcally, if we take (1) the limit of long times, followed by (2) the limit of long
lengths, we obtain the prediction that a metal screens an electric ﬁeld. On the other
hand, if (1) we take the limit of long lengths and then (2) the limit of long times, we
ﬁnd the Ohmic transport behaviour (i.e. electrical resistivity). The explanation for
the Ohmic transport behaviour is as follows: electrons diffuse though the system at
some characteristic rate τ. The time it takes for an electron to explore a given volume
of linear size L is τ = L2/D, where D is a diffusion constant. If we send L to inﬁnity
ﬁrst then this diffusion time τ is much longer than the typical observation time for
a measurement T . When we subsequently send T to large values, the measurement
time increases far more slowly than the diffusion time of the electrons. Physically, we
therefore make lots of observations of the electrons while they diffuse around, and
this is resistivity: the ﬁnite amount of charge in the metal rearranges itself but doesn’t
ﬁnish this process before our measurement is complete. In the other case where we
obtain the screening behaviour, taking the long measurement-time (T →∞) limit
ﬁrst means that the system has a chance to completely rearrange itself before a
measurement is complete. Since there is only a ﬁnite amount of charge available,
this charge rearranges itself such that it cancels out the applied electric ﬁeld. This is
the screening effect. This example teaches us that while we are forced to consider
the metal in the long-time, long-length-scale limit, how we pose the question affects
the answer. In Nature we’re not really free to take one limit and then the other: in
considering the behaviour over long times and distances the underlying structure of
the equations means that one scale will change faster than the other. In practice, of
course, these questions of description translate into different experiments. For the
screening case we apply a static electric ﬁeld to a conductor and the ﬁeld is screened at
equilibrium. In the Ohmic case, we drive a continuous current through the conductor
and measure the voltage dropped across it.
This idea of the limiting behaviour of a theory is central to a set of techniques
known as the renormalization group (RG) (Lancaster & Blundell, 2014; McComb,
2004). The RG allows us to examine how the behaviour of the underlying ﬁelds
in a theory behave as we examine the limit of long time and distance. The key to
applying this to metals is that the procedure supplies a natural description of the
inverse resistance, a quantity called the conductance g. The application of RG theory
to metals answers an interesting question: is it possible to turn off the conductance of

374
T. Lancaster
Fig. 5 The evolution of the conductance g as we take the long-length-scale-limit (shown by arrows).
For the one-dimensional (d = 1) and two-dimensional (d = 2) cases this leads to insulating (g = 0)
behaviour. For the three-dimensional (d = 3) case, the behaviour depends on where we start with
respect to the critical point gc. If we start with g > gc (low amounts of impurity, large conductance)
we see that g ﬂows to large values and the material conducts electricity. Taken from Lancaster and
Blundell (2014). Reproduced by permission of Oxford University Press (global.oup.com)
a metal by adding dirt to it? Nevill Mott (1905–1996) supposed this would be so: by
introducing impurities into the crystal structure of a metal the electron motions would
eventually become so confused that the system would be forced to be an insulator.
Applying RG theory allows one to use simple dimensional analysis to provide the
answer and this turns out to depend on dimensionality (Zee, 2003). That is, we get
a different result if the electrons is forced to move in a ﬂat slab (a 2D solid) or a
one-dimensional channel. The results are shown in Fig. 5. For a 3D metal we have
conducting behaviour if the amount of disorder is small and insulating if it is large,
just as Mott predicted. A surprise comes for 2D and 1D: no matter how small the
amount of disorder, the system is forced to be an insulator. We conclude that simple
Ohmic conductivity is not possible in 2D and 1D.
The idea of a 2D or 1D metal might seem hypothetical. However, for the metal it
is not a fantasy, but rather a state of affairs that is accessible in the laboratory, and
exploring the consequences of varying the number of dimensions is a regular and
fruitful preoccupation of physicists. Speciﬁcally, by growing layers of semiconduct-
ing materials it is possible for the energy bands of materials to arrange themselves
in such a way as to produce systems where electrons are conﬁned to 2D planes or
to 1D channels (Singleton, 2001). Quantum mechanics forces these to act as highly
idealised gases of 2D or 1D electrons, which do not have the possibility of exploring
or interacting in higher dimensions.
The fact the we don’t see Ohmic conduction in 2D and 1D doesn’t mean these
states are uninteresting. In 1D for example, Fermi-Liquid theory does not describe
the 1D system: there are no quasiparticles (Giamarchi, 2003). Instead excitations of
this state correspond to waves in charge density and, independently, waves in spin

The Metal: A Model for Modern Physics
375
Fig. 6 A cartoon showing
how spin and charge
separates in a
one-dimensional system. A
spin up electron is removed,
leaving a hole behind. As the
hole moves down the chain it
leaves behind it a spin
excitation (circled)
density. This is a remarkable feature where we see that the whole system interactions
allow the apparently fundamental properties of the electron: spin and charge, to break
into two. This feature can be understood with a simple thought experiment. Imagine a
set of electrons arranged along a one-dimensional line as shown in Fig. 6. We arrange
there electron spins up-down-up-down, so the overall spin of the system is zero. If
we remove an electron from this system then we leave behind a hole, which can be
thought of as an excited state of charge (it is known as a holon in this context). If
we move an electron along the line into the empty space without changing its spin,
then we see that the hole is mobile. This has a consequence: it leave two like spins
as neighbours. This is a spin excitation known as a spinon. As we slide electrons
around we see that the holon can move independently of the spinon. Similarly by
ﬂipping a pair of spins we can move the spinon around. The spin excitation and the
hole excitation are independent: we have spin-charge separation.
The 1D system is certainly very different to its 3D cousin. We obtain qualitatively
different physics again in the 2D case. The most dramatic manifestation of this is a
state known as the fractional quantum Hall ﬂuid (Lancaster & Pexton, 2015; Zee,
2003). This is the state of affairs that occurs when we apply a large magnetic ﬁeld to a
2D gas of electrons. In the presence of a magnetic ﬁeld electrons are forced to undergo
(helical) cyclotron orbits around the magnetic ﬁeld lines. In the 2D gas the electrons
are also forced to avoid each other owing to Coulomb repulsion and the quantum
mechanical constraint of Pauli’s principle. The result is a complicated, whole-system
dance of electrons that results in a new phase of matter. This is the fractional quantum
Hall ﬂuid and its properties are truly remarkable. Most remarkable of these is that
an extra electron added to the system seems not to be able to sustain its electronic
charge. For example in one of the FQH states it appears to fall apart into three.
Another way of saying this is that the quasiparticle excitation of the FQH ﬂuid have
fractional charge. This is a situation, therefore, where electronic charge, which we
are taught is a fundamental quantity that cannot be subdivided, is indeed divided into
a rational fraction. Furthermore, these excitations are neither fermions nor bosons,
but actually have different quantum statistics and are known as anyons. This state

376
T. Lancaster
of matter can be understood using notions from the mathematical study of topology,
whose concern is the overall shape of spaces (rather than the details of distances
and angles, which is the ﬁeld of geometry). The FQH ﬂuid is therefore characterized
as a topologically-ordered phase of matter in which whole-system interactions are
decisive in determining the properties (Lancaster & Pexton, 2015).
In both of these low-dimensional cases, we see new excitations emerge with
remarkable and unexpected properties. The driving force in both of these cases is the
electrostatic interaction between pairs of electrons that take place across the whole of
the system. The excitations are expressions of energy being absorbed by this whole
system.
7
Conclusion
If there is a standard model of condensed matter and the solid state, it is provided
by the metal. The simplest models of the metal give us the deceptive impression that
the physics of metals is mainly determined by electrons (speciﬁcally those electrons
with the Fermi energy) acting as single entities. This is an illusion: these electrons
are dressed in the interactions with the other electrons in the system forming quasi-
particles (and this is also true of electrons outside of the metal). Despite this, there
is a limit on the importance of whole-system interactions in the metal expressible in
terms of the coherence of the metallic quantum state.
Metals exist in crystals, which are broken-symmetry systems. A many-particle
manifestation of this broken symmetry state is the phonon: an excitation of the
crystal that involves changes in the coordinates of all of the atoms in the crystal.
These excitations can be treated as particles and scatter from electrons in the metal.
This can lead the metal to become unstable, itself undergoing a phase transition to
the superconducting state. This state is far more coherent than the metal, built as it
is from a special superposition of states of electron pairs.2
We engage with whole-system properties in the measurements we make on metals.
In order to relate these to the underlying dynamics of electrons we are forced to
examine the limiting behaviour of large lengths and times, which provides us with
Ohmic conduction and the dissipation of energy. Once we also invoke constraints on
the dimensionality of the system, this approach reveals a rich variety of behaviour.
Possibly the most dramatic of these is the topologically-ordered fractional quantum
Hall state.
In the recent literature on the philosophy of science, phase transitions and the
fractional quantum hall ﬂuid are often discussed, but the metal receives much less
attention. This would seem (to me, at least) to be a mistake, given the apparent
2 The superconducting transition involves the breaking of the phase symmetry of the wave function
in a system with charge. As a result, the superconductor does not support analogous particles to
the phonon: the description of the disappearance of these is known as the Higgs mechanism, and is
very similar to the Higgs mechanism in the standard model.

The Metal: A Model for Modern Physics
377
simplicity and the rich array of physics that the many-particle nature of the state
brings into being (Coleman, 2019), which results from many-particle and whole-
system effects. Finally, we can note that throughout this description the context, i.e.
a macroscopic piece of matter, experienced in the long-length-scale, long-time limit,
has been just as important as the detailed knowledge of the physics of single electrons
and more so than the knowledge of how electrons interact within atoms or molecules.
Acknowledgements I am grateful to Thomas Hicken and Ben Huddart for useful comments on
this essay.
References
Abrikosov, A. A., Gorkov, L. P., & Dzyaloshinski, I. E. (1963). Methods of quantum ﬁeld theory in
statistical physics. Dover.
Anderson, P. W. (1985). Basic notions in condensed matter physics. Benjamin-Cummings.
Annett, J. F. (2004). Superconductivity, superﬂuids and condensates. OUP.
Ashcroft, N. W., & Mermin, N. D. (2003). Solid state physics. Thomson Press (India) Ltd.
Coleman, P. (2015). Introduction to many body physics. CUP.
Coleman, P. (2019). In S. Gibb, R. F. Hendry, & T. Lancaster (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of
emergence. Routledge.
Feynman, R. P. (1990). QED: the strange theory of light and matter. Penguin.
Giamarchi, T. (2003). Quantum physics in one dimension. OUP.
Halzen, F., & Martin, A. D. (1984). Quarks and leptons. Wiley.
Lancaster, T. (2019). In S. Gibb, R. F. Hendry, & T. Lancaster (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of
emergence. Routledge.
Lancaster, T., & Blundell, S. J. (2014). Quantum ﬁeld theory for the gifted amateur. OUP.
Lancaster, T., & Pexton, M. (2015). Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics, 52, 343.
Lifshitz, E. M. & Pitaevskii, L. P. (1980). Statistical physics, part 2, Pergamon (1980).
Mattuck, R. D. (1967). A guide to Feynman diagrams in the many-body problem. Dover.
McComb, W. C. (2004). Renormalization methods. OUP.
Penrose, R. (2004). The road to reality. Vintage.
Peskin, M. E., & Schroeder, D. V. (1995). An introduction to quantum ﬁeld theory. Westview Press.
Rae, A. I. M. (1992). Quantum mechanics (3rd ed.). Institute of Physics Publishing.
Rosenberg, H. M. (1988). The solid state. OUP.
Sachdev, S. (2011). Quantum phase transitions (2nd ed.). CUP.
Schiff, L. I. (1968). Quantum mechanics (3rd ed.). McGraw-Hill.
Singleton, J. (2001). Band Theory and Electronic Properties of Solids. OUP.
Weinberg, S. (2013). Lectures on quantum mechanics. CUP.
Zee, A. (2003). Quantum ﬁeld theory in a nutshell. Princeton University Press.

Spacetime Emergence: Collapsing
the Distinction Between Content
and Context?
Karen Crowther
1
Introduction
When you think of emergence, you might think of the collective behaviour of ﬂocks
of birds or colonies of ants; you might think of the emergence of life from non-
living molecules, or of consciousness from collections of unconscious brain cells.
Perhaps, you think of more exotic things, like the emergence of stable macroscopic
objects whose behaviour can be described by deterministic laws, from some strangely
behaved fundamental quantum particles. In any case, what you think of is most prob-
ably some behaviour, process, property, or object that occurs, or exists, in space and
time. But what about the case of spacetime itself—can this be considered emer-
gent from some collective behaviour of non-spatiotemporal objects? Or, could a
spatiotemporal universe emerge from some ‘prior’ non-spatiotemporal state ‘before’
the beginning of the universe? Many philosophers and physicists believe that, indeed,
boththesescenariosarerealphysicalpossibilitiesinourownuniverse—thesesugges-
tions comes from research in quantum gravity and quantum cosmology, respectively.
Currently, our best description of spacetime is provided by Einstein’s theory of
general relativity (GR), which says that gravity is the curvature of spacetime due
to massive objects. While this theory is incredibly successful, physicists do not
believe that GR—along with the description of spacetime it provides—is fundamen-
tal. Instead, GR is thought to be incorrect at extremely short length scales (the Planck
scale, 10−35 m), and in regions of extremely high spacetime curvature, where quan-
tum effects cannot be neglected: these include black holes and the ‘Big Bang’. In
these domains we require a new theory, called quantum gravity (QG).
While there is no accepted theory of QG, there are several different attempts at
ﬁnding it (i.e., different research programs) that are currently in development. Some
of these approaches do not feature a concept of spacetime fundamentally. Instead, the
K. Crowther (B)
Centre for Philosophy and the Sciences, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway
e-mail: karen.crowther@iﬁkk.uio.no
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
S. Wuppuluri and I. Stewart (eds.), From Electrons to Elephants and Elections,
The Frontiers Collection, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-92192-7_22
379

380
K. Crowther
existence of spacetime (and gravitational phenomena) is to be explained by reference
to some more basic non-spatiotemporal objects that ‘underlie’, or ‘compose’ it. In
other words, these theories describe ‘atoms’ of spacetime that do not themselves exist
in space or time. Just as tables and chairs, and other familiar ‘macroscopic’ objects
are not fundamental according to our ‘microscopic’ quantum theories of matter, so
too spacetime is not fundamental according to these approaches to QG.
Does this mean that spacetime is emergent? If so, in what sense? So far, it has
been argued that yes, on some approaches to QG, we can understand spacetime as
emergentina‘hierarchical’(inter-level)sense,whereGR(and/orspacetime)emerges
from the more fundamental theory of QG.1 This can be understood as emergence of
content, where ‘objects’ (taken in a broad sense), or phenomena, emerge at a higher
(‘macro’) level that are not present at the more fundamental (‘micro’) level. But
another sense of emergence has also been argued for as potentially possible, where
spacetime emerges from a ‘prior’ non-spatiotemporal state replacing the Big Bang
at the beginning of the universe, described by quantum cosmology.2 This type of
emergence occurs at a single level, so I refer to it as ‘ﬂat emergence’ (Crowther,
2020). This can be understood as emergence due to (or of ) context, where novel
‘objects’ (again, in a broad sense) emerge at a ‘later’ state which are not present at
the ‘initial’ state of the system.
Given the unique case of spacetime emergence, however, it may be that the dis-
tinction between content and context just described is not a useful, or even sensible,
one to draw. It is a case where both types of emergence are supposed to obtain
‘simultaneously’, and where the standard ways of distinguishing between these two
types of emergence are not obviously available. For instance, in inter-level emer-
gence (which I’ve called hierarchical, or content emergence), the levels (‘micro’ and
‘macro’) are usually characterised in terms of different scales—e.g., length scales,
or energy scales—but how do we do this in the absence of space? And, for ﬂat
emergence, the states of a system (‘earlier’ and ‘later’), are usually distinguished by
reference to time—so how do we do this in the absence of time? Here, I explore the
possibility that the emergence of spacetime is a case where we need a more general
conception of emergence: one that collapses the distinction between content and
context.
I begin by ﬁrst describing QG (Sect. 2), including what it means to say that QG
is more fundamental than GR (Sect. 3), which requires that the relation of reduction
holds between the two theories (Sect. 4). I then describe the different senses of
spacetimeemergence(Sect.5).HierarchicalemergenceisexploredinSect.6,withthe
example of loop quantum gravity Sect. 6.1. Flat emergence is explored in Sect. 7, with
theexampleofloopquantumcosmologySect.7.1.Ithendiscusstheexampleofphase
transitions Sect. 8, arguing that these represent both hierarchical and ﬂat emergence,
as distinct notions. It is possible that spacetime also emerges in a phase transition,
which I explore in Sect. 8.1. In this case, however, the two notions of emergence are
1 See, e.g., Butterﬁeld and Isham (1999, 2001), Crowther (2016), Huggett and Wüthrich (2013),
Oriti (Forthcoming), Wüthrich (2017, 2019).
2 See, e.g., Brahma (2020), Crowther (2020), Huggett and Wüthrich (2018).

Spacetime Emergence: Collapsing the Distinction Between Content and Context?
381
supposed to obtain simultaneously, and are not so obviously distinguished. It may
be more natural to not make the distinction between hierarchical and ﬂat emergence
in the case of spacetime: this possibility is motivated in Sect. 9.
2
Quantum Gravity
Currently, all fundamental particles and forces are described by quantum ﬁeld theory
(QFT), while gravity is described by GR. Although these theories are supposed to
be universally applicable, we do not, in practice, need to use both of them together
to describe any of the systems that we observe or directly interact with in the world.
Yet, there are inaccessible domains of the universe whose description requires both
theories, including the the Planck scale 10−35 m, black holes, and cosmological
singularities (such as the Big Bang). The problem is that it is difﬁcult to combine
GR and QFT in a way that gives us acceptable answers about these domains. And
so physicists are seeking a new theory, QG.
QFT is a framework that combines quantum mechanics and special relativity. It
describes various quantum ﬁelds in a ﬁxed, non-dynamical (unchanging) background
spacetime. What we call the fundamental particles and forces—the electromagnetic,
strong and weak forces—are conceived of as local (point-like) excitations of these
ﬁelds according to one particular model of this framework, known as the standard
model of quantum ﬁeld theory. While spacetime is used in this theory, it is not
described by the theory. GR, on the other hand, is a theory of spacetime. It describes
spacetime itself as a dynamical ﬁeld (that does not exist in some further ‘background’
spacetime, and so is background independent), and says that gravity is due to the
curvature of spacetime. Both of these theories are incredibly successful, yet, nei-
ther theory is thought to be fundamental (Crowther, 2019). QG is supposed to be
more fundamental than both these theories, but since we are interested in spacetime
emergence, I consider only how it is supposed to be related to GR (Sect. 3).
There are various different approaches towards ﬁnding a theory of QG. The most
well-known of these is string theory. This approach describes tiny, 1-dimensional
strings propagating on a ﬁxed background spacetime, and the excitations of these
strings correspond to the fundamental particles and forces of the standard model,
as well as gravity. The approach can be seen as extending the methods of QFT at
the expense of the lessons of GR, in that it employs a ﬁxed background spacetime
rather than a background-independent dynamics. Here, gravity is treated on par with
the fundamental forces, coming from string excitations and corresponding to a QFT
particle known as the graviton (whereas according to GR, gravity is not a force but the
curvature of spacetime). We could thus say that the approach prioritises the principle
of uniﬁcation (all forces, including gravity, stem from the same origin) over that of
background independence (that QG not feature a ﬁxed, background spacetime).
Some other approaches to QG instead prioritise background independence;
because these describe basic entities that are non-spatiotemporal (not existing in
spacetime), they more completely demonstrate the emergence of spacetime. I brieﬂy
introduce one of these, loop quantum gravity.

382
K. Crowther
Fig. 1 Quanta of volume
(grey blobs). Adjacent
chunks are separated by a
surface S of quantised area.
The corresponding spin
network graph is overlaid.
Each link intersects one
quantised surface S (Rovelli,
2004, p. 20)
Fig. 2 Spin network: Nodes
represent quanta of volume,
which are adjacent if there is
a link between them.
Connected links form loops,
like the one highlighted in
red (Rovelli, 2004, p. 20)
2.1
Loop Quantum Gravity
Loop Quantum Gravity (LQG) is an attempt to construct a theory of QG by quantising
GR. It describes quanta (roughly, discrete quantum ‘chunks’) of spacetime. In a
quantum theory, the discrete values of a physical quantity can be found by calculating
the eigenvalues of its corresponding operator. In LQG, the important operators are
the ‘area operator’, Â, associated with the area, A, of a given surface, S, and the
‘volume operator’, ˆV, associated with the volume, V, of a given spatial region, R.
The eigenstates of these operators are called spin network states, and are represented
as graphs called spin networks. An example of a spin network is shown in Fig. 2,
with an illustrative depiction of how the spin network relates to the quanta of volume
shown in Fig. 1.

Spacetime Emergence: Collapsing the Distinction Between Content and Context?
383
This describes the kinematical aspect of the theory (i.e., the spin network states
provide a basis for the kinematic Hilbert space), rather than the dynamics, and so
represents space rather than spacetime. There is more to say about the dynamics
of the theory (and how this is supposed to relate to spacetime), but this very brief,
informal introduction to LQG is sufﬁcient to gain an understanding of how space
might emerge according to LQG.3
Physical space is thought to be a quantum superposition of spin network states
with well-behaved geometric properties, known as weave states.4 The intuitive idea
is captured by analogy: at familiar scales, the fabric of a t-shirt is a smooth, two-
dimensional curved surface, but when we examine it more closely, we see that the
fabric is composed of one-dimensional threads woven together.5 The suggestion is
that LQG presents a similar picture: while the geometry of space at large-scales is a
three-dimensional continuum, at high-energy it is revealed to be a very large lattice
of Planck-sized spacing (i.e. a spin network with a very large number of nodes and
links).
3
Fundamentality
As stated above, QG is supposed to be more fundamental than GR. In this section, I
ﬁrst explain what it means for one theory to be more fundamental than another (for
the purposes required here), and then explain how this applies in the case of QG as
more fundamental than GR.6
Here, I just speak about relative fundamentality, rather than absolute fundamen-
tality.7 A more fundamental theory, M, of a given system, S, or phenomenon, P,
provides a more basic description of S or P than a less fundamental theory, L, does.
I take it that there are two necessary conditions for relative fundamentality:
Asymmetric dependence
The laws of L depend upon the physics described by
M, and not vice-versa;
3 For more on LQG, see Rovelli (2004), Rovelli and Vidotto (2014). Note that this latter reference is
much more up-to-date than the brief sketch of the kinematic aspect of the theory that I present here;
in particular, it has much more detail on the dynamics of the theory, using the covariant approach
to LQG.
4 These are semiclassical states; i.e., states in which the quantum ﬂuctuations are minimal and the
gravitational ﬁeld behaves almost classically.
5 The analogy comes from Ashtekar et al. (1992).
6 The following discussion is based on Crowther (2018a), although the deﬁnition of relative fun-
damentality differs here in that I include two conditions, while Crowther (2018a) requires only
one.
7 While QG must be more fundamental than GR, QG need not be a fundamental theory; i.e., it is not
necessary to include the criterion of (absolute) fundamentality in the deﬁnition of QG (Crowther
& Linnemann, 2019). For other ideas of fundamentality in physics and metaphysics, see Morganti
(2020a, 2020b).

384
K. Crowther
Broader domain
The domain of validity of M includes that of L (i.e., that M
successfully describes all physical phenomena that L does).
A theory’s domain of validity is the part of the world that is successfully described
by the theory. In regards to this deﬁnition of relative fundamentality, note that M will
typically describe the system, S at a different range of energy scales than L, or perhaps
under different conditions. Also, M might not actually describe the phenomenon, P,
that L does, but rather (some of) the physics underlying P (i.e., part of the more-basic
physics responsible for the appearance of P).
The apparent inﬂuence or effect of the dependence of L upon M may not only
be very minimal, but also obscured by the way it is incorporated into the parameters
and structure of L. In other words, a less-fundamental physics may be largely robust
and apparently autonomous, in spite of being dependent on the M physics. Often, the
more fundamental theory provides a ‘ﬁner-grained’, or more detailed, description of
the system than the less fundamental one. The L is, in this sense, an approximation
to M that works well in a given regime (e.g., a certain range of energy scales, or
under special conditions).
There are two ways in which QG is more fundamental than GR: by being quantum
(or by being beyond quantum) and by being a ‘micro’ theory of spacetime. Each of
these is sufﬁcient to satisfy both the ‘asymmetric dependence’ and ‘broader domain’
conditions of relative fundamentality. The recovery of GR from QG may be a two-
step process, recovering the ‘appearance of classicality’ from the quantum theory,
and moving to the ‘macro’ (low-energy) limit of the theory (which brings us back
to familiar energy scales). The former is known as the quantum/classical transition,
and the latter is called the micro/macro transition. While both address the question
of why we do not need to use QG to describe much of the gravitational phenomena
we observe, they are distinct, and may or may not be related to one another. Both
transitions represent common problems in physics and the philosophy of physics;
and both play a role in understanding the relationships of reduction and emergence.
The micro/macro transition is not something that happens to a system, but a change
in the level of description: it is the move to a coarser-grained theory. The micro/macro
transition may be represented by an approximation procedure, a limiting process
(such as the thermodynamic or ‘continuum limit’), or the renormalisation group
ﬂow. All of these different techniques are employed by various approaches to QG in
their attempts to connect QG back to GR.
In the case of the quantum/classical transition there are two different issues. Quan-
tum theories are supposed to apply universally; so, ﬁrst, there is the question of why,
in practice, they are usually only necessary for describing small systems. Secondly,
there is the measurement problem: why it is that any measurement on a quantum
system ﬁnds the system in a deﬁnite state even though the system evolves as a super-
position of different states. The process of decoherence describes how the interfer-
ence effects associated with superpositions become suppressed through a system’s
interactions with its environment, with the consequence that the quantum nature of
the system is no longer manifest. Larger systems more strongly couple to their envi-
ronments, so decoherence provides the beginning of an explanation for why quantum

Spacetime Emergence: Collapsing the Distinction Between Content and Context?
385
theory is usually only necessary for describing micro-systems. As such, it gives us
some insight into the ‘transition’ that a system undergoes that prompts us to move
from a quantum description of it to a “classical” one (although the system remains
inherently quantum, as does the rest of the universe). Decoherence does not, however,
give us an answer to the measurement problem.
We expect that the generic states of the objects described by QG will be quantum
superpositions, but the quantum nature of spacetime is not manifest. An explana-
tion of the quantum/classical transition is necessary for understanding why this is.
Of course, this is an incredibly challenging task, given that the quantum/classical
transition is poorly understood in general. It seems likely that a solution to the mea-
surement problem is required if we are to fully understand the relationship between
spacetime and the quantum objects that somehow underlie it; or it may be that the
solution will be provided by the theory itself.8 For the time being, however, we seek to
better understand the relationship between QG and GR to any degree that will aid in
the development of the theory, even without full knowledge of the quantum/classical
transition.
4
Reduction
Reduction in physics means showing that the successful parts of the older theory
(in this case, GR), are, in principle, derivable (i.e., deducible) from the newer one
(QG) in the appropriate domain (where we know GR is successful), under appropri-
ate (physically sensible) conditions. Reduction in this sense also demonstrates that
the newer theory is more fundamental than the older one. The ‘asymmetric depen-
dence’ condition of relative fundamentality is satisﬁed, because if the older theory
is derivable from the newer one (and not vice versa), then there is a sense in which
the older theory is dependent upon the physics described by the newer theory. If
the newer theory is correct, and the older theory is appropriately derivable from the
newer one, then the older theory will automatically be correct, since it is entailed
by—or, a consequence of—the newer one.
QG is meant to be more fundamental than GR (as explained in Sect. 3): this means
that the physics described by QG is supposed to be responsible for the success of the
laws of GR, and that QG also describes all of the systems/phenomena that GR does.
As such, the relation of reduction must obtain between these two theories. This is
a strong constraint on QG, which serves to deﬁne the new theory: any prospective
theory of QG will not be accepted unless physicists are satisﬁed that GR is appropri-
ately derivable from the theory of QG. Standardly, however, the derivability of the
older theory from the newer one is not rigorously established: physicists employ var-
ious approximations and limiting relations, relying on different assumptions when
doing so. We demonstrate that particular correspondence relations hold between the
two theories in the shared domain where they are both supposed to apply. These
8 Penrose explores this second possibility, see e.g. Penrose (1999, 2002).

386
K. Crowther
are inter-theory relationships that connect the two theories, by, e.g., shared terms,
numerical predictions, laws, or principles.9 Reduction is taken to obtain when suf-
ﬁcient correspondence relations have been demonstrated (running in the direction
from the newer theory to the older one), such that we are convinced that the older
theory is in principle appropriately derivable from the newer one.
This is where many attempts to construct QG have run into difﬁculties. For
instance, although LQG starts out with GR, and uses correspondence relations run-
ning from GR to QG (‘top-down’) in order to construct the new theory, it has trouble
naturally ‘recovering’ spacetime (going ‘bottom-up’) and establishing that GR is
appropriately derivable from the new theory. This is not necessarily an indication
that GR is not recoverable from the theory, however, since it is still under development
and may eventually reach a stage where it succeeds. Given that it is a requirement
upon any theory of QG that it appropriately recover GR in the domains where GR is
successful, I will, in the rest of this essay, assume that GR is, ultimately, appropri-
ately derivable from whatever the accepted theory of QG turns out to be—i.e., that
reduction holds in the sense described above.
5
Emergence
Emergence is an empirical relation between two relate of the same nature, an emer-
gent, E, and its basis, B. Depending on the case of interest, E and B may be objects,
properties, powers, laws, theories, models, etc. Here, I am interested in emergence
as a relation between theories or parts of theories. I take the general conception of
emergence to comprise three claims,10
Emergence: General Conception
Dependence
E is dependent on B, as evidenced by E being derivable from B,
and/or supervenient upon B (supervenience means that there would be no change
in E unless there were a change in B, but not vice versa);
Novelty
E is strikingly, qualitatively different from B;
Autonomy
E is robust against changes in B; or E is the same for various choices
of, or assumptions about, the comparison class, B.
This is a positive conception of emergence, since it is not characterised by a failure
of reduction, deduction, explanation, or derivation in any sense in any sense. That is,
the emergent E need not be irreducible to, or unexplained by, its basis B. Such a pos-
itive conception of emergence is now familiar in the philosophy of physics generally,
and the philosophy of QG in particular.11 The positive conception of emergence is the
most appropriate for understanding the case of spacetime emergent from QG for two
9 Correspondence takes various forms and plays many important roles in theory development and
assessment; see, e.g, Crowther (2018b), Hartmann (2002), Post (1971), Radder (1991).
10 The discussion in this section is based on Crowther (2020).
11 This is largely due to Butterﬁeld and Isham (1999, 2001), Butterﬁeld (2011a, 2011b).

Spacetime Emergence: Collapsing the Distinction Between Content and Context?
387
reasons. First, as explained above, GR must be reducible to QG—i.e., it is a require-
ment on any theory of QG that GR be approximately and appropriately derivable
from it. This condition may be used to satisfy the ‘Dependence’ claim of emergence.
Thus, we need an account of emergence that is compatible with reduction, at least in
this sense. Second, none of the approaches to QG are complete, so basing any claims
of emergence on their failure to explain, derive, or predict particular aspects of GR
spacetime is risky, given that a central goal of each of the approaches is to develop a
theory that approximately and appropriately recovers (i.e., derives and explains) GR
spacetime.
This general conception of emergence admits more speciﬁc forms: for instance, it
can accommodate either synchronic or diachronic conceptions of emergence. In the
synchronic conception of emergence, B and E represent different levels of descrip-
tion: B is said to describe the system at the lower level and E at the higher level. In
physics, B and E may be theories that apply at different ranges of length- or energy-
scales, where, typically, B describes the system at higher energy scales (shorter length
scales) than E, whichapplies at comparativelylowenergyscales (largelengthscales).
These theories are supposed to apply to the system at the same time, or otherwise
under the same conditions, i.e, there is no ‘change’ considered, except the level at
which you view the system.
In the diachronic conception of emergence, E and B describe the system at the
same level. These theories, or models, are supposed to apply to the system at different
times, or otherwise under different conditions. The idea is that the system has under-
gone some change: typically, B describes it before, and E after. This conception of
emergence is not associated with a notion of fundamentality. The difference between
these two conceptions of emergence is illustrated in Fig. 3.
There are many speciﬁc accounts, and examples, of synchronic and diachronic
emergence described in the literature. However, any account of synchronic or
diachronic emergence requires some modiﬁcations in order to be applicable to the
case of spacetime emergence. Most obviously, these two conceptions rely on a notion
of time for their distinction, as reﬂected in the names ‘synchronic’ and ‘diachronic’. I
suggest two accounts of emergence, roughly analogous to synchronic and diachronic
accounts, but which do not rely on spatiotemporal notions; these are hierarchical
emergence and ﬂat emergence, respectively (Crowther, 2020). I brieﬂy describe
these in the next two sections.
6
Hierarchical Emergence: Content
Hierarchical emergence can be understood as an analogue of synchronic emergence
that doesn’t rely on a conception of space in order to distinguish the different lev-
els involved, and which doesn’t rely on a notion of time in identifying the system
between levels. I will distinguish levels in terms of ‘size of grain’ (‘size’ is not here
a reference to lengths, but refers to the amount of detail captured)—i.e., a lower-
level theory provides a ﬁner grained description of the physics, while a higher-level

388
K. Crowther
Fig. 3
Two conceptions of emergence. A system (a) at time t1 (red) has changed at time t2 (blue),
resulting in some novel higher-level phenomena (green). (i) If we are interested in synchronic
emergence (arrow SE), we consider the system at level n2 compared to the system viewed at n1, at
a single time, here t2. (ii) If we are interested in diachronic emergence (arrow DE), we consider the
system at t2 compared to the system at t1, at a single level, here n1. Figure adapted from Guay and
Sartenaer (2016)
theory provides a coarser-grained description of the phenomena (abstracting away
from the ﬁner details, which are irrelevant at this level). Although we tend to think
of ﬁner-grained theories as describing ‘shorter length scales’, this is not a neces-
sary correlation. Nevertheless, for convenience of notation, I will still distinguish
the lower level physics described by B as ‘micro’ physics, and the emergent level E
physics as ‘macro’ phenomena.
I suggest the following account of hierarchical emergence, which is based on
other case-studies involving effective theories in physics (Crowther, 2016):
Emergence: Hierarchical Conception
Dependence
The coarser grained theory (model, or structure) E is constructed
(i.e., derived) from the ﬁner grained theory B. The physics described by the laws
of E may be said to supervene on those of B.
Novelty
The physics described by the coarser grained, or low energy (‘macro’) the-
ory E differs remarkably from that of the ﬁner grained, or higher energy (‘micro’)
theory B;
Autonomy
The physics described by E is robust against changes in the micro
physics; B is underdetermined by E.
As in the more general conception above (Sect. 5), Novelty is a symmetric rela-
tion; this condition captures the ways in which the two theories differ from one
another. The idea of Autonomy here comes from universality or multiple-realisability,

Spacetime Emergence: Collapsing the Distinction Between Content and Context?
389
which ensures the robustness of the higher-level physics compared to the lower-level
physics: there are many different lower-level structures, systems, or states, that could
‘give rise to’ (or ‘realise’) the same higher-level, emergent physics (which is said
to be ‘universal’ behaviour).12 There are two different ways this can happen which
are relevant here. First, different micro states described by, or models of, B can cor-
respond to a single macro state/model of E. An an example is the way in which a
number of different micro states described by statistical mechanics correspond to a
single macro state in thermodynamics, i.e., how different conﬁgurations of molecules
in your coffee give rise to the same homogeneous-looking liquid of a particular tem-
perature (at the ﬁner-grained, micro level, the individual molecules can have different
positions and velocities, but you don’t notice this at the coarse-grained, macro-level).
Second, different micro theories can correspond to the same macro theory. An exam-
ple is how ﬂuids of different micro-constitutions (i.e., cells, molecules, atoms, or
particles of different types) can give rise to the same hydrodynamic behaviour at a
coarser-grained description. The fact that the macro physics is multiply-realisable
leads to an underdetermination of the micro-physics, meaning that if you only know
the E behaviour, you will not automatically be able to determine the speciﬁc B theory
(state, or model), since there are many possible candidates that could be responsible.
We can consider hierarchical emergence as emergence of content. This can be
understood in two ways: considering it as emergence of theoretical structures, or as
‘ontological’ emergence of some particular entities or behaviour associated with the
emergent theoretical structures. In either case, the idea is that novel content appears
at the higher level that is not present at the lower level, and which is autonomous
from the lower-level content in the sense that many different structures at the lower
level could ‘give rise to’ the same higher-level structures.
This conception of emergence can be used to understand hierarchical emergence
in several different approaches to QG (Crowther, 2016). In the next section, I consider
how it applies in LQG.
6.1
Hierarchical Emergence of Spacetime in LQG
LQG is still incomplete, and it is not yet clear how spacetime is to be recovered
from the fundamental structures of the theory. For now, we will just assume that
the kinematical aspect of LQG described above (Sect. 2.1) is roughly correct, which
means assuming that space (rather than spacetime) is fundamentally constituted by
a spin network. We will also take it that LQG is a serious contender for QG, and
thus assume that GR is appropriately derivable from LQG. So, we assume that the
Dependence condition for hierarchical emergence is satisﬁed.
The Novelty condition of emergence is plausibly satisﬁed because the spin net-
work states differ from space in a number of ways; I mention three of these here.
12 See Batterman (2000, 2002, 2018), Crowther (2015), Franklin (2018a) for more on autonomy,
universality, and multiple-realisability, particularly as related to emergence in effective ﬁeld theory.

390
K. Crowther
Fig. 4 Space as hierarchically emergent from a spin network
First, the spin networks represent discrete, quantum ‘objects’ rather than continuum
spacetime.13 Second, as has been emphasised by Huggett and Wüthrich (2013) there
is a particular form of “non-locality”, where it is possible for two discrete ‘chunks
of space’ that are adjacent (directly connected to one another) in the spin network
to not map to neighbouring regions in the corresponding spacetime (though this
“non-locality” should be heavily suppressed, otherwise the particular spin network
in question would correspond to a different spacetime, one which better reﬂects its
fundamental structure). Third, space is supposed to be a quantum superposition of
spin networks, so there is no clear notion of geometry at the fundamental level.
The Autonomy condition of emergence is plausibly satisﬁed because many dif-
ferent spin network states can correspond to the same (semiclassical) geometry—
demonstrating the robustness of the emergent spacetime. Also, given that space is
meant to correspond to a superposition of spin networks, it is autonomous from any
particular deﬁnite (non-superposed) spin network state. Thus, there is a plausible
claim to be made that GR spacetime is emergent from the fundamental structures of
LQG. This is depicted in Fig. 4 as space emergent from a deﬁnite spin network state.
13 Actually, the dynamics can be thought of as not simply a ‘quantum version’ of GR, as this
characterisation suggests, but a more radically different theory; see Oriti (2014, 2018) for more on
this aspect.

Spacetime Emergence: Collapsing the Distinction Between Content and Context?
391
7
Flat Emergence: Context
Flat emergence is an analogue of diachronic emergence which does not rely on spa-
tiotemporal notions. This conception is potentially applicable to spacetime because
one of the domains where GR is expected to be incorrect, and to require replacement
by QG, is at the very beginning of the universe. Using GR and current observations
of the large-scale structure of the universe, cosmologists extrapolate backwards in
time in order to produce a description of the past evolution of the universe. The
resulting picture (described in the direction of increasing time) is the standard, or
‘Big Bang’, model of cosmology, which describes the universe expanding from a
state of extremely high temperature and density approximately 13 billion years ago.
Before this, however, there is the Big Bang singularity, which is difﬁcult to interpret
physically.
One interpretation of the singular behaviour of the model is that GR is incorrect in
this domain, due to its neglect of quantum effects that become important at extreme
density and temperature (in which case GR likely becomes incorrect at some ﬁnite
time approaching the singularity). On this view, the singularity is an unphysical
artefact—a signal that GR is inapplicable here—and thus, QG should provide a
correct, non-singular description of the physics in this domain. Some approaches
to QG cosmology suggest that the ‘pre-Big Bang’ physics is non-spatiotemporal
(though there are different things this could mean, e.g., perhaps there is space, but
not time, or vice-versa, or there is nothing corresponding to spacetime), in which
case spacetime might emerge ‘after’ from this ‘prior’ non-spatiotemporal physics.
In order to develop an account of emergence that could potentially be applicable in
this case, I consider a characteristic account of diachronic emergence, from Guay and
Sartenaer (2016) and Sartenaer (2018). On this account, the Dependence condition
holds that E is the product of a spatiotemporally continuous process going from B,
and/or E is caused by B. The Novelty condition states that E exhibits new entities,
properties or powers that do not exist in B. And the Autonomy condition states that
these new entities, properties or powers are forbidden to exist in B according to the
laws governing B.
This account is not generally applicable to the case of spacetime, since it relies
on spatiotemporal notions such as causation, location, and continuous processes.14
If a spatiotemporal state is to emerge from a state that is non-spatiotemporal (or,
rather, less-than-fully-spatiotemporal), we cannot assume that this is a process that
itself takes place in space and time (although, in fact, some approaches to QG do
utilise a notion of time, this is not in all cases able to be identiﬁed with our familiar
conception of time). A more general conception of ﬂat emergence is required if we
are to account for the ‘ﬂat’ emergence of spacetime from the “Big Bang” state15
Additionally, the (Guay & Sartenaer, 2016) account of emergence is a negative one,
14 Although these notions may have non-spatiotemporal analogues, e.g., causation without time
(Baron & Miller, 2014, 2015; Tallant, 2019).
15 Note that the “Big Bang" strictly refers to the GR singularity, whereas in QG cosmology, this
state may not be singular.

392
K. Crowther
requiring that E exhibit forbidden entities, properties, or powers. As explained above
(Sect. 5), a negative conception of emergence is ill-suited for the case of QG, and a
positive conception is to be preferred.16
The more general, positive conception of ﬂat emergence that I propose is best-
suited for understanding the ﬂat emergence of our spatiotemporal universe from a
non-spatiotemporal state is one that is analogous to the hierarchical conception of
emergence presented in the previous section (Sect. 6).
Emergence: Flat Conception
Dependence
E ﬂatly supervenes on B. (Flat supervenience means that there would
be no change in the E state unless there were a change at the B state, but not vice
versa);
Novelty
E differs remarkably from B;
Autonomy
The physics described by E is robust against changes in B. The ‘prior’
state, B is underdetermined by E. (This sense of underdetermination can be under-
stood as a non- temporal form of indeterminism, meaning that many different
‘initial’ conditions at the B state could give rise to the same E state. If we only
have knowledge of the E state, this would not be enough information to determine
the ‘prior’ B state that it ‘evolved from’).
This account of emergence is very permissive, yet, it is still not trivially satisﬁed in
the case of QG cosmology. I present an example from loop quantum cosmology that
has recently been claimed to represent the emergence of spacetime from a ‘prior’ non-
spatiotemporal state (Sect. 7.1), and argue that it is not clear how we can make sense
of this. Later, I present the example of geometrogenesis, which is a type of approach
to QG that conceives of spacetime emergent in a phase transition (Sect. 8.1). This is
a case which is more readily able to be understood as ﬂat emergence of spacetime;
however, in Sect. 9, I argue that this example also is a good illustration for why it may
make more sense to collapse the distinction between hierarchical and ﬂat emergence.
7.1
Flat Emergence in Loop Quantum Cosmology
Loopquantumcosmology(LQC)istheattempttouseLQGindescribingthestructure
and evolution of the universe. Brahma (2020) describes a particular model of LQC
that aims to resolve (i.e., remove) the Big Bang singularity present in the standard
model of cosmology. It must be emphasised that, like all attempts at QG cosmology,
the model is not fully developed nor understood, so any interpretation is reliant
upon speculation, and is highly precarious. It is not clear whether these models are
physically meaningful at all.
The model discussed in Brahma (2020) starts by simplifying the system being
described, so that it is a spatial geometry with just one parameter, the ‘scale factor’,
with quantum operator ˆp. According to Huggett and Wüthrich (2018), the resulting
16 Shech (2019) also suggests weakening the novelty condition along these lines.

Spacetime Emergence: Collapsing the Distinction Between Content and Context?
393
Fig. 5 Two interpretations of LQC. a The standard interpretation, as a single universe contracting
(bottom cone) then expanding (top tcone) in time, is made difﬁcult by the intermediate state (middle
point) having no notion of time. b Huggett & Wüthrich interpretation, as of two expanding universes
that ‘emerge’ in positive time from the single non-temporal state (point)
simpliﬁed dynamical equation can be interpreted as describing the evolution of the
universe, with the scale factor acting as a ‘time variable’ (though this reading is
problematic in many ways). Running this backwards through what would otherwise
be the Big Bang, we ﬁnd that the singularity is not present, and that ‘on the other side’
of (what would otherwise be) the Big Bang, there is a ‘mirror world’: an expanding
universe in negative ‘time’. The resulting picture is standardly interpreted as ‘Big
Bounce’, or a universe undergoing a ‘Big Crunch’, contracting to a maximally hot,
dense state, before re-expanding (this is depicted in Fig. 5a).
At least in one particular type of model, however, Huggett and Wüthrich (2018)
argue that there is an alternative picture that is better supported by the physics. In
the particular model being referred to by Brahma (2020) and Huggett and Wüthrich
(2018), going backward in time leads us from a relativistic spacetime to a region of
Euclidean space (without time), and then back into a region of relativistic spacetime
on the ‘other side’. In other words, the state that replaces the Big Bang is one without
any notion of time (at the macro level), and so there is not a way of ‘connecting’ or
‘ordering’ the spatiotemporal states with respect to the purely spatial state. Without a
continuous time variable running through these three states, why should we say that
the purely spatial state lies ‘in between’ the collapsing universe and the expanding
one?Infact,becausethecollapsinguniverseandtheexpandinguniverseareotherwise
symmetric, and its more natural to understand time as directed away from the Big
Bang, Huggett and Wüthrich (2018) argue that this model is better interpreted not

394
K. Crowther
as a Big Bounce, but rather as a “twin birth” of two expanding universes that arise
‘after’ the purely spatial state (Fig. 5b).17
Brahma (2020) claims that this model represents the emergence of time, and
Huggett and Wüthrich (2018) says that it is an example of the “(a) temporal emer-
gence of spacetime”, though neither paper goes into detail about what this means
or how it ﬁts with standard conceptions of emergence. This is difﬁcult because the
physics in this example, at the macro level, can be interpreted either as a bounce or as
a “twin birth”. Which state emerges from which? In the bounce picture, it could be
that space (without time) emerges from a collapsing spacetime, and that an expand-
ing spacetime emerges from a space without time. While in the “twin birth” picture,
it is supposed to be two expanding universes emerging from space without time. In
order to apply the account of ﬂat emergence sketched above (Sect. 7), we need to
understand which state depends on which, if we are to specify what the emergent
state E is, and what its basis state B is. There is not a clear way of doing this, since
the model could arguably just as well represent the dissolution of spacetime as its
emergence (i.e., we have these two different pictures of what the model represents).
So, the Dependence condition of ﬂat emergence is unable to be assessed, as is the
Autonomy condition (since this requires understanding which state is E and which
is B). Clearly, however, the Novelty condition is satisﬁed in this example, however
Crowther (2020).
8
Phase Transitions
Here, I discuss phase transitions, which can be seen as examples of both hierarchi-
cal and ﬂat emergence. It is useful to understand this, too, because there are some
approaches to QG that imagine spacetime emergent in a phase transition, Sect. 8.1.
Phase transitions are qualitative changes in the state of a system; most famil-
iar are the examples of water freezing to ice, or boiling to vapour. Of particular
interest as examples of emergence are second-order phase transitions, where sys-
tems exhibit critical phenomena. These represent conditions under which there is
no real distinction between two states of the system–for instance, between the liquid
and vapour phases of water.18 Second-order phase transitions present clear exam-
ples universality (multiply-realised behaviour), where where a number of different
systems—different types of ﬂuids (e.g., with different molecular constitutions), as
well as magnetic materials—exhibit the same critical phenomena.
An example is the ferromagnetic phase transition. A magnetic material at the
micro level, can be pictured as comprising atoms with magnetic spins. When the
17 In other LQC models, however, the ‘Big Bounce’ picture is arguably better-supported.
18 Under these conditions, the system has a fractal structure, not changing as we view it at smaller
length scales. In this example of the second order phase transition between liquid and vapour, as
we look at smaller scales we would see liquid water droplets containing bubbles of steam, within
which ﬂoat even tinier liquid droplets, and so on... until we reach the scale of atoms.

Spacetime Emergence: Collapsing the Distinction Between Content and Context?
395
Fig. 6 Ferromagnetic phase
transition. At temperatures
below the critical
temperature, TC, most of the
atoms’ magnetic spins are
parallel (viewed at the micro
level), and the material has a
net magnetisation
(ferromagnetic phase).
Above TC, the spins point in
different directions and the
material has no net
magnetisation (paramagnetic
phase)
temperature is low, the spins of adjacent atoms are parallel (the energy is lower if
the spins on adjacent atoms are parallel than if they are antiparallel). Below a certain
‘critical’ temperature, (in this case it is called the Curie temperature), TC, most of the
spins in the material are parallel, and so add up constructively to give the material
a net magnetisation, known as ferromagnetism. Above TC on average half the spins
point in one direction and the other half in the opposite direction, and so the material
has no net magnetisation: it is a then a paramagnet. Thus, at TC, a phase transition
occurs where the material undergoes a sudden qualitative change in state: it goes from
being paramagnetic, having no net magnetisation, to suddenly being ferromagnetic,
having a magnetisation. This is illustrated in Fig. 6.
This example represents a symmetry-breaking phase transition. When the spins
are randomised, there is no preferred direction in the system: it is symmetric (looks
the same no matter how you rotate it). After the phase transition, however, the spins
are aligned and so there is a preferred direction: the symmetry has spontaneously
been broken.
We can understand critical phenomena as heirarchically emergent behaviour, as
well as ﬂatly emergent. But these are understood separately, and depends on the
perspective of interest—the two types of emergence are not related to each other
in this case. Start by considering hierarchical emergence, by reference to scenario
(i) of synchronic emergence (SE) depicted in Fig. 3. Here, the emergent physics
E (green) is at the higher level n2 from the basis state B (purple) at the lower,
micro level of atoms at n1. The emergent physics is described by a different theory,
with different degrees of freedom, than the micro physics. This is after the phase
transition has occurred (at time t2). The Dependence condition is satisﬁed because
we can derive the emergent macro behaviour from the micro dynamics; the macro
physics supervenes on the micro physics. The Novelty condition is met because

396
K. Crowther
there are new laws describing the emergent degrees of freedom compared to the
laws governing the micro-system. The Autonomy condition is met because of the
universality of the emergent behaviour: many different types of systems, of diverse
micro-constitutions, nevertheless exhibit the same behaviour at criticality. This is
explained by the mathematical apparatus known as the renormalisation group, which
is used to obtain a simple coarse-grained description from a complicated micro
description; it shows that the micro-details are irrelevant for describing the macro
physics. This is an independent framework that is used in many different areas of
physics, and demonstrates that the macro physics is largely robust against changes
in the micro physics.19
Symmetry breaking is also a strong explanation of the universality: the emergent
physics can be said to depend only on the particular symmetry-breaking pattern, and
not on the details of the micro physics. Even if we can derive the macro behaviour of
any given micro-system by starting out with the details of that system, the fact that
there are many other different micro systems that exhibit the same macro behaviour
under those conditions means that any particular ‘reduction’ based on a given micro-
system will fail to capture the universality of the phenomena. In this sense, we might
say that the micro-story does not and cannot provide an account of the emergent
(universal) phenomena. Laughlin and Pines (2000) present symmetry breaking as an
example of a “higher-order” organising principle, and the phenomena that depend on
it are “transcendent”—insensitive to, and unable to be deduced from, micro-details.
As Morrison (2012) states, too, the notion of symmetry breaking is not itself linked
to any speciﬁc theoretical framework, rather, it functions as a structural constraint on
many different kinds of systems, both in high-energy physics and condensed matter
physics.
Phase transitions can also be understood as examples of ﬂat emergence. This
means looking only at the system at one level, in this case we consider the micro level.
This can be understood by reference to the depiction (ii) of diachronic emergence
(DE) in Fig. 3. The basis state, B is the state of the system before the phase transition
(as depicted at time t1 in Fig. 3) and the emergent state E is the one after the phase
transition (at t2). E and B are different states of the same system, described by
different models of the same theory. The change has occurred in the system because
of the different conditions (i.e., the change in temperature). The way in which E
depends on B is not so obvious, but perhaps we can say that there is some non-
temporal notion of causality that can give a sense of ﬂat supervenience, where there
would be no change in the E state unless there were a change in the B state, and not
vice versa.20 The Novelty condition is more obviously satisﬁed, with B being a state
in which there is no preferred direction (symmetric), and E being one with a preferred
direction (broken symmetry). The Autonomy condition would hold that E can arise
from many different B micro states, e.g., there are many random arrangements at a
19 See Batterman (2005, 2011), Bain (2013), Franklin (2018b), Rivat and Grinbaum (2020) for
more on this.
20 Cf. Footnote 14.

Spacetime Emergence: Collapsing the Distinction Between Content and Context?
397
temperature above TC that will result in the same E at temperatures below TC. The
particular microstate of B is thus underdetermined given only the E state.
8.1
Geometrogenesis
Pregeometric approaches to QG describe spacetime emergent in a phase transition
known as geometrogenesis. There are several approaches of this type, but here I
consider just one simple example, quantum graphity.21 The fundamental structure
described by this approach is represented as a graph: points represent events, which
are causally related if there is a connection (link) between them. This system is
quantum-mechanical, and its dynamics is represented as a change in the connections
between the points. The connections, represented by the links of the graph, are able
to be in two states ‘on’ or ‘off’, and, being quantum-mechanical, the generic states
are superpositions of both ‘on’ and ‘off’.
In the early universe, prior to the phase transition, space does not exist. At the
micro-level, this is depicted as a maximally connected graph: every point is connected
to every other point (t1 in Fig. 7). This means that everything in the universe is
adjacent to every other event, and so there is no notion of geometry or locality. In
this state, the dynamics is invariant (symmetric) under permuation of the events (they
cannot be distinguished by their connections). As the universe cools and condenses,
it undergoes a phase transition in which many of the connections switch off. The
system at low-energy (i.e. at its ground state) is a graph with far fewer edges (t2 in
Fig. 7): the permutation invariance breaks, and instead translation invariance arises.
At this stage locality is able to be deﬁned and we gain a sense of relational geometry.
The idea is that geometry emerges in this phase transition, known as geometrogenesis.
This is illustrated in Fig. 7.
Note that, in these approaches, there is a notion of time at the fundamental level,
that connects the pre- and post-geometric phases. Spacetime is supposed to be associ-
ated with the geometric phase, such that the post-geometric phase is a ﬁner-grained
(lower-level) description of GR spacetime (being the higher-level phenomenon).
But ﬂat emergence concerns only a single level; here we consider the system just
at the more-fundamental level of the discrete structures, rather than the ‘phenom-
enal’ spacetime. So, the emergence basis B is taken as the model describing the
pre-geometric phase (t1 Fig. 7), and the emergent model E describes the geometric
phase (t2 Fig. 7).
The Dependence condition can be understood as ﬂat supervenience, since there
is no change in the E state unless there is a change in the B state, and not vice-versa.
This is ensured by the temporal aspect of these models, such that the B state causally
precedes the E state via the theory’s evolution equation, and the two states are sup-
posed to be of the same system, being the entire universe. The Novelty condition is
21 For details: Konopka et al. (2008), Markopoulou (2009). Another active approach to geometro-
genesis is in group ﬁeld theory, see Oriti (2009, 2014).

398
K. Crowther
Fig. 7 Geometrogenesis as ﬂat emergence (DE). (t1) High-energy (pre-geometric) phase of quan-
tum graphity, in which every point is connected to every other point. (t2) Low-energy (geometric)
phase of quantum graphity, in which there are fewer connections between the points, resulting in
the emergence of a conception of locality. Figure adapted from Markopoulou (2009)
satisﬁed given the different symmetries characterising the two states: B is permu-
tation invariant, while E is not permutation invariant (but is translation invariant).
Finally, the Autonomy condition is plausibly satisﬁed, since E depends only on the
broken symmetry pattern that the system instantiates, rather than the details of B.
Thus, there is a plausible sense in which spacetime could potentially be ﬂatly
emergent on these models (one which would arguably also apply to any symmetry-
breaking phase transition). But there is also a sense of hierarchical emergence here.
Unlike in more familiar cases of phase transitions, however, this is identical with
the ﬂat emergence in geometrogenesis. This is because there is no macro state cor-
responding to the pre-geometric phase of the universe. The emergent macro state
of the universe is associated with the post-geometrogenesis phase. These models
can be seen as simulataneously representing both the ‘diachronic’ (ﬂat) emergence
of spacetime from the (state replacing the) ‘Big Bang’ as well as the ‘synchronic’
(hierarchical) emergence of spacetime from its ‘atoms’. In other words, the con-
tent (spacetime) is emergent along with the context (the conditions required for the
geometrogenesis phase transition).
9
Collapsing the Distinction
So far, I have presented two different accounts of emergence, applicable to different
scenarios: the case of spacetime emergent from some more-fundamental ‘atoms’ is
a possible example of hierarchical emergence, while spacetime emergent from some
‘prior’ non-spatiotemporal state (replacing the Big Bang singularity) is a possible

Spacetime Emergence: Collapsing the Distinction Between Content and Context?
399
example of ﬂat emergence. But in the case of spacetime, it may be more natural to
think of them as representing the same situation. The conditions we encounter as we
extrapolate backwards in cosmological time, and see the universe contracting to a
very high-energy state, are the same conditions required to move to the ‘lower-level’,
ﬁner-grained picture of the ‘atoms’ of the universe (the most fundamental struc-
tures). This is the connection between cosmology and high-energy particle physics.
Understanding these two senses of emergence as lacking a distinction in the case of
spacetime is not exempliﬁed in the case of LQG and LQC, as presented here. But
it is more apparent in the case of geometrogenesis, which illustrates the possibility
of collapsing the two conceptions of emergence: it is a case where both types of
emergence obtain simultaneously.
Collapsing the distinction may seem natural, too, given how difﬁcult it is to accom-
modate the more standard conceptions of emergence in the case of spacetime. The
distinction between ﬂat and hierarchical emergence is intuitive, but loses this moti-
vation when we are forced to abstract away from spatiotemporal notions. We had to
deﬁne the ‘micro’ and ‘macro’ levels in hierarchical emergence not by reference to
length scales, in spite of the connotations of the labels ‘micro’ and ‘macro’. On the
other hand, we run into problems understanding the Dependence condition in ﬂat
(diachronic) emergence without a notion of time, and rely on a non-temporal sense
of causation, or ﬂat supervenience, to link the emergent state to its ‘prior’ basis. Rep-
resenting the ﬂat and hierarchical emergence of spacetime as the same scenario from
the outset may be a simpler way of envisioning spacetime emergence. For instance,
it might help us solve the problem of Dependence in ﬂat emergence: the ‘prior’ or
basis state may be identiﬁed as the one lacking a macro state, which emerges along
with the emergent micro state, as in geometrogenesis.
Arguably, the more general conception of emergence, presented in Sect. 5, is
suitable for capturing the relevant sense of ‘collapsed’ or ‘no levels’ emergence. This
account is supposed to be a balance of prescriptive and descriptive: to potentially
be useful for understanding the unique case of spacetime emergence, while still
attempting to capture enough of what is usually meant by ‘emergence’ in philosophy.
Butanalternativemaybetodevelopamoreradicalaccountofemergence,thatdeparts
further from resemblance to more standard accounts of emergence in philosophy.
For instance, we might explore abandoning the asymmetry typically required for
emergence, by removing the Dependence condition. Such a conception would then
be more readily applicable to the case of LQC, as an example, and we could say that
the model of Sect. 7.1 does actually represent both the emergence and dissolution of
spacetime.
10
Conclusion
Understanding emergence in QG is difﬁcult because we do not have a fully-developed
theory. We are trying to interpret fragmentary pieces of theories that may not even be
meaningful to speculate about at this stage. Nevertheless, philosophical exploration

400
K. Crowther
can still be interesting here, and potentially useful in anticipating what spacetime
emergence may be like, and perhaps for suggesting new avenues to explore.
Standardly, there are two different senses in which spacetime is thought to emerge
according to QG, and QG cosmology. I’ve recommended a positive conception of
emergence, based on other case studies in physics, that can be framed to ﬁt either the
hierarchical case, of spacetime emergent from some more fundamental structures,
or the ﬂat case, of (a ‘micro’ structure corresponding to) spacetime emergent from
some ‘prior’ non-spatiotemporal state, as described by models of QG cosmology.
But splitting this conception of emergence into the two speciﬁc accounts may not be
necessary—it may be more natural to collapse the distinction between ﬂat and hier-
archical emergence in the case of spacetime, given that the way these two accounts
are normally distinguished is by reference to spatiotemporal notions, and the pos-
sibility of QG models where the ‘micro dynamics’ responsible for the appearance
of spacetime is the same in the early universe as it is at a high-energy, ﬁner-grained
description of our universe ‘now’. It is a case where, possibly, content emerges along
with context.
Acknowledgements Thanks to Sebastiano Orioli for help with the ﬁgures.
References
Ashtekar, A., Rovelli, C., & Smolin, L. (1992). Weaving a classical geometry with quantum threads.
Phys. Rev. Lett., 69, 237–240.
Bain, J. (2013). Emergence in effective ﬁeld theories. European Journal for Philosophy of Science,
3(3), 257–273.
Baron, S., & Miller, K. (2014, August). Causation in a timeless world. Synthese, 191(12), 2867–
2886.
Baron, S., & Miller, K. (2015). Causation sans time. American Philosophical Quarterly, 52, 27–40.
Batterman, R. (2002). The devil in the details: Asymptotic reasoning in explanation, reduction and
emergence. Oxford University Press.
Batterman, R. W. (2000). Multiple realizability and universality. British Journal for the Philosophy
of Science, 51(1), 115–145.
Batterman, R. W. (2005). Critical phenomena and breaking drops: Inﬁnite idealizations in physics.
Studies In History and Philosophy of Modern Physics, 36(2), 225–244.
Batterman, R. W. (2011). Emergence, singularities, and symmetry breaking. Foundations of Physics,
41, 1031–1050.
Batterman, R. W. (2018). Autonomy of theories: An explanatory problem. Noûs, 858–873.
Brahma, S. (2020). Emergence of time in loop quantum gravity. In C. W. Nick Huggett Keizo Mat-
subara (Ed.), Beyond spacetime: The foundations of quantum gravity (pp. 53–78). Cambridge
University Press.
Butterﬁeld, J. (2011). Emergence, reduction and supervenience: A varied landscape. Foundations
of Physics, 41(6), 920–959.
Butterﬁeld,J.(2011).Lessisdifferent:Emergenceandreductionreconciled.FoundationsofPhysics,
41, 1065–1135.
Butterﬁeld, J., & Isham, C. (1999). On the emergence of time in quantum gravity. In J. Butterﬁeld
(Ed.), The arguments of time (pp. 116–168). Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Spacetime Emergence: Collapsing the Distinction Between Content and Context?
401
Butterﬁeld, J., & Isham, C. (2001). Spacetime and the philosophical challenge of quantum gravity.
In C. Callender & N. Huggett (Eds.), Physics meets philosophy at the planck scale (pp. 33–89).
Cambridge University Press.
Crowther, K. (2015). Decoupling emergence and reduction in physics. European Journal for Phi-
losophy of Science, 5(3), 419–445.
Crowther, K. (2016). Effective spacetime: Understanding emergence in effective ﬁeld theory and
quantum gravity. Springer.
Crowther, K. (2018). Inter-theory relations in quantum gravity: Correspondence, reduction, and
emergence. Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics, 63, 74–85.
Crowther, K. (2018). What is the point of reduction in science? Erkenntnis. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10670-018-0085-6
Crowther, K. (2019). When do we stop digging? conditions on a fundamental theory of physics. In
A. Aguirre, B. Foster, & Z. Merali (Eds.), What is ‘fundamental’? (pp. 123–133). Springer.
Crowther, K. (2020). As below, so before: ‘synchronic’ and ‘diachronic’ conceptions of spacetime
emergence. Synthese, 1–29.
Crowther, K., & Linnemann, N. (2019). Renormalizability, fundamentality, and a ﬁnal theory: The
role of uv-completion in the search for quantum gravity. British Journal for the Philosophy of
Science, 70(2), 377–406.
Franklin, A. (2018). On the renormalization group explanation of universality. Philosophy of Sci-
ence, 85(2), 225–248.
Franklin, A. (2018). Whence the effectiveness of effective ﬁeld theories? The British Journal for
the Philosophy of Science. https://doi.org/10.1093/bjps/axy050
Guay, A., & Sartenaer, O. (2016, May 01). A new look at emergence. or when after is different.
European Journal for Philosophy of Science, 6(2), 297–322.
Hartmann, S. (2002). On correspondence. Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics,
33(1), 79–94.
Huggett, N., & Wüthrich, C. (2013). Emergent spacetime and empirical (in)coherence. Studies in
History and Philosophy of Modern Physics, 44(3), 276–285.
Huggett, N., & Wüthrich, C. (2018). The (a)temporal emergence of spacetime. Philosophy of Sci-
ence, 85(5), 1190–1203.
Konopka, T., Markopoulou, F., & Severini, S. (2008). Quantum graphity: A model of emergent
locality. Physical Review D, 77(10).
Laughlin, R. B., & Pines, D. (2000, January). The theory of everything. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 97(1), 28–31 (Laughlin, RB Pines, D)
Markopoulou, F. (2009). New directions in background independent quantum gravity. In D. Oriti
(Ed.), Approaches to quantum gravity (pp. 129–149). Cambridge University Press.
Morganti, M. (2020a). Fundamentality in metaphysics and the philosophy of physics. Part II: The
philosophy of physics. Philosophy Compass, 15(10), 1–14.
Morganti, M. (2020b). Fundamentality in metaphysics and the philosophy of physics. Part I: Meta-
physics. Philosophy Compass, 15(7).
Morrison, M. (2012, January). Emergent physics and micro-ontology. Philosophy of Science, 79(1),
141–166.
Oriti, D. (2009). The group ﬁeld theory approach to quantum gravity. Approaches to quantum grav-
ity: Toward a new understanding of space time and matter (pp. 310–331). Cambridge University
Press.
Oriti, D. (2014). Disappearance and emergence of space and time in quantum gravity. Studies in
History and Philosophy of Modern Physics, 46, 186–199.
Oriti, D. (2018). Levels of spacetime emergence in quantum gravity. arXiv:1807.04875.
Oriti, D. (Forthcoming). Levels of spacetime emergence in quantum gravity. In C. Wüthrich, B. L.
Bihan, & N. Huggett (Eds.), Philosophy beyond spacetime. Oxford University Press.
Penrose, R. (1999). The central programme of twistor theory. Chaos, Solitons &amp; Fractals,
10(2–3), 581–611.

402
K. Crowther
Penrose, R. (2002). Gravitational collapse: The role of general relativity. General Relativity and
Gravitation, 34(7), 1141–1165.
Post, H. (1971). Correspondence, invariance and heuristics: In praise of conservative induction.
Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part A, 2(3), 213–255.
Radder, H. (1991). Heuristics and the generalized correspondence principle. British Journal for the
Philosophy of Science, 42, 195–226.
Rivat, S., & Grinbaum, A. (2020). Philosophical foundations of effective ﬁeld theories. European
Physical Journal A, 56(3).
Rovelli, C. (2004). Quantum gravity. Cambridge University Press.
Rovelli, C., & Vidotto, F. (2014). Covariant loop quantum gravity: An elementary introduction to
quantum gravity and spinfoam theory. Cambridge University Press.
Sartenaer, O. (2018). Flat emergence. Paciﬁc Philosophical Quarterly, 99(S1), 225–250.
Shech, E. (2019, June). Philosophical issues concerning phase transitions and anyons: Emergence,
reduction, and explanatory ﬁctions. Erkenntnis, 84(3), 585–615.
Tallant, J. (2019). Causation in a timeless world? Inquiry, 62(3), 300–316.
Wüthrich, C. (2017). Raiders of the lost spacetime. In D. Lehmkuhl (Ed.), Towards a theory of
spacetime theories (pp. 297–335). Birkhäuser.
Wüthrich, C. (2019). The emergence of space and time. In S. Gibb, R. F. Hendry, & T. Lancaster
(Eds.), The Routledge handbook of emergence (pp. 315–326).

Topological Quantum Field Theory
and the Emergence of Physical
Space–Time from Geometry. New
Insights into the Interactions Between
Geometry and Physics
Luciano Boi
1
Introduction
This paper addresses various topics and different issues related essentially to general
relativity theory and quantum ﬁeld theories, and, more generally, to the interactions
between geometry and physics. It aims at presenting recent works and discussing
new ideas and results from these topics. It focuses on the subject of the geometric and
topological structures and invariants which enriched in a remarkable way cosmology
and quantum ﬁeld theories in the last century, say, starting from Einstein’s general
relativity until string theory. In the last three decades, new and deep developments
in this direction have emerged from cosmology and theoretical physics.
The general goal of the paper is to examine some striking aspects of the role of
geometrical and topological concepts and methods in the developments of theoret-
ical physics, especially in cosmology, quantum ﬁeld theory, string theory, quantum
gravity and non-commutative geometry, and then to show the great signiﬁcance of
these concepts and methods for a better understanding of our universe and the phys-
ical world at the very small scale. From the beginning we would like to stress the
crucial fact that many physical phenomena appear to be related to deep geomet-
rical and topological invariants (Atiyah, 1988) and furthermore that they are effect
which emerge, in a sense, from the geometric structure of space–time (Connes &
Chamseddine, 2006; Vafa, 1998).
L. Boi (B)
École Des Hautes Études en Sciences Sociales, Centre de Mathématiques (CAMS), 54, bd
Raspail, 75006 Paris, France
e-mail: lboi@ehess.fr
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
S. Wuppuluri and I. Stewart (eds.), From Electrons to Elephants and Elections,
The Frontiers Collection, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-92192-7_23
403

404
L. Boi
2
Einstein’s General Relativity and the Interaction
Between Curvature and Matter
The ﬁrst good example we would like to mention of this new point of view, which
however rely upon ideas advocated by Riemann, Clifford and Poincaré, is that of
generalrelativity,whichshowedthatgravitywasaneffectofthespace–timecurvature
(Boi, 2004, 2006b; Penrose, 2004; Regge, 1992). More precisely, with the general
relativity theory, actual (physical) geometry enters the picture of Minkowski space–
time (which, mathematically speaking, is a manifold with a Lorentz metric, i.e., a
non-degenerate pseudo-Riemannian metric of signature + … + −; Rn with metric
(dx1)2 + … + (dxn–1)2−(dt)2) by assuming the world-history of each particle is a
geodesic and that the Ricci curvature of the metric reﬂects the structure of matter
and energy present at each point. The Einstein ﬁeld equations,
Rμυ−1/2gμυ R + gμυ = 8πGTμυ
states that mass and pressure warp space–time. These equations relate the metric
to matter distribution. Thus, according to the general theory of relativity, the gravi-
tational force has to be reinterpreted as the curvature of space–time in the proximity
of a massive object. When the energy is very concentrated, then the deformation of
space–time may change sufﬁciently its topological structure and not only its metric
(Baez & Muniain, 1994; Boi, 2004a; Regge, 1992). Let us stress that general rela-
tivity related two fundamental concepts which had, till then, been considered as
entirely independent, namely, the concepts of space and time, on the one hand, and
the concepts of matter and motion, on the other. Indeed, the geometry of space–
time is not given a priori, for, in some sense, depends on the underlying physical
structure of space-time. General relativity theory predicts at least three fundamental
phenomena of the physical reality: (i) the gravitational waves; (ii) the black holes;
(iii) the expanding of the Universe.
One of the most important ideas of general relativity was that space–time, not
space, was the fundamental intrinsic object and that its structure was to be deter-
mined by physical phenomena. Einstein’s main discoveries were as follow: (i)
Spacetime is a pseudo- Riemannian manifold, i.e., its metric ds2 is not Euclidean
but has the signature (+,−,−,−) at each point. In presence of matter (the gravi-
tational ﬁeld), general relativity, based on the geometric concepts discovered by
Riemann (see Riemann, 1854; and Boi 2019a), replaces the ﬂat (pseudo) metric of
Poincaré, Einstein (special relativity) and Minkowski, ds2 = dx2 + dy2 + dz2−dt2,
by a curved spacetime metric whose components form the gravitational potential
gμυ, ds2 = gμυ dxμ dxυ. (ii) Gravitation is just the physical manifestation of the
curvature of spacetime (as foreseen by Clifford in 1876, see (Clifford, 1876)). (iii)
Light travels along geodesics. Another point should, however, be added. (iv) The
metric of (ﬂat) space–time is not Euclidean but has the form ds2 = dx2 −dx2 −dx2
−dx2 at each point. This is what nowadays is called a Lorentzian structure. However,
even in the absence of matter, the geometry of space–time could not be asserted to

Topological Quantum Field Theory and the Emergence of Physical Space–Time …
405
be ﬂat but only Ricci ﬂat, i.e., that its Ricci tensor, which can be calculated from the
Riemannian curvature tensor, is 0 (Penrose, 2004; Regge, 1992).
3
Quantum Mechanics and the Idea of Non-Commutativity
The next essential advance in twenty-century physics has been quantum mechanics.
Let us summarize some fundamental idea of this theory (Cao, 1997; Heisenberg,
1930). In quantum mechanics and relativistic quantum ﬁeld theory formulated by W.
Heisenberg, P. Jordan, W. Pauli, P. Dirac and E. Wigner, the position and velocity of
a particle (at the subatomic scale) are non-commuting operators acting on a Hilbert
space, and classical notions such as “the trajectory of a particle” do not apply. In the
19th and early twentieth century physics, many aspects of nature were described in
terms of ﬁelds—the electric and magnetic ﬁelds, and the gravitational ﬁeld. So, since
ﬁelds interacts with particles, to give an internally coherent account of nature, the
quantum concepts must be applied to ﬁelds as well as to particles. When this is done,
quantities such as the components of the electric ﬁeld at different points in space–
time become non-commutative. When one constructs a Hilbert space in which these
operators act, one ﬁnds many surprises. The distinction between ﬁelds and particles
break down, since the Hilbert space of a quantum ﬁeld is constructed in terms of
particle-like excitations. Conventional particles such as electrons are reinterpreted
as arising from the quantization of a ﬁeld. In the process, one ﬁnds the prediction of
“antimatter”: for every particle there must be a corresponding antiparticle, with the
same mass and opposite electric charge (Coleman, 1985).
The quantum ﬁeld theories (QFT’s) that have proved to be very important in
describing elementary particle physics are gauge theories (Zeidler, 2011). The clas-
sical example of gauge theory is the theory of electromagnetism. The gauge group
is the Abelian group U(1). If the (physical) potential A denotes the U(1) gauge
connection, which locally can be regarded, mathematically speaking, as a one-form
on space–time, then the curvature or electromagnetic ﬁeld tensor is the two-form F
= dA, and Maxwell’s equation read: 0 = dF = d*F. Here * is the Hodge duality
operator.
4
Gauge Theories: From H. Weyl to Yang-Mills
The second main step of the geometrization of physics in the twenty-century has
been gauge theory, thanks to which several new deep geometrical and topological
structures have emerged (Bourguignon & Lawson, 1982; Boi, 2011). Gauge theory is
a quantum ﬁeld theory obeying to the geometrical principle of local gauge invariance.
Gauge theory was introduced by Hermann Weyl in 1918 as an attempt to unify
general relativity with electromagnetism (Weyl, 1918, 1929). However, the theory
of Weyl failed because of lacking of an appropriate quantum physics framework.

406
L. Boi
Gauge idea rebirths with the formulation of non-Abelian Yang-Mills theory in 1954
by Yang and Mills (Boi, 2019b; Yang & Mills, 1954). This new theory stems from
the recognition of the structural similarity, from the mathematical viewpoint, of non-
Abelian gauge (quantum) ﬁelds with general relativity and the understanding that
both are connections (Yang, 1977; Bourguignon & Lawson, 1982). This last, deﬁned
over a ﬁber bundle and possessing a curvature, is a very deep geometrical concept
introduced by Weyl and Cartan, which generalize the concept of parallel transport of
Levi–Civita to a new mathematical object: that of a non-point-like space or manifold
in which precisely the points are replaced by the ﬁbers (Boi, 2004a).
The very idea of Yang and Mills consists in suggesting a new program of
geometrization of physics, this time applied to the physical forces supporting the
quantum world. They proposed that the strong nuclear interactions be described by a
(quantum) ﬁeld theory in the same manner than electromagnetism, which is exactly
local gauge invariant, as it is general relativity. More precisely, they postulated that
the local gauge was the SU(2) isotopic spin-group or SU(2) isotopic spin-connection
on which the non-Abelian group (a compact Lie group1) acts. This idea was “revo-
lutionary” because it changed the very concept of “identity” of what has been ever
assumed to be an “elementary particle”. The novel idea that the isotopic spin connec-
tion, and therefore the potential Aμ (where, in order to relate the phases function λ(xi)
at different points, the familiar gauge transformation for Aμ was written in terms of
the phase change: Aμ →Aμ−1/e ∂μλ) acts like the SU(2) symmetry group is the most
important result of Yang-Mills theory. The concept of isotopic-spin connection lies at
the heart of local gauge theory. It shows explicitly how the gauge symmetry group is
built into the dynamics of the interaction between particles and ﬁelds (Atiyah, 1990;
Yang, 1977). Moreover, some of the important physical characteristics of the ﬁeld
can be deduced directly from the connection (the potential), which can be viewed as
a linear combination of the generators of the SU(2) group. We can, in fact, associate
this formal operation with real physical processes.
Let’s add few speciﬁcations on the mathematical structure of gauge theory (for a
more comprehensive exposition, see Bourguignon & Lawson, 1982; Manin, 1988;
Zeidler, 2011). Yang-Mills or non-Abelian gauge theory can, at the classical level,
be described similarly to the “classical” Abelian gauge theory, with U(1) (see above)
replaced by a more general compact gauge group G. The deﬁnition of curvature
must be modiﬁed to F = dA + A ∧A, and Yang-Mills equations: 0 = dAF = dA*F,
where dA is the gauge-covariant extension of the exterior algebra derivative. These
equations can be derived from the Yang-Mills Lagrangian
L = 1/4g2 ∫Tr TrF ∧∗F,
where Tr denotes an invariant quadratic form on the Lie algebra of G. The Yang-
Mills equations are non-linear, so, in contrast to the Maxwell equations, but like
1 Finite groups are spacial cases of compact Lie groups. For example, the rotation group SO(3) of
the three-dimensional Euclidean space or the gauge group U(1) × SU(2) × SU(3) of the Standard
Model in elementary particle physics are compact Lie groups.

Topological Quantum Field Theory and the Emergence of Physical Space–Time …
407
the Einstein equations for the gravitational ﬁeld, they are not explicitly solvable in
general. But they have certain properties in common with the Maxwell equations
and, in particular, they describe at the classical level massless waves that travel at
the speed of light.
The ﬁrst (classical) Yang-Mills theory corresponds to the quantum version of
Maxwell theory—known as Quantum Electrodynamics—, which gave a very accu-
rate account of the quantum behaviour of electromagnetic ﬁelds and forces. The
non-Abelian gauge theory were introduced for describing the other forces in nature,
notably the weak force (responsible among other things for certain forms of radioac-
tivity) and the strong or nuclear force (responsible among other things for the
binding of protons and neutrons into nuclei). For the weak force, we have now
the Weinberg-Salam-Glashow electroweak theory with gauge group: H = SU(2) ×
U(1).
The masslessness of classical Yang-Mills waves was avoided by elaborating the
theory with an additional “Higgs ﬁeld”. This is a scalar ﬁeld, transforming in a two-
dimensional representation of H, whose non-zero and approximately constant value
in the vacuum state reduces the structure group from H to U(1) sub-group (diagonally
embeddedinSU(2)×U(1)).Thistheorydescribesboththeelectromagneticandweak
forces, in a more or less uniﬁed way; because of the reduction of the structure group
to U(1), the long-range ﬁelds are those of electromagnetism only, in accord with
what we see in nature.
To sum up what we said about gauge theory, let’s stress that Yang and Mills showed
for the ﬁrst time that local gauge symmetry was a powerful fundamental principle
that provided new insights into the newly discovered “internal” quantum numbers
like isotopic spin. In their theory, isotopic spin was not just a label for the charge
states of particles, but it was crucially involved in determining the fundamental forms
of the interaction between these particles. The most important philosophical point
is that in the gauge theories of quantum ﬁelds, symmetries of nature determine the
properties of forces; therefore, it is allowed to say that mathematical groups and
invariants are at the origin of the dynamics of physical forces.
Let’s add that in the search for a non-linear generalization of Maxwell’s equations
to explain elementary particles, there are various symmetry properties one would
require. These are: (i) External (spatial–temporal) symmetries invariant under the
Lorentz and Poincare’s groups and under the conformal group if one is taking the
rest-mass to be zero; (ii) Internal (physical) symmetries invariant under the non-
Abelian groups like SU(2) or SU(3) to account for the known feature of weak and
strong interactions, respectively; (iii) Covariance or its supersymmetric coupling by
working on a complex topological space–time.

408
L. Boi
5
String Theory and the Supersymmetric Picture
of the Quantum World
The next fundamental step in the geometrization of physics has been realized by
string theory, a quantum ﬁeld theory that tries to unify in a coherent picture general
relativity and quantum mechanics at a deeper level than that of the Standard Model
of particle physics (Witten, 1995). String theory entails beautiful geometrical and
topological new structures, more rich and powerful with respect to those developed
before by the other quantum ﬁeld theories. It is yet theoretically incomplete and
hitherto physically untested (Marino, 2005; Vafa, 1998).
Itisworthofrecallingthatoriginallystringprogramgoback,inasense,totheideas
putted forward by the German mathematician Bernard Riemann about hundred-ﬁfth
years early. According to him, one can make two fundamental assumptions. (i) First,
on a given n- dimensional manifolds there are many possible metric structures (i.e.,
many different functions for measuring the distance between any pair of inﬁnitesi-
mally near points), so that the problem of which structure is the one appropriate for
physical space required empirical methods for its solution. In other words, Riemann
stated explicitly in 1854 (Riemann, 1854) that the question of the geometry of phys-
ical space does not make sense independently of physical phenomena. And (ii) space
does not exist independently of phenomena and its structure depends on the extent
to what we can observe and what happens in the physical world. From the previous
follows, say, a corollary even more insightful: in its inﬁnitely small parts (nowadays
we would say at the quantum level) space may not be accurately described even by
the geometrical notions of Riemannian geometry (Ashtekar & Lewandowski, 2004).
Thislastidea,whichishintedinRiemann’sstatement(ii),remaindormantuntilthe
searchforauniﬁedﬁeldtheoryatthequantumlevelforcedthephysiciststoreconsider
the structure of space–time at extremely small distances. One of the ideas to which
their efforts led them was that the geometry of spacetime was supersymmetric with
the usual coordinates supplemented by several anticommuting (fermionic) ones. This
is a model that reﬂects the highly fuzzy structure of spacetime in small regions (at the
quantum scale 10−33 cm) where one can pass back and forth between bosonic and
fermionic particles. Modern string theory (i.e., superstring theory) takes Riemann’s
vision even further, and replaces the points of spacetime by strings, thereby making
the geometry even more non-commutative (see Connes, 1994, 1996; and Landi,
1999).
Let’s address brieﬂy some conceptual aspects and issues of superstring theory.
Superstring theory relies on the two ideas of supersymmetry and spacetime structure
of eleven dimensions. Supersymmetry require that for each known particle having
integer spin 0, 1, 2, and so on, measured in quantum units—there is a particle with the
same mass but half-integer spin (1/2, 3/2, 5/2 and so on), and vice-versa. Supersym-
metry transforms the coordinate of space and time such that the laws of physics are the

Topological Quantum Field Theory and the Emergence of Physical Space–Time …
409
same for all observers. Einstein’s general theory of relativity derives from this condi-
tion, and so supersymmetry implies gravity. In fact, supersymmetry predicts “super-
gravity”, in which a particle with a spin of 2—the graviton—transmits gravitational
interactions and has as a partner a graviton, with spin of 3/2.
Superstring is based on the fundamental notion of T-duality, which relates two
kinds of particles that arise when a string loop around a compact (spatial) dimension.
One kind, call them “vibrating particles”, is analogous to those predicted by Kaluza
and Klein and comes from vibrations of the loop of the string. Such particles are
energetic if the circle is small. In addition, the string can wind many times around
the circle, its energy become higher the more times it wraps around and the larger the
circle. Moreover, each energy level represents a new particle—call them “winding
particle”. T-duality states that the winding particles for a circle of radius R are the
same as the “vibrating particles” for a circle of radius 1/R, and vice-versa. So, to a
physicist, the two sets of particles are indistinguishable: a fat compact dimension
may yield apparently the same particles as thin one.
String theory, if correct, entails a radical change in our concepts of spacetime. That
is what one would expect of a theory that reconciles general relativity with quantum
mechanics. The answer involves duality again. A vibrating string is described by an
auxiliary two-dimensional ﬁeld theory, whose Lagrangian is roughly
L = 1/2

dτ dσ(∂X/∂τ)2 + (∂X/∂σ)2.
Here, X(τ, σ) is the position of the string at proper time τ, at a coordinate σ
along the string. In string theory, the auxiliary two-dimensional ﬁeld theory plays
a more fundamental role than spacetime, and spacetime exists only to the extent
that it can be reconstructed from the two-dimensional theory. In other words, duality
symmetries of the two-dimensional ﬁeld theory put a basic restriction on the validity
of the classical notion of spacetime.
All the attempts mentioned, which are aimed at solving one of the central prob-
lems in twentieth-century physics, i.e.: how to combine gravity and the other forces
into a unitary theoretical explanation of the physical word, essentially depend on
the possibility of building a new geometrical framework conceptually richer than
Riemannian geometry. In fact, as we saw, it plays a fundamental role in non-Abelian
gauge theories and in superstring theory, thanks to which a great variety of new
mathematical structure has emerged. A very interesting hypothesis is that the global
topological properties of the manifold’s model of spacetime play a major role in
quantum ﬁeld theory and that, consequently, several physical quantum effects arise
from the non-local metrical and topological structures of these manifold (Isham,
1988; Labastida & Lozano, 1989). Thus, the uniﬁcation of general relativity and
quantum theory requires some fundamental breakthrough in our understanding of the
relationship between spacetime and quantum processes (Penrose, 2004). In particular
the superstring theory, but also, in a different manner, loop quantum gravity, lead to
the guess that the usual structure of spacetime at the quantum scale must be dropped
out from physical thought (Carfora, 2011). Non-Abelian gauge theories satisfy the

410
L. Boi
basic physical requirements pertaining to the symmetries of particle physics because
they are geometric in character. They profoundly elucidate the fundamental role
played by bundles, connections and curvature in explaining the essential laws of
nature. Kaluza-Klein theories and more remarkably superstring theory showed that
spacetime symmetries and internal (quantum) symmetries might be uniﬁed through
the introduction of new structures of space with a different topology. This essen-
tially means that “hidden” symmetries of fundamental physics can be related to
the phenomenon of topological change of certain class of (presumably) non-smooth
manifolds(Atiyah,1990).Thisentailsanumberofextremelyimportantmathematical
and physical consequences, which partly are discussed in this paper.
6
New Developments and Conceptual Issues in Quantum
Field Theory
Let us now address some of the recent most fundamental developments in mathemat-
ical and theoretical physics, and in particular, the fact that these developments point
forwards the search for a new scheme of spacetime structure at the quantum scale.
Quantum mechanics culminated in the “standard model” of particle interactions,
which is a quantum ﬁeld theory. The fundamental ingredients of nature that appear
in the underlying equations are ﬁelds: the familiar electromagnetic ﬁeld, and some
twenty or so other ﬁelds. The so-called elementary particles, like photons and quarks
and electrons, are “quanta” of the ﬁelds-bundles of the ﬁeld’s energy and momentum.
The properties of these ﬁelds and their interactions are largely dictated by princi-
ples of symmetry, including Einstein’s special principle of relativity, together with
a principle of “renormalizability”, which dictates that the ﬁelds can only interact
with each other in certain specially ways. The standard model has passed every test
that can be imposed with existing experimental facilities. However, many unsolved
problems and open questions remain. We do not know why it obeys certain symme-
tries and not others, or why it contains six types of quarks, and not more or less.
Finally, gravitation cannot be brought into the quantum ﬁeld theoretic framework of
the standard model, because gravitational interactions do not satisfy the principles of
renormalizability that governs the other interactions. This constitutes at present one
the most fundamental and challenging issues of researches in theoretical physics and
mathematics. Both topological quantum ﬁeld theories and non-commutative geom-
etry dedicate much effort to ﬁnd out a solution to the very hard and key problem of the
renormalization of the standard model. This problem might be answered, following
different paths, by the Witten’s topological string approach (Witten, 1988) and the
Connes’s non-commutative approach (Connes, 1996).
The not-yet-achieved incorporation of the fundamental ideas of a dynamical
space–time geometry into a quantum theory of matter is one of the central open
problems of contemporary physics, whose solution may well require another radical
change in the physicist’s conception of nature and space–time. We think that a real

Topological Quantum Field Theory and the Emergence of Physical Space–Time …
411
understanding of the cosmological questions and of the nature of elementary parti-
cles can ever been achieved without a simultaneous deeper understanding of the
nature of space–time itself. It is well-known that quantum mechanics taught us that
the classical notions of the position and velocity of a particle were only approxima-
tions of the truth. Notably, it is not clear whether the Riemannian geometry—even
in a revised and generalized form—is adequate for the description of the small-
scale structure of space–time (Isham, 1988; Penrose, 2004). The Planck length lP
= (Gℏ/c3) 1/2∼10−33 cm is considered as a natural lower limit for the precision at
which coordinates of an event in space–time make sense. Nevertheless, not only does
quantum mechanics have some striking geometrical characters, but its description
of the world also reveals a wealth of deep underlying mysteries—even bordering on
paradox—which cannot arise merely from an inadequate human understanding of
the implications of the theory’s mathematical formalism. Instead, at some level, there
must be a deviation from purely unitary evolution, so that state-vector reduction can
become a real phenomenon (Ashtekar & Lewandowski, 2004). Moreover, because of
the (mysterious) non-local nature of quantum entanglement, whatever the nature of
this revolution might be, the ﬁnal theory that will emerge must have a fundamentally
non-local character. In effect, according to certain mathematical-physical theories,
such as topological quantum ﬁeld theories and especially superstring theory, the
local information of the space–time ﬁelds and of the other ﬁelds is stored in global
(topological) structures of space–time (Boi, 2004).
7
Non-Commutative Geometry and the Quantum Fields
This is also truth for non-commutative geometry, where the quantum ﬁeld equations
are calculated for the full set of internal space metric ﬂuctuations allowed by the
non-commutative geometry axioms in the spectral triple formulation of the standard
model (Connes & Chamseddine, 2006). These calculations have been given both
from the perspective of the spectral triple and from the perspective of Fredholm
module.2 It has been showed that studying these Fredholm modules using algebraic
K theory and K homology leads to a suggested non-commutative version of Morse
theory—a well-known tool for studying the topology of manifolds—which is applied
to the ﬁnite spectral action. According to the spectral action principle, which has
been introduced ten years ago by Connes and Chamseddine, the standard model of
particle physics is formulated with a product (whose image is called the total space)
of two spectral triples—one that represents the Euclidean space–time manifold and
the other the zero-dimensional internal space of particles charges. The space–time
coordinate functions remain commutative but the internal space is a non-commutative
“manifold”. The spectral action principle is an important step towards the uniﬁcation
2 Recall that if A is an involutive algebra over the complex numbers C, then a Fredholm module over
A consists of an involutive representation of A on a Hilbert space H, together with a self-adjoint
operator F, of square 1 and such that the commutator [F, a] is a compact operator for all a ∈A.

412
L. Boi
of gravity with particle physics; the Einstein-Hilbert action plus Weinberg-Glashow-
Salam theory all result from a calculation of the eigenvalues of the Dirac operator on
the total space and since the Dirac operator encodes the metric, the spectral action
principle is a purely geometrical theory (Connes, 1995).
Formally, a spectral triple (A, H, D) provides the analog of a Riemannian
spin manifold to non-commutative geometry (here we follow closely Connes and
Chamseddine, 1996). It consists of an involutive, non-necessarily commutative
algebra A, a Hilbert space H: a ﬁnitely generated projective module on which the
algebra is represented, and a Dirac operator D that gives a notion of distance, and
from which is built a differential algebra. A very important technical point is that the
geometry of any closed (even dimensional) Riemannian spin manifold can be fully
described by a (real and even) spectral triple and a non-commutative geometry is
essentially the same structure but with the generalization that the algebra of coordi-
nates is allowed to be non-commuting. For the standard model the internal Hilbert
space is H = H ⊕H ⊕H C ⊕HC, where LRLR
H = (C2 ⊗CN ⊗C3) ⊕(C2 ⊗CN), L
H = ((C ⊕C) ⊗CN ⊗C3) ⊕(C ⊗CN), R
and whose basis is labeled by the elementary fermions and their antiparticles. The
symbol c is used to indicate the section represented by the antiparticles. The even
triple has the Z/2-grading operator χ, the chirality (eigenvalues + 1 or −1). In either
case of HL and HR, the ﬁrst direct summand is the quarks and the second the leptons.
N Stands for the numbers of generations. For example, the left-handed up and down
quarks form an isospin doublet and their right-handed counterparts are singlets and
there are three colors for quarks and none for leptons. The charges on the particles
are identiﬁed by the faithful representation of the algebra on the Hilbert space. In the
deﬁnition of H above we see a second Z/2-grading that splits the Hilbert space into
two orthogonal subspaces for particles and antiparticles: H + ⊕H – or H ⊕HC.
This is called S0 reality and is not an axiom but applies to the standard model as it
excludes Majorana masses. The S0 reality grading operator ε satisﬁes:
[D, ε] = 0,
[J, ε]+ = 0,
ε∗= ε,
ε2 = 1.
8
The “ontology” of Newtonian Physics and Quantum
Field Theory
Letusnowaddresstheimportantpointconcerningthedifferencesbetweenthe“ontol-
ogy” of classical physics and that of quantum physics. (Here this term stands for the

Topological Quantum Field Theory and the Emergence of Physical Space–Time …
413
nature and the kind of properties ascribed to the most fundamental physical entities
from which a speciﬁc theory is built up and also to the mathematical objects by means
of which one construct a deﬁnite space–time theory or model). One may afﬁrm that
Newtonian physics had a clear ontology: the world consisted of massive particles
situated in Euclidean space. In that sense, the nature of space played a fundamental
role. In the mathematical developments of Newtonian mechanics, however, the role
of space is not clear. There is not much difference between the description of two
particles moving in R3 and that of a single particle moving in R6, nor between that
of a pivoted rigid body and that of a point moving on the group-manifold SO3. In
quantum mechanics the idea of space is even more elusive, for there seems to be no
ontology, and, whatever wave-functions are, they are certainly not functions deﬁned
in space. Still, for about seventy years we have known that elementary particles must
be described not by quantum mechanics but by quantum ﬁeld theory, and in the
ﬁeld theory the role of space is quite different. Although it is an important fact that
quantum ﬁeld theory cannot be reconciled with general relativity, one could empha-
size that the two theories have a virtual feature in common, for in both of them the
points of space play a central and objective dynamical role. In quantum ﬁeld theory
two electrons are not described by a wave-function on R6; instead they constitute a
state of a ﬁeld in R3 which is excited in the neighborhood of two points. The points of
space index the observables in the theory. The mathematics of quantum ﬁeld theory
is an attempt to describe the nature of space, but it proposes to look at space in a
completely different way (Manin, 1988; Zeidler, 2011).
Like quantum ﬁeld theory, Penrose’s twistor theory is a radical attempt to get
rid of space as a primary concept (Penrose, 1977). The Connes’s program of non-
commutative geometry amounts to a huge generalization of the classical notion of a
manifold (Connes, 1994). Finally, string theory proposed a scheme for making space
as an approximation to some more general kind of structure. One striking difference
(maybe the essential one) between general relativity and quantum mechanics lie in
the fact that, whereas in general relativity it seems impossible to separate the postu-
late of (continuous) space–time localization of events and the theory of gravitation
from the (inner) geometric structure of space–time, on the other hand, it is precisely
this postulate of the indistinguishability of the physical ﬁelds from the space–time
geometry that got lost in quantum mechanics. It is particularly contradicted by the
Bohr principle of complementarity and the Heisenberg uncertainty relations, which
states the impossibility of knowing simultaneously the exact position and velocity
of particles (electrons). These relations are indeed based on a model in which the
electron jumps quickly from one orbit to another, radiating all energy thus liberated
in the form of a global package, a quantum of light.
9
What It Could Be a Quantum Geometry of Space–time?
Many attempts have been made, starting from the sixties, to understand what kind
of geometry and topology and therefore what kind of space–time model could be

414
L. Boi
truly appropriate to describe the behavior of physical space both at the very large
and quantum levels (Isham, 1988; Penrose, 2004). Among them, the most attractive
and promising ones seem to be string theory, non-commutative geometry and loop
quantum gravity (Ashtekar & Lewandowski, 2004; Carfora, 2011). The nature of
quantum geometry is the central issue of non-perturbative quantum gravity. Is the
familiar continuum picture then only an approximation? If so, what are the ‘atoms’
of geometry? What are its fundamental excitations? Is there a discrete underlying
structure? If so, how does the continuum picture arise from this fundamental discrete-
ness? By a quantized geometry, it is meant (Baez & Muniain, 1994) that there exist
physical quantities which can take on continuous values classically but are such
that the corresponding quantum operators have a discrete spectrum. In the resulting
quantum geometry, Riemannian geometry can then emerge only as an approximation
on a large scale. This topic can be discussed either from the perspective of topolog-
ical quantum ﬁeld theory and superstring theory or from that of non-commutative
geometry.
The most attractive feature of non-commutative geometry is that it develops a
new notion of geometric space where points do not play the central role, thus giving
much more freedom for describing the subatomic-scale nature of spacetime. The
theory proposed a framework which is sufﬁciently general to treat discrete space,
Riemannian manifolds, conﬁgurations spaces of quantum ﬁeld theory, and the duals
of discrete groups which are not necessarily commutative. The development of a
non-commutative geometry has been recently one of the most important attempts to
unify (mathematically) quantum ﬁeld theory with gravitation. In addition, its physical
implications have found lately a conﬁrmation in that it predicted a physical model
for coupling gravity with matter (Connes, 1996).
The other fundamental change in our conception of spacetime and physics comes
from superstring theory. Indeed, recent developments in theoretical physics suggest
that a new kind of quantum geometry may enter physics, and that spacetime itself may
be reinterpreted as an approximate, derived concept that one can extract from a two-
dimensional ﬁeld theory (Katz & Vafa, 1997; Witten, 1995). Intuitively, strings are
viewed as one-dimensional objects whose modes of vibration represent the elemen-
tary particles. In addition, in string theory the one-dimensional trajectory (world-line)
of a particle in space–time is replaced by a two-dimensional orbit (world-tube) of
the string. The main conceptual point of the string program is that it entails some
revolutionary ideas about our conception of space and space–time. Indeed, space is
not more thought as formed up of points-like elements and therefore the particles
not either. Space as well is endowed with a point-less structure. Instead of point-
like elements, the space seems to be ﬁlled out of other kinds of geometrical objects,
richer and more complex, like knots of many types, Riemannian surfaces, topological
(unconventional) objects, and so on. The most interesting point is that space must be
considered as a dynamical thing, which may change with respect to its metrical and
topological properties (Boi, 2009b; Vafa, 1998). The main physical aspect of string
theory is that all particles which we previously thought of as elementary, that is, as
little points without any structure in them, turn out in fact not to be points at all but
basically little loops of string which move through space, oscillating around it. We

Topological Quantum Field Theory and the Emergence of Physical Space–Time …
415
have thus that the different physical properties of matter emerge somehow from the
different structural and dynamical patterns of these strings and loops in space. For
example, the electric charge might be seen as a quality of the motion of the string
rather than something which is just added on to a particle as fundamental object.
The idea of replacing point particles by strings sounds so naïve that it may be hard
to believe that it is truly fundamental. But in fact, this naïve-sounding step is probably
as basic as introducing the complex numbers in mathematics. If the real and complex
numbers are regarded as real vector spaces, one has dimR(R) = 1, dimR(C) = 2. The
orbit of a point particle in space–time is one-dimensional and should be regarded as
a real manifold, while the orbit of a string in space–time is two-dimensional (over
the reals) and should be regarded as a complex Riemann surface. Physics without
strings is somehow analogous to mathematics without complex numbers.
10
New Insights Into the Nature of Space–time
We now outline some new ideas relating to the structure of space–time in the most
recent physical theories, to start with general relativity. (i) The geometric structure of
space–time gives rise to the dynamics of this same space–time, and in particular of
the gravitational ﬁeld. (ii) Even the other (fermionic and bosonic) ﬁelds describing
matter and its electroweak and strong interactions seems to emerge as dynamical
effects from the topological (global) structure of space–time. Conversely, the space–
time itself must be henceforth thought of, in some sense, as a derived (changing)
object whose metric and topological structures may be subject, to some extent, to
the quantum ﬂuctuations of these same ﬁelds. For example, one of the predictions of
T-duality in string theory is that geometry and topology are ambiguous at the string
length lS = √α’. Furthermore, space is ambiguous at the Planck length lP ≪lS.
Another more complicated and richer example of T-duality is the mirror symmetry
and topology change in Calabi-Yau spaces. There are different types of dualities
that play an important role in the recent developments of theoretical physics. One
conclusion is, thus, that spacetime is likely to be an emergent, approximate, classical
concept. The challenge is to have emergent spacetime, while preserving some locality
(macroscopic locality, causality, analyticity, etc.). (iii) The recent developments of
theoretical physics enable us to think that the discrete and continuous character of the
laws of physics are but special cases according with each other in the framework of a
new unitary mathematical-physical theory. With the theory of supergravity, and still
more with string theory, we get a consistent theoretical framework which is ﬁnite and
which simultaneously incorporate both quantum gravity and chiral supersymmetric
gauge theories in a natural fashion. Supergravity generalizes a gauge theory proposed
by H. Weyl in 1923 in order to unify the Einstein’s theory of gravitation with the
electromagnetic theory, and another by Kaluza and Klein in the 1920s, in which they
suggested to further unify the concepts of internal and space–time symmetries by
reducing the former to the latter through the introduction of some extra dimension
of space, more precisely, a ﬁfth (space-like) dimension, which has the topology of a

416
L. Boi
circle. (iv) The physical (dynamical) and space–time symmetries dictate, at different
extents, the various forces of nature and the interactions between particles. This is a
very general principle and it is the crucial idea at the heart of quantum ﬁeld theories.
In fact, all physical phenomena seem to be founded upon such principle (Coleman,
1985). However, at a deeper level, one is increasingly led to believe that, beside
symmetries (including, space–time, physical, broken symmetries, and maybe other
“hidden” symmetries), topological structures and invariants might have an even more
important role in determining physical phenomena at the very large and extremely
small scales (Atiyah, 1989).
11
Topological Quantum Field Theory
Topological quantum ﬁeld (TQFT) emerged in the eighties as a new relation between
mathematics and physics. The relation connected some of the most advanced ideas in
the two ﬁelds. The nineties have been characterized by its development, originating
unexpected results in topology and testing some of the most fundamental ideas in
quantum ﬁeld theory and string theory. The ﬁrst TQFT was formulated by Witten
in 1988 (Witten, 1988). He constructed the theory now known as Donaldson-Witten
theory, which constitutes a quantum ﬁeld theory representation of the Donaldson
invariants of four-manifolds (1983–84) (Donaldson, 1983). His work was strongly
inﬂuenced by M. Atiyah. In 1988 Witten formulated also another two-dimensional
TQFTs which have been widely studied during the last three decades: topological
sigma models in two dimensions and Chern-Simons gauge theory in three dimen-
sions (Marino, 2005). These theories are related, respectively, to Gromov invariants
(Gromov, 1985), and to knot and link invariants as the Jones polynomial and its
generalizations (Atiyah, 1988; Thurston, 1997; Turaev, 1994). TQFT has provided
an entirely new approach to study topological invariants. Being a quantum ﬁeld
theory, TQFT can be analyzed from different point of view. The richness inherent to
quantum ﬁeld theory can be exploited to obtain different perspectives on the topolog-
ical invariants involved in TQFT. This line of thought has shown to be very fruitful
in the last two decades and new topological invariants as well new relations between
them have been obtained.
TQFT have been studied from both, perturbative and non-perturbative points of
view. In the case of Chern-Simons gauge theory, non-perturbative methods have
been applied to obtain properties of knot and link invariants, as well as general
procedures for their computation. Perturbative methods have also been studied for
this theory providing integral representations for Vassiliev invariants. In Donaldson-
Witten theory perturbative methods have proved its relation to Donaldson invariants
(Donaldson, 1990). Non-perturbative methods have been applied after the work by
Seiberg and Witten on N = 2 supersymmetric Yang-Mills theory. The outcome of
this application is a totally unexpected relation between Donaldson invariants and a
new set of topological invariants called Seiberg-Witten invariants.

Topological Quantum Field Theory and the Emergence of Physical Space–Time …
417
Donaldson-Witten theory is a TQFT of cohomological type. TQFTs of this type
can be formulated in a variety of frameworks. The most geometric one corresponds
to the Mathai-Quillen formalism. In this formalism a TQFT is constructed out of
a moduli problem. Topological invariants are then deﬁned as integrals of a certain
Euler class (or wedge products of the Euler class with other forms) over the resulting
moduli space. A different framework is the one based on the twisting of N = 2
supersymmetry. In this case, information on the physical theory can be used in the
TQFT. Indeed, it has been in this framework where Seiberg-Witten invariants have
shown up. After Seiberg and Witten worked out the low energy effective action of
N = 2 supersymmetric Yang-Mills theory, it became clear that a twisted version
of this effective action could lead to topological invariants related to Donaldson
invariants. The twisted action revealed a new moduli space, the moduli space of
Abelian monopoles (Witten, 1994). Its geometric structure has been derived in the
context of the Mathai-Quillen formalism. Invariants associated to this moduli space
should be related to Donaldson invariants. This turned out to be the case. The relevant
invariants for the case of SU(2) as gauge group are the Seiberg-Witten invariants.
Donaldson-Witten theory has been generalized after studying its coupling to topo-
logical matter ﬁelds. The resulting theory can be regarded as a twisted form of N = 2
supersymmetric Yang-Mills theory coupled to hypermultiplets, or, in the context of
the Mathai-Quillen formalism, as the TQFT associated to the moduli space of non-
Abelian monopoles. Perturbative and non-perturbative methods have been applied
to this theory for the case of SU(2) as gauge group and one hypermultiplet of matter
in the fundamental representation. In this case, again, it turns out that the general-
ized Donaldson invariants can be written in terms of Seiberg-Witten invariants. One
would expect that in general the invariants associated to non-Abelian monopoles
could be expressed in terms of some other simpler invariants, being Seiberg-Witten
invariants just the ﬁrst subset of the full set of invariants.
The present situation in three and four dimensions relative to Chern-Simons gauge
theory and Donaldson-Witten theory, respectively, can be described as follows.
These theories share some common features. Their topological invariants are
labeled with group-theoretical data: Wilson lines for different representations
and gauge groups (Jones polynomials and its generalizations), and non-Abelian
monopoles for different representations and gauge groups (generalized Donaldson
polynomials); these invariants can be written in terms of topological invariants which
are independent of the group and representation chosen: Vassiliev invariants and
Seiberg-Witten invariants. This structure leads to the idea of universality classes
of topological invariants. In this respect Vassiliev invariants constitute a class in the
sense that all Chern-Simons or quantum group knot invariants for semi-simple groups
can be expressed in terms of them. Similarly, Seiberg-Witten invariants constitute
another class since generalized Donaldson invariants associated to several moduli
spacescanbewrittenintermsofthem.Thiscertainlyholdsforthetwocasesdescribed
above but presumably it holds for other groups. It is very likely that Seiberg-Witten
invariants are the ﬁrst set of a series of invariants, each deﬁning a universality class.

418
L. Boi
12
Concluding Remarks
We stressed the crucial fact that many physical phenomena, at the quantum and at the
cosmological level as well, appear to be deeply related to some geometrical and topo-
logical invariants, and furthermore that these phenomena are effects which emerge, in
a sense, from the geometric and topological structure of space–time (Atiyah, 1990).
The ﬁrst good example of this new point of view, which actually rely upon ideas
advocated by Riemann and Clifford, is that of general relativity, which showed that
gravity is a manifestation of the curvature of space–time. The Einstein’s ﬁeld equa-
tions relate the metric to matter distribution. Thus, according to the general theory
of relativity, the gravitational force has to be reinterpreted as the curvature of space–
time in the proximity of a massive object. When the energy is very concentrated, then
the deformation of space–time may change sufﬁciently its topological structure.
Topological quantum ﬁeld theory (TQFT) appear as a very rich and promising
research program in theoretical physics. Two conceptual points appear to be very
signiﬁcant, and likely promising for physics, in TQFT. (i) The ﬁrst is the assumption
of an effective correlation between knots and link invariants and the physical observ-
ables and states of quantum ﬁeld theories and gauge theories. (ii) The second is, on
the one hand, the idea of the fuzziness of physical space–time and of its emergence
from the dynamical ﬂuctuations of its metrical structure, on the other, the idea of the
geometric and topological nature of physical phenomena at different scales.
More precisely, the main ideas we have addressed in this paper are the following:
(1)
The geometric and topological deformations and invariants could generate the
dynamics of space and time, of the quantum ﬁeld and the gravitational ﬁeld
as well. For example, in string theory, the picture is that the different physical
properties of matter are linked to the different topological conﬁgurations of
strings and loops moving through space and oscillating around it. For instance,
the electric charge might be seen as a quality of the motion of the string rather
than something which is just added on to a particle as a fundamental object.
(2)
The fermionic and bosonic ﬁelds composing matter and its electroweak and
strong interactions seems to emerge as dynamical effects from the topological
(global) deformations of the varying structure of space–time. Conversely, the
space itself must be henceforth thought of, in some precise sense, as a derived
and changing object whose metric and topological structures may be subject,
to some extent, to the quantum ﬂuctuations of these same ﬁelds. We already
gave two very signiﬁcative examples illustrating these facts, both relating to
T-duality in string theory: the ﬁrst predict the ambiguous character of geometry
and topology at the string length scale; the second concerns mirror symmetry
and topological change in Calabi-Yau spaces. After Riemann’s revolution in the
geometric vision of physical space, which goes very far beyond the discovering
of what we now call “Riemannian geometry”, for he has not only the idea that
thedistributionofmatterintheuniversedependsuponthevariationofcurvature
of space–time, but also the vision of a geometry for the microscopic (quantum)
physical world as a dynamical and ﬂuctuating object, the next revolution should

Topological Quantum Field Theory and the Emergence of Physical Space–Time …
419
be to think that space–time might be an emergent, approximate, non-classical
concept. The challenge is to prove the validity of the emergent global nature
of space–time while preserving some locality (macroscopic locality, causality,
analyticity, etc.) On of the most remarkable constituents of quantum geometry
might be knots and other tangled structures. If different aspects of the link
between the Jones polynomial and mathematical physics have been intensively
studied in the last three decades and are quite well-known, the relationship
between knots and quantum physics remain still almost unexplored. Recently,
Witten suggested that, in quantum physics, a knot may be regarded as the
orbit in space–time of a charged particle. One way of calculating the Jones
polynomial in quantum theory involves using Chern-Simons function for gauge
ﬁelds. But to use the Chern-Simons function, the knot must be a path in a
space–time of three dimensions rather than the four dimensions of the real
world.
(3)
The recent developments of theoretical physics enable us to think that the
discrete and continuous character of the laws of physics are but special situa-
tions according with each other in the context of a new unitary mathematical-
physical theory. With the theory of supergravity, and still more with superstring
theory, we get a consistent theoretical framework which is ﬁnite and which
simultaneously incorporate both quantum gravity and chiral supersymmetric
gauge theories in a natural fashion. Supergravity generalizes a gauge theory
proposed by H. Weyl in 1923 in order to unify the Einstein’s theory of gravita-
tion with the electromagnetic theory, and another by Kaluza and Klein in the
1920s, in which they suggested to further unify the concepts of internal and
space–time symmetries by the former to the latter through the introduction of
some extra dimension of space, more precisely, a ﬁfth (space-like) dimension,
which has the topology of a circle.
(4)
The physical (“internal”) and space–time (“external”) symmetries, which we
tend to consider both dynamical because they can equally produce some phys-
ical effects, dictate, at different extents, the various forces of nature and the
interactions between particles. This is a very general and meaningful principle
and it is the crucial idea setting at the core of gauge quantum ﬁeld theories. In
fact, the most physical phenomena at different scales seem to be founded upon
such principle. However, at a deeper level, one is increasingly led to believe
that, beside symmetries—including space–time, physical and broken symme-
tries, and maybe other “hidden” symmetries –, topological deformations and
invariants might have an even more important role in determining the dynamics
of physical phenomena at the extremely small and very large scales. This is
essentially related with the phenomenon of topological changes. It is much
conceivable to think, on the one hand, that it can exist a deep link between
symmetries and topological changes, and, on the other, that topological defor-
mation be a new dynamical variable not depending on physical parameters but
which may produce important physical effects as well.

420
L. Boi
All the previous aspects and ideas play an important role in the TQFT. Topological
quantum ﬁeld theory is a third sort of idealization of the physical world, besides
general relativity and quantum ﬁeld theory, which is attractative and deep from
the mathematical and philosophical point of view as well. It is a background-free
quantum ﬁeld theory with no local degrees of freedom. The interesting thing is the
presence of ‘global’ degrees of freedom (Baez & Muniain, 1994; Turaev, 1994).3
Two spaces-times which are locally indistinguishable, since locally both look like the
same model of space–time, can, hovewer, be distinguished globally, for example, by
measuring the volume of the whole space–time or studying the behavior of geodesics
that wrap around a 3-dimensional torus.
An axiomatic approach to topological quantum ﬁeld theory was proposed by
Atiyah (Atiyah, 1990). An important feature of TQFTs is that they do not presume
a ﬁxed topology for space or space–time. In other words, when dealing with an
n-dimensional TQFT, we are free to choose any (n−1)-dimensional manifold to
represent space at a given time. Moreover given two such manifolds, say S and
S’, we are free to choose any n-dimensional manifold M to represent the portion
of spacetime between S and S’. For his construction, Atiyah used the notion of
cobordism, introduced by R. Thom in the 1950s (Thom, 1954), and he developped
a formalism in which he found that cobordism construction obeys to the algebraic
properties of associativity (of manifolds), the non-commutativity of the composition
of cobordism (this is related with the famous non-commutativity of observable in
quantum theory) and an identity cobordism. The operations are dynamical in the
sense that they formalize the notion of “passage of time” (temporal evolution) in a
context where the topology of space–time is arbitrary and there is no background
ﬁxed metric. Atiyah’s axioms relate this notion to quantum theory as follows. First,
a TQFT must assign a Hilbert Space Z(S) to each (n–1)-dimensional manifold S.
Vectors in this Hilbert space represent possible states of the universe given that space
is the manifold S. Second, the TQFT must assign a linear operator Z(M): Z(S) →
Z(S’) to each n-dimensional cobordism M: S →S’. This operator describes how
states change given that the portion of space–time between S and S’ is the manifold
M. In other words, if space is initially the manifold S and the state of the universe
is ψ, after the passage of time corresponding to M the state of the universe will be
Z(M) ψ.
Baez and Muniain (1994) emphasized that the analogy between differantial
topology and quantum theory “is exactly the sort of clue we should pursue for
3 A good example is quantum gravity in 3-dimensional space–time. Classicaly, Einstein’s equations
predict qualitatively very different phenomena depending on the dimension of space–time. If space–
time has 4 or more dimensions, Einstein’s equations imply that the metric has local degrees of
freedom. In other words, the curvature of space–time at a given point is not completely determined
by the ﬂow of energy and momentum through that point: it is an independent variable in its own
right. For example, even in the vacuum, where the energy–momentum tensor vanishes, localized
ripples of curvature can propagate in the form of gravitational radiation. In 3-dimensional space–
time, hovewer, Einstein’s equations sufﬁce to completely determine the curvature at a given point
of space-tume in terms of the ﬂow of energy and momentum through that point. We thus say that
metric has no local degrees of freedom. In particular, in the vacuum the metric is ﬂat, so every small
patch of empty space–time looks exactley like every other.

Topological Quantum Field Theory and the Emergence of Physical Space–Time …
421
a deeper understanding of quantum gravity. At ﬁrst glance, general relativity and
quantum theory look very different mathematically: one deals with space and space-
time, the other with Hilbert spaces and operators. (…) Topological quantum ﬁeld
theory suggests that perhaps they are not so different after all! Even better, it suggests
a concrete program of synthesizing the two, which many mathematical physicists
are currently pursuing. Sometimes this goes by the name of ‘quantum topology’”.
It seems likely that differential topology and quantum theory must merge if we
are to understand background-free quantum ﬁeld theories. In classical (Newtonian)
physics, one treat space as a background on which states of the world are posed, and,
similarly, one treat spacetime as a background on which the process of change occurs.
But it could be that these be idealizations which we must overcome in a background-
free theory, i.e. a theory with global degrees of liberty given by topological change.
As Baez and Muniain pointed out, the concepts of ‘space’ and ‘state’ are, in fact,
two aspects of a uniﬁed whole, and likewise for the concepts of ‘spacetime’ and
‘process’. This fact might open new and signiﬁcant perspectives for the mathematical
and philosophical understanting of the physical world.
References
Ashtekar, A., & Lewandowski, J. (2004). Background independent quantum gravity: A status report.
Class Quant Grav, 21, 53–152.
Atiyah, A. (1989). Topological quantum ﬁeld theories. Publ Math Inst Hautes Etudes Sci, 68,
175–186.
Atiyah, M. (1988). “New invariants of three-and four-dimensional manifolds,” in The Mathematical
Heritage of Hermann Weyl, O. Wells, Jr. (Ed.), Proc Symp Pure Math AMS, 48, 285–299.
Atiyah (1990). The geometry and physics of knots, Cambridge U. Press.
Baez, J., & Muniain, J. P. (1994). Gauge ﬁelds, knots and gravity, World Scientiﬁc.
Boi, L. (2004a). Geometrical and topological foundations of theoretical physics: from gauge theories
to string program. International Journal of Mathematics and Mathematical Sciences, 34, 1066–
1136.
Boi, L. (2004b). Theories of space-time in modern physics. Synthese, 139(3), 429–489.
Boi, L. (2006a). “From riemannian geometry to Einstein’s general relativity theory and beyond:
Space-time structures, geometrization and uniﬁcation,” in Proceedings of the Albert Einstein’s
century international conference, J.-M. Alimi & A. Füzfa (Eds.) (pp. 1066–1075), American
Institute of Physics Publisher.
Boi, L. (2006b). “Mathematical knot theory,” in Encyclopedia of mathematical physics, J.-P.
Françoise, G. Naber & T. S. Sun (Eds.), Elsevier, 399–406.
Boi, L. (2009a). Clifford geometric algebra, spin manifolds, and groups action in mathematics and
physics. Advances in Applied Clifford Algebras, 19(3), 611–656.
Boi, L. (2009b). Ideas of geometrization, invariants of low-dimensional manifolds, and topological
quantum ﬁeld theories. International Journal of Geometric Methods in Modern Physics, 6(5),
701–757.
Boi, L. (2011). The quantum vacuum. A scientiﬁc and philosophical concept: From electrodynamics
to string theory and the geometry of the microscopic world, The Johns Hopkins University Press.
Boi, L. (2019a). Some mathematical, epistemological and historical reﬂections on the relationship
between geometry and reality, space-time theory and the geometrization of theoretical physics,
from Riemann to Weyl and beyond. Foundations of Science, 24(1), 1–38.

422
L. Boi
Boi, L., H. (2019b). “Weyl’s deep insights into the mathematical and physical world. His important
contribution to the philosophy of space, time and matter,” in Weyl and the Problem of Space, C.
Lobo & B. Julien (Eds.) (pp. 231–263), Springer.
Bourguignon, J. P., & Lawson, H. B. (1982). Yang-Mills theory: Its physical origins and differential
geometric aspects. In S.-T. Yau (Ed.), Seminar on differential geometry (pp. 395–421). Princeton
University Press.
Yu, C. T. (1997). Conceptual developments of 20th century physics. Cambridge University Press.
Carfora, M. (2011). “Quantum gravity and quantum geometry,” in New trends in geometry. Their
role in the natural and life sciences, in C. Bartocci, L. Boi, & C. Sinigaglia (Eds.) (pp. 17–33),
Imperial College Press.
Clifford, W. K. (1876). On the space-theory of matter. Cambridge Philosophical Society Proceed-
ings, 2, 157–158.
Clifford, W.K. (1968). Mathematical papers (1882), new edition.
Coleman, S. (1985). Aspects of symmetry. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Connes, A., & Chamseddine, A. H. (2006). Inner ﬂuctuations of the spectral action. Journal of
Geometry and Physics, 57, 1–21.
Connes, A. (1994). Noncommutative geometry. Academic Press.
Connes, A. (1996). Gravity coupled with matter and the foundation of non-commutative geometry.
Comm Math Phys, 182, 155–176.
Connes, A. (1995). Noncommutative geometry and reality. Journal of Mathematics and Physics,
36, 6194–6231.
Connes, A., & Landi, G. (2001). Noncommutative manifolds, the instanton algebra and isospectral
deformations. Comm. Math. Phys., 221, 141–159.
Donaldson, S. K. (1983). An application of gauge theory to the topology of four manifolds. Journal
of Differential Geometry, 18, 269–287.
Donaldson, S. K. (1990). Polynomials invariants for smooth four-manifolds. Topology, 29, 257–315.
Gromov, M., & Lawson, H. B., Jr. (1983). Positive scalar curvature and Dirac operator on complete
Riemannian manifolds. Publ. Math. IHÉS, 58, 295–408.
Gromov, M. (1985). Pseudo-holomorphic curves in symplectic manifolds. Inventiones Mathemat-
icae, 82, 307–347.
Heisenberg, W. (1930). The physical principles of the quantum theory. University of Chicago Press.
Isham, D. (1988). “Topological and global aspects of quantum ﬁeld theory,” in Relativity, groups
and topology II, in B.S. DeWitt & R. Stora (Eds.), (pp. 1059–1290).
Katz, S., & Vafa, C. (1997). Matter from geometry. Nuclear Physics B, 497, 146–154.
Labastida, J. M. F., & Lozano, C. (1989). “Lectures on topological quantum ﬁeld theory”, in Trends
in theoretical physics, (Eds). H. Falomir, R. Gamboa & F. Schaposnik (Eds.) AIP, CP 419, p. 54.
Landi, G. (1999). An introduction to noncommutative spaces and their geometries. Springer.
Manin, Y. I. (1988). Gauge ﬁeld theory and complex geometry. Springer.
Marino, M. (2005). Chern–Simons theory and topological strings. Reviews of Modern Physics, 77,
675–720.
Penrose, R. (1977). The twistor programme. Reports in Mathem Physics, 12, 65–76.
Penrose, R. (2004). The road to reality. A Complete Guide to the Laws of the Universe. Vintage,
London.
Regge, T. (1992). “Physics and differential geometry,” in 1830–1930: A century of geometry, in
L. Boi, D. Flament & J.-M. Salanskis (Eds.), Lecture notes in physics, (Vol. 402, pp. 270–272),
Springer.
Riemann, B. (1990). “Über die hypothesen, welche der Geometrie zu Grunde liegen” (Habilita-
tionsarbeit, Göttingen, 1854), in Gesammelte mathematische werke (new edition edited by R.
Narasimhan) (pp. 304–319), Springer.
Thom, R. (1954). Quelques propriétés globales des variétés différentiables. Comment Math Helv,
28, 17–86.
Thurston, W. P. (1997). Three-dimensional geometry and topology. Princeton University Press.
Turaev, V. (1994). Quantum Invariants of Knots and 3-Manifolds. de Gruyter.

Topological Quantum Field Theory and the Emergence of Physical Space–Time …
423
Vafa, C. (1998). “Geometric physics”, in Documenta mathematica, Extra Volume ICM, I, 537–556
Weyl, H. (1929). Elektron und gravitation. Zeitschrift Für Physik, 56, 330–352.
Weyl, H. (1918). Gravitation und Elektrizität. Sitz Ber Königl Preuss Akad Wiss Berlin, 26, 465–480.
Weyl, H. (1928). Gruppentheorie und quantenmechanik. Hirzel.
Witten, E. (1995). String theory dynamics in various dimensions. Nuclear Physics B, 443, 85–126.
Witten, E. (1988). Topological quantum ﬁeld theory. Comm Math Phys, 117, 353–386.
Witten, E. (1994). Monopoles and four-manifolds. Mathematical Research Letters, 1(6), 769–796.
Wu, T. T., & Yang, C. N. (1975). Concept of nonintegrable phase factors and global formulation of
gauge ﬁelds. Phys. Rev. D, 12(12), 3845–3857.
Yang, C. N., & Mills, R. L. (1954). Conservation of Isotopic Spin and Isotopic Gauge Invariance.
Physical Review, 96(1), 191–195.
Yang, C. N. (1977). Magnetic Monopoles, ﬁber bundles, and gauge ﬁelds. Annals of the New York
Academy of Sciences, 294, 86–97.
Zeidler, E. (2011). Quantum ﬁeld theory III: Gauge theory—a bridge between mathematicains and
physicits. Springer.

The Electron and the Cosmos: From the
Universe of Fragmented Objects to the
Particle-World
Leonardo Chiatti
1
Prelude: Ninety (Three) Years Later
Born at the end of 1927 in the famous congresses held in Como and Brussels, modern
quantum theory has travelled a triumphal journey whose end is not still at sight
today. Yet the doubts about its formulation, already raised at the time by many
of its eminent founders, have not yet subsided. It is about some of these doubts
that we intend to return to in this article, suggesting a way in which they can be
clariﬁed.Havingtoestablishastartingpointforourreasoning,wechooseinparticular
one of these doubts, which was raised by Einstein with reference to the so-called
“dual description” (corpuscular and wavelike) of quantum entities (Bacciagaluppi
& Valentini, 2009). As is well known, an electron emitted—for example—by a hot
metal ﬁlament and directed towards a photographic plate is described, in quantum
theory, by a wave function which, in this speciﬁc case of a single particle, is deﬁned
on the usual spacetime. This wave function is widespread and incides on the whole
photographic plate or an extended portion of it. When, however, the interaction
between the plate and the electron takes place, this interaction is revealed through
the blackening of a well-deﬁned grain of the plate emulsion. This event marks the
end of the wave function, which cancels simultaneously in all points of space except
those corresponding to the position of the blackened granule. It is evident, Einstein
commented, that if the wave function is to be understood as a physical reality then
we are in presence of an instantaneous propagation of information that violates the
principle of relativity. The response suggested by Heisenberg was to consider the
wave function not as a physical entity but in purely epistemic terms, as a compendium
of information relating to the preparation of the electron. This proposal did not satisfy
Einstein and continues not to satisfy many scholars: the wave function seems to
L. Chiatti (B)
ASL VT Medical Physics Laboratory, Via Enrico Fermi 15, 01100 Viterbo, Italy
e-mail: leonardo.chiatti@asl.vt.it
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
S. Wuppuluri and I. Stewart (eds.), From Electrons to Elephants and Elections,
The Frontiers Collection, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-92192-7_24
425

426
L. Chiatti
“guide” the manifestation of the event (the blackening of the grain); and if it does
something, it must also be something.
We will return to this old question from a slightly more general perspective, which
seems pertinent to the theme of this anthology: that of the relationship between
global and local in microphysics, and more speciﬁcally in the physics of so-called
“elementary particles”. At ﬁrst glance it seems strange to evoke this relationship with
reference to a “particle”, which is the elementary entity for excellence (the minimal
building block) and is local by deﬁnition. One wonders where the “global” aspect
of a particle resides. However, Einstein’s observation reveals that this aspect exists
even if it is not immediately accessible to experimentation. The “transmission of
information” to which Einstein refers, if this really is concerned, is in fact conﬁned
within a process whose outcome is the event (the blackening of the grain), and has no
detectable effects externally. It is exactly this characteristic that saves the principle of
relativity, which concerns restrictions on the propagation of signals between events.
Instead, what we are talking about is the relationship—all internal to a single event—
between the space in which this event takes place and its manifestation in a single
position at a given instant.
From this perspective, the reductionist approach, which investigates the relation-
ships between particles and the causal links between individual events, taking care to
bring systems and their stories back to these ultimate atomic components, does not
seem to have much to say. In fact, we wonder about the internal structure of these
atomic components; an operation that is meaningless from the “pure” reductionist
point of view, although commonly practiced by particle physicists. Moreover, the
internal structure in question actually connects the entire spatial extension to a single
point of space in a single instant. This speciﬁcation of absence of duration is impor-
tant, because it reveals that the relationship between the point and the space involved
in the “quantum jump” is not dynamical. In other words, the “quantum jump” is some-
thing that cannot surely be described by dynamical laws and equations of motion
but by an entirely different formal structure. Conceptually, we must be prepared to
see in the physical phenomenon constituted by this jump the expression of a type of
causality different from the efﬁcient and diachronic one which is usual in physics
(i.e. the so called “dynamical” causality). Rather, the formal causality, in the original
meaning intended by Aristotle, will be involved.
These brief notes should unambiguously deﬁne our intentions, which are not
to immerse ourselves in the non-conclusive debate between the various proposals
of “interpretation” of the quantum formalism. In previous works, in fact, we have
entirely derived this formalism from basic principles (Chiatti, 2005, 2014). Instead,
what we intend to do is to reconnect the content of these and other previous works, to
which we refer for technical and formal details, through a single conceptual thread.
We thus hope to put Einstein’s argument in a new light and to highlight its powerful
implications for the construction of a renewed philosophy of nature.
The reference to Einstein, however, must not mislead the reader. It is not our inten-
tion to adhere to an outdated identiﬁcation of “physical realism” with an ontology
of objects permanently actualized in spacetime. The instantaneous quantum jumps
(whose existence and diversity from the underlying gradual evolution of the wave

The Electron and the Cosmos: From the Universe …
427
function guiding their manifestation have been widely demonstrated since the 1980s
(Nagourney et al., 1986)) represent something radically different and “new” com-
pared to the Einsteinian vision. Just as radically different and irreducible to that
vision (Howard, 2007) are the non-separability of the entangled quantum ampli-
tudes (Aspect et al., 1982) and the non-existence of pilot waves that guide corpuscle-
objects (Vigier et al., 1987; Zou et al., 1992). A correct realist attitude must therefore
be oriented towards the elucidation of an ontology of quantum entities completely
irreducible to that of the bodies of classical physics. This means being open to the pos-
sibility that physical processes are not exhaustively represented on the spatiotemporal
theater, and that spacetime itself constitutes a set of emerging relationship proper-
ties. Dynamical causality itself must, in this context, emerge from deeper forms of
causality, such as the aforementioned formal causality. We can therefore say that this
contribution is intended as an attempt to answer the question posed by Einstein, but
from a more modern perspective which is not limited to the spatiotemporal theater
[limitation assumed instead as indispensable by Einstein himself (Howard, 2007)].
At the same time our approach will be markedly ontological and based on the total
rejection of a purely epistemic reading of quantum formalism.
Einstein was concerned about consistency with relativity. In re-examining this
question, we will ﬁrst start with a more general relativity than that intended by
Einstein. In fact, the most general relativity possible under reasonable assumptions
(Bacry & Lévy-Leblond, 1968; Fantappié, 1954), namely the de Sitter relativity.
To make the discussion more self-contained, the essential aspects of this theory are
recalled in Sect. 2. Speciﬁcally, this theory allows a projective representation of
spacetime which is linked to the quantization problem in Sect. 3. The objective of
this section is to show how the wave functions of quantum systems, which live on
the multidimensional abstract space of the conﬁgurations of such systems, actually
represent phenomena in spacetime. This representation also appears to be local, in a
sense that will be speciﬁed.
In Sect. 4 this description is linked to quantum jumps, and an “event-based” ontol-
ogy of physical phenomena is proposed; the important problem of the emergence
of the classical level in which macroscopic bodies are located, including humans
and the biosphere, is also discussed. All this admits a semiotic narrative, according
to which the elementary particles constitute real “signs” manifested into the spa-
tiotemporal theater (Chiatti, 2014). This aspect is further explored in Sect. 5, which
in particular illustrates the emergence of spacetime and elementary particles of the
Standard Model from general conditions of semiotic nature.
Section 6 is a brief consideration on the self-reﬂective structure of the physical
Universe, which can be deduced from the topics of the previous sections, and the
problems it opens. In particular, the relationship between synchronic formal causality
and diachronic efﬁcient causality, i.e. the emergence of dynamical causality from a
timeless background, is discussed. Section 7 summarizes the concept of particle-
world and presents some considerations on the irreducible complexity of the self-
reﬂective relationship, which appears to be only partially mappable by reductionist
approaches.

428
L. Chiatti
2
From Fantappié to the Bindu
The form of physical laws must remain unchanged when passing from one “admis-
sible” spatiotemporal frame of reference to another; this is the substance of the
principle of relativity. Of course, it is necessary to specify what is meant precisely
by “admissible” frames and how the physical quantities, which appear in the expres-
sion of the laws, vary in the passage from one admissible frame of reference to
another. Depending on the answers to these questions, there are different theories of
relativity. The best known are the Galileian relativity and the Einsteinian (special)
relativity. In these theories the admissible references are the inertial ones while the
physical quantities are transformed as tensors of a group of coordinate transforma-
tions which is the Galileo group in the ﬁrst case, the Poincaré group in the second.
The essential difference between the two groups is that in the Poincaré group there
appears, as a parameter, a maximum speed of propagation of physical phenomena,
usually indicated with the letter c. The Galileo group is the limit case c →∞of the
Poincaré group and for this reason the Galileian relativity is normally considered
to be an approximation of the Einsteinian one. Physically c is identiﬁable with the
propagation speed of light in a vacuum (in the absence of gravitational ﬁelds).
It is good to dwell on the meaning of this limit speed. Let us consider an observer
whichcoordinatesthespatiotemporalpositionoftheeventsofthehistoryofamaterial
point, using appropriate measurement instruments such as graduated rulers, clocks,
etc. The generic instant of the point history will be associated with the spacetime
position Xμ (μ = 0, 1, 2, 3) relative to the observation point-event that constitutes
the observer here-now. At that moment the material point will be endowed with a
relative (four-)velocity Vμ with respect to the observer here-now. If V is the measure
of the projection of Vμ on the ordinary three-dimensional space, then the constraint
−c ≤V ≤+c holds in the ordinary Einsteinian relativity. In other words, the space
of relative velocities is limited: there is a horizon at the velocities ±c. Since this
constraint applies with respect to any direction of the ordinary space, in this latter
space the causal structure is deﬁned by light-cones. The essential point on which we
draw attention is however another here, namely that the space of relative velocities is
hyperbolic. To clarify the concept, we introduce the rapidity w through the usual rela-
tion tanh(w) = V
c . Two things are then immediately evident; ﬁrst: −∞< w < +∞,
that is, the rapidity is not limited in the two directions of the real axis. Second, this
deﬁnition of rapidity is the equivalent, in Bolyai-Lobachevski hyperbolic geometry,
of the relation tan(φ) = R
r valid in the Euclidean space. This relation admits a precise
geometric meaning in this space. In fact, let us consider a four-dimensional hyper-
sphere of radius r tangent to the three-dimensional space at point O. Let us imagine
that the points on the hyperspherical surface are projected onto the three-dimensional
space from a projection center located in the center of the hypersphere. Then a hyper-
spherical arc having an extreme in O and corresponding to an angle φ at the center
of the hypersphere is projected onto the three-dimensional space into a segment of
length R. In the hyperbolic space of relative velocities the hypersphere becomes a
pseudosphere, R becomes V and the radius r becomes the radius c of the pseudo-

The Electron and the Cosmos: From the Universe …
429
sphere. The angle φ (limited in the range between −π/2 and +π/2) thus becomes
the rapidity w (which is not limited, because the pseudosphere is not limited). The
reader interested in a more complete examination of the relationship between Ein-
steinian relativity and hyperbolic space can consult the reference (Barrett, 2011) and
the bibliography cited therein.
What matters here is that the nature of the relative velocity V is projective. Due
to the existence of a ﬁnite pseudospherical radius c (i.e. of the limit speed), each
value of V is converted into the value of an “angle” w measured in the projection
center of the pseudosphere. The whole V-space is thus coded in the straight lines
diverging from a single point of the four-dimensional space. This coding disappears
in the Galileian limit c →∞, in which the pseudosphere collapses on the three-
dimensional Euclidean space tangent to it and the projection becomes parallel. It
could therefore be said that the true sense of c is to establish the non-local translation
of V-space in the set of straight lines departing from a single point of the four-
dimensional space. It should be noted that this point does not belong to the V-space
and therefore, in this sense, it is not “physical”. It basically corresponds to an “aether”
with respect to which no observer can determine his own state of motion, but at the
same time includes all possible states of (relative) motion.
One may wonder whether similar conclusions can be drawn for the length X of
the projection of Xμ on the space of relative positions, that is, on the space prop-
erly understood. In the context of Einsteinian relativity the answer is negative: the
X-space (i.e. the space of contemporaneity of an observer) is Euclidean, not hyper-
bolic. However, the generalization is possible and it leads to the de Sitter relativity
(Arcidiacono, 1958, 1969; Fantappié, 1959). In de Sitter relativity both X-space
and V-space are hyperbolic and projective. In addition to the ﬁnite limit speed c,
a ﬁnite maximum time distance t0 from the observer here-now now appears, with
the result that the observer (placed naturally in the origin) can coordinate only the
events located at a spatial distance less than r = ct0. In other words, in addition to the
horizon in the V-space another horizon, previously absent, appears in the X-space.
The four-dimensional spacetime becomes the projection of the hypersphere (with
imaginary time, actually a hyperboloid) of radius r in the ﬁve-dimensional space
on a four-dimensional hyperplane tangent to it in the point-event corresponding to
the observer here-now. This projection is conducted from the center of the hyper-
sphere, which is located in the 5-space and is therefore physically inaccessible. All
spatial positions are coded non-locally as straight lines departing from that center.
The center of the hypersphere therefore represents a sort of “non-local aether” which
is not localizable in the usual four-dimensional spacetime, but which contains all the
point-events of this space.
In the limit t0 →∞, the de Sitter’s relativity collapses on the best known Ein-
stein special relativity. It should be noted that as is possible to pass from the Ein-
stein special relativity to the Einstein general relativity by generalizing the metric
[(−1, 1, 1, 1) →gμν; μ, ν = 0, 1, 2, 3], it is also possible, in the same way, to pass
from the de Sitter special relativity to the corresponding de Sitter general relativ-
ity (Arcidiacono, 1964). In particular, the hyperboloid in the 5-space is replaced
by a more complex manifold, but the four-dimensional spacetime remains inter-

430
L. Chiatti
pretable as the central projection of this manifold on tangent spaces. Despite of
its name, the de Sitter relativity was in fact discovered by the Italian mathemati-
cian Luigi Fantappié (1901–1956) in the 1950s, and subsequently developed by his
pupil Giuseppe Arcidiacono (1927–1998). Although the theory was subsequently
rediscovered independently by various authors, its original projective version has
remained largely conﬁned to the original publications of these two scholars, written
mainly in Italian. This led to a limited dissemination of the results concerning this
version; the reference (Licata et al., 2017) tries to partially ﬁll this gap. The impor-
tance of the projective version in relation to the examination of the problems posed
in the introductory section is evident. The ﬁniteness of c and t0 makes possible a
non-local coding of the entire spacetime in the projection center, and is presumably
justiﬁed by the need for the existence of this coding. We note, inter alia, that the
ﬁniteness of t0 is physically equivalent to the assertion of the existence of a positive
ﬁnite cosmological constant
3
(t0)2 , a prediction perfectly in agreement with current
cosmological observations. The projection center and the lines departing from it in
the ﬁve-dimensional space are therefore the true “system” to which the quantization
should be applied. Quantum non-locality in usual spacetime therefore derives (in
an apparently paradoxical way) from relativity; an aspect which is generally con-
cealed by the fact that in much better known Einstein relativity t0 is inﬁnite, so the
projection center disappears. However, it is known that the most general kinematic
group is that of de Sitter (Bacry & Lévy-Leblond, 1968) and that the most general
relativity possible, under physically reasonable assumptions, is that of de Sitter (Fan-
tappié, 1954). The appropriate theoretical environment for discussing the problems
in question therefore appears to be the one indicated here. The projection center then
becomes a sort of Bindu, an empty point in which the cosmos extending under our
gaze is transcribed.
3
Quantizing the Center of the Vacuum
As we have seen, each point-event of spacetime is really a line, joining that point
to the center of projection in ﬁve-dimensional space. All these “point-lines” diverge
from a common point which is the projection center; a reading of quantum formalism
in light of this awareness seems therefore appropriate. As is well known, the meaning
of the quantum amplitude of a particle:
|⟩=

x
|x⟩(x, t)
(1)
is the following. The event (x, tO) →δ(x −xO), corresponding to the projector
|xO⟩⟨xO|, represents the localization of the particle in the space point xO at the
instant tO. The probability density of this event, conditionated by the initial condition
assumed for , is proportional to ∗(xO, tO)(xO, tO). Since the wave functions
(x, t), ∗(x, t) depend on the line (x, t) departing from the center of projection

The Electron and the Cosmos: From the Universe …
431
in ﬁve-dimensional space, they can be deﬁned as properties of that center. The event
(x, tO) →δ(x −xO) is then, in this speciﬁc sense, local; it appears to involve a
form of non-locality only when viewed from the perspective of the spacetime domain.
It is clear that in this description there is no solid object permanently actualized
in spacetime and to which a trajectory can therefore be assigned. The “particle”
coincides with the event of its localization and is manifested in the spacetime domain
only at the instant tO, as the event (x, tO) →δ(x −xO). The experimental set up
considered by Einstein or the classic double slit experiment must be reconsidered in
this light.
The wave function of a “system of N particles” (x1, . . . xN, t) can be deﬁned in
the same way, assuming the possibility of a multiple event of the type
(x1, . . . xN, tO) →
i δ(xi −xOi), (i = 1,…, N) consisting of N simultaneous
localizations. Here the wave function (x1, . . . xN, t) depends on N lines (xi, t) in
ﬁve-dimensional space, for each assigned value of t. These lines diverge from the
projection center and therefore also in this more general case  can be considered as
a property of that center. It should be noted that in the case of identical particles, the
absence of trajectories that connect distinct origins to different places of localization
in a unique way leads directly to entanglement.
It is possible to postulate the existence of a direction for each line in the ﬁve-
dimensional space: the line can then be either leaving the projection center or enter-
ing it. The physical interpretation of this hypothesis is completely natural: the exit
from the center means the breaking of a symmetry that assigns to each particle a
position (delocalized on the spatial domain); entering the center means restoring that
symmetry with the disappearance of the spatial label associated with that particle.
In other words, the meaning is that of creating and destroying a distinct localizable
spatial position. The projection center therefore assumes the role of pre-spatial vac-
uum, already mentioned in the previous section. Thus, it becomes natural to assume
that the arguments of the function  are outgoing lines, while the arguments of the
conjugate ∗are incoming lines. The quantum jump that leads to projection |⟩⟨|
at the instant tO then corresponds, in virtue of (1), to the simultaneous “absorption”
of  into the pre-spatial vacuum and its re-“emission”. From a temporal perspective
this process can be seen as the double emission, at t = tO, of the advanced wave
function ∗with argument t < tO and the retarded wave function  with argu-
ment t > tO. It is necessary to realize that although the instant t = tO corresponds
to a spatial region (space of simultaneousness) on the spacetime domain, this dual
emission does not occur in three-dimensional space. Indeed,  and ∗are not neces-
sarily deﬁned as single-particle functions. This observation clariﬁes the relationship
between real space, that is, the spatial region t = tO where the interaction that induces
the quantum jump takes place, and the conﬁgurational space in which  and ∗live.
It also clariﬁes, more generally, the relationship between the Hilbert space (really,
a rigged space) of the quantum amplitudes of a system of N particles and the real
three-dimensional space.
In summary, we can say that real interactions, represented by quantum jumps,
occur on real space, while the connections between these interactions are described
in Hilbert space. This description refers to a “ﬁrst quantization” situation in which

432
L. Chiatti
the number of particles of each type is conserved. The more general case of the
second quantization, according to which there may be creations, annihilations and
transmutations of particles, will be discussed in a next section with speciﬁc refer-
ence to the Standard Model. We note however that (1) can be transformed into a
second quantization quantum amplitude by translating it into the representation of
the occupation numbers, according to standard procedures (Landau & Lifsits, 1973).
The superposition coefﬁcient (x, t) is then replaced by harmonic functions of x
and t multiplied by the operators of creation and annihilation on the “state”. All this
has no effect on the correspondence between spacetime event-points and directed
lines in ﬁve-dimensional space. The physical description introduced here therefore
remains applicable also to this more general case.
Before closing this section it is good to note that according to the description pro-
posed here, wave functions and quantum jumps are both real physical facts. However,
while wave functions exist at the level of the projection center and are therefore unde-
tectable, quantum jumps occur in the spacetime domain (the spatial region t = tO
or its sub-regions). They are therefore observable through the events they induce in
this domain.
4
Pauses in Time
In the context of the ﬁrst quantization, the identity of a particle is determined by the
Hilbert space to which its quantum amplitude belongs. If |⟩⟨| and |⟩⟨| are two
consecutive quantum jumps that take place respectively at t = tA and t = tB > tA
(that is, there are no intermediate jumps for tA < t < tB) and |⟩, |⟩are elements
of the same Hilbert space, then we say that a particle “prepared in the state |⟩at
t = tA has been propagated until its detection in the state |⟩at t = tB”. Posing
|t⟩= S(t −tA)|⟩, the connection between the two events is expressed by the
transition amplitude ⟨|S(tB −tA)|⟩and its complex conjugate. Of course, even
these amplitudes are properties of the projection center. Thus, although the structure
of the time evolution operator S must preserve causality and relativistic invariance,
in fact the connection between the real events of the history of a particle (i.e. the
quantum jumps in which it is involved) is of an extra-spatiotemporal nature.
What happens in the center is basically an annular process of this type: 1) 
evolves as S(tB −tA)|⟩and is subsequently projected onto |⟩by the operator
|⟩⟨|; 2) the conjugate ⟨| of |⟩evolves as ⟨|S+(tB −tA) and is subsequently
projected onto ⟨| by the operator |⟩⟨|; 3) the conjugate |⟩of ⟨| is fed back
as input of the ﬁrst operation. This process admits a simple statistical interpretation
(Chiatti, 2005, 2014), which provides its correct probability |⟨|S(tB −tA)|⟩|2
according to the Born rule. According to this interpretation ⟨|S(tB −tA)|⟩rep-
resents a bundle of directed links that connect the event |⟩⟨| to the next event
|⟩⟨|, while ⟨|S+(tB −tA)|⟩represents a bundle of directed links that connect
the event |⟩⟨| to the previous event |⟩⟨|. The product of these two transition
amplitudes is associated with the circular links that lead ﬁrst |⟩in ⟨|, then |⟩in

The Electron and the Cosmos: From the Universe …
433
⟨|. We can assume that these links can be in the normal state “0” or in the activated
state “1”, and that the activation of a single circular link leads to the actual manifes-
tation of the events |⟩⟨| and |⟩⟨|. If the probability of activation of a speciﬁc
link is independent on the link, that is, if the links are equally probable with respect
to their activation, then the probability of the process is expressed by the Born rule.
It is possible to reverse the reasoning, that is, start from the logic of the links, and
derive from it a statistic that can be represented by transition amplitudes and quantum
amplitudes. This leads to a complete derivation of quantum formalism in an entirely
Kolmogorovian probabilistic context (Chiatti, 2005, 2014; Chiatti & Licata, 2014).
It is also possible to show that in this description the onset of self-interference and
entanglement effects is completely natural (Chiatti, 2005, 2014).
The activation of the link implies the connection of |⟩with its conjugate ⟨|
through the involvement of the event |⟩⟨|, and the connection of |⟩with its con-
jugate ⟨| through the involvement of the event |⟩⟨|. In terms of the description
proposed in the previous section, this means that each of these two events arises
from nothing in the form of an entrance into the pre-spatial vacuum followed by
the simultaneous exit from it, through the mediation of the other event. This “boot-
strap” of the two events and their connection is clearly a process that is not entirely
contained in the temporal domain. The activation of the link deﬁnes both events
simultaneously, so it makes no sense to ask whether, in a single experimental case,
the former induces the latter in a deterministic way. Quantum randomness appears
only when one of the two events is known, and one wonders what the other event,
leaving the next quantum jump, will be. The probability expressed by the Born rule
is therefore always conditional (Chiatti & Licata, 2014). Of course, the activation
is possible only if the experimental context [representable in spatiotemporal terms
through (1)] allows real interactions of the required type. An electron can only be
located if there is a detector available, which can also be a single atom.
It should also be clear that the wave function of a system of N particles can be at
the origin of no more than N localization events. Therefore directed links not ended
by N actually realized events have no physical implications. In other words, there
are no “empty wave” effects deriving from the attribution of a physical reality to
the wave function, consistently with the requests for relativistic invariance (Pykacz,
1992) and experimental tests (Zou et al., 1992). A further element to keep in mind
to avoid misunderstandings is that the causal connection between the two events
described in this section is trans-temporal: it occurs between two distinct instants tA
and tB through modalities that are not entirely reducible to uni-directional crossing of
the spatio-temporal continuum between them. An excited atom “senses” the presence
of the ground state if there is an operator S that joins the present excited state to the
ground state and this “feeling” is through time. If this condition is veriﬁed, the decay
begins. In other words, spontaneous decay is connected to the vacuum term of the
Hamiltonian of interaction with the electromagnetic ﬁeld not because hypothetical
“vacuum ﬂuctuations” trigger it; but because is through that Hamiltonian term that
these two states come into contact.
Ifaphysicalsystemundergoesthreequantumjumpsinsuccession,say A, B andC,
trans-temporality and quantum aspects exist only as characteristics of the connection

434
L. Chiatti
between A and B and the connection between B and C. The connection between A
and C does not include these aspects; in particular, the causal and energetic ﬂow is
always directed from the past to the future (Chiatti, 2005, 2014; Chiatti & Licata,
2017). In other words, there is no form of super-causality above the direct causal
connection between two successive jumps.
In the case of many-particle quantum systems we have to distinguish two differ-
ent levels of time zoom. The temporal evolution of the quantum amplitude of one of
the elementary components of the system between two successive quantum jumps
is governed by unitary equations of motion (e.g. Schrödinger). Quantum jumps are
equivalent to a redeﬁnition of the initial condition for the application of these equa-
tions (Fock, 1957); this is the situation in which the system dynamics is zoomed in
to the maximum. Starting from this situation and zooming out on the same dynam-
ics, we can reach a point where the single connection between jumps is no longer
relevant and the relevant aspects of the dynamics are instead related to the evolution
over time of the average properties of groups of many events (jumps). The substan-
tial conﬁnement of the quantum aspects to the single direct connections constitutes
a basis for the possibility of representing these average properties through classical
quantities that evolve according to classical laws. It is in this sense that the pro-
posed description is compatible with the emergence of classical behavior in systems
that basically remain quantum. In this event based reading of quantum theory, the
classical macroscopic systems emerge from the fundamental quantum description,
ensuring the logical closure of this latter (Licata & Chiatti, 2019). In particular, the
pre-requisite of the existence of classical macroscopic observers is not required.
The absence, in this description, of any “measurement problem” is easily veriﬁ-
able, because the pointer states of a measurement device are never entangled with
the degrees of freedom of an elementary component. In particular, with reference to
the well-known cat paradox (Schrödinger, 1935), there is never a superposition of
the type d ∗D + nd ∗L between the nuclear states d (decayed), nd (not decayed)
and the states of the cat D (dead), L (alive). What happens is actually a process that
develops in three successive stages. In the ﬁrst phase there is the temporal evolution
of a superposition of the states d, nd according to the Schrödinger equation; this ﬁrst
phase ends with a quantum jump consisting in the passage from this superposition to
the outgoing amplitude d, with the emission of a gamma photon. The second phase
begins with the product of the photonic amplitude exiting the ﬁrst phase and the
ground state of the gas atom of the Geiger tube affected by the ﬁrst ionization event.
In this phase the Schrödinger equation governs the time evolution of the superposi-
tion 1 ∗g + 0 ∗i with initial condition 1 ∗g, where g = ground state of the atom,
i = ionized state of the atom, 0 = state of the electromagnetic ﬁeld with 0 photons
(vacuum), 1 = state of the electromagnetic ﬁeld with a photon (leaving the previous
phase). This phase ends with a quantum jump that transforms this superposition into
the outgoing amplitude 0 ∗i. The third phase includes a chain of essentially classical
ampliﬁcation processes, whose ﬁnal outcome is the conversion of the state |L⟩⟨L|
into the state |D⟩⟨D|. This ﬁnal outcome manifests itself, in a single experimental
run, at time tO; previously at this instant the cat is alive; after that moment it is
dead; the cat is never in a superposition of L and D. It follows that opening the box

The Electron and the Cosmos: From the Universe …
435
containing the cat at the instant t, one obtains the result |L⟩⟨L| if t < tO, |D⟩⟨D|
otherwise. If the duration of the last two phases is neglected, the probability pnd
of the result |L⟩⟨L| is simply that which can be derived from the coefﬁcient of nd
in the superposition of d, nd relative to the ﬁrst phase, extrapolated to time t. The
probability of the result |D⟩⟨D| is the complementary to 1 of pnd. The statistics of the
results obtained by opening the box in an ensemble of repetitions of the same exper-
iment is therefore that of a mixture pnd|L⟩⟨L| + (1 −pnd)|D⟩⟨D| where pnd(t) is
the probability derived from the superposition of the nuclear amplitudes. But these
amplitudes are never entangled with the states L, D.
Inter alia, the states L, D are related not to future events of an elementary com-
ponent of the system (as is the case of d, nd), but to the presently actualized average
properties of a cluster of quantum jumps so large (the cat) that the effects of quantum
delocalization are irrelevant. Thus, amplitudes like |L⟩, |D⟩can be used in quantum
language only bearing in mind (Chiatti & Licata, 2019; Licata & Chiatti, 2019) that
their physically achievable superpositions are only those trivial coinciding with the
|L⟩, |D⟩themselves. More generally, and regardless of the speciﬁc case, it must
be observed that the evolution of a system of many particles includes not only the
evolution of the amplitudes of its elementary components between one jump and the
next, but also the stable succession of jumps, represented by projectors. It is therefore
impossible to describe a system of this type with a single quantum amplitude. A more
general dynamical description is outlined in (Castellani, 2019).
Before closing this section we want to return to the elementary components, which
are instead described by a single quantum amplitude. These components are actual-
ized in the time domain in events of the type |⟩⟨| which, as we have seen, can be
understood as the absorption of an amplitude in the pre-spatial vacuum and simulta-
neous re-emission of the same amplitude from that vacuum. In practice it is as if there
was a pause in the temporal evolution of the particle, during which the properties
related to the component |⟩of its quantum amplitude are absorbed and re-emitted.
If to these properties (the “state”  of the particle leaving the jump) corresponds an
energy E, we can say that in the ﬁrst phase the vacuum absorbs that energy from the
temporal domain, to return it in the second phase. The energetic content of the time
domain therefore undergoes a variation equal to −E in the ﬁrst phase and a variation
+E in the second one. The total balance is clearly zero, according to the conserva-
tion of energy, but the relevant point is that a positive variation (the vacuum releases
energy to the temporal domain) is associated with |⟩and therefore to propagation
towards the future; instead, a negative variation (the vacuum absorbes energy from
the temporal domain) is associated with ⟨| and therefore to propagation towards
the past. In other words, a relationship is generated between the sign of the energy
and the two regions in which the temporal domain is divided: future and past. The
relationship between time domains and the sign of the energy represent a microscopic
time arrow.
For a free elementary particle of mass M is E = Mc2γ , where γ is the relativistic
contraction factor. It should be noted that this is the relativistic generalization of
the classical kinetic energy T , although in the handbooks is wisely suggested to
take instead E = Mc2γ −Mc2. Classically, T = MV 2/2 is the work required to

436
L. Chiatti
accelerate a body of mass M, initially at rest, up to the speed V ; −T is the work
necessary to bring this body back at rest. Moving from the three-dimensional space
of classical physics to spacetime, it happens that even a body at rest is actually in
movement along its timeline. This movement is nothing but the persistence of the
body. Therefore Mc2 is the energy necessary to start this movement from quietness,
that is, to create an object of mass M. Similarly, −Mc2 is the energy released by
stopping this movement, that is, in the destruction of the object. Of course, in the pre-
quantum relativistic description there is no quietness state over time. In the quantum
description adopted here, the state of quietness in which the amplitude |⟩enters
and from which it emerges is the pre-spatial vacuum previously described.
5
An Emergent Space-Time-Matter Made of Signs
According to the description proposed in the previous sections, a “particle” is man-
ifested through its quantum amplitude |⟩when it comes out of a quantum jump
at a well-deﬁned instant of time t. This outgoing amplitude is spatially delocalized
according to the wave function ⟨x|⟩= (x, t), evaluated at the instant of the jump.
On the other hand, we have seen that the spacetime points (x, t) are lines of the ﬁve-
dimensional space that depart from an origin in that space, which is the center of
projection. So also the function (x, t) is coded in this center. In accordance with
this approach, the problem of the structure of elementary particles is then led back to
the question: how does this coding take place? It is certainly not possible to univo-
cally answer this question, and in the following we consider only one of the possible
answers.
Let’s
start
with
some
preliminary
considerations.
Let
us
consider
a
three-dimensional sphere of radius ρ = ρ0 exp(T/T0), where ρ0 and T0 are posi-
tive real constants and T ∈(−∞, +∞); we will admit that this sphere can rotate
around its generic axis in a three-dimensional Euclidean space. On this sphere we
can consider a speciﬁc three-rectangle triangle (i.e. whose three internal angles are
all right) and assign a direction to each of its sides. Of course, an arbitrary rotation
of the sphere will rigidly move this triangle while maintaining the direction of its
sides. A homothety induced by the variation of T will transform the triangle into
another similar to it, preserving the relations between its sides. The three angles
that deﬁne the rotation will cover a three-dimensional space, which we will iden-
tify with the real physical space at time T . Taken together, homothety and rotation
map the four-dimensional spacetime and establish the invariance, with respect to
spacetime translations, of the relationships between the sides and the angles of the
three-rectangle triangle. In the following we will assume that the material degrees
of freedom of a particle can be associated with this triangle, and that the different
possible rotations and homotheties correspond to the different positional eigenstates
of the particle, with which these degrees of freedom can be associated. In particular,
it will be possible to identify a positional eigenstate at a deﬁnite instant by setting
the sphere conﬁguration (radius and orientation). The different positional eigenstates

The Electron and the Cosmos: From the Universe …
437
form the basis on which the quantum superposition of coefﬁcients ⟨x|⟩= (x, t)
can be constructed, to give the quantum amplitude |⟩of the particle coming out
of the jump. For details on this construction (directed links and their activation) we
remind to the previous section.
It is possible to associate the three sides of the three-rectangle triangle to the
quaternionic units i, j, k and the rotation identity to the quaternionic unit 1. In
this case the rotations of the sphere can be expressed by quaternions represented
on rigid transformations of the basis (1, i, j, k) and the quaternion angle will be
half the effective rotation angle. It can be seen that in this description the difference
between spacetime and matter (the three-rectangle triangle) disappears because both
are made up of the same elements. The sphere, with the “preferred” three-rectangle
triangle chosen on it, will represent the internal structure of the projection center in
the ﬁve-dimensional space that we will adopt.
In this particular solution to the problem of the structure of space-time-matter,
the importance attributed to the three-rectangle triangle derives from its self-duality:
both the edges and the vertices correspond to the same quaternionic units. If a duality
operationiscarriedout,consistingintheexchangeoftheverticeswiththeedgeswhile
maintaining the topological connection, the triangle has changed in itself. The fact
that, in a network, the nodes coincide with their relationships identiﬁes a level of
minimum complexity that cannot be further reduced and we identify it as that of
the “elementary particles”. Therefore the nature of elementarity is identiﬁed by the
irreducibility of the structural complexity of a set of relationships and has nothing to
do with the existence of “basic bricks” without internal structure (Chiatti, 2018).
The same concept can be understood in terms of Peirce’s triadic relationship
“sign”: in a typical relationship as i j = k between quaternion units, j can be assimi-
latedtotheObject,i totheRepresentamenandk totheInterpretant(i.e.theinteraction
between i and j which allows to associate the Object j with i). The cyclicity of this
relationship corresponds to the interchangeability (rotation) of Object, Interpretant
and Representamen; that is, we are at a level where interactions and interacting enti-
ties coincide. Therefore, at this fundamental level dominated by triadicity both the
material (triangle) and spatiotemporal (transformations of the sphere that leave the
triangle unchanged) degrees of freedom make their appearance.
Fromtheperspectiveofthesinglepositionaleigenstate|x⟩containedinthedecom-
position of |⟩, the quantum jump from which |⟩exits can be seen as a cascade
of symmetry breakings induced by the (ordinary) interactions involved in that jump
(Chiatti, 2018). The speciﬁc succession of symmetry breakings deﬁnes the type of
particle of the Standard Model (electron, proton, etc.). In other words, it is the pro-
cess of spatio-temporal localization of the particle that deﬁnes the “type” of particle.
This process can be represented through a particular graph called “glyph” (Chiatti,
2018). All glyphs are subsets of a mother glyph (the “universal oscillator”) and can
be viewed as its “states”.
In Chiatti (2018) it is hypothesized that the structure of the localization process,
i.e. the sequence of symmetry breakings involved in a quantum jump, is the following.
First of all, the fundamental quaternionic units deﬁned by the oriented three-rectangle
triangle are subdivided on the basis of their sign, with the resulting constitution of

438
L. Chiatti
two conjugated sets of units. These sets are what in usual quantum formalism is
designated respectively with symbols |x⟩, ⟨x| while the spacetime position (x, t) is
coded by the orientation of the sphere and its radius. This generation of a positional
label is graphically represented by the root vertex of the glyph (major vertex), while
the split is represented by a ﬁrst-order edge coming out of this vertex.
The two sets of quaternionic units derived from the split are then symmetrically
divided into sub-groups of units, each corresponding to a “center of charge” internal
to the particle manifested in (x, t). Graphically, each of these subgroups corresponds
in the glyph to a second order vertex (“minor” vertex), connected to the major vertex
by the ﬁrst-order edge which represents the ﬁliation by splitting. From each minor
vertex, second-order edges associated with the quaternionic units of the subgroup
represented by that vertex depart. These edges represent the “type” of center of charge
(electron center of charge, quark up, quark down, etc.).
This succession of operations connects the a-spatial and timeless realm of the pro-
jection center to the spacetime domain. Its outcome is the genesis of 1, 2, or 3 lines in
the ﬁve-dimensional space corresponding, in the usual spacetime, to the position of
1, 2 or 3 centers of charge within a particle located in (x, t). The construction is com-
pleted by assuming, in accordance with an old micro-causality argument discussed
by Caldirola (Caldirola, 1979), that (x, t) is the tangency point of a de Sitter space
of radius cθ (with θ ≤θ0) on the usual spacetime and that the positions of centers
of charge are enclosed (conﬁned) within the projection of this space on spacetime.
This leads (Chiatti, 2014, 2018) to the usual systematics of elementary particles and
their subdivision into leptons, mesons and baryons, according to the Standard Model
(with the bonus of an ab initio condition of conﬁnement of quarks and gluons).
This representation is completely a-dynamical and synchronic, since a connection
is involved between an a-temporal layer of physical reality and the usual temporal
domain. However, it is possible to move on to the more familiar dynamical repre-
sentation by examining the action of the interactions that govern the various stages
of the succession. It can then be seen that the ﬁrst stage of the sequence that forms
the quantum jump, described with the passage from the major vertex to the minor
vertex along the ﬁrst-order edge, is associated with the deﬁnition of the color and the
(possible) appearance of the color interaction between centers of charge. The second
passage, described by the second-order edges, corresponds to the identiﬁcation of
the ﬂavor of the center of charge operated by electroweak and Higgs ﬁelds coupled
with the center.
What remains largely conjectural in this model of quantum jump is the connection
between the gauge ﬁelds and the geometry of the de Sitter space, a topic that consti-
tutes the object of recent work (Chiatti, 2020). Largely unexplored is the relationship
with gravitation and inertia. The maximum radius cθ0 is deﬁned by the gravitational
self-coupling of the vacuum (Licata & Chiatti, 2019). Provided that the relationship
between the cosmological time t0 (described in Sect. 2) and the particle time θ0
is given by the conventional Dirac number, this condition ﬁxes the Planck length
(Licata & Chiatti, 2019).
Of course, the speciﬁc model of quantum jump summarized in this section (the
interested reader is referred to the cited papers for a more detailed and hopefully

The Electron and the Cosmos: From the Universe …
439
satisfactory presentation) is not the only one possible. What matters here, how-
ever, is the possibility of a theoretical representation which is both synchronic
and diachronic (Crowther, 2020). On the one hand, an a-dynamical connection
between the extra-spatial and extra-temporal domain and the spatio-temporal realm
is described, through a succession of distinctions. On the other hand, the symmetry
breakings that make up these distinctions, and that lead to the spatio-temporal local-
ization of a particle, can be investigated in the usual dynamical perspective. This
double reading of quantum formalism allows, on the one hand, to perceive the radi-
cality inherent in the non-unitary nature of the quantum jump; on the other hand, it
leads back to the usual dynamical and unitary formalism of the second quantization
operators of the Standard Model (Chiatti, 2018).
6
A Self-reﬂective Universe
In the previous sections a possible portrait of the physical world has been painted as
it appears seen at the level of its most elementary processes, that is quantum micro-
events. Each of these events occurs at a speciﬁc moment of time and involves quan-
tum amplitudes that are normally provided of an extension on the three-dimensional
ambient space (that is, the related wave functions). From this simple fact and the
relativistic invariance is possible to infer that these amplitudes cannot be classical
ﬁelds. In general, quantum amplitudes evolve over time, but they do not represent
objects in spacetime. The time evolution of amplitudes constitutes the expression
of the efﬁcient causality at the level of quantum phenomena. The quantum ampli-
tude connects, as a probability amplitude, different events that are then deﬁned as
causally connected. Since this connection is marked by ordinary time, it can be called
diachronic. The diachronic, efﬁcient (in Aristotelian sense) causality is what is nor-
mally called “dynamical causality”. It ﬁnds its expression in the laws of motion, for
example the Schrödinger equation in non relativistic quantum mechanics. The set
of micro-events actualized over time forms a network connected by the dynamical
causality, and this network is the physical world.
The limit of dynamic causality (and of the Schrödinger equation) is represented,
in the description of this network, by the single event. The events, or nodes of the
network, are in fact modiﬁcations of the underlying vacuum. This vacuum, as we
have seen, is completely a-spatial and a-temporal; it is connected to each individ-
ual event (and therefore to the temporal domain and to space) through a series of
transformations closely connected with elementary interactions: electroweak, strong
and presumably gravitational. This succession of transformations connects time to
what is outside of time, therefore it is not marked by time: it is not diachronic. On
the contrary, from the temporal perspective it appears as an unanalyzable event con-
centrated in a single instant, that of the “quantum jump”. To qualify this sequence
we can then use the adjective “synchronic”. The causality underlying the quantum
jump is therefore not diachronic, but synchronic; moreover, it cannot be properly
qualiﬁed as efﬁcient causality, but rather as a formal causality. In fact, what happens

440
L. Chiatti
in an event is the manifestation of something starting from a maximally symmetrical
void: the appearance of a form (the physical quantities associated with the event and
exchanged in it). We could also say: the production of signs. The opposition between
synchronic formal causality and dynamical causality is what appears in formalism
as the alternation between the collapse of the quantum amplitude and its subsequent
(or previous) unitary evolution.
This opposition is not irreducible; the same interactions that originate the suc-
cession of synchronic transformations, producing the appearance of a single event,
act in diachronic mode on the time evolution of the wave function. The reasoning
can therefore be rephrased by saying that there is a double face of the interactions:
one unitary, the other non-unitary. The ﬁrst face appears every time an interaction
is inserted into Schrödinger’s equation: this is the face that everyone recognizes.
The second face appears in non-unitary quantum jumps, and is often not recognized,
although it is certainly evident to everyone that, for example, the orbital jumps of an
electron are caused by the usual electromagnetic ﬁeld.
The instantonic treatment in imaginary time (Chiatti, 2020) attenuates the contrast
between the two forms of causality, allowing at least a partial application of equations
of motion to interaction vertices and quantum jumps. De Broglie would perhaps be
happy. However, it should not be forgotten that a single vacuum is connected to all
the events of the past, present and future history of the Universe through synchronic
causality (which is therefore properly synchronic in the sense of trans-temporal).
The ordinary dynamical causal connection between events is therefore a reﬂection
of the most profound and fundamental synchronic formal causality. We can say that
it represents its spatiotemporal reﬂection.
In our opinion, it is to this general context that reference must be made to under-
stand the non-locality inherent in the spatial delocalization of a single particle, or the
non-separability of the entangled amplitudes of distinct particles. But the scenario
we propose seems to be much broader. The vacuum is the environment of events and
the mean by which they communicate through synchronic relationships reﬂected in
the time evolution of quantum amplitudes. It seems legitimate to say that this vacuum
enters into a relationship with itself (a self-reﬂective relationship) through interme-
diate actors—quantum events—which ﬁx its contents. Here we will not develop a
reading of this type, instead focusing on the re-proposition of the basic theme of
this work, which we will return to in the following Epilogue. Our thesis is that the
so-called incomprehensibility of quantum phenomena derives from inadequate con-
ceptual instrumentation and, in particular, from the rampant ﬁxation on dynamical
causality as the only possible form of mechanical causality.
7
Epilogue
The material presented in the previous sections raises the question of whether many
problems of contemporary micro-physics (the nature of quantum amplitudes and the
reason for their collapse, hadronic conﬁnement, the origin of the masses, and many

The Electron and the Cosmos: From the Universe …
441
others) are not actually as many koan, thrown on the path of the investigation to
urge the researcher to a different point of view on elementarity, on the emergence of
space-time-matter, on the derived and secondary nature of dynamical causality. And
it is under the effect of this doubt that we are now going to our conclusions.
Normally we look at particle physics as the descriptive level at which physical
reality can be said to be entirely deciphered; the work of deciphering precisely con-
sists in bringing the categories of the higher levels of description (and organization)
of the physical world back to the language of reciprocal actions between the ele-
mentary components of matter. While not wanting to deny in any way the validity
of this methodological approach, which has marked the entire path of post-Galilean
physics, it is however important to realize that this operation of reduction and decom-
position is carried out on an entity - the physical world—which is a whole. And it is a
whole not only in the additive sense of a set of ontologically independent parts albeit
externally inter-dependent, but in the much stronger sense related to the existence
of a generative relationship that leads to the origination of all these parts and their
external relations from a single unity. Unity consisting of an a-spatial and a-temporal
void that enters into a self-reﬂective relationship, determining the emergence of all
these parts and their external relations, both of a causal dynamic and spatiotemporal
type. The individual physical events are to this void like the leaves of a tree are to
the trunk from which they are born.
To be content with the reconstruction of the structure of external relations starting
from concretely manifested events means to assume as fundamental the fragmen-
tation inherent in the self-reﬂective relationship mentioned, completely forgetting
the entirety of the underlying unity. This is consistent with the legitimate limits of
a correct methodological approach. But an uncompromosing reductionism, carried
beyond these limits and transﬁgured into fundamentalist ideology, exposes us to the
risk of leaving in the shadow important aspects for the understanding of physical
reality, even at the level of its “elementary constituents”. This is particularly evi-
dent in the complete fall into oblivion of the distinction between the particle, the
kinematically propagated unit, and its centers of charge. The relationship between
these two elements, which is a typical local-global relationship recognized in the
old structural models (Bohm et al., 1960; Corben, 1968; Rivas, 2015), is completely
ignored by the Standard Model. The latter only knows the centers of charge and their
local interactions with gauge ﬁelds, but completely ignores the micro-spaces that
allow the ab initio formulation of a global conﬁnement condition. The effect of this
limitation is not only constituted by the persisting mysteries of the conﬁnement of
quarks and gluons or, as we have seen, of wave-corpuscle dualism, with the related
debates that have dragged on without solution for decades.
Even more seriously, there is the real risk of a wrong setting of the research
program on the quantization of gravity. In fact, the problem arises: at what level of
the glyph is the gravitational interaction placed? If it is located at the level of the major
vertex and therefore of the center of mass, then gravity acts on the particle but not on
its centers of charge. If, on the other hand, the insertion of gravity is at or below the
minor vertices, then gravity acts on the centers of charge and, through them, on the
particle as a whole. At present it is not possible to experimentally distinguish these

442
L. Chiatti
two possibilities; to our best knowledge, no gravitational effect on single (say) quarks
has never been evidenced. The second possibility is the one implicitly accepted in
a more or less universal way, and this is coherent with a vision that takes centers of
charge as fundamental. But what if the ﬁrst possibility was true?
In this case, the gravitation would couple with the center of mass of a particle but
not with its centers of charge. The equivalence principle would then be applicable
at the center of mass level, which would become the equivalent of the famous free-
fall lift. The centers of charge would be manifested in strong and/or electro-weak
interactions, but not in graviton-mediated interactions. The latter would see only
the particle. If cθ is the de Sitter radius of the particle, gravitons of energy much
greater than ℏ/θ would be decoupled from the particle. It would be the task of a
quantum theory of gravitation to specify the dynamics of this decoupling [of the
same type that Fermi invoked for electrons with extended charge distribution in
quantum electrodynamics (Fermi, 1931)]. But if we keep in mind that the de Sitter
radius decreases with the reciprocal of the particle mass and that there seem to
be no heavier particles than the aggregates of the top quark, we can easily reach
two conclusions. The ﬁrst is that the Planck scale is never achieved in gravitational
interactions. It can be achieved by non-gravitational interactions but what happens
then is that gravitation is coupled with the particles produced as ﬁnal states. The
second is that gravitational collapse probably does not lead to singularities, but only
to hyperdense states (Licata & Chiatti, 2017). We do not intend to investigate these
suggestions here, but only to show that opening the reductionist-diachronic cage can
open up signiﬁcant horizons of physical research.
What we want to highlight is how the problems of greatest interest in fundamental
physics become truly understandable only if a broader perspective is adopted, which
recognizes the centrality of the synchronic formal causation and the derivative nature
of the ordinary dynamical causal representation. This recovery of Aristotelian phys-
ical categories appears necessary not only as a founding step of a renewed and
necessary “philosophy of nature”, which recognizes the fundamental unity of the
natural world by bringing back to it the results of the individual ﬁelds of scientiﬁc
investigation, but also for overcoming many difﬁculties that current physical research
encounters.
References
Arcidiacono, G. (1958). La relativitá di Fantappié. Collectanea. Mathematica, 10, 85–124.
Arcidiacono, G. (1964). Gli spazi di Cartan e le teorie unitarie. Collectanea Mathematica, 16,
149–168.
Arcidiacono, G. (1969). L’Universo di de Sitter e la meccanica. Collectanea Mathematica, 20,
231–256.
Aspect A., Grangier P., & Roger. G. Experimental realization of Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen-Bohm
Gedankenexperiment: a new violation of Bell’s inequalities. Physical Review Letters,49, 91.
Bacciagaluppi, G., & Valentini, A. (2009). Quantum theory at the crossroads: Reconsidering the
1927 Solvay conference. Cambridge University Press.

The Electron and the Cosmos: From the Universe …
443
Bacry, H., & Lévy-Leblond, J. (1968). Possible kinematics. Journal of Mathematical Physics,9(10),
1605.
Barrett, J. F. (2011). The hyperbolic theory of special relativity. arXiv:1102.0462 [physics.gen-ph]
Bohm, D., Hillion, P., Takabayasi, T., & Vigier, J. P. (1960). Relativistic rotators and bilocal theory.
Progress of Theoretical and Experimental Physics, 23(3), 496–511. https://doi.org/10.1143/PTP.
23.496.
Caldirola, P. (1978). The chronon in the quantum theory of the electron and the existence of
heavy leptons. Nuovo Cimento A,45, 549–579. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02730096; Caldirola,
P. (1979). A relativistic theory of the classical electron. La Rivista del Nuovo Cimento2, 1–49.
https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02724419
Castellani, L. (2019). History operators in quantum mechanics. International Journal of Quantum
Information, 17, 1941001. https://doi.org/10.1142/S0219749919410016.
Chiatti, L. (2005). Le strutture archetipali del mondo ﬁsico. Di Renzo.
Chiatti, L. (2014). The transaction as a quantum concept. International Journal of Research and
Reviews in Applied Sciences,16, 28–47 (Reprinted in In I. Licata (Ed.), Space-time geometry and
quantum events (pp. 11–43). Nova Publications).
Chiatti, L. (2020). Bit from qubit. A hypothesis on wave-particle dualism and fundamental interac-
tions. Information,11(12), 571. https://doi.org/10.3390/info11120571
Chiatti, L., & Licata, I. (2014). Relativity with respect to measurement: Collapse and quantum
events from Fock to Cramer. Systems,2, 576–589. https://doi.org/10.3390/systems2040576
Chiatti, L., & Licata, I. (2017). Fluidodynamical representation and quantum jumps. In: R. E.
Kastner, & J. Jeknic-Dugic, J. (Eds.),Quantum structural studies. Classical emergence from the
quantum level (pp. 201–223). World Scientiﬁc.
Chiatti, L., & Licata, I. (2019). A new version of quantum mechanics with deﬁnite macroscopic
states. Commubication to: Quantum 2019, Torino, May 27–31, 2019.
Chiatti, L. (2014). Elementary particles as signs. VS, 118, 105–117.
Chiatti, L. (2018). Thinking non locally: The atemporal roots of particle physics. Front. Phys., 6,
95. https://doi.org/10.3389/fphy.2018.00095.
Corben, H. C. (1968). Classical and quantum theories of spinning particles. Holden-Day.
Crowther, K. (2020). As below, so before: ‘synchronic’ and ‘diachronic’ conceptions of spacetime
emergence. Synthese. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11229-019-02521-1.
Fantappié, L. (1954). Su una nuova teoria di relativitá ﬁnale. Rendiconti. Accademia Nazionale dei
Lincei, 17, 158.
Fantappié, L. (1959). Sui fondamenti gruppali della ﬁsica (posthumous). Collectanea Mathematica,
11, 77–135.
Fermi, E. (1931). Le masse elettromagnetiche nella elettrodinamica quantistica. Nuovo Cimento, 8,
121–132.
Fock V. A. (1957). On the interpretation of quantum mechanics. Czechoslovak Journal of Physics,
643–656.
Howard, D. (2007). Revisiting the Einstein Bohr dialogue. Iyyun: The Jerusalem Philosophical
Quarterly,56, 57–90.
Landau, L. D., & Lifsits, E. M. (1973). Relativistic quantum theory (theoretical physics course (Vol.
IV)). MIR, SSSR.
Licata, I., & Chiatti, L. (2017). Quantum jumps: from foundational research to particle physics.
IOP Conference Series,880. https://doi.org/10.1088/1742-6596/880/1/012033
Licata, I., & Chiatti, L. (2019). Event-based quantum mechanics: A context for the emergence of
classical information. Symmetry,11(2), 181. https://doi.org/10.3390/sym11020181
Licata, I., Chiatti, L., & Benedetto, E. (2017). De Sitter projective relativity. Springer Briefs in
Physics. Springer.
Nagourney, W., Sandberg, J., & Demhelt, H. (1986). Shelved optical electron ampliﬁer: Obser-
vation of quantum jumps. Physical Review Letters, 56, 2797–2799. https://doi.org/10.1103/
PhysRevLett.56.2797.

444
L. Chiatti
Pykacz, J. (1992). Direct detection of empty waves contradicts special relativity. Physics Letters A,
171, 141–144. https://doi.org/10.1016/0375-9601(92)90416-J.
Rivas, M. (2015). The center of mass and center of charge of the electron. Journal of Physics:
Conference Series, 615012017.
Schrödinger, E. (1935). Die gegenwärtige situation in der quantenmechanik. Naturwissenschaften
23, 807–812, 823–828, 844–849. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01491891
Vigier, J. P., Dewdney, C., Holland, P. R., & Kyprianidis, A. (1987). Causal particle trajectories and
the interpretation of quantum mechanics. In B. J. Hiley & F. D. Peat (Eds.), Essays in honour of
David Bohm (pp. 169–204). Routledge.
Zou, X. Y., Grayson, T., Wang, L. J., & Mandel, L. (1992). Can an “empty” de Broglie pilot wave
induce coherence? Physical Review Letters,68, 3667–3669.

“A Novel Feature of Atomicity
in the Laws of Nature”: Quantum
Theory Against Reductionism
Arkady Plotnitsky
1
Introduction
Although Niels Bohr’s most famous conceptual contribution to physics and philos-
ophy is his concept of complementarity, introduced in 1927, two of his later concepts,
correlative to each other, phenomenon and atomicity, introduced in the late 1930s,
are as innovative and important. According to Bohr (writing in 1949): “Planck’s
discovery of the quantum of action [h] disclosed a novel feature of atomicity in
the laws of nature supplementing in such unsuspected manner the old doctrine of
the limited divisibility of matter” (Bohr, 1987, v. 2, p. 34). The realization of this
disclosure, however, took three decades after Max Planck’s discovery of quantum
theory in 1900. It was shaped by several subsequent developments, in particular by
Bohr’s (1913) atomic theory, the discovery of quantum mechanics (QM) in 1925,
and Bohr’s interpretation of QM, developed in its ultimate form, grounded in his
concepts of phenomena and atomicity, in1930s.1 This may be a long time in one’s
scientiﬁc life or in the history of quantum theory. It is, however, a very short time in
comparison with the history of “the old doctrine of the limited divisibility” and the
atomic constitution of matter, and with it, the idea of reductionism—the idea that
the reality of the world is reducible to the ultimate constitutive elements, atoms, and
their organization. Its history extends back two and half millennia, to the pre-Socratic
philosopher Leucippus and his pupil Democritus, with whose name the doctrine is
commonly associated. The doctrine has enjoyed sporadic importance throughout
its long history, as with Epicurus and then Lucretius in the ancient world, or via
1 Bohr’s interpretation, in any of its versions, will be distinguished here from “the Copenhagen
interpretation.” There is no single such interpretation, as even Bohr has changed his a few times. I
have considered different versions of Bohr’s interpretation in Plotnitsky (2012).
A. Plotnitsky (B)
Literature, Theory, and Cultural Studies Program, Philosophy and Literature Program, College of
Liberal Arts, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA
e-mail: plotnits@purdue.edu
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
S. Wuppuluri and I. Stewart (eds.), From Electrons to Elephants and Elections,
The Frontiers Collection, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-92192-7_25
445

446
A. Plotnitsky
Lucretius, in the sixteenth century, and then in modern, post-Galilean, physics, as in
Sir Isaac Newton’s corpuscular theory of light, before its rise to dominance with the
nineteenth-century atomic theories, from the kinetic theory of gases to the atomist
theory of Brownian motion, courtesy of Albert Einstein, and ﬁnally the present-day
atomism, that of elementary particles, in QM and quantum ﬁeld theory (QFT).
Planck’s discovery was initially understood on these lines as well, especially after
Einstein’s introduction of the concept of the photon in 1905, which, along with the
discovery of the electron (before Planck’s theory) and then the proton, brought with
them the concept of elementary particles as new atoms of nature. Quantum theory was
far from free of complexities and paradoxes, for example, the wave-like behavior of
these new “atoms” of nature in certain circumstances, a behavior initially associated
with radiation, but extended to the particles of matters, such as electrons, by Louis
de Broglie in the early 1920s. While QM, discovered by Werner Heisenberg and
Erwin Schrödinger in 1925–1926, resolved most physical difﬁculties of the previous
quantum theory (the “old quantum theory”) and is still our standard theory, it hardly
avoided the epistemological complexities brought about by quantum theory and even
exacerbated some of them.
Bohr’s interpretation of quantum phenomena and QM, introduced in 1927 and
developed by him during the next decade, met these complexities in a new way,
which has been and remains controversial and even unacceptable to some, beginning,
famously, with Einstein. Bohr distinguished, on Kantian lines (but more radically),
between quantum phenomena, deﬁned by what is observed in measuring instruments
and quantum objects, responsible for quantum phenomena. Quantum objects were
placed beyond knowledge or even conception. By 1937, Bohr spoke of “our not
being any longer in a position to speak of the autonomous behavior of a physical
object, due to the unavoidable interaction between the object and the measuring
instruments” (Bohr, 1937, p. 87). Accordingly, one could no longer ascribe to the
quantum objects such properties as discreteness or indivisibility, or their contin-
uous counterparts, such as wave properties. Such properties could only be those of
quantum phenomena observed in measuring instruments, as effects of their inter-
actions with quantum objects, effects predicted, in probabilistic terms, by QM or
QFT. No other predictions are possible on experimental grounds. “The novel feature
of atomicity” invoked by Bohr arises from this situation. It is deﬁned by a transfer
to quantum phenomena, manifested in measuring instruments, the key “atomic”
features—discreteness, discontinuity, individuality, and atomicity (indivisibility)—
previously associated with quantum objects. “Atomicity” becomes an epistemolog-
ical feature that refers to physically complex and hence divisible entities, and not
to physically indivisible quantum objects, including “elementary particles,” such as
electrons, photons, or quarks. An elementary particle or an atom, beginning with the
hydrogen, become a very different concept: it is technological and informational,
rather than describing the ultimate of reality responsible for quantum phenomena, to
which no atomic properties could be assigned any more than any other.
While the genealogy of Bohr’s concept of phenomenon appears to have been
more conventional, extending from Immanuel Kant’s philosophy, Bohr’s concept of
atomicity is unusual and its genealogy is less clear. An intriguing possibility is Alfred

“A Novel Feature of Atomicity in the Laws of Nature”: Quantum Theory …
447
North Whitehead’s concept of atomism in his 1927 Process and Reality (Whitehead,
1978), although there is no evidence that it was familiar to Bohr. Whitehead’s overall
ontological position is, however, different from that of Bohr. Whitehead’s discrete
atomicity of experience is underlain by the continuous ultimate reality, placed in a
complex way between the material and the mental. By contrast, while assuming the
existence of the material reality responsible for the emergence of discrete phenomena
observed in measuring instruments in quantum physics, Bohr’s interpretation “in
principle exclude[s]” a representation or even conception of this reality, and thus any
ontological conception, discrete or continuous, of this reality (Bohr, 1987, v. 2, p. 62).
Accordingly, it is difﬁcult to transfer Whitehead’s scheme into Bohr’s interpretation.
Building on Bohr’s view, I shall argue that QM and QFT, the currently standard
theories of elementary particles, occupy a unique position in contemporary thought,
at least in certain interpretations of these theories or quantum phenomena themselves:
While they radically depart from reductionism in physics, including when it comes to
the concept of elementary particles, they do not embrace holism either. They do have
afﬁnities with holism, arising from Bohr’s concepts of phenomenon and atomicity as
forming an indivisible whole with quantum objects. But these concepts are different
from those found in most forms of holism. They represent a different way of thinking
in physics and philosophy.
My argument is based on the concept of “reality without realism,” RWR, which,
while more general, is, when used in quantum theory, based on the irreducible role
of experimental technology in the constitution of quantum phenomena (e.g., Plot-
nitsky, 2016, 2021; Plotnitsky & Khrennikov, 2015). This concept places the reality
considered beyond representation or knowledge, which I deﬁne as “the weak RWR
view,” or even conception, which I deﬁne as “the strong RWR view,” with each view
leading to a corresponding set of interpretations of quantum phenomena and QM or
QFT.
Such interpretations may be different within each set, as are Bohr’s ultimate
interpretation and the one adopted here. In both interpretations, the concept of
RWR only applies to the ultimate constitution of the reality responsible for quantum
phenomena, the constitution commonly associated with quantum objects. This asso-
ciation, however, takes a different form in the present interpretation. While equally
beyond conception, the ultimate, RWR-type, reality and quantum objects are not the
same entities or, in the present view, forms of idealization. The ultimate RWR-type
stratum of reality is, as an idealization, assumed to exist independently of our inter-
actions with it. On the other hand, the reality idealized as quantum objects is only
assumed to exist at the time of measurement, deﬁned by the interactions between the
ultimate RWR stratum of reality and measuring instruments. There are no quantum
objects, such as electrons, photons, or quarks, existing independently in nature apart
from our interaction with it. In contrast to either the ultimate RWR-type reality or
quantum objects, quantum phenomena, observed in measuring instruments, allow
for a representational treatment, in fact by means of classical physics. Quantum
phenomena are an idealization as well, because they or our observations in the ﬁrst
place are a product of thought, and, as already Kant argued, phenomena may not

448
A. Plotnitsky
correspond how things, things-in-themselves, are in nature (Kant, 1997). This tripar-
tite view of the reality responsible for quantum phenomena is not found in Bohr’s
interpretation in any of its versions. This view, however, deﬁnes a more radical form
of anti-reductionism because it deﬁes the very possibility of speaking of the ultimate
atomic constituents of nature as existing independently.
2
Reality Without Realism
The concept of reality without realism, RWR, is grounded in more general concepts of
reality and existence, assumed here to be primitive concepts and not given analytical
deﬁnitions. These concepts are, however, in accord with most, even if not all (which
would be impossible), available concepts of reality and existence in realism and
nonrealismalike.By“reality”Irefertothatwhichisassumedtoexist,withoutmaking
any claims concerning the character of this existence, claims that deﬁne realism. The
absence of such claims allows one to place this character beyond representation or
even conception. I understand existence as a capacity to have effects on the world
with which we interact. The very assumption that something is real, including of the
RWR-type, is made on the basis of such effects. To ascertain observable effects of
physical reality entails a representation of them but not necessarily a representation
or even a conception of how they come about, which may not be possible and is
not in the RWR view. The concept of an effect is crucial here, and the appeal to
effects becomes persistent in Bohr’s writings (e.g., Bohr, 1987, v. 1, p. 92, v. 2,
pp. 40, 46–47). A given theory or interpretation might, then, assume different levels
and different types of idealizations of reality, some allowing for a representation or
conception and others not, in which case the RWR view applies, as against realism,
deﬁned by the fact that all levels of the reality considered allow for a representation
or at least conception.
Realist or ontological thinking in physics, or elsewhere, is manifested in the
corresponding theories, which are commonly representational and often reductionist
in character.2 Such theories aim to represent the reality they consider, usually by
mathematized models, suitably idealizing this reality. It is possible to aim, including
in quantum theory, for a strictly mathematical representation of this reality apart from
any physical concepts, at least as they are customarily understood, for example, in
classical physics or relativity. It is also possible to assume an independent architecture
oftherealityconsidered,whileadmittingthatitiseither(A)notpossibletoadequately
represent this architecture by means of a physical theory or (B) even to form a
speciﬁc concept of this architecture, either at a given moment in history or even
ever. Under (A), a theory that is merely predictive could be accepted for lack of a
2 Although the terms “realist” and “ontological” sometimes designate more diverging concepts, they
are commonly close and will be used, as adjectives, interchangeably here. I shall adopt “realism,” as
a noun, as a more general term and refer by an “ontology,” more speciﬁcally, to a given representation
or conception of the reality considered by a given theory.

“A Novel Feature of Atomicity in the Laws of Nature”: Quantum Theory …
449
realist alternative, but usually with the hope that a future theory will do better by
being a properly representational theory. Einstein adopted this attitude toward QM.
Even under (B), however, this architecture is usually conceived on the model of
classical physics (to which relativity philosophically, but not physically, conforms).
What, then, grounds realism most fundamentally is the assumption that the ultimate
constitution of reality possesses properties and the relationships between them, or, as
in structural realism (Ladyman, 2016), just a structure, in particular, a mathematical
structure, that may either be ideally represented by a theory or is unknown or even
unknowable, but is still conceivable, usually with a hope that it will eventually be
represented.3
Thus, classical mechanics (used in dealing with individual objects and small
systems, apart from chaotic ones), classical statistical mechanics (used in dealing,
statistically, with large classical systems), or chaos theory (used in dealing with clas-
sical systems that exhibit a highly nonlinear behavior) are realist. While classical
statistical mechanics does not represent the overall behavior of the systems consid-
ered because their great mechanical complexity prevents such a representation, it
assumes that the individual constituents of these systems are represented by classical
mechanics. The theory is a paradigmatic example of a reductionist theory, in part in
contrast to thermodynamics that need not rely on this type of reductionism and can
deal with macroscopic bodies themselves. In chaos theory, which, too, deals with
systems consisting of large numbers of atoms, one assumes a mathematical repre-
sentation of the behavior of these systems.The theory, however, can and has been
used in anti-reductionist approaches in physics and elsewhere, on realist lines.
Our phenomenal experience can only serve us partially in relativity. This is
because, while we can give the relativistic behavior a concept and represent it math-
ematically, which makes relativity a realist and classically causal and, in fact, deter-
ministic theory (the concept explained below), we have no means of visualizing
this behavior, for example, as represented by the Lorentz-Einstein velocity-addition
formula for collinear motion, s =
v+u
1+(vu/c)2 , especially in the case of photons. Never-
theless, relativity still offers a representation of the behavior of individual systems.
This behavior could, moreover, be treated classically causally (a concept explained
below), although, because all physical inﬂuences are limited by c, relativity imposes
new limits on causal relationships between events.
The representation of individual quantum objects and behavior became partial in
Bohr’s atomic theory, introduced in 1913 (Bohr, 1913). The theory only provided
representations, in terms of orbits, for the stationary states of electrons in atoms,
but not for the discrete transitions, “quantum jumps,” between stationary states. This
was an unprecedented step, because this concept was incompatible with classical
mechanics and electrodynamics alike. At the time, it was expected that Bohr’s theory
was a stop-gap measure that will no longer be necessary when a proper theory of
quantum phenomena is developed. It was, however, this concept that became central
3 One could, in principle, also see the assumption of the existence or reality of something to which
a theory can relate without representing it as a form of realism. I would argue, however, that the
present deﬁnition of realism is more in accord with most uses of the term in physics or philosophy.

450
A. Plotnitsky
for Heisenberg, who built on it by abandoning an orbital representation of stationary
states as well (Heisenberg, 1925). According to Bohr’s 1925 assessment:
In contrast to ordinary mechanics, the new quantum mechanics does not deal with a space–
time description of the motion of atomic particles. It operates with manifolds of quantities
[matrices] which replace the harmonic oscillating components of the motion and symbolize
the possibilities of transitions between stationary states …. These quantities satisfy certain
relations which take the place of the mechanical equations of motion and the quantization
rules (Bohr, 1987, v. 1, p. 48; emphasis added).
This assessment was thus based on the RWR view, at least the weak RWR view. By
contrast, the ﬁrst worked-out version of Bohr’s interpretation, in his Como lecture,
attempted to restore, ambivalently, realism to QM (Bohr, 1987, v. 1, pp. 52–91). This
interpretation was, however, quickly abandoned by Bohr, following his discussion
with Einstein in October of 1927 at the Solvay conference in Brussels. This discussion
initiated his path toward his ultimate, RWR-type, interpretation introduced in 1937
in “Complementarity and Causality” (Bohr, 1937). Bohr does not use the language
of reality without realism, but his understanding clearly amounts to the RWR view,
because one can no longer “speak of the autonomous behavior of a physical object”
(Bohr, 1937, p. 87). As explained below, Bohr’s view at this point becomes the
strong RWR view, which places this reality or quantum objects beyond conception,
but perhaps not the strongest one. For one can still ask whether our inability to
do so only (A) only applies as things stand now, or (B) reﬂects that this reality is
beyond the reach of our thought altogether. While Bohr at least assumes (A) and
while it is possible that he entertained (B), he never stated so, which leaves whether
he assumed (B) or only (A) to interpretation. Logically, once (A) is the case, then
(B) is possible. Although there is no experimental data that would favor one against
the other, these views are different philosophically in deﬁning how far our mind can
reach in investigating the ultimate constitution of nature. This is my main reason for
differentiating them, although my argument here applies to both (A) and (B).
The qualiﬁcation “as things stand now” applies, however, to (B) as well, even
though it might appear otherwise given that this view precludes any conception of
the ultimate reality not only now but also ever. It applies because a return to realism
in quantum theory is possible, either on experimental or theoretical grounds. This
return may take place either because quantum theory, as currently constituted, is
replaced by an alternative theory that requires a realist interpretation, or because the
strong (or weak) RWR view becomes obsolete even for those who hold it and is
replaced by a more realist view with quantum theory in place in its present form.
Weather one adopts (A) or (B), the renunciation of classical causality follows.
The concept of classical causality will be deﬁned here, as it was by Bohr and others,
usually under the rubric of “causality,” by the claim that the state, X, of a physical
system is determined, in accordance with a law, at all future moments of time once
it is determined at a given moment of time, state A, and A is determined in accor-
dance with the same law by any of the system’s previous states. This assumption also
implies a concept of reality, which deﬁnes this law and makes this concept of causality
ontological. This concept has a long history, beginning with the pre-Socratics, and it

“A Novel Feature of Atomicity in the Laws of Nature”: Quantum Theory …
451
has governed classical physics from its inception on. I designate it “classical causal-
ity” because there are alternative conception of causality, including applicable in
QM or QFT (e.g., Plotnitsky, 2020, pp. 1844–1846). Some, beginning with P. S.
Laplace, have used “determinism” for this concept. I prefer to deﬁne “determinism”
as an epistemological category referring to the possibility of predicting the outcomes
of classically causal processes ideally exactly. In classical mechanics, when dealing
with individual objects or small systems, both notions in effect coincide. On the other
hand, classical statistical mechanics or chaos theory are classically causal but not
deterministic in view of the complexity of the systems considered, which limit us to
probabilistic or statistical predictions concerning them. It is possible to assume that
the ultimate nature of reality is random or mixed; and, while causal conceptions of
reality have been dominant, random ones have been around since the pre-Socratics,
as in Democritus’s and then Epicurus’s and Lucretius’s atomism. Such conceptions
have a problem insofar as the dynamics leading to random events is not given an
explanation, a problem avoided by the RWR view, which in principle precludes such
as explanation.
In the case of quantum phenomena, deterministic predictions are not possible
even in considering the most elementary quantum phenomena, such as those associ-
ated with elementary particles. This is because the repetition of identically prepared
quantum experiments in general leads to different outcomes, and this difference
cannot be diminished beyond the limit deﬁned by Planck’s constant, h, by improving
the capacity of our measuring instruments. Hence, the probabilistic or statistical
character of quantum predictions must be maintained by interpretations of QM or
alternative theories of quantum phenomena that are classically causal. Such interpre-
tationsandtheoriesarealsorealistbecauseclassicalcausalityimpliesalawgoverning
it and thus a representation of the reality considered in terms of this law. By contrast,
RWR-type interpretations are not classically causal because the ultimate nature of
reality responsible for quantum phenomena is beyond representation or conception.
As stated in the Introduction, the idealization adopted by the present, strong RWR-
type, interpretation of quantum phenomena and QM or QFT is stratiﬁed into three
strata: the ultimate nature of the reality responsible for quantum phenomena, a reality
that is beyond conception and is assumed to exist independently; that of quantum
objects, which are also beyond conception but are assumed to exist only at the
time of measurement; and that of quantum phenomena, which are knowable and
representable. I shall now explain this stratiﬁcation, crucial for understanding how
radically quantum theory may depart from reductionism. It is, again, not adopted by
all RWR-type interpretations, including that of Bohr.
It is ﬁtting to start with quantum objects. The idealization of quantum objects in
all RWR-type interpretations is essentially different than those, often associated with
reductionism, found in classical mechanics, in particular that of using dimensionless
massive points to mathematically idealize the motion of material objects. Elementary
particles are commonly idealized as dimensionless, point-like entities, because, if
they had volume, charged particles would be torn apart by the electromagnetic force
within them. However, deﬁning them as quantum objects poses complexities even
in realist interpretations, for several reasons, in particular the following one. While

452
A. Plotnitsky
what is observed in a measuring instrument, as a quantum phenomenon, is always
uniquely (classically) deﬁned, what is the object under investigation and what is the
measuring instrument, beyond this observed part, are not. The difference between
these two entities is, nevertheless, irreducible, as against classical physics, where
it can be disregarded, because the interference of observation can be neglected.
According to Bohr:
This necessity of discriminating in each experimental arrangement between those parts of the
physical system considered which are to be treated as measuring instruments and those which
constitute the objects under investigation may indeed be said to form a principal distinction
between classical and quantum-mechanical description of physical phenomena. It is true
that the place within each measuring procedure where this discrimination is made is in both
cases largely a matter of convenience. While, however, in classical physics the distinction
between object and measuring agencies does not entail any difference in the character of the
description of the phenomena concerned, its fundamental importance in quantum theory …
has its root in the indispensable use of classical concepts in the interpretation of all proper
measurements, even though the classical theories do not sufﬁce in accounting for the new
types of regularities with which we are concerned in atomic physics. In accordance with
this situation there can be no question of any unambiguous interpretation of the symbols
of quantum mechanics other than that embodied in the well-known rules which allow us to
predict the results to be obtained by a given experimental arrangement described in a totally
classical way (Bohr, 1935, p. 701).
This statement may suggest that, while observable parts of measuring instruments
are described by means of classical physics, the independent behavior of quantum
objects is described or represented by means of the quantum–mechanical formalism.
This type of view has been adopted by some, for example, Dirac (1958) and von
Neumann (1932) in their inﬂuential books. It was not, however, Bohr’s view, at least
after he revised his Como argument. Bohr does say here that the observable parts
of measuring instruments are described by means of classical physics and that clas-
sical theories cannot sufﬁce to account for quantum phenomena. But he does not
say that the independent behavior of quantum objects is described by the quantum–
mechanical formalism. His statement only implies that quantum objects cannot be
treated classically. The “symbols” of quantum–mechanical formalism only have a
probabilistically or statistically predictive role. Also, although what is observed as
phenomena in quantum experiments is beyond the capacity of classical physics to
account for them, the classical description can and, in order for us to be able to
give an account of what happens in experiments, must apply to the observable parts
of measuring instruments. The instruments, however, also have a quantum stratum,
through which they interact with quantum objects. This interaction is quantum and
cannot be observed as such or, in RWR-type interpretations, represented. It is “irre-
versibly ampliﬁed” to the macroscopic level of observable effects, say, a spot left on
a silver screen (Bohr, 1987, v. 2, p. 73).
This situation is sometimes referred to as the arbitrariness of the “cut” or the
“Heisenberg-von-Neumann cut.” As Bohr noted, however, while “it is true that the
place within each measuring procedure where this discrimination [between the object
and the measuring instrument] is made is … largely a matter of convenience,” it is
true only largely. This is because “in each experimental arrangement and measuring

“A Novel Feature of Atomicity in the Laws of Nature”: Quantum Theory …
453
procedure we have only a free choice of this place within a region where the quantum–
mechanical description of the process concerned is effectively equivalent with the
classical description” (Bohr, 1935, p. 701). The ultimate (RWR-type) constitution
of the physical reality responsible for quantum phenomena is always on the other
side of the cut. Quantum objects, too, are idealized as part of the reality that is,
in each experiment, on the other, “object,” side of the cut. In the present view, if
not that of Bohr, a quantum object, as an idealization is different from that of the
ultimate, RWR-type, reality responsible for quantum phenomena. While a measuring
instrument, which is, in its observable part, a classical object, and the ultimate RWR-
type reality considered, are assumed to exist independently, a quantum object can
onlybeascribedexistencebyameasurement andits setup, includingthecut. What is a
quantum object can be different in each case, including something that, if considered
by itself, could be viewed as classical, although certain quantum objects, such as
elementary particles, are always on the other side of the cut, where the ultimate,
RWR-type, reality is.
The following question might, then, be asked. If a quantum object is only deﬁned
by a measurement, rather than as something that exists independently, could one still
speak of the same quantum object, say, the same electron, in two or more successive
measurements? According to the view here outlined, each of these two measurements
deﬁnes an electron, with the same mass and charge, in two different positions at two
different moments in time. The case can be given a strictly RWR interpretation,
insofar as all these properties (mass, charge, and position) are, physically, those of
measuring devices, assumed to be impacted by quantum objects, rather than of these
objects themselves, placed beyond representation or conception. The question is,
however: Do these two measurements register the same electron? To consider them
as the same electron is a permissible idealization in low-energy (QM) regime, an
idealization ultimately statistical in nature, because that the second measurement
will register an electron is not guaranteed, as would in principle be in classical
physics. On the other hand, as discussed below, speaking of the same electron in
successive measurements in high-energy (QFT) regimes is meaningless.
The epistemological cost of the RWR view is not easily absorbed by most and
to some, beginning, famously, with Einstein, is unacceptable. This is not surprising
because the features of quantum phenomena that are manifested in many famous
experiments and that led to RWR-views defy many assumptions concerning nature
commonly considered as basic. These assumptions, arising due to the neurological
constitution of our brain, have served us for as long as human life, and within certain
limits, are unavoidable, including in physics, although their scope, as noted, was
already challenged by relativity. QM have made this challenge much greater. The
same neurological constitution, however, may also prevent us from conceiving of
the ultimate (RWR) nature of physical reality responsible for quantum phenomena.
Thus, it is humanly natural to assume that something happens between observations.
Indeed, the sense that something happened is one of the most essential elements of
human thought. However, in the RWR view, the expression “something happened”
is inapplicable to the ultimate constitution of the reality considered. According to
Heisenberg:

454
A. Plotnitsky
There is no description of what happens to the system between the initial observation and the
next measurement. …The demand to “describe what happens” in the quantum-theoretical
process between two successive observations is a contradiction in adjecto, since the word
“describe” refers to the use of classical concepts, while these concepts cannot be applied in
the space between the observations; they can only be applied at the points of observation
(Heisenberg, 1962, pp. 57, 145).
The same would apply to the word “happen” or “system,” or any word we use,
whateverconceptitmaydesignate,includingreality,althoughwhen“reality”refersto
thatoftheRWR-type,itisawordwithoutaconceptattachedtoit.AsHeisenbergsays:
“The problems of language are really serious. We wish to speak in some way about
the structure of the atoms and not only about ‘facts’—the latter being, for instance,
the black spots on a photographic plate or the water droplets in a cloud chamber.
However, we cannot speak about the atoms in ordinary language” (Heisenberg, 1962,
pp. 178–179). Nor is it possible in terms of ordinary concepts, from which ordinary
language is indissociable, or even physical concepts.
Mathematical concepts are a possible exception. As Heisenberg said on an earlier
occasion, mathematics is “fortunately” free from the limitations of ordinary language
and concepts (Heisenberg, 1930, p. 11). At the time, Heisenberg, adopting the RWR
view, used this freedom to construct QM as a theory designed only to predict the prob-
abilitiesorstatisticsofeventsobservedinmeasuringinstruments.Inhislaterwritings,
he assumed the possibility of a mathematical representation of the ultimate consti-
tution of reality, while excluding physical concepts (at least in their customary sense
found in classical physics or relativity) as applicable to this constitution (Heisenberg,
1962, pp. 145, 167–186). Bohr, by contrast, rejected the possibility of a mathematical
representation of quantum objects and behavior, or the reality they idealize, along
with a physical one. Bohr often speaks of this reality as being beyond our phenom-
enal intuition, also involving visualization, sometimes used, including by Bohr, to
translate the German word for intuition, Anschaulichkeit (Bohr, 1987, v. 1 p. 51,
98–100, 108; v. 2, p. 59). It is clear, however, that Bohr saw the ultimate nature of
this reality as being beyond conception, including a mathematical one, in his ulti-
mate interpretation, based in the concepts of phenomena and atomicity, which I shall
discuss in Sect. 4. First, I shall consider Bohr’s concept of complementarity.
3
Complementarity
Deﬁned arguably most generally, complementarity is characterized by:
(a)
a mutual exclusivity of certain phenomena, entities, or conceptions; and yet
(b)
the possibility of considering each one of them separately at any given point;
and
(c)
the necessity of considering all of them at different moments of time for a
comprehensive account of the totality of phenomena that one must consider in
quantum physics.

“A Novel Feature of Atomicity in the Laws of Nature”: Quantum Theory …
455
The concept was not given by Bohr a single deﬁnition of this type. However, this
deﬁnition may be surmised from several of Bohr’s statements, such as: “Evidence
obtained under different experimental conditions cannot be comprehended within
a single picture, but must be regarded as complementary in the sense that only
the totality of the phenomena [some of which are mutually exclusive] exhaust the
possible information about the objects” (Bohr, 1987, v. 2, p. 40; emphasis added).
In classical mechanics, we can comprehend all the information about each object
within a single picture because the interference of measurement can be neglected:
this allows us to identify the phenomenon considered with the object under investi-
gation and to establish the quantities deﬁning this information, such as the position
and the momentum of the object, in the same experiment. In quantum physics, this
interference cannot be neglected, which leads to different experimental conditions
for each measurement on a quantum object and their complementarity, in correspon-
dence with the uncertainty relations. The situation implies two incompatible pictures
of what is observed. Hence, the possible information about a quantum object, the
information to be found in measuring instruments, could only be exhausted by the
mutually incompatible evidence obtainable under different experimental conditions.
On the other hand, once made, either measurement will provide the complete actual
information about the object, as complete as possible, at this moment in time.
It is worth noting that wave-particle complementarity, with which the concept
of complementarity is often associated, had not played a signiﬁcant role in Bohr’s
thinking. Bohr thought deeply, even before QM, about the problem of wave-particle
duality, as it was known then. However, Bohr was aware of the difﬁculties of applying
the concept of physical waves to quantum objects, or of thinking in terms of the wave-
particle duality, as the assumption that both types of nature and behavior pertain to
the same individual entities, such as each photon or each electron as such, considered
independently. The wave-particle duality was thought of as representing the same
thing in two different ways. By contrast, complementarity refers to two different,
incompatible, entities, like two different effects of an electron on a measuring instru-
ments, but not two features of the electron itself. The “both” (both types of properties)
of the wave-particle duality is the opposite of complementarity, based in the mutual
exclusivity of the two type of effects observed in measuring instruments, and thus
on “either or” (either one or the other type of effects). Bohr’s ultimate solution to
the dilemma of whether quantum objects are particles or waves was that they were
neither. Instead, either “picture” refers to one of the two mutually exclusive sets of
discrete individual effects of the interactions between quantum objects and measuring
instruments, particle-like, which may be individual or collective, or wave-like, which
are always collective, but still composed of discrete individual effects.
The concept of complementarity is best exempliﬁed by complementarities of
spacetime coordination and the application of momentum or energy conservation
laws, correlative to the uncertainty relations, as complementarities of phenomena
observed in measuring instruments and thus in accord with Bohr’s concept of

456
A. Plotnitsky
phenomena. Technically, the uncertainty relations, qp ∼= h (where q is the coor-
dinate, p is the momentum in the corresponding direction), only prohibit the simulta-
neous exact measurement of both variables, which is always possible, at least in prin-
ciple, in classical physics, and allows one to maintain classical causality there. The
physical meaning of the uncertainty relations is much deeper in Bohr’s interpretation.
First of all, they are not a manifestation of the limited accuracy of measuring instru-
ments, because they would be valid even if we had perfect measuring instruments.
As Bohr says: “we are of course not concerned with a restriction as to the accuracy
of measurement, but with a limitation of the well-deﬁned application of space–time
concepts and dynamical conservation laws, entailed by the necessary distinction
between measuring instruments and atomic objects” (Bohr, 1937, p. 86; Bohr, 1987,
v. 2, p. 73; v. 3, p. 5). The uncertainty relations make each type of measurement
complementary to the other. In addition, one not only cannot measure both variables
simultaneously but also cannot deﬁne them simultaneously, which makes proba-
bilistic or statistical considerations unavoidable in considering both the uncertainty
relations and complementarity. In RWR-type interpretations, however: “the statis-
tical character of the uncertainty relations in no way originates from any failure of
measurement to discriminate within a certain latitude between classically describ-
able states of the objects, but rather expresses an essential limitation of applicability
of classical ideas to the analysis of quantum phenomena” (Bohr, 1938, p. 100). There
is no contradiction between this statement and the fact that quantum phenomena are
described classically, because the statement only says that their ultimate nature and
emergence cannot be so described.
Bohr and others proposed using the concept of complementarity in philosophy,
biology, and psychology. Here, however, I am only concerned with complemen-
tarity in quantum physics. Bohr speaks of complementarity as “an artiﬁcial word”
that “does not belong to our daily concepts” (Bohr, 1937, p. 87). It is a physical
concept, eventually linked by Bohr to his ultimate, strong RWR-type, interpretation.
As explained, this concept prevents us from ascertaining the “whole” composed from
its “parts,” in contrast to the conventional understanding of parts complementing each
other within a whole. At any moment of time only one “part” and not the other could
be ascertained. This part is the only whole at this moment of time, and hence is not
a part. This difference has not always been adequately understood or appreciated.
Consider John S. Bell’s comments:
[Bohr] seemed to revel in contradiction, for example, between ‘wave’ and ‘particle.’ … Not
to resolves these contradictions and ambiguities, but rather to reconcile us to them, he put
forward a philosophy which he called ‘complementarity.” … There is very little I can say
about ‘complementarity.’ But I wish to say one thing. It seems that Bohr used this word
with the reverse of its usual meaning. Consider for example the elephant. From the front
she is head, trunk, and two legs. From the sides she is bottom, tail, and two legs. They
supplement one another, they are consistent with one another and they are all entailed by
the unifying concept ‘elephant.’ It is my impression that to suppose Bohr used the word
‘complementarity’ in this ordinary way would have been regarded by him as missing his
point and trivializing his thought. He seems to insist rather that we must use in our analysis
elements which contradict one another, which do not add up or derive from a whole. By
‘complementarity’ he meant, it seems to me, the reverse: contradictoriness. … Perhaps he

“A Novel Feature of Atomicity in the Laws of Nature”: Quantum Theory …
457
a subtle satisfaction in the use of a familiar word with the reserve of its familiar meaning.”
(Bell, 2004, p. 190).
Bell does not favor Bohr’s interpretation or for that matter QM, which attitude is
legitimate. On the other hand, Bell’s comments on complementarity are beside the
point. Bell is not incorrect in saying that “to suppose Bohr used the word ‘comple-
mentarity’ in this ordinary way would have been regarded by him as missing his
point and trivializing his thought.” It would have, because it does. Besides, while
“complementary” as an adjective is a familiar word, “complementarity” was never
used as a noun before Bohr. Also, Bohr’s treatment of the question of “particles and
“waves” in quantum theory is more complex than Bell makes it appear, which is why,
as noted, Bohr avoids speaking of wave-particle complementarity. Complementarity
is a new physical concept, which must be understood in the speciﬁc sense Bohr gives
it. There is no point in attempting to relate it to a meaning it may be given in our daily
life, as Bell does, by deﬁning complementary parts as adding up to a whole. This
is what Bohr wants to avoid. He needed a new concept in order to account for the
epistemological situation deﬁned by quantum phenomena (Bohr, 1937, p. 87; Bohr,
1935, p. 700). It is not, as Bell suggests, about some “subtle satisfaction in the use
of a familiar word with the reverse of its familiar meaning.” There is no evidence
that Bohr ever had such a satisfaction. On the other hand, there is plenty of evidence
for his physical reasons for deﬁning complementarity in the way he did, such as
the uncertainty relations or the double-slit and other iconic quantum experiments.
Complementarity was introduced in the spirit of resolving contradictions, and not
reveling in them, as it “seemed” to Bell. Bohr’s concept of complementary “parts”
that do not add up to a “whole” does just that. Against the Democritean atomism,
Bohr’s argument relates elementary particles, say, electrons to the “elephant” scale
of atomic phenomena observed in measuring instruments. The complementarity of
some of these phenomena does not allow them to be “parts” that could be added up
to a whole, as Bell wants to convey by his image of an elephant.
4
Measurement, Phenomena, and Atomicity: Bohr Against
Whitehead
Bohr’s ultimate interpretation of quantum phenomena and QM was ﬁrst presented
in “Complementarity and Causality” (Bohr, 1937). Bohr does not use the language
of reality without realism, but his argument clearly amounts to the RWR view:
The renunciation of the ideal of causality in atomic physics which has been forced on us is
founded logically only on our not being any longer in a position to speak of the autonomous
behavior of a physical object, due to the unavoidable interaction between the object and the
measuring instruments which in principle cannot be taken into account, if these instruments
according to their purpose shall allow the unambiguous use of the concepts necessary for
the description of experience (Bohr, 1937, p. 87).

458
A. Plotnitsky
The concept of causality that grounds this ideal of causality is that of classical
causality, explained earlier. RWR-type interpretations are not classically causal
because of the absence of realism in considering the behavior of quantum objects
or the reality thus idealized. Given, however, that it is possible to argue for inter-
pretations of QM or alternative theories of quantum phenomena that are realist and
classically causal, Bohr’s statement represents the strong RWR-type interpretation.
For, if, as Bohr says, we are no “longer in a position to speak of the autonomous
behavior of a physical object, due to the unavoidable interaction between the object
and the measuring instrument,” this behavior must also be beyond conception. If we
had such a conception, we would be able to say something about it. It is true that there
is a difference between some conception of this reality and a rigorous conception
that would enable us to provide a proper representation of it. Bohr, however, clearly
claims the impossibility of any such conception: we are no longer in a position to
speak of the autonomous behavior of quantum objects at all, at least as things stand
now. Bohr’s ultimate interpretation was grounded, along with complementarity, in
two new, correlative, concepts, “phenomenon” and “atomicity”, deﬁned in terms of
effects observed in measuring instruments impacted by quantum objects. According
to Bohr:
I advocated the application of the word phenomenon exclusively to refer to the observations
obtained under speciﬁed circumstances, including an account of the whole experimental
arrangement. In such terminology, the observational problem is free of any special intricacy
since, in actual experiments, all observations are expressed by unambiguous statements
referring, for instance, to the registration of the point at which an electron arrives at a
photographic plate. Moreover, speaking in such a way is just suited to emphasize that the
appropriate physical interpretation of the symbolic quantum-mechanical formalism amounts
onlytopredictions,ofdeterminateorstatisticalcharacter,pertainingtoindividualphenomena
appearing under conditions deﬁned by classical physical concepts [describing the observable
parts of measuring instruments] (Bohr, 1987, v. 2, p. 64).
As deﬁned by “the observations obtained under speciﬁed circumstances,”
phenomena refer to events that have already occurred, and not to future events that one
can predict. These observations are the same as in classical physics, which allows one
to identify phenomena with physical objects (here measuring instruments), because
our observation does not interfere with their behavior, in contrast to the way our
observation by means of a measuring instrument interferes with the (RWR-type)
ultimate reality responsible for a phenomenon thus observed.
Bohr’s rethinking of the concept of phenomena in quantum physics also led him to
his anti-reductionist concept of “atomicity,” capturing “the novel feature of atomicity
in the laws of nature,” disclosed by “Planck’s discovery of the quantum of action,”
h (Bohr, 1938, p. 38; Bohr, 1987, v. 2, p. 33; v. 3, p. 2). This concept transfers to
the level of phenomena all of the key features—discreteness, discontinuity, indi-
viduality, and indivisibility (atomicity proper)—previously associated with atomic
entities in nature. As is Bohr’s concept of phenomenon, the concept of “atomicity”
is deﬁned in terms of individual effects of quantum objects on the classical world.
In fact, both concepts are correlative: phenomena are atomic in their nature, while
Bohr’s new “atoms” are phenomena. “Atomicity” refers to physically complex and

“A Novel Feature of Atomicity in the Laws of Nature”: Quantum Theory …
459
sub-divisible entities, and no longer to indivisible physical entities, such as quantum
objects, in particular, elementary particles, to which one cannot ascribe atomic prop-
erties any more than any other. Each “atom” is individual, each—as every (knowable)
effect conjoined with every (unknowable and even unthinkable) process of its emer-
gence—unique and unrepeatable. Some can be clustered insofar as they refer to the
“same” quantum entities, whether individual or collective. Thus, along with indivis-
ibility, quantum atomicity as individuality is now understood as the individuality or
uniqueness of each phenomenon. By the same token, each phenomenon is discrete
in relation to any other.
These new “atoms” are technological-informational entities—bits of information
enabled by our experimental technologies and our thought processing this infor-
mation. One can see the situation in quantum-informational terms, following J. A.
Wheeler’s concept of “it from bit,” in part inspired by Bohr (Wheeler, 1990, p. 4).
The “it” in question is an RWR-type reality ultimately responsible for each quantum
phenomenon or techno-info-atom (bit), inferred from the totality of information
obtained in quantum experimental. This information qua information is classical,
but its structure, in particular, the so-called quantum correlations, such as those
observed in the Einstein–Podolsky–Rosen (EPR) type experiments, involved in the
Bell and the Kochen-Specker theorems, cannot be predicted by classical physics. One
could call this new technological-informational and thus, anti-reductionist, concept
“the Bohr atom,” adopting the term sometimes applied to Bohr’s concept of atom
in his 1913 theory. This theory already contained the seeds not only of the idea
of reality without realism, but also of this atomicity. In thinking of Bohr’s (1913)
concept of atom one usually focuses on electronic orbits (stationary states). The
key concept of theory was, however, that of discrete transitions, “quantum jumps,”
between stationary states, which has remains part of QM, while the concept of orbit
was abandoned. As Heisenberg was the ﬁrst to realize these transitions are techno-
atomic. As he said: “What I really like in this scheme is that one can really reduce
all interactions between atoms and the external world … to transition probabilities”
(Heisenberg, Letter to Kronig, 5 June 1925; cited in Mehra & Rechenberg, 2001,
v. 2, p. 242). By speaking of “interactions between atoms and the external world,”
this statement suggests that QM was only predicting the effects of these interactions,
observed in measuring instruments. This view was adopted by Bohr and came to
deﬁne his concepts of phenomenon and atomicity against the Democritean atomicity
of quantum objects. In the present view, moreover, quantum objects are deﬁned only
at the time of measurement, which leaves no room for reductionism.
One can detect afﬁnities between Bohr’s and Whitehead’s concepts of atomism,
as “drops of experience.” On the other hand, the ontological architecture of reality
in Bohr is very different from that in Whitehead, given that the concept of ontology
could, in Bohr, only apply to measuring instruments (phenomena) and not, in any
form, continuous or discontinuous, to the ultimate constitution of reality. Whitehead,
by contrast, sees this constitution as continuous. According to Henry Stapp, adapting
Whitehead’s view to quantum theory:

460
A. Plotnitsky
[D]iscreteness is the signature of quantum phenomena … The core issue for both Whitehea-
dian process and quantum process is the emergence of the discrete from the continuous. This
problem is illustrated by the decay of a radioactive isotope located at the center of a spher-
ical array of a ﬁnite set of detectors, arranged so that they cover the entire spherical surface.
The quantum state of the positron emitted from the radioactive decay will be a continuous
spherical wave, which will spread out continuously from the center and eventually reach
the spherical array of detectors. But only one of these detectors will ﬁre. The total space
of possibilities has been partitioned into a discrete set of subsets, and the prior continuum
is suddenly reduced to some particular one of the elements of the selected partition (Stapp,
2011, pp. 8, 88).
There are further complexities given the role of potentiality in Whitehead: “White-
head draws a basic distinction between the two kinds of realities upon which his
ontology is based: ‘continuous potentialities’ versus ‘atomic actualities’: ‘Continuity
concerns what is potential, whereas actuality is incurably discrete’ [Whitehead, 1978,
p. 91]” (Stapp, 2011). The question is the status of this continuous potentiality, espe-
cially if one sees it as real, if there “two kinds of realities,” actual and potential, and
the discrete actual reality emerges from the continuous potential one. I shall leave
aside Whitehead’s ontology of the world and the mind, which, it is worth noting,
involves neither probability nor complementarity. In quantum theory, the potentiality
in question is, according to Stapp, deﬁned by the formalism. If this potentiality is also
assumed to be real, this reality is, as mathematically represented by the formalism,
either physical, material, or ideal, Platonist. Bohr’s view is incompatible with either
possibility. There are no spreading waves in Bohr’s interpretation, in which quantum
waves have no physical signiﬁcance, but only a symbolic one, representing proba-
bility distributions. The only continuity within Bohr’s scheme of things is the mathe-
matical continuity of the formalism, which relates to observed discrete phenomena in
terms of probabilities and is not given the status of reality, material or mental, beyond
that of individual thinking, possibly shared, but not anything preexisting this thinking
on Platonist or Whiteheadian lines. Even if one assumes, as von Neumann (1932)
and his followers do, that the formalism represents the ultimate nature of quantum
reality undisturbed by measurement, this need not imply that this representation
corresponds to any physical (or even mental) picture, such as that of propagating
waves. Bohr, however, does not makes this assumption either. The difference is not
that between discrete and continuous ontologies, but between a discrete ontology of
quantum phenomena and the impossibility of any ontology applicable to quantum
objects.
The resulting concept of atomicity, especially if one, beyond Bohr’s view, sees
quantum objects, deﬁned strictly by experiment, rather than existing independently,
is more radical than any other nonreductionist concept proposed in quantum theory.
Consider, for example, Anthony J. Leggett’s concept of macrorealism. According
to Leggett, while QM is a correct theory dealing with nature at the microlevel, it
may not be applicable at the macrolevel, insofar are macrolevel phenomena are not
reducible to their microlevel quantum constitution, handled by QM (e.g., Leggett,
1988). Leaving aside the likelihood of Leggett’s theory as such, macrorealism tells
us little, if anything, about QM at a microlevel as concerns atomism or reductionism.
Leggett’s own position on this issue is not entirely clear, but he appears to allow for

“A Novel Feature of Atomicity in the Laws of Nature”: Quantum Theory …
461
the atomism of quantum objects at the microlevel. Bohr’s and more radically the
present interpretation preclude the Democritean atomism and, with it, reductionism
in considering the microscopic quantum objects, including elementary particles.
5
What is an Elementary Particle?4
As testiﬁed to by the persistent title, “What is an elementary particle?” used by,
among others, Heisenberg (1989, pp. 71–88) and Weinberg (1996), “an elementary
particle” has been and remains a problem to which only fragments of a possible
solution could be offered. As must be apparent from the preceding discussion “a
particle,” in the ﬁrst place, is a problem, too, a problem that underlies that of “an
elementary particle.” It is not my aim here do more than consider this problem as a
problem. In contrast, however, to most approaches to this problem, which are realist
in nature, I want to offer that based on the strong RWR view, extended to high-energy
regimes and QFT.5
Low-energy quantum regimes already permit a conception of elementary particles
as quantum objects. The same conception is also applicable in high-energy regimes,
beginning with the circumstance that elementary particles of the same type, such
as electrons or photons cannot be distinguished from each other, while these types
themselves are rigorously distinguishable. In the present interpretation, a particle,
again, only exists and is deﬁned as a quantum object by a measurement. One cannot
be certain that one encounters the same electron in an experiment designed to detect
it after it was assumed to be emitted from a source even in QM regimes, although
the probability that it would be a different electron is generally low and, as discussed
earlier, the assumption that it is the same is only a statistically permissible idealization
in the present view. In QFT regimes, speaking of the “same” electron detected in a
given experiment involving several measurements loses its meaning altogether. Two
electrons could be distinguished by a changeable property associated with them, such
as their positions in space or time, momentums, energy, or the directions of spins, but,
in the RWR view, only as properties manifested in measuring instruments and only
at the time of measurement. Such properties are subject to the uncertainty relations
and complementarity. It is possible to locate (and in the present view, establish)
by measurement two different electrons, as quantum objects, in separate regions in
space. It is not possible to distinguish them from each other on the basis of their
mass, charge, or spin. In RWR-type interpretations, such properties, too, could only
be associated with quantum objects by means of the corresponding effects observed
in measuring instruments and are not attributable to these objects themselves. It is,
however, possible to maintain both the indistinguishability of particles of the same
4 This discussion is part follows Plotnitsky (2020).
5 As a result, my engagement with literature on the subject is limited. Most sources cited here, such
as Kuhlman (2020) and Ruetsche (2011), contains extensive bibliographies. Among the standard
technical textbooks are Peskin and Schroeder (1995), Weinberg (2005), and Zee (2010).

462
A. Plotnitsky
type and the distinguishability of the types themselves in RWR-type interpretations
because both features can be consistently deﬁned by the corresponding sets of effects
manifested in measuring instruments.
This deﬁnition is, thus, in accord with the assumption, deﬁning RWR-type inter-
pretations, that the character of elementary particles and their behavior, or of the
reality thus idealized, is beyond representation or even conception, just as is the
ultimate, RWR-type, reality itself, except that, in the present view, this reality is
assumed to exist independently, while elementary particles are only assumed to exist,
as quantum objects, in measurements. An elementary particle of a given type, say,
an electron, is speciﬁed by a discrete set of possible phenomena or events (the same
for all electrons), observable in measuring instruments in the experiments associated
with particles of this type. Thus, an elementary particle can only exist as part of a
composite system, consisting of this particle and the quantum part of a measuring
instrument, which system has a registered effect upon the observable, classically-
describable, part of this instrument. The elementary character of a particle is deﬁned
by the fact that there is no experiment that allows one to associate the corresponding
effects on measuring instruments with more elementary individual quantum objects.
Once such an experiment becomes conceivable or performed the status of a quantum
object as an elementary particle could be challenged or disproven, as it happened
when hadrons and mesons were discovered to be composed of quarks and gluons.
This concept of an elementary particle, deﬁned in terms of such effects, does not
imply that “elementary particles,” even if never shown to be composite (as concerns
such effects), are fundamental elementary constituents, “building blocks” or “atoms”
of nature. This assumption is impossible in RWR-type interpretations, as is any
assumption concerning this constitution, including applying the concepts of elemen-
tary or constituents. Nor, by the same token, is it possible to apply to elementary
particles any concept of a particle, any more than any other concept, such as wave.
While most QFT conceptions of an elementary particle are transferred from QM
to high-energy quantum regimes, they are insufﬁcient in these regimes and need to be
adjusted or supplemented by additional concepts, most commonly that of quantum
ﬁeld. The present approach follows this approach by deﬁning the concept of quantum
ﬁeld in RWR terms. First, however, I shall explain why the concept of an elementary
particle operative in QM is insufﬁcient in high-energy regimes. This insufﬁciency
arises in view of the following situation, not found in QM, to which the mathematical
architecture of QFT responds. Suppose, in the case of quantum electrodynamics
(QED), the simplest form of QFT, that one arranges for an emission of an electron,
at a given high energy, from a source and then performs a measurement at a certain
distance from that source, say, by placing a photographic plate there. The probability
or, if we repeat the experiment with the same initial conditions, statistics of the
outcomes would be properly predicted by QED. But what will be the outcome? The
answer is not what our classical or even quantum–mechanical intuition would expect.
This answer was a revolutionary discovery made by Dirac through his equation
(Dirac, 1928).
Let us consider ﬁrst what happens if one deals with a classical object analogous
to an electron. A classical electron, say, a Lorentz electron, of a small ﬁnite radius,

“A Novel Feature of Atomicity in the Laws of Nature”: Quantum Theory …
463
would be torn apart by the force of its negative electricity. This led to treating the
electron mathematically as a dimensionless point, without giving it any physical
structure. One can take as an example a small ball that hits a metal plate. The place
of the collision could be predicted (ideally) exactly by classical mechanics, and we
can repeat the experiment with the same outcome on an identical or even the same
object. Regardless of where we place the plate, we always ﬁnd the same object, when
shielded from outside interferences.
If one considers an electron in the QM regime, it is, ﬁrst of all, impossible, because
of the uncertainty relations, to predict the place of collision exactly. A single emitted
electron could, in principle, be found anywhere or not found at all. Nor can an
emission of an electron be guaranteed. There is a small but nonzero probability that
such a collision will not be observed or that the observed trace is not that of the
emitted electron. Finally, as discussed above, assuming that one observes the same
electron in two successive measurements is an idealization, statistically permissible
in low-energy quantum regimes.
Once one moves to high-energy quantum phenomena, beginning with those
governed by QED, the situation is still different, even radically different. One might
ﬁnd, in the corresponding region, not only an electron (or nothing), as in QM regimes,
but also other particles: a positron, a photon, an electron–positron pair; that is,
in RWR-type interpretations, one registers the events or phenomena (observed in
measuring instruments) that we associate with such entities. QED predicts which
among such events can occur and with what probability; and just as QM, QED,
in RWR-type interpretations, does so without representing or, in the strong RWR
view, allowing one to conceive of how these events come about. The Hilbert-space
machinery becomes more complex, in the case of Dirac’s equation making the wave
function a four-component Hilbert-space vector, as opposed to a one-component
or, if one considers spin, two-component one, as in QM. These four components
represent the fact that Dirac’s equation
(βmc2 +
3

k=1
αk pkc)ψ(x, t) = iℏ∂ψ(x, t)
∂t
α2
i = β2 = I4
I4 is the identity matrix
αiβ + βαi = 0
αiα j + α jαi = 0
is an equation for both the (free) electron and the (free) positron, including their
spins, and they can transform into each other or other particles, such as photons,
transformations that, in the RWR view, are only manifested by effects observed in
measuring instruments. By the same token, one can no longer speak of the same

464
A. Plotnitsky
electron, positron, and so forth as detected in two successive measurements, as is
permissible, as a statistical idealization, in low-energy regimes.
Once one moves to still higher energies governed by QFT, the panoply of possible
outcomes becomes much greater. The Hilbert spaces and operator algebras involved
have still more complex structures, linked to the appropriate Lie groups and their
representations,associated(whentheserepresentationsareirreducible)withdifferent
elementary particles. In the case of QED, we only have electrons, positrons, and
photons, single or paired; in QFT, depending how high the energy is, one can ﬁnd any
known and possibly as yet unknown elementary particle or combination. Although
these transformations can only be handled probabilistically or statistically, they also
have a complex ordering to them. In particular, they obey various symmetry princi-
ples, especially local symmetries, central to QFT, which led to discoveries of new
particles, such as quarks and gluons inside the nucleus, and then various types of
them, eventually establishing the standard model of particle physics. QED is an
abelian gauge theory with the symmetry group U(1) and has one gauge ﬁeld, with
the photon being the gauge boson. The standard model is a non-abelian gauge theory
governed by the tensor product of three symmetry groups U(1)⊗SU(2)⊗SU(3) and
broken symmetries, and it has twelve gauge bosons: the photon, three weak bosons,
and eight gluons.
The concept of a relativistic quantum ﬁeld responds to this situation. The concept
was initially developed as a form of quantization of the electromagnetic ﬁeld, neces-
sary even in low energy quantum regimes. Not all quantum ﬁeld theories are rela-
tivistic. For now, however, by a quantum ﬁeld I shall only refer to a relativistic
quantum ﬁeld. The character and even the possibility of such a concept, especially
as a physical concept, is a subject of seemingly interminable debates. While there
is a strong general sense concerning the mathematics involved and while there is a
large consensus, although not a uniform one, that a physical concept of quantum ﬁeld
is necessary, most such concepts are realist.6 By contrast, I would like to suggest
a physical concept of quantum ﬁeld, deﬁned by the strong RWR view, which is
consistent with the mathematics of QFT and most currently available mathematical
concepts of quantum ﬁeld.
In this view, a quantum ﬁeld is not a quantum object but a particular mode of the
RWR-type reality, which, as any such mode, is assumed to exist independently and is
manifested only by its effects on measuring instruments, via quantum objects, such
as elementary particles. Thus, a quantum ﬁeld is independent of measurement, while
quantum objects are deﬁned by a measurement. These effects are more multiple than
those observed in low energy regimes. This multiplicity is deﬁned by the fact that
these effects correspond to elementary particles, to which a quantum ﬁeld gives a rise,
of various types, even in a single experiment, consisting of one or more successive
measurements, with the ﬁrst one performed on a given particle. The initial quantum
object could also be a set of elementary particles of the same or different types,
with a different such set, possibly consisting of entirely different types of particles,
appearing in each new measurement. As a mode of the RWR-type reality, a quantum
6 This assessment is conﬁrmed by Kuhlmann’s representative review (Kuhlmann, 2020).

“A Novel Feature of Atomicity in the Laws of Nature”: Quantum Theory …
465
ﬁeld is, again, assumed to exist independently and is manifested by creating trans-
forming effects associated with elementary particles created in the process, either
invariant (as concerns a given particle type), such as those associated with mass,
charge, or spin, or variable, associated with position, momentum, or energy. As
concerns this association, there is no difference from low energy regimes; the differ-
ence is in what kind of effects are observed. These effects have a kind of multiplicity
in high-energy regimes which they do not in low-energy regime. The multiplicities of
types of elementary particles thus observed or created become progressively greater
in higher-energy regimes. Quantum ﬁelds bring together the irreducibly unthinkable,
discovered by QM, and the irreducibly multiple, discovered by QFT.
As discussed earlier, in considering two successive measurements, which register
different outcomes, it is humanly natural, to assume that something “happened” or
that there was a “change” in the physical reality responsible for these events between
them. However, in any interpretation, we cannot give this happening a determined
location in space and time, and in RWR-type interpretations, there is nothing we can
say or even think about the character of this change, including as a “happening” or
“change,” apart from its effects. Nor can we assume (again, in any interpretation), as
we can, ideally, in low-energy regimes, that we observe the same quantum objects
in two successive measurements. For example, it is no longer possible to think of a
single electron in the hydrogen atom, as the same electron detected by (and in RWR-
type interpretations, deﬁned) by different measurements. Each measurement detects
a different electron. One could also speak of quantum ﬁelds in QM, but in a reduced
form that preserves the particle identities: each photon always remains the same
photon (or disappears), each electron the same electron (or disappears), and so forth.
In this understanding of the concept, speaking, as is common, of the quantum ﬁeld of
a particle, say, an electron, entails new complexities. Mathematically, the formalism
of, say, QED, as a quantum ﬁeld theory, allows one to make predictions concerning
the electron, which, mathematically, invited one to speak of the electron as a quantum
ﬁeld. Physically, in the present understanding of a quantum ﬁeld, this only means that
the RWR-type reality deﬁning the quantum ﬁeld considered in a given experiment,
has strata that enables the corresponding measurements detecting electrons. It is
not possible to separate these strata from those associated with the possibility of
detecting a positron or a photon in the same experiment, because neither of these
strata is observed in a measurement. It is possible, however, to experimentally specify
quantum ﬁelds associated with fundamental forces and the corresponding types of
particles, ﬁeld bosons, electromagnetic (photons), weak W+, W −, and Z, or strong
(gluons), or gravitation (gravitons), in the latter case, hypothetically, given that there
is no theory of gravity as a form of QFT.
The concept of a quantum ﬁeld thus deﬁned is a physical rather than mathemat-
ical concept. It can, however, be associated with several versions of a mathematical
concept, commonly also called a “quantum ﬁeld,” deﬁned in terms of a predictive
Hilbert space formalism, with a particular operator structure, enabling proper prob-
abilistic predictions of the phenomena concerned. The operators enabling one to
predict the probabilities for the “annihilation” of some particles and “creation” of
others, that is, for the corresponding measurable quantities observed in measuring

466
A. Plotnitsky
instruments, are called annihilation and creation operators or lowering and raising
operators, commonly designated as â and â†, each lowering or increasing a number
of particles in a given state by one. In RWR-type interpretations, these operators do
not represent any physical reality: they only enable one to calculate the probabilities
or statistics of the outcomes of experiments, just as the wave functions do in QM.
But those provided by QFT also relate to the appearance of quantities associated
with other types of particles even in experiments initially registering a particle of a
given type. In QFT regimes it is meaningless to speak of a single electron even in the
hydrogen atom. QFT correctly predicts these effects, probabilistically or statistically,
fully in accord with what is observed. QED is the best conﬁrmed physical theory in
existence.
6
Conclusion
The argument offered in this article does not imply that it is impossible to have
a realist view, of either reductionist or holistic type, at all levels of the physical
reality considered in quantum physics, but only that it may not be possible. On the
other hand, the RWR view, which precludes realism and especially reductionism, is
consistent with quantum phenomena and QM or QFT, at least as things stand now.
Equally importantly, the RWR view, even the strong one, does not preclude thinking
and knowledge from advancing. The advancement of quantum physics has always
allowed for this view. As Bohr noted:
[This type of] argumentation does of course not imply that, in atomic physics, we have no
more to learn as regards experimental evidence and the mathematical tools appropriate to its
comprehension. In fact, it seems likely that the introduction of still further abstractions into
the formalism will be required to account for the novel features revealed by the exploration
of atomic processes of very high energy. (Bohr, 1987, v. 3, p. 6)
The history of high-energy physics and QFT has amply conﬁrmed this assessment,
made in 1958, without, thus far, contradicting the RWR view. What changes, if one
adopts this view, is the character of thinking and knowledge. They now include the
assumption that there is something that is beyond thought that is, at the same time,
responsible for what we can think and know.
References
Bell, J. S. (2004). Speakable and unspeakable in quantum mechanics. Cambridge University Press.
Bohr, N. (1913). On the constitution of atoms and molecules (Part 1). Philosophical Magazine,
26(151), 1–25.
Bohr, N. (1935). Can quantum-mechanical description of physical reality be considered complete?
Physical Review, 48, 696–702.

“A Novel Feature of Atomicity in the Laws of Nature”: Quantum Theory …
467
Bohr, N. (1937). Causality and complementarity. In J. Faye, & H. J. Folse, (Eds.) The philosophical
writings of Niels Bohr, volume 4: Causality and complementarity, supplementary papers (pp. 83–
91). Ox Bow Press, 1994.
Bohr, N. (1938) The causality problem in atomic physics. In J. Faye, & H. J. Folse, (Eds.) The
philosophical writings of Niels Bohr, volume 4: Causality and complementarity, supplementary
papers (pp. 94–121). Ox Bow Press, Woodbridge, CT, 1987.
Bohr, N. (1987). The philosophical writings of Niels Bohr (Vol. 3). Ox Bow Press.
Dirac, P. A. M. (1928). The quantum theory of the electron. Proceedings of the Royal Society of
London A, 177, 610–624.
Dirac, P. A. M. (1958). The principles of quantum mechanics (4th ed.). Clarendon, rpt. 1995.
Heisenberg, W. (1962). Physics and philosophy: The revolution in modern science. Harper & Row.
Heisenberg, W. (1989). Encounters with Einstein, and other essays on people, places, and particles.
Princeton University Press.
Heisenberg, W. (1930). The physical principles of the quantum theory (K. Eckhart, F. C. Hoyt,
Trans.). Dover, rpt. 1949.
Kant, I. (1997). Critique of pure reason (P. Guyer, A. W. Wood, Trans.). Cambridge University
Press.
Kuhlmann, M.: Quantum ﬁeld theory. In: E. N. Zalta (Ed.), Stanford encyclopedia of philosophy.
https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/quantum-ﬁeld-theory/
Ladyman, J. (2016). Structural realism. In: E. N. Zalta (Ed.) The Stanford encyclopedia of
philosophy. https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2016/entries/structural-realism/
Leggett, A. J. (1988). Experimental approaches to the quantum measurement paradox. Foundations
of Physics, 18, 939–952. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01855943
Mehra, J., & Rechenberg, H. (2001). The historical development of quantum theory (Vol. 6).
Springer.
Peskin, M. E., & Schroeder, D. V. (1995). An introduction to quantum ﬁeld theory. CRS Press.
Plotnitsky, A. (2012). Niels Bohr and complementarity: An introduction. Springer.
Plotnitsky, A. (2016). The principles of quantum theory, from Planck’s Quanta to the Higgs Boson:
The nature of quantum reality and the spirit of Copenhagen. Springer/Nature.
Plotnitsky, A. (2021). Reality without Realism: Matter, Thought, and Technology in Quantum
Physics. Springer/Nature.
Plotnitsky, A., & Khrennikov, A. (2015). Reality without realism: On the ontological and
epistemological architecture of quantum mechanics. Foundations of Physics, 25(10), 1269–1300.
Ruetsche, L. (2011). Interpreting quantum theories. Oxford University Press.
Stapp, H. (2011). Mindful universe: Quantum mechanics and participating observer. Springer.
Von Neumann, J. (1932). Mathematical foundations of quantum mechanics (trans. R. T. Beyer).
Princeton University Press, rpt. 1983.
Weinberg, S. (1996). What is an elementary particle? http://www.slac.stanford.edu/pubs/beamline/
27/1/27-1-weinberg.pdf
Weinberg, S. (2005). The quantum theory of ﬁelds, volume 1: Foundations. Cambridge University
Press.
Wheeler, J. A. (1990). Information, physics, quantum: the search for links. In: W. H. Zurek, (Ed.),
Complexity, entropy, and the physics of information. Addison-Wesley.
Whitehead, A. N. (1978). Process and reality: An essay in cosmology. Free Press.
Zee, A. (2010). Quantum ﬁeld theory in a nutshell. Princeton University Press.

Geometric and Exotic Contextuality
in Quantum Reality
Michel Planat
1
Introduction
What is quantum reality? Quoting Niels Bohr: We are suspended in language in such
a way that we cannot say what is up and what is down. The world “reality” is also
a word, a word which we must learn to use correctly (Bohr, 1997). Today, the words
‘quantum holism’ are often used to qualify the inseparability of distant quantum
objects known as quantum entanglement or quantum non-locality (Esfeld, 1999;
Ferrero et al., 2004; Miller, 2014). The concept of ‘quantum contextuality’ seems
to be more appropriate because it is used to describe our objective experience of
quantum measurements. In a contextual world, the measured value of an observable
depends on which other mutually compatible measurements might be performed
and cannot simply be thought as revealing a pre-existing value. It is not only that the
whole supersedes the parts but that the observer interprets the quantum world with
his available sensors and words. Quantum contextuality is able to feature counter-
intuitive aspects of the quantum language and is now considered as more general
than quantum entanglement and quantum non-locality (at least when one refers to
Bell’s theorem).
In this line of thought, the Bell-Kochen-Specker theorem (BKS) is able to rule
out non-contextual hidden variable theories by resorting to mathematical statements
about coloring of rays located on maximal orthonormal bases in a d-dimensional
Hilbert space (with d at least 3) (Peres, 1993; Quantum contextuality, 2021). A
very transparent ‘proof’ of the BKS theorem makes use of 18 rays and 9 maximal
orthonormal bases of two qubits (i.e. in the 4-dimensional Hilbert space) (Cabello
et al., 1996). This topic will be described in some details in Sect.2.
In the past few years, the author developed a group theoretical approach of quan-
tum contextuality that he called ‘geometric contextuality’. The idea is to take seri-
M. Planat (B)
Université de Bourgogne/Franche-Comté, Institut FEMTO-ST CNRS UMR 6174, 15 B Avenue
des Montboucons, 25044 Besançon, France
e-mail: michel.planat@femto-st.fr
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
S. Wuppuluri and I. Stewart (eds.), From Electrons to Elephants and Elections,
The Frontiers Collection, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-92192-7_26
469

470
M. Planat
ously Bohr’s suggestion that quantum theory is a language. Most of the time, words
in this language only need two letters and the theory resorts to the so-called ‘dessins
d’enfants’ of Grothendieck (Planat, 2015, 2016; Planat and Zainuddin, 2017). This
topic is developed in Sect.3 by restricting to the case of two qubits in order to keep
the technicalities simple enough.
Then, in Sect 4, the topic ‘exotic contextuality’ offers an opportunity to reintro-
duce a four-dimensional space-time in our interpretation of the quantum world. Our
objects are four-manifolds. Quantum measurements may be seen as taking place in
‘parallel’ worlds/contexts that mathematically are homeomorphic but non diffeomor-
phic to each other (Planat, 2020). This idea looks like the many worlds interpretation
of quantum mechanics (DeWitt, 1970) while being different in the mathematical
approach.
2
A Glance at Two-Qubit Parity Proofs of the BKS
Theorem
A parity proof of BKS theorem is a set of v rays that form l bases (l odd) such that
each ray occurs an even number of times over these bases. A proof of BKS theorem
is critical if it cannot be further simpliﬁed by deleting even a single ray or a single
basis. The smallest BKS proof in dimension 4 is a parity proof and corresponds
to arrangements of real observables arising from the two-qubit Pauli group, more
speciﬁcally as eigenstates of two-qubit operators forming a (3 × 3)-grid (also known
as a Mermin’s square) as follows
|
|
||
I X−X I−X X−
|
|
||
Z X−X Z−YY−
|
|
||
Z I−I Z−Z Z−
|
|
||
(1)
where I is the two-dimensional identity matrix, X, Y and Z are the Pauli spin
matrices, and the operator products are Kronecker products.
The simpliﬁcation of arguments in favour of a contextual view of quantum mea-
surements started with Peres’ note (1993) and Mermin’s report (1993). Observe that
in (1), the three operators in each row and each column mutually commute and their
product is the identity matrix, except for the right hand side column whose product is
minus the identity matrix. There is no way of assigning multiplicative properties to
the eigenvalues ±1 of the nine operators while still keeping the same multiplicative
properties for the operators. Paraphrasing (Peres, 1993), the result of a measurement
depends “in a way not understood, on the choice of other quantum measurements,

Geometric and Exotic Contextuality in Quantum Reality
471
that may possibly be performed”. Mermin’s ‘proof’ of the BKS theorem stated in
terms of two-qubit observables can now be reformulated in terms of rays and maximal
bases.
We shall employ a signature of the proofs in terms of the distance Dab between
two orthonormal bases a and b deﬁned as (Planat, 2012)
D2
ab = 1 −
1
d −1
d

i, j

ai|b j
2 −1
d
2
.
(2)
The distance (2) vanishes when the bases are the same and is maximal (equal to
unity) when the two bases a and b are mutually unbiased,

ai|b j
2 = 1/d, and only
then. We shall see that the bases of a BKS proof employ a selected set of distances
which happens to be a universal feature of the proof.
Using the list of the unnormalized eigenvectors (numbered consecutively)
1 : [1000], 2 : [0100], 3 : [0010], 4 : [0001], 5 : [1111], 6 : [11¯1¯1]
7 : [1¯11¯1], 8 : [1¯1¯11], 9 : [1¯1¯1¯1], 10 : [1¯111], 11 : [11¯11], 12 : [111¯1]
13 : [1100], 14 : [1¯100], 15 : [0011], 16 : [001¯1], 17 : [0101], 18 : [010¯1]
19; [1010], 20 : [10¯10], 21 : [100¯1], 22 : [1001], 23 : [01¯10], 24 : [0110]
(3)
one gets 24 complete orthogonal bases are as follows
1 : {1, 2, 3, 4}, 2 : {5, 6, 7, 8}, 3 : {9, 10, 11, 12}, 4 : {13, 14, 15, 16},
5 : {17, 18, 19, 20}, 6 : {21, 22, 23, 24}, 7 : {1, 2, 15, 16}, 8 : {1, 3, 17, 18},
9 : {1, 4, 23, 24}, 10 : {2, 3, 21, 22}, 11 : {2, 4, 19, 20}, 12 : {3, 4, 13, 14},
13 : {5, 6, 14, 16}, 14 : {5, 7, 18, 20}, 15 : {5, 8, 21, 23}, 16 : {6, 7, 22, 24},
17 : {6, 8, 17, 19}, 18 : {7, 8, 13, 15}, 19 : {9, 10, 13, 16}, 20 : {9, 11, 18, 19},
21 : {9, 12, 22, 23}, 22 : {10, 11, 21, 24}, 23 : {10, 12, 17, 20}, 24 : {11, 12, 14, 15}.
(4)
Then, by normalizing rays, one obtains a ﬁnite set of distances between the 24
bases
D = {a1, a2, a3, a4, a5} = {

1/3,

7/12,

2/3,

5/6, 1}
≈{0.58, 0.76, 0.82, 0.91, 1.000}.
Table1 provides a histogram of distances for various parity proofs v −l.
The table reveals that there exist four main types of parity proofs arising from the
24 rays, that are of the type 18 −9, 20 −11, 22 −13 and 24 −15. Types 20 −11

472
M. Planat
Table 1 The histogram of distances for various parity proofs v −l obtained from Mermin’s square
Proof v −l
# Proofs
a1
a2
a3
a4
a5
24-15
16
18
18
9
54
6
22-13A
96
12
18
3
42
3
22-13B
144
12
18
4
42
2
20-11A
96
6
18
0
30
1
20-11B
144
6
18
1
30
0
18-9
16
0
18
0
18
0
and 22 −13 subdivide into two non-isomorphic ones A and B as shown in Table1
(Planat, 2012; Pavi˘ci´c et al., 2005; Waegell and Aravind, 2011).
The 16 proofs of the 18 −9 type can be displayed as the 4 × 4 square (5) in which
two adjacent proofs share three bases. Observe that each 2 × 2 square of adjacent
proofs has the same shared base, which is taken as an index (e.g. the upper left-hand-
side 2 × 2 square has index 7 and the lower right-hand-side square has index 10).
All four indices in each row and in each column correspond to four disjoint bases
that together partition the 24 rays.
⎛
⎝
7
8 10
13 14 16
22 23 24
⎞
⎠−
⎛
⎝
7
9 11
14 15 18
19 20 22
⎞
⎠−
⎛
⎝
8
9 12
16 17 18
20 21 24
⎞
⎠−
⎛
⎝
10 11 12
13 15 17
19 21 23
⎞
⎠−
|7
| 20
|12
|23
⎛
⎝
7 9 11
16 17 18
19 21 23
⎞
⎠−
⎛
⎝
7
8 10
13 15 17
20 21 24
⎞
⎠−
⎛
⎝
10 11 12
13 14 16
19 20 22
⎞
⎠−
⎛
⎝
8
9 12
14 15 18
22 23 24
⎞
⎠−
|17
|10
|14
|9
⎛
⎝
8
9 12
13 15 17
19 20 22
⎞
⎠−
⎛
⎝
10 11 12
16 17 18
22 23 24
⎞
⎠−
⎛
⎝
7
8 10
14 15 18
19 21 23
⎞
⎠−
⎛
⎝
7
9 11
13 14 16
20 21 24
⎞
⎠−
|12
|23
|7
|20
⎛
⎝
10 11 12
14 15 18
20 21 24
⎞
⎠−
⎛
⎝
8
9 12
13 14 16
19 21 23
⎞
⎠−
⎛
⎝
7
9 11
13 15 17
22 23 24
⎞
⎠−
⎛
⎝
7
8 10
16 17 18
19 20 22
⎞
⎠−
|14
|9
|17
|10
(5)
Diagrams for the proofs How can we account for the distance signature of a given
proof? A simple diagram does the job.
The diagram for the 18 −9 proof is simply a 3 × 3 square. Below we give an
explicit construction of the ﬁrst proof that corresponds to the upper left-hand-side
corner in (5). The 9 vertices of the graph are the 9 bases of the proof, the one-point
crossing graph between the bases is the graph (6), with aut = G72 = Z2
3 ⋊D4. There

Geometric and Exotic Contextuality in Quantum Reality
473
are 9 (distinct) edges that encode the 18 rays, a selected vertex/base of the graph is
encoded by the union of the four edges/rays that are adjacent to it.
 1 2
15 16

−1−
 1
3
17 18

−3−
 2
3
21 22

−2
|16
| 18
|22
 5
6
14 16

−5−
 5
7
18 20

−7−
 6
7
22 24

−6
|14
|20
|24
 11 12
14 15

−12−
10 12
17 20

−10−
10 11
21 24

−11
|15
|17
|21
(6)
As for the distances between the bases, two bases located in the same row (or the
same column) have distance a2 = √7/12, while two bases not in the same row (or
column) have distance a4 = √5/6 > a2, as readily discernible from Table2 and the
histogram in Table1. Indeed, any proof of the 18 −9 type has the same diagram as
(6).
Similar diagrams can be drawn to reﬂect the histogram of distances in proofs of
a larger size. Below we restrict to the case of a 20 −11A proof (where only the
distance between two bases is made explicit, but not the common rays of the bases)

10 12
17 20

−a2−

11 12
14 15

−a2−

10 11
21 24

...a4 = √5/6...
|a2 = √7/12
| a2
|a2
...

1
3
17 18

−a2−

1
2
15 16

−a2−

1
4
23 24

..a1 =
1
√
3..

1 2
3 4

|a2
|a2
|a2
|a5 = 1

5
7
18 20

−a2−

5
6
14 16

−a2−

5
8
21 23

..a1 =
1
√
3..

5 6
7 8

|a2
|a2
|a2
...
(7)
The proof consists of 11 bases, 9 of them have the same mutual diagram as in
(6) and their mutual distance is a2 = √7/12 (as shown) or a4 = √5/6 (not shown),
depending on whether they are located in the same row (or the same column) of the
3 × 3 square, or not. The extra two bases of the right-hand-side column are mutually
unbiased (with distance a5 = 1), their distance to any base of the same row is 1/
√
3
and their distance to any base of the ﬁrst row is a4 (as shown).
3
Geometric Contextuality
Interpreting quantum theory is a long standing effort and not a single approach can
exhaust all facets of this fascinating subject. Quantum information owes much to the
concept of a (generalized) Pauli group for understanding quantum observables, their
commutation, entanglement, contextuality and many other aspects, e.g. quantum

474
M. Planat
computing. Quite recently, it has been shown that quantum commutation relies on
some ﬁnite geometries such as generalized polygons and polar spaces (Planat, 2011).
Finite geometries connect to the classiﬁcation of simple groups as understood by
prominent researchers as Jacques Tits, Cohen Thas and many others (Planat and
Zainuddin, 2017; Thas et al., 2004).
In the Atlas of ﬁnite group representations (Wilson et al., 2015), one starts with
a free group G with relations, then the ﬁnite group under investigation P is the
permutation representation of the cosets of a subgroup of ﬁnite index d of G (obtained
thanks to the Todd-Coxeter algorithm). As a way of illustrating this topic, one can
refer to (Planat and Zainuddin, 2017, Table3) to observe that a certain subgroup
of index 15 of the symplectic group S′
4(2) corresponds to the 2QB (two-qubit)
commutation of the 15 observables in terms of the generalized quadrangle of order
two, denoted GQ(2, 2) (alias the doily). For 3QB, a subgroup of index 63 in the
symplectic group S6(2) does the job and the commutation relies on the symplectic
polar space W5(2) (Planat and Zainuddin, 2017, Table7). An alternative way to
approach 3QB commutation is in terms of the generalized hexagon GH(2, 2) (or its
dual) which occurs from a subgroup of index 63 in the unitary group U3(3) (Planat
and Zainuddin, 2017, Table8). Similar geometries can be deﬁned for multiple qudits
(instead of qubits).
The straightforward relationship of quantum commutation to the appropriate sym-
metries and ﬁnite groups was made possible thanks to techniques that we brieﬂy
summarize.
3.1
Finite Geometries from Cosets (Planat, 2015; Planat and
Zainuddin, 2017; Planat et al., 2015)
Let H be a subgroup of index d of a free group G with generators and relations.
A coset table over the subgroup H is built by means of a Coxeter-Todd algorithm.
Given the coset table, on builds a permutation group P that is the image of G given
by its action on the cosets of H. In this paper, the software Magma (Bosma, 2019)
is used to perform these operations.
One needs to deﬁne the rank r of the permutation group P. First one asks that
the d-letter group P acts faithfully and transitively on the set  = {1, 2, . . . , d}. The
action of P on a pair of distinct elements of  is deﬁned as (α, β)p = (α p, β p),
p ∈P, α ̸= β. The orbits of P on the product set  ×  are called orbitals. The
number of orbits is called the rank r of P on . Such a rank of P is at least two, and
it also known that two-transitive groups may be identiﬁed to rank two permutation
groups.
One selects a pair (α, β) ∈ × , α ̸= β and one introduces the two-point stabi-
lizer subgroup P(α,β) = {p ∈P|(α, β)p = (α, β)}. There are 1 < m ≤r such non-
isomorphic (two-point stabilizer) subgroups of P. Selecting one of them with α ̸= β,
one deﬁnes a point/line incidence geometry G whose points are the elements of the

Geometric and Exotic Contextuality in Quantum Reality
475
Fig. 1 The generalized quadrangle of order two GQ(2, 2). The picture provides a representation
in terms of the ﬁfteen 2QB observables that are commuting by triples: the lines of the geometry.
Bold lines are for an embedded 3 × 3 grid (also called Mermin square) that is a basic model of
Kochen-Specker theorem (e.g. Planat and Zainuddin, 2017, Fig.1 or (Planat, 2012)). The second
representation is in terms of the cosets of the permutation group arising from the index 15 subgroup
of G ∼= A6 (the 6-letter alternating group)
set  and whose lines are deﬁned by the subsets of  that share the same two-point
stabilizer subgroup. Two lines of G are distinguished by their (isomorphic) stabiliz-
ers acting on distinct subsets of . A non-trivial geometry is obtained from P as
soon as the rank of the representation P of P is r > 2, and at the same time, the
number of non isomorphic two-point stabilizers of P is m > 2. Further, G is said to
be contextual (shows geometrical contextuality) if at least one of its lines/edges is
such that a set/pair of vertices is encoded by non-commuting cosets (Planat, 2015).
Figure1 illustrates the application of the two-point stabilizer subgroup approach
just described for the index 15 subgroup of the symplectic group is S′
4(2) = A6 whose
ﬁnite representation is
H =

a, b|a2 = b4 = (ab)5 = (ab2)5 = 1

. The ﬁnite geometry organizing the
coset representatives is the generalized quadrangle GQ(2, 2). The other represen-
tation is in terms of the two-qubit Pauli operators, as ﬁrst found in (Planat, 2011;
Saniga and Planat, 2007). It is easy to check that all lines not passing through the
coset e contains some mutually not commuting cosets so that the GQ(2, 2) geome-
try is contextual. The embedded (3 × 3)-grid shown in bold (the so-called Mermin
square) allows a 2QB proof of Kochen-Specker theorem (Planat, 2012).

476
M. Planat
3.2
The Kochen-Specker Theorem with a Mermin Square
of Two-Qubit Observables
Let us show how to recover the geometry of the Mermin square, i.e. the (3 × 3) grid
embedded in the generalized GQ(2, 2) of Fig.1. Recall that it is the basic model
of two-qubit contextuality (Planat and Zainuddin, 2017, Fig.1) (Planat, 2012). One
starts with the free group G =

a, b|b2
and one makes use of the mathematical
software Magma (Bosma, 2019). Then one derives the (unique) subgroup H of
G that is of index nine and possesses a permutation representation P isomorphic
to the ﬁnite group Z2
3 × Z2
2 reﬂecting the symmetry of the grid. The permutation
representation is as follows:
P = ⟨9|(1, 2, 4, 8, 7, 3)(5, 9, 6), (2, 5)(3, 6)(4, 7)(8, 9)⟩,
where the list [1, ..., 9] means the list of coset representatives
[e, a, a−1, a2, ab, a−1b, a−2, a3, aba].
The permutation representation P can be seen on a torus as in Fig.2i.
Fig. 2 The map (i) leading to Mermin’s square (j). The two-point stabilizer subgroups of the
permutation representation P corresponding to the dessin (one for each line) are as follows:
s1 = (2, 3)(4, 7)(5, 6), s2 = (1, 7)(2, 8)(6, 9), s3 = (1, 4)(3, 8)(5, 9), s4 = (2, 6)(3, 5)(8, 9), s5 =
(1, 9)(4, 5)(6, 7),s6 = (1, 8)(2, 7)(3, 4),where the pointsofthe square (resp.the edgesofthe dessin
d’enfant) are labeled as [1, .., 9] = [e, a, a−1, a2, ab, a−1b, a−2, a3, aba]

Geometric and Exotic Contextuality in Quantum Reality
477
Next, we apply the procedure described at the top of this subsection. There are
twotypesoftwo-pointstabilizersubgroupsisomorphictothesingleelementgroupZ1
ortothetwo-elementgroupZ2.Bothdeﬁnethegeometryofa(3 × 3)gridcomprising
six lines identiﬁed, by their non-identical, but isomorphic two-point stabilizers s1 to
s6, made explicit in the caption of Fig.2. The ﬁrst grid (not shown) is considered
non-contextual in the sense that the cosets on a line are commuting. The second
grid, shown in Fig.2j, is contextual in the sense that the right column does not have
all its triples of cosets mutually commuting. The non-commuting cosets on this line
reﬂect the contextuality that occurs when one takes two-qubit coordinates for the
points of the grid, see (Planat, 2015) for more details about the relationship between
non-commuting cosets and geometric contextuality.
4
Exotic Contextuality
We already approached the topic of quantum contextuality (QC) in two ways. In
Sect.2, we found how the 3 × 3 grid (or Mermin square) can be considered as a
building block of QC by proving the BKS theorem, either at level of two-qubit
operators that parametrize the grid or at the level of rays that correspond to eigenstates
attached to the operators of the grid. In Sect.3, a group theoretical language with two-
letter words was found to nicely mimic QC in the Mermin square and its embedding
generalized quadrangle GQ(2, 2)—the locus of of the two-qubit Pauli group. In such
an approach, geometric contextuality corresponds to QC. Now, we jump to a possible
interpretation of this language by seeing the QC-geometries as creatures of exotic
four-manifolds that one may identify to our familiar space-time (Planat, 2020).
We introduce the concept of exotic contextuality for such an interpretation. More-
over, such a type of contextuality is related to a model of quantum computing based
on magic states that we developed in a series of papers (Planat and Gedik, 2017;
Planat et al., 2018, 2019). In quantum information theory, the two-qubit conﬁgura-
tion and its properties: quantum entanglement and quantum contextuality have been
discussed at length as prototypes of peculiarities or resources in the quantum world.
Our Sect.3.2 mainly featured the quantum contextuality of two-qubit systems. Our
model of quantum computing is based on the concept of a magic state—a state that
has to be added to the eigenstates of the d-dimensional Pauli group- in order to
allow universal quantum computation. This was started by Bravyi & Kitaev in 2005
(Bravyi and Kitaev, 2005) for qubits (d = 2). A subset of magic states consists of
states associated to minimal informationally complete measurements, that we called
MIC states (Planat and Gedik, 2017). We require that magic states should be MIC
states as well. For getting the candidate MIC states, one uses the fact that a permu-
tation may be realized as a permutation matrix/gate and that mutually commuting
matrices share eigenstates. They are either of the stabilizer type (as elements of the
Pauli group) or of the magic type. One keeps magic states that are MIC states in order
to preserve a complete information during the computation and measurements.

478
M. Planat
A further step in our quantum computing model was to introduce a 3-dimensional
manifold M3 whose fundamental group G = π1(M3) would be the source of MIC
states (Planat et al., 2018, 2019). Recall that G is a free group with relations and
that a d-dimensional MIC state may be obtained from the permutation group that
organizes the cosets of an appropriate subgroup of index d of G.
It was considered by us quite remarkable that two group geometrical axioms very
often govern the MIC states of interest (Planat et al., 2019), viz (i) the normal (or
conjugate) closure {g−1hg|g ∈G and h ∈H} of the appropriate subgroup H of G
equals G itself and (ii) there is no geometry (a triple of cosets do not produce equal
pairwise stabilizer subgroups). See (Planat et al., 2019, Sect. 1.1) for our method of
building a ﬁnite geometry from coset classes. But these rules had to be modiﬁed by
allowing either the simultaneous falsiﬁcation of (i) and (ii) or by tolerating a few
exceptions. If it happens that (ii) is violated, one gets geometric contextuality, the
parallel to quantum contextuality (Planat, 2015) that one featured in Sect.3.
It is known that there exist inﬁnitely many 4-manifolds that are homeomorphic but
non diffeomorphic to each other (Akbulut, 1991a, 2016; Gompf and Stipsicz, 1999;
Scorpian, 2011). They can be seen as distinct copies of space-time not identiﬁable
to the ordinary Euclidean space-time. A cornerstone of our approach is an ‘exotic’
4-manifold called an Akbulut cork W that is contractible, compact and smooth, but
not diffeomorphic to the 4-ball (Akbulut, 1991a). In our approach, we do not need
the full toolkit of 4-manifolds since we are focusing on W and its neighboors only.
All what we need is to understand the handlebody decomposition of a 4-manifold,
the fundamental group π1(∂W) of the 3-dimensional boundary ∂W of W, and related
fundamental groups. Following the methodology of our previous work (Planat and
Gedik, 2017; Planat et al., 2018), the subgroup structure of such π1’s corresponds to
the Hilbert spaces of interest. Our view is close to the many-worlds interpretation of
quantum mechanics where all possible outcomes of quantum measurements are real-
ized in some ‘world’ and are objectively real (DeWitt, 1970). One arrives at a many-
manifolds view of quantum computing -reminiscent of the many-worlds- where the
many-manifolds are in an exotic class and can be seen as many-quantum generalized
measurements, the latter being POVM’s (positive operator valued measures).
4.1
Excerpts on the Theory of 4-manifolds and Exotic R4’s
Handlebody of a 4-manifold. Let us introduce some excerpts of the theory of 4-
manifolds needed for our paper (Akbulut, 2016; Gompf and Stipsicz, 1999; Scorpian,
2011). It concerns the decomposition of a 4-manifold into one- and two-dimensional
handles as shown in Fig.3 (Akbulut, 2016, Figs.1.1 and 1.2). Let Bn and Sn be the
n-dimensional ball and the n-dimensional sphere, respectively. An observer is placed
at the boundary ∂B4 = S3 of the 0-handle B4 and watch the attaching regions of the
1- and 2-handles. The attaching region of 1-handle is a pair of balls B3 (the yellow
balls), and the attaching region of 2-handles is a framed knot (the red knotted circle)
or a knot going over the 1-handle (shown in blue). Notice that the 2-handles are

Geometric and Exotic Contextuality in Quantum Reality
479
Fig. 3 a Handlebody of a 4-manifold with the structure of 1- and 2-handles over the 0-handle B4,
b the structure of a 1-handle as a dotted circle S1 × B3
attached after the 1-handles. For closed 4-manifolds, there is no need of visualizing
a 3-handle since it can be directly attached to the 0-handle. The 1-handle can also
be ﬁgured out as a dotted circle S1 × B3 obtained by squeezing together the two
three-dimensional balls B3 so that they become ﬂat and close together (Gompf and
Stipsicz, 1999, p. 169) as shown in Fig.3b. For the attaching region of a 2- and a 3-
handle one needs to enrich our knowledge by introducing the concept of an Akbulut
cork to be described later on. The surgering of a 2-handle to a 1-handle is illustrated
in Fig.4a (see also Gompf and Stipsicz, 1999, Fig.5.33). The 0-framed 2-handle
(left) and the ‘dotted’ 1-handle (right) are diffeomorphic at their boundary ∂. The
boundary of a 2- and a 3-handle is intimately related to the Akbulut cork shown in
Fig.4b as described at the Sect. 4.1.
Akbulut cork. A Mazur manifold is a contractible, compact, smooth 4-manifold (with
boundary) not diffeomorphic to the standard 4-ball B4 (Akbulut, 2016). Its boundary
is a homology 3-sphere. If one restricts to Mazur manifolds that have a handle
decomposition into a single 0-handle, a single 1-handle and a single 2-handle then
the manifold has to be of the form of the dotted circle S1 × B3 (as in Fig.4a) (right)
union a 2-handle.
Recall that, given p, q,r (with p ≤q ≤r), the Brieskorn 3-manifold (p, q,r)
is the intersection in the complex 3-space C3 of the 5-dimensional sphere S5 with
the surface of equation z p
1 + zq
2 + zr
3 = 0. The smallest known Mazur manifold is
the Akbulut cork W (Akbulut, 1991a,b) pictured in Fig.4b and its boundary is the
Brieskorn homology sphere (2, 5, 7).

480
M. Planat
Fig. 4 a A 0-framed 2-handle S2 × B2 (left) and a dotted 1-handle S1 × B3 (right) are diffeomor-
phic at their boundary ∂= S2 × S1 , b two equivalent pictures of the Akbulut cork W
According to Akbulut and Durusoy (2005), there exists an involution f : ∂W →
∂W that surgers the dotted 1-handle S1 × B3 to the 0-framed 2-handle S2 × B2
and back, in the interior of W. Akbulut cork is shown in Fig.4b. The Akbulut cork
has a simple deﬁnition in terms of the framings ±1 of (−3, 3, −3) pretzel knot
also called K = 946 (Akbulut and Durusoy, 2005, Fig.3). It has been shown that
∂W = (2, 5, 7) = K(1, 1) and W = K(−1, 1).
Exotic manifold R4. An exotic R4 is a differentiable manifold that is homeomorphic
but not diffeomorphic to the Euclidean space R4. An exotic R4 is called small if it
can be smoothly embedded as an open subset of the standard R4 and is called large
otherwise. Here we are concerned with an example of a small exotic R4. Let us quote
Theorem 1 of (Akbulut, 1991a).
There is a smooth contractible 4-manifold V with ∂V = ∂W, such that V is
homeomorphic but not diffeomorphic to W relative to the boundary.
Sketch of proof (Akbulut, 1991a):
Let α be a loop in ∂W as in Fig.5a. α is not slice in W (does not bound an imbedded
smooth B2 in W) but φ(α) is slice. Then φ does not extend to a self-diffeomorphism
φ : W →W.
It is time to recall that a cobordism between two oriented m-manifolds M and N is
any oriented (m + 1)-manifold W0 such that the boundary is ∂W0 = ¯M ∪N, where
M appears with the reverse orientation. The cobordism M × [0, 1] is called the trivial
cobordism. Next, a cobordism W0 between M and N is called an h-cobordism if W0 is

Geometric and Exotic Contextuality in Quantum Reality
481
Fig. 5 a The loop α is not slice on the Akbulut cork, b the non-trivial h-cobordism between small
exotic manifolds V and W, c the mediating 4-manifold ¯W
homotopically like the trivial cobordism. The h-cobordism due to S. Smale in 1960,
states that if Mm and N m are compact simply-connected oriented M-manifolds that
are h-cobordant through the simply-connected (m + 1)-manifold W m+1
0
, then M and
N are diffeomorphic (Scorpian, 2011, p. 29). But this theorem fails in dimension 4. If
M and N are cobordant 4-manifolds, then N can be obtained from M by cutting out
a compact contractible submanifold W and gluing it back in by using an involution
of ∂W. The 4-manifold W is a ‘fake’ version of the 4-ball B4 called an Akbulut cork
(Scorpian, 2011, Fig.2.23).
The h-cobordism under question in our example may be described by attaching
an algebraic cancelling pair of 2- and 3-handles to the interior of Akbulut cork W as
pictured in Fig.5b (see Akbulut, 1991a, p. 343). The 4-manifold ¯W mediating V and
W is as shown in Fig.5c [alias the 0-surgery L7a6(0, 1)(0, 1)] (see Akbulut, 1991a,
p. 355).
Following (Akbulut, 1991b), the result is relative since V itself is diffeomorphic
to W but such a diffeomorphism cannot extend to the identity map ∂V →∂W on
the boundary. In (Akbulut, 1991b), two exotic manifolds Q1 and Q2 are built that
are homeomorphic but not diffeomorphic to each other in their interior.
By the way, the exotic R4 manifolds Q1 and Q2 are related by a diffeomorphism
Q1#S2 × S2 ≈Q ≈Q2#S2 × S2 (where # is the connected sum between two man-
ifolds) and Q is called the middle level between such connected sums. This is shown
in Fig.6 for the two R4 manifolds Q1 and Q2 (Akbulut, 1991b), (Gompf, 1993,
Fig.2).

482
M. Planat
Fig.6 Exotic R4 manifolds Q1 shownin(a)and Q2 shownin(b).Theconnectedsums Q1#S2 × S2
and Q2#S2 × S2 are diffeomorphic with middle level Q shown in (c)
4.2
Finite Geometry of Small Exotic R4’s, Quantum
Computing and Quantum Contextuality
In the present paper, we choose G as the fundamental group π1(M4) of a 4-manifold
M4 that is the boundary ∂W of Akbulut cork W, or governs the Akbulut h-cobordism.
More precisely, one takes the manifold M4 as ¯W in Fig.5 and Q in Fig.6. Manifolds
Q1 and Q2 are the small exotic R4’s of Ref. (Akbulut, 1991b, Figs.1 and 2). There
are homeomorphic but not diffeomorphic to each other in their interiors. This choice
has two important consequences.
In the present paper, we choose G as the fundamental group π1(M4) of a 4-
manifold M4 that is the boundary ∂W of Akbulut cork W, or governs the Akbulut
h-cobordism. More precisely, one takes the manifold M4 as ¯W in Fig.5 and Q in
Fig.6. Manifolds Q1 and Q2 are the small exotic R4’s of Ref. (Akbulut, 1991b,
Figs.1 and 2). There are homeomorphic but not diffeomorphic to each other in their
interiors. This choice has two important consequences.
Recall the introduction of this section that that axioms (i) and (ii) are expected to
govern the subgroup structure of groups G relevant to our model of quantum comput-
ing based on magic states. For the aforementioned manifolds M4, the fundamental
group G = π1(M4) is such that (i) is always satisﬁed and that (ii) most often is true or
geometric contextuality occurs with corresponding ﬁnite geometries of great interest
such as the Fano plane PG(2, 2) (at index 7), the Mermin’s pentagram (at index 10),
the ﬁnite projective space PG(3, 2) or its subgeometry GQ(2, 2) -known to control
2-qubit commutation (Planat et al., 2019, Fig.1) (at index 15), the Grassmannian
Gr(2, 8) -containing Cayley-Dickson algebras (at index 28 ) and a few maximally
multipartite graphs.

Geometric and Exotic Contextuality in Quantum Reality
483
Second, this new frame of ‘exotic contextuality’ provides a physical interpretation
of quantum computation and measurements as follows. Let us imagine that R4 is our
familiar space-time. Thus the ‘fake’ 4-ball W -the Akbulut cork- allows the existence
of smoothly embedded open subsets of space-time -the exotic R4 manifolds such as
Q1 and Q2- that we interpret in this model as 4-manifolds associated to quantum
measurements.
Theboundary ∂W ofAkbulutcork.Asannouncedearlier∂W = K(1, 1) ≡(2, 5, 7)
is a Brieskorn sphere with fundamental group
π1((2, 5, 7)) =

a, b|aBab2aBab3, a4bAb

, where A = a−1, B = b−1.
The cardinality structure of subgroups of this fundamental group is found to be
the sequence
ηd[π1((2, 5, 7))] = [0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 2, 1, 0, 3, 0, 0, 0, 12, 145, 178, 47, 0, 0, 4, · · · ] .
All the subgroups H of the above list satisfy axiom (i).
Up to index 28, exceptions to axiom (ii) can be found at index d = 14, 16, 20
featuring the geometry of multipartite graphs K (d/2)
2
with d/2 parties, at index d = 15
and ﬁnally at index 28. Here and below the bold notation features the existence of
such exceptions.
Apart from these exceptions, the permutation group organizing the cosets is an
alternating group Ad. The coset graph is the complete graph Kd on d vertices. One
cannot ﬁnd a triple of cosets with strictly equal pairwise stabilizer subgroups of Ad
(no geometry), thus (ii) is satisﬁed.
At index 15, when (ii) is not satisﬁed, the permutation group organizing the cosets
is isomorphic to A7. The stabilized geometry is the ﬁnite projective space PG(3, 2)
(with 15 points, 15 planes and 35 lines) as illustrated in Fig.7a. The geometry is
contextual in the sense that all lines not going through the identity element do not
show mutually commuting cosets.
At index 28, when (ii) is not satisﬁed, there are two cases. In the ﬁrst case, the
group P is of order 28 8! and the geometry is the multipartite graph K (7)
4 . In the
second case, the permutation group is P = A8 and the geometry is the conﬁguration
[286, 563] on 28 points and 56 lines of size 3. In (Saniga, 2015), it was shown that
the geometry in question corresponds to the combinatorial Grassmannian of type
Gr(2, 8), alias the conﬁguration obtained from the points off the hyperbolic quadric
Q+(5, 2) in the complex projective space PG(5, 2). Interestingly, Gr(2, 8) can be
nested by gradual removal of a so-called ‘Conwell heptad’ and be identiﬁed to the
tail of the sequence of Cayley-Dickson algebras (Saniga, 2015; Saniga et al., 2015,
Table4).

484
M. Planat
Fig. 7 a A picture of the smallest ﬁnite projective space PG(3, 2). It is found at Frans Marcelis
website (Marcelis, 2020). The coset coordinates are for a Fano plane PG(2, 2) of PG(3, 2). b A
picture of the generalized quadrangle of order two GQ(2, 2) embedded in PG(3, 2). It may also
be found at Frans Marcelis website
One expects a connection of the 28-point conﬁguration to a del Pezzo surface
of degree 2 (since the 56 lines of such a del Pezzo surface map in pairs to the 28
bitangents of a quartic).
The [286, 563] conﬁguration. Below are given some hints about the conﬁguration that
is stabilized at the index 28 subgroup H of the fundamental group π1(∂W) whose
permutation group P organizing the cosets is isomorphic to A8. Recall that ∂W is the
boundary of Akbulut cork W. The 28-letter permutation group P has two generators
as follows
P = ⟨28|g1, g2⟩with g1 = (2, 4, 8, 6, 3)(5, 10, 15, 13, 9)(11, 12, 18, 25, 17)
(14, 20, 19, 24, 21)(16, 22, 26, 28, 23), g2 = (1, 2, 5, 11, 6, 7, 3)(4, 8, 12, 19, 22, 14, 9)
(10, 16, 24, 27, 21, 26, 17)(13, 20, 18, 25, 28, 23, 15).
Using the method described in Sect.3.1, one derives the conﬁguration [286, 563]
on 28 points and 56 lines. As shown in [Table4] (Saniga, 2015), the conﬁguration
is isomorphic to the combinatorial Grassmannian Gr(2, 8) and nested by a sequence
of binomial conﬁgurations isomorphic to Gr(2, i), i ≤8, associated with Cayley-
Dickson algebras. This statement is checked by listing the 56 lines on the 28 points
of the conﬁguration as follows

Geometric and Exotic Contextuality in Quantum Reality
485
Fig. 8 The Cayley-Salmon
conﬁguration built around
the Desargues conﬁguration
(itself built around the Pasch
conﬁguration) as in (Saniga
et al., 2015, Fig.12)
{1, 7, 27}, →Gr(2, 3)
{1, 15, 23}, {15, 17, 27}, {7, 17, 23}, →Gr(2, 4)
{1, 5, 26}, {5, 18, 27}, {5, 15, 24}, {23, 24, 26}, {17, 18, 24}, {7, 18, 26}, →Gr(2, 5)
{12, 14, 17}, {1, 9, 22}, {5, 8, 9}, {9, 14, 15}, {7, 12, 22}, {8, 12, 18},
{8, 14, 24}, {8, 22, 26}, {14, 22, 23}, {9, 12, 27}, →Gr(2, 6)
{3, 10, 15}, {3, 6, 24}, {3, 17, 25}, {3, 23, 28}, {1, 10, 28}, {3, 14, 19}, {7, 25, 28}, {6, 8, 19},
{19, 22, 28}, {5, 6, 10}, {12, 19, 25}, {10, 25, 27}, {9, 10, 19}, {6, 18, 25}, {6, 26, 28}, →Gr(2, 7)
{4, 11, 12}, {11, 21, 25}, {6, 20, 21}, {2, 3, 21}, {2, 4, 14}, {7, 11, 16}, {2, 16, 23}, {1, 13, 16},
{2, 11, 17}, {4, 19, 21}, {16, 20, 26}, {2, 13, 15}, {11, 13, 27}, {16, 21, 28}, {2, 20, 24},
{5, 13, 20}, {11, 18, 20}, {4, 9, 13}, {4, 8, 20}, {4, 16, 22}, {10, 13, 21} →Gr(2, 8).
More precisely, the distinguished conﬁguration [215, 353] isomorphic to Gr(2, 7)
in the list above is stabilized thanks to the subgroup of P isomorphic to A7. The
distinguished Cayley-Salmon conﬁguration [154, 203] isomorphic to Gr(2, 6) in the
list is obtained thanks to one of the two subgroups of P isomorphic to A6. The
upper stages of the list correspond to a Desargues conﬁguration [103, 103], to a
Pasch conﬁguration [62, 43] and to a single line[31, 13] and are isomorphic to the
Grassmannians Gr(2, 5), Gr(2, 4) and Gr(2, 3), respectively. The Cayley-Salmon
conﬁguration conﬁguration is shown on Fig.8, see also (Saniga et al., 2015, Fig.12).

486
M. Planat
For the embedding of Cayley-Salmon conﬁguration into [215, 353] conﬁguration,
see (Saniga et al., 2015, Fig.18).
Frank Marcelis provides a parametrization of the Cayley-Salmon conﬁguration
in terms of 3-qubit operators (Marcelis, 2020).
Not surprisingly, geometric contextuality (in the coset coordinatization not given
here) is a common feature of all lines except for the ones going through the identity
element.
As a ﬁnal note for this subsection, we found Brieskorn spheres other than
(2, 5, 7) whose fundamental group admits an index 28 subgroup isomorphic to A8
whose geometry is the conﬁguration with 28 points and 56 lines. Three-manifolds
(3, 4, 5), (3, 4, 7) and (3, 5, 7) are such Brieskorn spheres.
5
Conclusion
To conclude, it has been shown that the group theoretical language seems efﬁcient
for describing quantum reality. We introduced the concepts of geometric and exotic
contextuality for quantum theory and quantum measurements. In other papers dealing
with slightly different subjects, we found that ‘informationally complete’ magic
states may be deﬁned as irreducible characters of an appropriate ﬁnite group. These
characters are useful in the context of quark and lepton mixings (Planat et al., 2020a)
and in the context of the universal code of life—the genetic code (Planat et al., 2020b,
2021). What next? Proteins are the language of life. We have much to learn about
quantum mechanics by decoding its 20-letter language, e.g.
MGFTC PN SDCLY SRSEW SN RAL RE EGLSFSM RC PG ACCG AML
V · · · , is the beginning of the sentence of spike protein of SARS-Cov-2. Under-
standing the contextuality of life is the next step of this type of research.
References
Akbulut, S. (2016). 4-manifolds, Oxford graduate texts in mathematics (Vol. 25). Oxford University
Press.
Akbulut, S., & Durusoy, S. (2005). An involution acting nontrivially on Heegard-Floer homology.
In Geometry and topology of manifolds (Fields Inst. Commun., Amer. Math. Soc., Providence,
Rhode Island), (Vol. 47, pp. 1–9).
Akbulut, S. (1991). A fake compact contractible 4-manifold. Journal of Differential Geometry, 33,
335–356.
Akbulut, S. (1991). An exotic 4-manifold. Journal of Differential Geometry, 33, 357–361.
Bohr, N. Philosophy of Science Vol. 37 (1934), p. 157, and in The Truth of Science : Physical
Theories and Reality (1997) by Roger Gerhard Newton, p. 176.
Bosma, W., Cannon, J. J., Fieker, C., & Steel, A. (Eds.), Handbook of Magma functions, Edition
2.23 (2017), 5914pp. Accessed on January 1, 2019.
Bravyi, S., & Kitaev, A. (2005). Universal quantum computation with ideal Clifford gates and noisy
ancillas. Physical Review A,71, 022316.

Geometric and Exotic Contextuality in Quantum Reality
487
Cabello, A., Estebaranz, J. M., & Garcia-Alcaine, G. (1996). Physics Letters A, 212, 183.
DeWitt, B. S. (1970). Quantum mechanics and reality. Physics Today, 23, 30.
Esfeld, M. (1999). Quantum holism and the philosophy of mind. Journal of Consciousness Studies,
6, 23–28.
Ferrero, M., Salgado, D., & Sánchez-Gómez, J. L. (2004). Is the epistemic view of quantum mechan-
ics incomplete? Foundations of Physics, 34, 1993–2003.
Gompf, R. E. (1993). An exotic menagerie, 37, 199–223.
Gompf, R. E., & Stipsicz, A. I. (1999). 4-manifolds and Kirby calculus, Graduate Studies in Math-
ematics (Vol. 20). American Mathematical Society.
Marcelis, F. (2020). https://fgmarcelis.wordpress.com/pg32/pg32-1/
and https://fgmarcelis.
wordpress.com/mermin-cayley-salmon-desargues. Accessed on January 1, 2020.
Mermin, N. D. (1993). Hidden variables and the two theorems of John Bell Rev. Modern of Physics,
65, 803–815.
Miller, E. (2014). Quantum entanglement, Bohmian mechanics, an humean supervenience. Aus-
tralasian Journal of Philosophy, 92, 567–83.
Pavi˘ci´c, M., Merlet, J.-P., McKay, B. D., & Megill, N. D. (2005). Kochen-Specker vectors. Journal
of Physics A: Mathematical Generation,38, 1577–1592.
Peres, A. (1993). Quantum theory, concepts and methods. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Planat, M. (2011). Pauli graphs when the Hilbert space dimension contains a square: Why the
Dedekind psi function? Journal Physics A Mathematical Theoretical44, 045301.
Planat, M., & Gedik, Z. (2017). Magic informationally complete POVMs with permutations. Royal
Society Open Science,4, 170387.
Planat, M., Giorgetti, A., Holweck, F., & Saniga, M. (2015). Quantum contextual ﬁnite geometries
from dessins d’enfants. International Journal of Geometric Methods in Modern Physics,12,
1550067.
Planat, M. (2012). On small proofs of the Bell-Kochen-Specker theorem for two, three and four
qubits. The European Physical Journal Plus, 127, 86.
Planat, M. (2015). Geometry of contextuality from Grothendieck’s Coset space. Quantum Informa-
tion Processing, 14, 2563–2575.
Planat, M. (2016). Two-letter words and a fundamental homomorphism ruling geometric contextu-
ality. Symmetry, Culture and Science, 1, 1–16.
Planat, M. (2020). Quantum computation and measurements from an exotic space-time R4. Sym-
metry, 12, 736.
Planat, M., Aschheim, R., Amaral, M. M., Fang, F., & Irwin, K. (2020). Complete quantum infor-
mation in the DNA genetic code. Symmetry, 12, 1993.
Planat, M., Aschheim, R., Amaral, M. M., & Irwin, K. (2018). Universal quantum computing and
three-manifolds. Symmetry, 10, 773.
Planat, M., Aschheim, R., Amaral, M. M., & Irwin, K. (2019). Group geometrical axioms for magic
states of quantum computing. Mathematics, 7, 948.
Planat, M., Aschheim, R., Amaral, M. M., & Irwin, K. (2020). Informationally complete characters
for quark and lepton mixings. Symmetry, 12, 1000.
Planat, M., Chester, D., Aschheim, R., Amaral, M. M., Fang, F., & Irwin, K. (2021). Finite groups
for the Kummer surface: The genetic code and quantum gravity. Quantum Reports, 3, 68–79.
Planat, M., & Zainuddin, H. (2017). Zoology of Atlas-Groups: Dessins D’enfants, ﬁnite geometries
and quantum commutation. Mathematics (MDPI), 5, 6.
Quantum contextuality, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quantum_contextuality. Accessed on Jan-
uary 15, 2021.
Saniga, M. (2015). The complement of binary Klein quadric as a combinatoriam Grassmannian.
Mathematics, 3, 481–486.
Saniga, M., Holweck, F., & Pracna, P. (2015). From Cayley-Dickson algebras to combinatorial
Grassmannians. Mathematics, 3, 1192–1221.
Saniga, M., & Planat, M. (2007). Multiple qubits as symplectic polar spaces of order two. Advanced
Studies in Theoretical Physics, 1, 1.

488
M. Planat
Scorpian, A. (2011). The wild world of 4-manifolds. American Mathematical Society.
Thas, J., & van Maldeghem, H. (2004).Generalized polygons in ﬁnite projective spaces. In Distance-
Regular Graphs and Finite Geometry, in Special Issue: Conference on Association Schemes,
Codes and Designs, Proceedings of the 2004 Workshop on Distance-regular Graphs and Finite
Geometry (Com 2 MaC 2004), Busan, Korea, 19–23 July 2004.
Waegell, M., & Aravind, P. K. (2011). Parity proofs of the Kochen-Specker Theorem Basedon the
24 Rays of Peres, Foundation of Physics,41 1786–99.
Wilson, R., Walsh, P., Tripp, J., Suleiman, I., Parker, R., Norton, S., Nickerson, S., Linton, S., Bray,
J., & Abbott, R. (2015). ATLAS of ﬁnite group representations, Version 3. Available online: http://
brauer.maths.qmul.ac.uk/Atlas/v3/exc/TF42/. Accessed on June 2015.

Quantum Identity, Content, and Context:
From Classical to Non-classical Logic
J. Acacio de Barros, Federico Holik, and Décio Krause
1
Introduction
Quantum mechanics (QM) is a very successful theory. It is also a strange theory.
Though QM can calculate many experiments’ outcomes, there is no consensus about
what quantum models tell us about the microscopic world. In other words, it is unclear
what is the relationship between QM and metaphysics. In this paper, we examine
one particular aspect of the quantum world: quantum particles seem to lack identity.
Under certain circumstances, two quantum systems of the same kind (e.g., two
electrons) become utterly indistinguishable by any empirical means. However, the
lackofidentitycomesfrommorethanjusttheimpossibilityofdistinguishingbetween
two quantum particles (e.g., two electrons). It derives from the fact that nothing
changes when we permutate two identical quantum particles, contrary to what hap-
pens in the classical world. This invariance by permutation is at the core of the
Bose-Einstein and Fermi-Dirac statistics. In this way, the standard interpretation of
the theory assumes indistinguishability. Here, we argue that indistinguishability is
an essential concept in quantum theories (both non-relativistic and quantum ﬁeld
theories). Indistinguishability should be thought of as at the same level as celebrated
quantum concepts, such as superposition (in particular, entanglement), contextuality,
and nonlocality.
Some philosophers and physicists are reluctant to admit that indistinguishability,
also known as indiscernibility, plays a salient role in quantum physics’s ontology.
Perhaps, this reluctance comes from the notion that indistinguishability can be sim-
J. A. de Barros (B)
School of Humanities and Liberal Studies, San Francisco State University, 1900 Holloway Ave.,
San Francisco, CA, USA
e-mail: barros@sfsu.edu
F. Holik
Universidad Nacional de La Plata, Instituto de Física (IFLP-CCT-CONICET),
C.C. 727, 1900, La Plata, Argentina
D. Krause
Department of Philosophy, Federal University of Santa Catarina, Florianópolis, Brazil
Graduate Program in Logic and Metaphysics, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
S. Wuppuluri and I. Stewart (eds.), From Electrons to Elephants and Elections,
The Frontiers Collection, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-92192-7_27
489

490
J. A. de Barros et al.
ulated within a “classical” mathematical setting, as we shall see below. However, we
ﬁnd this argument weak for several reasons.
First, just because we can do something does not mean that this is the best
approach. Consider, for example, the geometry of curved spaces. We may describe a
curved space using Riemannian geometry, where Euclid’s postulate of parallel lines is
not valid. Alternatively, we can describe the same space by embedding it in a higher-
dimensional space and keeping Euclid’s postulates. Both approaches yield the same
results: all geometry theorems on the curved space are valid in both descriptions.
However, one requires a more complicated ontological structure with extra dimen-
sions. Should we make our ontology unnecessarily complicated to accommodate our
prejudices? We believe not.
Second, whensomeoneis interestedinatheory’s foundations, theunderlyinglogic
and mathematics become fundamental. We should not do away with an ontological
feature because we can use a mathematical trick to describe it. Instead, we argue
that the mathematical formalism used to cope with quantum systems’ description
should consider the ontological features that one aims to describe. Therefore, as
we discuss below in more detail, it is crucial to develop a mathematical framework
that accommodates indistinguishability in a natural way. In fact, we cannot cope
with a contradictory theory (as some claim is Bohr’s theory for the atom, yet this is
disputable–see the discussion in Vickers, 2013) within a “classical” framework such
as in the mathematics developed in a standard set theory such as the ZFC system,
which we presuppose here.1
Thus, we wish to pursue a metaphysics of non-individuals. In this metaphysics,
quantum entities2 (here, quantum objects, independently of their proper character-
ization) are seen as not following the standard notion of identity (to be discussed
below). Therefore, we need to change logic and mathematics, unless we accept the
physicists’ usual way of impersonating them within classical frameworks. These
entities need to be considered in most cases as absolutely indiscernible, something
forbidden in the classical settings.3
Nevertheless, the interpretational problem does not end with the indiscernibility of
quantum objects. Indistinguishability is not the only mystery of quantum theory. The
ontological status of properties of these objects is also relevant. Quantum properties
are tricky, and if we are not careful about how we deal with them, we may reach
contradictions. These contradictions arise from considering the possible results of
multiple (and incompatible) experiments over the same system. As we have stated
elsewhere (de Barros et al., 2017), we never perform the same experiment twice.
What we do is take a similar experiment, so similar as to be indistinguishable.
Since experiments are associated with properties, we should consider indiscernible
1 ZFC is the Zermelo-Fraenkel set theory with the Axiom of Choice. The reader can think of it as
formalizing the intuitive notion of a set one learned in our math classes.
2 The notion of a quantum object, or quantum system, varies from one approach to another. In
orthodox quantum mechanics, we have particles and waves. In the quantum ﬁeld theories, the basic
entities are ﬁelds, and particles arise as particular conﬁgurations of the ﬁelds. Our claims in this
paper apply to both particles and ﬁelds.
3 For a defense of the non-individuals view, see (Krause et al., 2021).

Quantum Identity, Content, and Context: From Classical to Non-classical Logic
491
properties also. These indistinguishable properties are also forbidden by classical
logic.Weneedtogooutsideofstandardmathematicsanduseadifferentmathematical
(and logical) setting as, for example, quasi-set theory, to be sketched below. Given
that we need to recreate indiscernible properties and systems, it is natural to use a
mathematical setting that incorporates indistinguishability as a primitive notion right
from the start.
This paper is organized as follows. In Sect.2, we ﬁrst discuss the role of context
and content in classical and quantum physics. These two concepts play an essential
role in the difﬁculties physicists and metaphysicists face concerning quantum prop-
erties. In Sect.3, we consider the concepts of identity and indiscernibility and how
they are connected. Identity is a difﬁcult concept, and we explore it both as it is con-
nected to classical physics and indiscernibility in logic. This discussion opens up to
our investigations outlined in Sect.4. In this section, we argue that by intimately con-
necting identity to context, we can solve some puzzling aspects of quantum physics.
Finally, in Sect.6, we outline how to change mathematics to allow for the existence of
indiscernibility as a fundamental and primitive concept. This mathematics, grounded
on quasi-set theory, captures the idea that quantum objects are indistinguishable and
lack a classical identity. As a bonus, we included in Sect.7 somewhat more detailed
mathematical explanation of the structures discussed in Sect.6. We hope the inter-
ested reader will ﬁnd this useful, but this section can be skipped by those readers
not seeking further mathematical details. We end the paper with some ﬁnal remarks,
conclusions, and perspectives.
This article is written for a layperson with a strong mathematical background.
The reader is assumed to know enough mathematics to be comfortable with logic,
set theory, and orthodox quantum mechanics. It should be remarked that a paper
dedicated to foundations and aimed at a general reader requires many caveats, since
the delicate aspects can be quickly passed unsuspected. We try to warn the reader
about those details in between the text or in the footnotes. We ask the reader’s
forgiveness in advance for the numerous footnotes.
2
Content and Context in Quantum and Classical Physics
The idea of content and context comes from linguistics, speciﬁcally semantics and
pragmatics. Nevertheless, physics has straightforwardly borrowed those concepts.
This section will discuss how content and context translated from linguistics to
physics, focusing on quantum mechanics. We organize this section in the following
way. First, we concisely review the concepts from linguistics. Then we explore how
content and context show up in classical semantics theories. Our discussion should
not be thought of as a detailed scholarly review of the linguistic literature on content
and context, as this topic is the object of intense research in philosophy of language
and linguistics for more than a century. Instead, we present a subset of linguistics
that is relevant to physics. With that in mind, we follow our linguistics discussion
by examining some physics examples. We see that contents may present context-

492
J. A. de Barros et al.
dependency in both classical and quantum physics. However, we also argue that the
context-dependency in quantum physics is different.
Let us start with the concept of content. Roughly speaking, semantic content
refers to the meaning of a sentence.4 Consider the following statement, made by
Vera’s friend, Alice:
L1. Vera had a bad date.
Sentence L1 can be seen as a proposition referencing to an object. Assuming the
correspondence theory of truth,5 its truth value requires some metric, likely subjec-
tive, of what constitutes a “bad date.” However, once such a metric exists, one could
infer L1’s truth value. The truth-value of L1, therefore, lies on its semantic content.
In other words, a sentence’s semantic content can be thought of as a function that
takes the sentence and outputs a truth-value.
Context, on the other hand, is the idea that some statements and utterances depend
on the circumstances surrounding it, such as time, place, speaker, hearer, and topic,
to name a few. For example, Alice’s claim that “Vera had a bad date” has different
meanings depending on whether their conversation revolved around the fruits of the
Phoenix dactylifera or romantic engagements. The context alters the meaning and
the functions that take the content to truth values.
However, context does not alter meaning only. Consider the case of indexicals.
The statement “Acacio is hungry now” is contingent on when it is uttered and on
the particular subjective satiety state of the person named “Acacio.” In a sense, its
meaning does not change. Its referent, Acacio, is the same (assuming we are talking
about the same person, one of the co-authors of this paper), the concept of hunger is
invariant, and the meaning of now as the present moment is maintained. However,
its truth value is variable. As we write this paragraph, it is false, as Acacio just had
lunch. However, the same statement was right about an hour ago. It will be true again
several hours from now, even though its meaning is seemingly unchanged.
To summarize, sentences have meanings given by their semantic contents. Some-
times the meanings are context-dependent, as in the case of dates. However, other
times, their truth-values vary with context, whereas their meanings seem to do not.
We shall see that physics has some correlates to those ideas.
Let us start with classical physics. A physically-relevant proposition about an
object is something empirically measurable. For example, we can have the following
statement:
4 We shall assume this without further discussion, but things are not as straightforward as it may
appear. Meaning means “meaning for someone,” and there is no meaning tout court. Yuri Manin,
in his great book (Manin, 1977, pp. 34ff) mentions the case of Lev Alexandrovich Zasetsky, who
suffered a brain injury in battle. Zasetsky could write sentences with meaning, such as “An elephant
is bigger than an ant,” and know that it is true (semantically well deﬁned). But his illness impeded
him to understand the meaning of the terms “ant” and “elephant.” He had semantics and truth, but
not meaning.
5 We also sustain that the correspondence theory of truth, for instance that treated by Tarski, is not
suitable for the empirical sciences, but this is something to be developed in another opportunity;
here we take the standard view.

Quantum Identity, Content, and Context: From Classical to Non-classical Logic
493
P1. A billiard ball’s kinetic energy is between 0.1 and 0.2 kg m2/s2.
Similarly to linguistics, P1 has a meaning: if we measure the kinetic energy of a
billiard ball, perhaps by measuring its mass and speed and inferring the energy, we
ﬁnd it to be in a certain range. Its meaning is given by an accompanying experimental
procedure that yields a truth-value to the sentence. As importantly, this truth-value
also corresponds to the idea that the billiard ball, if P1 is true, has a speciﬁc property:
its kinetic energy.
As in linguistics, P1 refers to a subject (the billiard ball) and a truth-value asso-
ciated with some meaning-constructing procedure (the experiment). Accordingly,
we can think of any physics experiment as observing a physical system’s property.
This property itself has an associated proposition whose truth-value is assessed by
an experiment. So, in a certain sense, properties of physical systems, such as tem-
perature, momentum, energy, present an analogy with contents.
We may take the meaning of a statement as which experiment can yield a truth-
value to it. Consequently, expressions such as P1 attach a property to a physical
object. Of course, the property is the statement itself, and the experiment is a way to
determine its truth-value. To summarize, the properties of a physical system are the
content of the propositions.
What about context? Are classical properties context-dependent? Let us examine
an example from 18th-century physics. A group of Italian researchers in the1700s,
known as the Experimenters, did not differentiate between heat and temperature but
combined both concepts into one (Wiser and Carey, 1983). This combined concept
of heat and temperature led to some puzzling results. For instance, the Experimenters
wondered about examples such as the following. Imagine we heat a 2kg piece of iron
and immerse it in a container with room temperature water, subsequently measuring
the water’s temperature. Now, imagine that instead of iron, we use 2kg of a 3:1
mixture of nitric acid (1.5kg) and tin (0.5kg), immersing it in water, as we did with
the piece of iron. It was surprising to the Experimenters that even when the mixture
of tin and acid was not as hot as the iron, the latter would not raise the water’s
temperature as much. If both objects, iron and mixture, had the same amount of
“hotness,” why would they increase the water by different levels of “hotness?”
The answer to the above puzzle is straightforward in contemporary physics, as
we distinguish heat and temperature. Because of this distinction, we can measure
how much heat a substance holds as their temperature increases: what physicists
call speciﬁc heat. With this concept, we can measure that iron has a speciﬁc heat
of 0.44J/kg K. In contrast, the speciﬁc heat of a 3:1 mixture of nitric acid and tin
is 1.34J/kg K. This means that for every one-degree increase in temperature, the
amount of heat held by the 2-kg block of iron increases by 0.88J and by 2.64J for
the 2-kg tin-nitric acid mixture. In other words, at the same temperature, the mixture
holds three times the amount of heat as the iron. Because the Experimenters had a
single concept of heat and temperature, they could not even investigate the concept
of speciﬁc heat, nor could they understand the puzzle.
Let us examine the example above from a slightly different perspective. Imagine
we are observing a student who does not distinguish temperature from heat (as the

494
J. A. de Barros et al.
Experimenters) and thinks of both as the smorgasbord concept “hotness.” Consider
the following propositions observed to be empirically true for a speciﬁc experimental
setup involving three objects: X, Y, and W (as for instance X is iron, Y is the mixture
of nitric acid and tin, and W is water as in the example above).
A: If X has more heat than Y, then W will have a high temperature.
B: If X has a higher temperature than Y, then W will not have a high temperature.
Both propositions A and B can be true if we carefully chose X and Y’s masses,
heat capacities, and how we deﬁne statements such as “low temperature,” “high
temperature,” and so on. However, let us rephrase A and B in terms of the student’s
hotness concept. We now have two new propositions, A′ and B′:
A′: If X has more hotness than Y, then W will have high hotness.
B′: If X has more hotness than Y, then W will not have high hotness.
A′ and B′ cannot be both true, as they are contradictory. The contradiction comes
here from identifying heat and temperature as a single concept: hotness.
There is an obvious, albeit silly, solution to this contradiction. The student might
say, ad hoc, that “hotness” in the context of an experiment observing A′ is different
from experiment B′, so they are not the same statement. To save their hotness concept,
the student makes things unnecessarily more complicated than they need to be. As
more experiments pile up, the more contexts and the more complicated their theory
becomes. Furthermore, such a move would lead to a theory incapable of making
good predictions in different situations.
Of course, this is not what scientists usually do. Scientists try to ﬁnd appropriate
ways to describe a physical system that does not lead to contradictions or context
dependency. In the hotness case, they realized that differentiating between heat and
temperature was consistent and allowed for predictions and explanations of ther-
mal phenomena. When faced with contradictions, scientists realized that the best
approach is to face them and ﬁgure out ways to rethink our theories or experiments
without resorting to context-dependency.
The above example is interesting for historical reasons, but it also illustrates a
type of explicit contextuality. In the physics literature, this explicit contextuality
is called direct inﬂuences (Dzhafarov & Kujala, 2016) or signaling (Popescu &
Rohrlich, 1994). When the student “explained” the differences between A′ and B′
as context-dependent, he thought of explicit contextuality. Explicit contextuality
manifests when there is a direct contradiction between two statements or results,
such as the contradiction between A′ and B′. When this happens, scientists recognize
a problem and try to solve it, as with the development of the concepts of heat and
temperature.
Let us now move from classical to quantum physics. Quantum physics, as far as
we know, forbids any type of properties that exhibit direct inﬂuences, i.e., signaling.
However, it allow another type of context-dependency (or contextuality): implicit
contextuality. In the technical literature, this is called simply “contextuality.” We
call it implicit contextuality to emphasize its contrast with contextuality due to direct

Quantum Identity, Content, and Context: From Classical to Non-classical Logic
495
inﬂuences. From now on, when we talk about contextuality, we will refer solely to
implicit contextuality.
To understand contextuality in quantum physics, let us consider another example
(Specker, 1975). Imagine a Simon-like-game device with three buttons (instead of
the usual 4). Each button on this device, when pushed, randomly emits red or green
light. Turns consists of multiple trials, where after observing their behavior, the player
can try to predict how each button will lit. For each trial of this game, the player can
push at most two buttons at the same time, for as many times as they want, and in
any combination of the three buttons they wish. If all three buttons are pushed at the
same time, no light is emitted. To win the turn, the player needs to correctly guess
what color the unpressed button would light in their last trial.
Let us consider a simple non-contextual example for this game. During her turn,
Alice notices the following.
• For trials when she only presses one key, they seem to yield either color randomly.
In other words, if Alice presses X, 50% of the time he observes green and 50%
red.
• For trials when Alice presses X and Y, she also gets 50% for each color for X or
Y, and the two colors are the same;
• For trials when Alice presses X and Z, she also gets 50% for each color for X and
Z trials colors are opposite;
• For trials when Alice presses Y and Z, she also gets 50% for each color for Y and
Z trials colors are also opposite.
So, after realizing that, if Alice presses X and Y and obtain “red” for both, she could
logically infer that Z would be “green.” This is because Z has the opposite color of
both X and Y. Guessing “green” would win Alice the turn.
Now, imagine that in another turn, Bob starts prodding different combinations of
pairs of X, Y, and Z, and observes the following.
• For trials when Bob only presses one key, they seem to yield either color randomly.
In other words, if Bob presses X, 50% of the time he observes green and 50% red.
• For trials when Bob presses X and Y, he also gets 50% for each color for X or Y,
but the two colors are the opposite;
• For trials when Bob presses X and Z, he also gets 50% for each color for X and
Z trials colors are opposite;
• For trials when Bob presses Y and Z, he also gets 50% for each color for Y and Z
trials colors are also opposite.
In other words, when two buttons are pushed simultaneously, they randomly emit red
or green light, but in opposite colors. This example exhibits implicit contextuality.
To see this contextuality, imagine we start with X emitting green and Y red. Bob can
reason that if he pushed X and Z instead, then Z would be red. However, he could
also argue that if he pushed Y and Z, since Y was red, Z would be green. Here we
reach a logical contradiction: Z would be both red and green, and impossibility in the
game. To avoid such contradiction, we need to either assume that Z has no possible
color, or that its color changes with the “context” of being seen with X or with Y.

496
J. A. de Barros et al.
To convince themselves that Z changes with which other buttons it is pushed, we
urge the readers to think about possible mechanisms that could yield the outcomes
we described. The reader will quickly see that any mechanism that generates the
outcomes for X and Y needs to be physically different from one generating X and
Z (for an example using a ﬁreﬂy in a box, see de Barros et al., 2016).
The above example of contextuality is contrived. But contextuality shows up
in quantum mechanics. One such example comes from the Greenberger-Horne-
Zeilinger state (Greenberger et al., 1989), also known as GHZ. Without going into
the details of where the following relations are derived, the GHZ state predicts the
existence of six observable properties, X1, X2, X3, Y1, Y2, and Y3, satisfying the
following properties. First, the properties Xi and Yi take values +1 or −1. Second,
whenever we observe each of those properties separately, they look completely ran-
dom, i.e., their average value is zero. The same is true for when we observe them in
pairs: they look completely uncorrelated. Third, we can observe them in triples, and
when we do, we see the following relationship between the triplets.
Y1Y2Y3 = 1,
(1)
Y1X2X3 = X1Y2X3 = X1X2Y3 = −1.
(2)
The above correlations are experimentally observed (de Barros & Suppes, 2000;
Bouwmeester et al., 1999). Finally, we cannot observe all six properties at the same
time. In fact, we can only observe at most three of them simultaneously. For example,
quantum mechanics forbids us to see Y1, X1,X2, and X3 at the same time. Contextu-
ality manifests in a similar way as the previous three-variable example.
To see how contextuality manifests itself, let us assume that the six properties are
not contextual. Then, we can use (1) and (2) and write the following.
(Y1X2X3)(X1Y2X3)(X1X2Y3) = (−1)(−1)(−1) = −1.
(3)
But we can regroup the above product, and get
Y1Y2Y3(X2X3)(X1X3)(X1X2) = Y1Y2Y3(X2
2)(X2
1)(X2
3).
(4)
However, because Xi is ±1 valued, their square is 1, i.e., X2
i = 1. Therefore, it
follows that
(Y1X2X3)(X1Y2X3)(X1X2Y3) = Y1Y2Y3.
(5)
But this is a mathematical contradiction! The ﬁrst term in the above equation is −1
whereas the second term is +1, and (5) is telling us that 1 = −1.
Where is the contradiction coming from? It does not come from a mathematical
mistake, but from an assumption of non-contextuality. When we wrote that X1
1 = 1,
we implicitly assumed that X1 observed together with Y2 and X3 is the same as when
observed together with X2 and Y3. This turns out to be false. If we, instead, call each

Quantum Identity, Content, and Context: From Classical to Non-classical Logic
497
Xi by a different name depending on the context, no contradiction is obtained. What
happens in quantum mechanics is similar to the simple color game we discussed
before.
The reader may now be thinking about whether we could make a move similar to
the contextual classical case. Namely, can we redeﬁne properties such that no such
kind of contradictions arise in quantum physics? The answer is yes. Unfortunately,
there are many different ways to do so, and there is no consensus among the physics
community as to which answer is even acceptable. So, let us end this section with
two possible ways around this contradiction.
One move is to assume that properties depend on the context. This is the idea
behind Bohm’s interpretation of quantum mechanics (Bohm, 1952; Holland, 1995).
In Bohm’s theory, the famous duality wave/particle is resolved by assuming both
wave and particle existence. The wave ﬁlls out the whole of space, and this wave
guides the particle. How the wave directs the particle in one direction or another
depends on its form. For example, in the two-slit experiment, the wave goes through
both slits simultaneously, and due to its interference pattern, it guides the particle
toward certain areas and away from others. The result is different if one or two slits are
open (Holland, 1995). Since the wave depends on the context dictated by the physical
experiment, Bohm’s theory tells us that particles’ reality and their properties are con-
textual. However, Bohm’s theory presents a problem: for two or more particles, their
waves are affected by their corresponding particle’s positions. This theory implies
the existence of instantaneous interactions between physical systems. Instantaneous
interactions present a difﬁculty to the causal structure in Bohm’s quantum world. As
Einstein showed, to have cause and effect, we cannot have instantaneous interactions.
This difﬁculty between Bohm’s theory and Einstein’s special relativity is the main
reason for many physicists to reject it.
Bohm’s theory gets into trouble with special relativity because it assumes that
properties exist, whether we choose to measure them or not. When we measure,
we affect the wave function and, consequently, the physical system. However, the
property exists independent of an observer. In other words, Bohm’s theory assumes
that reality exists, whether we observe it or not.
Another possible solution to the problem of contextuality, particularly to contex-
tuality at a distance (also called non-locality), is to assume quantum properties do
not have values before a measurement and that the measurement process “creates”
such values. This position was held by Bohr and is the core of the Copenhagen
interpretation of quantum mechanics (Jaeger, 2009). In this interpretation, saying
that an electron has spin ℏ/2 in the direction z is meaningless unless we perform a
measurement of spin in the direction z and ﬁnd it to be ℏ/2. However, before such a
measurement, we cannot say anything about the spin. Furthermore, when we after-
ward make a measurement of spin in an orthogonal direction, say x, because z and
x spins are incompatible (i.e., cannot be measured simultaneously), we cannot say
anything anymore about the spin in the z direction; such “property” becomes mean-
ingless. So, Bohr solves the problem of properties in quantum physics by merely
denying their “existence” prior to a measurement.

498
J. A. de Barros et al.
We shall not cover all possible solutions to deﬁning properties in quantum theory,
as they abound. We just wanted to present to the reader two possible paths on how
to deal with it and emphasize that the choices we have are not necessarily great.
In Bohm’s theory, we need to re-think the concepts of causality and space-time,
two well-established tenets of special relativity, to accommodate faster-than-light
signaling. In the Copenhagen interpretation, it becomes problematic to talk about a
reality independent of a measurement apparatus (and the observer behind it). Either
solution present metaphysical difﬁculties that have troubled physicists for more than
a century. These puzzles all boil down to the problem of having properties that depend
on the context.
To summarize, in this section, we discussed the idea of content and context. We
started with its origins from linguistics and presented an interpretation that allows us
to apply these concepts to physical phenomena. We saw that contextual dependencies
appear in classical physics, but they are resolved by resorting to reinterpretations and
reﬁnements of the theory. We then discussed another contextual dependency that
appears in quantum mechanics, such as the GHZ-state example. We then presented
some of the proposed solutions to the problems and their corresponding metaphysical
issues. In the following sections, we will show that those issues are intimately related
to the concept of identity in the quantum world.
3
Identity and Indiscernibility
Identity is an old and difﬁcult notion to be dealt with. Usually, the discussions have
focused on personal identity and identity through time. Here, we shall be concerned
with particular applications of this notion to the identity of objects and properties.
By “identity of objects,” or individuals as we prefer to call them,6 we mean identity
of those entities which are dealt with by the theories of physics.7 For a more detailed
discussion about the origins of the term “object,” see (Toraldo di Francia, 1986,
pp.13ff); here we review brieﬂy some aspects of the argumentation given in (French
& Krause, 2006, Chap.1).
We have an intuitive idea of what it means to say that two objects, or individuals,
are identical: they are the same. However, to say this is to say nothing, for we also do
not know what is to be “the same,” something reported equivalent to identity. Thus,
we go to the opposite side: we judge individuals as being different and, therefore,
not identical, hence not the same. Nevertheless, in virtue of what should individuals
6 The word “individual,” according to the Oxford Online Etymological Dictionary, means “one and
indivisible.” Hence our preference for the term. However, as it is common practice, we relax the
idea of ‘indivisible’ and keep “one,” adding that it can always be distinguished in other contexts, at
least in principle, from any other individual as being that individual. This distinguishability cannot
occur with quantum entities, even those trapped by some device.
7 The standard quantum formalism is developed within a mathematical structure called “Hilbert-
space formalism,” although there are alternatives (Styer, 2002 mentions nine different ways of
developing orthodox quantum mechanics).

Quantum Identity, Content, and Context: From Classical to Non-classical Logic
499
be different? Usually, we look for their differences; although quite similar, two peas
show differences, maybe some small scratch or a slightly different color. At least,
that is what we tend to think.
Still, in virtue of what two objects would be different? Are they so? Is it possible
to have two (or more) objects perfectly alike, with no differences at all? Put in other
words, what makes an object an individual, distinct from any other? Is there some
Principle of Individuation we can use to specify an individual’s individuality? Theo-
ries of individuation are generally divided up in two main lines: substratum theories
and theories of bundles of properties. According to the ﬁrst group, beyond the prop-
erties of an object and the relations it can share with others, there is something more,
something Locke described as “I don’t know what" (Locke, 1959, Book I, XXIII, 2).
This notion and the related ones (such as haecceities and thisness)8 were discarded
in favor of bundle theories of individuation. Bundle theories say that there is noth-
ing more to an object than the collection of its properties (encompassing relations).
Nevertheless, if in the substratum theories one could say that what distinguishes an
object from another is its substratum (or something like that), in bundle theories,
many discussions have appeared concerning the possibility of two objects having
the same collection of properties. Can they have the same collection of properties?
If not, why not? Of course, that objects in our scale, i.e., “macroscopic objects,”
can partake all their properties is something that cannot be logically proven. This
assumption must be accepted as a metaphysical hypothesis, and there are no known
counterexamples to it. Furthermore, this hypothesis was what Western philosophy
has preferred, from the Stoics to Leibniz’s metaphysics.
Let us remember Leibniz’s metaphysics’ intuitive idea: no two individuals share
all their properties; if they have the same attributes, they are not different, but the
same individual. This metaphysical principle was encapsulated in standard logic
with the deﬁnition of identity given by Leibniz Law. This law says what we have
expected: entities are identical if and only if they share all their properties, hence all
their relations, that is, if and only if they are indistinguishable.
What about the identity of properties? In standard logic, we usually say that two
properties, P and Q, are “identical” if they are satisﬁed by the same “things.” For
instance, for Aristotle, the properties “to be a human” and “to be a rational animal” are
“identical” in this sense. As an example from standard mathematics, consider the sets
{x ∈R|x2 −5x + 6 = 0}, {x ∈N|1 < x < 4}, and {x ∈R|x = 2 ∨x = 3}. These
three sets are identical: they have the same extensions but different intensions.9
Classical mathematicalframeworksdonotaccommodateindistinguishables;enti-
ties sharing all their attributes and being just numerically distinct do not exist in
classical mathematics (but see below). Individuals are unique, separable, at least in
8 The term “haecceity” was coined in Medieval philosophy to designate that thing that makes an
individual the individual it is and that does not belong to the catalog of the individual’s properties
(see Teller, 1998). There are peculiarities in using haecceity or thisness, but broadly speaking, all
refer to something beyond an individual’s properties.
9 In technical terms, in extensional higher-order logics, we can deﬁne such a notion by saying that
P and Q are identical when they have the same extensions, that is, when they are satisﬁed by the
same lower terms.

500
J. A. de Barros et al.
principle, counted as one of a kind and presenting differences to every other object.
There are no purely numerical identical individuals: some form of Leibniz’s Law
holds. This is so within standard logic and mathematics, and the ways of dealing
with indiscernibles require mathematical tricks such as conﬁning them to non-rigid
structures.10 For example, take the structure ⟨Z, +⟩, which represents the integer
numbers, Z, and only the standard addition operation, “+.” This structure is not
rigid, since the transformation f (x) = −x is an automorphism of the structure, i.e.,
it keeps the individuals indiscernible within its point of view. To see this, take the 2
and −2. We cannot discern them within this structure. Imagine any property for 2
deﬁned only with “+,” such as “2 + 1 = 3.” If we change the numbers by the “minus”
ones, we have “(−2) + (−1) = (−3).” From within this structure, the latter is iden-
tical to the former; we cannot distinguish them. Of course, if we added additional
properties to the structure, such as the “<” relation, it would become rigid, and we
would be able to distinguish between 2 and −2. However, we cannot do it only with
“+.”
The search for legitimate indiscernible objects/individuals, in the above sense and
without mathematical tricks, requires a change of logic. We will retake this discussion
later on this paper, but we wish to turn to another kind of question for now.
Some authors, such as Peter Geach, argue that identity is relative. The only thing
we can say, according to him, is that two individuals a and b are (or not) identical
relative to a sortal11 predicate F; in the positive case, we say that they are F-identical
and can write a =F b. In our opinion, identity is absolute. Identity is, according to
us, to be associated with metaphysical identity, as explained above. It is something an
individual has that says that it is unique and, when it appears in some other context,
we are authorized to think that it is the same individual that has appeared twice.
Alternatively, an individual’s identity is its identity card, one for each individual: it
accompanies it in all contexts and, with its help, we can distinguish the individual as
being the same individual of a previous experience. Identity makes the individual’s
name a rigid designator, denoting the same entity in all possible accessible worlds.
As it is well known, David Hume guessed that there is no such an identity; according
to him, we recognize someone as being the same from a previous experience by
habit, by familiarity (Hume, 1985, p. 74 and passim), but cannot “logically” prove
that. Schrödinger had a similar opinion regarding quantum entities when he says that
[w]hena familiarobject reentersourken,it isusuallyrecognizedasa continuationofprevious
appearances, as being the same thing. The relative permanence of individual pieces of matter
is the most momentous feature of both everyday life and scientiﬁc experience. If a familiar
10 A structure (a domain comprising relations over its elements) is rigid if its only automorphism
(bijections that preserve the relations of the structure) is the identity function. Indiscernibility in
a structure means that the objects are invariant by some automorphism of the structure; in rigid
structures, an object is indiscernible just from itself. Non-rigid (deformable) structures hide the
object’s identity so that we may not be able to discern them by lack of distinctive relations or
properties. For details, see (French & Krause, 2006, §6.5.2), (Krause & Coelho, 2005).
11 A sortal predicate enables to count the objects that obey the predicate, such as “being a philoso-
pher.” So, Isaac Newton and Stephen Hacking would both be counted as “Lucasian Professor of
Mathematics in Cambridge.”.

Quantum Identity, Content, and Context: From Classical to Non-classical Logic
501
article, say an earthenware jug, disappears from your room, you are quite sure that somebody
must have taken it away. If after a time it reappears, you may doubt whether it really is the
same one −breakable objects in such circumstances are often not. You may not be able to
decide the issue, but you will have no doubt that the doubtful sameness has an indisputable
meaning −that there is an unambiguous answer to your query. So ﬁrm is our belief in the
continuity of the unobserved parts of the string! (Schrödinger, 1998, p. 204)
Entities partaking metaphysical identity are termed individuals. Can we think of non-
individuals too? If yes, can we give examples of entities of this kind? The ﬁrst way to
think of them, by considering what we have said, is to deny them the epithet “to have
an identity.” What should it mean? The short answer is that they would be entities
sharing all their characteristics, either substratum or properties and relations. From
now on, we shall avoid speaking of substratum and keep with bundle theories (Teller,
1998). However, non-individuals, in our formulation, are not simply metaphysically
or numerically identical entities, although this is logically possible.12 Our notion
is weaker, enabling non-individuals to form collections (termed “quasi-sets”) with
cardinalities greater than one so that no particular differences can be ascribed to
them. Furthermore, they would be indistinguishable even if an omniscient demon
(Laplace’s demon) exchanged them with one another; in this case, nothing would
change in the world at all. That is the difference: individuals, by deﬁnition, when
permuted, make a difference! This difference is of fundamental importance, for it
involves several other related notions which appear in physical theories, such as space
and time and, fundamentally, permutations. We shall need to explain that further, but
for now, we wish to emphasize that we do not regard identity as something an entity
must have. When something has an identity, then it is absolute, it is metaphysical, and
no two entities with identity can be only numerically distinct. Non-individuals are
entities that lack identity, that can be just numerically discerned, that have all the same
identity card. If one looks at one non-individual here and there, one ﬁnds “another”
one in a different context; not even demons or gods will tell one if this new object is
“different” or “the same” one found previously, as this would be meaningless.
Nevertheless, once we think about more than one entity, one could claim that they
must be different. Mathematically, this would be expressed by the set-theoretical
argument that once the cardinal of a set is greater than one, its elements must be
different. We stress that this depends on the set theory one is taking into account.
In standard set theories, such as the most celebrated systems (the apparently most
famous one is termed “ZFC”), this is true, but in quasi-set theory (discussed below),
this is may not be the case. In quasi-set theory, we not only can have collections
(quasi-sets) of absolutely indiscernible entities and with a cardinal greater than one,
but we can also quantify such “non-individuals.” Quasi-set theory shows that Quine’s
motto of “no entity without identity" (Quine, 1969, p. 23) does not hold in general,
for even non-individuals can be values of the variables of a regimented language.
12 In his criticism to the deﬁnition of identity given by Whitehead and Russell in their Principia
Mathematica (Leibniz Law, in a standard second-order language, x = y := ∀F(Fx ↔Fy), where
x and y are individual terms and F is a predicate variable for individuals), F. P. Ramsey said precisely
this: that we could logically conceive entities violating the deﬁnition, sharing all their properties,
and even so not being the same entity (Ramsey, 1965, p.30).

502
J. A. de Barros et al.
3.1
Identity in Classical Formal Settings
There is a problem concerning the metaphysical identity of the last section: it cannot
be deﬁned in ﬁrst-order languages (Hodges, 1983; French & Krause, 2006).13 We
provide here a slightly technical explanation. As said earlier, ﬁrst-order languages
speak of the individuals of some domain. Usually, the axiomatizations take logical
identity as primitive (represented by a binary predicate “=”), subject to certain axioms
(reﬂexivity and substitutivity). We can prove that identity is an equivalence relation,
really a congruence, whose intended interpretation is the identity of the domain;
calling it D, then we are referring to the set D := {⟨a, a⟩: a ∈D}, also called the
diagonal of D. But it can be proven that there are other structures, called elementary
equivalent structures,14 which also model “=” but interprets this symbol in sets other
than the diagonal (op.cit.). So, within a ﬁrst-order language, we never know if we
speak of the identity (or the difference) of two individuals or of, say, classes of
individuals.
Higher-order languages enable us to deﬁne logical identity by Leibniz Law, but
such logical identity is deﬁned through indiscernibility. If we wish to deﬁne indis-
cernibility instead, the deﬁnition would be the same: agreement for all properties. So,
higher-order languages do not distinguish between these two concepts. If we intend
to speak of indiscernible but not identical things, Leibniz Law does not help.15 Fur-
thermore, if we aim to preserve some meta-properties of our system (Henkin’s com-
pleteness), we are subject to ﬁnd Henkin models so that two objects of the domain
look as indiscernible since they obey all the language’s predicates, but which are not
the same element (French & Krause, 2006, §6.3.2). In short, we need to conclude
that metaphysical identity cannot be deﬁned. The most we can do is ﬁnd refuge in
logical identity, but this, as we shall see soon, causes troubles to quantum mechanics.
However, let us ﬁrst put away the often-made claim that even quantum objects
can be discerned by spatio-temporal location.
3.2
Identity and Space and Time
There is still another way to look at identity in classical settings: include space and
time. Orthodox non-relativistic quantum mechanics makes use of classical space
13 First-order languages deal with domains of individuals, their properties, relations and operations
over them. Quantiﬁed expressions like “There exists some x such that . . .” and “For all individuals x,
. . .” applies only to individuals, and we cannot say things like “There is a relation among individuals
. . .” or “For every property of individuals . . ..” In logic, we say that ﬁrst-order languages quantify
over individuals only.
14 Elementary equivalent structures are interpretations of a ﬁrst-order language that preserve the
same truth sentences. From the language’s point of view, one cannot distinguish among such struc-
tures: they look the same.
15 The distinction between identity and indiscernibility can be made only in semantical terms; see
(da Costa & Krause, 1997).

Quantum Identity, Content, and Context: From Classical to Non-classical Logic
503
and time or, as we can say, “Newtonian” absolute notions. Intuitively, the classical
space and time structure is a space that looks, at least for small regions, like the
R4, namely three dimensions for space (R3) and one for time (R). More precisely,
mathematically, the classical space-time is a manifold locally isomorphic to R4,
usually termed E4 (for “Euclidean”); see (Penrose, 2004, Chap.17).
This structure has some interesting features, but for us here, an important char-
acteristic is that it is a “Hausdorff space.” This property of being Hausdorff means
that, given any two points a and b, a ̸= b, it is always possible to ﬁnd two disjoint
open sets (say two open balls) Ba and Bb such that a ∈Ba and b ∈Bb. In exten-
sional contexts, such as the ZFC set theory, a property is confounded with a set; the
objects that belong to the set are precisely those satisfying the property. So, a and b
have each a property not shared with the other, namely, to belong to “its” open set.
Hence, Leibniz’s Law applies, and they are different. Notice that this holds for any
two objects a and b: once we have two, they are distinct. Therefore, we may say that,
within such a framework, there are no indiscernibles!16
Let us see now how we can pretend to say that we have indiscernibles within a
classical framework.
3.3
Indiscernibility in Classical Logical Settings
Still working in a classical setting, say the ZFC system, we can mimic indiscernibility.
In this subsection we expand the above discussion about using non-rigid structures,
presenting some of its more technical concepts and ideas.
Usually, we say that the elements of a certain equivalence class are indiscernible,
and perhaps this is acceptable for certain purposes. More technically, in doing that, we
are restricted to a non-rigid (or deformable) structure. As we saw previously, we say
that a structure A = ⟨D, Ri⟩, i ∈I, is rigid if its only automorphism is the identity
function; this means that we have a domain D, a non-empty set, and a collection of
relations over the elements of D, each one of a certain arity n = 0, 1, 2, 3, . . ..17 If
the structure is not rigid, then it is is non-rigid or deformable. We saw an example
of a deformable structure earlier on, the ⟨Z, +⟩. Another example of a deformable
structure is the ﬁeld of the complex numbers, for the operation of taking the conjugate
is an automorphism. In such a structure C = ⟨C, 0, 1, +, ·⟩, the individuals i and −i
are indiscernible.
Given A as above, we say that the elements a and b of D are A-indiscernible if
there exists X ⊆D such that (i) for every automorphism h of A, h(X) = X, that
16 In model theory, an important part of logic, we can speak of “indiscernibles” in a sense, for
instance, Ramsey indiscernibles. However, this is a way of speaking; even these entities obey the
classical theory of identity, therefore being individuals. See (Button & Walsh, 2018, Chap.15).
17 That the identity mapping is an automorphism is trivial. For all the argumentation, it is enough
to consider relational structures, for distinguished elements and operational symbols can be taken
as particular kinds of relations; also, we subsume all domains in just one.

504
J. A. de Barros et al.
is, X is invariant by the automorphisms of the structure, and (ii) a ∈X iff b /∈X.
Otherwise, a and b are A-discernible (Krause & Coelho, 2005).
It is clear that in a rigid structure, the only element indistinguishable from a is a
itself since the only automorphism is the identity function. In informal parlance, we
may say that a and b are A-indiscernible iff they are invariant by permutations that
“preserve the relations of the structure.”
Something like that is what we do in quantum mechanics. Roughly speaking, the
theory says that when we measure a certain observable value for a quantum system in
a certain state, the value does not change before and after a permutation of particles
of the same kind. Physicists say that permutations are not observable, and this is
expressed by the Indistinguishability Postulate.18
Leaving formal logic and mathematics for a while, let us consider more general
situations, which will lead us to a more detailed discussion about quantum mechanics.
We shall commence by emphasizing the importance of the contexts.
4
Connecting Identity to Context
On many occasions, we are tempted to think about possible worlds which are not
actual. We wonder what our life would have been like if we had taken different deci-
sions at crucial moments. We can think about an object, person, or animal, in many
different circumstances, which can differ from the actual ones. For example, suppose
that we have a pet cat and live in a small apartment. Given its living conditions, the
cat cannot catch the birds that he sees through the window. He observes them with
attention, craving for them but unable to reach them. Thus, in our tiny-apartment
world, our cat never caught a bird. Furthermore, he never will because he cannot go
out. However, we can imagine a different world, in which we live in a house with a
big yard in which our cat can wander out as many times as it wants. In this big yard
world, our cat can surely try to catch a bird, and he will undoubtedly do so at least
once.
The above story is an example of how we reason about counterfactuals. We are
tempted to conclude something that occurs in a world that is not actual could happen,
even if that world never becomes actual. This kind of reasoning is very natural in our
everyday life. However, what are the assumptions behind it? First, somehow, our cat
18 In technical terms, let us take a permutation P between particles denoted by xi and x j. As usually
stated, we may say that for any x1, . . . , xn,
P(x1, . . . , xi, . . . , x j, . . . , xn) ↔P(x1, . . . , x j, . . . , xi, . . . , xn)
(6)
The Indistinguishability Postulate is expressed in terms of “expectation values;” it says that
⟨ψ| ˆA|ψ⟩= ⟨Pψ| ˆA|Pψ⟩
(7)
for any observable represented by a self-adjoint operator ˆA and for any permutation operator P,
being |ψ⟩the vector state of the system.

Quantum Identity, Content, and Context: From Classical to Non-classical Logic
505
retains its identity among the different worlds: the cat in the small apartment world
is the same as the cat in the big yard world. Both cats have the same name, color,
same capabilities, and desire to catch birds. Nevertheless, how can we assure that the
cat will retain its properties among the different worlds? Perhaps, if we could afford
a house with a big yard, we could also afford fancy and tasty cat food. The cat gets
used to it, stays inside the house, and eats the whole day. In the fancy house world,
it might become idle to the point that it barely moves or plays, as it happens with
some cats. When it ﬁnally goes out to the garden, it cannot catch birds anymore, as
it became clumsy and slow.
The above example shows that we should not make hasty conclusions: the prop-
erties of an object, person, or animal, might depend strongly on the context in which
we are considering them. In the small apartment, humble life, with cheap food, our
cat is playful and agile: it has a high probability of catching a bird but no bird to
catch. In the big house, those properties may or may not be valid. The ﬁrst lesson
is: to assume that an object retains its properties among different and incompatible
worlds is not granted. Even more so, one may ask: in which sense are the two cats
in different worlds the same? From a strict point of view, one may say that the agile
cat from our actual world is not the same as the idle cat of the alternative reality. In
the same way, we should not mix the different worlds with counterfactual reasoning.
If we conclude, by studying our cat in this actual world, that he is very skilled in
chasing birds, we cannot use empirical information from our world to conclude that
the cat will indeed chase a bird in the alternative world.
Thus, we are introduced to a profound philosophical problem by thinking about
the above straightforward situation: what are the principles or conditions that grant
identity to objects considered in different possible worlds? Are we entitled to say
that a given object retains its identity when considered in different and incompatible
situations? Of course, in many situations of our daily life, assuming that objects retain
their identities and properties in different contexts will work. Our bike works well on
sunny and rainy days and in diverse landscapes (such as cities or mountains). Many
characteristics of our bike–such as its color or its range of velocities–are, to a great
extent, context independent. However, we should not take this context independence
for granted. This is more so if we consider quantum systems that deﬁne phenomena
that lie far beyond our everyday experience. The realm of the atom extends far
beyond the ångström scale (ten to the minus ten meters, which is something like
0, 0000000001 meters for one ångström!). The principles–whatever they are–that
allow us to identify properties and objects among incompatible situations may no
longer be valid for atomic systems. Moreover, this seems to be the case, as the GHZ
example above and the following example show.
SupposethatAliceandBobhaveseparatedlabs, L A and L B,inwhichtheyperform
their experiments. At a given time, a third party prepares a quantum system capable
of affecting what happens in L A and L B. Suppose that Alice decides to make an
experiment PA in her lab, in order to interact with the given quantum system, and
that Bob can do PB or P′
B in L B. Due to the peculiarities of quantum mechanics, PB
and P′
B cannot be performed at the same time–they are incompatible experiments.
To understand what incompatible means, imagine the following situation: in order to

506
J. A. de Barros et al.
perform PB, Bob must align a magnet in a given direction d, and in order to perform
P′
B, he must align its magnet in a different direction d′. A magnet cannot point in two
different directions–similarly, a clock’s handle cannot point at two different angles
simultaneously. Thus, there are two incompatible situations: either Alice performs
experiment PA and Bob performs PB, or Alice performs PA and Bob P′
B. The two
possibilities cannot coexist in the same world. Let us call these possibilities W1 and
W2, respectively.
Suppose now that Alice and Bob are in the process of deciding what to do. They
wonder about the experiments’ possible outcomes in the different situations, W1
and W2. Notice that they do not need actually to perform the experiments. It is all
about reasoning in various alternatives without actually performing them. Now we
question: what is the status of the possible results of experiment PA concerning W1
and W2? After the discussion about the cat, we should not be as quick to identify what
happens in W1 with W2, even if we are talking about the same experiment, PA. In both
possible worlds, Alice will perform the same actions (she will orient the magnets in
the same directions, prepare the same reading apparatus, and so on). Is she going to
obtain the same results? What enables us to conclude that she will? Notice that we
are not asking here about an inﬂuence of Bob’s actions in Alice ones: the laboratories
can be very far away in space and time. We are asking here whether we are entitled
to assume that there is some trace of identity among the results obtained in different
(and incompatible worlds). As expected, the answer is: no, we are not. Contradictions
can be readily achieved if we do so, as the cat and contextuality examples suggest
(and shown in technical research on quantum theory).
The actions required for experimenting PA are the same in W1 and W2. Can we say
that PA in W1 is the same as PA in W2? After the cat discussion, let us be conservative
about the answer. We will say that PA in W1 is indistinguishable from PA in W2.
The two experiments are completely alike: Alice will execute the same actions in a
system prepared with an equivalent procedure in both worlds. However, we should
not be tempted to claim they are the same. The more so, we should not expect the
same results. In this sense, we say that the properties studied by experiment PA in
W1 are indistinguishable from the properties studied by PA in W2. We denote these
properties by the pairs (PA; W1) and (PA; W2) and write (PA; W1) ≡(PA; W2), to
stress the fact that they are indistinguishable (but not identical). A natural, logical
formalism for describing this kind of indistinguishability is the quasi-set theory. This
theory allows us to consider properties or objects in alternative worlds as collections
of indiscernible ur-elements.
If world W1 becomes actual, Alice and Bob will perform their actions, obtain their
results, and record them. Out of these results, what conclusions should they take about
the possible results associated with W2? Are they entitled to reason in a counterfactual
way and combine the results of worlds W1 and W2 to extract conclusions about them?
Much caution should be taken here, as the cat and contextual examples show. In
principle, there is no a priori reason to do so. That we are allowed to do so in many
(but not all!) everyday situations is more a lucky strike that we share with other
creatures in our macroscopic reality than a general rule. Counterfactual reasoning
simpliﬁes our existence, but we should not expect it to be valid in every situation.

Quantum Identity, Content, and Context: From Classical to Non-classical Logic
507
This lack of validity seems empirically suggested at microscopic scales, which are
very different from our own.
To summarize, we can state the following:
• Evenifstatepreparationsandmeasurementproceduresarecompletelyalikeamong
different worlds, we should not treat them as identical. In this sense, we speak about
things such as indistinguishable properties and objects.
• Even if two experiments are completely indistinguishable, we should not expect
the same results in different worlds.
• We should not derive conclusions from counterfactual reasoning, especially in the
quantum domain. Such conclusions are not reliable and are not metaphysically
justiﬁed.
5
Quantum Mechanics in Classical Logical Settings
In this section, we brieﬂy review how the standard quantum formalism performs the
trick of treating indiscernible quantum systems within the scope of classical logic
(encompassing mathematics). In doing so, we lay the groundwork for alternative
logics and mathematics, which provide an adequate description from our perspective.
A glance at standard textbooks on quantum mechanics reveals that they use classi-
cal mathematics, hence classical logic. However, the claim that quantum mechanics
requires a different logic, known as quantum logic, can also often be found.19 These
two observations seem contradictory. Why is this apparent contradiction present in
the literature?
The reason may be as follows. Most physicists are concerned with physical prob-
lems being solved by quantum theory and not with philosophical or logical founda-
tional questions about it. Although they might endorse some particular interpreta-
tion of quantum mechanics, thus presupposing some concern with quantum theory’s
philosophy, most physicists use “classical” mathematics in an almost instrumentalist
way. Thus, when dealing with entities that would be indistinguishable, physicists use
some mathematical tricks to hide the identiﬁcations typical of our standard mathe-
matical languages. Let us see how they do it.
First, we recall that, in quantum mechanics’ standard formulation, a system’s
state is represented mathematically by a vector in a Hilbert space. This vector, also
called the wave function, is supposed to encode all information available for that
system in a speciﬁc situation. Observables, which represent possible experimental
procedures and their outcomes, are self-adjoint operators in the Hilbert space. When
an observable is measured, the state-vector enters (or “collapse”) into one of the
observable operator’s eigenvectors. Since this process is “mysterious,” in the sense
that the formalism does not explain how it happens, many physicists try to avoid
19 The ﬁeld of “quantum logic” arose from Birkoff and von Neumann’s 1936 seminal paper. The
reader interested in the subject is referred to the following excellent papers: (Dalla Chiara et al.,
2004) and (Svozil, 1998).

508
J. A. de Barros et al.
it, adopting alternative explanations. Nevertheless, the primary mathematical object
in quantum theory is the Hilbert space and vectors in it. So, the question is how to
represent indistinguishable objects using the mathematics of vectors.
Quantum particles come in two types: bosons and fermions. Their main differ-
ence comes from their statistics: bosons follow the Bose-Einstein statistics, whereas
Fermions satisfy the Fermi-Dirac one. Both statistics count objects as if they were
indistinguishable, contrary to the classical Maxwell-Boltzman statistics.
Bosons are a typical type of indistinguishable quantum entities. Bosons are a
kind of quantum “particles,” and they are entirely indistinguishable when prepared
in the same quantum state. This state is such that they share all the relevant quantum
properties. A system composed of, say, two bosons 1 and 2 in two possible situations
A and B is described by a symmetric wave function such as the following.
 =
1
√
2

ψ A
1 ψ B
2 + ψ A
2 ψ B
1

,
(8)
where ψ A
1 ψ B
2 means system 1 in the state A and system 2 in B and similarly for the
other term. The
1
√
2 is just a normalization factor required by the formalism.  is
invariant under the permutation of 1 and 2. This invariance means that exchanging
particle 1 by 2 (and vice-versa) does not affect the state of the system. Consequently,
any measurement results are maintained under permutations.
This symmetrization of the wave function works, but it is a trick. We are still
using labels to “name” the particles because our language and mental models have a
hard time thinking otherwise. In other words, this trick assumes, upfront, that bosons
are individuals. Suddenly, as if a miracle happened, permutations do not conduce to
different situations. However, this invariance was put there by hand. We could give
more detailed arguments as to why this is a mathematical trick that does not make
bosons indistinguishable, but we hope the above example is sufﬁcient for the reader
to grasp the main idea.
The use of the above trick is similar to conﬁning the discussion to a deformable
(non-rigid) structure, as explained earlier. However, as mentioned, within such clas-
sical settings, we can always go “outside” of the structure and identify the particles.
This possibility of identiﬁcation is at odds with the hypothesis that they are indis-
cernible.20
There is no way to escape this conclusion. As we have said before, standard
mathematics and logic are theories of individuals. This is so for historical reasons:
classical logic, mathematics, and even classical physics were built with individuals in
mind. Quantum mechanics, of course, came to challenge those ideas and to question
the concepts of individuality.
20 The way to “go outside” the quantum formalism is to go to the set-theoretical universe since all
mathematics used in quantum mechanics can be performed in terms of sets.

Quantum Identity, Content, and Context: From Classical to Non-classical Logic
509
6
Alternative Logical Approaches
Assuming that indiscernibility is a core notion in quantum mechanics, we should look
for an alternative logical and mathematical basis that considers it right from the start.
This bottom-up approach would not mimic it within a standard framework from a top-
bottom one. Our strategy is grounded in a metaphysics of non-individuals (for detail,
see(French&Krause,2006),(Krauseetal.,2021),andreferencestherein).Moreover,
it tries to develop mathematics compatible with such metaphysics. Consequently,
Schrödinger logics and quasi-set theory were developed in the 1990s. Although they
are mathematical developments independent of the interpretations, the intended one
is precisely to cope with such non-individual entities. In this section, we will give a
rough idea about how quasi-set theory works. For a review about Schrödinger logics,
see (French & Krause, 2006, chap.8).
6.1
Quasi-set Theory
In the quasi-theory Q, indiscernibility is a primitive concept, formalized by a binary
relation “≡” satisfying the properties of an equivalence relation, but not full substi-
tutivity.21 In this notation, “x ≡y” is thought to mean “x is indiscernible from y.”
This binary relation is a partial congruence in the following sense: for most relations,
if R(x, y) and x ≡x′, then R(x′, y) as well (the same holds for the second variable).
The only relation to which this result does not hold is membership: x ∈y and x′ ≡x
does not entail that x′ ∈y; details in (French & Krause, 2006, 2010)).
Quasi-sets can have as elements other quasi-sets, particular quasi-sets termed sets
which are copies of the sets in a standard theory (in the case, the Zermelo-Fraenkel
set theory with the Axiom of Choice), and two kinds of atoms (entities which are
not sets), termed M-atoms (M-objects), which are copies of a standard set theory
with atoms (ZFA) and m-atoms (m-objects), which have the quanta as their intended
interpretation, to whom it is supposed that the logical identity does not apply. If we
eliminate the m-atoms, we are left with a copy of ZFA, the Zermelo-Fraenkel set
theory with atoms. Hence, we can reconstruct all standard mathematics within Q in
such a “classical part” of the theory.
Functions cannot be deﬁned in the standard way. When m-atoms are present, it
cannot distinguish between indiscernible arguments or values. Therefore, the theory
generalizes the concept to “quasi-functions,” which map indiscernible elements into
indiscernible elements. See below for more on this point.
Cardinals (termed “quasi-cardinals,” qc) are also taken as primitive, although
they can be proven to exist for ﬁnite qsets (ﬁnite in the usual sense Domenech &
Holik, 2007; Arenhart, 2011). The concept of quasi-cardinals can be used to speak
of “several objects.” So, when we say that we have two indiscernible q-functions,
21 If we add substitutivity to the postulates, then no differences between indiscernibility and logical
ﬁrst-order identity would be made.

510
J. A. de Barros et al.
according to the above deﬁnition, we are saying that we have a qset whose elements
are indiscernible q-functions and whose q-cardinal is two.22 The same happens in
other situations.
An interesting fact is that qsets composed of several indistinguishable m-atoms
do not have an associated ordinal. This lack of an ordinal means that these elements
cannot be counted since they cannot be ordered. However, we can still speak of a
collection’s cardinal, termed its quasi-cardinal or just its q-cardinal. This existence
of a cardinal but not of an ordinal is similar to what we have in QM when we say that
we have some quantity of systems of the same kind but cannot individuate or count
them, e.g., the six electrons in the level 2p of a Sodium atom.23
Identity (termed extensional identity) “=E” is deﬁned for qsets having the same
elements (in the sense that if an element belongs to one of them, then it belongs to
the another)24 or for M-objects belonging to the same qsets. It can be proven that this
identity has all the properties of classical logical identity for the objects to which it
applies. However, it does not make sense for q-objects. That is, x =E y does not have
any meaning in the theory if x and y are m-objects. It is similar to speak of categories
in the Zermelo-Fraenkel set theory (supposed consistent). The theory cannot capture
the concept, yet it can be expressed in its language. From now on, we shall abbreviate
“=E” by “=,” as usual.
The postulates of Q are similar to those of ZFA, but by considering that now we
may have m-objects. The notion of indistinguishability is extended to qsets through
an axiom that says that two qsets with the same q-cardinal and having the same
“quantity” (we use q-cardinals to express this) of elements of the same kind (indistin-
guishable among them) are indiscernible too. As an example, consider the following:
two sulfuric acid molecules H2SO4 are seen as indistinguishable qsets, for both con-
tain q-cardinal equals to 7 (counting the atoms as basic elements), and the elements
of the sub-collections of elements of the same kind are also of the same q-cardinal
(2, 1, and 4 respectively). Then we can state that “H2SO4 ≡H2SO4,” but of course,
we cannot say that “H2SO4 = H2SO4,” as for in the latter, the two molecules would
not be two at all, but just the same molecule (supposing, of course, that “=” stands
22 Quasi-cardinals turn to be sets, so we can use the equality symbol among them. We use the
notation qc(x) = n (really, qc(x) =E n, see below) for a quasi-set x whose cardinal is n.
23 To count a ﬁnite number of elements, say 4, is to deﬁne a bijection from the set with these
elements to the ordinal 4 = {0, 1, 2, 3}. This counting requires that we identify the elements of the
ﬁrst set.
24 There are subtleties that require us to provide further explanations. In Q, you cannot do the maths
and decide either a certain m-object belongs or not to a qset; this requires identity, as you need to
identify the object you are referring to.
In quasi-set theory, however, one can hypothesize that if a speciﬁc object belongs to a qset,
then so and so. This is similar to Russell’s use of the axioms of inﬁnite (I) and choice (C) in his
theory of types, which assume the existence of certain classes that cannot be constructed, so going
against Russell’s constructibility thesis. What was Russell’s answer? He transformed all sentences
α whose proofs depend on these axioms into conditionals of the form I →α and C →α. Hence,
if the axioms hold, then we can get α. We are applying the same reasoning here: if the objects of a
qset belong to the another and vice-versa, then they are extensionally identical. It should be noted
that the deﬁnition of extensional identity holds only for sets and M-objects.

Quantum Identity, Content, and Context: From Classical to Non-classical Logic
511
for classical logical identity). In the ﬁrst case, notwithstanding, they count as two,
yet we cannot say which is which.
Let us speak a little bit more about quasi-functions. Since physicists and math-
ematicians may want to talk about random variables over qsets as a way to model
physical processes, it is important to deﬁne functions between qsets. This can be done
straightforwardly, and here we consider binary relations and unary functions only.
Such deﬁnitions can easily be extended to more complicated multi-valued functions.
A (binary) q-relation between the qsets A and B is a qset of pairs of elements (sub-
collections with q-cardinal equals 2), one in A, the other in B.25 Quasi-functions
(q-functions) from A to B are binary relations between A and B such that if the pairs
(qsets) with a and b and with a′ and b′ belong to it and if a ≡a′, then b ≡b′ (with a’s
belonging to A and the b’s to B). In other words, a q-function maps indistinguishable
elements into indistinguishable elements. When there are no m-objects involved, the
indistinguishability relation collapses in the extensional identity, and the deﬁnition
turns to be equivalent to the classical one. In particular, a q-function from a “classi-
cal” set such as {1, −1} to a qset of indiscernible q-objects with q-cardinal 2 can be
deﬁned so that we cannot know which q-object is associated with each number (this
example will be used below).
To summarize, in this section, we showed that the concept of indistinguishability,
which conﬂicts with Leibnitz’s Principle of the Identity of Indiscernibles, can be
incorporated as a metaphysical principle in a modiﬁed set theory with indistinguish-
able elements. This theory contains “copies” of the Zermelo-Frankel axioms with
Urelemente as a particular case when no indistinguishable q-objects are involved.
This theory will provide us the mathematical basis for formally talking about indis-
tinguishable properties, which we will show can be used in a theory of quantum
properties. We will see in the next section how we can use those indistinguishable
properties to avoid contradictions in quantum contextual settings such as KS.
7
Formulating Quantum Mechanics Within Quasi-set
Theory
As we have seen, the quasi-set theory enables us to form collections (the quasi-sets)
of “absolutely” indiscernible elements. In this theory, even if one goes outside the
relevant structures, they will not become rigid: this mathematical universe is not rigid.
Thus, the quasi-set theory is a suitable device to develop a quantum theory where
indiscernibility is considered from the start as a fundamental notion. This section
explains how quantum mechanics (in the Fock space formalism) can be developed
within the quasi-set theory Q. The current development is based in (Domenech
25 We are avoiding the long and boring deﬁnitions, as, for instance, the deﬁnition of ordered pairs,
which presuppose lots of preliminary concepts, just to focus on the basic ideas. For details, the
interested reader can see the indicated references.

512
J. A. de Barros et al.
et al., 2008) and is technical. This level of mathematical formality is necessary to
provide essential details. The reader unconcerned with such technicalities may skip
this section and proceed directly to the conclusions.
7.1
The Q-spaces
In the standard mathematical formalisms, the assumptions that quantum entities of
the same kind must be indiscernible are hidden behind mathematical tricks such as
symmetrizing wave-functions and vectors. In order to avoid these tricks, we introduce
the notion of Q-spaces. The resulting framework is termed nonreﬂexive quantum
mechanics or, simply, nonreﬂexive.
Webeginwithaq-setofrealnumbersϵ = {ϵi}i∈I,where I isanarbitrarycollection
of indexes, denumerable or not. Since it is a collection of real numbers, which may
be constructed in the classical part of Q, we have that Z(ϵ). Intuitively, the elements
ϵi represent the eigenvalues of a physical observable ˆO, that is, they are the values
such that ˆO|ϕi⟩= ϵi|ϕi⟩, with |ϕi⟩the corresponding eigenstates. Since observables
are Hermitian operators, the eigenvalues are real numbers. Thus, we are justiﬁed
in assuming that elements of ϵ are real numbers. Consider then the quasi-functions
f : ϵ −→Fp, where Fp is the quasi-set formed of all ﬁnite and pure quasi-sets (that
is, ﬁnite quasi-sets whose only elements are indistinguishable m-atoms). Each of
these f is a q-set of ordered pairs ⟨ϵi, x⟩with ϵi ∈ϵ and x ∈Fp. From Fp we select
those quasi-functions f which attribute a non-empty q-set only to a ﬁnite number of
elements of ϵ, the image of f being ∅for the other cases. We call F the quasi-set
containing only these quasi-functions. Then, the quasi-cardinal of most of the q-sets
attributed to elements of ϵ according to these quasi-functions is 0. Now, elements
of F are quasi-functions which we read as attributing to each ϵi a q-set whose
quasi-cardinal we take to be the occupation number of this eigenvalue. We write
these quasi-functions as fϵi1ϵi2...ϵim . According to the given intuitive interpretation,
the levels ϵi1ϵi2 . . . ϵim are occupied. We say that if the symbol ϵik appears j-times,
then the level ϵik has occupation number j. For example, the notation fϵ1ϵ1ϵ1ϵ2ϵ3 means
that the level ϵ1 has occupation number 3 while the levels ϵ2 and ϵ3 have occupation
numbers 1. The levels that do not appear have occupation number zero. Another
point to be remarked is that since the elements of ϵ are real numbers, we can take
the standard ordering relation over the reals and order the indexes according to this
ordering in the representation fϵi1ϵi2...ϵim . This will be important when we consider
the cases for bosons and fermions.
The quasi-functions of F provide the key to the solution to the problem of label-
ing states. Since we use pure quasi-sets as the images of the quasi-functions, there
is simply no question of indexes for particles, for all that matters are the quasi-
cardinals representing the occupation numbers. To make it clear that permutations
change nothing, one needs only to notice that a quasi-function is a q-set of weakly

Quantum Identity, Content, and Context: From Classical to Non-classical Logic
513
ordered pairs.26 Taking two of the pairs belonging to some quasi-function, let us
say ⟨ϵi, x⟩, ⟨ϵ j, y⟩, with both x and y non-empty, a permutation of particles would
consist in changing elements from x with elements from y. However, by the unob-
servability of permutations theorem,27 what we obtain after the permutation is a q-set
indistinguishable from the one we began with. Remember also that a quasi-function
attributes indistinguishable images to indistinguishable items; thus, the indistinguish-
able q-set resulting from the permutations will also be in the image of the same eigen-
value. To show this point precisely, we recall that by deﬁnition ⟨ϵi, x⟩abbreviates
[[ϵi], [ϵi, x]],28 and an analogous expression holds for ⟨ϵ j, y⟩. Also, by deﬁnition,
[ϵi, x] is the collection of all the items indistinguishable from ϵi or from x (taken
from a previously given q-set). For this reason, if we permute x with x′, with x ≡x′
we change nothing for [ϵi, x] ≡[ϵi, x′]. Thus, we obtain ⟨ϵi, x⟩≡⟨ϵi, x′⟩and the
ordered pairs of the permuted quasi-function will be indiscernible (the same if there
are no m-atoms involved). Thus, the permutation of indistinguishable elements does
not produce changes in the quasi-functions.
7.2
A Vector Space Structure
Now, we wish to have a vector space structure to represent quantum states. To do
that, we need to deﬁne addition and multiplication by scalars. Before we go on, we
must notice that we cannot deﬁne these operations directly on the q-set F, for there
is no simple way to endow it with the required structure; our strategy here is to deﬁne
⋆(multiplication by scalars) and + (addition of vectors) in a q-set whose vectors
will be quasi-functions from F to the set of complex numbers C. Let us call C the
collection of quasi-functions that assign to every f ∈F a complex number. Once
again, we select from C the sub-collection CF of quasi-functions c such that every
c ∈CF attributes complex numbers λ ̸= 0 for only a ﬁnite number of f ∈F. Over
CF, we can deﬁne a sum and a product by scalars in the same way as it is usually
done with functions as follows.
Deﬁnition 7.1 Let γ ∈C, and c, c1 and c2 be quasi-functions of CF, then
(γ ⋆c)( f ) := γ (c( f ))
(c1 + c2)( f ) := c1( f ) + c2( f )
26 A weak ordered pair is a qset having just one element (that is, its cardinal is one). We cannot
name such an element, for we need an identity to do that. SO, it can be taken as one element of a
kind.
27 This theorem says that if we exchange an element of a qset by an indistinguishable one, the
resulting qset turns to be indistinguishable from the original one.
28 We are leaving aside the subindices in this notation.

514
J. A. de Barros et al.
The quasi-function c0 ∈CF such that c0( f ) = 0 for every f ∈F acts as the null
element for the sum operation. This can be shown as follows:
(c0 + c)( f ) = c0( f ) + c( f ) = 0 + c( f ) = c( f ), ∀f.
(9)
With both the operations of sum and multiplication by scalars deﬁned as above we
have that ⟨CF, C, +, ⋆⟩has the structure of a complex vector space, as one can easily
check. Some of the elements of CF have a special status though; if c j ∈CF are the
quasi-functions such that c j( fi) = δi j (where δi j is the Kronecker symbol), then the
vectors c j are called the basis vectors, while the others are linear combinations of
them. For notational convenience, we can introduce a new notation for the q-functions
in CF; suppose c attributes a λ ̸= 0 to some f , and 0 to every other quasi-function in
F. Then, we propose to denote c by λf . The basis quasi-functions will be denoted
simply fi, as one can check. Now, multiplication by scalar α of one of these quasi-
functions, say λfi can be read simply as (α · λ) fi, and sum of quasi-functions λfi and
αfi can be read as (α + λ) fi. What about the other quasi-functions in CF? We can
extend this idea to them too, but with some care: if, for example c0 is a quasi-function
such that c0( fi) = α and c0( f j) = λ, attributing 0 to every other quasi-function in
F, then c0 can be seen as a linear combination of quasi-functions of a basis; in fact,
consider the basis quasi-functions fi and f j, (this is an abuse of notation, for they are
representing quasi-functions in CF that attribute 1 to each of these quasi-functions).
The ﬁrst step consists in multiplying them by α and λ, respectively, obtaining αfi and
λf j (once again, this is an abuse, for these are quasi-functions in CF that attribute
the mentioned complex numbers to fi and to f j). Now, c0 is in fact the sum of these
quasi-functions, that is, c0 = αfi + λf j, for this is the function which does exactly
what c0 does. One can then extend this to all the other quasi-functions in CF as well.
7.3
Inner Products
The next step in our construction is to endow our vector space with an inner product.
This is a necessary step for we wish to calculate probabilities and mean values.
Following the idea proposed in (Domenech et al., 2008), we introduce two kinds of
inner products, which lead us to two Hilbert spaces, one for bosons and another for
fermions. We begin with the case for bosons.
Deﬁnition 7.2 Let δi j be the Kronecker symbol and fϵi1ϵi2...ϵin and fϵi′
1ϵi′
2...ϵi′m two
basis vectors (as discussed above), then
fϵi1ϵi2...ϵin ◦fϵi′
1ϵi′
2...ϵi′m := δnm

p
δi1 pi′
1δi2 pi′
2 . . . δin pi′n.
(10)
Notice that this sum is extended over all the permutations of the index set i′ =
(i′
1, i′
2, . . . , i′
n); for each permutation p, pi′ = (pi′
1, pi′
2, . . . , pi′
n).

Quantum Identity, Content, and Context: From Classical to Non-classical Logic
515
For the other vectors, the ones that can be seen as linear combinations in the sense
discussed above, we have
⎛
⎝
k
αk fk) ◦(

k
α′
k f ′
k) :=

kj
α∗
kα′
j( fk ◦f ′
j
⎞
⎠,
(11)
where α∗is the complex conjugate of α. Now, let us consider fermions. As remarked
above in page 512, the order of the indexes in each fϵi1ϵi2...ϵin is determined by the
canonical ordering in the real numbers. Thus, we deﬁne another • inner product as
follows, which will do the job for fermions.
Deﬁnition 7.3 Let δi j be the Kronecker symbol and fϵi1ϵi2...ϵin and fϵi′
1ϵi′
2...ϵi′m two
basis vectors, then
fϵi1ϵi2...ϵin • fϵi′
1ϵi′
2...ϵi′m := δnm

p
σpδi1 pi′
1δi2 pi′
2 . . . δin pi′n
(12)
where: σp = 1 if p is even and σp = −1 if p is odd.
This deﬁnition can be extended to linear combinations as in the previous case.
7.4
Fock Spaces Using Q-spaces
We begin with a deﬁnition to simplify the notation. For every function fϵi1ϵi2...ϵin in
F, we put
α|ϵi1ϵi2 . . . ϵin) := αfϵi1ϵi2...ϵin
Note that this is a slightly modiﬁed version of the standard notation. We begin with
the case of bosons.
Suppose a normalized vector |αβγ . . .), where the norm is taken from the
corresponding inner product. Let ζ stand for an arbitrary collection of indexes.
We deﬁne a†
α|ζ) ∝|αζ) in such a way that the proportionality constant satisﬁes
a†
αaα|ζ) = nα|ζ). From this it will follow, as usual, that:
((ζ|a†
α)(aα|ζ)) = nα.
Deﬁnition 7.4 aα| . . . nα . . .) := √nα| . . . nα −1 . . .)
On the other hand,
aαa†
α| . . . nα . . .) = K
	
nα + 1| . . . nα . . .),

516
J. A. de Barros et al.
where K is a proportionality constant. Applying a†
α again, we have
a†
αaαa†
α| . . . nα . . .) = K 2	
nα + 1| . . . nα + 1 . . .).
Using the fact that a†
αaα|ζ) = nα|ζ), we have that
(a†
αaα)a†
α| . . . nα . . .) =
	
nα + 1K| . . . nα + 1 . . .).
So, K = √nα + 1. Then, we have
Deﬁnition 7.5 a†
α| . . . nα . . .) := √nα + 1| . . . nα + 1 . . .).
From this deﬁnition, with additional computations, we obtain (aαa†
β −a†
βaα)|ψ) =
δαβ|ψ). In our language, this means the same as
[aα; a†
β] = δαβ I.
In an analogous way, it can be shown that
[aα; aβ] = [a†
α; a†
β] = 0.
So, the bosonic commutation relation is the same as in standard Fock space formal-
ism.
For fermionic states, we use the antisymmetric product “•.” We begin by deﬁning
the creation operator C†
α.
Deﬁnition 7.6 If ζ is a collection of indexes of non-null occupation numbers, then
C†
α := α|ζ)
If α is in ζ, then |αζ) is a vector of null norm. This implies that (ψ|αζ) = 0, for every
ψ. It follows that systems in states of null norm have no probability of being observed.
Furthermore, their addition to another vector does not contribute to any observable
difference. To take the situation into account, we have the following deﬁnition.
Deﬁnition 7.7 Two vectors |φ) and |ψ) are similar if the difference between them
is a linear combination of null norm vectors. We denote similarity of |φ) and |ψ) by
|φ) ∼= |ψ).
Using the deﬁnition of C†
α we can describe what is the effect of Cα over vectors,
namely
(ζ|Cα := (αζ|.
Then, for any vector |ψ),
(ζ|Cα|ψ) = (αζ|ψ) = 0
for α ∈ζ or (ψ|αζ) = 0. Then, if |ψ) = |0), then (ζ|Cα|0) = (αζ|0) = 0. So, Cα|0)
is orthogonal to any vector that contains α, and also to any vector that does not contain

Quantum Identity, Content, and Context: From Classical to Non-classical Logic
517
α, so that it is a linear combination of null norm vectors. So, we can put by deﬁnition
that ⃗0 := Cα|0). In an analogous way, if ∼α denotes that α has occupation number
zero, then we can also write Cα|(∼α) . . .) = ⃗0, where the dots mean that other levels
have arbitrary occupation numbers.
Now, using our notion of similar vectors, we can write Cα|0) ∼= ⃗0 and Cα|(∼
α) . . .) ∼= 0. The same results are obtained when we use ∼= and the sign of identity.
By making |ψ) = |α), we have (ζ|Cα|α) = (αζ|α) = 0 in every case, except when
|ζ) = |0). In that case, (0|Cα|α) = 1. Then, it follows that Cα|α) ∼= 0. In an analo-
gous way, we obtain Cα|αζ) =∼= |(∼α)ζ) when α /∈ζ. In the case α ∈ζ, |αζ) has
null norm, and so, for every |ψ):
(αζ|C†
α|ψ) = (αζ|αψ) = 0.
It then follows that
(ψ|Cα|αζ) = 0,
so that Cα|αζ) has null norm too.
Now we calculate the anti-commutation relation obeyed by the fermionic creation
and annihilation operators. We begin calculating the commutation relation between
Cα and C†
β. We do that by studying the relationship between |αβ) and |βα). Let us
consider the sum |αβ) + |βα). The product of this sum with any vector distinct from
|αβ) is null. For the product with |αβ) we obtain (αβ|[|αβ) + |βα)] = (αβ||αβ) +
(αβ||βα). By deﬁnition, this is equal to δααδββ −δαβδβα + δαβδαα −δααδββ. This is
equal to 1 −0 + 0 −1 = 0.
The same conclusion holds if we multiply the sum |αβ) + |βα) by (βα|. It then
follows that |αβ) + |βα) is a linear combination of null norm vectors, which we
denote by |nn), so that
|αβ) = −|βα) + |nn).
Given that, we can calculate
C†
αC†
β|ψ) = |αβψ) = −|βα|ψ) + |nn) = −C†
βC†
α|ψ) + |nn).
From this it follows that {C†
α; C†
β}|ψ) = |nn). We do not lose generality by setting
{C†
α; C†
β}|ψ) = 0. In an analogous way we conclude that
{Cα; Cβ}|ψ) = 0.
Now we calculate the commutation relation between Cα and C†
β. There are some
cases to be considered. We ﬁrst assume that α ̸= β. If α /∈ψ or β ∈ψ then
{Cα; C†
β}|ψ) ≈⃗0.

518
J. A. de Barros et al.
If α ∈ψ and β /∈ψ, assuming that α is the ﬁrst symbol in the list of ψ, then
{Cα; C†
β}|ψ) = Cα|βψ) + C†
β|ψ(∼α)) ∼= −|βψ(∼α)) + |βψ(∼α)) = ⃗0. If α =
β and α ∈ψ, then {Cα; C†
α}|ψ) = Cα|αψ) + C†
α|ψ(∼α)) ∼= ⃗0 + |ψ) = |ψ). If
α = β and α /∈ψ, then {Cα; C†
α}|ψ) = Cα|αψ) + C†
α|ψ(∼α)) ∼= |ψ) + ⃗0 = |ψ).
In any case, we recover {Cα; C†
α}|ψ) ∼= δαβ|ψ). So, we can put
{Cα; C†
α} = δαβ.
It then follows that the commutation properties in Q-spaces are the same as in
traditional Fock spaces.
Using this formalism, we can adapt all the developments done in (Mattuck, 1967,
Chap.7) and (Merzbacher, 1970, Chap.20) for the number occupation formalism.
However, contrary to what happens in these books, no previous (even unconscious)
assumptions about quantum objects’ individuality is taken into account.
8
Conclusions
It is an exciting question to ask if we need to change logic every time we ﬁnd
difﬁculties with the classical one. Are there other ways to circumvent the problems,
such as in the quantum case, using the tricks mentioned above, or choosing an
alternative interpretation? This question makes sense. However, we think that every
theory, even a mathematical one, starts from metaphysical hypotheses, even if not
made explicit. We have stated above that classical logic, standard mathematics, and
classical physics were developed with the classical enclosing world in our minds.
This world is one of individuals that have an identity. So, two of those individuals
cannot possibly be different.
Nevertheless, quantum mechanics brought us a different world, a world with no
proper names. In the quantum world, objects are (in most cases) precisely alike, and
permutationsbetweenobjectsofthesamekinddonotleadtoanyphysicaldifferences.
Here we emphasize that it is not that these are not measurable differences; there are
no differences at all. So, we arrive at the following conclusions.
1. Indistinguishability is essential in quantum mechanics, regardless of interpreta-
tion.Inouropinion,itshouldbeplacedatanequallevelofimportanceinquantum
foundations to concepts such as entanglement, contextuality, and nonlocality.
2. Ontological and epistemic aspects matter. Any physical theory is grounded in
interpretations due to the possibility of associating different world views (or
metaphysics) to a theory. Parodying Poincaré, we can say that physics is (also)
a domain where we give the same name to distinct things.29
29 Poincaré was referring to mathematics: “mathematics is the art of giving the same name to
distinct things”—look at (Verhulst, 2012). Of course, he spoke within the framework of axiomatized
mathematical theories, able to have different models.

Quantum Identity, Content, and Context: From Classical to Non-classical Logic
519
3. Since mathematics and logic need to reﬂect the assumed metaphysical aspects
(we could speak in terms of ontology), quantum mechanics’ formalism and
physical theories should do the same.
Let us expand on this last point with an example involving logic. It is common to
say that in order to obtain intuitionistic logic, it is enough to drop the excluded middle
law from the axioms of classical logic. From a purely formal point of view, this is
correct. However, logic is not only syntax. It also involves semantic aspects and even
pragmatic ones (making references to who uses the logic and why). Let us consider
semantics. Although classical and intuitionistic logic differs syntactically just by
one axiom, semantically, they are much different. Classical propositional logic can
be described through truth-tables; intuitionistic logic cannot. In classical logic, any
proposition is either true or false, yet we may not know what the case is; in intuition-
istic logic, the notions of true and false are different. In this logic, a proposition p is
true if there is a “process” to get it, and false if a process for obtaining p leads to a
contradiction. Other differences can be pointed out. For instance, in classical logic,
something exists if its nonexistence entails a contradiction. In intuitionistic logic,
something exists if it can be created by our imagination.
This example shows that in order to consider a logic, semantical aspects must at
least be considered. Of course, this is true also with physical theories. Otherwise, we
risk having a purely mathematical theory. However, what corresponds to semantics
in the quantum case? We chose interpretations because quantum mechanics, as Yuri
Manin wrote, “does not really have its own language” (Manin, 1977, p. 84). At least
not yet. Indeed, the standard formalism grounded on Hilbert spaces makes use of the
language of standard functional analysis, which presupposes classical mathematics
and logic, with all the problems seem before (in regarding quantum phenomena). A
proper language should reﬂect the indiscernibility of quanta from the start, without
tricks!
As we showed in this paper, such a correct language can be constructed. In this
paper, we examined content and context in quantum physics. We provided examples
of context for the classical and quantum realms and argued that the quantum situation
is fundamentally different. Furthermore, we reasoned that context-dependency in
the quantum world is intrinsically connected to the lack of identity. Thus, the non-
identity of individuals is an essential feature of the quantum world. Since the standard
mathematics used in physics does not exactly allow for objects who lack identity, i.e.,
indistinguishable objects, we advocated for using a different mathematical structure
in physics: quasi-set theory. Quasi-set theory includes standard mathematic in it but
alsocontains indistinguishableobjects. Webelievethat recreatingquantumphysics in
terms of quasi-set theory and its underlying logic would result in thinking closer to a
more reasonable ontology for the quantum world than currently available ontologies.
This way of thinking may lead to exciting insights into quantum ontologies and
fundamental physical principles that deﬁne quantum mechanics.

520
J. A. de Barros et al.
References
Aerts, D., D’Hondt, E., & Gabora, L. (2000). Why the disjunction in quantum logic is not classical.
Foundations of Physics, 30(9), 1473–1480.
Arenhart, J. R. B. (2011). A discussion on ﬁnite quasi-cardinals in quasi-set theory. Foundations of
Physics, 41, 1338–1354.
Bohm, D. (1952). A Suggested interpretation of the quantum theory in terms of “Hidden” variables.
II. Physical Review, 85(2), 180–193. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRev.85.180
Bouwmeester, D., Pan, J.-W., Daniell, M., Weinfurter, H., & Zeilinger, A. (1999). Observation of
three-photon Greenberger-Horne-Zeilinger entanglement. Physical Review Letters, 82(7), 1345–
1349.
Button, T., & Walsh, S. (2018). Philosophy and model theory. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
da Costa, N. C. A., & Krause, D. (1997). An intensional Schrödinger logic. Notre Dame Journal of
Formal Logic, 38(2), 179–194.
de Barros, J. A., & Suppes, P. (2000). Inequalities for dealing with detector inefﬁciencies in
Greenberger-Horne-Zeilinger type experiments. Physical Review Letters, 84(5), 793–797.
de Barros, J. A., Kujala, J. V., & Oas, G. (2016). Negative probabilities and contextuality. Journal
of Mathematical Psychology, 74, 34–45. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmp.2016.04.014
de Barros, J. A., Holik, F., & Krause, D. (2017). Contextuality and indistinguishability. Entropy,
19(9), 435–57.
Domenech, G., & Holik, F. (2007). A discussion on particle number and quantum indistinguisha-
bility. Foundations of Physics, 37(6), 855–78.
Domenech, G., Holik, F., & Krause, D. (2008). Q-spaces and the foundations of quantum mechanics.
Foundations of Physics, 38(11), 969–994.
Dalla Chiara, M. L., Giuntini, R., & Greechie, R. (2004). Reasoning in Quantum Theory. Sharp
and Unsharp Quantum Logics. Kluwer Ac. Pu.
Dzhafarov, E. N., & Kujala, J. V. (2016, July). Contextuality-by-default 2.0: Systems with binary
random variables. In de Barros, J. A., Coecke, B., & Pothos, E. (Eds.), International Symposium
on Quantum Interaction (pp. 16–32). Springer.
French, S., & Krause, D. (2006). Identity in physics: A historical, philosophical, and formal analysis.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
French, S., & Krause, D. (2010). Remarks on the theory of quasi-sets. Studia Logica, 95(1–2),
101–124.
Geach, P. (1967). Identity. Review of Metaphysics, 21, 3–12.
Greenberger, D. M., Horne, M. A., & Zeilinger, A. (1989). Going Beyond Bell’s theorem. In M.
Kafatos (Ed.), Bell’s theorem, quantum theory, and conceptions of the universe (Vol. 37, pp.
69–72). Kluwer.
Hodges, W. (1983). Elementary predicate logic. In: D. M. Gabbay & F. Guenthner, (Eds.), Handbook
of philosophical logic—Vol. I: Elements of classical logic (pp. 1–131). D. Reidel.
Holland, P. R. (1995). The quantum theory of motion: An account of the de Broglie-Bohm causal
interpretation of quantum mechanics. Cambridge University Press.
Hume, D. (1985). Treatise of human nature (L. A. Selby-Bigge (Eds.), 2nd ed.). Oxford University
Press.
Jaeger, G. (2009). Entanglement, information, and the interpretation of quantum mechanics.
Springer.
Krause, D., Arenhart, J. R. B. & Bueno, O. (2020). The non-individuals interpretation of quantum
mechanics. In O. Freire Jr., G. Bacciagaluppi, O. Darrigol, T. Hartz, C. Joas, A. Kojevnikov, &
O. Pessoa Jr. (Eds.), Forthcoming in the Oxford Handbook of the History of Interpretations of
Quantum Mechanics.
Krause, D., & Coelho, A. M. N. (2005). Identity, indiscernibility, and philosophical claims.
Axiomathes, 15, 191–210. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10516-004-6678-5
Locke, J. (1959). AN essay concerning human understanding. New York: Dover.
Manin, Y. I. (1977). A course in mathematical logic. Springer.

Quantum Identity, Content, and Context: From Classical to Non-classical Logic
521
Mattuck, R. D. (1967). A guide do Feynman diagrams in the many-body problem. McGraw-Hill.
Merzbacher, E. (1970). Quantum mechanics. New York: Wiley.
Penrose, R. (2004). The road to reality: A complete guide to the laws of the universe. London:
Jonathan Cape.
Popescu, S., & Rohrlich, D. (1994). Quantum nonlocality as an axiom. Foundations of Physics,
24(3), 379–385.
Quine, V. O. (1969). Ontological relativity and other essays. New York: Columbia University Press.
Ramsey, F. P. (1965). The foundations of mathematics and other logical essays. In R. B. Braithwaite
(Ed.), with a preface by G. E. Moore. Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Schrödinger, E. (1998). What is an elementary particle? In E. Castellani (Ed.), Interpreting bodies:
Classical and quantum objects in modern physics (pp. 197–210). Princeton: Princeton University
Press.
Specker, E. P. (1975). The logic of propositions which are not simultaneously decidable. In C. A.
Hooker (Ed.), The logico-algebraic approach to quantum mechanics (pp. 135–140). Netherlands:
Springer.
Styer, D. F., et al. (2002). Nine formulations of quantum mechanics. American Journal of Physics,
70(3), 288–297.
Svozil, K. (1998). Quantum logic. Singapore: Springer.
Teller, P. (1998). Quantum mechanics and haecceities. In E. Castellani (Ed.), Interpreting bodies:
Classical and quantum objects in modern physics. New Jersey: Princeton University Press.
Toraldo di Francia, G. (1986). Le Cose e i Loro Nomi. Bari: Laterza.
Verhulst, F. (2012). An interview with Henri Poincaré. NAW 5/13 nr. 3 September 2012
Vickers, P. (2013). Understanding inconsistent science. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Weyl, H. (1949). Philosophy of mathematics and natural science. Princeton: Princeton University
Press.

Contextual Probability in Quantum
Physics, Cognition, Psychology, Social
Science, and Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Andrei Khrennikov
1
Introduction
This is the review on the applications of QP to modeling behavior of biological,
social, and AI systems. The recent years were characterized by explosion of interest
to applications of quantum theory outside of physics, especially in cognitive psy-
chology, decision making, information processing in the brain, molecular biology,
genetics and epigenetics, and evolution theory, psychology, decision making, social
and political sciences, economics and ﬁnance (see Khrennikov, 1999–Khrennikov,
2004a for the pioneer papers, (Khrennikov, 2004b)–(Bagarello, 2019) for mono-
graphs, and (Ozawa & Khrennikov, 2020)–(Khrennikov & Watanabe, 2021) for the
recent papers).
We call the corresponding models quantum-like. They are not directed to micro-
level modeling of real quantum physical processes in biosystems, say in cells or
brains. Thus, quantum-like research has to be sharply distinguished from quantum
biophysics-thestudyofgenuinequantumphysicalprocessesinbiosystems,inpartic-
ular, from quantum brain theory associated with the names of Penrose and Hameroff.
Quantum-like modeling works from the viewpoint to quantum theory as a measure-
ment theory. For example, humans are systems performing information processing
and measurements including self-measurements which are described by the quan-
tum formalism. Such modeling is also applicable to AI-systems which functioning
is based on the Hilbert space representation of their information states and transi-
tion from one state to another is described by quantum channels. The quantum-like
approach to modeling of cognition is based on the quantum-like contextual paradigm
proposed by the author (Khrennikov, 2004b, 2010):
A. Khrennikov (B)
Linnaeus University, International Center for Mathematical Modeling in Physics and Cognitive
Sciences, 351 95 Vaxjo, Sweden
e-mail: andrei.khrennikov@lnu.se
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
S. Wuppuluri and I. Stewart (eds.), From Electrons to Elephants and Elections,
The Frontiers Collection, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-92192-7_28
523

524
A. Khrennikov
The mathematical formalism of quantum information and probability theories
can be used to model behavior not only of genuine quantum physical systems, but
all context-sensitive systems, e.g., human beings.
Thus, contextuality of quantum theory is one of the main motivations for using
QP in cognition, psychology, and decision making. The same can be said about
AI-systems that should be sensitivity of context variation.
We review the basic applications of quantum-like models, from cognition to com-
plex social processes, including the recent waves of mass protests throughout the
world described by the novel theory of social laser (Khrennikov, 2020), as well to
behavior of AI systems, individual systems as robots and their collectives.
We want to present in more detail consequences of such information processing
for rationality. In classical decision making, rational agents are mathematically mod-
eled as probabilistic information processors using Bayesian update of probabilities:
rational = Bayesian. Quantum state update is generally non-Bayesian (Ozawa &
Khrennikov, 2020). We deﬁne quantum rationality as decision making that is based
on quantum state update. Quantum and classical rational agents behave differently.
For instance, a quantum(-like) agent can violate the Savage Sure Thing Principle
(Savage, 1954) (see Busemeyer & Bruza, 2012; Haven & Khrennikov, 2013; Haven
et al., 2017) and the Aumann theorem (Aumann, 1976) on impossibility of agreeing
to disagree (see Haven et al., 2017).
2
Classical and Quantum Probability Calculi:
Measures Versus Complex Amplitudes
classical probability (CP) was mathematically formalized by Kolmogorov (1933)
(Kolmogorov, 1933). This is the calculus of probability measures, where a non-
negative weight p(A) is assigned to any event A. The main property of CP is its
additivity: if two events O1, O2 are disjoint, then the probability of disjunction of
these events equals to the sum of probabilities:
P(O1 ∨O2) = P(O1) + P(O2).
In fact, powerful integration theory that is needed for calculation of averages demands
σ-additivity:
P(∪j O j) =

j
P(O j),
(1)
where O j ∩Oi = ∅, i ̸= j.
Quantum probability (QP) is the calculus of complex amplitudes or in the abstract
formalism complex vectors. Thus, instead of operations on probability measures one
operates with vectors. We can say that QP is a vector model of probabilistic reasoning.

Contextual Probability in Quantum …
525
Each complex amplitude ψ gives the probability by the Born’s rule: Probability is
obtained as the square of the absolute value of the complex amplitude.
p = |ψ|2.
(2)
By operating with complex probability amplitudes, instead of the direct operation
with probabilities, one can violate the basic laws of CP.
InCP,thelawoftotalprobability (LTP)isderivedbyusingadditivityofprobability
and the Bayes formula, the deﬁnition of conditional probability,
P(O2|O1) = P(O2 ∩O1)
P(O1)
, P(O1) > 0.
(3)
Consider the pair, A and B, of discrete classical random variables. Then
P(B = β) =

α
P(A = α)P(B = β|A = α).
Thus, in CP the B-probability distribution can be calculated from the A-probability
and the conditional probabilities P(B = β|A = α).
In QP classical LTP is perturbed by the interference term (Khrennikov, 2010); for
dichotomous quantum observables A and B of the von Neumann-type, i.e., given by
Hermitian operators ˆA and ˆB, the quantum version of LTP has the form:
P(B = β) =

α
P(A = α)P(B = β|a = α)
(4)
+2

α1<α2
cos θα1α2

P(A = α1)P(B = β|A = α1)P(A = α2)P(B = β|a = α2)
(5)
If the interference term is positive, then the QP-calculus would generate a probability
that is larger than its CP-counterpart given by the classical LTP (2). In particular, this
probability ampliﬁcation is the basis of the quantum computing supremacy.
3
Non-Kolmogorovness of QP and Its Contextual
Background: Quantum-like Paradigm
Violation of CP-laws in QP can be formulated in the probabilistic terms as the
impossibility to represent all quantum observables as random variables on the same
Kolmogorov probability space. This is a consequence of the existence of incompat-
ible observables which are mathematically described by noncommuting operators.

526
A. Khrennikov
In quantum physics, incompatible experimental contexts are described by different
probability spaces. Thus, QP can be considered as a special calculus of contextual
probabilities, manifold of probability spaces labeled by experimental contexts. This
probabilistic picture matches with Bohr’s complementarity principle.
A complex probability amplitude, a pure quantum state, serves for coupling prob-
ability measures corresponding to a variety of generally incompatible observables.1
Asmentionedinintroduction,applicationsofQPtocognitionanddecisionmaking
are based on
Quantum-like paradigm. The mathematical formalism of quantum information
and probability theories can be used to model behavior not only of genuine quantum
physical systems, but all context-sensitive systems, e.g., human beings. Contextual
information processing cannot be based on complete resolution of ambiguity. It is
meaningless to do this for the concrete context, if in a few minutes (or even seconds)
context will be totally different. Therefore such systems process ambiguities, process
superpositions of alternatives.
We remark that in the original Kolmogorv’s formulation (Kolmogorov, 1933) CP
is also contextual, but this contextual viewpoint on CP was practically forgotten (see
appendix for details).
4
Quantum Formalism
4.1
States: Pure and Mixed
Denote by H a complex Hilbert space endowed with the scalar product ⟨·|·⟩. For
simplicity, we assume that it is ﬁnite dimensional. The space of density operators is
denoted by S (H) The space of all linear operators in H is denoted by the symbol
L(H). In turn, this is the complex Hilbert space with the scalar product, ⟨A|B⟩=
Tr(A⋆B). We shall also consider linear operators acting in L(H). They are called
superoperators.
A pure quantum state is represented by a vector |ψ⟩∈H that is normalized to
1, i.e., ⟨ψ|ψ⟩= 1. It can be represented as the density operator ρψ = |ψ⟩⟨ψ|; this
is the orthogonal projector on the vector |ψ⟩. States which are not pure are called
mixed.
1 A density operator, a mixed quantum state, serves for the same purpose.

Contextual Probability in Quantum …
527
4.2
Entropy
The von Neumann entropy is deﬁned as
S(ρ) = −Trρ ln ρ,
(6)
where ρ is a density operator.
There exists an orthonormal basis | j⟩consisting of eigenvectors of ρ, i.e., ρ| j⟩=
p j| j⟩(where p j ≥0 and 
j p j = 1). In this basis, the matrix of the operator ρ ln ρ
has the form diag(pj ln pj; ) hence
S(ρ) = −

j
p j ln p j.
(7)
However, the von Neumann entropy has the classical form, but only w.r.t. this to
special basis.
We present three basic properties of the von Neumann entropy.
1. S(ρ) = 0 if and only if ρ is a pure quantum state, i.e., ρ = |ψ⟩⟨ψ|.
2. For a unitary operator U, S(UρU ⋆) = S(ρ).
3. The maximum of entropy is approached on the state ρdisorder = I/N and
S(ρdisorder) = ln N, where N is the dimension of the state space.
It is natural to call ρdisorder = I/N the state of maximal disorder.
4.3
Projective Measurements
In the original quantum formalism (Von Neumann, 1955), physical observable A is
represented by a Hermitian operator ˆA. We consider only operators with discrete
spectra:
ˆA =

x
x ˆE A(x),
where ˆE A(x) is the projector onto the subspace of H corresponding to the eigenvalue
x. Suppose that system’s state is mathematically represented by a density operator
ρ. Then the probability to get the answer x is given by the Born rule
Pr{A = x∥ρ} = Tr[ ˆE A(x)ρ] = Tr[ ˆE A(x)ρ ˆE A(x)]
(8)
and according to the projection postulate the post-measurement state is obtained via
the state-transformation:
ρ →ρx =
ˆE A(x)ρ ˆE A(x)
Tr ˆE A(x)ρ ˆE A(x)
.
(9)

528
A. Khrennikov
For reader’s convenience, we present these formulas for a pure initial state ψ ∈H.
The Born’s rule has the form:
Pr{A = x∥ρ} = ∥ˆE A(x)ψ∥2 = ⟨ψ| ˆE A(x)ψ⟩.
(10)
The state transformation is given by the projection postulate:
ψ →ψx = ˆE A(x)ψ/∥ˆE A(x)ψ∥.
(11)
Here the observable-operator ˆA (its spectral decomposition) uniquely determines the
feedback state transformations IA(x) for outcomes x
ρ →IA(x)ρ = ˆE A(x)ρ ˆE A(x).
(12)
The map x →IA(x) given by (12) is the simplest (but very important) example of
quantum instrument.
4.4
Simplest Non-projective Measurements
In general, the statistical properties of any measurement are characterized by
(i) the output probability distribution Pr{x = x∥ρ}, the probability distribution of
the output x of the measurement in the input state ρ;
(ii) the quantum state reduction ρ →ρ{x=x}, the state change from the input state ρ to
the output state ρ{x=x} conditional upon the outcome x = x of the measurement.
In von Neumann’s formulation, the statistical properties of any measurement of an
observable A is uniquely determined by Born’s rule (8) and the projection postulate
(9), and they are represented by the map (12), an instrument of von Neumann type.
However, von Neumann’s formulation does not reﬂect the fact that the same observ-
able A represented by the Hermitian operator ˆA in H can be measured in many ways.2
Formally, such measurement-schemes are represented by quantum instruments.
Now, we consider the simplest quantum instruments of non von Neumann type,
known as atomic instruments. We start with recollection of the notion of POVM
(probability operator valued measure); we restrict considerations to POVMs with a
discrete domain of deﬁnition X = {x1, ..., xN, ...}. POVM is a map x →ˆD(x) such
that for each x ∈X, ˆD(x) is a positive contractive Hermitian operator (called effect)
(i.e., ˆD(x)⋆= ˆD(x), 0 ≤⟨ψ| ˆD(x)ψ⟩≤1 for any ψ ∈H), and the normalization
condition

x
ˆD(x) = I
2 Say ˆA = ˆH is the operator representing the energy-observable. This is just a theoretical entity
encodingenergy.Energycanbemeasuredinmanywayswithinverydifferentmeasurementschemes.

Contextual Probability in Quantum …
529
holds, where I is the unit operator. It is assumed that for any measurement, the output
probability distribution Pr{x = x∥ρ} is given by
Pr{x = x∥ρ} = Tr[ ˆD(x)ρ],
(13)
where { ˆD(x)} is a POVM. For atomic instruments, it is assumed that effects are
represented concretely in the form
ˆD(x) = ˆV (x)⋆ˆV (x),
(14)
where V (x) is a linear operator in H. Hence, the normalization condition has the
form 
x V (x)⋆V (x) = I. 3 The Born rule can be written similarly to (8):
Pr{x = x∥ρ} = Tr[V (x)ρV ⋆(x)]
(15)
It is assumed that the post-measurement state transformation is based on the map:
ρ →IA(x)ρ = V (x)ρV ⋆(x),
(16)
so the quantum state reduction is given by
ρ →ρ{x=x} =
IA(x)ρ
Tr[IA(x)ρ].
(17)
The map x →IA(x) given by (16) is an atomic quantum instrument. We remark that
the Born rule (15) can be written in the form
Pr{x = x∥ρ} = Tr [IA(x)ρ].
(18)
Let ˆA be a Hermitian operator in H. Consider a POVM ˆD = ( ˆD A(x)) with the
domain of deﬁnition given by the spectrum of ˆA. This POVM represents a measure-
ment of observable A if Born’s rule holds:
Pr{A = x∥ρ} = Tr[ ˆD A(x)ρ] = Tr[ ˆE A(x)ρ].
(19)
Thus, in principle, probabilities of outcomes are still encoded in the spectral decom-
position of operator ˆA or in other words operators ˆD A(x) should be selected in
such a way that they generate the probabilities corresponding to the spectral decom-
position of the symbolic representation ˆA of observables A, i.e., ˆD A(x) is uniquely
determined by ˆA as ˆD A(x) = ˆE A(x). We can say that this operator carries only infor-
mation about the probabilities of outcomes, in contrast to the von Neumann scheme,
3 We remark that any orthonormal projector ˆE is Hermitian and idempotent, i.e., ˆE⋆= ˆE and
ˆE2 = ˆE. Thus, any projector ˆE A(x) can be written as (14): ˆE A(x) = ˆE A(x)∗ˆE A(x). The map
x →ˆE A(x) is a special sort of POVM, the projector valued measure - PVM, the quantum instrument
of the von Neumann type.

530
A. Khrennikov
operator ˆA does not encode the rule of the state update. For an atomic instrument,
measurements of the observable A has the unique output probability distribution by
the Born’s rule (19), but has many different quantum state reductions depending of
the decomposition of the effect ˆD(x) = ˆE A(x) = V (x)∗V (x) in such a way that
ρ →ρ{A=x} =
V (x)ρV (x)∗
Tr[V (x)ρV (x)∗].
(20)
4.5
Quantum Instruments
Finally, we formulate the general notion of quantum instrument. A superoperator
acting in L(H) is called positive if it maps the set of positive semi-deﬁnite operators
into itself. We remark that, for each x, IA(x) given by (16) can be considered as
linear positive map.
Generally any map x →IA(x), where for each x, the map IA(x) is a positive
superoperator is called Davies–Lewis (Davies & Lewis, 1970) quantum instrument.
Here index A denotes the observable coupled to this instrument. The probabilities of
A-outcomes are given by Born’s rule in form (18) and the state-update by transfor-
mation (17). Ozawa (Ozawa, 1984) introduced the important additional condition to
ensure that every quantum instrument is physically realizable. This is the condition
of complete positivity. A superoperator is called completely positive if its natural
extension T ⊗I to the tensor product L(H) ⊗L(H) = L(H ⊗H) is again a posi-
tive superoperator on L(H) ⊗L(H). A map x →IA(x), where for each x, the map
IA(x) is a completely positive superoperator is called Davies-Lewis-Ozawa (Davies
& Lewis, 1970; Ozawa, 1984) quantum instrument or simply quantum instrument.
Complete positivity is a sufﬁcient condition for an instrument to be physically
realizable. On the other hand, necessity is derived as follows [?]. Every observable
A of a system S is identiﬁed with the observable A ⊗I of a system S + S′ with any
system S′ external to S.
Then, every physically realizable instrument IA measuring A should be identi-
ﬁed with the instrument IA⊗I measuring A ⊗I such that IA⊗I(x) = IA(x) ⊗I. This
implies that IA(x) ⊗I is again a positive superoperator, so that IA(x) is completely
positive. Similarly, any physically realizable instrument IA(x) measuring system S
should have its extended instrument IA(x) ⊗I measuring system S + S′ for any
external system S′. This is fulﬁlled only if IA(x) is completely positive. Thus, com-
plete positivity is a necessary condition for IA to describe a physically realizable
instrument.

Contextual Probability in Quantum …
531
5
Classical and Quantum Probabilistic Formalization
of the Concept of Rationality
5.1
Savage Sure Thing Principle as the Rationality Axiom
In classical theory of decision making, rational behavior of agents is formalized with
the Savage Sure Thing Principle (STP) (Savage, 1954):
If you prefer prospect b+ to prospect b−if a possible future event A happens (a =
+1); and you prefer prospect b+ still if future event A does not happen (a = −1);
then you should prefer prospect b+, despite having no knowledge of whether or not
event A will happen.
Savage’s illustration refers to a person deciding whether or not to buy a certain
property shortly before a presidential election, the outcome of which could radically
affect the property market:
“Seeing that he would buy in either event, he decides that he should buy, even
though he does not know which event will obtain”.
STP is considered as the axiom of rationality of decision makers (Savage, 1954).
It plays the important role in decision making and economics in the framework
of Savage’s subjective utility theory. In the latter, probability is formalized in the
classical probabilistic framework (Kolmogorov, 1933) and it is endowed with the
subjective interpretation.
We remark that STP is a simple consequence of the law of total probability - LTP
(see (5)). Violation of LTP implies violation of STP. Thus, the degree of satisfaction
of LTP can be used as a statistical test of classical (STP-type) rationality.
In cognitive psychology, violation of STP is known as the disjunction effect. A
plentyofstatisticaldatawascollectedincognitivepsychologyinexperimentsdemon-
strating disjunction effect. For example, in experiments of the Prisoners’ Dilemma
type (Kahneman & Tversky, 1972)–(Kahneman & Thaler, 2006). Such data violate
LTP. The latter implies irrationality (from classical viewpoint) of agents participating
in experiments (mainly students).
We recall that LTP is derived from two assumptions that are ﬁrmly incorporated
into the Kolmogorov axiomatics:
1. Additive law for probability.
2. Baeys formula for conditional probability.
Therefore, violation of LTP and, hence, of STP (and classical rationality) is generated
either by violation of additivity of probability or the Bayes law for conditional proba-
bility or by the combination of these factors. Generally, this leads to the impossibility
to use in decision making Bayesian inference. Quantum(-like) agents proceed with
more general inference machinery based on the quantum state update.

532
A. Khrennikov
Hence, classical rationality is Bayesian inference rationality and quantum ratio-
nality is non-Bayesian inference rationality.4
5.2
Quantum(-like) Rationality
In the light of above considerations, one can ask:
Are quantum agents irrational?
As was discussed, by using QP it is possible to violate LTP and hence STP.
Therefore, generally quantum-like agents are (classically) irrational. However, we
can question the classical probabilistic approach to mathematical formalization of
decisionmakingand,consequently,thecorrespondingnotionofrationality.Wedeﬁne
quantum(-like) rationality as respecting the quantum calculus of probabilities and
the quantum formula for interference of probabilities, LTP with the interference term
(5).
In the framework of quantum-like modeling, violation of the classical CP-laws
including the Byaes formula for conditional probability or even additivity of prob-
ability are not exotic at all. Moreover, the situation in which the probabilistic data
satisﬁes LTP seems to be rather an exception than the norm. We can speculate that
CP-processing of information was resulted from evolution of biological systems, not
only humans, but even animals and simple bio-organisms.
The question whether the “genuine human behavior” should be characterized by
classical rationality taken as the normative theory for the rational decision making
is very complicated and we are not ready to discuss it in this paper.
6
Social Laser
One of the consequences of information overload is that information loses its con-
tent. A human has no possibility analyze deeply the content of communications
delivered by mass-media and social networks. People process information without
even attempting to construct an extended Boolean algebra of events. They oper-
ate with labels such as say covid-19, vaccination, pandemy without trying to go
deeper beyond this labels. Contentless information behaves as a bosonic quantum
ﬁeld which is similar to the quantum electromagnetic ﬁeld. Interaction of humans
with such quantum information ﬁeld can generate a variety of quantum-like behav-
ioral effects. One of them is social lasing, stimulated ampliﬁcation of social actions
(SASA) (Khrennikov, 2015)-(Tsarev et al., 2019). In social laser theory, humans
4 Of course, non-Bayesian probability updates are not reduced to quantum, given by state transfor-
mations in the complex Hilbert space. One may expect that human decision making violates not
only classical, but even quantum rationality.

Contextual Probability in Quantum …
533
play the role of atoms, social atoms (s-atoms). Interaction of the information ﬁeld
composed of indistinguishable (up to some parameters, as say social energy) exci-
tations with gain medium composed of s-atoms generate the cascade type process
of emission of social actions. SASA describes well e.g. color revolutions and other
types of mass protests (see Khrennikov, 2020 for detailed presentation).
Over the past years, our society has been constantly shaken by high-amplitude
information waves. These are waves of enormous social energy. They are often
destructive and are a kind of information tsunami. The main distinguishing features
of these waves are their high amplitude, coherence (the homogeneous nature of the
social actions they generate) and the short time required for their generation and
relaxation, huge singular spikes.
We showed [] that such waves can be modeled using the social laser, which
describes stimulated ampliﬁcation of coordinated social actions. “Actions” are inter-
preted very broadly, from mass protests, in particular, leading to color revolutions
such as the Orange or Maidan revolutions in Ukraine or the recent mass protests in
USA (anti-Baiden protests for fair votes), Belarus (anti-Lukashenko protests for fair
votes), Russia (anti-Putin protests for liberation of Naval’nii), Germany, UK, Aus-
tralia, Canada, Sweden (protests against corona-fascism and violation of the basic
human rights with pandemic-justiﬁcation) as well as generating of “right voting” and
other collective decisions as, e.g., acceptance of lockdown and support of the total
vaccination against covid-19 by the majority of population (Khrennikov, 2020).
7
Order-stability as a Bonus for Quantum Rationality
Entropy is typically considered as a measure of disorder in a system (physical or bio-
logical). For an isolated classical system, the second law of thermodynamics implies
that entropy increases monotonically. Of course, a biosystem is never completely
isolated; in particular, energy and matter ﬂows from and into environment never
stop. A completely isolated biosystem is dead. But, we are not interested in these
physical ﬂows, only in information processing, in the dynamic of the agent’s informa-
tion state. How would behave classical versus quantum agents isolated from external
information ﬂows? As was mentioned the entropy of an isolated system performing
classical information processing would increase, but the entropy of an isolated system
performing quantum information processing is preserved (Khrennikov & Watanabe,
2021).
8
Concluding Remarks
Applications of the mathematical formalism of quantum theory and its methodology
outside of physics cover the wide range of research areas, from molecular biology
to cognition, social science, and artiﬁcial intelligence [].

534
A. Khrennikov
We emphasize that behavior quantum(-like) agents differs crucially from behavior
of classical agents. Quantum agents demonstrate superiority over classical agents in
informationally dense environments, because they need less computational resources
fordecisionmaking.Themaindangerofquantumrationalbehavioristhatsuchagents
become a very good medium for social engineering; in particular, a good active
medium for social lasing. The latter can be used to generate instability throughout
the world, in the form of mass-protests and color revolutions.
Appearance of this sort of instability can be expected the AI-area. Quantum robots
having sufﬁciently high cognitive abilities, i.e., not just algorithmically programmed
entities, but self-learning and developing creatures, would also become a good active
medium for AI-social lasing.
9
Appendix: Contextuality of Kolmogorov Theory
We recall the original Kolmogorov’s interpretation of probability (Kolmogorov,
1933):
“[. . . ] we may assume that to an event A which may or may not occur under
conditions 	 is assigned a real number P(A) which has the following characteristics:
• (a) one can be practically certain that if the complex of conditions 	 is repeated a
large number of times, N, then if n be the number of occurrences of event A, the
ratio n/N will differ very slightly from P(A);
• (b) if P(A) is very small, one can be practically certain that when conditions 	
are realized only once, the event A would not occur at all.”
The (a)-part of this interpretation is nothing else than the frequency interpretation
of probability. This is the essence of the ‘statistical interpretation of probability’
which is mathematically justiﬁed by the law of large numbers (a theorem in the
Kolmogorov measure-theoretic mathematical model): frequencies converge to prob-
abilities for almost all elementary events.
This reference to context 	 is closely related considerations of Sect.3. Kol-
mogorov pointed out that each probability space is determined by its own complex
of conditions (context) 	. For example, he deﬁnitely would not be surprised if sta-
tistical data collected for a few different experimental contexts, 	1, ..., 	n, would
violate one of the laws of probability; for example, LTP. For him, in general, each of
these contexts determines its own probability space
P	 j = (
	 j, F	 j, p	 j ).
Since LTP was proven by working in a single Kolmogorov probability framework
(the same probability measure was used to deﬁne all conditional probabilities in the
right-hand side of LTP), the possibility of its violation in a multi-space framework
is not surprising. Unfortunately, this contextuality dimension of classical proba-
bility model [which was so strongly emphasized in Sect.2 of Kolmogorov’s book

Contextual Probability in Quantum …
535
(Kolmogorov, 1933)] has be washed out in the process of further development of
classical probability. Therefore by seeing violation of LTP people often make fun-
damental philosophic conclusions such as, e.g., “death of realism”. The latter means
impossibility to assign deﬁnite values of observables to chance parameters ω ∈
 (in
physics one speaks about hidden variables and use symbols λ ∈.), i.e., impossibil-
ity to construct the functional representation of observables ω →a(ω). Kolmogorov
would defend realism, but at the same time emphasize its contextuality, dependence
on the experimental context. For Kolmogorov, one cannot speak about probability
and random variables before concrete experimental context is ﬁxed.
References
Asano, M., Khrennikov, A., Ohya, M., Tanaka, Y., & Yamato, I. (2015). Quantum adaptivity in
biology: From genetics to cognition. Heidelberg-Berlin-New York: Springer.
Aumann, R. J. (1976). Agreeing on disagree. The Annals of Statistics, 4, 1236–1239.
Bagarello, F. (2019). Quantum concepts in the social, ecological and biological sciences. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press.
Busemeyer, J., & Bruza, P. (2012). Quantum models of cognition and decision. Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.
Davies, E. B., & Lewis, J. T. (1970). An operational approach to quantum probability. Communi-
cations in Mathematical Physics, 17, 239–260.
Haven, E., & Khrennikov, A. (2013). Quantum social science. Cambridge University Press.
Haven, E., Khrennikov, A., & Robinson, T. R. (2017). Quantum methods in social science: A ﬁrst
course. Singapore: WSP.
Kahneman, D., & Thaler., R. (2006). Utility Maximization and experienced utility. Journal of
Economic Perspectives,20, 221–232.
Kahneman, D. (2003). Maps of bounded rationality: Psychology for behavioral economics. Amer-
ican Economic Review, 93(5), 1449–1475.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1972). Subjective probability: A judgment of representativeness.
Cognitive Psychology, 3(3), 430–454.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1979). Prospect theory: An analysis of decision under risk. Econo-
metrica, 47, 263–291.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1984). Choices values and frames. American Psychologist, 39(4),
341–350.
Khrennikov, A., Alodjants, A. Troﬁmova., & A. and Tsarev, D. (2018). On interpretational questions
for quantum-Like modeling of social lasing. Entropy,20(12), 921.
Khrennikov, A. (1999). Classical and quantum mechanics on information spaces with applications
to cognitive, psychological, social and anomalous phenomena. Foundations of Physics, 29, 1065–
1098.
Khrennikov, A. (2003). Quantum-like formalism for cognitive measurements. Biosystems, 70, 211–
233.
Khrennikov, A. (2004). On quantum-like probabilistic structure of mental information. Open Sys-
tems and Information Dynamics, 11(3), 267–275.
Khrennikov, A. (2004). Information dynamics in cognitive, psychological, social, and anomalous
phenomena. Dordreht: Ser.: Fundamental Theories of Physics, Kluwer.
Khrennikov, A. (2010). Ubiquitous quantum structure: from psychology to ﬁnances. Berlin-
Heidelberg-New York: Springer.
Khrennikov, A. (2015). Towards information lasers. Entropy, 17(10), 6969–6994.

536
A. Khrennikov
Khrennikov, A. (2016). Social laser: Action ampliﬁcation by stimulated emission of social energy.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society, 374(2054), 20150094.
Khrennikov, A. (2018). Social laser model: From color revolutions to Brexit and election of Donald
Trump. Kybernetes, 47(2), 273–278.
Khrennikov, A. (2020). Social laser. Singapore: Jenny Stanford Publ.
Khrennikov, A., Toffano, Z., & Dubois, F. (2019). Concept of information laser: From quantum
theory to behavioral dynamics. The European Physical Journal Special Topics, 227(15–16),
2133–2153.
Khrennikov, A., & Watanabe, N. (2021). Order-stability in complex biosystems from the viewpoint
of the theory of open quantum systems. Entropy, 23(3), 355–365.
Kolmogorov, A. N. (1933). Grundbegriffe der Wahrscheinlichkeitsrechnung. Berlin: Springer.
Ozawa, M., & Khrennikov, A. (2020). Application of theory of quantum instruments to psychology:
Combination of question order effect with response replicability effect. Entropy, 22(1), 37. 1-
9436.
Ozawa, M. (1984). Quantum measuring processes for continuous observables. Journal of Mathe-
matical Physics, 25, 79–87.
Ozawa, M., & Khrennikov, A. (2020). Modeling combination of question order effect, response
replicability effect, and QQ-equality with quantum instruments. Journal of Mathematical Psy-
chology, 100, 102491.
Savage, L. J. (1954). The foundations of statistics. New York: Wiley and Sons.
Tsarev, D., Troﬁmova, A., Alodjants, A., et al. (2019). Phase transitions, collective emotions and
decision-making problem in heterogeneous social systems. Scientiﬁc Reports, 9, 18039.
Von Neumann, J. (1955). Mathematical foundations of quantum mechanics. Princeton, NJ, USA:
Princeton Univ Princeton Univ Princeton Univ Princeton University Press.

Cognitive Science/Computer Science

Nothing Will Come of Everything:
Software Towers and Quantum Towers
Samson Abramsky
The theme of this volume is content and context, as a perspective on the long-standing
debate between reductionism and holism. I will discuss these dichotomies with ref-
erence to three areas of science: computer science, mathematics, and foundations of
quantum mechanics.
Firstly, though, some general remarks. In my view, from a scientiﬁc perspective,
reductionism is, perhaps in a caricature form, the basic method of science; whereas
holism is reaching for a way to protect various forms of belief from the incursions of
science, and to call for a return to a pre-scientiﬁc viewpoint. Science proceeds by mas-
tering the overwhelming complexity of everything by isolating aspects of the whole:
subsystems, degrees of freedom, parts. This enables it to ﬁnd the hidden simplicities
and patterns underlying the richness and speciﬁcity of phenomena. In a slogan:
On the other hand, this method has to be understood in a suitably nuanced fashion.
I shall argue, ﬁrstly, that Computer Science offers an excellent arena for discussing
these issues, all the more so as it is removed from the emotional undertones which
usually color the debate.
S. Abramsky (B)
Department of Computer Science, Oxford University, Wolfson Building,
Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3QD, UK
e-mail: samson.abramsky@cs.ox.ac.uk
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
S. Wuppuluri and I. Stewart (eds.), From Electrons to Elephants and Elections,
The Frontiers Collection, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-92192-7_29
539

540
S. Abramsky
1
First Lens: Computer Science
Let us begin with an old chestnut which has often been used in the following kind
of reductive argument:
All a computer does is manipulate 1’s and 0’s. Therefore it can’t […].
The speciﬁc conclusion often relates to exhibiting intelligent behaviour of one kind
or another. There is a serious discussion to be had about possible limits to AI. But the
above argument does not contribute to such a discussion. In fact, while the premise
of the argument is, for standard computer architectures, true enough, there are no
interesting conclusions which can be drawn from this fact.
The basic issue is this: does the fact that at a low level of description1 computers
are manipulating ﬁnite strings of bits, in any way prevent or falsify the description of
computers as manipulating much higher level objects: whether they are our medical
records, bank accounts, credit records, games of chess, mathematical proofs, musical
scores, visual images, text or speech? Any computer science undergraduate after a
year or two of their studies will be well aware that the answer to this question is
a resounding No! In fact, a large part of what they will have learnt in their studies
will have been precisely how to build high-level structures of diverse kinds based on
lower-level primitives. This is actually what programming, and software design and
architecture, are all about. Several features are worthy of attention:
• Firstly, there is an obvious parallel between the way software developers build
high-level abstractions from low-level primitives, and work in the foundations
of mathematics. Indeed, contemporary work in developing formal mathematics
in systems such as Agda, Coq, HoTT (homotopy type theory), etc. makes this
explicit, so that the boundaries between code and mathematics become somewhat
indistinct. From the heroic age of Principia Mathematica, we are now in an era
of highly engineered software systems, capable of undertaking large scale proofs,
such as the proof of the Kepler conjecture in the Flyspeck project led by Tom
Hales (Hales et al., 2017), and the proofs of the Four-Color Theorem and the Feit-
Thompson theorem in projects led by Georges Gonthier (Gonthier, 2008; Gonthier
et al., 2013). In each case, elaborate towers of concepts, deﬁnitions and results
relating to specialised mathematical theories are built up from simple, logically
evident foundations. This has much the same overall structure as the way that
elaborate towers of modules and libraries determined by application-level concepts
are built from the basic mechanisms provided by a programming language—
which itself sits on top of a stack of compilers, editors, tracing and debugging
tools, etc. These in turn are ultimately mapped down to the code controlling the
“bare metal” of the computer—which is indeed directly manipulating 1’s and 0’s.
This last fact, however, is gloriously irrelevant to the software artefact that sits
on top of this tower of abstractions. Indeed, by virtue of the decoupling of high-
level programming languages from speciﬁc machines provided by the now-routine
1 By no means the lowest: there is a lot of complicated device physics sitting underneath the
abstraction level of computer architecture.

Nothing Will Come of Everything: Software Towers and Quantum …
541
mechanisms of compilation, the same code can be run on many different machines,
eliciting different sequences of manipulations of bit-strings, but achieving the same
high-level effect.
• While the architecture of concepts embodied in code is analogous to the architec-
ture of mathematical concepts, there is also mathematics about code: namely, the
tools of formal speciﬁcation and veriﬁcation. It is by virtue of these tools that we
can be sure of the independence of high-level code from low-level implementation
details. Another important aspect is directly relevant to the holism-reductionism
debate, as reﬂected in the manifesto of this volume. For each level of the soft-
ware tower, speciﬁcations will be written at the corresponding abstraction level.
If we are specifying relationships between geometric objects in a visual feature
recognition system, or a hierarchical relationship in an ontology used in a medical
database, we would no more refer to details of bitstrings being loaded into the
registers of a GPU than we would refer to electrons in describing the biology of
elephants. Yet our code will not run without being executed on a physical machine,
any more than an elephant can exist without being manifested in physical matter.
So as far as the delightful rhetorical ﬂourishes of this volume’s manifesto are con-
cerned, they are exhibited in software in terms completely familiar to computer
science undergraduates on a daily basis. Nothing to see here!
• One feature that perhaps serves to obscure the analogy we are making is that
we customarily read these towers of abstractions in opposite directions. In the
case of scientiﬁc reductionism, we read the tower downwards, in the direction of
analysis.Thatis,weemphasizethereductionofhigher-levelconceptstolowerlevel
ones—even though, in many cases, this reduction is “in principle”, and difﬁcult
or impossible to achieve in practice. By contrast, in the case of software, we read
the tower upwards, in the direction of synthesis. We are interested in constructing
a complex artefact, not in analyzing the complexity of a pre-existing class of
systems occurring in nature. But this difference in how these towers arise does
not in itself show that they are different in kind—and indeed, the well-understood
towers of software abstraction may serve to shed light on the hierarchical structure
of scientiﬁc theories.
• One difference that may be argued is that in natural science, we expect nature to
force our hand in the development of a tower of theories, whereas in an engineering
context we have the luxury of choosing our programming language and tools, and
our hardware. But this difference is not as great as it may appear. In mathematics,
the same ideas in a given domain may be developed from different choices of
foundationalconcepts.Forexample,algebraicgeometryhasbeensubjecttoseveral
different foundational frameworks, in a process which is still ongoing (Van der
Waerden, 1971; Dieudonné & Grothendieck, 1971; Anel & Catren, 2021). In
physical science, physical systems can be studied in a classical, semi-classical, or
fully quantum framework according to need.
The main overall point we wish to make is that Computer Science offers, in the ideas
of the tower of software concepts, a well-understood, well-formalised, non-mystical
paradigm for understanding how systems can be described at different levels of
abstraction, and the levels related to each other. Moreover, although the mappings

542
S. Abramsky
downwards are well-understood, and essential for the design and veriﬁcation of
implementations, there is no temptation to refer to them when reasoning about the
higher levels! In fact, the development of higher levels of abstraction is a practical
necessity. It is an essential tool in mastering complexity. Indeed, the tower enables
us to introduce suitable levels of abstraction, so that we can “think bigger thoughts”.
An essential part of this Computer Science methodology, to which we shall
now turn, is compositionality, an idea which is also of great relevance to the con-
text/content and reductionism/holism debates.
1.1
Compositionality
Compositionality is a methodological principle, originating from the work of Frege
and others in logic (Janssen, 2001; Janssen & Partee, 1997), which has played a cru-
cial rôle in Computer Science for several decades, but has yet to achieve the recogni-
tion in general scientiﬁc modelling which it deserves. I believe it is of major potential
importance for mathematical modelling throughout the sciences. See e.g. (Werning
et al., 2012; Fong & Spivak, 2019) for some recent texts.2
Compositionality was originally formulated as a principle for the semantics of
natural language: the meaning of an expression should be a function of the meaning of
its syntactic constituents, and of how these parts are combined to form the expression.
That is, the structure of semantics should follow the grammatical structure of the
language—it should be syntax-directed, in computer science parlance.
In mathematical logic, the Tarskian semantics of predicate logic stands as the
paradigm of compositional deﬁnitions for formal languages (Tarski, 1936; Tarski
& Vaught, 1956). It has in turn heavily inﬂuenced the development of the formal
semantics of programming languages (Scott & Strachey, 1971).
More generally, in computer science, compositionality has become a major
paradigm in enabling the structured description of complex systems. We can con-
trast it with the traditional approach in mathematical modelling, of whole-system
(monolithic) analysis of given systems. In the compositional approach we start with
a ﬁxed set of basic (simple) building blocks, and constructions for building new (in
general more complex) systems out of given sub-systems, and build up the required
complex system with these.
A little more formally (and somewhat simplistically), compositionality can be
expressed algebraically:
S = ω(S1, . . . , Sn)
The system S is described as being built up from sub-systems S1, …Sn by the oper-
ation ω. This allows the hierarchical description of systems, e.g.
S = ω1(ω2(a1), ω1(a2, a3)).
2 There is also a journal, https://compositionality-journal.org/.

Nothing Will Come of Everything: Software Towers and Quantum …
543
In graphical form:
Here ω1 is a binary operation, ω2 a unary operation, and a1, a2, a3 are sub-
expressions, which may themselves be built from components in arbitrarily complex
fashion.
There is also a logical perspective:
S1 |= φ1, . . . , Sn |= φn
ω(S1, . . . , Sn) |= φ
(Read S |= φ as “system S satisﬁes the property φ”). Here properties φ of the com-
pound system S can be inferred by verifying properties φ1, …, φn for the simpler
sub-systems S1, …Sn. This allows the properties of the sub-systems to be tracked all
the way up (or down) the tree of syntax.
In addition to its major role in Computer Science and linguistics, compositionality
is increasingly being introduced into other areas, including physics (Abramsky &
Coecke, 2009), systems biology (Danos et al., 2007), game theory (Ghani et al.,
2018), and more.
Since compositionality systematically relates the meaning of larger systems to
the meanings of their parts, it appears as an antithesis to contextualism, which asserts
that a part only acquires meaning in relation to the larger context in which it appears.
There is a reductio of contextualism which echoes our opening slogan: if we pursue
it to its limit, we end up needing to understand the meaning of everything in order
to understand the meaning of anything. And how is this “everything” delimited,
anyway? Perhaps we can only fully understand the meaning of an English utterance
in the context of the entire history, not yet completed, of English speech.3
1.2
Challenges to Compositionality
We have emphasized the importance of compositionality as a methodological princi-
ple. It is also interesting to consider some challenges to it which have arisen, explicitly
or implicitly, in recent developments.
3 We may quite plausibly claim that our present understanding of past utterances and writings is
heavily inﬂuenced by the subsequent history.

544
S. Abramsky
Independence-Friendly logic A notable challenge to compositionality was made by
Jaakko Hintikka in relation to his independence-friendly logic (IF logic), a general-
ization of branching quantiﬁers (Hintikka & Sandu, 1989; Hintikka, 1998). Hintikka
claimed that this logic could not be given a compositional semantics in a Tarskian
style. One had to look at entire formula, and give the meaning in terms of strategies
for a game associated with this formula. While Hintikka was correct in his claim
that one could not give a semantics for this logic using assignments of elements
of a quantiﬁcational domain to the variables in a formula, as is done in Tarskian
semantics of predicate logic, he was taking too limited a view of the possibilities
for a compositional semantics. Wilfrid Hodges subsequently showed that a com-
positional semantics could be given, using sets of assignments rather than single
assignments (Hodges, 1997). This semantics in terms of sets of assignments, nowa-
days called team semantics, has been extensively developed by Jouko Väänänen and
his collaborators, in his logics of dependence and independence (Väänänen, 2007;
Abramsky et al., 2016). It turns out that this yields a very interesting extension of the
possibilities for compositional semantics, and for logic in general, with connections
to databases, foundations of probability and statistics, quantum physics, and more.
What this illustrates is that overcoming challenges to compositionality can lead to
signiﬁcant advances.
Emergence A key concept in the reductionism/holism debate is that of emergence:
the idea that salient concepts or features of systems can only appear at higher struc-
tural levels, and cannot be accounted for at the lower levels. Referring this to the
setting of the software tower, we can recognise that, on the level of feasibility and
intelligibility, this is clearly true in an unproblematic way. If we think of the analo-
gous mathematical situation, deﬁning the curvature of a Riemannian manifold in the
bare language of set theory or type theory, without an intervening tower of deﬁnitions
and intermediate results, would be hopelessly long and unwieldy. The question is
whether there are truly higher-level emergent properties which fundamentally cannot
be expressed at all in terms of lower levels. I am not aware of precise results to this
effect.
AI One place where we might look for such results is in Artiﬁcial Intelligence, in
particular in its dominant modern form based on machine learning. The history of AI
can be argued to have gone against the compositional grain. Much of early AI was
logic- and rule-based, but there has been a big shift towards statistical machine learn-
ing, where the wisdom is in the data. This has led to systems with highly impressive
performance in terms of their ability to carry out a wide range of specialised tasks in
natural language processing, vision, robotics and autonomous devices, games play-
ing, medical diagnosis, ﬁnancial analysis, protein folding and many more. Many of
these encroach well into areas previously considered as requiring distinctively human
intelligence, although the challenge of integrative intelligence, encompassing a full
range of intelligent behaviour, remains. These systems have been highly resistant to
compositional description and analysis. However, there is a major push in current
research to achieve this, in order to have explainable, veriﬁable and accountable AI
(Adadi & Berrada, 2018; Huang et al., 2017). This is a fundamental issue in the cur-

Nothing Will Come of Everything: Software Towers and Quantum …
545
rent research agenda in AI. Indeed, can one be said to have a “theory of intelligence”,
or to have achieved scientiﬁc understanding of it, if one has a system which produces
intelligent behaviour, but has no explanation of how this behaviour is produced? And
such an explanation would surely have to refer to an underlying system structure. It
can be plausibly argued that structure “cashes out” into compositionality.
Cheap tricks? A more subtle challenge to compositionality is that it is too easily
achieved.Thisisargued,forexample,inHodges(2001,1998).Indeed,byintroducing
additional variables, which in effect encode the relevant contextual information,
one can, in some generality, make any semantic deﬁnition compositional. Does this
trivialise compositionality? Rather, it highlights the importance of having additional
criteria over and above compositionality for the acceptability of a formal semantics.
In the setting of programming language semantics, such criteria are provided by
adequacy and full abstraction (Plotkin, 1977; Milner, 1977). Similar criteria can
be applied for team semantics, which we discussed above (Abramsky & Väänänen,
2009). As we shall see, there are analogous issues in the foundations of quantum
mechanics.
2
Second Lens: Quantum Mechanics
Two issues which arise from the foundations of quantum mechanics can be related
to our discussion. Interestingly, they pull in opposite directions:
• One the one hand, the quantum phenomenon of entanglement has been argued to
imply a form of “quantum holism” (Healey, 1991).
• On the other hand, quantum contextuality, a key non-classical feature of quantum
mechanics, is problematic for holism, since it calls into question whether there is
a whole.
2.1
Entanglement and Quantum Holism
A fundamental aspect of quantum mechanics is entanglement, a phenomenon where
the quantum state of a group of particles cannot be described solely in terms of the
states of each particle separately. This behaviour may be exhibited even when the
particles are spatially separated.
Intuitively, entanglement violates common sense principles like the “Principle
of Local Action”, by which an object is directly inﬂuenced only by its immediate
surroundings. This counter-intuitive nature led Einstein to describe entanglement as
spooky action at a distance, and to the Einstein–Podolsky–Rosen (EPR) paradox
(Einstein et al., 1935).
Bell’s seminal idea in (Bell, 1964) was that entanglement has observable implica-
tions, which separate the predictions of quantum theory from any attempt at classical

546
S. Abramsky
explanation by a local, realistic theory. If the particles in an entangled system are
spatially separated, and each particle is measured independently, the presence of
entanglement implies correlations between the outcomes of the measurements that
provably exceed what can be achieved classically. This clear separation of the predic-
tions of quantum theory from any classical theory has been veriﬁed experimentally
(Freedman & Clauser, 1972; Aspect et al., 1982; Hensen et al., 2015; Giustina et al.,
2015; Shalm et al., 2015), and forms the basis of the currently emerging technologies
of quantum information and communication.
One point to mention is that Bell’s result bounding the possible correlations
achievableby“localrealistictheories”,andshowingthatquantummechanicsexceeds
these bounds, can be stated as an impossibility result for hidden-variable theories.
There is a striking analogy with our discussion of “cheap tricks” for compositionality
in the previous section. Just as we can trivially make deﬁnitions compositional by
adding extra variables which encode contextual information, so we can construct hid-
den variable theories to account for any observable phenomena (Abramsky, 2014).
However, if we introduce suitable constraints on such theories, e.g. locality of infor-
mation ﬂow, then results such as Bell’s can be proved. This parallels the way that
compositionality has to be tensioned against required properties of a semantics, such
as adequacy and full abstraction. Similarly, contextual hidden variable theories can
be constructed for quantum mechanics. Bohmian mechanics can be viewed as such
a theory. However, these theories are as non-local as quantum mechanics itself.
Returning to entanglement, it has been argued that the non-separable nature of
entangled states exhibits a form of holism, since we cannot recover the entangled state
from its components. We ﬁnd this dubious, mainly because it is not clear what is at
stake here. While much has been learnt about how to use entanglement in quantum
information, a deeper physical understanding of how and why this phenomenon
arises, if there is one to be had, remains elusive.
We content ourselves with the following observations:
• Non-separability in this sense is a common phenomenon, which arises mathe-
matically wherever we have monoidal categories (Fong & Spivak, 2019).4 There
are many examples of this in classical computation, and in Linear and other sub-
structural logics (Girard, 1987; O’Hearn & Pym, 1999).
• Monoidal categories, and the mathematics of entanglement, can be handled in a
thoroughly compositional fashion (Abramsky & Coecke, 2009).
2.2
Contextuality: Is There a Whole?
Contextuality arises from an even more fundamental non-classical feature of quan-
tum theory: the incompatibility of different measurements, meaning that one cannot
observe deﬁnite values for all physical quantities at the same time. Again, this is not
4 More precisely, monoidal categories which are not cartesian, ie where the tensor product is not
the usual (cartesian) product, equipped with diagonals and projections (Abramsky, 2009).

Nothing Will Come of Everything: Software Towers and Quantum …
547
merely a practical limitation, but a fundamental feature of quantum mechanics, as
shown by the seminal results due to Bell (Bell, 1964, 1966) and Kochen–Specker
(Kochen & Specker, 1967). This feature is known as contextuality, and recent work
has shown that it is a key signature of the non-classicality of quantum mechanics,
responsible for many of the known examples where quantum computation offers pos-
sibilities that exceed classical bounds (Raussendorf, 2013; Abramsky et al., 2017;
Howard et al., 2014; Bermejo-Vega et al., 2017; Bravyi et al., 2018; Aasnæss, 2019).
Moreover, contextuality subsumes non-locality as a mathematical feature of a phys-
ical theory (Abramsky & Brandenburger, 2011).
2.2.1
Contextual Logic in Quantum Mechanics
Logic traditionally emphasises truth (semantically) and consistency (proof-
theoretically). While the debates in the foundations of mathematics have, among
other things, led to contrasting classical and constructive views of logic, these share
an integrated view, going back to at least Plato and Aristotle, which can be sum-
marised as follows:
a logical system should stand or fall as a whole.
Quantum mechanics challenges this integrated perspective in a new way. This was
already revealed by the seminal results of John Bell and Simon Kochen and Ernst
Specker in the 1960s (Bell, 1964, 1966; Kochen & Specker, 1967), but we are still
in the process of understanding these ideas. To accommodate a non-integrated view,
the logical structure of quantum mechanics is given by a family of overlapping per-
spectives or contexts. Each context appears classical, and different contexts agree
locally on their overlap. However, there is no way to piece all these local perspec-
tives together into an integrated whole, as shown in many experiments, and proved
rigorously using the mathematical formalism of quantum mechanics.
To illustrate this non-integrated feature of quantum mechanics, we may consider
the well-known “impossible” drawings by Escher, such as the one shown in Fig.1.
Clearly, the staircase as a whole in Fig.1 cannot exist in the real world. Nonethe-
less,theconstituentpartsofFig.1makesenselocally,asisclearfromFig.2.Quantum
contextuality shows that the logical structure of quantum mechanics exhibits exactly
these features of local consistency, but global inconsistency. We note that Escher’s
work was inspired by the Penrose stairs from (Penrose & Penrose, 1958).5
5 Indeed, these ﬁgures provide more than a mere analogy. Penrose has studied the topological
“twisting” in these ﬁgures using cohomology (Penrose, 1992). This is quite analogous to our use
of sheaf cohomology to capture the logical twisting in contextuality (Abramsky et al., 2012, 2015;
Carù, 2017).

548
S. Abramsky
Fig. 1 M. C. Escher, Klimmen en dalen (Ascending and descending), 1960. Lithograph.
2.3
Discussion
Conceptually, an intriguing feature of our discussion of quantum contextuality is that,
whereas context is customarily aligned with holism, contextuality tends to undermine
holism, since it brings into question the existence of an integrated whole. Rather, the
picture of reality which it suggests is of an overlapping family of local perspec-
tives, which support local consistency, but cannot be pieced together into a global,
context-independent reality. This raises a number of questions, spanning a range of
disciplines:

Nothing Will Come of Everything: Software Towers and Quantum …
549
Fig. 2 Locally consistent parts of Fig.1.
• Philosophically,howshouldweunderstandthislackofglobal,context-independent
truth or consistency? Can contextual logic give a formal foundation for contextu-
alism in contemporary philosophy, such as epistemic contextualism (e.g. DeRose
(DeRose, 2009), as a counter to scepticism) and ontic contextualism (e.g. Gabriel,
known for Why the world does not exist (Gabriel, 2015))?
• Logically,
we
have
physically
meaningful—and
indeed
experimentally
accessible—systems which, when viewed globally, can validate contradictory
propositions. This is, arguably, more radically disturbing than the more familiar
fact that some classical tautologies may not be valid constructively.
• Mathematically, the structures underlying these logical phenomena have a rich
geometric and topological content, in which sheaf theory, the mathematics of local-
to-global phenomena, and cohomology play a key role, identifying the geometry
of the “logical twisting” obstructing a global semantics.
• Physically, we have the issue of experimentally witnessing these phenomena, and
understanding the role they play in a wide range of physical systems. These include
many-body systems, e.g. frustration in spin networks (Liang et al., 2011), and
quantum simulators (Kirby & Love, 2019, 2020).
• Computationally, contextuality appears as a key signature of non-classicality, and
is at the core of many of the known examples of quantum advantage in information
processing tasks. This is both of great practical import and a crucial tool for
showing the impact of non-classicality at the macroscopic level.

550
S. Abramsky
3
Concluding Remarks
In this brief essay, we have posed some challenges to holism, if it is to be more than
a fuzzy feel-good term. What would holistic science, or science done holistically,
look like? It is not clear that there are any convincing examples.
Also,wehavearguedthatquantumcontextualityposesachallengetoholism,since
it is casts doubt on whether there is an integrated whole underlying our perceptions
of physical reality.
More positively, we have advocated the importance of compositionality and levels
of abstraction, important methodologies in Computer Science, which provide a much
richer and more nuanced alternative to crude reductionism.
For those readers interested in more technical presentations of related issues, we
refer to papers such as (Abramsky, 2015, 2017, 2020).
References
Aasnæss, S. (2019). Contextuality as a resource for shallow circuits. Talk at Workshop on Quantum
Contextuality in Quantum Mechanics and Beyond (QCQMB 2019), Prague, 2019.
Abramsky, S. (2009). No-cloning in categorical quantum mechanics. Semantic Techniques in Quan-
tum Computation, 1–28.
Abramsky, S. (2017). Contextuality: At the borders of paradox. In E. Landry (Ed.), Categories for
the working philosopher. Oxford University Press.
Abramsky, S. (2020). Classical logic, classical probability, and quantum mechanics. In M. Hemmo
& O. Shenker (Eds.), Quantum, probability, logic: The work and inﬂuence of Itamar Pitowsky
(pp. 1–17). Springer.
Abramsky, S., Barbosa, R. S., Kishida, K., Lal, R., & Mansﬁeld, S. (2015). Contextuality, cohomol-
ogy and paradox. In Kreutzer, S. (Ed.), 24th EACSL Annual Conference on Computer Science
Logic (CSL 2015), Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics (LIPIcs) (Vol. 41, pp. 211–
228). Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik.
Abramsky, S., Barbosa, R. S.. & Mansﬁeld, S. (2017). Contextual fraction as a measure of contex-
tuality. Physical Review Letters, 119(5), 050504.
Abramsky, S., Brandenburger, A., & Savochkin, A. (2014). No-signalling is equivalent to free choice
of measurements. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.8523.
Abramsky, S., Kontinen, J., & Väänänen, J., & Vollmer, H. (2016). Dependence Logic: Theory and
Applications. Birkhäuser.
Abramsky, S., Mansﬁeld, S., & Barbosa, R. S. (2012). The cohomology of non-locality and contex-
tuality. In B. Jacobs, P. Selinger, & B. Spitters (Eds.), 8th International Workshop on Quantum
Physics and Logic (QPL 2011), Electronic Proceedings in Theoretical Computer Science (Vol.
95, pp. 1–14). Open Publishing Association.
Abramsky, Samson. (2015). Contextual semantics: From quantum mechanics to logic, databases,
constraints, and complexity. Contextuality from Quantum Physics to Psychology, 6, 23–50.
Abramsky, S., & Brandenburger, A. (2011). The sheaf-theoretic structure of non-locality and con-
textuality. New Journal of Physics, 13(11), 113036.
Abramsky, S., & Coecke, B. (2009). Categorical quantum mechanics. Handbook of Quantum Logic
and Quantum Structures, 2, 261–325.
Abramsky, S., & Väänänen, J. (2009). From IF to BI. Synthese, 167(2), 207–230.
Adadi, A., & Berrada, M. (2018). Peeking inside the black-box: A survey on explainable artiﬁcial
intelligence (XAI). IEEE Access, 6, 52138–52160.

Nothing Will Come of Everything: Software Towers and Quantum …
551
Anel, M., & Catren, G. (2021). New spaces in mathematics: Formal and conceptual reﬂections.
Cambridge University Press.
Aspect, A., Dalibard, J., & Roger, G. (1982). Experimental test of Bell’s inequalities using time-
varying analyzers. Physical Review Letters, 49(25), 1804–1807.
Bell, J. S. (1964). On the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen paradox. Physics, 1(3), 195–200.
Bell, J. S. (1966). On the problem of hidden variables in quantum mechanics. Reviews of Modern
Physics, 38(3), 447–452.
Bermejo-Vega, J., Delfosse, N., Browne, D. E., Okay, C., & Raussendorf, R. (2017). Contextuality
as a resource for models of quantum computation with qubits. Physical Review Letters, 119(12),
120505.
Bravyi, S., Gosset, D., & König, R. (2018). Quantum advantage with shallow circuits. Science,
362(6412), 308–311.
Carù, G. (2017). On the cohomology of contextuality. In R. Duncan & C. Heunen (Eds.), 13th
International Conference on Quantum Physics and Logic (QPL 2016), Electronic Proceedings
in Theoretical Computer Science (Vol. 236, pp. 21–39). Open Publishing Association.
Danos, V., Feret, J., Fontana, W., Harmer, R., & Krivine, J. (2007). Rule-based modelling of cellular
signalling. In International conference on concurrency theory (pp. 17–41). Springer.
DeRose, K. (2009). The case for contextualism: Knowledge, skepticism, and context (Vol. 1). Oxford
University Press.
Dieudonné, J., & Grothendieck, A. (1971). Éléments de géométrie algébrique. Berlin, Heidelberg,
New York: Springer.
Einstein, A., Podolsky, B., & Rosen, N. (1935). Can quantum-mechanical description of physical
reality be considered complete? Physical Review, 47(10), 777–780.
Fong, B., & Spivak, D.I. (2019). An invitation to applied category theory: Seven sketches in com-
positionality. Cambridge University Press.
Freedman, S. J., & Clauser, J. F. (1972). Experimental test of local hidden-variable theories. Physical
Review Letters, 28(14), 938–941.
Gabriel, M. (2015). Why the world does not exist. Polity.
Ghani, N., Hedges, J., Winschel, V., & Zahn, P. (2018). Compositional game theory. In Proceedings
of the 33rd Annual ACM/IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer Science (pp. 472–481).
Girard. J.-Y. (1987). Linear logic. Theoretical Computer Science.
Giustina, M., Versteegh, M. A. M., Wengerowsky, S., Handsteiner, J., Hochrainer, Phelan, K.,
Steinlechner, F., Koﬂer, J., Larsson, J., Abellán, C., Amaya, W., Pruneri, V., Mitchell, M. W.,
Beyer, J., Gerrits, T., Lita, A. E., Shalm, L. K., Nam, S. W., Scheidl, T., Ursin, R., Wittmann, B.,
& Zeilinger, A. (2015). Signiﬁcant-loophole-free test of Bell’s theorem with entangled photons.
Physical Review Letters, 115(25), 250401.
Gonthier, G., Asperti, A., Avigad, J., Bertot, Y., Cohen, C., Garillot, F., Le Roux, S., Mahboubi,
A., O’Connor, R., Biha, S., et al. (2013). A machine-checked proof of the odd order theorem. In
International Conference on Interactive Theorem Proving (pp. 163–179). Springer.
Gonthier, G. (2008). Formal proof-the four-color theorem. Notices of the AMS, 55(11), 1382–1393.
Hales, T., Adams, M., Bauer, G., Dang, T. D., Harrison, J., Le Truong, H., Kaliszyk, C., Magron, V.,
McLaughlin, S., Nguyen, T. T., et al. (2017). A formal proof of the Kepler conjecture. In Forum
of mathematics, Pi (Vol. 5). Cambridge University Press.
Healey, R. A. (1991). Holism and nonseparability. The Journal of Philosophy, 88(8), 393–421.
Hensen, B., Bernien, H., Dréau, A. E., Reiserer, A., Kalb, N., Blok, M. S., Ruitenberg, J., Vermeulen,
R. F. L., Schouten, R. N., Abellán, C., Amaya, W., Pruneri, V., Mitchell, M. W., Markham, M.,
Twitchen, D. J., Elkouss, D., Wehner, S., Taminiau, T. H., & Hanson, R. (2015). Loophole-free
Bell inequality violation using electron spins separated by 1.3 kilometres. Nature, 526(7575),
682–686.
Hintikka, J. (1998). The principles of mathematics revisited. Cambridge University Press.
Hintikka, J., & Sandu, G. (1989). Informational independence as a semantical phenomenon. In
J. E. Fenstad et al. (Eds.), Logic, methodology and philosophy of science VIII (pp. 571–589).
Elsevier.

552
S. Abramsky
Hodges,W.(1997).Compositional semanticsfora language ofimperfect information. Logic Journal
of the IGPL, 5(4), 539–563.
Hodges, W. (1998). Compositionality is not the problem. Logic and Logical Philosophy, 6(6), 7–33.
Hodges, Wilfrid. (2001). Formal features of compositionality. Journal of Logic, Language and
Information, 10(1), 7–28.
Howard, M., Wallman, Jl., Veitch, V., & Emerson, J. (2014). Contextuality supplies the ‘magic’ for
quantum computation. Nature, 510(7505), 351–355.
Huang, X., Kwiatkowska, M., Wang, S., & Wu, M. (2017). Safety veriﬁcation of deep neural
networks. In International Conference on Computer Aided Veriﬁcation (pp. 3–29). Springer.
Janssen, T. M. V., & Partee, B. H. (1997). Compositionality. In Handbook of logic and language
(pp. 417–473). Elsevier.
Janssen, T. M. V. (2001). Frege, contextuality and compositionality. Journal of Logic, Language
and Information, 10(1), 115–136.
Kirby, W.M., & Love, P.J. (2020). Classical simulation of noncontextual Pauli Hamiltonians.
PreprintarXiv:2002.05693 [quant-ph].
Kirby, W. M., & Love, P. J. (2019). Contextuality test of the nonclassicality of variational quantum
eigensolvers. Physical Review Letters, 123(20), 200501.
Kochen, S., & Specker, E. P. (1967). The problem of hidden variables in quantum mechanics.
Journal of Mathematics and Mechanics, 17(1), 59–87.
Liang, Y.-C., Spekkens, R. W., & Wiseman, H. M. (2011). Specker’s parable of the overprotective
seer: A road to contextuality, nonlocality and complementarity. Physics Reports, 506(1–2), 1–39.
Milner, R. (1977). Fully abstract models of typed lambda-calculi. Theoretical Computer Science,
4, 1–22.
O’Hearn, P. W., & Pym, D. J. (1999). The logic of bunched implications. Bulletin of Symbolic Logic,
5(2), 215–244.
Penrose, R. (1992). On the cohomology of impossible ﬁgures. Leonardo, 25(3–4), 245–247. (Visual
Mathematics: Special Double Issue).
Penrose, L. S., & Penrose, R. (1958). Impossible objects: A special type of visual illusion. British
Journal of Psychology, 49(1), 31–33.
Plotkin, G. D. (1977). LCF considered as a programming language. Theoretical Computer Science,
5, 223–255.
Raussendorf, Robert. (2013). Contextuality in measurement-based quantum computation. Physical
Review A, 88(2), 022322.
Scott, D., & Strachey, C. (1971). Mathematical semantics for computer language. Technical Mono-
graph PRG-6, Programming Research Group, University Of Oxford.
Shalm, L. K., Meyer-Scott, E., Christensen, B. G., Bierhorst, P., Wayne, M.A., Stevens, M. J.,
Gerrits, T., Glancy, S., Hamel, D.R., Allman, M.S., Coakley, K. J., Dyer, S. D. , Hodge, C., Lita,
A. E., Verma, V. B, Lambrocco, C., Tortorici, E., Migdall, A. L., Zhang, Y., Kumor, D. R., Farr,
W.H., Marsili, F., Shaw, M. D., Stern, J. A., Abellán, C., Amaya, W., Pruneri, V., Jennewein,
T., Mitchell, M. W., Kwiat, P. G., Bienfang, J. C., Mirin, R. P., Knill, E., & Nam, S. W. (2015).
Strong loophole-free test of local realism. Physical Review Letters, 115(25), 250402.
Tarski, A., & Vaught, R. (1956). Arithmetical extensions of relational systems. Compositio Math-
ematica 81–102.
Tarski, A. (1936). Der wahrheitsbegriff in den formalisierten sprachen. Studia Philosophica, 1,
261–405.
Väänänen, J. (2007). Dependence Logic, London Mathematical Society Student Texts (Vol. 70).
Cambridge University Press.
Van der Waerden, B. L. (1971). The foundation of algebraic geometry from Severi to André Weil.
Archive for History of Exact Sciences, 171–180.
Werning, M. E., Hinzen, W. E., & Machery, E. E. (2012). The Oxford handbook of compositionality.
Oxford University Press.

The Quantum-like Behavior of Neural
Networks
Thomas Filk
1
Introduction
A neural network can be deﬁned as “a massively parallel distributed processor made
up of simple processing units that has a natural propensity for storing experiential
knowledge and making it available for use” (Haykin, 2009). ‘Experiential knowl-
edge’ refers to a training or learning phase during which certain properties of the
network (usually the connectivity or the so-call synaptic weights) are changed, and
this ‘knowledge’ is represented in the connectivity (and its weights) of this network.
‘Making it available for use’ refers to a retrieval phase in which the network can be
stimulated by input-activities, while a reaction, which depends on this knowledge,
is read from activities of certain network units (the output nodes).
Essentially networks are graphs, where the nodes—also called vertices or, in this
case, neurons—represent the processing units, and the lines of the graph represent
the connectivity. In addition, a dynamics speciﬁes how the activities of the units
change in time.
Alain Turing suggested the ﬁrst networks of this type (Turing, 1948) using sim-
ple gates (like NAND- or NOR-gates) as processing units. McCulloch (McCulloch
& Pitts, 1943) and later Rosenblatt (Rosenblatt, 1958) deﬁned units which model
neuronal behavior in the sense that an input of activities is integrated and leads to an
output depending on a threshold. While in the realm of neurosciences often spiking
neuron models are used, the most prominent example being the model of Hodgkin
and Huxley (Hodgkin & Huxley, 1952) (for more general models and applications
see also (Gerstner & Kistler, 2002)), the neural networks designed for practical pur-
poses, which do not aim at the physiological details in the millisecond range, use
rate-coded networks [see, e.g., (Haykin, 2009)].
A second distinction between applications in the neurosciences and in engineering
refers to the architecture of networks: Most networks used for pattern recognition
or pattern classiﬁcation (like ‘deep learning’) are based on so-called feed-forward
T. Filk (B)
Institute of Physics, Albrecht-Ludwigs University Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg, Germany
Parmenides Foundation for the Study of Thinking, Munich, Germany
e-mail: thomas.ﬁlk@physik.uni-freiburg.de
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
S. Wuppuluri and I. Stewart (eds.), From Electrons to Elephants and Elections,
The Frontiers Collection, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-92192-7_30
553

554
T. Filk
networks which do not contain closed loops along which activity can propagate,
on the other hand, most network models used in the neurosciences are recurrent.
Recurrent networks exhibit a much more complex behavior and are therefore much
less predictable.
A recurrent network with N nodes allows for N(N −1) possible directed lines
and as each line can be present or absent, the number of such networks grows as
2N(N−1) or roughly O(2N 2). So, already for networks with N = 10 nodes this leads
to roughly 1027 different conﬁgurations, which brings us to the edge of most present
day computers when we want to test all these conﬁgurations individually for their
behavior. Even though the local behavior of each node as well as the connectivity
of nodes and how they interact pairwise is completely known and almost trivial, the
overall behavior of larger networks cannot be predicted apart from a few special
cases. This is one way to see networks as an example where it is difﬁcult to relate
the ‘context’ (the overall behavior) to the ‘content’ (the local constituents), and
sometimes surprising phenomena emerge.
However, neural networks allow for a second way to distinguish between con-
tent and context. The content can refer to all the local activities, connectivities,
weights, activity thresholds, types of neurons (e.g., inhibitory or excitatory) etc., i.e.
the physics of the total network and its dynamics; this aspect will be dealt with in
Sect. 2. In contrast, the context refers to the input-output behavior (depending also on
the history of the network), i.e. on what can be seen from the outside. This perspective
is more similar to most psychological or cognitive experiments, in which subjects
are ‘stimulated’ by asking them questions or putting them into certain experimental
situations, and the reaction of the subjects—their answer or behavior—is observed.
The input-output behavior of recurrent neural networks exhibits surprising phenom-
ena which sometimes are closer to phenomena observed in quantum systems as
compared to classical systems. This perspective and some of its phenomena will be
addressed in Sect. 3. One particular surprising phenomenon in quantum cognition
is contextuality, which will be the subject of Sect. 4. The advantage of using neural
networks as models for content and context is that we can always ‘open the sculp’
and look into the physics and/or mathematics and see what is happening.
2
Neural Networks
I begin with a brief introduction to the main concepts and terminology of neural
networks: the architecture, the dynamics of single neurons, the training and the
retrieval phase.

The Quantum-like Behavior of Neural Networks
555
2.1
Neural Networks: Structure and Dynamics
2.1.1
Constituents and Architectures
Neural networks consist of nodes, also called vertices or neurons (the set of nodes
will be denoted by V = {vi}), and directed lines connecting these nodes, sometimes
called synaptic connections. Mathematically, this represents a graph. A graph with
N nodes can be represented by an N × N adjacency matrix:
Ai j =
1 if there exists a connection from node j to node i
0 otherwise .
(1)
This deﬁnition excludes so-called multi-loops, i.e. multiple connections between the
same two vertices. More general structures are possible but will not be considered
here.
If Ai j = A ji = 1 for some i and j, the connection between the two vertices vi
and v j is called bidirectional; if the adjacency matrix is symmetric, i.e. Ai j = A ji
for all i and j, the graph is called undirected. If Aii = 1, the line connecting vertex
i to itself is called a self-loop. Most models exclude self-loops, i.e. Aii = 0 for all i,
but again there are exceptions.
In general, one distinguishes three types of nodes: so-called input nodes, output
nodes and internal or hidden nodes. Input nodes receive signals from an environment
and direct the activities to the internal nodes. The result of a neural network compu-
tation is read-off from the output nodes. If the vertices can be ordered in such a way
that Ai j = 0 for j > i, the network is called feed-forward. All lines are necessarily
directed. If the set of vertices V can be partitioned, V = L1 ∪L2 ∪... ∪L O with
Li ∩L j = ∅, such that for all vertices vi and v j with vi ∈Lm and v j ∈Ln we have
Ai j = 0 unless m = n or m = n + 1, the graph is called layered. The set Lm deﬁnes
layer m, L1 is the set of input nodes and L O the set of output nodes. If Ai j = 0
unless m = n + 1 there are no connections between vertices within a layer and such
networks are called ‘layered feed-forward’.
So-called ‘deep learning’ networks often consist of hundreds to thousands of
layers and usually are layered feed-forward. In this article I mostly consider so-called
recurrent networks, i.e., there can be (directed) lines forming closed loops within the
graph. Many of the ‘non-classical’ features of neural networks—non-commutativity,
non-trivial attractors, etc.—do not occur in layered feed-forward networks.
2.1.2
The Dynamics of Single Neurons
Nodes or neurons are the local signal processing units of a network. One of the
major distinctions between different classes of neural networks is the type of signal,
where one usually distinguishes between so-called spiking and rate-coded networks.
In spiking neural networks the signal consists of spikes—very brief pulses—and the
information is stored in the temporal pattern of these spikes, i.e. essentially in the

556
T. Filk
frequency and the relative phases between spikes. Most neural networks which are
used in the ﬁeld of neurocomputing are based on a dynamics for spiking neurons
(more details can be found in (Gerstner & Kistler, 2002)).
In the present article I will concentrate on so-called rate-coded networks. In this
case the signal consists of a real number which can be interpreted as an activity of a
neuron and it represents a mean ﬁring rate for spikes. While spiking neural networks
are used to model parts of the dynamics happening in real neuronal networks and
attempt a temporal resolution in the range of milliseconds or smaller, a signal in rate-
coded networks usually refers to an average of spike trains and, when compared with
biological models, corresponds to a temporal resolution in the range of several dozens
up to hundreds of milliseconds. However, rate coded models can be considered as a
type of neural networks of its own and almost all applications of neural networks,
e.g. in pattern recognition, are based on rate-coded networks.
A second distinction in the type of dynamics refers to ‘continuous’ versus ‘discrete
time models’. Continuous dynamics is usually described in terms of a (ﬁrst order)
differential equation for the rates. Discrete time step models are based on a dynamics
of the type xi(t + 1) = F({x j(t)}), where xi(t) denotes the activity rate of neuron
vi at time step t. For the rest of this article I will restrict myself to discrete time step
models.
In most cases the dynamics of neural networks is deﬁned by the following type
of equation, which I will refer to as the ‘update-equation’:
xi(t + 1) = T

i
wi jϵ jx j(t)

.
(2)
Here wi j is the so-called weight matrix (or synaptic weight matrix), ϵ j = ±1 controls
inhibitory inﬂuence and T is the so-called transfer or activity function. The meaning
of these entities will be explained in the following paragraphs.
2.1.3
The Weight Matrix
Weight matrix and adjacency matrix are the same, if the synaptic weights wi j assume
only the values 0 and 1. However, the elements of the weight matrix represent a degree
of ‘transmissivity’ for a connection between two neurons. In biological systems this
transmissivity is regulated by many parameters, amongst others by neurotransmit-
ters of the pre-synaptic neuron and the corresponding receptors at the post-synaptic
neuron, and they can be inﬂuenced, e.g., by drugs, mood, or viruses. The weight-
matrix contains the information or ‘knowledge’ stored in the network because in
most models the weights wi j are the parameters which are changed and adapted
during a training phase [(see sect. 2.2)].

The Quantum-like Behavior of Neural Networks
557
2.1.4
The Activity Function
The activity or transfer function T determines the activity (ﬁring rate) of a neuron
depending on the input it gets. The argument of T in eq. 2 is a sum over all activities
x j of neurons j which are connected to a particular neuron i, weighted by wi j, the
transmissivity or synaptic weight of the connection from j to i. Biological neurons
ﬁre as the result of a cumulative effect: if the sum of the incoming signals exceeds
a certain threshold (within a certain time interval of the order of 20ms), the neuron
ﬁres. The details will not be relevant here, but in order to model this behavior, the
activity function T is usually chosen to be a sigmoid function: 0 for small values of
the argument with a threshold at a particular input level and 1 for large values of the
argument. For more details about the ﬁring behavior of physiological neurons see,
e.g., (Kandel, 2000).
In very crude models, T (x) is a step-function and has the form: T (x) = 0 for
x < xt and T (x) = 1 for x ≥xt (where xt is the threshold value). In mathemat-
ics, this function is called the Heaviside-Function and often denoted by (x −xt).
Sometimes also continuous functions are used, e.g.
T (x) =
1
1 + exp(−a(x −xt)) ,
(3)
where a determines the sensitivity of T near the threshold: for a large this is almost a
step-function, for a small T increases slowly from 0 to its maximal value 1, assuming
the value 1
2 for x = xt.
2.1.5
Inhibitory and Excitatory Neurons
Mammal brains consist of many different types of neurons with special features.
For recurrent networks the distinction between at least two types of neurons turns
out to be relevant: excitatory and inhibitory neurons. Inhibitory neurons control the
activity in a network, preventing it from getting too large. Inhibitory effects can be
incorporated into the model by allowing the weights wi j to be negative. However,
as a rule of thumb (which has its exceptions), a single neuron uses one type of
neurotransmitter and therefore either acts in an inhibitory or an excitatory way. This is
sometimes referred to as Dale’s rule. So, ϵi = +1 indicates that neuron i is excitatory
and ϵi = −1 indicates that it is inhibitory.
2.2
The Training of Networks—Two Examples
As already mentioned, the information stored in a neural network is contained in the
weights wi j, i.e. essentially in the connectivity of the network. The ﬁrst step in using
neural networks is a training or learning phase. During such a training phase certain

558
T. Filk
patterns are presented to the input neurons. In general, one distinguishes three types
of training: unsupervised learning, reinforcement learning and supervised learning.
In unsupervised learning there is no feed-back to the network; the network detects
regularities and correlations in a set of input-data and restructures itself in such a
way that the output reﬂects some of these regularities. An example for such net-
works are so-called Kohonen networks or self-organizing maps (Kohonen, 1984).
In supervised learning the weights are changed in such a way as to get closer to the
desired output. This strategy is used, e.g., in layered feed-forward networks where
there exist powerful algorithms (like the so-called backpropagation algorithm; see,
e.g., (Haykin, 2009)) to update the weights for better performance. In reinforcement
learning the weights are changed according to general rules which only depend on
whether the output is correct or incorrect, or whether it is better or worse as compared
to a previous network.
Here, I will describe two learning mechanisms which will be used later in the
applications.
2.2.1
Hopﬁeld Networks and Hebbian Learning
Hopﬁeld networks (Hopﬁeld, 1982) are used as models for associative pattern mem-
ory. They consist of a single layer of neurons, each connected (bidirectionally) with
every other neuron. This layer serves as input and output layer. The state xi of each
neuron is usually chosen binary, e.g. xi = 0 or 1.
The training phase of such a network can be replaced by an exact calculation
of the weights using the so-called Hebbian learning rule. In 1949, Donald Hebb
formulated a learning rule according to which the connection between neurons ﬁring
simultaneously gets strengthened (Hebb, 1949). This is often abbreviated as “ﬁre
together, wire together”. Given a certain set of patterns {Mα
i } where α = 1, 2, ..., n
enumerates the patterns (for a network with N neurons, n should not be much larger
than roughly 0.14 N (Amit et al., 1985)) and Mα
i ∈{0, 1}, the weight matrix of the
network is calculated according to
wi j = 1
n
n

α=1
Mα
i Mα
j .
(4)
For each pattern, where neuron i and j are active (Mα
i = Mα
j = 1), the corresponding
entry wi j of the weight matrix is increased by 1/n. Sometimes in eq. 4, instead
of Mα
i Mα
j , which is a strict application of Hebb’s rule, the combination (2Mα
i −
1)(2Mα
j −1) is chosen. In this case the weight increases, if neurons i and j in a
pattern α have the same activity (both 0 or both 1) and it decreases if the activity
is different. This choice has some mathematical advantages. For the following these
differences will not be relevant.

The Quantum-like Behavior of Neural Networks
559
For the retrieval of a pattern, the network is stimulated by a pattern M R
i ∈{0, 1}
(i = 0, ..., N) which may be similar but not necessarily identical to one of the training
patterns. The activity of the nodes is then updated according to
xi(t + 1) = 
⎛
⎝
j
wi jx j(t) −c
⎞
⎠
(5)
with xi(0) = M R
i and (x) being the Heaviside function. One can show that this
algorithm stops after a ﬁnite number of steps. For c ≈1/n (a good value for c has
to be determined by trials and depends on the ‘density’ of the patterns {Mα}, i.e.,
the ratio of 0s versus 1s in a typical pattern) it usually stops with the trained pattern
Mα which is closest (e.g. in the sense of a minimal number of differing entries) to
M R. However, depending on the value of c and the chosen pattern M R, the algorithm
might also stop at a new pattern. So, Hopﬁeld networks may create ‘novelty’ (see
Sect. 3.5)
2.2.2
Random Recurrent Networks and Genetic Learning Algorithms
Hebbian learning is only moderately successful in recurrent networks for which
input, internal and output neurons are different and which are trained to ‘react’ in a
particular way to a certain input. In such cases so-called genetic learning algorithms
can be applied.
First one deﬁnes an error function (or performance function, depending on the
context one also speaks of an inverse ﬁtness or an energy function), which measures
the quality of the network. In many cases the error function is deﬁned as a sum over
the squared differences between ‘desired activity’ and ‘actual activity’ at the output
nodes, i.e.
E =

i∈O
(xi(t) −xd
i )2
(6)
where xd
i is the desired activity of output node i (O is the set of output nodes and
the sum runs over all output nodes) and xi(t) is the actual activity of node i at a
particular time-step t. One can also average over a certain number of time-steps as
well as over input patterns with different desired reactions.
In many cases so-called genetic algorithms are used for such networks: One starts
with a random adjacency (or weight) matrix and determines its error function. Then
one makes a random change at one of the connections or weights and determines
the error function of the new network. If the error function of the new network is
smaller, one proceeds with this network. If the error function of the new network
is worse as compared to the previous network, one keeps the previous network and
tries different changes.

560
T. Filk
This basic idea can be extended in many ways: One can introduce error-dependent
probabilities such that in some cases also the network with the larger error is kept (in
this way one arrives at so-called Boltzmann machines) or one can add other terms to
the error function, like a sum over squared weights; this suppresses networks with
manyconnectionsorlargeweightsandissometimesreferredtoasa‘renormalization’
of the network. In extreme cases this renormalization can lead to sparse networks
with only few connections.
The learning phase stops when the error function for a networks gets below a preset
threshold—in extreme cases when it is zero. For pattern recognition this training is
done with a certain set of training patterns and the error function usually consists of an
average error for these training patterns. Very often the training phase (during which
the connectivities and/or weights are changed) is followed by a test phase in which
the quality of the network is tested using a set of new patterns. If the error for these
test patterns is sufﬁciently small, the training phase is over and the connectivities and
weights are kept constant. The network can be applied to ‘real’ pattern recognition.
If not, the training phase is extended.
3
Non-classical Behavior of Neural Networks
After a brief discussion of what I mean by ‘non-classical behavior’, which involves
the notion of states, observables, and attractors, I will give some examples from
recurrent neural networks which in this sense behave non-classically.
3.1
States and Observables
Physical systems are often described in terms of so-called states and observables.
E.g., in Newtonian mechanics a state is described by a point in phase space giving the
position and the momentum or velocity of particles, and an observable is a function of
these variables, like energy, angular momentum etc., which are functions of positions
and momenta. On the other hand, in quantum mechanics a state is represented by
a normalized vector (or, to be more precise, by a one-dimensional linear subspace,
in which case the vector is a representative of this subspace) in a Hilbert space
(essentially a vector space with a scalar product) and an observable is represented by
a linear mapping on this Hilbert space. In general, a state describes what we know
about the system from its past, e.g., how it was prepared, and an observable describes
the information we can gain by measuring this quantity.
When I speak of the ‘behavior’ of a neural network I refer to this structure of
states and observables. When a neural network is considered as a physical system,
for which the state is speciﬁed by the weight matrix and the momentary activity of all
nodes, and an observable is a function of these variables, we treat it like a Newtonian
system. However, one can also deﬁne states and observables in terms of the reaction

The Quantum-like Behavior of Neural Networks
561
of a network (which we can read off from the output nodes) as a result of a stimulus
at the input nodes. Again, a state refers to what we know about the network from
its past input-output reactions (as far as this is relevant for the prediction of future
reactions) and an observable describes what we can learn from applying a certain
stimulus (pattern) to the input nodes.
This second perspective emphasizes a ‘black box’ nature of a neural network: only
the input patterns (stimuli) can be controlled and only the reaction of the network
(the activity at the output nodes) can be observed. Therefore, I distinguish between
an ‘observer perspective’, which is the perspective just mentioned, and an ‘internal’
or ‘God’s-eye perspective’, which has access to all the connectivities, weights and,
in particular, momentary activities of the nodes inside the network. With respect to
the God’s-eye perspective, all neural networks mentioned in this article are classical
systems and can be described by classical dynamics.
From a physics point of view, the notion of states and observables with respect
to an observer perspective might be considered as strange or, at least, non-standard.
However, from a cognitive or psychological point of view this concept is exactly
what models observations or experiments in the cognitive sciences: A stimulus is
presented to a subject and we observe his or her reaction. Essentially, this is all we
have. From these ‘measurements’ we have to deduce features of a ‘mental state’
which may lead to predictions about future reactions.
These two perspectives allow for a second way to view neural networks as being
in between ‘content’ and ‘context’: The content refers to the physical system as
being made up of nodes and connections and the equations for updating activities
(the ‘internal perspective’). On the other hand, the context refers to the input-output
relations of such a network (the ‘observer perspective’).
When I speak of ‘non-classical’ behavior of neural networks, I mean that the
observer perspective sometimes exhibits phenomena which resemble phenomena in
quantum systems and which usually are not expected to occur in classical Newtonian
systems. Some of these will be described in the following sections after a brief
introduction to the useful notion of attractors and attractor landscapes. The particular
important phenomenon of contextuality will be addressed in Chap.4.
3.2
Attractors in Neural Networks
Thenotionof anattractor is particular useful indynamical systems theory. It describes
the long-term behavior of a system—usually depending on initial conditions and on
boundary conditions—for which all transient dynamics is irrelevant. I will describe
the concept of an attractor only for discrete dynamics like the one deﬁned in eq. 2.
Let us denote by x(t) = {x1(t), x2(t), ..., xN(t)} the activities of all nodes at time
t. For a given initial conﬁguration of activities {x(0)} (time t = 0), eq. 2 determines
all subsequent conﬁgurations {x(t)}. Note that a given stimulus pattern acts as a
boundary condition on the input neurons and should be considered as constant for
this sequence (i.e., the input neurons do not change their activities as a function of

562
T. Filk
t). Now denote by XT = {x(T ), x(T + 1), ...} the set of all activity conﬁgurations
in this sequence from time t = T on. Obviously, XT ⊆XT ′ for T ′ < T , i.e., XT can
never increase as a function of T . The formal deﬁnition of the attractor set X∞of the
sequence of activities is X∞= limT→∞

 XT . Essentially, these are all activities
which keep reappearing after arbitrary many time steps.
An important example of an attractor is a ﬁxed point attractor, for which X∞
contains only one element, i.e., one activity pattern for the network which repeats
itself. All feed-forward networks have ﬁxed point attractors in this sense: from a
certain moment on the activity doesn’t change any more.
A second import class of attractors are so-called periodic attractors of cycle length
L.Inthiscase,asequenceof L activitypatternsrepeatsitselfinacycle.Iftheactivities
xi(t) can assume only ﬁnitely many (discrete) values (e.g., only 0 and 1), ﬁxed point
attractors and periodic attractors are the only attractor sets possible. If xi(t) can
assume a continuum of values (e.g. xi(t) ∈[0, 1] for a transfer function T like in eq.
3) also so-called strange attractors are possible. They consist of an inﬁnite number
of points and usually have a fractal nature. In the following I will only consider ﬁxed
point and periodic attractors. For small networks (with a total of less than 50 vertices)
the attractor states are reached quite rapidly (mostly within less than 20 time steps).
Note that from an observer’s perspective, which only has access to the activity of
output nodes, a periodic attractor may look like a ﬁxed point attractor: The activity of
internal nodes may still vary while the activity at the output nodes remains constant.
For a given network, deﬁned by its weight matrix wi j, the attractor set usually
depends not only on the input pattern, which from a mathematical point of view can
be considered as ﬁxed boundary conditions, but also on the initial activity pattern
x(0). The set of all initial activity patterns which ﬁnally lead to the same attractor is
called the attractor basin (for this attractor). For feed-forward networks the ﬁxed point
attractors depend only on the boundary condition (i.e. the input activity in the ﬁrst
layer). Therefore, the attractor structure of feed-forward networks is quite simple. For
recurrent networks, however, the attractor structure may be quite complicated with
different initial conditions leading to different attractors. This gives rise to a so-called
attractor landscape, which can contain ﬁxed point attractors and periodic attractors
of various length. These attractor landscapes change during the training phase when
the weight matrix wi j is changed and show an interesting complexity structure: In
the average, the number of attractors ﬁrst increases during a training process and
decreases towards the ﬁnal stage when the networks have almost completed their
training (Atmanspacher & Filk, 2006; Atmanspacher et al., 2009).
3.3
Non-commutativity
Non-commutativity is one of the catchwords which is often used to distinguish clas-
sical and quantum systems. It refers to an order-dependence of observations. If ﬁrst
an observation A is performed and then an observation B, the results may differ if
the order is reversed. In psychology this phenomenon is known from questionnaires

The Quantum-like Behavior of Neural Networks
563
and similar ‘measurements’ [see, e.g., (Atmanspacher & Filk, 2018; Atmanspacher
& Römer, 2012; Wang et al., 2014)].
In order to make the non-commutative nature of neural networks more explicit,
I deﬁne an observation A to consist of the following steps (performed for a given
network with ﬁxed weight matrix wi j):
• A pattern (also called A) is presented to the input nodes of the network, i.e., the
activity of these input nodes is ﬁxed by this pattern.
• For the ﬁrst observation, the initial activity state x(0) can be chosen randomly.
One can also choose the last activity pattern from a previous ‘observation’ for the
initial conﬁguration. The update of activities follows eq. 2. The update is performed
sufﬁciently often until an attractor state is reached.
• After an attractor state has been reached, the result of the observation consists
of the output activities for sufﬁciently many time steps. If the attractor happens
to be a ﬁxed point attractor, ‘sufﬁciently many’ is 1. If the system has reached
a periodic attractor, the result of the observation consists of all the activities at
output nodes within one attractor cycle. (For more details on the notion of states
and observations and the mathematical structure of observables in neural networks
as derived from the external knowledge about the attractor landscape, see (Kleiner,
2012).)
For a second measurement B, a second pattern (also called B) is presented to the
input nodes of the network as a stimulus. In this case, the initial state consists of one
of the activity states of the previous attractor state. If the previous attractor state of
observation A was a ﬁxed point attractor, this ﬁxed point activity serves as the initial
activity conﬁguration for the second observation.
In recurrent networks order effects have been observed, i.e., the ﬁnal results
of observations may depend on the order in which the patterns are presented
(Atmanspacher & Filk, 2006; Atmanspacher et al., 2009). It is important to note
that the attractor state of the ﬁrst observation serves as an initial condition for the
second observation. This protocol is close to what is done in psychological or cog-
nitive experiments, e.g. in questionnaires: The ﬁrst question may prime the mental
state of a person for the second question.
3.4
Causality and Observed Indeterminism
From a God’s-eye perspective, a neural network subject to the dynamics of eq. 2 is
completely deterministic. However, from an observer’s perspective this may not be
the case.
Imagine the following situation: An observation A has been made, i.e., the input
nodes have the activity of pattern A and the output nodes show a constant activity
which is interpreted as the ‘result’ of this measurement. Internally, the activity might
be in a periodic cycle. If the input pattern is changed from A to a new ‘stimulus’ B
at a certain moment t, the result, i.e. the attractor which ﬁnally appears at the output

564
T. Filk
nodes, may depend on the internal activity at the exact moment t. But as the internal
activity is part of a periodic cycle, which is not observed, there is no control about
this activity. For continuous variables the internal activity may be part of a strange
attractor, in which case the situation is even worse. For an external observer the
result seems indeterministic, because the ‘switch’ from one pattern A with a given
result to a second pattern B may not always lead to the same results for this second
measurement.
For larger networks with a complicated attractor landscape it may be impossible
to determine the complete internal state of the system from the past reactions. And for
real neuronal networks the synaptic weights keep changing all the time which makes
any form of prediction even less likely. Even if the complete history of a network is
known—this refers to the observer’s perspective, i.e. the previous relations between
input pattern and output activities— the network will appear to be indeterministic.
Of course, in general this indeterminism will not be completely random but one will
observe statistical rules or regularities.
3.5
Memory and Novelty
Hopﬁeld networks are models for associative memory (Hopﬁeld, 1982): Upon a
clue, which usually consists of parts of a previously trained pattern, the network
reproduces the full pattern. How large this ‘part’ of a previously trained pattern has
to be in order to trigger the full pattern depends on many details, amongst others also
on similarities among the trained patterns and the threshold chosen for the transition
function. A Hopﬁeld network of N nodes can memorize roughly 0, 14 N randomly
chosen pattern (Amit et al., 1985).
However, depending on the threshold of the transition function and the stimulus,
the network sometimes reproduces a pattern which is not part of the trained set. At
least for small networks (of the order of 30 nodes) any combination of trained patterns
can be reproduced: the conjunction of activities, the disjunction, the complement of
one pattern minus the other, etc. (Bässgen, 2017). (In mathematics this is called a
sigma algebra.)
This implies that by varying the threshold of the transition function and applying
appropriate stimuli one can generate many new patterns which are combinations of
the old ones. In real neural networks the threshold of the transition function can
easily be inﬂuenced by changes in neurotransmitter concentrations, so this testing of
patterns can be an effective method of the brain to ﬁnd new solutions.

The Quantum-like Behavior of Neural Networks
565
4
Contextuality in Neural Networks
Quantum contextuality does not only play an important role in quantum physics, but
it also became a relevant issue in quantum cognition (for a general introduction of
quantum cognition see, e.g., (Busemeyer & Bruza, 2012; Filk, 2019; Khrennikov,
2010; Wendt, 2015)). After some historical remarks, I will explain this phenomenon
using the example of the so-called CHSH inequality, putting some emphasis on the
role of signaling, before I ﬁnally make the connection to neural networks.
4.1
Preliminary Historical Remarks
Historically, the notion of contextuality—at least as far as its meaning of ‘context
dependence’ is concerned—took a somewhat bizarre path. While context depen-
dence is a familiar concept in the arts or cognitive sciences (philosophy later added
the term ‘contextualism’) it swapped over to physics in the 1960s as a consequence
of the Kochen-Specker theorem (see below), where it received a mathematical for-
mulation. During the last ﬁfteen to twenty years, contextuality—equipped with this
mathematical add-on—drifted back again into the cognitive sciences via the route of
‘quantum cognition’.
The term ‘contextuality’ seems to have ﬁrst emerged in quantum physics. In 1957,
Andrew Gleason proved a mathematical theorem about the existence of measures
on the set of closed subspaces of a Hilbert space (in quantum physics such linear
subspaces represent physical states) (Gleason, 1957). After analyzing the physical
consequences of this theorem, John Bell came to the conclusion that “The result of
an observation may reasonably depend not only on the state of the system (including
hidden variables) but also on the complete disposition of the apparatus” and that
the strangeness of these consequences are grounded in the “tacid assumption [...]
that measurement of an observable must yield the same value independently of what
other measurements may be made simultaneously” (Bell, 1966). In 1967 Kochen
and Specker constructed an example with discrete states in which it could be proven
that the results of certain measurements depend on which other compatible measure-
ments (the context) are performed on this same system (Kochen & Specker, 1967).
Despite its discreteness, the model of Kochen and Specker was quite complicated
and involved 117 hypothetical measurements. Later simpler proofs were published
[see e.g. (Cabello, 1994; Peres, 1991)].
A special example of contextuality are quantum correlations of entangled systems.
In this article I will only discuss one example of this form of contextuality, which is
the CHSH inequality (see next subsection). This inequality has been the subject of
much research also in the cognitive sciences. It was ﬁrst noted by Aerts et al. that
Bell-type inequalities (like CHSH) can be violated in scenarios where subjects are
asked to answer certain sets of questions (Aerts et al., 2002). Later similar results
were obtained by other groups (Aerts & Sozzo, 2014; Bruza & Cole, 2005). Then
it was noted by Dzhafarov et al. that the data of all these experiments do not have

566
T. Filk
‘marginal selectivity’ (a term used in early articles of this group, e.g. (Dzhafarov &
Kujala, 2014)) or ‘consistent connectedness’ (the equivalent expression used in more
recent articles, e.g. (Dzhafarov et al., 2016)). This quantity measures to which extend
correlations of two variables can be used for a transfer of information between the
sites where these variables are measured. This group suggested to ﬁrst subtract these
‘signaling’ correlations before the CHSH inequality is evaluated. They found that in
this case none of the previously reported results from the cognitive sciences violated
the inequality anymore. However, they reported about the data of a new experiment
which indeed did violate the inequality (Dzhafarov et al., 2016).
4.2
CHSH as Contextuality
There are many good review articles about entanglement and the violation of Bell-
type inequalities, in particular also the CHSH inequality, in quantum theory [see
e.g. (Clauser et al., 1969; Horodecki et al., 2009; Nielsen & Chuang, 2000)]. In this
section, I will present a very explicit case which later can be transferred to various
approaches in the realm of quantum cognition.
Photons, the so-called quanta of light, have a property called polarization. Even
though there are inﬁnitely many possible polarization states, a measurement (e.g. by
letting a photon pass through a polarization ﬁlter) can only yield the result ‘yes’ (has
passed the ﬁlter) or ‘no’ (did not pass). We are free to choose an orientation for the
ﬁlter, and I will denote this orientation by an angle α which can be between +90 and
−90 degrees.1 In a single experiment we can ‘measure’ the polarization only with
respect to one direction, i.e. one angle, and the result is binary: yes or no.
Consider the following set-up: There are two photons (in an entangled state, but
this is not relevant at this stage; see below). On photon 1 we choose to measure the
polarization either with respect to an axis α, say 0 degrees, or an axis α′ = 45◦(the
particular angles are chosen in such a way that certain quantum systems yield a maxi-
mal violation of the CHSH inequality). On photon 2 we choose to measure the polar-
izationeitherwithrespecttoanaxisβ = 22, 5◦oranaxisβ′ = 67, 5◦.α andα′ cannot
be measured simultaneously (on the same photon), similarly β and β′. But we can
measure any polarization on photon 1 in combination with any polarization on pho-
ton 2 simultaneously. This leaves us with four possibilities: (α, β), (α, β′), (α′, β),
and (α′, β′). Denote by a, a′, b, and b′ the results of measurements for angles α, α′,
β and β′, respectively (e.g. a = +1 for ‘passed’ and a = −1 for ‘did not pass’ etc.).
Now we consider a huge number of photon pairs prepared in the same (entangled)
state. One photon is always sent to site A where its polarization is measured (either
with respect to α or α′) and the polarization of the other photon (β or β′) is measured
at site B. In a next step, the protocols from site A and B are compared and the
four expectation values ⟨xy⟩, with x = a or a′ and y = b or b′, determined. In each
1 A rotation of 180 degrees does not change the polarization axis, and for simplicity I will only
consider linear polarization states.

The Quantum-like Behavior of Neural Networks
567
single case the product can only be +1 or −1, therefore the expectation value can be
anything in between. Finally, the following quantity is evaluated:
S = ⟨ab⟩−⟨ab′⟩+ ⟨a′b⟩+ ⟨a′b′⟩.
(7)
The minus sign can be in front of any one of these four terms, important is that three
terms have the plus sign and one the minus sign. One can show [see e.g. (Clauser
et al., 1969; Horodecki et al., 2009; Nielsen & Chuang, 2000)] that if the results of
the measurements were predetermined by some hidden parameter—i.e., before the
measurement is actually performed some hidden degrees of freedom determine what
the result of the measurement will be—we must have
|S| ≤2 .
(8)
This is called the CHSH inequality. Essentially, its applicability depends on two
assumptions: (1) there are no correlations between hidden parameters and the choice
of the experimentalists for their decision to measure a or a′ at site A or b or b′ at site B,
respectively; this is sometimes called the ‘no conspiracy assumption’ (with various
other names in use, like ‘free will of the experimentalist’ or ‘no superdeterminism’),
and (2) there is no signaling between the two sites, i.e., whatever measurement is
performed at site A (with result a or a′) has no direct inﬂuence onto the results of
measurements performed at site B or vice versa.
While assumption (1) is tacitly assumed in physics (we believe in the freedom of
the experimentalist to make his or her choice of measurements freely and not pre-
determined), assumption (2) is ‘guaranteed’ in most physics experiments by putting
sites A and B far apart (up to several hundred kilometers) and performing the mea-
surements on the two entangled photons within nanoseconds. This excludes any
signaling with a velocity not exceeding the velocity of light (up to now signaling
velocities with less than 10.000 times the velocity of light can be experimentally
excluded (Yin, 2013)). So, assuming the theory of relativity is valid, any direct inﬂu-
ence of the results obtained at one site onto the results obtained at the other site can
be excluded.
In quantum theory, the two photons can be prepared in a so-called entangled state
such that the CHSH-inequality is violated for the polarization orientations given
above. It turns out that the upper limit for S in quantum theory is S = 2
√
2 ≈2, 83.
This is the so-called Tsirelson bound (Tsirelson, 1980).
What has this to do with contextuality? As measurements on different photons are
always compatible (they can be performed simultaneously) the violation of the CHSH
inequality in quantum theory can be interpreted as ‘the results of measurements
obtained at one site depend on which measurements are performed and which results
are obtained at the other site’. Measuring α in combination with β yields (on average)
other values for a as compared to a measurement of α in combination with β′. I will
not prove this statement here, but I will demonstrate, why S cannot be equal to +4,
even though it is the sum of four terms each of which can be anything between +1
and −1.

568
T. Filk
For S = +4 we must have ⟨ab⟩= ⟨a′b⟩= ⟨a′b′⟩= +1 and ⟨ab′⟩= −1. How-
ever, the ﬁrst equalities imply that a is always equal to b, b is always equal to a′
and this in turn is always equal to b′. But now we have a = b = a′ = b′, which also
implies that a = b′. In this case, however, the expectation value ⟨ab′⟩is also +1 and
S assumes the value 2. For ⟨ab′⟩to be −1, the results for a and b′ should always be
different. So, if S = +4 the result of α depends on whether it is measured together
with β or together with β′. This is called contextuality. One can show in general that
for S > 2, the results a, a′ etc. have to be contextual: They depend on what other
measurements are performed simultaneously [see, e.g., (Fine, 1982)].
4.3
CHSH in Quantum Cognition
The situation described above has been applied to cognitive experiments. Without
going into the details of each of these experiments [see e.g.(Aerts et al., 2002; Bruza
& Cole, 2005; Dzhafarov & Cervantes, 2018) and references therein] I just outline
the main characteristics using the example of (Atmanspacher & Filk, 2019). Four
pairs of terms are chosen, usually of two different types which I will call A-type and
B-type. In our example the A-type pairs consist of numbers and are (3, 4) and (2, 9)
and the B-type pairs consist of properties of numbers and are (prime, non-prime) and
(even, odd). These four pairs correspond to the four possible measurements: α, α′ as
A-type and β, β′ as B-type. In Aerts et al. 2002 the ﬁrst group consisted of animal
names (horse, cat, bear, etc.) and the second group of sounds (whinnies, roars, etc.),
in Dzhafarov and Cervantes 2018 the ﬁrst pairs consisted of characters in the fairy
tale Snow Queen by Hans Christian Andersen (Snow Queen, Gerda, Troll, etc.) and
the second of attributes (beautiful, mean, etc.). The group of subjects is divided into
four equal-sized subgroups and the subjects of each subgroup are given two pairs of
terms, one from the A-type the other from the B-type. E.g., the ﬁrst subgroup gets
the combination (3, 4) and (prime, non-prime). The experiment consists of asking
the subjects to choose one element of each of their pairs such that it ﬁts, which
means, e.g., that 3 of the ﬁrst pair has to be combined with ‘prime’ from the second,
while 4 of the ﬁrst pair should be combined with ‘non-prime’. The ﬁrst term of each
pair is counted as result +1, the second as result −1. Now the expectation values
are determined (each group contributes one expectation value) and the quantity S is
determined. In the above example this would lead to:
S = ⟨((3, 4), (prime,non-prime)⟩1 −⟨((3, 4), (even,odd)⟩2
+⟨((2, 9), (prime,non-prime)⟩3 + ⟨((2, 9), (even,odd)⟩4
Ifallanswers‘ﬁt’,theresultwillbe S = +4inthiscase.Ihavemarkedtheexpectation
values by subscripts 1 to 4 indicating that these are four different samples or groups of
subjects. The ‘no-conspiracy’ assumption essentially states that these four samples
have the same statistical properties with respect to whatever ‘hidden’ parameters,

The Quantum-like Behavior of Neural Networks
569
which may have an inﬂuence onto the results of the measurements; or, to put it
differently, that the result would have been essentially the same if the four groups of
subjects were assigned to different A- and B-type pairs.
Is this result surprising? I think not. The main assumption in physics for the
inequality to hold, and which is violated here, is ‘non-invasiveness‘ or ‘no-signaling’.
Whatever pair is chosen ﬁrst by a subject determines the answer for the second pair.
If a subject of group 2 (second term in the expression for S) makes a decision which
pair to take ﬁrst (say the pair (3, 4)) and chooses e.g. 4, this determines the ‘ﬁtting’
answer for the second pair, namely ‘even’. And the product of the results will be −1.
The same holds for all other combinations in this group: the choice from the ﬁrst
pair determines the outcome of the second. In physics, such a situation is avoided by
making the two measurements within the complement of each other’s light-cone, i.e.
by performing them in such a way that no signal can travel (with the speed of light)
from one site to the other. This is not the case here: The subject is the same and, of
course, he or she knows the ﬁrst choice and the matching answer.
The appropriate ‘cognitive’ experiment would be the following: Subjects are
grouped into pairs (they can be ‘entangled’ in the sense that they may have a relation-
ship, are friends, have been primed in a similar way etc.), lets call them Alice (the
A-type) and Bob (the B-type). Alice and Bob are separated such that no exchange of
information between them is possible. Alice gets an A-type pair of terms (e.g. (3, 4)),
Bob a B-type pair (e.g. (even, odd)). Of course, Alice and Bob must not know in
advance, before they get separated, the pair of terms they will get (this would be
superdeterminism or ‘conspiracy’), and after they got their pair of terms they are
not allowed to get into contact anymore (this would be signaling). Alice chooses
one possibility of her pair and Bob chooses one possibility of his pair. Even if Alice
and Bob decide beforehand on a certain strategy (e.g. both taking always the ﬁrst
term of their pair) it is easy to show that the CHSH inequality will be satisﬁed. Any
other result would indeed be surprising. But this is not the way the experiments are
performed.
4.4
Signaling and Contextuality
What is the connection between the CHSH inequality and the notion of contextu-
ality in the cognitive sciences? Presumably Fine’s theorem is responsible for this
relationship. In 1982, Arthur Fine proved that if the CHSH inequality (plus some
trivial consistency conditions) holds for a set of data then there exists a joint proba-
bility distribution for these data (Fine, 1982). This implies that if the inequality holds
there is no need for assuming a context dependence, while on the other hand, if the
inequality is violated, there has to be some form of contextuality in the sense that the
results of one or more observables depend on which other observables are measured
simultaneously and what these results are. A violation of the CHSH inequality is a
sufﬁcient condition for context dependence, however, it is not a necessary one. The
point is, and this is what Fine’s theorem tells us, that, if CHSH is satisﬁed, from the

570
T. Filk
data alone we can never judge whether there is a context dependence or not. For such
a judgement it needs a model which explains how certain correlations come about.
In entangled quantum systems the CHSH inequality can be violated for certain
parameters (e.g., the particular angles used in Sect. 4.2), but there are other parameter
regimes, where the CHSH inequality is not violated. This doesn’t imply that there
is no ‘context dependence’ in these cases. It would be quite surprising if context
dependence suddenly sets in for certain ranges of parameters. The mathematical
formalism which determines the statistics of the results does not suddenly change
when the parameters (the angles) switch from a region where the CHSH inequality is
satisﬁed to a region where it is not. However, we can construct local hidden variable
models without context dependence to explain the cases where CHSH holds, but we
cannot construct such models when the CHSH inequality is violated.
It is still a matter of debate among physicists how to interpret the violation of
Bell-type inequalities like CHSH in quantum theory. Some argue that there has to
be a kind of mutual ‘inﬂuence’ between the two sites where the correlations occur,
however, this ‘inﬂuence’ does not involve an exchange of energy and it cannot be used
for a controlled exchange of signals (and, therefore, a superluminal communication)
between Alice and Bob. This is referred to as the ‘non-communication theorem’ or
sometimes also as the ‘non-signaling theorem’. Even though the correlations maybe
absolute (e.g. always correlated or always anti-correlated), the local outcomes at the
sites of Alice and Bob appear to be random and cannot be controlled.
Apparently, the notion of ‘signal’ is used in this context in two different meanings:
(1)anoperationaldeﬁnition,whichisusedbyDhzafarovetal.[?]andwhichmeasures
the extend to which the observed correlations can be used to transfer information from
one site to the other (communicating signals), and (2) an ‘ontological’ deﬁnition with
respecttoamodelinwhichitisobviousthatasignalhasbeentransferredfromonesite
to the other, however, this signal cannot be used for communication. This distinction
of meanings has recently been emphasized in several articles (Atmanspacher & Filk,
2019; Jones, 2019; Walleczek & Grössing, 2016).
I will not go into the technical details of how signaling is treated in the different
approaches but I want to emphasize, that ‘signaling’ is not in contradiction to ‘context
dependence’. Indeed, we are surprised (and quantum physics seems to be the only
example where this may be true) if the behavior of a system A depends on a context
without A having knowledge (in a very broad sense) about this context. And ‘having
knowledge’ usually implies that some kind of signal has passed from the site of the
context to the site of A. So, eliminating this type of signaling may not be the right
approach for a deﬁnition of contextuality in the sense of ‘context dependency’. On
the other hand, one can deﬁne contextuality as a dependence which is not due to a
common course and also not due to any form of (non-communicating) signaling. In
this case, however, while quantum theory involves a contextual formalism, it is not
clear whether or not quantum reality is contextual.

The Quantum-like Behavior of Neural Networks
571
4.5
Neural Networks Can Violate CHSH
Figure1 (left) shows an example of a neural network which violates the CHSH
inequality maximally (i.e., |S| = 4, such devices are sometimes called PR-boxes
(Popescu & Rohrlich, 1994)) and for which the output correlations do not allow
for communicating signal exchanges (or, to put it differently, which has marginal
selectivity). Alice’s choice for α or α′ is translated into the input 0 or 1, respectively,
while Bob’s choice for β or β′ is translated into 1 or 0, respectively. The box with
a symbolized threshold function and the label θ = 0.5 represents a neuron which
sends out the signal 1 if the sum of the two inputs is larger than 0.5, which is always
the case except for the choice (α, β′), which leads to an output of 0. Up to point (3)
in Fig. 1(left) the network represents a simple AND-gate, which already violates the
CHSH inequality maximally [(see also (Filk, 2016, 2015), where this model has been
elaborated]. However, the AND gate can be used for signaling: Bob can signal to
Alice, because if she keeps her setting in α, her reading 0 or 1 depends only on Bob’s
choice of β or β′, respectively. External signaling is made impossible by adding a
random number generator RNG with equal probabilities for 0 and 1. This random
number generator is triggered by Bob’s input (dashed line). The output on Bob’s site
equals the random number while the output on Alice’s site is obtained as the result
of an XOR gate, which has as its input the result of the ﬁrst ‘neuron’ (essentially the
AND gate) and the random number. The outputs on both sides, 0 or 1, are ﬁnally
translated to external outputs −1 and +1, respectively. The device leads to S = +4.
The two elements which are ‘foreign’ to neural networks, the XOR gate and
the random number generator, can easily be realized by neural networks: The XOR
gate can be realized with three ‘neurons’ (Fig. 1 (right)), and the random number
generator can be realized by any network which has a periodic attractor with period
2 or larger. The state of this attractor at the exact moment when Bob sets his choice
for β or β′ will then serve as the random number generator. The connection between
the random number generator and the XOR gate (connection 2) can be replaced by
Fig. 1
(left) This network violates the CHSH inequality maximally but cannot be used for signal-
ing.(right) The XOR gate can be realized by a neural network. The small boxes with entries −1 in
front of the two threshold boxes to the left denote an inhibitory inﬂuence (the synaptic weight is
−1) by reversing the sign of the input signal. See main text for other symbols.

572
T. Filk
an entangled pair of 2-state quantum systems [see (Filk, 2015)], so this part of the
device does not constitute a real transfer of information and can be instantaneous,
but the internal signal of Bob’s setting to Alice’s site (connection 1) is subject to the
laws of relativity and this internal information transfer is the reason why this simple
classical device can violate the CHSH inequality.
Of course, the details of these networks are not relevant for this discussion, what
is relevant is the ‘proof of principle’: Classical systems can easily violate the CHSH
inequality (even maximally) such that the correlations cannot be used for commu-
nicating signaling. A violation of the CHSH inequality is sometimes used as an
argument that a classical mathematical formalism (based on Kolmogorov probabil-
ities and, e.g., Markov processes) cannot explain this situation and that a quantum
formalism (using Hilbert spaces as state spaces and the square of the scalar prod-
uct for calculating probabilities) has to be used. However, while using a quantum
formalism might be a possibility as long as the CHSH value satisﬁes the Tsirelson
bound, it will be of no help in cases like the one discussed here where the CHSH
inequality is violated beyond the Tsirelson bound.
5
Conclusions
Neural networks are excellent examples to study the ‘route from content to context’ in
thesensethatthelocalbehaviorofthesesystemsissimpleandforverysmallnetworks
also the global behavior can be determined analytically, but for large systems the
complexity increases rapidly such that analytical solutions or predictions become
almost impossible. On the other hand, the local dynamics of these systems is simple
enough to enable effective computer simulations.
Furthermore, neural networks allow for two perspectives: (1) an internal perspec-
tive, which is similar to the perspective of classical physics and for which a state
of the system is described by the activities of all the nodes and the constellation
of weights, and (2) an external perspective, more similar to cognitive disciplines,
where only the input-output relations can be observed. In particular this second per-
spective shows much similarity to some quantum effects, e.g. non-commutativity
of observations, non determinism, memory effects and, in particular, contextuality.
A violation of a CHSH inequality has often been interpreted as a sign for quantum
or, at least, quantum-like effects. However, this conclusion is indispensable only if
certain loopholes can be excluded, in particular the locality loophole: measurements
must not have a direct inﬂuence onto each other. If some form of mutual inﬂuence
is possible, a violation of CHSH inequalities is no surprise and already very simple
classical devices like neural networks can realize such situations.
The no-signaling theorem (or non-communication theorem) does not imply that
there has been no mutual inﬂuence between the measurements. It only means that
the observed correlations cannot be used for communication or controlled signal
transfer. This does not exclude an internal form of inﬂuence which, however, cannot
be observed directly. Even in quantum theory there is still a debate to which extend the

The Quantum-like Behavior of Neural Networks
573
violation of CHSH inequalities can be explained by some ‘internal’ form of inﬂuence
which, however, is not part of the quantum formalism. Again, neural networks are a
very instructive example for these phenomena.
I should emphasize that I do not argue against the use of the mathematical formal-
ism of quantum theory in the cognitive sciences. Many examples have been reported
in the past [see, e.g., (Khrennikov, 2010; Busemeyer & Bruza, 2012; Wang & Buse-
meyer, 2013)] where the quantum formalism yields signiﬁcantly better results than
the standard classical approaches, even if one takes into account that the quantum for-
malism has more adjustable parameters. The reason for this remains to be explored,
and also for this purpose neural networks maybe of help.
References
Aerts, D., Broekaert, J. & Gabora, L. (2002). Intrinsic contextuality as the crux of consciousness.
In K. Yasue, M. Jibu, & T. Della Senta (Eds.), No matter, never mind, Series Advances in Con-
sciousness Research (Vol. 33). John Benjamins. ISSN 1381 -589X.
Aerts, D., & Sozzo, S. (2014). Quantum entanglement in concept combinations. International
Journal of Theoretical Physics, 53, 3587–3603.
Amit, D. J., Gutfreund, H., & Sompolinsky, H. (1985). Storing inﬁnite numbers of patterns in a
spin-glass model of neural networks. Physical Review Letters, 55, 1530–1533.
Atmanspacher, H., & Filk, T. (2006). Complexity and non-commutativity of learning operations on
graphs. BioSystems, 85, 84–93.
Atmanspacher, H., Filk, T., Finke, R., & Gruber, G. (2009). Complexity constraints and error
tolerance in learning processes on small graphs. The Open Cybernetics and Systems Journal, 3,
90–97.
Atmanspacher, H., & Filk, T. (2018). Non-commutativity and its implications in physics and beyond.
In P. Stenner & M. Weber (Eds.), Orpheus’ glance. Selected papers on process psychology; The
Fontaréches meetings 2002–2017; Les Éditions Chromatika.
Atmanspacher, H., & Filk, T. (2019). Contextualitiy revisited—Signaling may differ from commu-
nicating. In A. de Barros & C. Montemayor (Eds.), Quanta and mind (pp. 117–127). Springer
Nature (ﬁrst online publication 2019).
Atmanspacher, H., & Römer, H. (2012). Order effects in sequential measurements of non-
commuting psychological observables. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 56, 274–280.
Bässgen, F. (2017). Self-organized restructuring of attractor landscapes of neural networks. Master
Thesis Freiburg.
Bell, J. (1966). On the problem of hidden variables in quantum theory. Reviews of Modern Physics,
38, 447–452.
Bruza, P., & Cole, R.J. (2005). Quantum Logic of semantic space: An exploratory investigation
of context effects in practical reasoning. In S. Artemov, H. Barringer, A. S. d’Avila Garcez, L.
C. Lamb, & J. Woods (Eds.), We will show them: Essays in honour of Dov Gabbay. College
Publications.
Busemeyer, J. & Bruza, P. (2012). Quantum models of cognition and decision. Cambridge University
Press.
Cabello, A. (1994). A simple proof of the Kochen-Specker theorem. European Journal of Physics,
15, 179–183.
Clauser, J. F., Horne, M. A., Shimony, A., & Holt, R. A. (1969). Proposed experiment to test local
hidden-variable theories. Physical Review Letters, 23, 880–884.
Dayan, P., & Abbott, L. F. (2001). Theoretical neuroscience—Computational and mathematical
modeling of neural systems. Cambridge, Massachusetts, London: MIT Press.

574
T. Filk
Dzhafarov, E. N., & Kujala, J. V. (2014). Selective inﬂuences, marginal selectivity, and Bell/CHSH
inequalities. Topics in Cognitive Science, 6, 121–128.
Dzhafarov, E. N., Kujala, J. V., & Cervantes, V. H. (2016). Contextuality-by-default: A brief
overview of ideas, concepts, and terminology. In H. Atmanspacher, T. Filk, & E. Pothos (Eds.),
Lecture Notes in Computer Science (Vol. 9535, pp. 12–23).
Dzhafarov, E. N., & Cervantes, V. H. (2018). Snow queen is evil and beautiful: Experimental
evidence for probabilistic contextuality in human choices. Decision, 5, 193–204.
Filk, T. (2015). A mechanical model of a PR-box. arXive: quant-phys 1507.06789
Filk, T. (2016). It is the theory which decides what we can observe (Einstein). In E. Dzhafarov,
S. Jordan, R. Zhang, & V. Cervantes (Eds.), Proceedings of Purdue Winer Memorial Lectures
2014—Contextuality from Physics to Psychology (pp. 77–92). World Scientiﬁc Publishing Co.
Filk, T. (2019). ‘Quantum’ and ‘Quantum-like’: An introduction to quantum theory and its appli-
cations in cognitive and social sciences iASK Publishing, K˝oszeg.
Fine, A. (1982). Hidden variables, joint probability, and the Bell inequalities. Physical Review
Letters, 48, 291–295.
Gerstner, W., & Kistler, W. (2002). Spiking neuron models. Cambridge University Press.
Gleason, A. M. (1957). Measures on the closed subspaces of a Hilbert space. Journal of Mathematics
and Mechanics, 6, 885.
Haykin, S. (2009). Neural networks and learning machines (3rd ed.). Pearson Education.
Hebb, D. (1949). The organization of behavior. Wiley.
Hodgkin, A. L., & Huxley, A. F. (1952). A quantitative description of membrane current and its
application to conduction and excitation in nerve. Journal of Physiology, 117, 500–544.
Hopﬁeld, J. J. (1982). Neural networks and physical systems with emergent collective computational
abilities. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 79,
2554–2558.
Horodecki, R., Horodecki, P., Horodecki, M., & Horodecki, K. (2009). Quantum entanglement.
Reviews of Modern Physics, 81, 865–942.
Jones, M. (2019). Relating causal and probabilistic approaches to contextuality. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society A, 377, 20190133.
Kandel, E. R., Schwartz, J. H., & Jessell, T. M. (2000). Principles of Neural Science (4th ed.).
McGraw Hill.
Khrennikov, A. (2010). Ubiquitous quantum structure: From psychology to ﬁnances. Springer.
Kleiner, J. (2012). The mathematical structure of measurements, observables and states on Neural
Networks. Master Thesis, Heidelberg.
Kochen, S., & Specker, E. P. (1967). The problem of hidden variables in quantum mechanics.
Journal of Mathematics and Mechanics, 17, 59–87.
Kohonen, T. (1984). Self-organization and associative memory. Berlin: Springer.
McCulloch, W., & Pitts, W. (1943). A logical calculus of the ideas immanent in nervous activity.
Bulletin of Mathematical Biophysics, 5, 115–133.
Nielsen, M., & Chuang, I. (2000). Quantum computation and quantum information. Cambridge
University Press.
Peres, A. (1991). Two simple proofs of the Kochen-Specker theorem. Journal of Physics A: Math-
ematical and General, 24, L175–L178.
Popescu, S., & Rohrlich, D. (1994). Nonlocality as an axiom. Foundations of Physics, 24, 379.
Rosenblatt, Frank. (1958). The perceptron—a probabilistic model for information storage and orga-
nization in the brain. Psychological Review, 65, 386–408.
Tsirelson, B. S. (1980). Quantum generalizations of Bell’s inequality. Letters in Mathematical
Physics, 4, 93–100.
Turing, A. (1948). Intelligent Machines. National Physics Laboratory Report 6/205.
Walleczek, J., & Grössing, G. (2016). Nonlocal quantum information transfer without superluminal
signaling and communication. Foundations of Physics, 46, 1208–1228.
Wang, Z., & Busemeyer, J. (2013). Quantum question order model supported by empirical tests of
an a priori and precise prediction. Topics in Cognitive Science, 5, 689–710.

The Quantum-like Behavior of Neural Networks
575
Wang, Z., Solloway, T., Shiffrin, R. M., & Busemeyer, J. R. (2014). Context effects produced by
question orders reveal quantum nature of human judgments. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences of the USA, 111, 9431–9436.
Wendt, A. (2015). Quantum mind and social science: Unifying physical and social ontology. Cam-
bridge University Press.
Yin, J., et al. (2013). Bounding the speed of ‘spooky action at a distance’. Physical Review Letters,
110.

Concepts, Experts, and Deep Learning
Ilkka Niiniluoto
1
From GOFAI to Deep Learning
DeeplearningisanewparadigmwhichduringthelastdecadehassupersededGOFAI,
the Good Old-Fashioned Artiﬁcial Intelligence, which was based on rules for manip-
ulating symbols and logical reasoning.1 The pioneering work on AI in the 1950s was
inspiredbyAlanTuring’s1936modelofanidealmachinewhichisabletoaccomplish
all effectively calculable tasks. Turing machines operate with a digital representation
of symbols in their own language and the manipulation of symbols with simple rules.
InJohnvonNeumann’sarchitecture,dataandprogramsarestoredinthememoryunit,
which is connected with the control unit and the arithmetic logic unit. Allen Newell
and Herbert Simon with their co-workers had high expectations for the success for
weak AI, which aims to be more effective than human agents for speciﬁc computa-
tional tasks, and strong AI, which attempts to imitate intelligent human thinking and
reasoning. This cognitive approach gave some promising results in the treatment of
pattern recognition and machine learning, where the machine receives an input and
is able to perform deductive and inductive inferences and to make decisions.
However, critics like Hubert L. Dreyfus in his What Computers Can’t Do? (1972),
explained the slow progress in the areas of machine translation and problem-solving
by the thesis that the human mind does not process information by formal rules.
Inspired by the European phenomenologists Martin Heidegger and Maurice Merleau-
Ponty, Dreyfus argued that computers differ from human beings also in the fact that
they do not have bodies, needs, and forms of life. John Searle’s (1984) “Chinese
room argument” added that computers, which operate blindly with digital symbols,
1 For GOFAI, see Haugeland (1985).
I. Niiniluoto (B)
Department of Philosophy, History, and Art Studies, University of Helsinki, P.O. Box 24, 00014
Helsinki, Finland
e-mail: ilkka.niiniluoto@helsinki.ﬁ
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
S. Wuppuluri and I. Stewart (eds.), From Electrons to Elephants and Elections,
The Frontiers Collection, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-92192-7_31
577

578
I. Niiniluoto
do not have a semantics or understanding about linguistic meaning. Computers at
best pretend to be intelligent or sensitive with emotions. They also lack common
sense or everyday practical reason, as shown by the frame problem (i.e. when a robot
acts, what changes and what remains unchanged in the environment). As a solution,
Marvin Minsky (1987) suggested that robots should be taught to play with toys and
to build towers from blocks.
Deep learning (DL), which emerged in the early 2000s as an alternative to GOFAI,
is based on neural networks.2 The ﬁrst model of a biological neuron was formu-
lated already in 1943 by Warren McCulloch and Walter Pitts. Self-organizing neural
nets, proposed by Teuvo Kohonen in the 1980s, were an important step toward the
modeling of the associative and parallel computational processes of the human brain.
The starting point of deep learning is thus connectionist rather than computational,
i.e., this form of machine learning is “sub-symbolic” in the sense that the perceived
input creates or strengthens connections between the units of the network. The
layers of neural nets with billions of connections are thus constantly transformed as
effects of input and parallel calculations, without any concepts that represent external
objects. Important methods, used already in old models of machine learning, include
supervised learning, reinforced learning, and unsupervised learning. In supervised
learning, the machine learns millions of training examples which are paired with
correct outputs, so that the algorithm is able recognize regularities and to use them
for successful predictions about new data. Reinforced learning, which resembles
the techniques of psychological behaviorists with animals and humans, is based on
positive and negative feedback. In unsupervised learning, the machine classiﬁes unla-
beled data by their properties without reference to previously given categories. These
methods have been successfully used in DL-networks for concept learning, face
recognition, and natural language translation (e.g. Google translate)—even though
such neural nets are agnostic and cannot be claimed to “know” or “understand”
anything. The results of DL are also opaque in the sense that we humans do not
always envisage the steps and reasons for their conclusions or decisions.
It is easy to teach a machine to follow the constitutive rules of chess, which tell the
moves that are allowed and forbidden, but it is much more difﬁcult to implement the
strategic rules for winning the game effectively. In 1997 IBM’s chess machine Deep
Blue succeeded to defeat the world champion Garri Kasparov by its “brute force”
in computation, which helped to calculate and compare several moves ahead. But
more brilliant result have been reached by letting hundreds of layers of neural nets
to learn from examples and self-plays against itself. Google’s company DeepMind
built in 2017 the machine Alpha Zero, which during one day was raised to the master
level by reinforced learning from millions of training examples of successful games
of Go. The triumph of deep learning was witnessed in 2016 when Google’s neural
network Alpha Go with tree search methods succeeded to defeat Leo Sedol, who
was praised as the best player of Go in the world.3
2 See LeCun et al. (2015), Goodfellow et al. (2016).
3 See Silver et al. (2016).

Concepts, Experts, and Deep Learning
579
2
Back to Concept Empiricism?
The classic of British empiricism John Locke argued in An Essay Concerning Human
Understanding (1689) that the human mind does not include any innate ideas or
principles:
Let us then suppose the mind to be, as we say, white paper, void of all characters, without any
ideas: How comes it to be furnished? …To this I answer, in one world, from EXPERIENCE.
The senses at ﬁrst let in particular ideas, and furnish the yet empty cabinet, and the mind
by degrees growing familiar with some of them, they are lodged in the memory, and names
got to them. Afterwards, the mind proceeding further, abstracts them, and by degrees learns
the use of general names.4
Thus, by the Lockean concept empiricism, human mind is originally an empty
table (tabula rasa), to which external objects causally impress ideas by means of
perceptual experience. Language arises when these ideas are generalized and named.
Immanuel Kant’s Kritik der reinen Vernunft (1781/1787) gave what many philoso-
phers regarded as a fatal blow to Locke’s empiricism. According to Kant, the human
consciousness is an active partner in cognition, so that knowledge can arise only
from the united operation of understanding and the sensuous faculty:
Thoughts without content are void; intuitions without conceptions blind.5
In Kant’s system, space and time are the two a priori forms of sensuous intuition
(perception), and categories like modality and causality are the general conceptions
of pure understanding. Many Kantians thought that common names (like “cat” and
“brown”) are human constructions, to be used in the interpretation of sensuous infor-
mation. For example, the British philosopher William Whewell (1840) emphasized
the interplay between ideas and senses in scientiﬁc concept formation:
Terms must be constructed and appropriated so as to be ﬁtted to enunciate simply and clearly
true general propositions.
Charles S. Peirce’s semiotics included three kinds of signs (indices, icons, and
symbols), where symbols are signs whose meaning is based on conventions within the
linguistic community (e.g. “cat” in English and “kissa” in Finnish are conventional
symbols in this sense).6 The Finnish philosopher and psychologist Eino Kaila argued
that the key difference of human beings to other animals is their use of symbols. In his
posthumous work, he illustrated vividly the entanglement of “perceptual and concep-
tual elements” in everyday experience.7 In philosophy of science, this is known as
the theory-ladenness of observations. In philosophy of language, Jaakko Hintikka’s
(1975) “neo-Kantian” logic of perception treats perception as thoroughly concep-
tual: all perception statements are reducible to the propositional construction “S
4 See Locke (1965), 61.
5 See Kant (1930), 46.
6 See Short (2007).
7 See Kaila (1979).

580
I. Niiniluoto
perceives that p”. Hintikka blames the phenomenology of Edmund Husserl for the
illegitimate assumption that in our sensuous experience there exists a non-conceptual
ingredient or hyle (p. 198), so that he would reject Tim Crane’s (1992) idea of “non-
conceptual content” in experience. In linguistics, Noam Chomsky defended in the
1950s the thesis that the learning of language presupposes linguistic competence,
which consists of the possession of “linguistic universals” common to all languages.
Chomsky’s student Jerry Fodor (1975) developed the computational model of human
mind which assumes the existence of “the language of thought”.
A typical post-Kantian model of language acquisition is learning by ostension:
the teacher has a concept, and she points to an object by saying e.g. that “This is
koala”. A child may learn to use such a classiﬁcatory concept even by one instance.
A generalization of this model is based on several exemplars: a concept C is learned
by an example c of C and by including in the extension of C all objects which are
sufﬁciently similar to c. In philosophy of language and philosophy of science this
method has been used by Ludwig Wittgenstein and Thomas Kuhn. Pattern recog-
nition of traditional AI, used for the recognition of faces, signs, words, speech, and
pictures, is also based on this method: patterns G1, …, Gn are stored in memory
as prototypes, and an observation H is identiﬁed with the pattern G which has the
greatest degree of similarity with H. In the GOFAI tradition, Mitchell (1997) uses
this method for concept learning by training examples.8 Within this scheme, it can be
understood how caricatures are able represent their targets, even though they inten-
tionally exaggerate and distort some of their characters. Theoretical terms used in
science have been compared to caricatures, since it is not necessary to assume a
perfect ﬁt between them and theoretical entities.9 But it is also clear that theoretical
terms cannot be learned by ostension: electrons are not directly observable, so they
are known only by theoretical description and identiﬁed abductively as causes of
observable effects.
Hilary Putnam (1975) has distinguished different degrees in the mastery of
language by his “division of linguistic labor”. Ordinary people are able to distin-
guish some coniferous trees (such as spruce, pine, juniper) and some leaf trees (such
as birch, rowan, maple), but only a subset of speakers, a class of linguistic experts, are
abletodiscriminatebetweenelmandlinden.InspiredbyPutnam,wemayaskwhether
machines and robots may become concept experts. In the computational model of AI,
it would be natural to appeal to traditional methods of deﬁning concepts by semantic
criteria (necessary and sufﬁcient conditions) or clusters of characters and attributes.
Semantic webs provide a tool for expressing conceptual systems and their interrela-
tions. But the procedure of deep learning is quite different. In supervised learning,
the neural network is given millions of training examples (images of houses, cars,
people, elephants, pets etc.) labelled with their category.10 This resembles repeated
8 See also Niiniluoto (2005).
9 For the caricature theory of reference, see Niiniluoto (1999), 125–132; Niiniluoto (2020).
10 The difference to the old model of machine learning can be seen in the fact that for L. Valiant’s
1984 method of PAC-learning probable approximate correctness is enough, as it decreases the
number of required positive instances. See Valiant (2013) and Niiniluoto (2005).

Concepts, Experts, and Deep Learning
581
ostensive learning, but the classiﬁcation is created on the sub-conceptual level by
modifying the weights of the multiple links between the units of the network. In
reinforced learning, errors of output scores with respect to desired patterns of scores
may be counted. Thereby the machine learns to recognize new concepts so that irrel-
evant variations are noted and even minute details are detected. The deep learning
algorithm becomes a Putnamian expert, who is able to recognize instances of a class,
even though it does not have a deﬁnition for a concept. For example, an algorithm can
be trained to separate spam and non-spam among emails. But, instead of conceptual
or propositional knowledge, the DL-expert has a special kind of linguistic know how.
Yann LeCun, Yoshua Bengio, and Geoffrey Hinton, who received in 2018 the
Turing Award for their contribution to deep learning, present supervised learning in
their 2015 article in Nature. But they predict that unsupervised learning will become
more important in the future:
we discover the structure of the world by observing it, not by being told the name of every
object.
Technically this means that the outputs for objects of the same kind cluster close
to each other. But philosophically this sounds like a return to a crude concept empiri-
cism: a concept is learned by copying a vast number of its training examples on an
“empty table”. Does the success of deep learning in fact mean that Locke overcomes
Kant after all?
Arno Schubbach (2019), a scholar of the neo-Kantian Ernst Cassirer, has proposed
a link between Kant and deep learning, but this time with reference to Kant’s Kritik
der Urteilskraft (1790).11 In this “third critique”, Kant studied aesthetic judgments of
taste and beauty. This human faculty lacks transparency and cannot be explained by
the use of general rules. According to Shubbach, this kind of judgment is comparable
to deep learning neural networks as “judging machines”. Indeed, this comparison
gains plausibility from the fact that DL is sub-conceptual and Kant’s aesthetic judg-
ments operate “without interests and without concepts”. Still, in my view, there is
another so far unnoticed comparison, even more interesting than the Kantian “power
of judgment”, viz. the ﬁve-stage expertise scale of Hubert L. Dreyfys.12
3
Experts and Skill Acquisition
A solution to the slow progress of AI in the 1980s was sought from the Japanese
conception of “the ﬁfth generation” computers, which store and apply expertise in the
form of computer programs. Edward Feigenbaum and Pamela McCorduck (1983)
developed the idea of expert systems, where a “knowledge engineer” expresses an
expert’s non-propositional professional skill in the form of production rules and
11 See Kant (2000).
12 Dreyfus was aware of the nature of neural networks in the 1992 edition of his 1972 book, but the
dramatic successes of their applications were not yet observed at the time.

582
I. Niiniluoto
directives. Examples could include the skills of a lawyer, a physician, or a composer.
Such expert systems communicate with natural language, and were hoped to perform
well as judges, medical doctors, and artists. It is clear that this program represented
a new higher stage of the GOFAI approach.
Hubert L. Dreyfus, with his psychologist brother Stuart Dreyfus, raised again to
oppose the hopes of AI. In their joint book Mind over Machine (1986) the brothers
argued that Feigenbaum’s expert systems fail to understand the situational, intuitive,
and non-calculative nature of the problem-solving by real experts. They analyze the
acquisition of skills in a scale of ﬁve stages:
– a novice follows simple orders, rules, and procedures which refer to context-free
objective features of the situation
– an advanced beginner recognizes new aspects of the situation and is able to make
comparisons to previous similar situations
– a competent person is able to effectively select salient aspects and important rules
to follow
– a proﬁcient person is involved and experienced in the task, and thereby able to
make decisions quickly
– an expert ﬁnds a solution immediately by unconscious personal intuition without
rational calculation.
If this model is valid, the highest levels of human skills cannot be expressed
by statements, propositional knowledge, or computer programs. Rules are useful to
novices and beginners, but not any more to real experts whose actions are based
on holistic understanding of problem situations—and therefore “intuitive” and “ara-
tional”. If an expert is forced to justify decisions or choices on the basis of rules, this
involves a regression down to the lower stages of the scale.
The Dreyfus scale is inspired by Heidegger, but need not be interpreted in a
mystical manner, since expertise is here rooted in increasing experience. H. L.
Dreyfus himself illustrated advanced skills by chess players, pilots, and car drivers—
andevenethics couldbeaskill inhis sense. PatriciaBenner (1984) gaveanillustration
of the scale by nursing practices. Expertise could be partly based on propositional
education, and it may serve valuable purposes in everyday life and in the professional
ﬁelds of science, arts, and technology.
Yet, the Dreyfus scale faces a number of problems. First, it is not evident that the
same model of ﬁve stages applies to all kinds of skills among animals and humans.
Secondly, for some skills there is no unique order of superiority (e.g. composers of
different styles and genres). Thirdly, experts need to be recognized and evaluated.
Could two genuine experts come to conﬂicting conclusions in special cases? How
could we choose whom to rely in such situations? How could experts be recognized
in the ﬁelds of medicine, architecture, and politics? If experts are required to be
experienced and successful, does this lead a conservative dominance? If an expert
behaves arationally on the basis of subjective certainty, how can his or her advice

Concepts, Experts, and Deep Learning
583
be publicly assessed and criticized? Might the crucial difference of human beings to
other animals and computers lie in their linguistic abilities and self-consciousness,
which implies the possibility of testing and correcting rules and recommendations
of actions?13
A surprising turn in the debate concerning skills has followed from deep learning,
which also puts in new light Dreyfus’ critique of rule-based expertise. His critical
assessment of computational AI seems to be correct in the case of games like chess,
where it is feasible to compare the success of competing agents or systems: the new
neural networks beat the old chess programs. Deep learning DL-networks do not
avoid Searle’s (1985) criticism that they fail to know anything (even when classifying
training examples) or understand meanings (even when translating languages), but
nevertheless they have pre-conceptual and non-propositional know how. It is ironic,
however, that a deep learning AI-system seems to reach rapidly the highest stage of
the Dreyfus scale. For example, Alpha Go learned quickly to be a master-level player
from examples of wins and losses in successful games. Its expertise seems to satisfy
the strict ﬁfth-level requirements of Dreyfus: experienced, intuitive, non-conceptual,
not rule-based. Thus, Dreyfus was wrong in claiming that artiﬁcial intelligence could
not compete with a well-experienced physician: a neural network can go through in
one day as many training examples as a good medical doctor in a life-time.
Still, DL-systems face similar questions as the Dreyfus experts. In the game Go it
is easy to measure the outcome: who wins the play? This is the case, even when the
moves and solutions of the AI system lack transparency. But in many other examples
it is hard to evaluate the competence and reliability of experts. DL-algorithms are
already in use in banks and insurance companies to make quick decisions about loans
and investments. Such programs may search through enormous numbers of juridical
cases andreports of sickness. Deeplearningpromises toassist alsoscientiﬁcresearch,
when solutions involve complex phenomena and massive data,14 and it may promote
economic growth in several sectors. Still, the competence of a DL-expert crucially
depends on the quality and variety of the numerous training examples: if they are one-
sidedorbiased,therecommendationsanddecisionsofalgorithmsmaybemisleading,
harmful, and discriminating. Even though AI can function as supporting intelligence
for the humans, to what extent and on what conditions are we really willing to rely our
destiny on DL-economists, DL-physicians, DL-politicians, and DL-army generals?
How do we react if the best DL-experts disagree with each other?
In sum, Dreyfus was both right and wrong. His critique of GOFAI-type expert
systems was largely valid. But it does not hit deep learning AI-expertise, which
can override human capacities in speciﬁc tasks and reach a high level of learned
“intuitive” expertise. Still, the Dreyfusian ideal is not unproblematic even in the case
of DL-networks, if it is applied to work life, administration, and other areas of social
decision making.
13 This is largely the task of applied social sciences. See Niiniluoto (2013).
14 A recent report by Senior et al. (2020) tells that a neural network AlphaFold has learned to make
accurate predictions on protein structure.

584
I. Niiniluoto
4
Discussion: Content and Context
Deep machine learning has two peculiar features. First, a layered neural network as
a model of human brain follows a bottom-up approach, which starts from the under-
lying structure of elements with weighted connections and proceeds to the brain as a
whole. Secondly, this underlying structure is sub-symbolic, so that it has no concep-
tual or propositional content. Even the achieved higher-level performance—e.g.
playing chess, classifying objects, recognizing faces, translating languages, issuing
predictions, and making decisions—exhibits abilities or know how without an asso-
ciated conceptual framework. As far as DL is a form of reductionism, it does not
reduce higher-order entities to a lower level, but rather higher-order performances.
The explanation of the upper level is here untypical of reductionism, as it does not
appeal to components and structures with conceptual or propositional content.
On the other hand, the traditional computational artiﬁcial intelligence operates on
the higher-level with content, and its context is speciﬁed by the chosen conceptual
framework. In the big ontological picture, mathematics is reducible to logic, which
studies entailment relations between propositions, whereas propositions are consti-
tuted by concepts, which are compact regions in qualitative or quantitative conceptual
spaces.15 The aim of GOFAI was to teach computers to imitate human intelligence in
their ability to gain input information, recognize patterns, make logical inferences,
and solve problems. In this sense, GOFAI is a top-down approach which starts from
the relatively independent higher-level without attempting to reduce this context to
lower-level entities.
GOFAI accepts the Kantian dictum that “thoughts without content are void” (there
is no thinking without concepts) and its continuation “intuitions without conceptions
are blind” (all sensations are mingled with concepts). It follows that DL-networks,
in spite of their spectacular performances, do not think, and their experience with
training examples does not include anything like “non-conceptual content”. As DL-
networks do not have a symbolic language nor consciousness, they do not help to
solve the perennial philosophical riddle, the mind–body-problem, which in the case
of humans should show how the mind emerges from the combination of sufﬁciently
complex material systems with a cultural environment.16
It is no wonder that the relation of the conceptual level and sub-conceptual DL-
systems is a highly pressing open problem. Certainly it would help the project of
Explainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence (XAI), which tries to explain the non-transparent
performance of DL-algorithms. As LeCun et al. (2015) point out, it is impor-
tant to study how to combine reasoning with deep learning. Some sort of bridge
between neural networks and symbolic languages would be needed for this task.
15 For conceptual spaces, see Gärdenfors (2000).
16 For this philosophical task, Karl Popper’s anti-reductionist ontology of three worlds is a useful
tool for an emergent materialist (cf. Niiniluoto, 1999, 23–25, 2006). For example, electrons and
elephants, as well as spoken and written words “electron” and “elephant”, belong the physical
World 1; thoughts about such physical objects belong to the mental World 2; elections and other
institutions, as well as abstract concepts and propositions, belong to the cultural World 3.

Concepts, Experts, and Deep Learning
585
Lorenzo Magnani (2019) has made an effort to model abductive reasoning within
the framework of neural networks. Carlos Perez (2017) has argued that deep learning
is not an example of inductive inference, since training examples are not chosen by
random sampling. In the Bayesian theory of concept learning one can express the
investigator’s background assumptions or knowledge by the prior probability distri-
bution.17 Perhaps the Lockean ﬂavor of deep learning algorithms can be restricted by
noting that in practice the system cannot be “an empty table”, since the application of
the results of DL in inference presupposes that the learning network already knows
something about the world, i.e., possesses some kind of background theory or formal
ontology.18
References
Benner, P. (1984). From novice to expert: Excellence and power in clinical nursing practice. Addison
Wesley.
Crane, T. (1992). The nonconceptual content of experience. In T. Crane (Ed.), The contents of
experience: Essays on perception (pp. 136–157). Cambridge University Press.
Dreyfus, H. (1972). What computers can’t do: A critique of artiﬁcial reason. Harper & Row.
Dreyfus, H., & Dreyfus, S. (1986). Mind over machine: The power of human intuition and expertise
in the era of the computer. Blackwell.
Feigenbaum, E., & McCorduck, P. (1983). The ﬁfth generation: Artiﬁcial intelligence and Japan’s
computer challenge to the world. Addison Wesley.
Fodor, J. (1975). The language of thought. Crowell.
Gärdenfors, P. (2000). Conceptual spaces: The geometry of thought. The MIT Press.
Goodfellow, I., Bengio, Y., & Courville, A. (2016). Deep learning. The MIT Press.
Haugeland, J. (1985). Artiﬁcial intelligence: The very idea. The MIT Press.
Hintikka, J. (1975). The intentions of intentionality. D. Reidel.
Kaila, E. (1979). The perceptual and conceptual components of everyday experience. In Reality and
experience: Four philosophical essays (pp. 259–312). D. Reidel. (Original publication in 1960.)
Kant, I. (1930). Critique of pure reason. G. Bell and Sons. (Original publication in 1781/1787.)
Kant, I. (2000). Critique of the power of judgment. Cambridge University Press. (Original
publication in 1790.)
Landgrebe, J., & Smith, B. (2021). Making AI meaningful again. Synthese, 198, 2061–2081. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s11229-019-02192-y
LeCun, Y., Bengio, Y., & Hinton, G. (2015). Deep learning. Nature, 521, 436–444.
Locke, J. (1965). An essay concerning human understanding. Collier—Macmillan. (Original
publication 1689.)
Magnani, L. (2019). AlphaGo, locked strategies, and eco-cognitive openness. Philosophies, 4, 8.
https://doi.org/10.3390/philosophies4010008
Minsky, M. (1987). The society of mind. Heinemann.
Mitchell, T. M. (1997). Machine learning. McGraw-Hill.
Niiniluoto, I. (1999). Critical scientiﬁc realism. Oxford University Press.
17 See Tenenbaum (1999). Cf. Niiniluoto (2005).
18 See Landgrebe and Smith (2021), who argue that such ontology is needed in successful translation
between natural languages.

586
I. Niiniluoto
Niiniluoto, I. (2005). Inductive logic, verisimilitude, and machine learning. In P. Hajek, L.
Vald´es-Villanueva, & D. Westersta˚hl (Eds.), Logic, Methodology and Philosophy of Science:
Proceedings of the Twelfth International Congress (pp. 295–314). King’s College Publications.
Niiniluoto, I. (2006). World 3: A critical defence. In I. Jarvie, K. Milford, & D. Miller (Eds.), Karl
Popper: A centenary assessment Volume II metaphysics and epistemology (pp. 59–69). Ashgate.
Niiniluoto, I. (2013). On the philosophy of applied social sciences. In H. Andersen (Ed.), New
challenges to philosophy of science (pp. 265–274). Springer.
Niiniluoto, I. (2020). Remarks on representation and misrepresentation. Estudios Filosóﬁcos, 69,
253–264.
Perez, C. E. (2017). Deep learning is not probabilistic induction. https://medium.com/intuitionmac
hine
Putnam, H. (1975). The meaning of meaning. Mind, language and reality (philosophical papers 2)
(pp. 215–271). Cambridge University Press.
Schubbach, A. (2019). Judging machines: Philosophical aspects of deep learning. Synthese. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s11229-019-02167-z
Searle, J. (1984). Minds, brains, and science. Harvard University Press.
Senior, A. W., et al. (2020). Improved protein structure prediction using potential from deep learning.
Nature, 577, 706–710.
Short, T. L. (2007). Peirce’s theory of signs. Cambridge University Press.
Silver, D., et al. (2016). Mastering the game of go with deep neural networks and tree search. Nature,
529, 484–489.
Tenenbaum, J. B. (1999). A Bayesian framework for concept learning. The MIT Press.
Valiant,L.(2013).Probablyapproximatelycorrect:Nature’salgorithmsforlearningandprospering
in a complex world. Basic Books.
Whewell, W. (1840). The philosophy of the inductive sciences. Parker and Sons.

A Route to Intelligence: Oversimplify
and Self-monitor
Daniel C. Dennett
I want to try to do something rather more speculative than the rest of you have done.
I have been thinking recently about how one might explain some features of human
reﬂective consciousness that seem to me to be very much in need of an explanation.
I’m trying to see if these features could be understood as solutions to design problems,
solutions arrived at by evolution, but also, in the individual, as a result of a process
of unconscious self-design. I’ve been trying to think of this in the context of work
in AI on the attempt to design intelligent robots—not “bed-ridden” expert systems,
but systems that have to act in real time in the real world. If you want to think about
something like this, you have to stray fairly far from experiments and hard empirical
data; you have to get fairly speculative. Nevertheless the design efforts of people in
AI do seem to bring home to conviction—if not to prove—various design constraints
looming large and inescapable. If we can come to see why a system—or an organ or
a behavior-pattern—must have certain features or a certain structure in order to do
its task, this may help us ask the right questions, or at least keep us from dwelling
on some of the wrong questions when we try to explain the machinery in the brain
that is responsible for intelligent action.
Resuming the discussion of yesterday evening, let me remind you that intelligent
action in the real world depends on anticipation, of two kinds: both the built-in, fast,
unconscious modular anticipation of the sort we were considering yesterday, and,
[In 1984 a workshop was held at the Maison Française in Oxford, organized by Jean Khalfa, and
involving René Thom, Richard Gregory, myself and others. A volume was supposed to emerge from
it, but it never appeared, so far as I know, and so this has never been published. (The collection of
DarwinLectures,WhatisIntelligence?(CambridgeUniv.Press,1996)editedbyKhalfaisanentirely
different anthology.) I refer to this essay as ‘forthcoming’ in “Evolution, Error and Intentionality”
in The Intentional Stance, but that was a promise never kept.—DCD, February 15, 2008].
D. C. Dennett (B)
Center for Cognitive Studies, Tufts University, 115 Miner Hall, Medford, MA 02155, USA
e-mail: daniel.dennett@tufts.edu
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
S. Wuppuluri and I. Stewart (eds.), From Electrons to Elephants and Elections,
The Frontiers Collection, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-92192-7_32
587

588
D. C. Dennett
in the case of human beings and maybe some other higher species, something that
looks much more like voluntary, conscious, expectation-formation and calculation
about the future.
There is an important family of verbs that strangely enough has not yet been
singled out for philosophical attention. Central members of the family are “avoid”,
“prevent”, “hinder”, “foster”, and, perhaps the most basic of all, “change” in its
transitive sense, where we think of one thing or agent or event “actively” changing
somethingelse.Thesearethepre-eminentverbsofaction,whereoneischaracterizing
the situation in terms of a rational agent who, as one says, sets out the “change the
course of history.” This is a curious phrase. We all want to be able to change the
course of history, if only in our own little corners of the world. The problem of
free will is very much a matter of whether one thinks one can change the course
of history, but of course this familiar phrase, on even the most superﬁcial analysis,
turns out to be deeply puzzling. If you suppose it is to be taken at its face value it is
absurd. How could you change the course of history? From what to what? If history
is simply the sequence of events that actually occur, then of course you can’t change
history. People say you can’t change the past, and that’s true enough, but then you
can’t change the future either.
When one is thinking in this mode in which one considers bringing about these
changes that one so very much wants to bring about, one has to be thinking of an
anticipated history, the way history is going to go ceteris paribus, the way history is
going to go unless somebody does something, or until somebody does thing, or in
spite of what somebody does. These verbs of agency can have no foothold outside the
framework of a projected, anticipated history, even when they are used to characterize
the effects brought about by entirely inanimate objects. Let me illustrate this with an
example borrowed from my book Elbow Room (Dennett, 1984b).
Imagine that astronomers discover a meteor heading for the earth, and they calcu-
late that it is going to hit North America on Tuesday, and there is nothing anyone can
do about it. People would be frantic, of course, wondering if there was anything to be
done, and perhaps praying for miraculous deliverance from this terrible catastrophe.
And then, suppose, on the eve of destruction, another meteor appears, plunging out
of darkest space on a course that is just right to deﬂect the ﬁrst onto a near-miss
trajectory, thus narrowly averting the catastrophe, preventing calamity.
These words would come naturally to our lips on such an occasion. But am
I suggesting that the second meteor was a miracle—a God-given answer to our
prayers? No, I am supposing that the second meteor was always out there, tracing
out exactly the intercepting course, just as predictably as the ﬁrst; it was simply not
noticed by the astronomers until the last minute. In fact, had they noticed the second
meteor when they noticed the ﬁrst, they would never have alarmed us, because (as
they can see now in retrospect and could have calculated then) there was never going
to be a catastrophe. It was merely an anticipated catastrophe—a mis-anticipated
catastrophe. It seems appropriate to speak of an averted or prevented catastrophe
because we compare an anticipated history with the way things turned out and we

A Route to Intelligence: Oversimplify and Self-monitor
589
locate an event which was the “pivotal” event relative to the divergence between that
anticipation and the actual course of events, and we call this the “act” of preventing
or avoiding.
Mark Twain once said “I’m an old man, and I’ve seen many troubles, but most of
them never happened.” This is the experiential history of somebody who is used to
living in the world of avoiding and preventing. This is the world in which a rational
deliberator lives. Suchadeliberator has tohaveaworldviewthat is constantlylooking
forward, anticipating the way things are going to go unless it does various things or
until it does various things.
Suppose then that one wants to design a robot that will live in the real world
and be capable of making decisions so that it can further its interests—whatever
interests we artiﬁcially endow it with. We want in other words to design a foresightful
planner. How must one structure the capacities—the representational and inferential
or computational capacities—of such a being? The problem that such a creature
faces is, as usual in Artiﬁcial Intelligence, the problem of combinatorial explosion.
The way one obtains anticipations is by sampling the trajectories of things in one’s
perceptual world and using the information thus gathered to ground an inference or
extrapolation about the future trajectory of the thing. One cannot deal intelligently
with anything that one cannot track in this way. When I speak of tracking, I am not
just thinking of tracking the trajectories through space of moving things, but also
the trajectories through time of things like food stores, seasons, inﬂation rates, the
relative political power of one’s adversaries, one’s credibility, and so forth. There
are indeﬁnitely many things that could be kept track of, but the attempt to track
everything, to keep up-to-date information about everything, is guaranteed to lead to
a self-defeating paroxysm of information-overload. No matter how much information
one has about an issue, there is always more that one could have, and one can often
know that there is more that one could have if only one were to take the time to gather
it. There is always more deliberation possible, so the trick is to design the creature
so that it makes reliable but not foolproof decisions within the deadlines naturally
imposed by the events in its world that matter to it.
The fundamental problem, then, is what we might call the problem of Hamlet,
who, you recall, frittered away his time in deliberation (or so it appears), vacillating
and postponing. This is the sort of postponement that Réné Thom was discussing
yesterday in his example of the man at the crosswalk who must make a decision.
One has to make decisions in real time, and this means that one has to do a less than
perfect job if one is to succeed at all. So one must be designed from the outset to
economize, to pass over most of the available information.
How then does one partition the task of the robot so that it is apt to make reliable
real time decisions? One thing one can do is declare that some things in the world
of the creature are to be considered ﬁxed; no effort will be expended trying to track
them, to gather more information on them. The state of these features is going to be
set down in axioms, in effect, but these are built into the system at no representational
cost. One simply designs the system in such a way that it works well provided the
world is as one supposes it always will be, and makes no provision for the system to
work well (“properly”) under other conditions. The system as a whole operates as if

590
D. C. Dennett
the world were always going to be one way, so that whether the world really is that
way is not an issue that can come up for determination. The rigid-linkage assumption
in human vision described by Ullman (1979), is a good example. It is presumably a
design feature endorsed over the eons by natural selection. In the past, the important
things that have moved in our visual neighborhoods have tended to be assemblages of
linkages the parts of which are rigid (hands, wrists, arms, elbows, and so forth), and
one can create a much more efﬁcient visual system for a creature with such a world by
simply building in the rigidity assumption. This permits very swift calculations for
speedy identiﬁcation and extrapolation of the futures of relevant parts of the world.
Other things in the world are to be declared as beneath notice even though they
might in principle be noticeable were there any payoff to be gained thereby. These
are things that are not ﬁxed but the changes of which are of no direct relevance to
the wellbeing of the creature. These things are smeared into a blur, as it were, in
our perceptual world and not further attended to. An example drawn from Wimsatt
(1980) is the difference in cognitive strategy between two different predators: the
insectivorous bird and the anteater, which both need to keep track of moving insects.
The insectivorous bird tracks individual ﬂying insects and samples their trajectories
with a fast sampling technique: a very high ﬂicker fusion rate relative to human vision.
(If you showed a motion picture to such a bird, it would see it as a slide show, in
effect,notcontinuousmotion.)Thebirdseestheindividualinsectsas individuals.The
anteater does not track individual ants. The anteater sees swarms of ants as batches of
edible substance. (If I believed it was always appropriate to speak this way, I would
say that “ant” was a mass term in the anteater’s language of thought!) It laps up
regions of ant, and does not waste any of its cognitive resources tracking individual
ants any more than we track individual molecules when we detect a “permeating”
uniform odor in a volume of air which may contain a few parts per billion of the
telltale molecule.
The “grain” of our own perception could be different; the resolution of detail is a
function of our own calculus of wellbeing, given our needs and other capacities. In
our design, as in the design of other creatures, there is a trade-off in the expenditure
of cognitive effort and the development of effectors of various sorts. Thus the insec-
tivorous bird has a trade-off between ﬂicker fusion rate and the size of its bill. If it
has a wider bill it can harvest from a larger volume in a single pass, and hence has a
greater tolerance for error in calculating the location of its individual prey.
If then some of the things in the world are considered ﬁxed, and others are consid-
ered beneath notice, and hence are just averaged over, this leaves the things that
are changing and worth caring about. These things fall roughly into two divisions:
the trackable and the chaotic. The chaotic things are those things that we cannot
routinely track, and for our deliberative purposes we must treat them as random, not
in the quantum mechanical sense, and not even in the mathematical sense (e.g., as
informationally incompresssible), but just in the sense of pseudo-random. These are
features of the world which, given the expenditure of cognitive effort the creature is
prepared to make, are untrackable; their future state is unpredictable.
This means that any real, ﬁnite deliberator must partition the states of its world in
such a way as to introduce the concept of possibility: it is possible that item n is going

A Route to Intelligence: Oversimplify and Self-monitor
591
to be in state A, and it is possible that item n is going to be in state B, or in state C. We
get an ensemble of equipossible (but not necessarily equiprobable) alternatives. This
idea of partitioning the world into “possible” alternatives that remain “open” is very
clearly the introduction of a concept of epistemic possibility. It is what is possible
relative to a particular agent’s knowledge. As the agent gets more knowledge, this
may contract the set of possibilities. “I used to think that state B was possible, but
given what I just learned, I realize it is not possible” (see Dennett, ).
Sellars (1963, 1966) draws the very useful distinction between what he calls the
manifest image and the scientiﬁc image. The manifest image is the everyday world
view, the world of macroscopic, solid, colored objects, and other persons or rational
agents. It is the world of folk physics and folk psychology. Then there is the scientiﬁc
image: the world of atomic and sub-atomic particles too small to be perceived by
the naked eye, the world of forces and light waves. Sellars draws his distinction in
such a way as to focus on the manifest image shared by (normal) human beings, but I
think we can usefully extend his distinction to other species. We are the only species
that has developed science, and so we have a scientiﬁc image of the world, of the
world that we and other species live in, in spite of the vast differences in our manifest
images of that world. The manifest image enjoyed by a species is determined, I
suggest, by the set of design “decisions” that apportion things in its environment into
the categories of ﬁxed, or beneath notice, or trackable, or chaotic. (It is important to
note that this way of thinking of the manifest image of a species somewhat belies
the connotations of the adjective “manifest”—since it presupposes nothing about
consciousness. It is not at all ruled out that an entirely unconscious creature—our
imaginary robot, for instance—would have a manifest image.)
Why are we the only species to have developed a scientiﬁc image in addition
to—and somewhat discordant with—our manifest image? That is a topic that has
often been written on, so I will pause to make just one point. The principles of
design that create a manifest image in the ﬁrst place also create the loose ends that
can lead to its unraveling. Some of the engineering shortcuts that are dictated if
we are to avoid combinatorial explosion take the form of ignoring—treating as if
non-existent—small changes in the world. They are analogous to “round off error”
in computer number-crunching. And like round-off error, their locally harmless
oversimpliﬁcations can accumulate under certain conditions to create large errors.
Then if the system can notice the large error, and diagnose it (at least roughly), it
can begin to construct the scientiﬁc image. For example, we have been designed to
detect “directly” only those changes that occur within a certain speed range. Outside
our window of direct visibility lie those changes that happen too fast or too slow
for us to perceive without the aid of time-lapse or slow-motion photography, for
instance. We cannot see a plant or a child grow from moment to moment. We can
see the sun’s motion relative to the earth only at sunrise or sunset, or with the aid of
a simple prosthetic extension of our senses—a couple of sticks stuck in the ground
will do. But over a few minutes in the latter case, or months or years in the case
of plants or children, we detect the difference: our expectations of no change (zero
plus zero plus zero … equals zero) are overturned. Now the minimal, non-brilliant
response to this is simply to make mid-course corrections in our extrapolations of

592
D. C. Dennett
trajectory and continue as before. The insightful response is to notice that we have
to do this (often) and to posit changes too small to be seen, the entering wedge into
the scientiﬁc world of postulated, invisible phenomena. Thus it is from a variety
of self-monitoring—in particular the noticing of a pattern in one’s own cognitive
responses—that the bounteous shift of vision arises.
Let me return to the manifest image of our foresighted planner, with its “open
future” of types of epistemically possible events that matter to it but cannot normally
be tracked by it.
These are the alternatives it may deliberate about, and must deliberate about if it
is to fend for itself in the world. One of the pre-eminent varieties of epistemically
possible events is the category of the agent’s own actions. These are systematically
unpredictable by it. It can attempt to track and thereby render predictions about
the decisions and actions of other agents, but (for fairly obvious and well-known
logical reasons, familiar in the Halting Problem in computer science, for instance)
it cannot make ﬁne-grained predictions of its own actions, since it is threatened by
inﬁnite regress of self-monitoring and analysis. Notice that this does not mean that
our creature cannot make some boundary-condition predictions of its own decisions
and actions. Thus I can make reliable predictions about decisions I will make in the
near future: tomorrow at breakfast I will decide how many cups of tea I will drink,
and right now I predict that I will decide to have more than zero and less than four.
Now if our creature is to be able to choose among the alternatives of which it can
conceive, what strategies of deliberation should we endow it with? One feature we
want to build in is one mentioned by Réné Thom yesterday: we must guard against
the possibility that an evaluation process will end in a tie—the classic problem of
Buridan’s ass. The cheap way of providing this safety measure is to build in some-
thing functionally analogous to a coin-ﬂip: an arbitrary, pseudo-random “oracle”
available for a decision-aiding nudge whenever the system needs it. I am fascinated
by Julian Jaynes’ speculation (Jaynes, 1976), that the various traditions of super-
stitious decision-making and prognostication found in the ancient world—throwing
bones and lots, looking at the entrails of animals, consulting oracles, reading tea
leaves—are actually stratagems more or less unconsciously invented by early human
beings in order to get themselves out of the position of Buridan’s ass, or out of the
somewhat related predicament (Hamlet’s, we might say) of one who simply does not
know how to deliberate effectively about a complicated situation, and needs never-
theless to act somehow in a timely manner. When the issues are too imponderable,
when one can think of no considerations that settle the issue, when one is simply at
a loss as to how to continue deliberations, here, as in the case of the pedestrian at
the crosswalk, it can be valuable simply to get yourself moving in one direction or
another. It doesn’t in the long run and on average matter which direction you move
as long as you get out of your state of decisional funk and get a move on. These
rituals, Jaynes suggests, had the effect of making up people’s minds for them when
they weren’t very good at making up their own minds. So these were deliberative
crutches, or prostheses. I mention them here because they provide a vivid example
of something that was not designed and transmitted genetically by natural selection,
but rather a cultural artifact, unconsciously designed by individuals.

A Route to Intelligence: Oversimplify and Self-monitor
593
To some ears the phrase “unconsciously designed” is an oxymoron, but what I
mean is quite straightforward: by haphazard some individuals came to engage in
these strange behaviors without having any point in mind, but they found they had
agreeable results, and so under certain circumstances they became popular behaviors.
And so the rituals were subjected to further design reﬁnement and then preserved
by cultural transmission. A behavioral strategy thus transmitted probably has no
speciﬁc, organic (neural) control system (in computerese, no “dedicated hardware”),
but rather is just software, part of the “virtual machine” of the human decision-maker
shaped by cultural and other environmental factors, and differently implemented in
individual control structures.
The most fundamental problem that faces the designer of such a deliberator is
what Artiﬁcial Intelligence calls the Frame Problem. Since I have described that
unsolved problem at length elsewhere (Dennett, 1984a), I will just remark here that
we may view it as the problem of the effective management of the manifest image
of a planner, so that the sorts of informational or representational short-cuts taken
yield anticipations that are both timely and reliable. It is called the Frame Problem
because of the so-called frame axioms that apparently must be used to stipulate,
systematically, the sorts of constancies of effect that are assumed in any particular
manifest image. What are the (gross, reliable, normal) effects of moving one thing
onto another, for instance? Can we codify this understanding into deﬁning axioms
for the action type move x onto y?
This should be a rather basic action in the repertoire of any interestingly capable
agent, and will be immediately recognized by anyone who is familiar with the famous
“blocks world” of AI—an imaginary table-top world consisting of a few colored,
differently shaped blocks that can be moved around and stacked by an equally imag-
inary robot arm (see SHRDLU, for instance, in Winograd, 1972). This is a world of
breathtaking simplicity compared to the real world of any even very simple creature.
But even in this diminished world the frame problem looms large. Consider some of
the frame axioms that are needed:
(1)
If z ̸= x, then if I move x onto y, then if z was on w before, z is on w afterwards.
(2)
If z is blue, then if I move x onto y, z is blue afterwards.
(3)
If z is red, then if I move x onto y, z is red afterwards.
Do we really need separate, independent axioms for everything that doesn’t
change? If we do, the deﬁnition of each action type is going to have to contain
clauses for every predicate available for use in state descriptions in a mindless
profusion of axioms—apparently an engineering monstrosity. Can we not have
some more general, basic axioms, to the effect, for instance, that the colors of
things don’t change?
(4)
(For all x) (If x is red, x stays red).
This won’t do, since one of the action types we may want to include in the
repertoire is paint x red, which rules out (4) and its kin on pain of contradiction. The
unsolved problem is how to provide a system of world-knowledge representation
that is both simple and efﬁcient enough to avoid combinatorial explosion, while

594
D. C. Dennett
supple and sensitive enough to recover from at least some of the stupid effects of its
deliberate oversimpliﬁcation.
No one has a good solution to the Frame Problem yet, least of all me, but I would
claim that one element in any good solution is going to be layers of self-noticing. I
will close by describing brieﬂy two examples of the sort of thing I have in mind. I
once had a dog that loved to fetch tennis balls thrown to it, but faced with two balls on
the lawn and unable to hold them both in his mouth at once, he would switch rapidly
back and forth, letting go of one to grab the other, then seeing the dropped ball, and
immediately emptying his mouth again to fetch it, and so forth. He would do this
maybe twenty or thirty times, apparently acting on some oversimple rule to the effect
that getting is better than keeping. This was a bad rule more or less built into him—he
never unlearned it—but he didn’t die of following it. That is, he wasn’t so transﬁxed
by the rule that he followed it until he dropped dead of starvation. Something would
click over in him after those several dozen iterations and he would stop. He didn’t
have to know why he stopped. He had a minimal safety valve—somehow sensitive
to “excess” repetition of his own response—that stopped him, and let him set out on
some more promising course of action.
A similar case was recently described by Geoffrey Hinton in a talk at MIT on the
Boltzmann machine architecture he and Terry Sejnowski have developed (Hinton &
Sejnowski, 1983a, 1983b). Boltzmann machines are powerful problem solvers in
certain traditionally difﬁcult problem domains, but they have their characteristic
weaknesses. Consider a typical problem graphically as the task of ﬁnding the lowest
spot—theglobalminimum—inalargeterraindimpledwithmanydepressions—local
minima. (This is, of course, just “hill-climbing” turned upside down!) Boltzmann
machines are efﬁcient ﬁnders of global minima under many conditions, but they can
be trapped in unusual terrains.
Consider a terrain crossed by a steep-sided gully, which slopes gently at the bottom
towards the global minimum. When a Boltzmann machine “enters” such a gully in
the course of its explorations, it asks itself, in effect, “which direction should I go
to go down?” and looks around locally for the steepest downgrade. Only at the very
bottom of the gully is the gentle slope towards the solution “visible”; at all other
points the fall line (to use skier’s jargon) will be at roughly right angles to that
direction. With slight overshooting, the Boltzmann machine will end up somewhere
on the opposite slope of the gully, ask its question again, and shoot back onto the
opposite slope. Back and forth it will oscillate in the gully, oblivious to the futility of
its search. Trapped in such an environment, a Boltzmann machine loses its normal
speed and efﬁcacy, and becomes a liability to any organism that relies on it.
As Hinton noted on the occasion, what one wants in such a situation is for the
system to be capable of “noticing” that it had entered into such a repetitive cycle,
and resetting itself on a different course. The design solution that thus might be
favored is not to discard the Boltzmann machine idea because it has this weakness,
but to compensate for the weakness with some ad hoc strategy of oversight and
management. Just this policy, I think, will be found to be endemic in the design of
intelligent control systems.

A Route to Intelligence: Oversimplify and Self-monitor
595
References
Dennett, D. C. (1984a). Cognitive wheels: The frame problem of AI. In C. Hookway (Ed.), Minds,
machines and evolution (pp. 129–151) Cambridge University Press.
Dennett, D. C. (1984b). Elbow room: The varieties of free will worth wanting. Bradford Books/MIT
Press, and Oxford University Press.
Hinton, G., & Sejnowski, J. (1983a), Analyzing cooperative computation. In Proceedings of the
Fifth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, Rochester NY, May 1983.
Hinton, G., & Sejnowski, J. (1983b). Optimal perceptural inference. In Proceedings of the IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, Washington DC, June 1983.
Jaynes, J. (1976). The origins of consciousness in the breakdown of the bicameral mind. Houghton
Mifﬂin.
Sellars, W. (1963). Science. Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Sellars, W. (1966). Fatalism and determinism. In K. Lehrer (Ed.), Freedom and determinism.
Random House.
Ullman, S. (1979). The interpretation of visual motion. MIT Press.
Wimsatt, W. (1980). Randomness and perceived randomness in evolutionary biology. Synthese, 43,
287–329.
Winograd, T. (1972). Understanding natural language. Academic Press.

Context is King: Contextual Emergence
in Network Neuroscience, Cognitive
Science, and Psychology
Michael Silberstein
1
Introduction
While there are by now many, many different deﬁnitions of emergence in the scien-
tiﬁc and philosophical literature, they tend to reduce to either “weak emergence”
or “strong emergence.” If ontological reductionism is true, then epistemological
or weak versions of emergence are the only kinds possible. For instance, David
Chalmers deﬁnes weak emergence as follows:
To capture this, one might suggest that weak emergence is the phenomenon wherein [non-
obvious] complex, interesting high-level function is produced as a result of combining simple
low-level mechanisms in simple ways…This conclusion captures the feeling that weak emer-
gence is a ‘something for nothing’ phenomenon… The game of Life and connectionist
networks are clear cases: interesting high-level behavior emerges as the consequence of
simple dynamic rules for low-level cell dynamics (2006, p. 252).
Chalmers talks about weak emergence in terms of “ease of understanding one level
in terms of another. Emergent properties are usually properties that are more easily
understood in their own right than in terms of properties at a lower-level” (2006,
p. 251).1 However, is weak emergence in principle sufﬁcient to explain everything?
There are those who think that while everything emerges from and depends on
fundamental physical processes, they doubt that weak emergence is sufﬁcient to
explain everything. These people thus tend to champion what is sometimes called
1 Bear in mind that “weak emergence” is deﬁned differently by different people (e.g., Bedau, 2008,
Huneman, 2008 and Wilson, 2015). Some would argue that weak emergence need not be strictly
epistemic, though it is often deﬁned in terms of in practice failures of derivability, prediction or
computability.
M. Silberstein (B)
Department of Philosophy, Elizabethtown College, Elizabethtown, PA 17022, USA
e-mail: silbermd@etown.edu
Department of Philosophy, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742, USA
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
S. Wuppuluri and I. Stewart (eds.), From Electrons to Elephants and Elections,
The Frontiers Collection, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-92192-7_33
597

598
M. Silberstein
strongorradicalemergence,whichhistorically,hasmanydifferentdeﬁnitions(seefor
exampleMorgan,1912,Alexander,1920,Broad,1925,O’Connor,1994,Humphreys,
1997, Silberstein, 1999 and Chalmers, 2006). However, the basic idea is that if X
is strongly emergent with respect to Y then Y does not determine X. Or, if Y does
determine or cause X, it is a brute fact that has no further explanation. Thus, a strongly
emergent property is one that, in principle, cannot be derived from, predicted from or
fully explained by some more fundamental (physical) theory because the emergence
of such properties are brute facts. Another common but distinct way to deﬁne a
strongly emergent property is in terms of its autonomous causal efﬁcacy, what some
unfortunately call “downward causation” with its suggestion of the brute emergence
of some new type of phenomena or, reiﬁed “higher-level” of organization, that then
magically exerts a new force on that from which it emerged. This is the radical
ontological emergence that threatens a disuniﬁed picture of the world.
Historically, mental phenomena have been a driver of the emergence debate and
that has not changed. Witness the hard problem of consciousness and the explana-
tory gap. Chalmers, for instance, posits universal, brute psycho-physical bridge-laws,
which determine the distribution of conscious properties given physical, functional
or informational properties in this world (1996). Tim O’Connor and Hong Yu Wong
are modern day defenders of strong emergence who hold that given the instantia-
tion of particular complex microstructural properties, basic mental properties will be
caused diachronically to come into being (2005). These emergent mental properties
will have causal powers that are distinct from any microphysical or microstruc-
tural properties. Furthermore, these emergent mental properties will, in turn, cause
the instantiation of both other microphysical properties, and other emergent mental
properties. According to this view, physical states play a causal role in the rise of
consciousstatesand theseconsciousstatesaffectphysicalstates(so-calleddownward
causation). On their view, mental properties would be diachronically or dynamically
emergent.
It must be said however, that these days, with some exceptions (see for example
John Symons, 2018, Elly Vintiadis, 2018, Peter Wyss, 2018 and Robin Findlay
Hendry, 2019), outside of intentionality and conscious experience, one does not see
much advocacy for strong emergence anymore. As suggested by Jeremy Butterﬁeld,
another notable modern-day exception is Nobel prize-winning condensed matter
theorist Anthony Leggett. According to Butterﬁeld, “Leggett’s work was motivated
by his expecting that the phenomena could not be explained by orthodox quantum
mechanics—he believed it would need to be modiﬁed by admitting new forces, e.g., a
quantum analogue of Broad’s conﬁgurational forces” (2011b, p. 936). Leggett, with
his Macrorealism interpretation of quantum mechanics, has subsequently attempted
and failed to show that unadorned non-relativistic quantum mechanics is incomplete
with respect to the emergence of classical phenomena (Allen, Maroney and Gogioso,
2017). If it turned out that intentionality and conscious experience were the only
possible candidates for ontological emergence, that would be troubling and puzzling.
Whichistosaythatthehardproblemofconsciousnessandtheexplanatorygapshould
not drive the larger scientiﬁc debate about the structure of reality.

Context is King: Contextual Emergence in Network Neuroscience …
599
Thus, all these defenders of strong emergence are the exception that proves the
rule. When it comes to strong emergence and weak emergence, the consensus is
that with the possible exception of conscious experience, the former does not exist
at all and the latter while ubiquitous (indeed the norm) in science, has no obvious
Earth-shattering ontological implications, e.g., it does not tell against ontological
reductionism. Here, we have the contours of the false forced choice between onto-
logical reductionism or radical forms of ontological emergence. But this false forced
choice is hardly ontologically innocent. It presupposes the hierarchical and founda-
tionalist picture of reality assumed by ontological reductionism. It must be noted that
proponents of both weak and strong emergence differ only in that the latter think new
(physical or metaphysical) laws, causal powers or entities must be added to the set
of fundamental or brute facts to explain the existence of novel emergent phenomena.
Herein I defend an alternative to both weak and strong emergence that we call,
contextual emergence. Contrary to both weak and strong emergence, contextual
emergence suggests that relations between smaller and larger scales need not be
anti-symmetric, transitive, or anti-reﬂexive. In Sect. 2 contextual emergence will be
deﬁned and in Sect. 3 we look at evidence from network neuroscience, social neuro-
science, embodied, embedded, enactive and extended cognitive science (4E cogni-
tive science), and clinical psychology that singly and collectively support contex-
tual emergence. In the concluding Sect. 4 we will discuss what are in my opinion,
retrograde attempts by neo-mechanists and reductionists of various stripes to resist
contextual emergence.
2
Contextual Emergence
Metaphysicians often complain that science and philosophy of science, while great
at generating detailed case studies such as the emergence and stability of super-
conductivity, never get around to drawing deeper or more universal metaphysical
conclusions. As Robert Batterman puts it regarding emergence, “Instead of focusing
on questions of correct ontology, I suggest a more fruitful approach is to focus on
questions of proper modeling technique” (2015, p. 133). But the concern for someone
primarily interested in studying the ultimate nature of reality is that there is no point
in focusing on science if it does not aid this project. For instance, it would no doubt
be disappointing if the only conclusions that one could draw about emergence based
on science, is that on multiple scales, novel processes and patterns come into being
that are not predictable or derivable from, nor intuitively understandable in terms of,
underlying smaller scale physical processes. This lesson is trivially made with any
number of concepts ranging from geometric shapes such as cubes made of different
materials to natural selection (on any planet, no matter how alien the physics or the
biological organisms involved).
Speaking broadly, when it comes to relatively recent interest in emergence, we
note that the widespread assumption in naturalistic metaphysics and in science, is that

600
M. Silberstein
matter (i.e., the most basic microphysical entities whatever they are) alone is funda-
mental and brute, and thus life, mind and culture must somehow emerge from funda-
mental physical processes. But what does “emerge” mean here? Laughlin claims,
“I prefer the more physical view that politics, and human society generally, grow
out of nature and are really sophisticated high-level versions of primitive physical
phenomena” (2005, p. 210). Take a popular analogy people often give for ontological
reductionism: That the universe is like a ﬁnite automaton, such as John Conway’s
Game of Life. In this analogy, the cells in the game are like the fundamental physical
entities, the rules of the cell’s temporal evolution are like the fundamental laws of
physics, and robust patterns in the game such as gliders and eaters emerge “for free.”
This is exactly what Laughlin seems to be claiming about psychological, cultural
and sociological phenomena.
This is really an astounding and counterintuitive claim if one dwells on it for any
length of time. Indeed, it is at this point that the idea of ontological reductionism
and strong/radical emergence being exhaustive options becomes most troubling.
Fortunately, contextual emergence provides a third option. What is needed to get
beyond this impasse in the debates is a form of both explanatory and ontological
emergence grounded in scientiﬁc explanation that: (1) does not violate the inherent
unity of the world; (2) does not assume that if no reductive explanation exists then
thereisnoscientiﬁcexplanationtobehadotherthanpositingabrutenewlaworcausal
power; and (3) does not presuppose foundationalism. Contextual emergence is both
an explanatory and ontological account of emergence that makes good on all three
desiderata, demonstrating that there is a viable, empirically well-grounded alternative
between ontological reductionism coupled with explanatory anti-reductionism (weak
emergence) and strong/radical emergence.
Ontological reductionism is based on foundationalism. Foundationalism is ﬁrst
the idea that only basic physics contains brute or fundamental laws and entities,
i.e., only basic physical facts are fully ontologically autonomous in that they depend
on nothing else for their existence and are determined by nothing else. Second, the
world exhibits a well-ordered objective hierarchy ranging from basic physics on
up the spatiotemporal scales, wherein the facts from basic physics unidirectionally
determine all the other facts in the world. Foundationalism thus implies that, at least
in principle, the complete explanation for phenomena at a particular scale or “level”,
must come from a theory about smaller scales or “lower-level” phenomena.
If one insists on a hierarchical and foundationalist conception of reality as exem-
pliﬁed by the Game of Life analogy, then the only way to get any kind of robust
ontological emergence out of the system—any kind of emergence other than weak
emergence,istoaddsomethingmetaphysical,somethingextra tothegamesuchasthe
brute bridge-laws of the sort we ﬁnd in the strong emergence of C. D. Broad (1925).
Even so, in this case we are simply adding laws or what have you to the explanatory
base. But imagine instead of foundationalism, that reality is more like multiscale
complex networks or structured graphs of extrinsic dispositions, now robust onto-
logical emergence is perfectly natural. Order comes not from anything extra-added,
not from any causal or nomological glue, not from any metaphysical grounding

Context is King: Contextual Emergence in Network Neuroscience …
601
whatsoever. What science shows us in case after case, is that the arrow of explana-
tion and determination is not strictly bottom-up, not unidirectionally from smaller
length and time scales to larger scales. It is for these reasons that contextual emer-
gence is common, universal, non-spooky and does not defy scientiﬁc explanation.
Nor does contextual emergence imply any kind of discontinuity or disunity in nature.
Contextual emergence emphasizes the ontological and explanatory fundamentality
of multiscale contextual constraints, often operating globally over interconnected,
interdependent, and interacting entities and their relations at multiple scales. (For
the origins of contextual emergence see Bishop, 2005 and Bishop & Atmanspacher,
2006. For an early attempt to model contextual emergence see Silberstein, 2006 and
for a more recent revision see Silberstein, 2018).
Contextual emergence can be summarized as follows:
1.
Contextual emergence is a type of scientiﬁc explanation that emphasizes the
equal fundamentality of what are often multiscale contextual constraints and
interdependent relations at multiple interacting scales. Such constraints are
characterized by stability conditions.
2.
Such constraints can include global or systemic constraints such as topological
constraints, dimensional constraints, network or graphical constraints, order-
parameters, etc. Contextual constraints therefore need not involve anything like
local or direct causal-mechanical or dynamical interactions, though they often
do.
3.
Such constraints can be causal-mechanical and dynamical, but they can also
involve non-causal or adynamical difference makers, such as conservation laws,
free energy principles, least action principles, symmetry breaking, etc.
4.
Such constraints can also include global organizing principles such as plas-
ticity, robustness, and autonomy in complex biological systems. Contextual
constraints can even be behavioral, social, normative, etc.
5.
Contextual constraints can be symmetric, such that X and Y can simultaneously
act as contextual constraints for one another.
6.
Contextual constraints represent both the screening off and opening up of
new areas of modal space, i.e., degrees of freedom, and thereby new patterns
emergence and become robust.
7.
Contextual emergence provides a framework to understand two things: (A) how
novel properties are produced, and (B) why those novel properties matter.
To unpack the last point, contextual emergence differs from deductive nomolog-
ical (D-N) explanations that have received much of the focus in discussions of scien-
tiﬁc explanation and reduction/emergence debates.We agree with James Woodward
(2003) that there is no need to determine whether something is a genuine, D-N-style
law or merely a robust invariance to determine whether it is a viable explanation—
that is, not all good scientiﬁc explanation refer to laws, even indirectly. Woodward
claims that a good explanation allows one to answer a wide range of what-if ques-
tions: the more what-if questions answered, the more complete the explanation. His
goal is to sort causal interactions, so construed, from mere correlations. Woodward

602
M. Silberstein
stresses that robust causal explanations exhibit invariance in that the speciﬁed relation
between the cause variable and the effect variable holds under a wide range of condi-
tions. There are diverse types of invariance, including insensitivity to micro-details,
background conditions, interventions, and so forth. The kinds of explanations in
contextual emergence exhibit a high degree and a wide variety of invariances, though
the invariances might not primarily be explained by the mechanistic details, but by
stability conditions, such as dynamical and topological features and the network of
other relations involved in the context of the target system. The contingent conditions
characterizing contexts that guarantee the existence and stability of relevant systems
and their states and observables over time. The key feature of stability conditions
is that they are whatever ‘environmental’ or contextual features, however concrete
or abstract, that we are treating as being outside the system, that together make up
the full set of conditions for the emergent in question to come into being. That is,
stability conditions enable emergence and robustness (Bishop & Silberstein, 2019).
Finally, let’s compare contextual emergence with typical intuitions about emer-
gence. In surveying the literature on emergence, four typical intuitions or “marks”
of emergence are often discussed (e.g., Jaegwon Kim, 1999, 19–22)2:
Arise: Emergents at a higher-level arise out of properties and relations characterizing the
entities and properties at a lower-level.
Unpredictable: Emergents are unpredictable, even given exhaustive information concerning
the lower-level.
Inexplicable: Emergents are inexplicable in terms of lower-level properties.
Novel: Emergents have novel features not found at the lower-levels.
Regarding Arise, ﬁrst, contextual emergence calls into question the fundamentalist
and hierarchical assumptions built into this intuition. That is, contextual emergence
calls into question the existence of some fully autonomous or fully independent
microscopic causally/dynamically closed basic physical process sufﬁcient to deter-
mine all other phenomena at larger scales. With contextual emergence, emergents
only arise from a “lower-level” or smaller scale provided relevant stability condi-
tions, often found at larger scales, are present. While some necessary conditions
for the emergents may exist at the “lower-level” or smaller scale; nonetheless, for
contextual emergence, the sufﬁcient conditions are represented by all the relevant
stability conditions at various scales. Second, emergents can also come into being
at smaller scales or levels of organization as the result of how these constraints at
larger scales or levels of organization are implemented (e.g., the behavior of quantum
systems being in part determined by the classical experimental set-up). This is modal
accessibility in physical possibility space at work.
Emergents are often Unpredictable given exhaustive information at the “lower
level” or smaller scale alone. However, given contextual emergence, the emergent
is often predictable given the “lower level” information plus the relevant contextual
features at other “levels” or larger scales (e.g., the relevant physical states and stability
2 Notice the dependence on an ordered hierarchy of levels.

Context is King: Contextual Emergence in Network Neuroscience …
603
conditions). Similarly, for the Inexplicable intuition. As we will see, the contextually
emergent explanation is not going to be fully reductive in either the intertheoretic
sense of derivation as discussed by Hempel and company (the D-N model), nor in
any synchronic notion of reduction involving the properties of parts determining
the properties of wholes (what analytic metaphysics calls realization), and not in
any causal-mechanical sense of reduction as with localization and decomposition in
biological systems. Thus, in the case of contextual emergence, being unpredictable
or inexplicable need not be hallmarks of emergence.
The term Novel is certainly loaded. We have already said that an emergent can
be predicted and explained, so given contextual emergence, novel means unexpected
and irreducibly different in kind from features and concepts connected to the “lower-
level” or smaller scales. It can however mean more than this. For example, Kim,
among others, has argued that if new “causal powers” emerge at a “higher-level” not
reducible to or realized by “lower-level” “causal powers,” then we face a mystery
as to where such “powers” come from (e.g., Kim, 1998, 1999). Given contextual
emergence, so called “causal powers” are just extrinsic dispositions that typically
require interdependent multiscale conditions. Kim’s worries about microphysical
causal closure and exclusion have no purchase given contextual emergence. Finally,
contextual emergence explains why novel emergents arise.
Contextual emergence is multiscale in that “higher-level” or target domain infor-
mation is required to enrich and constrain the laws and properties of the “lower-
level” or underlying domain to produce the set of contingent necessary and sufﬁcient
conditions for explanation of the emergent. Thus, contextual emergence focuses on
making explicit the essential features absent in the fundamental level or underlying
domain. Scientiﬁc explanations don’t ﬂoat free in their own “level” or domain alone.
Instead, scientiﬁc explanations implicitly rely on contextual features not contained
in or implied by the lower level or smaller scale. Nevertheless, as we will see going
forward, the absence of explanatory reduction does not imply explanatory or ontolog-
ical disunity—pluralism yes, disunity no. Contextual emergence enables explanatory
uniﬁcation across multiple “levels,” scales and domains. While contextual emergence
does not suggest the hierarchical structure implied by foundationalism, it also does
not suggest a world of reiﬁed and explanatorily closed levels of organization. Nor
does it does suggest the “gappy” world of C. D. Broad and his “transordinal” laws
(1925).
We are certainly not alone in suggesting something like contextual emergence.
As Smolin argues that, “the world around us is nothing but a network of evolving
relationships” (2000, p. 96). In the words of Laudisa and Rovelli:
ForRQM(relationalquantummechanics),thelessonofquantumtheoryisthatthedescription
of the way distinct physical systems affect each other when they interact (and not the way
physical systems ‘are’) exhausts all that can be said about the physical world. The physical
world must be described as a net of interacting components, where there is no meaning to
‘the state of an isolated system’, or the value of the variables of an isolated system. The state
of physical system is the net of the relations it entertains with the surrounding systems. The
physical structure of the world is identiﬁed as this net of relationships. (Laudisa, Federico and
Carlo Rovelli, "Relational Quantum Mechanics", The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy

604
M. Silberstein
(Spring 2021 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL = <https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/
spr2021/entries/qm-relational/>.).
Contextual emergence implies a contingent multiscale web of inextricably inter-
connected and interdependent extrinsic dispositions most of which are in constant
ﬂux. Some laws, constraints, principles, and so forth, are more general and subsume
more phenomena than others, but such constraints and laws, while not violated by
emergents, need not determine all the other phenomena at every scale. It is also
important to note that the most general constraints need not always come from or
be recoverable from, the domain of fundamental physics. For instance, in physics
we use the principle that there are no preferred reference frames. The term “refer-
ence frame” has many meanings in physics related to microscopic and macroscopic
phenomena, Galilean versus Lorentz transformations, relatively moving observers,
and more. Think again of the light postulate and the relativity principle in special
relativity as speciﬁc examples of the more general no preferred reference frame
stability condition that constrains the possibilities for motion. While we use this
general principle in physics more than other sciences do, there is nothing exclusively
physical or microphysical about this principle. Think again of natural selection. This
principle is certainly not recoverable from physics and is every bit as basic as any
law of physics.
3
Contextual Emergence in Network Neuroscience
and Cognitive Science
The following quote from Pigliucci explains why I chose to mostly focus on complex
bio-cognitive systems for this chapter:
Ever since Darwin a great deal of the conceptual history of biology may be read as a struggle
between two philosophical positions: reductionism and holism. On the one hand, we have
the reductionist claim that evolution has to be understood in terms of changes at the funda-
mental causal level of the gene. As Richard Dawkins famously put it, organisms are just
‘lumbering robots’ in the service of their genetic masters. On the other hand, there is a
long holistic tradition that focuses on the complexity of developmental systems, on the non-
linearity of gene–environment interactions, and on multi-level selective processes to argue
that the full story of biology is a bit more complicated than that. Reductionism can marshal
on its behalf the spectacular successes of genetics and molecular biology throughout the
20th and 21st centuries. Holism has built on the development of entirely new disciplines
and conceptual frameworks over the past few decades, including evo-devo and phenotypic
plasticity. Yet, a number of biologists are still actively looking for a way out of the reduc-
tionism–holism counter-position, often mentioning the word ‘emergence’ as a way to deal
with the conundrum (Pigliucci, 2014, p. 261).
Words like “reductionism”, “holism” and “emergence” have so many different mean-
ings, one has to be careful. One also has to be careful because there are forms of reduc-
tionism and emergence that are completely compatible with one another. However,
suppose by reductionism one means something like the following: “Ideally, every

Context is King: Contextual Emergence in Network Neuroscience …
605
level of organization should be explained by the level below it. In an ideally complete
mechanistic explanation of a phenomenon, the capacities of entities at each level are
explained by the organized subcapacities of those entities’ components” (Piccinini,
2020, p. 326).
This sort of explanation in the literature on neural mechanisms is known as local-
ization and decomposition, perhaps the most well-known example of which is the
attempt to localize speciﬁc cognitive functions or even aspects of conscious experi-
ence, somewhere in the brain. The core idea of localization and decomposition is to
break down a mechanism as a whole, into operations of interrelated parts, organize
them into modules, which when properly ordered, explain the workings of larger
mechanisms or sub-mechanisms that they make up. Thus, we see how interacting
and hierarchically organized parts causally produce the phenomenon in question
(Bechtel and Abrahamsen, 2005; Bechtel, 2011; Machamer et al., 2000). While
many defenders of neuro-mechanistic explanation and reductionism now grant that
simplistic forms of localization and decomposition often fail and they grant that
mechanisms are often multiscale and multilevel, they still often want to defend
neo-mechanistic explanation, mechanistic reductionism and even localization and
decomposition in some form (see Silberstein & Chemero, 2013, and Silberstein,
2021 for details). However, even most liberal neo-mechanists would like to restrict
the explanation of cognition, behavior and conscious experience to the brain and
central nervous system as much possible. In short, most neo-mechanists are method-
ological individualists who still regard “emergence” as almost as dirty a word as
“holism” (Silberstein, 2021), at least “emergence” in any but the weak or merely
epistemic sense of the word. This is in part because they can only conceive of two
kinds of emergence, strong or weak.
While this ancient debate rages on in the literature on neural mechanisms, I think
that what many often fail to notice or refuse to acknowledge, is that contextual
emergence is not only well conﬁrmed by the biological and cognitive sciences, but
even constitutes textbook science. While there is certainly still lots of room for
debate about what the data entails and still the battle continues, I want to make
the case that when it comes systems biology, network neuroscience, psychology,
psychiatry, and embodied, embedded, enactive and extended cognitive science (4E
cognitive science), that contextual emergence is the best and perhaps even most
common interpretation of the data.
3.1
Systems Neuroscience and Social Neuroscience
In terms of textbook or popular presentations, let’s start with renowned neuroscien-
tist Lisa Feldman Barrett’s bestselling book 7 ½ Lessons About the Brain (2020).
Barrett’s second lesson is that “Your brain is a network—a collection of parts that are
connectedtofunctionasasingleunit”(p.30).Asshenotes,“Yourbrainnetworkisnot
static—it changes continuously. Some changes are extremely fast….These network

606
M. Silberstein
changes happen instantaneously and continually, even as your physical brain struc-
ture seems unchanged” (p. 36). We will return to discuss brain networks at length
nearer the end of this section, but her key point is that the primary unit for modelling
and understanding the brain in systems neuroscience is functional and structural
networks, as opposed to neurons, local neural circuits, local assemblies of neurons,
etc. Such networks often encompass a variety of spatial and temporal scales, entities
and activities as well as interactions across scales, can be used to model brain-wide
organization, as well as more regional activity (see Silberstein & Chemero, 2013, and
Silberstein, 2021). Multiscale modeling of such structural and functional networks is
more and more the norm in systems neuroscience and computational neuroscience,
where the goal is to create more and more sophisticated mathematical tools to model
and simulate such networks (Schirner et al., 2018, p. 1).
As will be made clear in later discussion, the relevance of network neuroscience
to bolstering the case for contextual emergence is that these networks involve inher-
ently multiscale interactions, explanatory relations and dependence relations not only
across the brain itself, but encompassing central nervous system, immune system,
bodily actions, other brains, social interactions and culture (Bassett and Spotns,
2017). Furthermore, these networks ground and explain the key organizational
features of the brain enumerated below.
Barrett’s third lesson is that “little brains wire themselves to their world” (p. 47).
Her point is that whether you want to call it embodied, embedded, enactive or
extended cognition (more on those shortly), one must acknowledge that the brain and
the world must often be treated as one system or at least as inextricably connected.
This includes the brain’s connections to the world both physical and social. As she
says, “Little brains require a social world in order to develop typically. For example,
certain physical inputs, such as photons of light bombarding their retinas must be
provided or the brain won’t develop normal vision” (p. 57). Other examples of essen-
tial connections she gives include the following: role of caregivers in social world
for tuning and pruning the brain in newborn’s neural development, guided attention,
various stable features of the ﬁxed environment, niche, training the senses, expo-
sure to natural language, many different social inputs, love and affection, education,
various socioeconomic conditions, etc. (pp. 57–58). In her own words, “Our three
examples of tuning and pruning demonstrate how the social world profoundly shapes
the physical reality of the brain’s wiring (p. 57). As she notes, all of this illustrates
the silliness of the nature versus nurture debate (pp. 62–63).
Echoing the ﬁeld of Social Neuroscience which we will discuss shortly, Barrett’s
ﬁfth lesson is that “Your brain secretly works with other brains” (p. 83). The fact
that we are a social species does not stop at early brain development or even at child-
hood. As she puts it, “ultimately, your family, friends, neighbors, and even strangers
contribute to your brain’s structure and function and help keep your brain humming
along” (p. 84). Our social interactions with others co-regulate and synchronize a
number of biological and cognitive processes such as breathing, brain waves, motion
and bodily movements generally, heart rate, circadian cycles, menstrual cycles,
linguistic capacities, learning, etc. (Spivey, 2020). Of course, we know all this in

Context is King: Contextual Emergence in Network Neuroscience …
607
part because, whether “in the wild” or in the lab, we can observe what happens to
people when they are removed from their social connections.
In the widely used textbook Introduction to Social Neuroscience (2020) by leading
lights Stephanie and John T. Cacioppo, they note that this relatively nascent ﬁeld of
social neuroscience is based on the following assumptions:
• Human brains are not regarded as isolated computational devices, but like a device
networked with other brains and people both physically and socially.
• Evolutionarily speaking, there are conserved neural, hormonal, cellular, and
molecular mechanisms involved in social behavior.
• Social connectedness, social complexity and social/cultural learning are some of
the driving forces behind the evolution of the human brain.
• Brains and their evolution underly social processes, but the reverse is true as well.
This can be seen on both evolutionary and developmental time scales.
• The social brain hypothesis. Larger and more complex brains enabled more social
interaction and vice-versa. As culture developed many more complex problems
were solved by social groups, all leading to positive feedback in the direction of
ever increasing neural and cultural complexity.
• The focus is on connection and coordination, e.g., inherently social functions such
as communications, social perception, recognition, imitation, empathy, competi-
tion, cooperation, etc. For example, in Social Neuroscience language is not viewed
primarily as an information processing medium, but as a means of communication.
• Multiple interacting scales and levels of organization from genes on up connect
brains and social interactions, such that there are multiple multiscale avenues of
mutual-determination and multiple multiscale interacting causal factors. There
is “reciprocal determinism” from social-to-biological and vice-versa at multiple
scales. Such bio-psycho-social dynamical systems are highly complex, often non-
linear and “interaction dominant” (Spivey, 2020). Examples include the growing
evidence that social environment can modulate gene expression, the severe effects
of social isolation and loneliness on neurological, cognitive and genetic processes,
and that the effects of pharmacological interventions such as stimulates or even
placebos is partly a function of social hierarchy and other social factors (Cacioppo
and Cacioppo, 2020, Chaps. 1–3).
Social neuroscience then is an entire discipline devoted to studying the way neural
and social processes contextually constrain and enable one another to emerge, over
both evolutionary and developmental time scales. The import of all this should be
clear. Very highly regarded hardnosed, mechanistically minded neuroscientists at the
top of their profession think that we can now regard it as well conﬁrmed neurosci-
entiﬁc commonsense that contextual emergence is the right way to think about the
relationship between brains and their physical and social environments. All of this
evidence of course dovetails with a growing body of evidence from epigenetics and
epigenomics more generally (Silberstein, 2021).
From the point of view of everyday commonsense, there is only one possible
reaction, “duh.” Anyone who, for example, has been paying serious attention to the
recent effects of social media on all aspects of human cognition, behavior, politics,

608
M. Silberstein
mood and affect, etc., could have told you that what humans are, how they cognize,
how they act, how they feel, what they believe, etc., cannot be isolated from social and
technological structures. In short, human beings are a contextually emergent multi-
scale spatiotemporal network that includes interacting processes that range from the
molecular to the social and subsumes timescales both evolutionary and develop-
mental. (See Spivey’s excellent book Who You Are: The Science of Connectedness,
2020, for many more examples to this effect).
3.2
Organizational Features of the Brain and Related
Complex Biological Systems
While yes, there are neural mechanisms involved in all aforementioned processes,
the explanation for our malleability and adaptability is not, largely speaking, a reduc-
tionist one. There are however features of the brain that, again, support contextual
emergence and that help explain why we are so malleable and adaptive. Let us turn
to those. Along with network properties to be discussed, the key features of the brain
that help explain human general intelligence, the contents of conscious experience,
and our overall adaptability are as follows:
• Many different types of neural plasticity—generally deﬁned as changes in the
structure, activity or function of the brain on some scale relative to some change
incontext suchasinjury,strokeorsimplylearning,i.e.,synapticplasticity,wherein
experience, learning and memory formation change the synaptic connections in
the brain. There are many other different types of neural plasticity like cross-
modal plasticity (such as the loss of one sensory modality inducing cortical reor-
ganization that leads to enhanced sensory performance in remaining modalities,
e.g., the relocation and transfer of somatosensory and auditory functions to the
former visual cortex), intramodal plasticity (plasticity within a modality, such as
the expansion of cortical maps to neighboring regions of intact cortex that have
been deprived of sensory input from within the same modality as supported by the
expanding cortex), and supramodel plasticity (not unlike cross-modal plasticity
but need not involve injury, sensory deprivation or special training, e.g., occipital
cortices not only serve as basis for non-visual information processing, but are
contributing something inherently visual to the non-visual input, i.e., “non-visual
input is being processed visually”, Zerilli, 2021, p. 20.). See Zerilli (2021, Chap. 2)
for more details on these types of plasticity.
• As Zerilli notes, “plasticity is an intrinsic and persistent property of the nervous
system” at all scales in the brain including, not only the aforementioned cortical
map reorganization, but neurotransmitters, neuromodulators, cellular changes
caused by learning and memory consolidation, neuromorphology, neurogenesis,
etc.” (2021, p. 10). Perhaps the most well-known example of plasticity is sensory
substitution,e.g.,convertingvisualimagesintosoundscapesviaa“visual-auditory
sensory substitution device” (Zerilli, 2021, p. 88). Neural plasticity is joined by

Context is King: Contextual Emergence in Network Neuroscience …
609
a host of other types of plasticity in biology such as phenotypic plasticity, all of
which helps explain the robustness and autonomy of complex biological systems
in general. More on this shortly.
• Neural reuse or recontextualization-Each region of your brain ends up partic-
ipating in many different functional coalitions over time/at a time—same
neural circuits contributing to different tasks or functions depending on various
contextual features (Anderson, 2010 and 2014; Zerilli, 2021, Chap. 3).
• Neural redundancy (numerically distinct brain regions have same structure and
function). These regions become active given certain changes in context, such as
injury and stroke.
• Neural degeneracy (different neural structures and mechanisms perform same
function depending on certain contextual features that change over time). As
Barrett puts it, “Degeneracy in the brain means that your actions and experiences
can be created in multiple ways. Each time you feel afraid, for example, your
brain may construct that feeling with various sets of neurons” (2020, p. 39).
One can certainly debate how all these different context-driven adaptive features
of the brain relate to each other, if for example some are more fundamental than
others, etc. In the case of neural reuse, by deﬁnition the very same neural circuits (the
same mechanism) are contributing to different functions under different conditions—
in different contexts, but at least in some cases of plasticity, not only do we have
different mechanisms subserving the same function, but sometimes the mechanism
(what Anderson calls “the working”, 2010, p. 297) itself might change as a result
of its new role or context. In the case of degeneracy distinct mechanisms that have
always been distinct end up subserving the same function or task at different points
in time. What all of these features have in common is the fact that they are triggered
by changes in context, such as environmental changes, changing cognitive tasks,
changes at larger and smaller scales within the brain, etc.
Again, plasticity, reuse, etc., are not unique to neural and cognitive systems, in
addition to the brain, one can ﬁnd multiscale networks, reuse, plasticity, robustness
(invariance in the face of environmental and contextual changes), and autonomy
(adaptability and ﬂexibility in the face of environmental and contextual changes) in
many complex biological systems (Silberstein, 2016, 2021). Thus, it is no surprise
that neuroscience is no exception. As Bateson and Gluckman put it, “The central
elements underlying many forms of plasticity are epigenetic processes, and plasticity
operating at different levels of organization often represents different descriptions of
the same process. Underlying behavioral plasticity is neural plasticity and underlying
that is the molecular plasticity involving epigenetic mechanisms” (2011, p. 43). The
point here being that brains inherit their network properties, organizational princi-
ples and other global organizing constraints from even more fundamental or basic
biological processes and principles.
Perhaps all of this is best illustrated by the relationship between plasticity, robust-
ness and autonomy. There are many different forms of robustness and plasticity,
such as developmental, phenotypic, a variety of neural, behavioral, immunolog-
ical, etc. Let’s take phenotypic plasticity and robustness as an example. This is the

610
M. Silberstein
phenomenon in which genetically identical individuals will develop different pheno-
typic traits in different environmental conditions (Kaplan, 2005, 2008). Because
of phenotypic plasticity, a single genotype or genome can produce many different
phenotypes depending on environmental and developmental contingencies (Gilbert
and Epel, 2009). Phenotypic plasticity is just one example of epigenomic processes
in which various mechanisms create phenotypic variation without altering base-pair
nucleotidegenesequences,alteringtheexpressionofgenesbutnotthegenesequence.
In contrast, there are cases in which genetic or environmental changes have no
phenotypic effect. This persistence of a particular organism’s traits across environ-
mental or genetic changes is called robustness. Robustness is illustrated by various
knock-out experiments in synthetic biology whereby a particular gene (or group of
genes) known to be involved in the development of some protein or phenotypic trait
is disabled without disturbing the presence or production of the developmental end
product in question (Jablonka & Lamb, 2005).
As we will see, to account for and model plasticity and robustness, develop-
mental biologists have called upon network/dynamical explanations. The ongoing
development of an organism acts as a global constraint that ‘enslaves’ the compo-
nents necessary to maintain its dynamics. Because of this, a developing system will
have highly plastic boundaries, and will be composed of different enslaved compo-
nents over time. This plasticity serves the autonomy and robustness of the developing
organism, making it more likely to be viable and adaptive. Brains are no exception.
Robustness is closely related to autonomy, another key concept in evolutionary
developmental biology. Autonomy is the property of living systems to make use
of their environments to maintain themselves. Autonomy is sometimes explained
in terms of recursive self-maintenance. Some systems are plastic such that they can
maintain stability not only within certain ranges of conditions, but also within certain
ranges of changes of conditions: they can switch to deploying different processes
depending on conditions they detect in the environment.
As Bateson and Gluckman note, robustness and plasticity are two-sides of the
same coin, they are interdependent, “Indeed, plasticity is often regulated by robust
mechanisms and robustness is often generated by plastic mechanisms” (2011, p. 46),
in an interplay of evolutionary and developmental processes. The ever-growing vari-
eties of robustness and plasticity are co-creating and co-maintaining, allowing a
complex biological system to have autonomy, “Development involves both internal
regulation and reciprocity with the environment. Careful analysis of what happens
during development suggests that it is no longer helpful to retain a hard and fast
distinction between robustness and plasticity” (2011, p. 62).
Plasticity, robustness and autonomy are universal features of complex biological
systems. Such global or systemic contextual constraints and organizing principles
are well known from a variety of different ﬁelds of biology, they have been well
known for a long time, and they are well conﬁrmed without any appeal to abstract
mathematical models (Jaeger & Calkins, 2012, p. 27, Koonin, 2011, pp. viii–ix). It
is also well known that such global constraints can impose the same function even
across different species, using different structural components. One can demonstrate
equivalence classes of networks across species, including network function. Jaeger

Context is King: Contextual Emergence in Network Neuroscience …
611
and Calkins further infer that, “Given that function is conserved and the mode [i.e.,
speciﬁc structural mechanism] isn’t, it suggests regulation by the organism as a
whole” (2012, p. 27). This real-world example of multiple realizability is a case of
“top-down information control” via multilevel causation, wherein the working parts
are constrained in their behavior in service to the larger function, i.e., functional
networks.
The biological networks involved in Evo-Devo and systems biology are like-
wise multiscale. As we are now all well aware, the relationship between genes and
proteins is many-many, and we must now think in terms gene networks (genomics),
RNA networks, protein networks (proteome), and the complex non-linear interac-
tions between them. Furthermore, these relationships are also affected by several
global constraints and multi-scale contextual features including cellular environment,
the wider organismic environment and various features of the external environment
in which the organism is situated. These interactions are obviously multi-scale, multi-
level, inextricably interrelated and interdependent (Noble, 2006, 105). In the devel-
opmental process, what any key biological player does, such as genes and proteins
and what it results in as output, is a function of multiscale contexts (Bechtel, 2019,
p. 461 and p. 488; Francis, 2011, 159; Noble, 2006, p. 17 and p. 34). We now know
for example that So-called “junk” DNA contains millions of switches that regulate
protein coding genes. It also produces many different types of RNA which play key
regulatory roles in their own right such as regulating chemical modiﬁcations of the
DNA genome and associated proteins in response to environmental signals. Epige-
nomic effects show that the genome is very much affected by cellular activity, bodily
changes as a whole, and changes in the external environment (Parrington, 2021, p. 4,
Silberstein, 2021). All of this illustrates that genes or DNA, are not best conceived
of as codes for creating or computing proteins, and that the process of biological
development is best viewed in the light of contextual emergence.
What all of this strongly suggests is that structural and functional modularity, or
localization and decomposition, are not the norm in complex biological systems.
Obviously, all of this goes for both developmental biological systems and brains.
For example, as regards language, as Zerilli notes, “The picture that emerges here is
very unlike the one bequeathed by Paul Broca and Carl Wernicke” (2021, p. 111).
Language processing is enabled by highly distributed neural networks composed of
very many smaller brain regions or nodes that are themselves multifunctional and
domain-general (Zerilli, 2021, Chap. 7). Language processing is no exception in this
regard, but rather exemplary. This brings us to networks and network neuroscience.
3.3
Network Neuroscience
The following is a brief overview of network neuroscience and the nature of topo-
logical networks (see Silberstein & Chemero, 2013 and Silberstein, 2021 for more
details). Network analyzes of the brain are based on the thought that brain function is
not just relegated to individual regions and connections but emerges instead from the

612
M. Silberstein
topology of the brain’s entire network, i.e., the connectome of the brain as a whole.
In such graphical models of neural activity, the basic units of explanation are not
neurons, cell groups, or brain regions, but multiscale networks and their large-scale,
often distributed, and nonlocal connections or interactions (Silberstein & Chemero,
2013 and Silberstein, 2021). The study of this integrative brain function and connec-
tivity is mostly based in topological features or architecture of the network. Such
multiply realized networks are partially insensitive to, decoupled from, and have a
one-to-many relationship with respect to lower-level neurochemical and “wiring”
details.
More speciﬁcally, a graph in this case is a mathematical representation of some
actual many-bodied biological systems. The nodes in such models can represent
neurons, cell populations, brain regions, etc., and the edges represent connections
between the nodes. The edges can represent structural features such as synaptic path-
ways and other wiring-diagram-type features, or they can represent more topological
features such as graphical distance and network types. What matters in such graph-
ical explanations is the topology or pattern of connections. Different geometries or
arrangements of nodes and edges can instantiate the same topology (see Silberstein &
Chemero, 2013 and Silberstein, 2021 for more technical details).
When mapping the interactions (the edges) between the local neighborhood
networks, we are interested in global topological features, i.e., the topological archi-
tecture of the brain as a whole. While there are local networks within networks, it
is the global connection between these that is often of greatest interest in systems
neuroscience. Graph theory has many different kinds of network topologies, but one
of great interest to systems neuroscience are small-world networks. This is because
various regions of the brain and the brain as a whole are thought to instantiate such
networks. The key topological properties of small-world networks are:
• Sparseness: relatively few edges given the large number of vertices;
• Clustering: edges of the graph tend to form knots, for example, if X and Y know
Z, there is a higher-than-normal chance they know each other;
• Small diameter: the length of the most direct route between the most distant
vertices, for example, a complete graph, with n2/2 edges, has a diameter of 1,
since you can get from any vertex to any other in a single step. Most nodes are not
neighbors of one another yet can be reached through a short sequence of steps.
That is, (1) there is a much higher clustering coefﬁcient relative to random
networks with equal numbers of nodes and edges and (2) short topological path
length. Small-world networks thus exhibit a high degree of topological modularity
and nonlocal or long-range connectivity. There are many different types of small-
world networks and other types of networks with unique topological properties that
allow researchers to make predictions about the robustness, plasticity, functionality,
health, etc., of brains that instantiate these networks (Sporns, 2011). One type of
network of particular interest is called the “Rich-Club” network (Pedersen and Omid-
varnia, 2016; van den Heuvel and Sporns, 2011). Such network architectures are
called “Rich-Club” based on the analogy with wealthy, well-connected people in
society. “Members” of this club constitute a few “rich” brain-regions or central

Context is King: Contextual Emergence in Network Neuroscience …
613
“hubs” that distribute a large number of the brain’s global neural communications.
The “Rich-Club” topological brain architecture is instantiated when the hubs of a
network tend to be more densely connected among themselves than nodes of a lower
degree.
The dynamical interactions in such networks are recurrent, recursive, and reen-
trant. Therefore, the arrow of explanation or determination in such systems is both
top-down (graphical to structural) and bottom-up (structural to graphical). Global
topological features of complex systems are not explicable in principle via localiza-
tion and decomposition. The many-to-one relationship between the structural and the
graphical features demonstrates that speciﬁc structural features are neither necessary
nor sufﬁcient for determining global topological features, i.e., topological features
such as the properties of small-world networks exhibit a kind of “universality” with
respect to lower-level structural details. In the case of random networks for example,
power laws and other scale-invariant relations can be found. These laws, which
by deﬁnition transcend scale, help to predict and explain the behavior and future
time evolution of the global state of the brain, irrespective of its structural imple-
mentation. Power laws are explanatory and unifying because they show why the
macroscopic dynamics and topological features exist across heterogeneous structural
implementations (Silberstein & Chemero, 2013).
In my view the nature of networks is the underlying unifying factor that explains
and binds all the features of complex biological and cognitive systems previously
discussed, such as plasticity, reuse, redundancy and degeneracy. Let us say more
about the nature of such networks:
1.
Networks have plasticity, reuse, redundancy and degeneracy built into them.
As Sporns’ says, “the same set of network elements can participate in multiple
cognitive functions by rapid reconﬁgurations of network links or functional
connections” (2011, pp. 182–83).
2.
We can use tools from network neuroscience and graph theory to model both
structural networks (the “workings” at various scales) and functional networks
(e.g., the various types of ‘causally relevant’ statistical dependencies that exist
between different regions of structural networks, indicating that they participate
in the same cognitive functions in some important way). See (Bassett and Sporns
2017; Silberstein, 2021; Silberstein & Chemero, 2013) for more details.
3.
Network analysis link structure and function, showing us the very complex
statistical, dynamical, topological and various causal relationships that can exist
between them. These relationships generally don’t look anything like the neo-
mechanist’s localization and decomposition (Silberstein, 2021). As Weiskopf
puts it:
One upshot of this form of organization is that the neural regions that participate in
this assembly may have no identiﬁable cognitive function outside of their role in the
ensemble. While classical localization assumed that distinct cognitive systems would
have disjoint physical realization bases, massive redeployment and network theory
seem to demonstrate that different systems may have entangled realizers: shared phys-
ical structures spread out over a large region of cortex. This suggests that not only will
there not be distinct mechanisms corresponding to many of the systems depicted in

614
M. Silberstein
otherwise well-supported cognitive models but given that the relevant anatomical struc-
turesaremultifunctionalinahighlycontext-sensitiveway,perhapstherewillbenothing
much like mechanisms at all—at least as those have been conceived of in the dominant
writings of contemporary mechanistic philosophers of science. And while it might
be that these networks should count as mechanisms on a sufﬁciently liberal concep-
tion of what that involves, widespread entanglement still violates Poldrack’s constraint
that distinct cognitive structures should be realized in distinct neural structures (2019,
p. 681).
4.
One essential feature of network analysis is to illuminate the topological struc-
tures of brain networks, e.g., small-world networks and “rich club networks”
seem to appear over and over in the brain and elsewhere. The point for now is
that such topological features explain many key capacities and aforementioned
organizational principles of brains just in virtue of the topology type—indepen-
dently of structural details, and these networks also constrain the behavior and
dynamics of their ever-changing structural elements. This again is an instance
of real world multiple realizability at various scales (Silberstein & Chemero,
2013 and Silberstein, 2021).
5.
As noted earlier these networks are highly dynamical and network neuroscience
is melding tools from dynamical systems theory with network theory to better
model such dynamical networks (Kaiser, 2020). Per Bassett and Sporns:
More recently, methods from network science are expanding in new directions, going
beyond descriptive accounts of network topology and toward addressing network
dynamics, generative principles and higher order dependencies among nodes. One
prominent example is the development of methods for assessing multi-scale organiza-
tion in networks. This includes characterizing ﬂuctuations in community structure of
networks across time and implementing dynamic processes on networks as a diagnostic
tool for explicitly linking micro-scale features of network organization to macro-scale
characteristics of neurophysiological dynamics. Yet another approach uses network
science to ask questions about the processes that can potentially generate the topology
of an empirical network. Such generative models can clarify the contributions of spatial
embedding and other (non-spatial) wiring rules in shaping the network topology of the
connectome and can also reveal potential factors driving the selection of functionally
important network attributes (2017, p. 356).
Notably, changes in function can elicit changes in structure, leading to dynamics of
networks. The ﬁrst conception of dynamics of networks grew from the recognition that
many physical and biological systems display patterns of connections that change over
time, in different contexts or in response to varying external demands (2017, p. 357).
6.
Such networks are often multiscale and highly distributed throughout the brain,
central nervous system and body. We can model brain networks at various spatial
and temporal scales often called “microscale, mesoscale and macroscale.”
However, often such brain-wide networks harness, recruit, integrate and unify
all these scales and their components in the service of various cognitive func-
tions and to subserve contents of conscious experience. The scales, compo-
nents and their complex interactions often include the following: ionic ﬂux,
sub-cellular structures, proteins, genes, RNA, neurons and neural assemblies,
glialcells,neurotransmittersandneuromodulators,hormones,large-scaleneural
synchrony and neural oscillations, electrical ﬁelds, etc. (Godfrey-Smith, 2020,

Context is King: Contextual Emergence in Network Neuroscience …
615
p. 193; Parrington, 2021, p. 114). For example, regulatory RNAs are secreted
by both neurons and glial cells and travel to other cells in the brain in order to
modulate various functions.
It is a mistake to focus only on networks involving neurons and their action poten-
tials and oscillations. Complex networks often involve brain-wide integration at every
scale. The brain (and the body and the environment) has to manage, modulate and
coordinate these processes that are happening at very different spatial and temporal
scales. There are many different heterogenous time scales in the brain ranging from
milliseconds to seconds to minutes and beyond. This is sort of integration is what
networks do (Bassett and Sporns 2017 and Silberstein, 2021). It should be imme-
diately obvious from all this that, just like the genes as codes misnomer, brains are
not merely or primarily simply computational devices wherein synaptic activity and
their connections are all that really matter.
Graph theory and the big data tricks of network neuroscience, such as network
simulations, time series analysis, various sorts of causal analysis such as Granger
causality, etc., dimension reduction and universality class analysis, are perfect for
illuminating these multiscale relationships and connections. That is, “Networks can
also bridge across data of very different types and from different domains of biology.
One example is the joint investigation of gene co-expression patterns and patterns
of brain connectivity. These studies raise important questions about the nature of
the mechanisms that tie the topology of structural and functional brain networks to
fundamental aspects of basic brain physiology” (Bassett and Sporns 2017, p. 358).
7.
In every area of cognitive neuroscience ranging from learning to memory to
decision making and action to empathy and mind reading to consciousness and
the contents of consciousness, etc., the central theoretical unit of study and
analysis is the multiscale network (Bertolero & Bassett, 2020; Jansson, 2020
and Schirner et al., 2020; Shine et al., 2019). Whether we are talking about
task neutral networks such as the Default Mode Network (DMN), or task posi-
tive networks such as Executive Control Network (ECN), the Salience Network
(SN), Dorsal Attention Network (DAT), Frontoparietal Network (FPN), Amyg-
dala Network (AN), Action-Perception Network, (APN), Empathy-Network
(EN), the thalamus-anterior–posterior cingulate cortex-angular gyri network
(whatever it is called), etc., the idea is that various functional brain networks are
the key unit of investigation (Huang et al., 2020 and Scheinin, 2020). The details
of how all these speciﬁc networks work need not concern us for the purposes of
this conversation. The point is that the explanations involving these networks
for various cognitive abilities and various states and contents of consciousness,
all have to do with the structural, functional and topological changes in these
networks and their various multiscale interactions (or lack thereof), over time
under different changes in context, e.g., the presence or absence of anesthesia,
psychedelics, deep sleep, stress, speciﬁc cognitive tasks, social interactions, etc.
Sometimes spirited reductionists accuse me of “cherry picking” and “special
pleading” with my focus on network neuroscience. I hope all the preceding
points make it clear that their charge is empty. There is a reason that Barrett’s

616
M. Silberstein
second lesson is that your brain is a network. Bassett and Sporns once again
explain why networks are so central to neuroscience and systems biology:
“Network science tools are perfectly suited to accomplish the important goal
of crossing levels or scales of organization, integrating diverse data sets, and
bridging existing disparate analyses” (2017, p. 368).
8.
As I stressed at the beginning of this paper, many hardnosed neuroscientists from
different sub-disciplines now fully acknowledge that the networks in question
also encompass and include social networks. Working up to social networks
proper, Bassett and Sporns note that, “Large-scale studies of brain-behavior
relations and behavior-behavior dependencies, although still in their infancy,
promise to provide a rich database for mapping the relations among brain
processes and their contributions to perception, action and cognition” (2017,
p. 354). Such network analysis obviously includes correlates that fall under
the category of embodied, embedded, enactive and extended cognition such as
action-perception cycles. They go on to say, “network neuroscience asks how all
of these levels of inquiry help us to understand the interactions between social
beings that give rise to ecologies, economies and cultures. Rather than reducing
systems to a list of parts deﬁned at a particular scale, network neuroscience
embraces the complexity of the interactions between the parts and acknowledges
the dependence of phenomena across scales” (2017, p. 358).
Such analysis is often called the modelling of various types of “networks-of-
networks” or meta-networks (Silberstein, 2016). Just as Barrett and Cacioppo
and Cacioppo noted, in such meta-networks, brain networks depend on social
networks and vice-versa. Analysis of such networks can be used to study the
complex relationships between ever changing social conditions, various other
environmental features, changes in genomic, RNA and proteome networks,
changes in gene expression and modulation, behavioral patterns, both mental
and physical health, various types of neural activity, etc. (Bassett and Sporns,
p. 361). Again, all of this illustrates why networks are central here.
To summarize, what makes such networks examples of contextual emergence is
multiscale co-determination relations; global constraints, e.g., ‘small-worldness’;
sensitivity to contextual changes at all scales, both “internally” and “externally”
as it were; multiple-realizability of networks with respect to structural details or
“universality”; and the fact that what explains the power and autonomy of such
networks is the topology itself, e.g., ‘small-worldness’.
3.4
Implications for the Relationship Between Neuroscience,
Cognitive Science, Psychiatry and Clinical Psychology
Currently there are various debates in what we can broadly call psychology, neuro-
science and cognitive science for which all of this has immediate consequences.
Broadly speaking, the debates are about how we ought to think of the relationship

Context is King: Contextual Emergence in Network Neuroscience …
617
between neuroscience, psychiatry, clinical psychology, and cognitive science. It is
fair to say that the main dividing lines are more or less reductionism and more
or less internalism (i.e., methodological individualism). The two debates I want to
discuss herein are the frequently touted “war” between the “biomedical model” of
psychiatry and the biopsychosocial model (BPS) (Savulescu, Roache and Davies
and Loebel, 2020), and secondly the debate between embodied, enactive, embedded,
and extended models of cognitive science (4E) versus more internalist models. I will
begin with the former debate.
According to Wikipedia, “The biomedical model of health focuses on purely
biological factors and excludes psychological, environmental, and social inﬂuences.
It is considered to be the leading modern way for health care professionals to diagnose
and treat a condition in most Western countries.” As Murphy deﬁnes it, “Scholars and
textbooks alike agree (though they might not like it) that psychiatry now adheres to
the “medical model”, which advocates “the consistent application, in psychiatry, of
modern medical thinking and methods” (Black, 2005, 3) because psychopathology
“represents the manifestations of disturbed function within a part of the body” (Guze,
1992, 44) to wit, the brain” (Murphy, Dominic, “Philosophy of Psychiatry”, The Stan-
ford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2020 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL
= < https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2020/entries/psychiatry/ > .). A strong
form of the biomedical model holds that the causes of mental disorders are primarily
neurological and that therefore the best way to taxonomize and treat most mental
disorders is through some neurological intervention such as psychopharmacological
manipulation.
A strong form of BPS holds that mental disorders are often caused by biological,
psychological or social factors or some complex combination of these. And thus,
mentaldisorderswilloftenbemosteffectivelytaxonomizedandtreatedbybiological,
psychological or social treatments, or some combination of these (McConnell, p. 381,
2020). It is important to note that for both models, the causal claim can be separated
from the claim about treatment. However, the treatment claim is a not unreasonable
provisional inference given the causal claim. While no one denies that we should
continue to seek and will continue to ﬁnd purely neurological treatments for mental
disorders, the BPS model predicts that the best treatment for mental disorders that
do have a BPS causal origin, is often one grounded in BPS types of interventions
including, talk therapy and cognitive therapy (Cecil, 2020, p. 190). It is safe to say
that so far at least, the BPS prediction has been born out (Cecil, 2020, p. 190).
There is no question that the multiscale and multi-domain networks model
presentedinthissectionstronglyfavorsandsupportssomeformoftheBPSmodeland
vice-versa. Given everything presented herein, some form of BPS is the best way to
look at the relationship between neuroscience, psychiatry and clinical psychology.
What is the BPS model but contextual emergence ‘in action.’ I will return to the
discussion of psychiatry shortly.
This brings us to the question of the relationship between neuroscience and cogni-
tive science. One school of cognitive science is internalist in its designation about
what counts as the cognitive system and where to look for explanation as regards
cognition or conscious experience. The internalist school historically as two basic

618
M. Silberstein
ﬂavors, a cognitivist/functionalist one or a brain-centric one. The latter is more
common these days. As with the biomedical model the internalist brain-centric school
predicts that in principle, cognitive science and clinical psychology should reduce
to or be eliminated by neuroscience. The school of 4E cognition is, to one degree
or another, a rejection of both schools of internalism. Historically, many different
traditions of thought and many different thinkers feed into and are the foundation for
the 4E movement (Chemero & Silberstein, 2008; Newen, de Bruin and Gallagher,
Chap. 1, 2018). Furthermore, there are many different brands and varying strengths
of 4E cognition.
The big debate in the 4E movement is whether or not the cognitive system is consti-
tuted by brain-body processes only (embodied) or by extra-brain-body processes
(extended). The word enactive implies that the cognitive system is partly constituted
by “active engagement in the agent’s environment” (Newen, de Bruin and Gallagher,
p. 6, 2018; Silberstein & Chemero, 2012). Such engagement is sometimes called
perception–action cycles. The focus here is to see cognition as driven by and partly
constitutedbyaction.Thenotionof“environment”heremeansnotjusttheorganism’s
physical or social environment as deﬁned from a third-person perspective, but their
“phenomenological niche” with its ﬁrst-person affordances (Silberstein & Chemero,
2012). The word embedded generally refers to the strong causal dependence or”s-
caffolding” on the environment of the cognitive system. Most people will grant
some degree of embeddedness, but the degree of autonomy varies depending on how
reductionist or internalist one is in their thinking.
As I said, with regard to the 4E’s, the big debate seems to be about where one
falls on the spectrum between constituted by versus causally dependent on. If forced
to choose sides I am certainly with the constituted camp. However, I am previously
on record for arguing that this is a pretty empty, mostly purely metaphysical debate
(Chemero & Silberstein, 2008 and Silberstein & Chemero, 2012). My reasoning is
as follows, ﬁrst, for this to be more than a merely metaphysical debate we would
have to agree on exactly how to deﬁne the slippery terms of “constituted by” versus
“causally dependent” such that they are clearly mutually exclusive. And then based
on that we would need to see forthcoming a group of competing predictions, the
outcomes of which we could use to make our judgements. Of course, there is no such
thing as a crucial experiment, but I still don’t think this basic work has been done
to the point where we can easily create a win/loss column for each camp, certainly
not one with much consensus. In addition, both sides are generally able to provide
their own spin on most any results. For example, champions of predictive coding or
predicting processing tend to be internalist, but one can also give it a 4E twist (see
for example Kirchhoff, Chap. 12, , 2018; Anderson and Chemero, Chap. 12, , 2019).
But obviously, if we can’t simply deﬂate this dispute by an appeal to pragmatism
or pluralism, we want this dispute to be an empirical question that is empirically
resolvable in principle.
My second reason for skepticism about the value of this debate is that it presup-
poses that there is some metaphysically or Platonically given fact of the matter about
where to draw the lines around systems, cognitive or otherwise. I can think of no
non-spooky reason (e.g., Platonism) for believing this. Of course, everywhere in

Context is King: Contextual Emergence in Network Neuroscience …
619
science we make distinctions between the system we want to explain and the envi-
ronment, boundary conditions, etc. However, those decisions are generally made on
a pragmatic basis. In every ﬁeld in science, we constantly redraw the shifting lines
between what is system and what is environment as our pragmatic and explanatory
interests change and our knowledge grows (Bishop & Silberstein, 2019). An obvious
example to bring to bear here is developmental biology-epigenetics-epigenomics
and the quaintness of the nature versus nurture debate. Are we partly constituted
by non-linear and causally interdependent gene networks, RNA networks, proteome
networks, human cells, bacteriological cells, a host of chemicals, bodily processes
at multiple scales, etc., all taking place in larger physical and social environments,
with which they all share co-determination, co-constitution and massive causal inter-
dependence? Yes. Recall the quote from Pigliucci that began this section, where he
invoked the old-school genetic determinism and reductionism of biology. One would
be hard put to ﬁnd many educated biologists who still believe in genetic determinism.
The point is, depending on our explanatory purposes, need and capacity for manipu-
lation an intervention, we can change the boundaries as needed (Silberstein, 2021).
So why are we still having this moribund debate in the foundations of cognitive
science?
What does any of this have to do with contextual emergence? My point is that
regardless of your stance on internalism versus externalism or your position on 4E
cognition, I think the facts speak pretty loudly for themselves. Network neuroscience,
social neuroscience, systems biology, 4E cognition, BPS psychiatry and psychology,
etc., separately and collectively all point to contextual emergence. Part of the point
I tried to make herein is that even key areas of neuroscience itself, the dark tower of
reductionism and mechanistic thinking, tout contextual emergence. Not convinced?
For more evidence see (Newen, de Bruin and Gallagher, 2018; Spivey, 2020; and
Silberstein, 2021). I am not alone in making this claim. As Spivey notes:
Cognitive scientists Harald Atmanspacher and Peter beim Graben call this ‘contextual emer-
gence’ [my emphasis]. They have studied systems like these in intense mathematical detail
and designed computational simulations of how a mental state can emerge from a neural
network. They ﬁnd in these mathematical treatments that being in a particular mental state
requires more than just for the neurons to be producing a particular pattern of activity.
The context of that simulated brain, such as the body and its environment, also need to be
accounted for in order to develop a statistically reliable characterization of the mental states
that the mind takes on. Hence, based on these computational simulations, the brain by itself
is not sufﬁcient to generate a mental state. A mental state, such as a belief or desire, only
emerges between a brain and its context, that is, its body and the environment…So the brain-
and-body is an open system…What you are studying has become an ‘organism-environment
system’ (2020, pp. 142–43).
No matter how one wants to count systems, and wherever one wants to locate the
mind and cognition, I believe there is ample evidence from across several disciplines
(including biology and neuroscience), that what Spivey is suggesting is likely true. I
suggestwecollectivelyfocusourenergiesonexploringandadvancingtheserelatively
nascent network sciences so we can more fully appreciate systems such as ourselves
in all our glorious emergent complexity.

620
M. Silberstein
To see how all these contextual emergence exhibiting sciences can collectively
support one another and bolster my claims, let us return to the case of psychiatry. In
his Stanford Encyclopedia entry on psychiatry Murphy says the following:
An important development that is avowedly sceptical of the existing biomedical paradigm in
psychiatry is the rise of approaches inspired by the 4E movement in philosophy of mind—the
“embedded, embodied, extended and enactive” tradition. Many philosophers of psychology
and cognitive scientists dispute the viability of what they see as an unduly reductive and
anti-environmental tradition of philosophical psychology. The consensus among 4E propo-
nents is that psychiatry is wedded to a number of outdated philosophical positions…To
begin with, many externalist approaches to psychiatry contest what they see as the basic
ontological commitments of psychiatry when it comes to mental illness, by objecting to
what is seen as a reductive or internalist thesis that psychiatric conditions are neurological
disorders. Competing conceptions of mental illness may accept that psychiatric conditions
involve neural dysfunction in some sense, but they argue that no psychic process, including
pathological ones, “can be reduced to the brain or to localized neural activities: they are
embodied, inherently intentional, and context related” (Fuchs, 2018, p. 253)….The situ-
ated view construes psychological capacities as intimately dependent upon environmental
states of affairs, and so prohibits methodological solipsism…Poor mental health can be the
outcome of neural dysfunction, but it can also owe to problems with the environments in
which agents are situated, as well as with their capacity to fruitfully exploit environmental
resources (Sneddon, 2002; Roberts, Krueger, and Glackin, 2019). The externalist claims
that she can discern types of explanations, interventions and strategies that an internalist
picture misses. (Murphy, Dominic, "Philosophy of Psychiatry", The Stanford Encyclopedia
of Philosophy (Fall 2020 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL = <https://plato.stanford.
edu/archives/fall2020/entries/psychiatry/>.).
While again there are different 4E models and different BPS models with different
degrees of strength, etc., I would say the BPS model and 4E cognition go hand-
in-hand. The obvious example to discuss here is the biomedical model’s claim that
addiction is a brain disease. Why are neuroscientists so convinced addiction is a
disease of the brain? Because as Levy notes, “neuroscientists embrace the brain
disease model of addiction for an obvious reason: because they have made great
progress in elucidating neural mechanisms and neuroadaptations that are correlated
with,andundoubtedlycausallyinvolvedin,addiction.Neuroscientistshaveidentiﬁed
a range of such changes, including (but not limited to) the long term depression of
reward circuitry and increased activity in anti-reward circuitry (Koob and Le Moal,
1997, 2008); alterations in the mid-brain dopamine system (Volkow and Li, 2004);
and in frontal regions involved in impulse inhibition” (Levy, p.1, 2013).
The retorts on the part of the BPS and 4E schools are so obvious one hardly feels
they need to be said, but here goes. First, at best what neuroscience has identiﬁed
here is a necessary condition for addiction. Indeed, one doubts it is even necessary
as there is growing evidence that addiction is multiply realizable in the brain and in
other non-human nervous systems. There is a lot of evidence that dopamine doesn’t
by itself equal pleasure and evidence that having a dopamine-based neural reward
system is neither necessary nor sufﬁcient for addiction (Levy, 2013 and Hart, 2021). It
is easy to see the ﬂaw in the biomedical modeler’s reasoning. They infer that where
there is some neural mechanism involved that therefore that must be the primary
explainer for the case at hand. However, everything involving humans and other

Context is King: Contextual Emergence in Network Neuroscience …
621
animals entails some neural processes, but nothing about the sufﬁciency or primacy
of mechanistic explanations follows from that. Perhaps the biomedical modeler is
reasoning that the best or easiest place to intervene in addiction is in the brain and
therefore we should count something in the brain as the cause of addiction. As we
discussed earlier, this is clearly a bad inference. Furthermore, in spite of the rhetoric
from some biomedical model purveyors that talk-therapy and 12 step programs are
inefﬁcacious pseudoscience, leaving aside the latter demarcation problem, the data
as to efﬁcacy suggests otherwise (Hart, 2021). Furthermore, even though neuro-
science has continued to develop direct interventions in the brain such as blocking
opioid receptors, there is little evidence that such tricks make addiction disappear
and addictive behavior more generally disappear. As of this moment, the efﬁcacy of
the “pseudoscience” based interventions is far greater than the strictly neurological
interventions (Hart, 2021).
Second, only a very small percentage of people who take, say, opioids become
an addict. This strongly suggests that the mere interaction of a controlled substance
and a neural reward system doesn’t equal addiction (Hart, 2021).
Third, the strongest correlates and biggest predictors of addiction are socio-
economicsuchas poverty, familydysfunction, isolationandloneliness, lackof educa-
tion, emotional abuse, trauma, deprivation, etc. (Hart, 2021). All of this strongly
suggests a multi-causal and multi-scale network-type complex causal interaction
account of addiction. To which those of us who have been on planet Earth for a
while, can respond once again with, “duh.” Let us bring all this back to networks.
Kim et. al., based on multiscale network analysis argue that their “ﬁndings suggest
that childhood poverty may result in wide-spread disruptions of the brain connectome
among girls, particularly at the lowest INR levels, and are differentially expressed in
females and males” (2019, p. 409). Why is poverty such a predictor of disruptions in
neural networks? The primary answer isn’t literal malnutrition, it’s because poverty
is super-correlated with all the social, emotional and cognitive predictors of addic-
tion and other mental disorders I enumerated above. Once again, all of this illustrates
what Barrett and others are telling us, that neural networks and social networks are
often of apiece. To which again, I can’t resist saying, “duh.”
Once again, the point of all this is that the data from across the biological and
mind sciences strongly suggests contextual emergence. Historically one reason many
people resisted the sort of picture outlined herein is fear of invoking “downward
causation”, and the worry that it would violate causal closure of the physical or
microphysical. Downward causation was often imagined, for example, as an occult
mental force acting downwardly on the lower level of neural processes via some sort
of efﬁcient causation. However, as many now acknowledge, we can easily understand
such multiscale causal and otherwise co-determinative interactions in terms of global
constraints, contextuality and boundary conditions. Contextual emergence in the
biological and mind sciences makes it clear that the world is not divided up into
autonomous levels of hierarchical organization wherein levels at smaller or lower
scales “constitute” the entities that make up the higher level. None of which is to say
that causal closure is safe or well supported by science or scientiﬁc practice. Indeed,
if one accepts everything said herein, science across the board supports multiscale

622
M. Silberstein
and global causal interactions and as the BPS model and 4E cognition illustrates,
this very clearly includes social and psychological effects on brains, nervous systems
and immune systems. In other words, causal closure is empty analytic metaphysics
that simply does not square with experience, science, or scientiﬁc practice.
4
Conclusion: Looking Backward or Moving Forward?
I have argued at length that contextual emergence, just as commonsense would
predict, is the norm in the biological, social and psychological sciences. I have
argued that even many “mechanistic” explanations and methods in these ﬁelds
suggest contextual emergence and not ontological reductionism, e.g., localization
and decomposition (see also Silberstein, 2021). I have even taunted the defender of
ontological reductionism with the word “duh.” I do this in the hopes of baiting them
into pushing back, because in my experience, instead of fully acknowledging the
overwhelming evidence against ontological reductionism and for contextual emer-
gence, they simply choose to redeﬁne words like “mechanism”, “reductionism”,
“localization” and “decomposition”, in order that they never have to acknowledge
that the world just isn’t the way the mechanist and other ontological reductionists
thought it was. To see me engage that very ghettoized debate in detail in the arena
of neural mechanisms see (Silberstein, 2021). Part of what I point out therein is that
even some very “liberal” mechanists who acknowledge much of what I have said
herein, are still inclined to ﬂy the ﬂag of mechanism and to be allergic to the word
“emergence.”
I hope to have shown that there is no longer any reason for such a shunning.
Contextual emergence is not the fringe, it’s mainstream textbook science across the
board. For more such evidence from multiple sciences including physics see our
forthcoming book Emergence in Context (Bishop, Silberstein and Pexton, Oxford
University Press, Summer 2022).
C. D. Broad, perhaps the most well-known champion of “emergence” in the
modern era, was typically considered an archenemy of the mechanists of his time,
a compositional view of nature he called “pure mechanism.” According to Broad,
this is the view that the ‘laws governing’ the parts of a system operate in a purely
context-independent fashion (Broad, 1925, pp. 58–61). Contextual emergence keeps
the context-dependence feature of Broad’s account of emergence but rejects the
claim that emergents (e.g., laws, properties, entities, processes, etc.) are brute or
inexplicable and it rejects the discontinuity and gappiness of “transordinal laws.”
Of course, many philosophers of science will simply note that one can do philos-
ophy of science without ever mentioning or caring about metaphysics, they are simply
interested in scientiﬁc explanation and methodology. To that I would say, ﬁrst, the
explanatory approaches of the aforementioned sciences still suggest contextual emer-
gence methodologically as opposed to some brand of intertheoretic reduction or
mechanistic reduction. Second, it is important to see that ontological contextual
emergence as described in Sect. 2 and as suggested by our best explanatory practices

Context is King: Contextual Emergence in Network Neuroscience …
623
in the sciences, is the reason why those explanatory practices make sense and work
so well, as opposed to being some giant function of ignorance masking the truth of
ontological reductionism or foundationalism. For example, just as current scientiﬁc
practice suggests, human beings really can be most proﬁtably treated as contextually
emergent multiscale spatiotemporal network that includes interacting processes that
range from the molecular to the social and subsume timescales both evolutionary
and developmental. That’s just the way the world is. Pragmatically we can choose
to focus on any part, aspect or interrelations of those networks for explanation and
intervention as needed. Nothing here cuts against methodological reductionism or
smaller-scale interventions when they are useful and successful. But science isn’t
exactly hurting for these sorts of moves.
What I am suggesting her is that we really need to get much cleverer at explanation
and intervention in multiscale and multi-causal networks, cleverer at science that
is avowedly based in contextual emergence. Happily, more and more people are
engaged in just this project. Take the following for example:
Everywhere in biology and cognitive science we deal with systems made of parts or elements
with different functionalities acting in a selective and harmonized way, coordinating them-
selves at different time scales, interacting hierarchically in local networks, which form, in
turn, global networks and, then, meta-networks…The organization of living systems consists
in different nested and interconnected levels which, being somewhat self-organized in their
local dynamics, depend globally one upon the others. This means that both the components
and the sub-networks contribute to the existence, maintenance and propagation of the global
organizations to which they belong. And, in turn, those global organizations contribute to the
production, maintenance and propagation of (at least some of) their constitutive components
(Sporns, 2011, p. 322).
I should also make clear that in spite of some of the aforementioned differences,
there are those mechanists whose models and ways of thinking dovetail greatly with
contextual emergence (see for example Raja & Anderson, 2021; Winning & Bechtel,
2018; and Winning, 2020). More good news, there are an increasing number of mech-
anists, computationalists and representationalists (which tend obviously to be inter-
nalists) to grant that the story is more complex. Take for example Piccinini, an avid
defender of “neurocognitive computationalism”, who says the following, “Thus, a
complete explanation of cognition may require, in addition to an appeal to [neuro]
computation, an account of consciousness, representational content, embodiment,
and embeddedness. Computation may be insufﬁcient for some aspects of cognition,
but it may still be an important part of the explanation of most—or even all-cognitive
capacities” (2020, p. 245). Obviously, we still have a way to go here for rapproche-
ment, but it’s a start. It’s also worth noting that Piccinini’s concept of computation
and representation is very much divorced from functionalism, cognitivism, compu-
tationalism, Fodorianism, etc., and is multiscale (2020). He also acknowledges the
autonomy of social psychology and folk psychology, etc. As a side note, it’s also
worth mentioning that folk psychology, the autonomy of which is a frequent debate
in this neck of the woods, can be divorced from “scientiﬁc psychology” (cognitivism)
and from internalism more generally.

624
M. Silberstein
None of this is to deny that new things we learn about the brain such as those
discussed in Sect. 3, won’t lead to major revisions in both folk and cognitive
psychology. For example, I think the multiscale network picture outlined herein
shows how the emergence and autonomy of folk and cognitive psychology is
possible, but it also shows the limits of that autonomy. That is, in such multiscale
interdependent networks, one cannot screen off neural processes from belief/desire
psychology, cognitive psychology, and social psychology the way some cognitivists
suggest. This is because such neural processes are only a necessary component
at best, in a much vaster multiscale network with which they share strong inter-
dependence and co-determination. What in part makes possible the emergence of
belief/desire psychology, sociality, and various cognitive functions is the plastic
nature of nervous systems and brains. This in part guarantees coupling with all
aspects of the environment and one another, rather than being cognitively closed
systems.
Thus, the standard metaphysical relations invoked by cognitivists and philoso-
phers of mind such as realization, supervenience and other modal and synchronic
relations, simply don’t apply to the kinds of rapidly changing multiscale dynamical
networks under discussion here. Unlike even some who champion 4E cognition, it
is important to understand that the issue here isn’t simply one of extending the real-
ization or supervenience base for minds into the body and environment, rather, the
contextually emergent-network model herein is a complete rejection of that foun-
dationalist and hierarchical way of looking at the world, both metaphysically and
physically.
Finally, I would be remiss if I didn’t point out that there is push back from some
philosophers of mind and philosophers of neuroscience against the sort of anti-
reductionist arguments herein. For example, Zerilli grants that multiple realizability
(MR) is an empirical question and he grants much what I’ve said herein but, is
skeptical about “true multiple realization” (MR) and thus skeptical that it counts as
an argument against reductionism or some sort of mind-brain identity theory (2021,
Chap. 8). Part of the problem with this discussion is that while everyone agrees that
MR means difference underlying sameness, i.e., truly causally distinct mechanisms
underlying the same cognitive function or content of conscious experience, there is no
set agreement on what counts as truly causally distinct or same function. That is, there
is little consensus on the necessary and sufﬁcient conditions for MR, what constitutes
causally relevant differences in the mechanism, or what constitutes truly different
ways to “bring about” the same function that deﬁnes the kind. In short, whether
MR is true depends on how tightly or weakly one deﬁnes the “mechanism” and the
“function” in question. No one would deny that lots of different animals, insects, etc.,
utilize different mechanisms such as electrical ﬁelds and magnetic ﬁelds to perform
general functions such as navigation and communication (electroreception). The MR
skeptic clearly has a different target.
What makes two causal mechanisms truly causally distinct? Polger and Shapiro
assert that “multiple realization occurs if and only if two (or more) systems perform
the same function in different ways” (2016, p. 45). Thusly, Zerilli argues crossmodal
plasticity and supramodal plasticity are not evidence of MR because, for example,

Context is King: Contextual Emergence in Network Neuroscience …
625
the auditory cortex came to resemble the visual cortex, i.e., the auditory cortex came
to take on the same columnar organization as the visual cortex (2021, p. 141), and
therefore this is not a case of truly distinct causal mechanisms underlying the same
function. My opening response is that if the brain or any complex biological system
can under certain contexts or conditions, convert itself or some sub-region of itself
into a distinct causal mechanism in order to mimic the damaged mechanism, that
should count as MR par excellence! I would also reply that surely degeneracy by
deﬁnition counts as MR. And as Barrett acknowledges degeneracy is a real feature
of brains. This is an empirical claim of course and is subject to revision in light
of further data. But for now, I’ll take the word of leading neuroscientists. Perhaps
neural degeneracy is rare, but even so, it is proof in principle of MR. Even in cases of
reuse, redeployment or recontextualization, if a particular cognitive function can at
different times have different workings subserve them, even if those workings do not
morph into new mechanisms in the process, that should count as MR with respect to
those cognitive functions.
Many of us would argue that convergent evolution provides more such cases of
MR. The standard deﬁnition of convergent evolution is as follows: the causally inde-
pendent evolution of similar functional features or evolutionary strategies in species
of different periods or epochs in time. Convergent evolution creates analogous struc-
tures that have similar form or function but were not present in the last common
ancestor of those groups. The idea is that the same function, behavior, evolutionary
strategy or even roughly the same mechanism comes into being in causally inde-
pendent circumstances as the result of environmental and evolutionary pressures.
Sometimes in such cases the same mechanism (or partial mechanism) arises inde-
pendently to perform the same function and sometimes the mechanism is different.
For example, ﬂying as an evolutionary strategy appears again and again a la conver-
gent evolution, but the mechanism can be very different, e.g., bats, birds, various
insects and ﬂying squirrels. However, such cases don’t rise to the level of true MR
for the skeptic because “ﬂying” is too general a function.
There are other cases of convergent evolution where almost the same mechanism
appears independently across time, to perform a very similar function. For example,
the brain architecture of the DVR (Dorsal Ventricular Ridge) in reptiles developed
independently from the mammalian neocortex, but they share a good deal of struc-
ture and function, in part due to evolutionarily conserved neural circuits (Yamashita
and Nomura, 2017, p. 302). Another example, birds, whose neural architecture
also developed independently, do not have a mammalian-neocortex as such, but the
avian pallium contains circuits homologous to those of the mammalian neocortex
(Wada et al., 2017, p. 285). However, it is very likely that the genetic and develop-
mental mechanisms and pathways that form the avian columnar circuit formation are
different (Wada et al., 2017, p. 285). That is, while the neocortex of mammals and
the pallium of birds share similar mechanisms and functions, the neural and genetic
mechanisms that explain the development and placement of those neural structures is
different. There are other more straightforward cases of convergent evolution such as
eyes like ours, photosynthesis, sex as a strategy, nervous systems or nerve nets, etc.
But as long as the mechanism remains the same or the function deﬁned is too broad

626
M. Silberstein
(e.g., dolphins and monkeys respectively herding prey), the MR skeptic is likely to
be unimpressed.
There is an argument however that I believe shows that natural selection trumps
the existence of speciﬁc mechanisms, and thus is a case of contextual emergence.
What emerges are various universal mechanisms, behaviors, strategies, cognitive
functions, etc., as the result of the contextual constraints given by certain speciﬁc
evolutionary environments, as well as more general evolutionary principles such as
the idea that the organisms that are most adaptive are most likely to survive and
thrive. And the most adaptive will be the animals with the most general intelligence.
Here is the argument in a nutshell:
1.
Natural selection and thermodynamics are universal, so as to include not only
all of Earth but other planets, etc.
2.
Therefore, without knowing anything else about an environment or planet, the
evolutionary environment of selection will allow us to predict what traits, etc.,
organisms are likely to possess. If the environment has tall trees, high elevations,
deep dark cold waters, low oxygen, etc., natural selection will allow us to predict
with a high degree of accuracy what sorts of traits and evolutionary strategies
have emerged regardless of knowledge of implementing mechanisms. Certainly,
many different features of the environment, biological, physical and otherwise,
will place constraints on what is possible, but otherwise natural selection will
be the determining factor. Natural selection tells us that no matter what sort of
mechanisms might be available in different planetary contexts or even on other
planets,whilethemechanismscananddovary,certaintraitswillcomeintobeing
via one set of mechanisms or another. And this has happened here on Earth in
the form of convergent evolution. Natural selection transcends any particular
mechanistic account of a particular cognitive function. As Godfrey-Smith puts
it, “evolution sometimes builds a range of different structures that carry the same
function” (2020, p. 91). As he points out, crustaceans and other animals do not
have a cerebral cortex, visual centers or pain related mechanisms such as our
own, and yet they have the same functions and probably subjective experience as
well (p. 91). His favorite example of convergent evolution is the nervous system
of the octopus. The nervous system of the octopus is highly decentralized with
two-thirds of the neurons not in the brain but in the tenacles, delegation of
limb control is decentralized to some extent with each tenacle able to explore
and multiply-sense the environment independently, and there is no body-map
within their brain, thus orientation in space happens differently somehow, and
they have a big optic lobe behind each eye with dedicated processing to that
eye only (pp. 129–30). There is also the obvious example of creatures with very
small brains (one hundred thousand neurons or less) such as bees and spiders,
who nonetheless by neural mechanisms that must be quite different and perhaps
less varied in many ways, manage to have sophisticated visual capacities and
other sensory modalities, complex motor control, navigation, communication,
problem solving and in some cases sociality and cooperation.

Context is King: Contextual Emergence in Network Neuroscience …
627
3.
Speciﬁc biological mechanisms such as evolutionarily conserved neural circuits
are going to be a function of various historically contingent constraints, and thus
such mechanisms can differ greatly, especially if we consider radically different
environments, different planets, etc. There is no good evolutionary reason for
example that DNA, RNA, neurons, etc., need be the implementing mechanisms,
these are contingent facts. For example, here on Earth some bacteria-killing
viruses called bacteriophages replace adenine with 2-aminoadenine. To quote
Zhou, “life doesn’t have to be GTAC, life can be more diverse” (Zhou, 2021).
The genome of single-celled plankton (dinoﬂagellates) is organized into alter-
nating unidirectional blocks, as opposed to being random. This changes the
three-dimensional structure of the genome into rod-shaped chromosomes and
the structure is strangely dependent on transcriptional activity. Other oddities
include: few transcription factors in their genome, they do not alter gene expres-
sion in response to environmental changes, and unlike other eukaryotes, instead
of the exclusive use of histones to structure their DNA, they use viral proteins
incorporated into their genome long ago. This may in part explain why their
genome structure is so different. As Salazar notes, “It shows that nature can work
in a completely different way than we thought. There are many possibilities for
how life could have evolved” (2020). Many others make the same point, “The
fundamental forces at work in evolution are independent of which molecules
interact with which and how” (Kershenbaum, 2020, p. 46).
4.
If an environment is complex, changing and challenging enough, natural selec-
tion will favor the most adaptive organisms—biologically, behaviorally and
cognitively. The most adaptive organisms will be the most plastic and robust
organisms. Those whose nervous systems and embodiment are plastic enough
to enable the most universally adaptive strategies in the face of environmental
changes, such as sociality, tool use and language. Therefore, it is not surprising
that a number of disparate animals on Earth such as octopuses, bees, crows,
dogs, dolphins and primates, etc., evolve, to one degree or another, certain
universal strategies, skills, modes of learning, etc., such as motor control and
perception, motility, predictive coding perhaps, memory of various sorts, mental
time travel, sociality and cooperation, communication and language, culture,
tool use, etc. The selective advantage of general intelligence generally and the
selective advantage of all the aforementioned speciﬁc skills and cognitive func-
tions is well documented across all life on Earth. Natural selections dictate,
that when constraints allow, these same strategies and cognitive functions will
emerge over and over across disparate environments, on different planets, with
disparate mechanisms, as they already have on Earth.
Take the strategy of sleep for example. While experts still debate the various
possible functions of sleep, it is ubiquitous across species. There is now evidence
that sleep even predates animals with brains and central nervous systems, e.g., Hydra
(Kanaya, 2020, p. 1). Amongst those animals who sleep and do have nervous systems,
thereisevidenceofMR.Sleep-likestatesareconservedacrossmostspecies,butusing
different mechanisms (Hayashi and Lui, 2017, p. 343). For example, hypocretin has

628
M. Silberstein
a crucial role in maintaining waking states in mammals. Invertebrates have no homo-
logue, but in fruit ﬂies for instance, neuropeptide pigment dispersing factor (PDF)
is critical in regulating circadian rhythms and wakefulness (Hayashi and Lui, 2017,
p. 360). Different neural circuits, neurochemicals, hormones and genes are engaged
in sleep regulation in different animals. There is simply no universal mechanism or
molecular pathway that encodes sleepiness or wakefulness.
All of this gives us a big clue as to the nature of the human brain and to why
humans are quantitatively if not qualitatively more intelligent than other species on
Earth. We are the most adaptive creatures with the most general intelligence in part
because our brains, nervous systems and bodies maximize plasticity and robustness.
Thus, we are very responsive and adaptive to internal changes and environmental
changes, i.e., our brains, bodies, etc., are ‘engines’ of plasticity and robustness.
Which means in fact that our cognitive systems and ways of being are very open
to environmental changes and what’s more, as Social Neuroscience predicts, there
will be all sorts of positive feedback relationships (for instance) between our cultural
advances such as tool use, sociality and language and our brain development and
activity. In this bio-psycho-social process of potentially ever-increasing plasticity,
various boot-strapping processes involving speciﬁc cognitive functions, biological
mechanisms and speciﬁc technologies converge, get integrated, get repurposed, and
get iterated into ever more complex patterns of development. Which is to say, human
beings are not just brains or brains and bodies, but they are temporally extended
multiscale bio-psycho-social networks. And as I will stress in what follows, key
“design” principles, such as plasticity and robustness are themselves MR and not
fully explicable in any mechanistic fashion.
One might wonder why neo-mechanists resist the reality of MR. Perhaps part of
the answer lies in the fact that the best argument for MR harkens back to a time when
functionalism (generally computational) in philosophy of mind and cognitive science
was ascendant. During that period functionalists often felt justiﬁed in ignoring neuro-
mechanistic details and the brain more generally (the stuff that goes in those boxes in
thecognitivist“boxological”computationaldiagram),becauseimplementingmecha-
nisms were viewed as secondary. Fodor and others famously used functionalist-based
MR as an argument against type-type identity theory. Regardless of one’s evaluation
of such arguments in the past, it should be clear that I am not invoking functionalism
of any sort and rather than ignoring neuroscience and evolution, I’m using them to
make my case.
However, in light of the preceding, it would be absurd to believe that certain cogni-
tive functions such as speciﬁc types of memory, won’t occur even on other planets,
and (even on this planet) equally absurd to believe that such occurrences will always
involve the same mechanisms. The idea that there is some law or identity relation
that universally links cognitive functions or even worse speciﬁc mental contents and
speciﬁc mechanisms or brain states, wreaks of the supernatural, not scientiﬁcally
grounded naturalism. This is the sort of magical metaphysical thinking that allows
some to take Putnam’s brains-in-vats and Boltzmann brains seriously.
All of this brings me back to the much more-Earthly topic of MR and neural
networks. Discussions of MR rarely have multiscale networks in mind. Therefore,

Context is King: Contextual Emergence in Network Neuroscience …
629
allow me to elaborate my MR argument with networks at the center. As we discussed
earlier, the brain’s networks featuring “small-worldness”, “rich-clubbyness” with
hubs, and “scale-freeness”, are universal topological/organizational features. Indeed,
the neural architecture of many different insects and animals exhibit such topolog-
ical features and such features appear early in the development of individual organ-
isms. The reason for this is clear. Those topological features maximize plasticity and
robustness with respect to both internal and environmental perturbations, and thus
they maximize adaptability.
Certainly, mechanistic explanations can advert to such organizational features in
principle, if by “organizational features” one means some representation (however
abstract) of the spatiotemporal, causal and dynamical relationships between various
components. What I’m denying however, is that network explanations are nothing but
maps or representations (however abstract) of such componential relationships. This
is true not only because the nodes and edges in network explanations need not refer to
components and their relations directly, but because the behavior of the components
is often determined by or constrained by the global organizational feature of in this
case, small-worldness. It is because network properties (or order parameters in the
dynamical case) can represent/alter the global state of the system (or some sub-set
of it) that one can change the behavior of the various components by tweaking the
network properties.
Why are such global network constraints so prevalent, so often multiply realized
in complex biological and cognitive systems even though processes at smaller scales
often happen at very different time scales than the processes at larger scales they
support? There is often a rapid turnover of entities and states at the smaller scales
creating real world multiple realizability that belies any simplistic account of compo-
sition and realization. My answer is that those global topological features, once in
place, in turn constrain the behavior of the ever-changing constituents in order to
maintain the relevant efﬁcacious topological features. The multiscale and global co-
determination and causal dependency involved in such systems looks nothing like the
functionalist’s MR wherein the same cognitive functions are “realized” by distinct
biological mechanisms. Nor does real world MR in networks look like localization
and decomposition. The autonomy of functional and topological networks and the
autonomy of other global organizing principles in the brain has nothing to do with
realization relations or brute identity relations, it has to do with contextually emergent
causally open networks.
For any particular synchronic-frame or still-shot of a biological system at a time t
with some duration d, the determining features include diachronic multiscale inter-
actions (context sensitivity) and global constraints outside the time-slice in question
that cannot even be assigned a scale or ‘level.’ That is, when it comes to such complex
biological systems one should take the word process very seriously and understand
that such systems are spatially, temporally, functionally and in a thin sense, tele-
ologically extended. This is not to deny of course that there are a variety of both
global-to-local and local-to-global determination relations involved in such systems.
This alone should be enough to dispense with talk of realization and the like.

630
M. Silberstein
Thus, once we see that, per contextual emergence, global topological network
properties and other organizing principles do not “supervene” on and are not “real-
ized” by structural components as such, there is little reason to think that topolog-
ical explanations are reductionist or mechanistic in the sense of localization and
decomposition. As Love notes:
First, reciprocal interactions between genetic and physical causes does not conform to the
expectations that mechanism descriptions ‘bottom-out’ in lower-level activities of molec-
ular entities (Darden, 2006). The interlevel nature of the causal dynamics between genetic
and physical factors runs counter to this expectation and is not amenable to an interpreta-
tion in terms of nested mechanisms realizing another mechanism. Second, the reciprocal
interaction between genetic and physical causes does not require stable, compositional orga-
nization, which is a key criterion for mechanisms (Craver and Darden, 2013). The productive
continuity of a sequence of genetic and physical difference-makers can be maintained despite
changes in the number and types of elements in a mechanism. Although compositional differ-
ences can alter relationships of physical causation (ﬂuid ﬂow or tension), these relationships
do not require the speciﬁcity of genetic interaction predominant in most mechanistic expla-
nations from molecular biology. (The multiple realizability of CPM outcomes is central to
this conclusion). Standard mechanistic strategies of representation and explanation appear
inadequate to capture these mechanisms” (Love, 2018, p. 341; see also Love, 2012, p. 120
and Love & Hüttemann, 2011).
In such cases, global constraints and organizing principles and multi-scale contexts
determine the behavior of the parts, not primarily or solely the other way around.
With contextual emergence, global constraints and other kinds of context sensitivity
are fundamentally at play. As Broad puts it, “[A]n emergent quality is roughly a
quality which belongs to a complex as a whole and not to its parts” (Broad, 1925,
p. 23). According to him, if the properties of an irreducible whole are not given by
the properties of the basic parts in isolation, they are emergent (see Humphreys, 2016
for more details). For Broad, the global or systemic properties P of a system S are
only reducible when the parts in isolation are sufﬁcient to explain the existence of P.
That is, there is reducibility when P can be derived or predicted in principle from the
parts of S in isolation or when embedded in simpler systems (Stephan, 1992, p. 55).
Contextual emergence emphasizes the ontological and explanatory fundamen-
tality of multiscale contextual constraints, often operating globally over intercon-
nected, interdependent, and interacting entities and their relations at multiple scales,
e.g., topological constraints and organizational constraints in complex biological
systems. In (Silberstein, 2021) I argued at length that such multiscale contextual
constraints and global organizing principles such as network topology, plasticity,
degeneracy, robustness, autonomy, and universality, which are mostly deﬁnitely
multiply realized in complex biological systems, cannot possibly be explained in
terms of localization and decomposition. Not only are these organizing principles
global by deﬁnition, but we see them repeatedly instantiated over and over in many
different biological systems and kinds, and they remain invariant over vast changes
in structural dynamics.
Thus, such organizing principles are themselves MR. I happily predict that, as with
natural selection, in untold planets across the universe one will ﬁnd these organizing
principles at work regardless of the physical or biological nature of the organisms in

Context is King: Contextual Emergence in Network Neuroscience …
631
question. Perhaps this is some comfort to the token or type identity theorist? If so, I’m
not sure what we are arguing about, because the autonomy and invariance of these
organizational principles is best explained by their co-causal and co-determinative
nature as contextual constraints. Maybe wherever we ﬁnd these organizing principles
and multiscale networks we will ﬁnd similar minds with similar content, but I don’t
think this is the kind of reductionism the identity theorist was hoping for.
Does the identity theorist really believe that after mastering comparative cogni-
tion and neuroscience on Earth and Astrobiology, that we will ﬁnd that the same
cognitive functions and social structures are always subserved by “the same” biolog-
ical mechanisms? Why in the name of natural selection and systems biology would
anyone believe such a thing? Please don’t misunderstand me, I don’t doubt that there
are many universal constraints on plasticity and other organizing principles of cogni-
tive systems. Such constraints might include physical, molecular, evolutionary (e.g.,
canalization, etc.). What these constraints are is an empirical question. As noted, I
also don’t doubt the existence of universally conserved mechanisms across evolu-
tionary time scales, at least relative too particular evolutionary histories such as here
on Earth. What this tells is that some mechanisms are more invariant than others.
But what is the explanation for the invariance? I argue in (Silberstein, 2021) that the
answer again is contextual emergence. Such mechanisms do what they do not for
any nativist reasons, but because of their being shaped for maximal invariance by
contingent evolutionary processes—which is of course more context. Part of how
this works is that such conserved mechanisms carry with them the internally relevant
context that allows them to function. It is contextual emergence that allows complex
multiscale networks to maximize robustness and autonomy and thus adaptability.
To believe that wherever in the universe one ﬁnds certain cognitive functions or
mental contents, one will also ﬁnd literally “the same” underlying mechanism, is a
strange piece of metaphysical magical thinking that has nothing to do with science
so far as I can tell. What kind of laws would this be? Why should one believe in
such brute identities? Again, these are empirical questions. It could happen that after
intense analysis of all the different animals on Earth including cephalopods, birds,
etc., andactual alienspecies, that wewill ﬁndsomereal mechanisticinvarianceacross
all of it. However, if one had to place a bet now, the most universal, powerful and
explanatory invariances would not be speciﬁc mechanisms, but topological networks
and other global organizing principles.
Once again, and this is crucial, per contextual emergence and the multiscale
network picture painted herein, the debate about which lower-level or smaller-scale
neural mechanisms subserve particular cognitive functions simply misses the point.
In such networks the explanation for various cognitive functions and mental contents
willbemultiscaleandthedeterminationinsuchnetworkswillalsobemultiscale.This
and all the preceding leads me to seriously doubt that there is any strong argument
based in neural mechanisms against MR properly understood. Given this multiscale
network picture, MR exists and is to be expected. Of course, maybe there are real
brute physical or metaphysical identity relations between speciﬁc cognitive func-
tions/mental states and speciﬁc neural mechanisms. But again, this strikes me as a

632
M. Silberstein
decidedly spooky and unscientiﬁc idea, to really believe for example that congen-
ital brains-in-a-vat or Boltzmann brains would be having thoughts and experiences
exactly like our own is beyond me. How is this any less spooky than the idea of
brute psychophysical bridge-laws as espoused by strong emergentists? Indeed, how
is it any different than that idea? After all, even dreaming brains, brains in sensory
deprivation tanks, and brains in deep meditation produce very different contents and
experiences.
If after all this one still insists that mechanistic reduction or some other form of
ontological reductionism is the right picture here, then I can only imagine two reasons
for that. Either they think I have the facts wrong, or they have a vastly different idea
of mechanistic or ontological reductionism than deﬁned herein. Whichever the case,
I eagerly await their reply. For my part, I think it’s already clear that evolution and
history are on the side of contextual emergence.
Bibliography
Alexander, S. (1920). Space, time, and deity: The gifford lectures at glasgow 1916–1918, Vols. 1
and 2. Macmillan.
Allefeld, C., Atmanspacher, H., & Wackermann, J. (2009). Mental states as macrostates emerging
from EEG dynamics. Chaos, 19, 015102.
Anderson, P. W. (1972). More Is different. Science, 177, 393–396.
Anderson, P. W. (2000). Brainwashed by Feynman? Physics Today., 53(2), 11–14.
Anderson, P. W. (2011). More and different: Notes from a thoughtful curmudgeon. World Scientiﬁc.
Anderson, M. L. (2010). Neural reuse: A fundamental organizational principle of the brain.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 33, 245–313.
Anderson, M. L. (2014). After phrenology: Neural reuse and the interactive brain. MIT Press.
Anderson, M. L. (2016). “Précis of after phrenology: Neural reuse and the interactive brain
behavioral and brain sciences”. 39, 1–22.
Anderson, M.L. (2020). “Neural reuse: A fundamental organizational principle of the brain.” 2010
Aug; 33(4), 245–66; discussion 266–313. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X10000853.
Atasoy, S., Roseman, L., Kaelen, M., et al. (2017). Connectome-harmonic decomposition of human
brain activity reveals dynamical repertoire re-organization under LSD. Science and Reports, 7,
17661. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-017-17546-0
Atmanspacher, H., & Graben, P. B. (2007). Contextual emergence of mental states from
neurodynamics. Chaos and Complexity Letters, 2(2/3), 151–168.
Bassett, D.S., & Sporns, O. (2017). “Network Neuroscience.” Nature Neuroscience, 20(3). https://
doi.org/10.1038/nn.4502.
Bassett,D.S.,Zurn,P.,&Gold,J.I.(2018).Onthenatureanduseofmodelsinnetworkneuroscience.
Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 19, 566–578. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41583-018-0038-8
Batchelor, G. (1967). An introduction to ﬂuid dynamics. Cambridge University Press.
Bateson, P., & Gluckman, P. (2011). Plasticity, robustness, development and evolution. CUP.
Batterman, R. W., & Rice, C. C. (2014). Minimal model explanations. Philosophy of Science, 81(3),
349–376.
Batterman, R. (2015). “Autonomy and scales: In why more is different. Philosophical issues in
condensed matter physics and complex systems.” Springer. 115–135.
Baumgartner, M., & Gebharter, A. (2015). Constitutive relevance, mutual manipulability, and fat-
handedness. The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science. https://doi.org/10.1093/bjps/
axv003

Context is King: Contextual Emergence in Network Neuroscience …
633
Baumgartner, M., & Casini, L. (2017). An abductive theory of constitution. Philosophy of Science,
84(2), 214–233.
Bechtel, W. (2010). “Dynamic mechanistic explanation: Computational modeling of circadian
rhythms as an exemplar for cognitive science.” Studies in History and Philosophy of Science.
Bechtel, W., & Richardson, R. C. (2010). Discovering complexity: Decomposition and localization
as strategies in scientiﬁc research (2nd ed.). MIT Press.
Bechtel, W. (2011). Mechanism and biological explanation. Philosophy of Science, 78(4), 533–558.
Bechtel, W., & Abrahamsen, A. (2011). “Complex biological mechanisms: Cyclic, oscillatory, and
autonomous.” In C. A. Hooker (Ed.) Philosophy of complex systems.
Bechtel, W., & Abrahamsen, A. (2013). Thinking dynamically about biological mechanisms:
Networks of coupled oscillators. Foundations of Science, 18, 707–723.
Bechtel, W. (2017). “Explicating top-down causation using networks and dynamics.” Philosophy
of Science.
Bechtel, W. (2017). “Top-down causation in biology and neuroscience: Control hierarchies.” In:
M.P. Paolini, & F. Orilia (Eds.) Philosophical and scientiﬁc perspectives on downward causation.
Routledge.
Bechtel, W. (2017). Systems biology: Negotiating between holism and reductionism. In S. Green
(Ed.). Philosophy of systems biology: Perspectives from scientists and philosophers. Springer.
Bechtel, W. (2018). The importance of constraints and control in biological mechanisms: Insights
from cancer research. Philosophy of Science, 85(4), 573–593.
Bechtel, W. (2019). Analysing network models to make discoveries about biological mechanisms.
The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 70(2), 459–484.
Bechtel, W. (2020). Hierarchy and levels: Analysing networks to study mechanisms in molecular
biology. Phil Trans r Soc B, 375, 20190320. https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2019.0320
Becker, A. (2018). What is real? The unﬁnished quest for the meaning of quantum physics. Basic
Books.
Bedau, M. (2008). Is weak emergence just in the mind? Minds and Machines, 18, 443–459.
Bedau, M., & Humphreys, P. (Eds.). (2008). Emergence: Contemporary readings in philosophy and
science. MIT Press.
Bedau, M. (2010). “Two varieties of causal emergentism.” In A. Corradini, & T. O’Connor (Eds.)
Emergence in science and philosophy. Routledge studies in the philosophy of science, (Vol. 14,
pp. 46–63) Routledge.
Bertolero, M.A., & Bassett, D.S. (2020). “On the nature of explanations offered by network science:
A perspective from and for practicing neuroscientists.” Topics in Cognitive Science (2020) 1–22.
https://doi.org/10.1111/tops.12504.
Biology
and
Philosophy
(2007).
bioRxiv
preprint.
Sep.
4,
2018;
22,547–563.
http://dx.doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1101/408278.
Bishop, R. C. (2005). Patching physics and chemistry together. Philosophy of Science, 72, 710–722.
Bishop, R. C., & Atmanspacher, H. (2006). Contextual emergence in the description of properties.
Foundations of Physics, 36, 1753–1777.
Bishop, R. C. (2008). What could be worse than the butterﬂy effect? The Canadian Journal of
Philosophy, 38, 519–548.
Bishop, R. C. (2008). Downward causation in ﬂuid convection. Synthese, 160, 229–248.
Bishop, R. C. (2011). Metaphysical and epistemological issues in complex systems. In C. Hooker
(Ed.) Philosophy of complex systems, Volume 10 of Handbook of the Philosophy of Science,
119–150.
Bishop, R. C. (2012). Fluid convection, constraint and causation. Interface Focus, 2, 4–12.
Bishop, R., Silberstein, M. (2019). Complexity and feedback. In The Routledge handbook of
emergence. In S. Gibb, R. Hendry, & T. Lancaster. Routledge.
Bishop, R., Silberstein, M., & Pexton, M. (forthcoming). Emergence in context. Oxford University
Press.
Bishop, R.C., & Silberstein, M. (2019). “Emergence and complexity.” Routledge handbook of
emergence, in S. Gibb, R. F. Hendry, & T. (Eds.) (pp. 145–156). Lancaster.

634
M. Silberstein
Bliss, R., & Priest, G. (2018). The geography of fundamentality: An overview. In Reality and its
structure: Essays in fundamentality Bliss & Priest (Eds.). Oxford University Press.
Boi, L. (2017). The interlacing of upward and downward causation in complex living systems: on
interactions, self-organization, emergence and wholeness. In M. P. Paolini & F. Orilia (Eds.),
Philosophical and scientiﬁc perspectives on downward causation. Routledge.
Brigandt, I. (2013). Systems Biology and the integration of mechanistic explanation and mathe-
matical explanation. Ingo Brigandt—2013—Studies in History and Philosophy of Biological and
Biomedical Sciences 44(4), 477–492.
Brigandt, I., Green, S., O’Malley, M. (2018). Systems biology and mechanistic explanation. Ingo
brigandt, sara green and maureen O’Malley—2018—, in S. Glennan & P.M. Illari (Eds.), The
Routledge handbook of mechanisms and mechanical philosophy (pp. 362–374). Routledge.
Broad, C.D. (1925). The mind and its place in nature, London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1st ed.
Burnston, D. C. (2016a). “Computational neuroscience and localized neural function.” Synthese,
1–22. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11229-016-1099-8.
Burnston, D. C. (2016b). “A contextualist approach to functional localization in the brain.” Biology
and Philosophy, 1–24. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10539-016-9526-2.
Burnston, D. C. (In preparation-c). “Getting over atomism: Functional decomposition in complex
neural systems.”
Busse, F. (1978). Non-linear properties of thermal convection. Reports on Progress in Physics, 41,
1929–1967.
Cacioppo, S., & Cacioppo, J.T. (2020). “Introduction to social neuroscience.” Princeton University
Press, School ed.
Calzavarini, F., & Viola, M. (2020). “Neural mechanisms: New challenges in the philosophy of
neuroscience (Studies in Brain and Mind, 17).” Springer, 1st ed.
Casini, L. (2016). How to model mechanistic hierarchies. Philosophy of Science, 85(5), 946–958.
Caston, V. (1997). Epiphenomenalisms, ancient and modern. Philosophical Review, 106(3), 309–
363.
Caston, V. (2001). “Dicaearchus’ philosophy of mind”. In Fortenbaugh & Schu¨trumpf, pp. 175–93.
Cecil, C.A.M. (2020). “Biopsychosocial pathways to mental health and disease across the lifespan:
The emerging role of epigenetics.” In J. Savulescu, R. Roache, & W. Davies (Eds.) Psychiatry
reborn: Biopsychosocial psychiatry in modern medicine. 381–404. 190–206.
Chalmers, D. (1996). The conscious mind. In search of a fundamental theory. Oxford University
Press.
Chalmers, D. (2006). Strong and weak emergence. In P. Clayton & P. C. W. Davies (Eds.) The
re-emergence of emergence, (pp. 244–56). Oxford University Press.
Chemero, A., & Silberstein, M. (2008). After the philosophy of mind: Replacing scholasticism with
science. Philosophy of Science, 75(1), 1–27.
Colombo, M., & Weinberger, N. (2018). Discovering Brain Mechanisms Using Network Analysis
and Causal Modeling. Minds and Machines, 28(2), 265–286. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11023-
017-9447-0
Craver, C. Bechtel, W. (2007). “Top-down causation without top-down causes.”
Craver, C. F. (2007). Explaining the brain: Mechanisms and the mosaic unity of neuroscience.
Oxford University Press.
Craver, C. F. (2014). “The ontic account of scientiﬁc explanation. Explanation in the Special
Sciences” (pp. 27–52). Springer.
Craver, C. F. (2016). “The explanatory power of network models.” Philosophy of Science
(forthcoming).
Cross, M., & Hohenberg, P. (1993). Pattern formation outside of equilibrium. Reviews of Modern
Physics, 65, 851–1112.
Damicelli, F., Hilgetag, C. C., Hütt, M. T., & Messé, A. (2019). Topological reinforcement as a
principle of modularity emergence in brain networks. Network Neuroscience, 3(2), 589–605.
https://doi.org/10.1101/408278
Duhem, P. (1954). The aim and structure of physical theory. Princeton University Press.

Context is King: Contextual Emergence in Network Neuroscience …
635
Ehrenfest, P. (1917). Proc Amsterdam Acad, 20, 200.
Euler. L. (1736). “Solutio problematis and geometriam situs pertinentis.” Comment Acad Sci U
Petrop 8, 128–40.
Favela, L.H. (2019). “Integrated information theory: A complexity science approach to conscious-
ness.” Journal of Consciousness Studies 26(1–2), 21–47(27)
Favela, L.H. (2020). “The dynamical renaissance in neuroscience.” Synthese. September 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11229-020-02874-y.
Fazekas, P., & Kertesz, G. (2018). “Are higher mechanistic levels causally autonomous?” In: [2018]
PSA 2018: The 26th Biennial meeting of the philosophy of science association. 1–4 Nov 2018.
Feldman Barrett, L. (2020). Seven and a half lessons about the brain. Houghton Mifﬂin Harcourt.
Feldt Muldoon, S., & Bassett, D. S. (2016). Network and multilayer network approaches to
understanding human brain dynamics. Philosophy of Science, 83(5), 710–720.
Fox Keller, E. (2010). The mirage of a space between nature and nurture. Duke University Press.
Francis. R.C. (2011). The ultimate mystery of inheritance: Epi-Genetics. W. W. Norton and
Company.
Ganeri, J. (2011). Emergentisms, ancient and modern. Mind, 120, 671–703.
Gilbert, S., & David, E. (2009). Ecological developmental biology: Integrating epigenetics medicine
and evolution. Sinauer Associates, Inc.
Gillett. C. (2010). “Weak emergence and context-sensitive reduction.” In A. Corradini, & T.
O’Connor (Eds) Emergence in science and philosophy. Routledge Studies in the Philosophy
of Science (Vol. 314, pp. 25–46). Routledge.
Gillett, C. (2016). Reduction and emergence in science and philosophy. Cambridge University
Press.
Glennan, S. (2016). Mechanisms and mechanical philosophy. The Oxford of philosophy of science,
P. Humphreys (Ed.). Chp. 38.
Glennan, S. (2017). The new mechanical philosophy. Oxford University Press.
Glennan, S., & Illari, P. (2018). The Routledge handbook of the philosophy of mechanisms, in S.
Glennan & P. Illari (Eds.). Routledge.
Godfrey-Smith, P. (2020). Metazoa: Animal life and the birth of the mind. Farrar, Straus and Girouxs.
Green, S., Serban, M., Scholl, R., Jones, N., Brigandt, I., & Bechtel, W. (2018). Network analyses
in systems biology: New strategies for dealing with biological complexity. Synthese, 195(4),
1751–1777.
Hart, C. L. (2021). Drug use for grown ups: Chasing liberty in the land of fear. Penguin Press.
Hayashi, Y. Liu, C. (2017). “The evolution and function of sleep.” In S. Shigeno, Y. Murakami, & T.
Nomura (Eds.) Brain evolution by design: From neural origin to cognitive architecture (pp. 243–
366). Springer.
Handbook of the philosophy of science. (2012). Vol. 10, pp. 275–285, Elsevier.
Hilgetag. C.C., & Goulas, A. (2015). “Is the brain really as small-world network?”.
Hilgetag, C. C., & Goulas, A. (2020). ‘Hierarchy’ in the organization of brain networks. Phil. Trans.
r. Soc. B, 375, 20190319. https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2019.0319
Hoekstra, A., Chopard, B., & Coveney, P. (2014). Multiscale modelling and simulation: A position
paper. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A, 372, 20130377. https://doi.org/10.1098/
rsta.2013.0377
Hoffmann-Kolss, V. (2014). Interventionism and higher-level causation. International Studies in
the Philosophy of Science, 28(1), 49–64.
Holt, J. (2012). “Physicists, stop the churlishness”. New York Times Online.
Hooker, C (2011). “Conceptualising Reduction, Emergence and Self-Organization in Complex
Dynamical Systems.” Philosophy of Complex Systems, Hooker editor. Elsevier. 195–222.
Huang, Z., Zhang, J., Wu, J., Mashour, G. A., Hudetz, A. G., & Hütteman, A. (2005). Explanation,
Emergence, and Quantum Entanglement. Philosophy of Science, 72, 114–127.
Huang,Z.,Zhang,J.,Wu,J.,Mashour,G.A.,&Hudetz,A.G.(2020).“Temporalcircuitofmacroscale
dynamic brain activity supports human consciousness.” Cognitive Neuroscience 6(11). https://
doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.aaz0087

636
M. Silberstein
Humphreys, P. (1997). How properties emerge. Philosophy of Science, 64, 1–17.
Humphreys, P. (2016). Emergence. A philosophical account. Oxford University Press.
Huneman, P. (2008). “Emergence made ontological? Computational versus combinatorial
approaches.” Philosophy of science/ Vol. 75, No. 5, Proceedings of the 2006 Biennial Meeting
of the Philosophy of Science Association Part II: Symposia Papers, C. Bicchieri, & J. Alexander
(Dec=c 2008), pp. 595–607.
Huneman, P. (2010). Topological explanations and robustness in biological sciences. Synthese, 177,
213–245.
Huneman, P. (2018a). Diversifying the picture of explanations in biological sciences: Ways of
combining topology with mechanisms. Synthese, 195, 115–146.
Huneman, P. (2018b). Outlines of a theory of structural explanations. Philosophical Studies., 175,
665–702.
Hüttemann, A., & Love, A. C. (2011). Aspects of reductive explanation in biological science:
Intrinsicality, fundamentality, and temporality. British Journal for Philosophy of Science, 62,
519–549.
Hüttemann, A., & Love, A. C. (2016). Reduction. In P. Humphries (Ed.), The Oxford handbook of
philosophy of science (pp. 460–484). Oxford University Press.
Jablonka, E., & Lamb, M. (2005). Evolution in four dimensions: Genetic, epigenetic, behavioral,
and symbolic variation in the history of life. MIT Press.
Jaeger, L., & Calkins, E. R. (2012). Downward causation by information control in micro-organisms.
Interface Focus, 2, 26–41.
Jansson, L. (2020). Network explanations and explanatory directionality. Phil Trans r Soc B, 375,
20190318. https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2019.0318
Kanaya, H et al (2020). “A sleep-like state in Hydra unravels conserved sleep mechanisms during the
evolutionary development of the central nervous system.” Science Advances. 6(41), eabb9415.
https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.abb9415.
Kaiser, M. (2020). Changing connectomes: Evolution, development, and dynamics in network
neuroscience. The MIT Press.
Kaiser, M. I., & Krickel, B. (2017). The metaphysics of constitutive mechanistic phenomena.
The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 68(3), 745–779. https://doi.org/10.1093/bjps/
axv058
Kaplan, D.M. (2018). “Mechanics and dynamical explanation.” The Routledge handbook of
mechanisms and mechanical philosophy. S. Glennan (Ed.), pp. 267–80.
Kaplan, J. (2008). “Review of genes in development: Rereading the molecular paradigm.” M. Eva
(Ed.) Neumann-held and christoph rehmann-sutter. Biological Theory 2, 427–429.
Kellert, S. H., Longino, H. E., & Waters, C. K. (2006). Scientiﬁc pluralism. University of Minnesota
Press.
Kershenbaum, A. (2020). The zoologist’s guide to the galaxy: What animals on earth reveal aliens—
and ourselves. Penguin Press.
Kim, J. (1998). Mind in a physical world. The MIT Press.
Kim, J. (1999). Making sense of emergence. Philosophical Studies, 95, 3–36.
Kim, D. J., et al. (2019). Childhood poverty and the organization of structural brain connectome.
NeuroImage, 184, 409–416. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2018.09.041 Epub 2018 Sep
17.
Koonin, E.V. (2011). The logic of chance: The nature and origin of biological evolution, E.V. Koonin
(Ed.) p. 528. FT Press.
Kostic, D. (2018).The topological realization. Synthese 195 (1).
Kostic, D. (2020). General theory of topological explanations and explanatory asymmetry. Phil
Trans r Soc B, 375, 20190321. https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2019.0321
Kronz, F., & Tiehen, J. (2002). Emergence and quantum mechanics. Philosophy of Science, 69(2),
324–347.
Ladyman, J. (2017). “An apology for naturalised metaphysics.”
Laughlin, R. (2005). A different universe: Reinventing physics from the bottom down. Basic Books.

Context is King: Contextual Emergence in Network Neuroscience …
637
Laughlin, R. B., & Pines, D. (2000). The theory of everything. Stanford University.
Levy, N. (2013). “Addiction is Not a Brain Disease.” Front Psychiatry. 4, 24. Published online 2013
Apr 11. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyt.2013.00024
Levy, A., & Bechtel, W. (2016). “Towards mechanism 2.0: Expanding the scope of mechanistic
explanation.” In: [2016] PSA 2016: The 25th biennial meeting of the philosophy of science
association (Atlanta, GA; 3–5 November 2016) <http://philsci-archive.pitt.edu/view/confandvol/
confandvol2016PSA.html>. http://philsci-archive.pitt.edu/id/eprint/12567.
Love,A.C.(2012).Hierarchy,causationandexplanation:Ubiquity,locality,andpluralism.Interface
Focus, 2, 115–125.
Love, A. C. (2018). Developmental mechanisms. In S. Glennan & P. Illari (Eds.), The Routledge
handbook of the philosophy of mechanisms and mechanical philosophy (pp. 332–347). Routledge.
Love, A. C., & Hüttemann, A. (2011). Comparing part-whole explanations in biology and physics.
In D. Dieks, W. J. Gonzalez, S. Hartmann, T. Uebel, & M. Weber (Eds.), Explanation, prediction,
and conﬁrmation (pp. 183–202). Springer.
Mackie, J. L. (1965). Causes and conditions. American Philosophical Quarterly, 2, 245–264.
Maillé, S., & Lynn, M. (2020). Reconciling current theories of consciousness. Journal of
Neuroscience, 40(10), 1994–1996. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2740-19.2020
Markov, N. T. Ercsey-Ravasz, M., Van Essen, D.C., & Knoblauch, K. (2013). “Cortical high-density
counterstream architectures.” Science 342 (578).
Massimini, M., & Tononi, G. (2018). Sizing up consciousness. Oxford University Press.
Massimo, P. “Between holism and reductionism: A philosophical primer on emergence.” Biological
Journal of the Linnean Society 112(2), 261–267 https://doi.org/10.1111/bij.12060.
Matthiessen, D. (2017). Mechanistic Explanation in Systems Biology: Cellular Networks. The
British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 68, 1–25.
McConnell.D.(2020).“Specifyingthebestconceptionofthebiopsychosocialmodel.”InPsychiatry
reborn: Biopsychosocial psychiatry in modern medicine, J. Savulescu, R. Roache, & W. Davies
(Eds), pp. 381–404.
McNally, R. J. (2016). Can network analysis transform psychopathology? Behaviour Research and
Therapy, 86, 95–104.
Moreno, A., Ruiz-Mirazo, K., & Barandiaran, X. (2011). The impact of the paradigm of complexity
on the foundational frameworks of biology and cognitive science. In Philosophy of Complex
Systems, Hooker (Ed.) (pp. 311–333), Elsevier.
Morgan, L. (1923). Emergent evolution. Williams and Norgate.
Moroz, L., et al. (2014). The ctenophore genome and the evolutionary origins of neural systems.
Nature, 510, 109–114.
Nand, A., et al (2021). Genetic and spatial organization of the unusual chromosomes of the dinoﬂag-
ellate Symbiodinium microadriaticum, Nature Genetics (2021). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41588-
021-00841-y. Salazar quoted in.
Newen, A., de Bruin, A., Gallagher, S. (2018). Introduction. The Oxford handbook of 4E cognition.
A. Newen, A. de Bruin, & S. Gallagher (Eds.) Oxford University Press.
Morrison, M. (2015). Reconstructing reality: Models, mathematics, and simulations. Oxford
University Press.
Murphy, D. (2020). “Philosophy of psychiatry”. Murphy, Dominic, “Philosophy of psychiatry”,
The stanford encyclopedia of philosophy (Fall 2020 Edition), E.N. Zalta (ed.), https://plato.sta
nford.edu/archives/fall2020/entries/psychiatry/.
Nagel. E. (1961). The structure of science: Problems in the logic of scientiﬁc explanation. Harcourt,
Brace, and World.
Niquil, N., Haraldsson, M., Sime-Ngando, T., Huneman, P., & Borrett, S. R. (2020). Shifting levels
of ecological network’s analysis reveals different system properties. Phil Trans r Soc B, 375,
20190326. https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2019.0326
O’Connor, T. (1994). Emergent properties. American Philosophical Quarterly., 31(2), 91–104.
O’Connor, T., & Wong, H. (2005). The metaphysics of emergence. Noˇus, 39, 658–678.

638
M. Silberstein
O’Malley, M. A., Brigandt, I., Love, A. C., Crawford, J. W., Gilbert, J. A., Knight, R., Mitchell,
S. D., & Rohwer, F. (2014). Multilevel research strategies and biological systems. Philosophy of
Science, 81, 811–828.
Paolini, M.P., & OriliA, F. (2017). Philosophical and scientiﬁc perspectives on downward causation.
Routledge.
Parrington, J. (2021). Mind shift: How culture transformed the human brain. Oxford University
Press.
Paul, M., Chiam, K.-H., Cross, M., & Greenside, H. (2003). Pattern formation and dynamics
in rayleigh-bénard convection: Numerical simulations of experimentally realistic geometries.
Physica d: Nonlinear Phenomena, 184, 114–126.
Philosophy of Science, 83 (December 2016) 674–685.
Pigliucci, M. (2014). Between holism and reductionism: A philosophical primer on emergence.
Biological Journal of the Linnean Society., 112, 261–267.
Piccinini, G. (2020). Neurocognitive mechanisms: Explaining biological cognition. University
Press.
Povich, M., & Craver, C. F. (2018). Mechanistic levels, reduction, and emergence. M. Povich &
C. F. Craver—forthcoming—In S. Glennan & P.M. Illari (Eds.) The Routledge handbook of
mechanisms and mechanical philosophy. Routledge.
Primas, H. (1977). Theory reduction and non-Boolean theories. Journal of Mathematical Biology,
4, 281–301.
Raja, V., & Anderson, M.L. (2021). “Behavior considered as an enabling constraint.” In Neural
mechanisms: New challenges in the philosophy of neuroscience. Springer Neuroscience, F.
Calzavarini & M. Viola (Eds.), Chapter 9.
Rathkopf, C. (2018). Network representation and complex systems. Synthese, 2018(195), 55–78.
Rescher, N. (1993). Pluralism. Clarendon Press.
Richerson, P.J., Boyd, R., & Henrich, J. (2010). “Gene-culture coevolution in the age of genomics.”
PNAS May 11, 2010. 107 (Supplement 2), 8985–8992, ﬁrst published May 5, 2010, https://doi.
org/10.1073/pnas.0914631107.
Ross, L. (2015). “Dynamical Models and Explanation in Neuroscience.” Phil of sci, 82, jan 2015,
32–54.
Ruiz-Mirazo, K., & Moreno, A. (2012). Autonomy in evolution: From minimal to complex life.
Synthese, 185(1), 21–52.
Ruiz-Mirazo, K., Moreno, A. (2012). Autonomy in evolution: From minimal to complex life
Safron, A. (2020). An integrated world modeling theory (IWMT) of consciousness: Combining
integrated information and global neuronal workspace theories with the free energy principle
and active inference framework; toward solving the hard problem and characterizing agentic
causation. Front Artif Intell, 3, 30. https://doi.org/10.3389/frai.2020.00030
Scheinin, A. (2020). Foundations of human consciousness: Imaging the twilight zone. Journal of
Neuroscience. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0775-20.2020
Schirner, M., McIntosh, A. R., Jirsa, V., Deco, G., & Ritter, P. (2018). Inferring multi-scale neural
mechanisms with brain network modelling. eLife, 7, e28927. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.289
27.001
Serban, M. (2020). Exploring modularity in biological networks. Phil Trans r Soc B, 375, 20190316.
https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2019.0316
Shine, J. M., Breakspear, M., Bell, P. T., Ehgoetz, K. A., Richard Shine, M., Koyejo, O., Sporns,
O., & Poldrack, R. A. (2019). Human cognition involves the dynamic integration of neural activity
and neuromodulatory systems. Nature Neuroscience., 22, 289–296.
Silberstein, M. (1998). Emergence and the mind-body problem. Journal of Consciousness Studies,
5(4), 464–482.
Silberstein, M., & McGeever, J. (1999). The search for ontological emergence. Philosophical
Quarterly, 49, 201–214.

Context is King: Contextual Emergence in Network Neuroscience …
639
Silberstein, M. (2001) “Converging on emergence: Consciousness, causation and explanation”
Journal of Consciousness Studies 8(9–10), 61–98. Special issue: The Emergence of Conscious-
ness.
Silberstein, M., (2002). “Reduction, emergence, and explanation”, in The Blackwell guide to the
philosophy of science, Machamer, P., & M., Silberstein (Eds.) (pp. 203–226), Blackwell.
Silberstein, M. (2006). “In defense of ontological emergence and mental causation”, in The re-
emergence of emergence, P. Davies (Ed.), Chapter 9 (Oxford University Press).
Silberstein, M. (2009a). “Quantum Nonseparability and Mereology” in Philosophia Verlag
Handbook of Mereology. Seibt and Burkhard, Editors.
(2009b) “Emergence and consciousness” in Oxford companion to consciousness. T. Bayne, A.
Cleeremans, & P. Wilken (Eds.) Oxford University Press.
Silberstein, M. (2012). “Emergence and reduction in context: Philosophy of science and/or analytic
metaphysics”, Metascience. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11016-012-9671-4.
Silberstein, M., & Chemero, A. (2012). “Complexity and extended phenomenological-cognitive
systems” in G. Van Orden & D. Stephen (Eds.) Topics in cognitive science: Special issue on the
role of complex systems in cognitive science.
Silberstein, M., & Chemero, A. (2013). Constraints on localization and decomposition as
explanatory strategies in the biological sciences. Philosophy of Science, 80(5), 958–970.
Silcerstein. M. (2014). “Dynamics, systematicity and extended cognition” in P. Calvo & J. Symons
(Eds.) Systematicity and the post-connectionist era. MIT Press.
Silberstein, M. (2016). The implications of neural reuse for the future of cognitive neuroscience
and the future of folk psychology. Brain and Behavioral Sciences, 39, E132.
Silberstein, M. (2018). “Contextual emergence.” Special issue of philosophica on emergence 91,
45–92. A.D. Carruth, & J.T.M. Miller (Eds.).
Silberstein. M. (2021). “Constraints on localization and decomposition as explanatory strategies
in the biological sciences 2.0.” In F. Calzavarini, M. Viola (Eds.) Neural mechanisms: New
challenges in the philosophy of neuroscience. Springer neuroscience.
Slater, M.H., & Yudell, Z. (2017). Metaphysics and the philosophy of science: New essay. Kindle
Locations (pp. 3491–3492). Oxford University Press. Kindle Edition.
Spivey, M.J. (2020). Who you are: The science of connectedness. The MIT Press.
Solé, R., & Valverde, S. (2020). Evolving complexity: How tinkering shapes cells, software and
ecological networks. Phil Trans r Soc B, 375, 20190325. https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2019.0325
Stephan, A. (1992). Emergence—A systematic view on its historical aspects, in A. Beckermann
et al. (eds.), pp. 25–47.
Stinson, C. (2016). Mechanisms in psychology: Ripping nature at its seams. Synthese, 193(5),
1585–1614. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11229-015-0871-5
Thalos, M. (2013). Without hierarchy: The scale freedom of the universe. Oxford University Press.
Van Gulick, R. (2001). Reduction, emergence and other recent options on the mind/body problem:
A philosophic overview. Journal of Consciousness Studies, 8, 1–34.
Venturelli, N. A. (2016). A cautionary contribution to the philosophy of explanation in the cognitive
neurosciences A. Nicolás Venturelli Minds and Machines, 26(3), 259–285.
Weinan, E. (2011). Principles of multiscale modeling. Cambridge University Press.
Weinan, E., & Jianfeng, L. (2011). Multiscale modeling. Scholarpedia, 6(10), 11527.
Weinberg, S. (1995). Reductionism redux. The New York review of books. Reprinted in Weinberg,
Steven. 2001. Facing Up. Harvard University Press.
Weinberg, S. (2014). As quoted in, conceptual foundations of quantum theory. T.Y. Cao (Ed.) p. 260.
Weinberg, S. (2017). “The trouble with quantum mechanics.” http://quantum.phys.unm.edu/466-
17/QuantumMechanicsWeinberg.pdf.
Weiskopf, D. A. (2016). “Integrative modeling and the role of neural constraints.” Philosophy of
Science, 83(December 2016), 674–685.
Wilson, J. (2011). Non-reductive physicalism and degrees of freedom (2010). British Journal for
Philosophy of Science, 61, 279–311.

640
M. Silberstein
Wilson, J. (2013). A determinable-based account of metaphysical indeterminacy (2013). Inquiry,
56, 359–385.
Wilson, J. (2015). “Metaphysical emergence: Weak and strong.” In T. Bigaj & C. Wüthrich (Eds.),
Metaphysics in contemporary physics. Leiden-Boston, pp. 345–402.
Winning, J., & Bechtel, W. (2018). Rethinking causality in biological and neural mechanisms:
Constraints and control. Minds and Machines, 28(2), 287–310.
Winning, J. (2020). Mechanistic causation and constraints: Perspectival parts and powers, non-
perspectival modal patterns. Brit J Phil Sci, 71(2020), 1385–1409.
Wolf, Y. I., Karev, G., & Koonin, E. V. (2002). Scale-free networks in biology: New insights into
the fundamentals of evolution? BioEssays, 24(2), 105–109.
Woodward, J. (2003). Making things happen. Oxford University Press.
Yamashita, W., Nomura, T. (2017). “The Neocortex and dorsal ventricular ridge: Functional conver-
gence and underlying developmental mechanisms.” In Brain evolution by design: From neural
origin to cognitive architecture, S. Shigeno, Y. Murakami, T. Nomura (Eds.) (pp. 291–310),
Springer.
Zednik, C. (2011). The nature of dynamical explanation. Philosophy of Science, 78(2), 238–263.
Zednik, C. (2014). Are systems neuroscience explanations mechanistic? Preprint volume for
philosophy science association 24th biennial meeting (pp. 954–975). Philosophy of Science
Association.
Zednik. C. (2015). “Heuristics, descriptions, and the scope of mechanistic explanation.” In
Explanation in biology, (pp. 295–318), Springer.
Zednik, C. (2018). Models and mechanisms in network neuroscience. Philosophical Psychology,
32(1), 23–51.
Zerilli. J. (2020). The adaptable mind: What neuroplasticity and neural reuse tell us about language
and cognition. Oxford University Press.
Zbili, M., Rama, S., & Debanne, D. (2016). “Dynamic control of neurotransmitter release by
presynaptic potential.” Front Cell Neurosci 10, vv278. Published online 2016 Dec 5. https://doi.
org/10.3389/fncel.2016.00278
Zhou, Y., et al. (2021). A widespread pathway for substitution of adenine by diaminopurine in phage
genomes. Science. 372(April 30), 512. https://doi.org/10.1126/science. Abe 4882.
Zimmer, C. (2018). She has her mother’s laugh: The powers. Dutton Press.
Zurn, P., & Bassett, D. S. (2020). Network architectures supporting learnability. Phil Trans r Soc
B, 375, 20190323. https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2019.0323

From Electrons to Elephants: Context
and Consciousness
Michael Tye
John Donne said, “Nature’s great masterpiece, an elephant; the only harmless great
thing.” What is needed to build such a masterpiece?
We know that elephants, like everything else in the natural world, are made up
of sub-atomic particles. Some philosophers would say that you can build one out
of a very large boulder. You just have to take the boulder apart down to its sub-
atomic particles and re-arrange them suitably. But would the resulting entity really
be an elephant or just a microphysical duplicate of an elephant, indistinguishable
in itself from a real elephant? Further, are elephants literally one and the same as
aggregates of sub-atomic particles? Or are they something more? What is needed to
endow elephants with consciousness? These are the questions addressed in this essay.
The bulk of the essay concerns the last question. A partial answer is offered. Along
the way, I make some remarks about the so-called ‘hard problem of consciousness’
(Chalmers, 1995a, 1995b).
1
History Matters
Elephants belong to a particular biological species. What makes something an
elephant, in my view, is not just how it is internally but its biological history. You can’t
really make an elephant simply by putting together a fantastically complex arrange-
ment of sub-atomic particles that together constitute the putative elephant. Not even
God can do that. The wider context matters too. The arrangement of sub-atomic
particles has to have arisen naturally in the right way. History matters.
M. Tye (B)
Department of Philosophy, University of Texas at Austin, 2210 Speedway, Stop C3500, WAG
316, Austin, TX 78712-1737, USA
e-mail: mtye@austin.utexas.edu
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
S. Wuppuluri and I. Stewart (eds.), From Electrons to Elephants and Elections,
The Frontiers Collection, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-92192-7_34
641

642
M. Tye
Here’s an argument for this view. Suppose that you go in your spaceship to planet
Mercurius. As you walk around in the oxygen rich environment there, you see lying
on the ground something that perfectly resembles a Honda motorbike speedometer.
Is it really a Honda speedometer? No Honda factory exists there. Indeed you are
the ﬁrst human on Mercurius and you didn’t bring a speedometer with you. As you
explore further and meet the locals, you ﬁnd that there is a company on Mercurius
with the name ‘Honda’ that makes oil pressure gauges physically indistinguishable
from Honda speedometers. The thing you found is really one of these. What makes
it such is its history: it was designed to measure oil pressure. That’s why it is really
an oil pressure gauge and not a Honda speedometer. What goes for artiﬁcial design
goes for natural design too, or so it seems plausible to suppose. If you wander
around Mercurius and come across creatures that look exactly like elephants, it
doesn’t follow that they are elephants. If they are products of Mercurius without
any historical connection with Earth, they belong to another species, one not found
on earth though superﬁcially resembling our elephant species. Melephants are not
elephants.
So, this is my ﬁrst point: an elephant can’t be built just by combining a bunch
of sub-atomic particles in the right way so as to make the whole physically
indistinguishable from an elephant. Historical context is crucial.
2
Is an Elephant One and the Same as an Aggregate
of Sub-atomic Particles?
Suppose it is granted that what makes something an elephant is, in part, its history.
Still, isn’t the thing that is a particular elephant one and the same as an aggregate of
sub-atomic particles? Again, it’s not that simple. Consider a bunch of ﬂowers. That
isn’t just an aggregate of ﬂowers. If the ﬂowers are spread out in space, there is no
bunch of ﬂowers. A bunch of ﬂowers consists of various ﬂowers under the relation
of being bunched (Fine, 2003). Here is another example. Consider a corporation,
Apple, say. Apple isn’t just the aggregate of people who work for it. If these people
do not communicate with one another, no corporation at all exists. Apple consists of a
large number of people who are connected via the relation of working cooperatively
together in certain roles.
Returning now to the case of elephants, even if a given elephant isn’t one and the
same as just an aggregate of microparticles, can’t it be one and the same as a speciﬁc
group G of subatomic particles arranged elephant-wise (as we might put it).? The
answer is ‘No’. Identity is not relative to a time and the group of subatomic particles
in the spatial region occupied by the elephant varies through time. Furthermore,
the elephant surely does not have precise boundaries. There are many minimally
different overlapping groups of particles, each of which has as much right as any
of the others to be identiﬁed with the elephant. So, either they are all elephants, in
which case there are many elephants present and not one as we are supposing or none

From Electrons to Elephants: Context and Consciousness
643
of them are elephants. The given elephant, then, is best taken to be something that is
constituted by a certain aggregate of subatomic particles. It is not identical with that
aggregate, however its parts are arranged.
Is this mysterious? Take a simpler example. Consider a speciﬁc rock. It is made up
of certain particles. It is not identical with the aggregate, R, of those particles for the
reasons just given mutatis mutandis in the case of the elephant. Imagine now that God
had laid out R in space and arranged its parts rock-wise. Did He have further work to
do to create a rock? Or was His work already done? Rocks are material things. Surely
once God had laid out R, and arranged its parts in the appropriate spatial way, there
was nothing further for him to do. Why? The answer, I think, is that it is a conceptual
truth that if an aggregate of fundamental material parts is arranged rock-wise then a
rock exists. Similarly, in the earlier example of the bunch of ﬂowers, it is a conceptual
truth that if an aggregate of ﬂowers is arranged bunch-wise then a bunch of ﬂowers
exists.
Is what is true for rocks and bunches of ﬂowers true for elephants? Evidently, the
situation is more complex; for as already noted, history matters. So, arranging an
aggregate of fundamental material entities so as to form something that is physically
indistinguishable from an elephant does not sufﬁce. Further, elephants are conscious
beings. They see and hear things and in so doing undergo visual experiences and
auditory experiences. They feel pain. They are subjects of a range of emotional
experiences. Electrons have none of these things. How can complex, spatial conﬁg-
urations of electrons and other subatomic particles be arranged so as to form not just
creatures with tusks and trunks but creatures that are also conscious, creatures that
experience and feel things? What building work was required here?
3
An Elephant Never Forgets; But What Makes
an Elephant Conscious?
First, a few words about how I am using the term ‘consciousness’. Consciousness,
as I understand it in this essay, just is experience. Experiences are mental states such
that there is inherently something it is like subjectively to undergo them. Examples
are feeling pain, feeling an itch, visualizing an elephant, experiencing anger and
feeling fearful. In each of these cases, it is incoherent to suppose that the state exists
without there being some phenomenology, some subjective or felt character.
In understanding the term ‘consciousness’ in this way, I do not mean to suggest
that the term has not had other uses both in science and philosophy. Sometimes, for
example, it is held that a mental state is conscious just in case it is one of which its
subject is introspectively aware. This is sometimes called “higher-order conscious-
ness”. My claim is simply that among the various mental states we undergo, many
of which are introspectively accessible (but arguably not all), are experiences and
feelings, and these states, unlike beliefs, for example, are inherently such that they
feel a certain way. Different experiences differ in how they feel, in their subjective

644
M. Tye
character, and that is what makes them different experiences. In being this way, expe-
riences are conscious mental states by their very nature. This point is sometimes put
by saying that experiences are phenomenally conscious.
There are two dimensions to the puzzle here. Elephants are conscious. Rocks and
trees are not. Why? The obvious answer is that the former have brains and the latter
do not. But all sorts of physical events occur in elephant brains that have nothing to
do with consciousness. Think of the neurophysiological mechanisms responsible for
their continuing to breath or their hearts beating. What is it about the neurological
goings-on underlying elephant conscious states that explains why they generate the
conscious states they do or why they generate anything conscious at all for that
matter? This is the so-called hard problem of consciousness to which I turn next.
4
The Hard Problem
Upon closer examination, it may be seen that the problem really has two dimensions
to it. To appreciate this, consider your own case, speciﬁcally, the color experience
you undergo as you view a ripe tomato. Light is reﬂected from the surface of the
ripe tomato, thereby activating cells on your retina. Via a sequence of physical inter-
actions, cells become active in your visual cortex and you experience red. That
experience has a certain ‘raw feel’ or subjective phenomenology to it. Why does
your experience of red feel to you the way it does? Why doesn’t it feel the way your
experience of blue does or your experience of anger or a tickle? What explains its
subjective character. This is the ﬁrst dimension of the hard problem: why does your
experience subjectively feel this way rather than that? There is a further question:
why are you undergoing a subjective experience at all? Why do the neural events
underlying your experience of red have any raw ‘feel’ to them? This is the second
dimension of the hard problem.
Representationalism—the view of consciousness I advocate (Tye, 1995, 2021)1—
hasasimple,andtomymindcompelling,answertotheﬁrstquestion.Yourexperience
of red feels the way it does because it represents the color red. What it is for the
experience to feel the way it does just is for it to be an experience representing red.
Your experience of blue feels different because it represents a different color. The
experience of red could not feel the way the experience of blue feels because if it
did, it wouldn’t be the experience of red at all but rather the experience of blue.
This is the view introspection seems to support. Turn your attention inwards as you
experience red. What do you ﬁnd? Obvious answer: the color red. That is what makes
your experience feel as it does. Nothing more (and nothing less). The view of some
philosophers that our experiences have intrinsic qualities, in addition to the qualities
they represent, qualities that are responsible for the speciﬁc phenomenology of the
experiences seems to me fundamentally misguided. When I introspect my experience
1 See also Dretske 1995.

From Electrons to Elephants: Context and Consciousness
645
of red, I ﬁnd no extra quality. I ﬁnd only the color red. That is what I respond to
cognitively, what I like or dislike, what I want to keep experiencing or to cease.
How does the experience of red represent red? Answer: by itself being a brain state
with the natural function of indicating the presence of the color red. Compare: the
heart has as its natural function to pump blood and certain neuronal cells (known as
edge detector cells) have as their natural function to indicate the presence of an edge
in the visual ﬁeld. On this view, you can’t really discover the ways our experiences
feel by peering among the neurons. That’s the wrong place to look. You have to
look rather at what the neural states represent. And that is determined by historical
circumstances that gave the relevant neural states their natural functions of indicating
environmental (and bodily) features of one sort or another. Once again, then, history
matters.
5
The Hardest Part of the Hard Problem
As for the second dimension to the hard problem, we have, it seems, two options. One
is to say that consciousness simply emerged with suitably complex arrangements of
micro-particles. On this view, certain neural states have a felt character associated
with them because that character automatically emerged with those states. A second
option is to take the view that consciousness already exists even at the level of micro-
particles, so it did not really emerge at all. This option still needs a further account
of why certain complex physical states are conscious and not others, and so it does
not offer a direct answer to the hardest part of the hard problem, but it does at least
avoid puzzles associated with emergence. What is still needed is an account of why
certain complex arrangements of subatomic particles are conscious, given that their
constituent fundamental parts are, and not others.
On the face of it, neither option is attractive. As already noted, electrons can’t feel
pain or experience red. So obviously if they are conscious, they can’t be conscious
of the various things we are. But consciousness always has a content. So, of what
then are electrons conscious? There seems no way to answer this question. Indeed,
the question itself just seems wrong-headed. On the other hand, if consciousness
only emerged at the level of certain highly complex physical things, then what was
responsible for that emergence?
This last question would have an answer if our concept of consciousness (expe-
rience) were itself a complicated functional concept in the way that the concept life
is. But it is not. The reason is straightforward. Take the case of life. We know that
living things use energy, they grow, they reproduce, they respond to their environ-
ment, they adapt and they self-regulate. Reﬂecting upon these facts, it seems clear
that these are things we know not as a result of scientiﬁc investigation but rather
simply by understanding the concept life. All it is for an entity to be living is for it
to have enough of these functional and behavioral features. The concept life, thus,
is a functional/behavioral, cluster concept. Here emergence is unproblematic. Once
certain complexes support the relevant functional and behavioral features, they are

646
M. Tye
automatically living. In the case of consciousness, however, there is no functional or
behavioral deﬁnition. We know this because we can make intelligible to ourselves the
idea of a zombie, a being that functions exactly as we do but who has no experiences
at all.
The question about emergence would also have an answer if consciousness had a
hidden (a posteriori) physical essence in the way that, for example, water does. But
this is not at all plausible; for any putative such essence will be vague, that is, admit
of possible borderline cases. Consciousness itself, however, is sharp. This needs a
little explanation.
Consider ﬁrst the point about consciousness being sharp. If consciousness is sharp
then there are no borderline cases of consciousness. Is this correct? Suppose, for
example, I have only just woken up, and I am still groggy, I am not yet fully conscious.
Isn’t this a borderline case of consciousness? It is certainly a fact that I am more
conscious of the world around me when I am fully awake than when I ﬁrst groggily
open my eyes. What I experience is initially vague and impoverished. As I become
fully awake, what I experience gets richer and richer. But this doesn’t show that
experience or consciousness itself has borderline cases.
Here is how Papineau puts the point:
If the line between conscious and non-conscious states is not sharp, shouldn’t we expect to
ﬁnd borderline cases in our own experience? Yet when we look into ourselves we seem to ﬁnd
a clear line. Pains, tickles, visual experiences and so on are conscious, while the processes
which allow us to attach names to faces, or to resolve random dot stereograms are not. True,
there are “half-conscious” experiences, such as the ﬁrst moments of waking …. But, on
reﬂection, even these special experiences seem to qualify unequivocally as conscious, in the
sense that they are like something, rather than nothing. (1993, p. 125)
Trytothinkofotherclearcut,objectivelyborderlinecasesofconsciousness,thatis,
cases such that it is objectively indeterminate whether consciousness is present. Obvi-
ously, with some simpler creatures, we may not know whether they are conscious.
But that is not germane to the issue. You can certainly think of a case of consciousness
which is indeterminate as to whether it is a case of pain, say. Think of sensations at
the dentist as your teeth are being drilled. Some of these sensations seem impossible
to classify as to their species. There is a feeling of pressure perhaps. Is it pain? Not
clearly so, but not clearly not. Here it is indeterminate as to what you are feeling, but
not indeterminate as to whether you are feeling.
Alternatively, imagine that you are in a hospital bed feeling pain and that you can
adjust a dial that controls the delivery of morphine to your body. As you do so, your
pain becomes less intense, gradually transforming itself into a feeling of pleasure. In
the middle of this process, there may well be experiences that are not easy to classify.
Again, there is indeterminacy at such times as to what you are feeling, but there is
no indeterminacy as to whether feeling continues to be present.
Consider the case of auditory sensations. Suppose you are participating in an
experiment, listening to random high-pitched sounds through headphones. You are
asked to press a button for each sound you hear. In some cases, you are unsure whether
you are hearing any sound at all. Isn’t this a borderline case of consciousness?

From Electrons to Elephants: Context and Consciousness
647
We can agree that there is epistemic indeterminacy here: you do not know whether
you are hearing any sound. Still, this isn’t enough for there to be a borderline case of
consciousness. After all, you are listening attentively for a sound; are you hearing a
soundornot?Well,evenifyouaren’thearingasound,youarestillhearingsomething,
namely silence. That is, you are hearing the absence of a sound; it is not that you are
failing to hear at all! There is something it is like for you subjectively to hear silence.
So, either way, you are hearing and thus experiencing something. So, this doesn’t
show that there can be borderline cases of experience.
Suppose someone held that being tall is precise, admitting of no borderline cases.
We can quickly show this person that she is wrong by presenting her with examples
of people who aren’t deﬁnitely tall but who also aren’t deﬁnitely not tall. We can
do the same with experiencing red or feeling pain or hearing a loud noise or feeling
happy. But can we do it with being an experience (or being conscious)?
I don’t think we can. We can certainly agree that as the intensity of an experience
diminishes, it becomes less and less deﬁnite and rich in its character, but either an
experience is still there or it isn’t. Picturing what it is like from the subject’s point of
view, we picture the experience gradually changing in its phenomenology until it is so
‘washed out’ and minimal that it has hardly any distinguishing features subjectively.
But the subject is still having an experience. The gradual transition is in the number
and intensity of the subjective features of the experience, not in the state’s being an
experience (being phenomenally conscious).
So, consciousness itself is sharp. If this is the case, then the complex physical prop-
erty that supposedly makes up its essence must be sharp too. But this seems very
implausible. To see why, consider ﬁrst the type identity theory and the hypothesis put
forward by Crick and Koch that consciousness is one and the same as neuronal oscil-
lation of 40 MHz. It is evident that Crick and Koch did not intend this hypothesis to
rule out every neuronal oscillation that is not exactly 40 MHz. What about a neuronal
oscillation of 40.1 MHz? Or 40.01 MHz? Or 40.000001 MHz? Their proposal is that
consciousness is one and the same as neuronal oscillation of approximately 40 MHz
or neuronal oscillation sufﬁciently close to 40 MHz. But these formulations of the
hypothesis bring out its inherent vagueness, and not just from the use of the terms
‘approximately’ and ‘sufﬁciently’; for the term ‘neuron’ is vague too.
Neurons are complex physical entities with diverse components. Each neuron has
a cell body, dendrites and an axon. Electrical impulses come in along the dendrites
and go out along the axon. Imagine removing atoms one by one from a given neuron.
Eventually, as one does so, there will be no neuron left. But along the way, there
will surely be a range of borderline cases—entities that are neither deﬁnitely neurons
nor deﬁnitely not neurons. So, the property of being a neuronal oscillation is vague.
It admits of borderline cases. In general, neurophysiological properties are highly
complex. The idea that the relevant neural properties for consciousness are sharp is
extremely implausible.
Suppose it is now proposed that integrated information holds the answer. What it
is for a physical system to be conscious is for it to have a large amount of integrated
information (Phi) in it (Tononi et al., 2016). This view, which can be taken to be

648
M. Tye
offering a high-level physical account of consciousness, has some extremely counter-
intuitive consequences. For example, as noted by Aaronson (2014), it predicts that
if a simple 2-D grid has ten times the amount of integrated information as my brain,
the grid is ten times more conscious! What exactly is meant by one system being
more conscious than another has also not been made fully clear by advocates of the
theory, but for present purposes, it sufﬁces to note that what it is for an amount of
integrated information to be large is patently vague and thus the view is of no help
to anyone who wants to hold that consciousness is sharp and broadly physical.
A response to this difﬁculty is to say that some degree of consciousness goes
along with any amount greater than zero of integrated information. So, consciousness
is sharp, after all. This requires us to agree that thermostats are conscious as are
speedometers, since they contain some integrated information, and that seems a line
to be avoided, if at all possible! But even if you disagree here, as noted above, there
remains the question as to what it is for one system to have a greater amount of
consciousness than another. And since advocates of integrated information theory
accept that certain 2-D grids are more conscious than human brains, it cannot have
to do with the number of experiences or the intensity of the experiences; for surely
no one wants to hold that the relevant grids have more experiences or more intense
experiences than our brains (Pautz, 2019). What is meant by saying that they are
more conscious then?
What about functional properties? Might they make up the essence of conscious-
ness. Again, it seems obvious that any scientiﬁc functional properties with phys-
ical inputs and outputs that are proposed as candidates for the hidden essence of
consciousness will admit of possible borderline cases. So, again they cannot really
make up the essence of consciousness at all.
It appears, then, that if consciousness did emerge out of certain brain structures,
it must be sharp and nonphysical, suddenly appearing on the scene. Here there is
no reducibility and relatedly no explanation as to why it emerged as it did. So,
uniformity in nature is lost. Phenomena gradually get more and more complex and
then suddenly out of the blue something radically different just occurs. Why? There
is no explanation. It is just a brute fact that once certain vague physical structures
are in place, something sharp and nonphysical emerges. But that is very difﬁcult to
accept or even comprehend.
6
The Solution
The way out of these difﬁculties, I suggest, is as follows. Consider belief. You can’t
just believe period. That makes no sense. If you believe, you must believe something
or other. Beliefs always have a content. What is it to have a belief then? The natural
answer is that it is to undergo a state that has a content and that has a character
that distinguishes it from, for example, a desire or a fear with that content. Let us
call this feature “belief*”. Corresponding features for desire and fear are desire*
and fear*. Conceptually, there is no requirement that belief* states have a content.

From Electrons to Elephants: Context and Consciousness
649
That requirement is one on belief states only. Correspondingly, conscious states
(experiences) always have a content. On a representationalist view, they always
represent something or other. What it is to have an experience, I suggest, is to undergo
a state that has a content and that has a feature that distinguishes it from nonconscious
contentful states. Let us call this feature “consciousness*”. Conceptually, there is no
requirement that conscious* states have a content. This is the counterpart point to
the one made about belief*.
The proposal I want to make, then, is that consciousness* did not emerge. It
is there at the very bedrock of reality. Electrons are conscious*. What emerged
was consciousness. More on that shortly. Consciousness admits of possible border-
line cases since such cases can arise with respect to what one is experiencing, but
consciousness* does not.
How can electrons be conscious*? After all, no physics textbooks about micro-
physical reality ever mention consciousness*. Furthermore, in the case of belief*,
it seems plausible to hold that it is a narrow functional role property (Fodor, 1987).
Beliefs are states that function in the right sort of way and that have content. But this
is not plausible in the case of consciousness*; for, as already noted, a zombie has
internal states that function as conscious states do and that have content. Furthermore,
functional role properties are vague, not sharp.
The initial answer, I suggest, is that physical science itself tells us only about the
relational/structural properties of matter, including spatiotemporal properties and
causal/behavioral dispositions (second order properties). Physical science leaves
open the nature of the categorical bases for these properties—the nature, that is,
of the intrinsic properties that occupy the causal/dispositional roles associated with
the basic theoretical terms of microphysics.
Here is an illustration. Suppose electrons are basic. Electrons are particles having
mass and negative charge. But what are mass and charge? The suggestion is that
these properties are to be cashed out in terms of how electrons behave and interact
with other elements of reality. Things having mass attract other things with mass and
resist acceleration. What it is for an electron to have mass is for it to have an intrinsic
property that enables it to behave as just speciﬁed (to play the mass role). Electrons
have negative charge. Negative charged things attract positively charged things and
repel other negatively charged things. What it is for an electron to have negative
charge is for it to have an intrinsic property that enables it to behave in these ways
(to play the negative charge role). Of course, these speciﬁcations are very rough and
ready. The full story about these roles is told by physics via fundamental physical
laws. Generalizing, the properties that physics attributes to elementary particles are
structural (that is, pertaining to their arrangement and combinations), causal (nomic)
and spatio-temporal. Physics thus has nothing to say about the intrinsic or categorical
properties of electrons and likewise for other fundamental particles. It is here that
consciousness* enters the picture. The intrinsic natures of the micro-parts of reality
are made up of (presumably a small number of) intrinsic properties, one of which, I
am suggesting, is consciousness*.
Consciousness* is an intrinsic property of electrons and other basic entities, a
property that has no further inner nature. Consciousness* is a fundamental property

650
M. Tye
of the fundamental parts of micro-reality. But not only fundamental entities are
conscious*. Some highly complex entities are conscious* too. Consciousness*, we
may suppose, transfers from fundamental entities to certain complexes so long as
the fundamental entities are arranged in the right sort of way. Which complexes?
Well, evidently only ones found in living creatures with brains. So, the relevant
arrangements of micro-entities must be ones that require a brain.
So far, I have not said directly how it is that the various feelings and experiences we
all undergo arise. What is responsible for the various conscious states we undergo—
the feeling of pain, the experience of red, the feeling of anger?
It should be clear that from the present perspective we cannot hold that there are
different stripes of consciousness at the micro-level, different combinations of which
give rise to different macro-phenomenal states. There isn’t even consciousness at that
level. Instead, there is just bare consciousness*. The various different macro-states
are generated via the various representational contents of the complex conscious*
states. Different macro-phenomenal states are generated representationally.
An example may help to make this clear. Suppose that a large number of elec-
trons (or quarks) are arranged so as to form a complex state A that itself Normally
tracks (and thereby represents) property P. That state A, let us suppose, is conscious*.
Given this and given also that A also represents red, A is a full-ﬂedged experience of
red. What is true in this case is true in all cases of macro-consciousness. The various
species of consciousness are generated by the different properties and different prop-
erty complexes that are represented, and it is in connection with this that vagueness
intrudes.
Of course, there is much more to say about the nature of representation here; my
own view (Tye, 2000) is that in general the basic properties represented by expe-
riences are phylogenetically ﬁxed. We are simply built by nature to feel pain, to
experience various colors, to feel anger, and so on. Other creatures are built differ-
ently and their experiences are different in varying degrees from ours. The bird that
immediately spots what is to us a green caterpillar sitting on a green leaf (and to our
eyes almost perfectly camouﬂaged) does so because it experiences the caterpillar as
having a color different from that of the leaf (in my view, the color is a binary one—
ultra-violet green, as we might call it—only one component of which is available to
us, given the different sensitivity of the cones in our eyes (Tye, 2001)). When we
view the caterpillar, the state we are in represents it as green since that state is the
one in us that Mother Nature has given us to track the color green. That state is the
one that Normally tracks green (or, in Dretske’s terms (1988), has as its biological
function to indicate green). The bird viewing the caterpillar is in a different conscious
state, one that Normally tracks the binary color, ultraviolet-green.2
The question I have not tried to answer here is: what arrangements of conscious*
micro-entities are themselves conscious*? This is a big question I have taken up in
detail elsewhere.3 The key idea is that some properties of parts transfer to wholes,
given the right arrangement of those parts. Consider, for example, an ensemble of
2 For more here, see Bradley and Tye 2001.
3 See Tye 2021.

From Electrons to Elephants: Context and Consciousness
651
graceful dancers. The whole ensemble may be graceful too, but only if the dancers
are coordinated in the right way. Or consider a play with three acts, each of which
is wonderful. The play too will be wonderful if the parts ﬁt together appropriately;
otherwise it may simply be disjointed. What goes for dancers and acts goes for
electrons and complex arrangements of them. In elephants, the arrangements of
conscious* micro-parts are such that the elephants themselves undergo states that
are conscious*. And these states, in being conscious* and representing various things
are themselves conscious states of various sorts. That is how elephants are conscious
beings.
7
Conclusion
So, given enough microphysical entities having consciousness* as part of their
intrinsic natures, and given the right arrangement of them and given the right histor-
ical context, you get a ﬂesh and blood, conscious elephant. A microphysical dupli-
cate of an elephant might not be an elephant, however. Indeed, it might not even
be a conscious entity at all (for its fundamental parts might be microphysical dupli-
cates of real elephants’ fundamental parts without being conscious*). To build an
elephant, background context and consciousness are crucial. Furthermore, the two
are not independent; for if consciousness itself essentially involves representation
and representation invZolves biological indicator function or Normal tracking, then
context in part also determines consciousness.
References
Aaronson, S. (2014). Why I am not an integrated information theorist. https://www.scottaaronson.
com/blog/?p=1799
Bradley, P., & Tye, M. (2001). Of colors, kestrels, caterpillars, and leaves. Journal of Philosophy,
98, 469–487.
Chalmers, D. (1995). The conscious mind. Oxford University Press.
Chalmers, D. (1995). Facing up to the problem of consciousness. Journal of Consciousness Studies,
2, 200–219.
Dretske, F. (1988). Explaining behavior. MIT Press.
Dretske, F. (1995). Naturalizing the mind. MIT Press.
Fine, K. (2003). The non-identity of a material thing and its matter. Mind, 112, 195–234.
Fodor, J. (1987). Psychosemantics. MIT Press.
Papineau, D. (1993). Philosophical naturalism. Blackwells.
Pautz, A. (2019). What is the integrated information theory of consciousness. Journal of
Consciousness Studies, 1, 1–2.
Tononi, G., Boly, M., Massimini, M., & Koch, C. (2016). Integrated information theory: From
consciousness to its physical substrate. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 17, 450–461.
Tye, M. (1995). Ten problems of consciousness. The MIT Press.
Tye, M. (2000). Consciousness, color, and content Cambridge. Bradford Books, the MIT Press.

652
M. Tye
Tye, M. (2001). (with P. Bradley) Of colors, kestrels, caterpillars, and leaves. Journal of Philosophy,
98, 469–487.
Tye, M. (2021). Vagueness and the evolution of consciousness: Through the looking glass. Oxford
University Press.

When Two Levels Collide
John Bickle
Your world was so different from mine, don’t you see/And we
couldn’t be close though we tried/We both reach for heavens but
ours weren’t the same/That’s what happens when two worlds
collide …—“When Two Worlds Collide,” written by Roger
Miller and Bill Anderson, ﬁrst recorded by Roger Miller in 1961
Often when philosophers and scientists reﬂect on how explanations across “levels”
relate, they focus on successful cases, where some “higher-level” explanation aligns
relatively smoothly with its “lower-level” counterpart. Philosophers of the contempo-
rary mind-brain sciences are not exceptions to this focus, and reﬂections on familiar
examples has generated recent accounts of reduction (Bickle, 2006, 2012), mecha-
nism (Bechtel, 2008; Craver, 2007; Piccinini & Craver, 2011), realization (Polger,
2004; Polger & Shapiro, 2016), and emergence (Gillett 2016). There are numerous
instances where some cognitive explanation aligns smoothly with some neurosci-
entiﬁc counterpart, especially when the latter is drawn from cognitive and systems
neuroscience. However, when we consider some recent explanations of cognitive
phenomena in the neuroscience ﬁeld of ‘molecular and cellular cognition’ (MCC),
we encounter some instances that involve signiﬁcant mismatch across counterpart
cognitive-scientiﬁc and MCC explanations. And MCC is not some fringe appendage
in current neuroscience. It has been prominent in the discipline for nearly thirty years
(for a review see Silva et al., 2014).1
I will here use a detailed case study to demonstrate a mismatch between a
cognitive-scientiﬁc and an MCC explanation of related phenomena. It is important to
note some caveats from the outset. I am NOT suggesting that all cognitive-scientiﬁc
explanations are headed toward similar mismatches with MCC counterparts! There
are plenty of examples of counterpart cognitive-MCC explanations that link together
1 MCC has a professional society which has sponsored more than twenty annual meetings over the
past ﬁfteen years, boasts of European and Asian afﬁliates, and has an international membership of
more than 5000 scientists. See https://molcellcog.org/ for details.
J. Bickle (B)
Department of Philosophy and Religion, Mississippi State University, Starkville, MS 39762, USA
e-mail: jbickle@philrel.msstate.edu
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
S. Wuppuluri and I. Stewart (eds.), From Electrons to Elephants and Elections,
The Frontiers Collection, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-92192-7_35
653

654
J. Bickle
relatively smoothly—I’ll even reference some examples below. But mismatches do
occur and need to be considered in any full discussion of cross-level relationships
in the cognitive and brain sciences. As I will argue in this paper’s Sect. 2, a fairly
common “neural plausibility” desideratum among contemporary cognitive scien-
tists takes from them one way to downplay such mismatches. I will then show in
this paper’s Sect. 3, also based on a detailed case study, that cross-lev el cognitive
science-to-neurobiology mismatches also occur concerning counterpart phenomena,
not only explanations. In this chapter’s ﬁnal section I will point out that there
is nothing unique about cognitive science vis-à-vis neurobiology that would limit
cross-level mismatches to these sciences. Any time that some “lower level science”
begins to address data about the behaviors of the larger systems that its ontology
composes, cross-level mismatches of counterpart explanations and phenomena are
genuine scientiﬁc possibilities. We may hope that counterpart explanations across
science’s “levels” align smoothly, and indeed sometimes they do. But neither nature
nor our scientiﬁc practices guarantees that they always will. In fact, sometimes they
do not. And it remains an open philosophical-cum-scientiﬁc question about what we
should say about cases of serious mismatch, although some constraints we commonly
put on our “higher-level” sciences do rule out some strategies for dismissing these
mismatches as inconseqential.
So far I’ve enclosed usage of “levels” in scare-quotes. This is because my under-
standingof“levels”and“counterpartexplanationsandconcepts”isadmittedlypedes-
trian. The ontologies of “lower level” sciences are constituents that compose the
ontologies of “higher level” sciences. The speciﬁc ontology of a “counterpart lower
level” science to some speciﬁc “higher level” science composes those speciﬁc “higher
level” systems, and the “lower level” explanations purport to explain some of the
“higher level” data. Ontologies are the classes and relationship between the members
of those classes that deﬁne a scientiﬁc ﬁeld (Larson & Martone, 2009). That’s enough
“scientiﬁc metaphysics” for my tastes, and with these remarks I will henceforth
refrain from using the scare quotes around levels, counterparts, and the like.
1
A Mismatched Counterpart Cognitive-MCC Explanation
Pair
The “Ebbinghaus spacing effect” is named after nineteenth century German psychol-
ogist Hermann Ebbinghaus (1850–1909), who ﬁrst explored it systematically (using

When Two Levels Collide
655
himself as a research subject in some experiments!).2 Animals, ranging from inverte-
brates to rodents to humans, typically learn a task quicker, and remember previously
presented training stimuli better (as measured by recall performance) when training
episodes are divided into several separate sessions, with longer non-training intervals
separating them (up to a non-training interval time limit, beyond which test recall
performance declines). Experimental psychologists since Ebbinghaus have explored
the most effective number of training sessions and durations of non-training intervals
for numerous tasks, along with a variety of other factors; most recently these other
factors have included experimenters’ intentional manipulations of encoding condi-
tions across presentation of items to be remembered (Maddox, 2016). But no single
cognitive explanation for the Ebbinghaus spacing effect has garnered unanimity.
One cognitive explanation that received some initial acceptance was Spear and
Riccio’s (1994) hypothesis that when memory training is grouped into a single
session (so-called ‘massed’ training), information about a given stimulus acquired on
a previous learning presentation is still being processed into memory stores when the
next training input arrives for processing. This timing interferes to disrupt ongoing
processing of the previously presented information. Longer delay intervals between
learning episodes (so-called ‘spaced’ training) permit full processing and integration
of each learning episode into long-term memory.
More recent experimental work by psychologists on verbal learning in humans
(acquiring, retaining, and recalling verbal materials) has generated additional cogni-
tive explanations for the spacing effect. In a recent review Maddox (2016) surveys
much of these data and focuses on the two proposed cognitive explanations that best
account for them.3 A reminding explanation “assumes that items are forgotten over
time based on the power-law of forgetting, and when presented, items have some
capacity to spontaneously cue retrieval (e.g., remind) of an earlier item” (Maddox,
2016, 695). This account further assumes that the difﬁculty of reminding modulates
the subsequent amount of rehearsal that a subject gives to target memory items. This
explanation accounts for numerous data pertaining to the spacing effect because
2 This ﬁrst case study is a more detailed account of one I presented in a previous publication
(Bickle 2014). There I dubbed this case an example of ‘little-e eliminativism,’ where the mismatch
demonstrates the falsity and so the rejection of the cognitive explanation. (I called it ‘little-e’
because the elimination is strictly within science itself, and has nothing to do with some broader
“folk psychology, as the “Big-E Eliminativism’ of, e.g., Paul and Patricia Churchland targets.) I
now think that the eliminativist conclusion I stressed previously was too hasty. It takes more than
just the mismatch I’m about to discuss to warrant an eliminativist conclusion about the cognitive
explanation. But as I will stress in the ﬁnal sections below, a little-e eliminativist conclusion about
mismatched cognitive explanations vis-à-vis some MCC counterpart remains one available option,
though not the only one.
3 See Maddox (2016) for the “reliable recent experimental ﬁndings,” plus more details on these two
proposed explanations and extensive references to the published literature. Spoiler alert! Maddox
plumps for the combined encoding variability + study-phase retrieval explanation I’ll present below.
Healsosurveysadditionalproposedcognitiveexplanationsforthespacingeffectwhichhearguesare
less successful in handling the recent experimental data. I will not discuss those other approaches
here, but I note that all of them fail to match with the MCC explanation of the spacing effect,
introduced later in this section.

656
J. Bickle
difﬁcult-to-retrieve, i.e., spaced items, get rehearsed more than easy-to-retrieve, i.e.,
massed items. A second hypothesized cognitive explanation for spacing combines
encoding variability + study phase retrieval. The ﬁrst component holds that contex-
tual items get encoded in memory along with the target item, and so “an item is more
likely to be encoded in different ways when repetitions are spaced than when they
are massed” (Maddox, 2016, 696). Thus increased encoding variability with spaced
as compared to massed presentations yields an increased number of “retrieval routes,
and probability of retrieval at later test,” since co-encoded contextual elements are
more likely to be distinct at the different spaced presentation times (Maddox, 2016,
696) The second component of this combined account, the study phase, is akin to the
reminding mechanism of the ﬁrst explanation. The learner is retrieving previously-
studied information throughout the entire study phase of the new item. Items must
be recognized as repetitions during study to generate a spacing effect on ﬁnal test
performance and the difﬁculty of retrieval associated with longer delays leads to
increased repetitions, and thus increased ﬁnal test performance with spaced training.
Turning to MCC research, work in Isabelle Mansuy’s lab provided strong evidence
for a direct intraneuronal molecular mechanism for the Ebbinghaus spacing effect
(Genoux et al., 2002). During training episodes, speciﬁc neurons recruited into the
memory trace for the training stimuli undergo signiﬁcant synaptic plasticity, inducing
late long-term potentiation (L-LTP). These same neurons also show increased levels
of phosphorylated cyclic adenosine monophosphate-responsive element-binding
protein (pCREB) at the time of training (Han et al., 2007, 2009; Zhou et al., 2009).
One isoform of pCREB is an activity-dependent transcriptional enhancer for genes
coding for both regulatory and structural proteins.4 The end result of pCREB activa-
tion in these neurons recruited into a speciﬁc tone-shock memory trace is the locking
of additional “hidden” excitatory (glutamate-responding) receptors into active sites
in post-synaptic densities. These additional excitatory receptors make these neurons
much more likely to respond with action potentials to pre-synaptic activity (glutamate
release) induced by subsequent presentations of the same training stimulus.
However, the high neuronal activity required to induce pCREB-driven synaptic
potentiation can also activate protein phosphatase 1 (PP1) in these same neurons.
Activated PP1 removes the phosphate group from pCREB molecules. This blocks
CREB’s gene transcriptional-enhancing activities, and so inhibits the protein
synthesis that potentiates the synapses in these highly active neurons (Genoux et al.,
2002). Because of the increased frequency of training stimuli presentations during
massed (and briefer-interval distributed) training, action potential frequencies in
highly active neurons responding to the stimulus is high enough not only to acti-
vate pCREB, but also to simultaneously activate PP1, to inhibit activity-dependent
pCREB.TheendresultintheseneuronsislittletonoL-LTP,andsolittletonolearning
of the stimulus to be remembered later. However, with longer-interval distributed
(‘spaced’) training, the extended non-training periods between training sessions are
long enough to decrease activation frequency in the speciﬁc neurons recruited into
4 Transcriptional enhancers bind to sites on the control region of genes to turn on the process of
gene transcription via messenger RNA production.

When Two Levels Collide
657
the memory traces, to still be above the level required to induce L-LTP via activated
pCREB, but below the level that simultaneously activates PP1 to inhibit pCREB-
driven synaptic plasticity. The lessened PP1 activity in these neurons recruited into
the memory trace allows pCREB to induce lasting synaptic potentiation through
new gene expression and protein synthesis, and ultimately produces the learning indi-
cated by recall behavior upon later presentations of the ‘spaced’ training stimuli. The
resulting behavioral dynamics are exactly the Ebbinghaus spacing effect (Silva &
Josselyn, 2002): enhanced learning and memory with longer-interval distributed
(‘spaced’) training.
For readers unfamiliar with molecular biology, the MCC explanation is apt to
puzzle. Some experimental details from the Genoux et al. (2002) study will not only
clarify this molecular-mechanistic explanation of the Ebbinghaus effect but will also
illuminate the nature of the mismatch between the cognitive and MCC explanations
of the Ebbinghaus spacing effect. Genoux and colleagues engineered a transgenic
mouse, the I1* mutant, that overexpresses a protein speciﬁcally in forebrain neurons
(including in hippocampus) one step upstream in intracellular signaling to pCREB-
PP1 interactions. Inhibitor-1 (I1) deactivates PP1, blocking its inhibition of pCREB
activity.TheI1*mutanthasanextracopyoftheI1gene,withthisextratransgenetran-
scribed and extra protein translated only when the mutant animals were dosed with
doxycycline (dox) in their diets.5 Nonmutated littermate control mice displayed the
typical Ebbinghaus spacing effect in an object recognition task, with only mice in the
longer-interval distributed training group showing statistically signiﬁcant improved
memory performance for previously-presented objects, compared to those wildtypes
undergoing briefer-interval distributed training or massed training.6 I1* mutants off
5 As was standard in genetic engineering twenty years ago, transgene expression was limited to
speciﬁc neurons by the addition of an engineered promoter binding site. Only in the targeted
(forebrain) neurons does this speciﬁc promoter binding molecule (in this case, calmodulin kinase
II, or CaMKII) occur in sufﬁcient quantities to bind to the transgene promotor region to drive its
expression. So while the transgene, inserted at the embryonic stem cell stage of development, is
present in all cells in the mutants’ bodies, due to this engineered promoter region it will only be
expressed in the targeted forebrain cells. The temporally limited transcription of the transgene via
systemic doxycycline dosage was likewise driven by an inserted activator system on the engineered
transgene. Bickle (2003) provides an introduction for non-molecular biologists to the basics of such
molecular-genetic work in mainstream neurobiology.
6 Object recognition is a standard rodent non-spatial learning and memory paradigm that exploits
their natural curiosity for novelty. During training episodes rodents are exposed to a novel object
for a speciﬁed time interval and allowed to explore it. The object is removed, a delay period ensues,
and the original object and a new novel object are presented in the testing period. The amount of
time the rodent spends exploring the new novel object during the testing period, divided by the total
amount of time it spends exploring both objects, computes a discrimination ratio for the novel object
in the testing phase. Ratios greater than 50% operationalize memory for the original novel object
presented during the learning phase, and higher ratios operationalize stronger memories for it. In
the Genoux et al. (2002) study rodents in the massed training groups were exposed to the original
object for one 25-min learning session. Mice in the briefer-interval distributed training groups were
exposed to it for ﬁve 5-min learning sessions, each interspersed by a 5-min non-training interval.
Mice in the longer-interval distributed training groups were exposed to it for ﬁve 5-min learning
sessions, each interspersed by a 15-mintue non-training interval.

658
J. Bickle
dox (where the I1 transgene was not expressed) showed the same pattern. But I1*
mutants on dox, in which the extra I1 transgene was expressed, and the protein
synthesized and activated, showed statistically signiﬁcantly improved memory for
objects previously presented during the training sessions for both longer-interval and
briefer-interval distributed training. The effect was reversible; these same mutants
returned to control and mutant off-dox performance (increased memory for previ-
ouslypresentedobjectsonlywithlonger-intervaldistributedtraining)whentheywere
taken off dox. A control study conﬁrmed increased pCREB levels in hippocampal and
cortical neurons in the mutants on dox group during both briefer-interval and longer-
interval distributed training. Increased pCREB levels in these neurons were found
in control groups (both wildtype and mutants off-dox) only during longer-interval
distributed training.
Genoux et al. (2002) took their results as strong evidence in favor of an intracel-
lular pCREB-PP1 interaction mechanism to explain the Ebbinghaus spacing effect.
Activation levels in neurons recruited into the memory trace for the training stimuli
after longer intervals between learning episodes exceed pCREB activation thresholds
to induce L-LTP in activated synapses, but do not exceed PP1 activation thresholds,
so pCREB-driven synaptic plasticity is not immediately blocked in these neurons.
During briefer-interval distributed and massed training, however, action potential
frequencies in highly activated neurons activate both pCREB and its inhibitor, PP1,
producing little L-LTP in these neurons and therefore little learning and memory
for the training stimuli as indicated by recall behavior. Artiﬁcially blocking PP1
activation during briefer-interval distributed training via the activated I1* transgene
in mutants on dox enabled the activated pCREB to induce L-LTP without the PP1
inhibition activated in the non-mutated controls and mutants off dox; so the activated
PP1 was blocked by the additional I1 protein from the activated transgene. This
produced L-LTP in the highly activated neurons and subsequently increased recall
performance in the I1* mutants to the remembered stimuli in the briefer-interval
training rodent object recognition task.
Let us now be more precise in characterizing the mismatch between the coun-
terpart cognitive and MCC explanations in this case. The important difference is
more than just that one account appeals to speciﬁc neurobiological molecules and
their roles in intra-cellular signaling pathways in neurons recruited into the memory
trace, while the other appeals to information processing, encoding variability, or
reminding.7 It has to do rather with differences in the basic functional proﬁles of
the neurobiological mechanism as contrasted with those of the cognitive ones. The
basic functional proﬁles of the MCC and the cognitive explanations differ. From the
perspective of Genoux et al.’s (2002) neurobiological explanation, the hypothesized
7 Maddox himself, in his recent review of cognitive explanations of the spacing effect, notes that
“it is important to examine the biological underpinnings of the spacing effect” (2016, 702). He
mentions cross-species work “indicat[ing] that spacing and massing study events differentially
inﬂuence long-term potentiation (LTP) induction” in fruit ﬂies, mice and honeybees (although he
does not mention or cite the Genoux et al. (2002) paper). Here he, as a cognitive psychologist, assets
that the neurobiology is relevant to the cognitive explanation. More on this in the discussion of the
neural plausibility constraint in Sect. 2 below.

When Two Levels Collide
659
cognitive mechanisms surveyed above are not found.8 The cognitive explanations
are not even approximations of the discovered neurobiological causal mechanism,
abstracted away from neurobiological detail. Speciﬁcally, Spear and Riccio’s (1994)
cognitive explanation of the Ebbinghaus spacing effect attributes a central causal
role to the interruption of ongoing processing of the previous training stimuli, due to
the more rapid re-occurrence of training stimuli during massed (and briefer-interval
distributed) training. Only longer-interval distributed training permits complete, non-
interrupted processing and full integration of each separate training episode. But in
the pCREB activity-PP1 inactivity neurobiological account, supported by Genoux
and colleagues’ molecular pathway intervention experiments, in the cases of massed
and briefer-interval distributed training the high frequency of neuronal activity in
activated neurons, which activates both the transcriptional enhancer (pCREB) and
its related phosphatase (PP1), blocks even the initial steps in the induction of L-LTP.
The ‘memory processing’ initiated by the initial training stimulus thus never even gets
started in the hippocampus neurons highly activated by the training stimulus. The
activated pCREB molecules are dephosphorylated by the activated PP1 molecules
before they initiate even the ﬁrst steps of gene transcription and protein synthesis
that lead to L-LTP in the recruited neurons, and hence to learning and memory. No
“ongoing processing” of the earlier training episode gets “interfered with,” because
none gets initiated. Even as a functional approximation of the neurobiological mech-
anisms that the Genoux et al. (2002) intervention experiments reveal to be causally at
work, the cognitive explanation does not match its neurobiological counterpart. The
underlying functional accounts of the cognitive and MCC explanations mismatch.
Interfering with ongoing memory processing to previous training presentations is
a different functional process than is inhibiting even the initial steps in memory
processing of the training stimulus.9
Similar remarks hold for the more recent reminding and encoding variability
+ study-phase retrieval cognitive explanations reviewed by Maddox (2016). The
reminding mechanism attributes increased rehearsal to difﬁcult-to-retrieve items due
to their presentation in spaced training, as opposed to less rehearsal to easy-to-retrieve
items due to their presentation in massed training. But these effects will only apply to
items already encoded in memory, and that is the step that the pCREB-PP1 interaction
mechanisms blocks or reduces signiﬁcantly in the highly activated neurons. Similarly
with the study-phase mechanism of the combined account, which is directly related to
the reminding mechanism. And the encoding variability component of the combined
8 Take note of the expression, ‘from the perspective of the neurobiological explanation.’ I will return
to it in the ﬁnal two sections below.
9 How then does any learning and memory occur for stimuli presented in massed or briefer-interval
training, according to the MCC explanation? The stimulus will produce a distribution of activity
rates across the population of activated neurons. Even in massed training, some neurons activated
by the stimulus will have activity rates that fall within the “sweet spot” of just enough to activate
pCREB but not enough to activate PP1. These neurons will induce LTP to the training stimulus. But
there will be fewer such neurons falling within this range of activity necessary for inducing LTP
to massed-trained items than to spaced-trained items, so there will be less learning and memory
induced to the former, just as the Ebbinghaus behavioral data indicates.

660
J. Bickle
mechanism likewise hinges on features of retrieval of previously encoded memory
items, which include elements of the broader context occurring alongside the targeted
memory item. That cognitive component also hypothesizes a mechanism with a
different basic functional proﬁle than the intracellular molecular mechanism as the
latter directly blocks or reduces encoding of the memory item at the earliest processing
phase. In short, all of these cognitive explanations attribute the effects of a training
stimulus’s temporal spacing either to late stages of the encoding phase or to effects on
memoryretrieval.ButGenouxandcolleagues’neurobiologicalexplanationattributes
the effects to the earliest stage of encoding. That is the mismatch in basic functional
proﬁles across the cognitive and neurobiological explanations of Ebbinghaus spacing
data.
2
What Should We Make of Such Explanation
Mismatches?
We have now seen a detailed example in which an explanation of a phenomenon in
cognitive science mismatches with a counterpart explanation of that phenomenon
in neurobiology. The two explanations don’t only differ in the extent to which they
abstract away from neurobiological detail, but also in the basic functional proﬁles
they attribute to the mechanisms taken to generate the behavioral data. Attenuation of
ongoing memorial processing of a previous stimulus, or mechanisms for additional
rehearsal or for exploiting contextual information paired with the target memory, as
the accepted cognitive explanations hold, is not the same function as a mechanism
that blocks memory processing at its initial stages, as the neurobiological intracellular
pCREB-PP1 interactions explanation holds.
How might we best interpret such a cross-level mismatch, especially our assess-
ment of the higher-level cognitive explanations? One possible interpretation is elim-
inativism. In attributing a functional proﬁle to a mechanism for the behavioral
data that is inconsistent with the proﬁle that the discovered neurobiological mech-
anism displays, the cognitive explanations simply got things wrong and need to be
replaced by the emerging neurobiological explanation. Given its strictly scientiﬁc
focus, such a “little-e eliminativism” differs from, e.g., the Churchlands’ 1980s-
style eliminative materialism (e.g., Chruchalnd 1981, 1986), a view which by the
mid-1990s had pretty much been relegated to philosophical oblivion. The Church-
lands’ speciﬁc target was something called “folk psychology,” some common-sense
conception of the mental. The little-e eliminativism I’m considering here has no
concern with or stake in that target. But this little-e eliminativist interpretation
of cognitive science/neurobiological counterpart explanation mismatches certainly
would be consequential for the current cognitive and brain sciences. Genuine inte-
gration of results across these sciences has proved to be more elusive than what
many had hoped for or predicted a half-century ago, when both ﬁelds began to
ﬂourish. Even real cross-pollination of serious research between systems/cognitive

When Two Levels Collide
661
and cellular/molecular neuroscience is fairly rare. It is hard enough to keep up with
the published literature in one’s own speciﬁc research area, much less to branch one’s
program across the systems/cognitive-cellular/molecular neuroscience divide. And
this cross-ﬁeld gulf grows even broader and more difﬁcult to span in anything but
ﬂowery rhetoric when we expand it to include all of the cognitive sciences, including
cognitive psychology, artiﬁcial intelligence, cognitive anthropology, and the like.
Specialists in any of these ﬁelds rarely even read across these divisions for anything
more than avocational amusement, much less pursue actual research that crosses
them.
Interpreting explanation mismatches like the one I sketched in Sect. 1 above as
being (little-e) eliminativist for the cognitive explanations would further complicate
integration across these divides. If ongoing cellular/molecular research sometimes
demonstrates the incorrectness of some explanations accepted in cognitive science,
one can appreciate a “no, thanks,” judgment by cellular/molecular neurobiologists
about a call to integrate explanations from cognitive science into their ongoing
research, even heuristically as guides for cellular-molecular investigations. After all,
if the Genoux et al. (2002) team had gone looking for some cellular/molecular mech-
anism that attenuated ongoing processing of previously presented memory stimuli, or
cordoned rehearsal time and effort to speciﬁc memories, or tracked co-encoded extra-
memory stimulus contextual features from training episodes, they would not have
found the intracellular pCREB-PP1 interaction explanation for the Ebbinghaus data.
Nothing in those accepted cognitive explanations would have pointed them toward
developing their I1* mutant mice. And as the neurobiological ﬁeld of MCC continues
to expand its explanatory reach into other cognitive phenomena beyond those of core
learning and memory, it seems reasonable to conjecture that more cognitive-MCC
mismatches will be discovered. No one need insist implausibly that such mismatches
will be ubiquitous, or even the norm. Some cognitive explanations already match up
reasonably well with discovered neurobiological mechanisms. (Bechtel, 2009 Sect. 4
contains some good examples.) But if one is inclined to treat such mismatches when
found as evidence for (little-e) elimination of the cognitive explanations, this might
give one methodological pause. From the perspective of pursuing MCC research, one
might be inclined to pay no attention to existing cognitive explanations of phenomena
now coming into new MCC experimental focus, and instead push forward directly
toward ﬁnding cellular/molecular explanations for the behavioral data. And then let
the cross-level matches or mismatches, and so the status of the cognitive explana-
tions, fall as they may. This is hardly the picture of interdisciplinary research that
many have envisioned.
In presenting the case study in Sect. 1 above I was careful to indicate the “per-
spectival” aspect of the claimed mismatch between the cognitive-scientiﬁc and the
neurobiological explanations, preﬁxing my discussions with expressions like “from
the perspective of MCC …” (I ﬁrst made mention of such phrasing in footnote 8
above.) I’ve just done the same for the little-e eliminativist interpretation of such
mismatches. Might not cognitive scientists reply that turnabout is fair play? Why
can’t a cognitive scientist appeal to his or her own perspective to interpret such

662
J. Bickle
mismatches, i.e., “from the perspective of cognitive science, the discovered intracel-
lular pCREB-PP1 interactions are irrelevant to our investigations and explanations
…” ‘Autonomy’ arguments for cognitive science vis-à-vis neurobiology sometimes
take exactly this perspectival tack. Wouldn’t this response render the little-e elimi-
nativist interpretation of these mismatches likewise irrelevant for ongoing cognitive
science?
A problem with such a response lies in an important difference between cogni-
tive science and neurobiology—a difference that many cognitive scientists acknowl-
edge. Despite the abstraction of cognitive-scientiﬁc concerns and explanations from
cellular and molecular details of “blooming, buzzing brains,” nevertheless many
cognitive scientists and their philosopher allies accept a demand on the ‘neural
plausibility’ of cognitive explanations. ‘Neural plausibility’ is a slippery and highly
ambiguous desideratum, especially in practice. However, if the notion is to have any
real content, it at least requires consistency of a cognitive explanation with what
comes to be known about actual cellular and molecular brain mechanisms. In his
review paper on recent data and cognitive explanations of the Ebbinghaus spacing
effect that I discussed in Sect. 1 above, Maddox (2016) commits to at least this
much “neural plausibility” (see the quote in footnote 7 above). Cellular and molec-
ular neuroscientists are under no similar demand for consistency with even widely
accepted cognitive explanations. It’s nice when neurobiologists ﬁnd cross-level
consistency with cognitive explanations of related phenomena, but nothing compels
neurobiologists to seek it out, or to question the scientiﬁc validity of their ﬁndings
if they fail to achieve it. Even cognitive scientists who insist that their explanations
“constraint” lower level explanations must admit that this pull on neurobiologists is
weaker than a demand that cognitive explanations be “neurally plausible.”
In his important defense of cognitive/systems neuroscience for addressing ques-
tions about higher “levels of mechanisms,”10 William Bechtel implicitly requires
consistency with the cellular/molecular mechanisms lower in the ‘nested hierarchies
of mechanisms-within-mechanisms’ jointly composing the system: “Researchers
pursuing [cognitive/systems] research are fully aware that the brain regions they
study are comprised of neurons and that processes such as the generation of
action potentials and the altering of communication at synapses are crucial to the
behavior of the brain regions” (2009, 34; emphasis added). Even for mechanists,
inconsistencies across “levels of mechanisms” composing a single system are a
problem. A “complete nested-hierarchy of mechanisms-within-mechanisms” expla-
nation of a cognitive system performing some speciﬁc cognitive function cannot
tolerate the cellular/molecular mechanisms to provide one explanation while the
network/systems one provides a different one. The higher-level mechanisms that
explain a system’s behavior decompose completely into the components, activities
and organization of the lower-level mechanisms. The kind of cross-level explanation
mismatch detailed in the case study in Sect. 1 is a problematic inconsistency even
for mechanists.
10 Talk of “levels” (of mechanisms) here is Bechtel’s, but his is the weak “componency” account I
adopted at the outset above.

When Two Levels Collide
663
In this context it is worth pointing out what “neural plausibility” amounts to
from the perspective of MCC. Neurons are bi-lipid membrane-bound molecular
mechanisms for moving ions selectively across those membranes, releasing receptor-
binding molecules for generating ionic movements across the membranes of other
neurons. This is where the ﬁgurative causal-mechanical “rubber meets the road”
in functioning nervous tissue. Those are also exactly the mechanisms that MCC
researchers manipulate experimentally, and then appeal to in explanations of behav-
ioral data taken to operationalize some cognitive function for experimental inves-
tigation. From the perspective of MCC, those are the neuroscientiﬁc phenomena
that a cognitive explanation must decompose into if it is to be “neurally plausible.”
For those are the phenomena experimenters can now manipulate experimentally
and affect behavior that operationalizes cognitive phenomena like the Ebbinghaus
spacing effect.
So the “neural plausibility” assumption adopted by many cognitive scientists rules
out their offering a “turnabout is fair play” response to a “little-e” eliminativst inter-
pretation of cognitive-neurobiological explanation mismatches from the perspec-
tive of neurobiology. But there are other ways that cognitive scientists might resist
little-e eliminativism about such mismatches. One way is to adopt a recent trend in
philosophy of science that builds on a distinction between ‘data’ and ‘phenomena’
introduced by philosophers of science Bogen and Woodward (1988).11 Although
Bogen and Woodward introduced this distinction to contribute to a debate that has
since lost its attraction, namely the “theory-ladeness” of observation in science and
its epistemological consequences, recent authors have emphasized the impact of
their distinction on the difﬁculty and importance of individuating (“characterizing”)
scientiﬁc phenomena (Colaço, 2020; Craver & Darden, 2013). According to Bogen
and Woodward, ‘data’ can be straightforwardly observed, while ‘phenomena’ for the
most part cannot (“in any interesting sense of that term,” 1988, 306). Data “play the
role of evidence of the existence of the phenomena” (1988, 305). Examples of data
“include bubble chamber photographs, patterns of discharge in electronic particle
detectors and records of reactions times and error rates in various psychological
experiments”; examples of phenomena “for which the above data might provide
evidence, [are] weak neutral currents, the decay of the proton, and chunking and
recency effect in human memory” (1988, 306). Data are “idiosyncratic to particular
experimental contexts,” while phenomena “can occur in a wide variety of different
situations or contexts … we expect phenomena to have stable, repeatable characteris-
tics which will be detectable by means of a variety of different procedures, which may
yield quite different kinds of data” (1988, 317). Little-e eliminativist interpretations
of the kinds of cross-level explanation mismatches sketched here can be avoided by
proponents of the higher-level accounts by showing that the two explanations address
different phenomena. E.g., the ‘Ebbinghaus spacing effect’ that cognitive scientists
seek to explain is a different scientiﬁc phenomenon in this Bogen-Woodward sense
than is the ‘Ebbinghaus spacing effect’ that the pCREB-PP1 intraneural interactions
11 Thanks to David Colaço for suggesting to me this cognitivist response.

664
J. Bickle
of MCC explain. Of course, this idea is just a strategy for avoiding a little-e elimina-
tivist interpretation. The cognitive scientists must show that the scientiﬁc phenomena
differ across the two explanations. The mere fact that the experimental data differ
alone does not establish a difference between the phenomena explained.
Another cognitivist strategy for avoiding the little-e eliminativist interpretation of
cross-level explanation mismatches is to adopt some characterization of ‘autonomy.’
One promising example is that of philosophers Polger and Shapiro (2016).12 Polger
and Shapiro defend a version of a mind-brain identity theory from multiple realization
arguments long thought to falsify such views, but they emphasize that their account
is not ontologically eliminativist about psychological kinds. This is because of their
three types of arguments against multiple realization—“uniﬁcationist” arguments
which ﬁnd relevant commonalities in the realized and realizing kinds, “heuristic,
abstraction, and idealization” arguments that characterize practices in contempo-
rary cognitive science, and their plump for taxonomic “kind splitting”—none leads
to any troubling elminativist conclusion. And by further adopting James Wood-
ward’s (2003) “interventionist difference-making” account of causal explanation,
Polger and Shapiro seek to deﬂect the charge that their identity theory undermines
the legitimacy of psychological explanations, and thus rules out any autonomy for
psychology vis-à-vis neuroscience. They claim that charge rests on an overly strin-
gent and misguided understanding of scientiﬁc explanation. Identity theorists can be
and should be pluralists about scientiﬁc explanation. Neuroscientists can appeal to
neural causes, psychologists and cognitive scientists to mental causes. Since both
can cite causal invariances at their respective levels, both offer genuine explana-
tions. Despite the mind-brain identities that Polger and Shapiro accept, psychology
remains a methodologically autonomous science.13 Their kind of autonomy will
look promising to contemporary cognitive scientists who advocate even aa fairly
strong sense of “neural plausibility” on their explanations. Scientiﬁc buyer beware,
however; Polger and Shapiro (2016) traverse fairly complicated “metaphysics of
science” labyrinths to develop their identity theory! I for one am not an enthusiast
for that journey. And there remains a difﬁculty within their approach for handling
detailed cross-level mismatches like the one described here. How can one identify
cognitive kinds like the ones advocated by contemporary cognitive explanations
of the Ebbinghaus spacing data, with neuromolecular kinds, like the intraneuronal
pCREB-PP1 interactions in the neurons most highly activated by the memory stim-
ulus, when the cross-level explanation pairs don’t even share the same functional
proﬁles? Won’t doing so stretch our sense of ‘identity’ beyond the breaking point?
Of course, another possible strategy for avoiding a little-e eliminativist interpre-
tation of these kinds of cross-level explanation mismatches is for cognitive scientists
to simply ignore the neuroscience ﬁndings that mismatch with accepted cognitive
explanations. As I mention in my discussion of the case study above (footnote 7), in
his recent review cognitive scientist Geoffrey Maddox (2016) accepts the relevance
12 I offer a similar description of Polger and Shapiro’s account of autonomy in Bickle (2020).
13 Polger and Shapiro’s (2016) defense of psychology’s autonomy resembles Woodward’s (2018)
recent defense of a more general kind of explanatory autonomy.

When Two Levels Collide
665
of neurobiological results toward adjudicating competing cognitive explanations of
the Ebbinghaus spacing effect, but fails to mention the Genoux et al. (2002) paper
(despite its publication in Nature, a high-proﬁle journal across all of science). The
vast disciplinary divides that separate cognitive science from molecular neuroscience
encourage this kind of indifference. But ignoring such experimental results and the
explanationstiedtothem,orassumingthatone’sownfavoredcognitivistexplanations
will not be subject to similar mismatches as MCC marches onward, amounts to, in
American vernacular, cognitive scientists “whistling past the graveyard”: remaining
cheerfully in pursuit of an action while blithely oblivious to real risks lurking about;
proceeding conﬁdently with a task while remaining willfully indifferent to frightful
hazards lurking nearby.
3
When Distinct Cognitive Phenomena Get “Lumped”
into a Single Neurobiological Mechanism
A different way that cognitive science and neurobiology can mismatch has not
to do with counterpart explanations of related phenomena, but rather in a way
that related phenomena characterized across levels match up. Sometimes a recog-
nized phenomenon from cognitive science “splits” into distinct neurobiological
phenomena. Other times phenomena recognized as distinct within cognitive science
get “lumped” into a single neurobiological phenomenon.14 “Splitting” is much
discussed by philosophers and scientists; the example of ‘memory’ is common-
place, which “splits” into multiple forms rooted in distinct brain systems (Squire,
1987). Phenomena “splitting” doesn’t tend to generate interpretive difﬁculties, as the
acknowledged abstraction of cognitive concerns from neurobiological detail seems
readily to accommodate its occurrence. “Lumping,” however, is sometimes not so
easilyaccommodated,especiallywhenseeminglyquitedistinctcognitivephenomena
get “lumped” surprisingly into a single underlying neurobiological mechanism, as
I explore in this section. Again I will focus on a detailed case study. A distinction
between phenomena that cognitive science recognizes, even operationalizes differ-
ently for experimental investigation, seems to be eliminated. But it is not so clear
what we should say about those cognitive phenomena. I illustrate this with some
recent work on visual attention.
Vision neuroscientist John Maunsell (2015) offers a philosophically astute assess-
ment of this recent work relating two cognitive phenomena: “The terminology we
use to describe attention and related phenomena is vague. On the one hand, we likely
fail to appreciate distinct aspects of attention. On the other hand, we might be using
different terms to describe a common mechanism. With respect to the latter, important
issues exist regarding the relationship of attention to reward expectation.” (2015, 384;
14 The “splitter”/“lumper” distinction is often traced back to McKusick’s (1969) essay concerning
the nosology of genetic diseases. His humorous Fig. 1 illustrates this distinction.

666
J. Bickle
my emphases) From a cognitive perspective, these phenomena are related. As Maun-
sell (2015) points out, in behavioral studies experimenters often direct an animal’s
visual attention to a particular stimulus or location by altering either the quantity or
probability of the reward associated with the animal’s correct responses. For nearly
two decades Maunsell has complained that experimenters using this strategy are
potentially confounding attention effects with reward expectation effects (see, e.g.,
his 2004). But from a neurobiological mechanism perspective this relationship may
be even closer. Attention cues and reward expectation cues might activate one and the
same neural feedback processing pathway eliciting activity augmentation in visual
neurons all the way back to the earliest stage of cortical visual processing. What then
do we say about these phenomena that cognitive science distinguishes?
In his (2015) review Maunsell points us to the work of Dutch researchers Chris
van der Togt, Pieter Roelfsema, and collaborators, who showed that experiments
manipulating both visual attention and reward expectation cues reveal statistically
identical effects of both manipulations on individual neuron activity rates in primary
visualcortex(V1).St˘ani¸soretal.(2013)ﬁrstinvestigatedtheeffectsofcuesindicating
quantity of reward to be expected (high, medium, or low) on both behavior and
activity in V1 neurons in non-human primates (rhesus macaques). They developed
an eye-movement curve-tracing task, where the animal starts from an initial visual
ﬁxation point, and after a delay period must saccade (make directed eye movements)
to the end point of one of two curves. The to-be-rewarded curve target of the two was
indicated by a cue that appears after the two curves and targets appear and disappear,
at the end of the delay period where the animal maintains central visual ﬁxation.
Operationally, the visual attention cue indicating the to-be-rewarded saccade target
was prior training to the length of the curve from ﬁxation point to target; only the
target curve reached all the way from ﬁxation point to target (see St˘ani¸sor et al., 2013,
Fig. 1). At the end of the delay period, when the location cue of the target stimulus
appeared, the animal had to make a saccade to the indicated target in order to receive
the reward for a successful performance. Activity in individual V1 neurons was
recorded on each trial both prior to the appearance of the strength-of-reward cues and
during the delay period just prior to saccade initiation to target. The receptive ﬁelds
of the V1 neurons being recorded from always occurred within one of the possible
curves. St˘ani¸sor et al. operationalized reward expectation by prior training to color
of the target stimuli, with different colors denoting low, medium, or high reward for a
successful saccade to it. Rewards were different amounts of fruit juice administered
to macaques who had been denied liquids for 24 h prior to experimentation. Animals
were only rewarded for saccading within a speciﬁed time limit to the location of the
cued end-of-curve stimulus, and then received the amount of fruit juice indicated by
the color of that target cue. Monkeys received no rewards for trials in which they
failed to maintain ﬁxation for the duration of the delay period, or saccaded to the
non-targeted “distracter” color-coded stimulus or to anywhere else.
As expected, behaviorally the monkeys’ saccade accuracy and speed increased
signiﬁcantly to target stimuli indicating high, as opposed to low, reward value. Inter-
estingly, these behavioral effects matched statistically the increases in speed and
accuracy of saccades of macaques engaged in strictly visual attentional tasks without

When Two Levels Collide
667
differential reward expectations; saccade speed and accuracy increase similarly when
saccades are directed to attended rather than unattended target locations (e.g., Desi-
mone & Duncan, 1995). More interestingly, activity rates (action potential frequen-
cies) in individual V1 neurons were also inﬂuenced by the expected reward values,
with increased gain in action potential rate with successful saccades to target stimuli
indicatinghighrewardexpectationas comparedtothoseindicatinglowrewardexpec-
tation (see St˘ani¸sor et al. (2013), Fig. 2). Just as with the behavioral component of this
ﬁrst experiment, these increases in neuronal activity in V1 neurons to high reward
cues statistically matched increases found in prior studies using purely spatial atten-
tion cues (without differential reward expectations) that directed the animal to attend
to the receptive ﬁelds of the individual V1 neurons being recorded from, as compared
to attention directed outside those neurons’ receptive ﬁelds (e.g., Roelfsema et al.,
2003). These statistical identities suggested that, both behaviorally and neurophysio-
logically, activity driven by high reward expectation cues and that driven by selective
attention location cues might result from activation of a single neural mechanism.
If that was true, then what cognitive science distinguishes as two distinct kinds of
phenomena, reward expectation and selective visual attention, and even operational-
izes experimentally using prior training to different visual cues, would turn out to
be a single mechanism from the perspective of neurobiology. This discovery would
give us a second kind of cross-level mismatch between counterpart cognitive science
and neurobiology, but here not a mismatch between explanations but rather between
phenomena. Phenomena that cognitive science distinguishes, namely visual attention
location and reward expectation, neurobiology would unite into one and the same
mechanism. But could a unitary neurobiological mechanism for visual attention and
reward expectation be demonstrated experimentally, directly on the lab bench?
To explore this question, St˘ani¸sor et al. (2013) developed a second experiment.
The monkeys’ task was similar to that in their ﬁrst experiment, but with one additional
delay period inserted prior to the monkeys’ making the to-be-rewarded saccade to the
target stimulus location. In this second experiment the initial ﬁxation point appears,
indicating a new trial; the monkey ﬁxates it, and then the two curves appear with the
strength of reward expectation associated with each saccade target cued by its color.
Then the ﬁrst delay period ensues, before the appearance of the length-of-curve cue
indicating the location of the target that is to be rewarded for the upcoming saccade.
So far this experiment exactly matches the methodology of the ﬁrst experiment. But
with the appearance of the location-of-target cue, the ﬁxation point still remains
illuminated, initiating a further delay period. The monkey must wait through this
second delay, maintaining ﬁxation on the initial ﬁxation point, then when the ﬁxation
point ﬁnally extinguishes the monkey must saccade to the indicated target stimulus in
order to receive the amount of fruit juice reward indicated by its color (low, medium,
or high). Activity in individual V1 neurons was recorded during the ﬁrst delay after
the presentation of the stimulus reward cue in those neurons’ visual ﬁelds, as in
the ﬁrst experiment; but now also during the second delay period after the location-
of-target stimulus has been indicated but while the monkey cannot yet execute the
saccade. What was the purpose of V1 recordings during this second delay period?
St˘ani¸sor et al. reasoned as follows:

668
J. Bickle
If reward cues and attentional cues have separable effects, they are expected to interact in
an additive manner and to inﬂuence independent groups of neurons. However, if there is
a single neuronal selection mechanism at the level of V1, then (i) the neuronal effects of
reward and attention cues might interact nonadditively because the effect of one cue might
occlude the effect of the other one and (ii) neurons inﬂuenced by reward cues should also
be affected by the central attentional cue. (2013, 9138)
Comparison of activity in individual V1 neurons during the ﬁrst and second delays
thus permitted an experimental test of the independence or non-independence of the
neurobiological mechanisms of the reward expectation cue and the visual attention
location cue at the earliest stage of cortical visual processing.
St˘ani¸sor et al.’s results from this second experiment were unequivocally in favor
of the neurobiological non-independence of reward expectation and visual attention
location cues (2013, Fig. 3). Just as in their ﬁrst experiment, during the ﬁrst delay
period,beforetheanimallearnedwhichtargetlocationwouldberewarded,thereward
value of the cue in the individual V1 neuron’s receptive ﬁeld was a good predictor
of its activity rate; cues for higher expected rewards in a neuron’s receptive ﬁeld
drove higher action potential frequencies. However, during the second delay, when
the to-be-rewarded target location had been distinguished from the distractor by the
visual attention cue but the animal still wasn’t permitted to execute the saccade,
and speciﬁcally on trials in which the monkey subsequently saccaded to the correct
target location, correlation between V1 neuron activity and reward value of the cue
in its receptive ﬁeld became nonsigniﬁcant. In fact, reward value of the cue lost all
inﬂuence on individual V1 neuron activity during the second delay. Activity evoked
by the curve in the V1 neuron’s receptive ﬁeld with a high reward value stayed high
if that curve was later cued as the target location before the second delay period,
but decreased to baseline if that curve became the distractor. Conversely, activity
evoked by a curve with a low relative reward value stayed low during the second
delay if that curve became the distractor, but increased to the level evoked by a
high-reward expectation cue if that curve became the target. Thus the effects of the
visual attention target cue during the second delay period simply replaced the relative
reward value cueing effects during the ﬁrst delay on V1 neuron activity, so long as the
monkey subsequently correctly selected the target curve after the second delay. As
St˘ani¸sor et al. put it in the paper’s Discussion section, “the present results show that
the effects of the reward cues on neuronal activity in V1 are the same as the effects
of central attention cues in many respects” (2013, 9140). In particular, these effects
were the same in the two respects the experimenters had hypothesized if reward
expectation and visual attention cues were not independent: reward expectation and
visual attention cues interacted nonadditively on individual V1 neurons; and the same
V1 neurons were affected by the two types of cues.
How best to explain these similar effects of reward expectation and visual attention
cues? St˘ani¸sor et al. offer “a likely explanation … the central [attentional] cues
also inﬂuence the relative value of the two curves” (2013, 9140). In other words,
“the present results support the hypothesis that studies on selective attention …
and relative value … in the visual cortex investigated the same selection process”
(2013, 9140). As Maunsell had noted in the review paper cited earlier in this section,

When Two Levels Collide
669
often monkeys are trained to attend to speciﬁc stimuli or locations by varying reward
contingencies to attended versus unattended stimuli; and studies of reward processing
likewise typically inﬂuence the distribution of subjects’ selective attention across the
displayed stimuli. According to St˘ani¸sor et al. “a single selection process is at work
… rewarding stimuli attract attention in proportion to their value” (2013, 9140). What
might this single selection process be? Since their presentation of target and distractor
stimuli locations on a single trial required comparisons across regions far apart in
visual space, St˘ani¸sor et al. speculate that the modulation of activity in individual V1
neurons, each with relatively limited receptive ﬁelds, “likely … depends on feedback
from higher visual and frontal areas and the amygdala where the representation of
reward value depends less on the spatial conﬁguration of stimuli” (2013, 9140). Their
suggestion is that visual attention location and reward expectation generate activity
in one single feedback mechanism from these higher visual processing areas back
to V1 neurons. This feedback affects processing to speciﬁc visual stimuli in V1 and
subsequent processing further up the visual pathways.
Whatever this feedback pathway might be, the mismatch implications of this study
concerning cognitive science and neurobiology are intriguing. Cognitive science
distinguishes reward expectation and selective visual attention phenomena. In behav-
ioral studies, these notions are even operationalized using prior training to different
visual cues, e.g., in the St˘ani¸sor et al. study attention to target location as opposed to
distractor location stimulus was indicated by length of saccade curve, while (quantity
of) reward expectation was operationalized by prior training to differently colored
target stimuli. From the perspective of neurobiology, however, a single mechanism is
found to affect activity at the earliest stages of cortical visual processing in response
to both attention location and reward expectation cues. In this type of cross-level
mismatch, phenomena that cognitive science distinguishes, neurobiology reveals
to evoke a single mechanism. From the perspective of neurobiology, a distinction
between cognitive phenomena, even one distinguished operationally in behavioral
studies, is not found in the brain. As vision neuroscientist John Maunsell put it in
the quote that began this section, “regarding the relationship of attention and reward
expectation,” cognitive science appears to be “using different terms to describe a
common mechanism.”
In the previous section we examined ways we might interpret mismatches of coun-
terpart explanations across cognitive science and neurobiology. Interestingly here,
none of the ones to remain available when cognitive scientists accept a common
“neural plausibility” constraint on its explanations look particularly promising in
this case of “lumping” differentiated cognitive phenomena into one and the same
neurobiological mechanism. A distinction among phenomena recognized by cogni-
tivesciencegetseliminated.Buthavevisualattentionlocationandrewardexpectation
qua cognitive phenomena been little-e eliminated. Surely visual attention location
and reward expectation still exist, even if they are subserved by one and the same
neurobiological pathway. They can still be operationalized distinctly in a study that
manipulates both! Yet these two ways of operationalizing visual attention location
and reward expectation doesn’t “save” their distinctiveness as phenomena from the
perspective of neurobiology. From that perspective the distinct cues for each of these

670
J. Bickle
cognitive phenomena appear to be activating one and the same neurobiological mech-
anism. It is also not clear what the ‘autonomy’ of cognitive science amounts to, or
what comfort it offers the cognitive scientist, when we learn that these separable cues
turn out to activate one and the same neurobiological mechanism from upstream back
to downstream visual processing areas.15
4
Cross-Level Mismatches Beyond the Behavioral
and Brain Sciences
I close with an observation. There is nothing unique in the ways explored here about
cognitive science and MCC neurobiology. Cross-level explanation and phenomena
mismatches of these types, and probably of other types, are possibilities whenever
two sciences pitched at different “levels” of biological organization begin to inves-
tigate related phenomena. These kinds of mismatches are not inevitable; plenty of
counterpart cross-levels scientiﬁc explanations and phenomena align smoothly with
one another. But mismatches are also not impossible or unheard of. And their exis-
tence and possibility complicates prospects for the interdisciplinary aspirations of
contemporary science writ large. Most molecular biologists accept a demand on
the biochemical and physical (‘physics-cal’) plausibility of their explanation and
phenomena. Some sociologists and economists aspire for their explanations to be
psychologically or even neuroscientiﬁcally plausible. Sometimes existing explana-
tions from a science focused on the system turn out to link smoothly with ones from
sciences investigating that system’s components, their dynamics and organization.
But sometimes serious cross-level mismatches occur. If we aspire for science to link
electrons, elephants, and elections, we must acknowledge cross-science explanation
and phenomena mismatches as well as matches. And we must ﬁgure out what these
mismatches imply for the status of the higher-level explanations and phenomena. To
not do so would be to fail to include some actual episodes from science-in-practice,
and so would limit the scope of any metascientiﬁc relationship we derive from studies
of how cross-level sciences link up.
References
Bechtel, W. (2009). Molecules, systems and behavior: Another view of memory consolidation.
In J. Bickle (Ed.), The Oxford handbook of philosophy and neuroscience (pp. 13–40). Oxford
University Press.
Bechtel, W. (2008). Mental mechanisms: Philosophical perspectives on cognitive science. Taylor &
Francis.
Bickle, J. (2003). Philosophy and neuroscience: A Ruthlessly reductive account. Springer.
15 Thanks again to David Colaço for helping me clarify some o the ways this second kind of
cross-level mismatch differs from the ﬁrst kind discussed in Sects. 1 and 2 above.

When Two Levels Collide
671
Bickle, J. (2006). Reducing mind to molecular pathways: Explicating the reductionism implicit in
current cellular and molecular neuroscience. Synthese, 151, 411–434.
Bickle, J. (2014). Little-e elminativism in mainstream cellular and molecular neuroscience: Tensions
for neuro-normativity. In C. T. Wolfe (Ed.), Brain theory (pp. 134–148). Palgrave Macmillan.
Bickle, J. (2012). A brief history of neurosciences’s actual inﬂuences on mind-brain reductionism.
In S. Gozzano & C. Hill (Eds.), New perspectives on type identity theory (pp. 88–109). Cambridge
University Press.
Bickle,J.(2020).Multiplyrealizability.InE.N.Zalta(Ed.),TheStanfordencyclopediaofphilosophy
(Summer 2020 Edition). https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/sum2020/entries/multiple-realizabi
lity/
Bogen, J., & Woodward, J. (1988). Saving the phenomena. Philosophical Review, 97(3), 303–352.
Churchland, P. M. (1981). Eliminative materialism and the propositional attitudes. Journal of
Philosophy, 78, 67–90.
Churchland, P. S. (1986). Neurophilosophy. MIT Press.
Colaço, D. (2020). Recharacterizing scientiﬁc phenomena. European Journal of Philosophy of
Science, 10(2), 1–19.
Craver, C. F. (2007). Explaining the brain. Oxford University Press.
Craver, C. F., & Darden, L. (2013). In search of mechanisms. University of Chicago Press.
Desimone, R., & Duncan, J. (1995). Neuronal mechanisms of selective visual attention. Annual
Review of Neuroscience, 18, 193–222.
Genoux, D., Haditsch, U., Knobloch, M., Michalon, A., Storm, D., & Mansuy, I. M. (2002). Protein
phosphatase 1 is a molecular constraint on learning and memory. Nature, 418(6901), 970–975.
Gillett, C. (2016). Reduction and emergence in science and philosophy. Cambridge University
Press.
Han, J.-H., Kushner, S. A., Yiu, A. P., Cole, C. I., Matynia, A., Brown, R. A., Neve, R. I., Guzowski,
J. F., Silva, A. J., & Josselyn, S. A. (2007). Neuronal competition and selection during memory
formation. Science, 316(5823), 457–460.
Han, J. -H., Kushner, S. A., Yiu, A. P., Hsiang, H. -L., Buch, T., Waisman, A., Bontempi, B., Neve,
R. l., Frankland, P. W., & Josselyn, S. A. (2009). Selective erasure of a fear memory. Science,
323(5920), 1492–1496.
Larson, S. D., & Martone, M. E. (2009). Ontologies for neuroscience: What are they and what are
they good for? Frontiers in Neuroscience (May 01, 2009). https://doi.org/10.3389/neuro.01.007.
2009
Maddox, G. B. (2016). Understanding the underlying mechanisms of the spacing effect in
verbal learning: A case for encoding variability and study-phase retrieval. Journal of Cognitive
Psychology, 28(6), 684–706.
Maunsell, J. H. R. (2004). Neuronal representations of cognitive state: Reward or attention? Trends
in Cognitive Science, 8, 261–265.
Maunsell, J. H. R. (2015). Neuronal mechanisms of visual attention. Annual Review of Vision
Science, 1, 373–391.
McKusick, V. A. (1969). On lumpers and splitters, or the nosology of genetic disease. Perspectives
in Biology and Medicine Winter, 12(2), 298–312.
Piccinini, G., & Craver, C. (2011). Integrating psychology and neuroscience: Functional analyses
as mechanism sketches. Synthese, 183(3), 283–311.
Polger, T. (2004). Natural minds. MIT Press.
Polger, T., & Shapiro, L. (2016). The multiple realization book. Oxford University Press.
Roelfsema, P. R., Khayat, P. S., & Spekreijse, H. (2003). Subtask sequencing in the primary visual
cortex. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences (USA), 100(9), 5467–5472.
Silva, A. J., Landreth, A., & Bickle, J. (2014). Engineering the next revolution in neuroscience.
Oxford University Press.
Silva, A. J., & Josselyn, S. A. (2002). The molecules of forgetfulness. Nature, 418(6901), 929–930.
Spear, N. E., & Riccio, D. C. (1994). Memory: Phenomena and principles. Allyen and Bacon.
Squire, L. (1987). Memory and brain. Oxford University Press.

672
J. Bickle
St˘ani¸sor, L., van der Togt, C., Cyriel, M. A., & Roelfsema, P. R. (2013). A uniﬁed selection signal for
attention and reward in primary visual cortex. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
(USA), 110(22), 9136–9141.
Woodward, J. (2003). Making things happen: A theory of causal explanation. Oxford University
Press.
Woodward, J. (2018). Explanations in neurobiology: An interventionist perspective. In D. M. Kaplan
(Ed.), Explanation and integration in mind-Brian science (pp. 70–100). Oxford University Press.
Zhou, Y., Won, J., Karlsson, M. G., Zhou, M., Rogerson, T., Balaji, J., Neve, R., Poirazi, P., & Silva,
A. J. (2009). CREB regulates the excitability and the allocation of memory to subsets of neurons
in the amgydala. Nature Neuroscience, 12, 1438–1443.

Biology

Some Remarks on Epigenetics
and Causality in the Biological World
Luciano Boi
1
Introduction
The understanding of the amazing complexity and plasticity of high living organ-
isms requires we investigate their organismal properties and their interactions with
a larger, both natural and cultural environment (Jacob, 1970; Boi, 2011a; Emmeche,
1997). We are faced with the need of shifting from the local description of the
molecular-genetic structure of DNA to the study of the networks of interactions
between early development and evolution of complex living organisms, and of the
way in which epigenetic, environmental and social factors affects the behavior and
response of living beings. It is important to highlight the enormous impact of epige-
netic and environmental phenomena on biological, cognitive and social processes.
Another signiﬁcant goal is to show that epigenetic, ecological and cultural effects
can also be inherited across generations. This notably means that natural history and
human evolution have been shaped by gene-culture and organisms-environments
interactions. Thus, our ‘living environments’, such as natural and urban landscapes,
learning processes and cultural contexts, can have a profound effect on phenotypic
variations and human evolution; conversely, human activities and cultural practices
can modify organism’ metabolism and the contingent ‘history’ of evolution’ paths.
We think that this cross-disciplinary dialogue may provide novel insights into how
nature and culture are deeply interrelated and is essential for bringing biological
sciences and social sciences together in a very new perspective.
Within this perspective, we speciﬁcally pursue a twofold objective. First, we
want to show that positive selection of morphological and functional capabilities
during evolution may have developed in response to human cultural practices. Next,
that the organisms-environments systems have co-evolved over evolutionary time
L. Boi (B)
Ecole des Hautes Etudes en Sciences Sociales, Center of Mathematics and Program of
Epistemology, 54, boulevard Raspail, 75006 Paris, France
e-mail: lboi@ehess.fr
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
S. Wuppuluri and I. Stewart (eds.), From Electrons to Elephants and Elections,
The Frontiers Collection, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-92192-7_36
675

676
L. Boi
through different interacting processes (for example: symbiosis as a source of novel
traits; huge geographic migrations as a cause of genetic evolutionary and linguistic
variation; radioactive large-rate pollution as a factor of genomic and phenotypic
mutation) and niche-construction, that is the capacity of organisms to affect natural
selection and evolution by modiﬁcations of their micro- and macro environments.
2
The Different Meanings of Epigenetics
To some, epigenetics means nuclear inheritance not based on differences in DNA
sequence, i.e. trans-generational effects and inherited expression states; to others,
epigenetics belongs in the province of expressed nucleic acid information, that is
changes in gene expression (Lederberg, 1958; Holliday, 1994). The word epige-
netics has essentially two different meaning following that it is used by molecular
biologists or by morphologists and systems biologists. Molecular biologists favored
the restricted deﬁnition of epigenetics as the study of mitotically and/or meiotically
heritable changes in gene function that cannot be explained by changes in DNA
sequences (Morange, 2000). For them, epigenetic mechanisms would include DNA
methylation and histone modiﬁcation. Functional morphologists, however, preferred
a larger and more global deﬁnition such as that of Herring (1993), for whom epige-
netics refers to the entire series of interactions among cells and cell products which
leads to morphogenesis and differentiation. Thus, epigenetic inﬂuences range from
hormonesandgrowthfactorstoambienttemperatureandorientationinagravitational
ﬁeld.
Although serviceable, these views of epigenetic events tend to be very provin-
cial. They neglect the current consequences of past history, and underestimate the
non-genetic contributions to the phenotype. Perhaps, those working with animal
behaviour have been most ready to include non-genetic inﬂuences in formulation of
adult behaviors (phenotype). The development of bird songs (e.g., Konishi, 1965;
Marler, 1990) and of offspring imprinting (e.g., Lorenz, 1965) would be a few exam-
ples. Similarly, morphologists are in a position to recognize the importance of non-
genetic features that contribute to the phenotype of an organism and how it evolves.
To do so, and place epigenetics in a modern idiom, we should adopt and slightly
expand on the term epigenomics, meaning the analysis of the normal non-genetic
processes that inﬂuence the characteristics of the phenotype during the lifetime of
the organism and the historical-contingent inﬂuences included. These events occur
above (hence epi-) and beyond the level of the DNA (hence genomic). Note that,
because the phenotype is also an historical product, evolutionary events important to
epigenomics must similarly be incorporated into analysis (Strohman, 1997).
Examples of non-genetic contributions to the phenotype have been known for
some time, have been repeated frequently in scientiﬁc publications, and have received
extensive reviews (Hall, 1970). The sex of many reptiles depends upon the tempera-
ture, or schedule of temperatures, the embryos experience while in the egg (Webb &
Cooper-Preston, 1989). Nutritional deﬁciencies lead to phenotypic changes. Calcium

Some Remarks on Epigenetics and Causality in the Biological World
677
deﬁciencies during infancy lead to rickets. In humans, bound feet, wrapped skulls
and cradle boards all produce modiﬁed mechanical demands which result in modi-
ﬁcations of the skeleton. Careful experimental manipulations illustrate the impor-
tance of mechanical events in the differentiation of the phenotype. Leg muscles of
the developing chick contract irregularly while still in the egg, thereby producing
an intermittent environment of mechanical stresses experienced by the femur (and
other leg bones). If deprived of this mechanical environment, by removing embryonic
muscles or growing the femur as an explant, then the developing femur is misshapen;
its diaphysis is bowed, and its ends indistinct (Murray, 1936). Removing the tempo-
ralis jaw muscles and/or the cervical muscles in-day-old rats resulted (3–5 months)
in morphological deﬁciencies later; the coronoid process was lost as were skull
ridges at the site of what would be the muscle origin (Washburn, 1947). Less radical
interventions in the mechanical environment produced by muscles have involved
simply denervation of limb muscles, which similarly produce deﬁciencies in the
bony phenotype (Lanyon, 1980).
In all these experiments, the genome remained unaltered; only the environment
of mechanical inﬂuences was modiﬁed. These are inﬂuences outside the genes: part
of the epigenomic environment that in turn controls selective gene expression. But
these epigenomic contributions are more than just mechanical or nutritional in char-
acter. When grown in a bacteria-free environment, the usually leafy marine alga
Ulva instead becomes ﬁlamentous. A rotifer, when placed in an environment with
its natural predators, grows protective spine-like projections. Biotic factors in the
environment affect phenotypic outcomes. In fact, the genes do not initiate these
morphological modiﬁcations to serve in a hostile environment, but instead the biotic
information from the environment itself initiates gene action.
The interaction between phenotype—form-function complexes—(Bock &
Wahlert, 1965; Bock, 1998) and external environment places demands upon indi-
vidual organisms with which they must cope to survive and reproduce. These
demands that arise are selective agents (Bock, 1998) if they participate directly
in the culling of phenotypes from the population. Selective agents (selective forces,
selective demands), arising out of organismal interaction with the environment, are
causative agents within an evolutionary context. They help explain evolutionary
outcomes (Ayala and Dobzhansky, 1974).
Certainly, other interactions of organisms with their environment may result, even-
tually, in changes in the phenotype. One such interaction results in mutations, changes
in the genome, as occurs for example in exposure to environmental radiation. Another
is the epigenomic inﬂuence acting on an organism during its lifetime (Bock, 1998).

678
L. Boi
3
Epigenetic Phenomena Mediate the Link Between
Environmental Factors and the Processes of Inheritance
Environmental agents and genetic variants can induce heritable epigenetic changes
that affect phenotypic variation and disease risk in many species (Holliday, 1987;
Jablonka and Lamb, 1989). These trans-generational effects challenge conventional
understanding about the modes and mechanisms of inheritance, but their molecular
basis is poorly understood. These heritable epigenetic changes persisted for multiple
generations and were fully reversed after consecutive crosses through the alternative
germ-lineage.
Many environmental factors and genetic variants are known to induce heritable
epigenetic changes that can persist for multiple generations, affecting a broad range
of traits, and that often are as frequent and strong as direct environmental exposures
and conventional genetic inheritance. These trans-generational effects challenge our
understanding of the modes and mechanisms for inherited phenotypic variation and
disease risk, as well as the premise of most genetic studies in which causal DNA
sequence variants are sought within the genome of affected individuals. Several
molecular mechanisms have been implicated, ranging from inherited RNAs to chem-
ically modiﬁed DNA and proteins. These trans-generational effects have important
implications for our understanding of adaptation and evolution, the origins of pheno-
typic variation and disease risk, and the molecules in addition to DNA that can be
the basis for inheritance.
The fetal basis of adult disease or the ‘early origins’ hypothesis postulates that
nutrition and other environmental factors during prenatal and early postnatal devel-
opment inﬂuence developmental plasticity (West-Eberhard, 2005), thereby altering
susceptibility to adult chronic diseases. Developmental plasticity occurs when envi-
ronmental inﬂuences affect cellular pathways during gestation, enabling a single
genotype to produce a broad range of adult phenotypes. This emerging ﬁeld of
research also points to the epigenotype as an important modiﬁer of disease suscep-
tibility. Aberrant epigenetic gene regulation has been proposed as a mechanism
of action for non-genotoxic carcinogenesis, imprinting disorders, and complex
disorders including Alzheimer’s disease, schizophrenia, asthma, and autism.
Within the above context, epigenetics is deﬁned as the study of the heritable
changes in gene expression that occur without a change in DNA sequence. These
heritable epigenetic changes include DNA methylation, post-translational modiﬁ-
cations of histone tails (acetylation, methylation, phosphorylation, etc.), and higher
order packaging of DNA around nucleosomes. Epigenetic modiﬁcations are inherited
not only during mitosis, but also can be transmitted trans-generationally.
Thus, identifying epigenetic targets and deﬁning how they are deregulated in
human disease by environmental exposures will allow for the development of inno-
vative novel diagnostic, treatment, and prevention strategies that target the ‘epige-
nomic software’ rather than the ‘genomic hardware’. Furthermore, characterizing the

Some Remarks on Epigenetics and Causality in the Biological World
679
important environmental exposures affecting the epigenome and determining the crit-
ical windows of vulnerability to epigenetic alterations will inﬂuence environmental
risk assessment.
The epigenome is particularly susceptible to deregulation during gestation,
neonatal development, puberty, and old age. Nevertheless, it is most vulnerable to
environmental factors during embryogenesis because the DNA synthetic rate is high,
and the elaborate DNA methylation patterning and chromatin structure required for
normal tissue development is established during early development.
Epigenetic adaptations in response to in utero nutritional and environmental
factors are hypothesized to play an important role in developmental plasticity and
disease susceptibility. Because diet-derived methyl donors and co-factors are neces-
sary for the synthesis of the S-adenosylmethionine (SAM), which provides the methyl
groups required for DNA methylation, environmental factors that alter early nutrition
and/or SAM synthesis can potentially inﬂuence adult phenotype via alterations in
CpG methylation at critically important, epigenetically labile regions in the genome.
Environmental factors, including xenobiotic chemicals, behavior, and even low dose
radiation, can also directly affect methylation and chromatin remodeling factors to
alter the fetal epigenome and subsequent gene expression patterns. Furthermore,
epigenetic alterations have also been observed in response to post-natal and adult
exposure to environmental factors. Below, we summarize the effects observed in a
number of recent studies.
Alterations in epigenotype have also been observed following exposure to envi-
ronmental xenobiotic chemicals. Exposure of adult mice to sodium arsenite in vivo
revealed decreased genomic methylation, while co-exposure to sodium arsenite and
methyl deﬁcient diet showed gene-speciﬁc hypomethylation in the promoter region
of the oncogenic gene, Ha-ras. In vitro arsenic studies also revealed global DNA
hypomethylation as well as increased expression of the oncogenic K-ras gene;
however, gene speciﬁc changes in methylation were not observed following arsenic
exposure, indicating that K-ras overexpression occurs via a non-DNA methylation
dependent mechanism. Other metals, including cadmium, lead, and nickel, have
also been shown to interact with the epigenome. In addition, decreased histone
acetylation, increased histone methylation, and subsequent decreased gene expres-
sion occur following nickel exposure. Furthermore, chromium exposure is linked to
epigenetically controlled gene expression alterations via interactions with histone
acetyltransferase and histone deacetylase enzymes.
Endocrine active chemicals have also been associated with epigenetic alterations
following in utero and adult exposures. Recently, methylation studies on the estro-
genic pharmaceutical agent diethylstilbestrol (DES) observed hypomethylation in
two critical DNA control regions in mice exposed in utero or in the perinatal
period. DES is a non-genotoxic carcinogen that was prescribed to millions of preg-
nant women from the early 1940s to the early 1970s. Individuals exposed in utero
during the ﬁrst three months of pregnancy exhibited increased incidences of repro-
ductive disorders and the rare cancer, clear cell adenocarcinoma of the vagina.
Increased incidences of these uncommon disorders were also seen in DES grand-
daughters, suggesting epigenetic transgenerational inheritance. Furthermore, recent

680
L. Boi
mouse studies demonstrated that the effects of maternal DES exposure are trans-
mitted through the maternal germline to offspring via both genetic and epigenetic
mechanisms.
The endocrine active compound, bisphenol A (BPA), is similarly associated with
epigenetic alterations following developmental exposure to environmentally relevant
levels. BPA is a high-production volume additive for many plastics including food
containers, baby bottles, and dental composites. Recently, detectable levels of BPA
were observed in 95% of samples from a human reference population (n = 394). Ho
et al. (2012) observed multiple changes in gene-speciﬁc DNA methylation patterns
in the rat prostate, including hypomethylation of the phosphodiesterase type 4 variant
4 (PDE4D4) gene following neonatal exposure to both estradiol and low-level BPA.
Decreased PDE4D4 methylation is associated with a marked increase in prostate
cancer risk. Since methylation levels are detectable well before disease presenta-
tion, it should be investigated as an early molecular marker for prostate cancer risk
assessment.
4
On the Link Between Epigenetics and Diseases, Mediated
by Aberrant Chromatin Alterations
The relationship between the global-topological and functional organization of high-
order chromatin structure and the expression and cellular activity of the genomes
is a very good example of reciprocal interaction between upward and downward
causation (Lillie, 1940; Campbell, 1974; El-Hani and Emmeche, 2000). In order
to highlight the fundamental fact that the organizational properties of chromatin
inﬂuence the genome activity, in the sense that they are the principal carrier and
activator of the multilevel genetic and epigenetic information, let us now consider
the epigenome of a sick cell. Most human diseases have an epigenetic cause. The
perfect control of our cells by DNA methylation, histone modiﬁcations, chromatin
remodeling and microRNAs become dramatically distorted in the sick cell (Esteller,
2008). In other words, severe alterations of nuclear forms and especially of the chro-
matin and the chromosome may provoke different damages to the cell’s activity,
suggesting thus that the topological form of living systems is likely one of the most
fundamental determinants of the unfolding of biological functions during develop-
ment and evolution (Cremer, 2006; Boi, 2021). The groundbreaking discoveries have
beeninitiallymadeincancer cells, but it is just thebeginningof thecharacterizationof
the wrong epigenomes underlying neurological, cardiovascular and immunological
pathologies.
In human cancer, the DNA methylation aberrations observed can be considered as
falling into one of two categories: transcriptional silencing of tumor suppressor genes
by CpG island promoter hypermethylation in the context of a massive global genomic
hypermethylation (Ballestar and Esteller, 2005; Hammond et al., 2001). CpG islands
become hypermethylated with the result that the expression of the contiguous gene

Some Remarks on Epigenetics and Causality in the Biological World
681
is shut down. If this aberration affects a tumor suppressor gene it confers a selec-
tive advantage on that cell and is selected generation after generation. Recently,
researchers have contributed to the identiﬁcation of a long list of hypermethylated
genes in human neoplasias, and this epigenetic alteration is now considered to be a
common hallmark of all human cancers affecting all cellular pathways. At the same
time as the aforementioned CpG islands become hypermethylated, the genome of the
cancer cell undergoes global hypomethylation. The malignant cell can have 20–60%
less genomic 5mC than its normal counterpart. The loss of methyl groups is accom-
plished mainly by hypomethylation of the “body” (coding regions and introns) of
genes and through demethylation of repetitive DNA sequences, which account for
20–30% of the human genome.
How does global DNA hypomethylation contribute to carcinogenesis? Three
mechanisms can be invoked as follows: chromosomal instability, reactivation of
transposable elements and loss of imprinting (Fraga et al., 2005). Undermethyla-
tion of DNA may favor mitotic recombination, leading to loss of herezygosity as
well as promoting karyotypically detectable rearrangements. Additionally, exten-
sive demethylation in centromeric sequences is common in human tumors and may
play a role in aneuploidy. As evidence of this, patients with germline mutations in
DNA methyltransferase 3b (DNMT3b) are known to have numerous chromosome
aberrations. Hypomethylation of malignant cell DNA can also reactivate intrage-
nomic parasitic DNA, such as L1 (Long Interspersed Nuclear Elements, LINEs) and
Alu (recombinogenic sequence) repeats. These, and other previously silent trans-
posons, may now be transcribed and even “moved” to other genomic regions, where
they can disrupt normal cellular genes. Finally, the loss of methyl groups can affect
imprinted genes and genes from the methylated-X chromosome of women. The best-
studied case is of the effects of the H19/IGF-2 locus on chromosome 11p15 in certain
childhood tumors. DNA methylation also occupies a place at the crossroads of many
pathways in immunology, providing us with a clearer understanding of the molecular
network of the immune system (Bhalla and Iyengar, 1999). Besides, aberrant DNA
methylation patterns go beyond the ﬁelds of oncology and immunology to touch a
wide range of ﬁelds of biomedical and scientiﬁc knowledge (Horrobin, 2003).
Regarding histone modiﬁcations, we are largely ignorant of how these histone
modiﬁcation markers are disrupted in human diseases. In cancer cells, it is known
that hypermethylated promoter CpG islands of transcriptionally repressed tumor
suppressor genes are associated with hypoacetylated and hypermethylated histones
H3 and H4. It is also recognized that certain genes with tumor suppressor-like prop-
erties such as p21WAF1 are silent at the transcriptional level, in the absence of CpG
island hypermethylation in association with hypoacetylated and hypermethylated
histones H3 and H4. However, until very recently there was not a proﬁle of overall
histone modiﬁcations and their genomic locations in the transformed cell. This need
to determine the histone modiﬁcation pattern of tumors was even more urgent, given
the rapid development of histone deacetylase inhibitors as putative anticancer drugs.
It has been provided this missing linking demonstrating that human tumors undergo
an overall loss of monoacetylation of lysine 16 and trimethylation of lysine 20 in the
tail of histone H4 (Fraga et al., 2005). These two-histone modiﬁcation losses can be

682
L. Boi
considered as almost universal epigenetic markers of malignant transformation, as
has now been accepted for global DNA hypomethylation and CpG island hyperme-
thylation. Certain histone acetylation and methylation marks may have prognostic
value. For other human pathologies, research is still in the infancy to deﬁne their
histone modiﬁcation signatures.
The most important theme of the previous remarks on the human epigenome,
which is mainly related to a methodological and epistemological revolution in epige-
netics, maybesummarizedas follow. Cells of amulticellular organismaregenetically
homogeneous but structurally and functionally heterogeneous owing to the differen-
tial expression of genes. Many of these differences in gene expression arise during
development and are subsequently retained through mitosis. Stable modiﬁcations of
this kind are said to be “epigenetic”, because they are heritable in the short term but do
not involve mutations of the DNA itself. The two most important nuclear processes
that mediate epigenetic phenomena are DNA methylation and histone modiﬁcations.
Epigenetic effects by means of DNA methylation have an important role in develop-
ment but can also arise stochastically as humans and animals age. Identiﬁcation of
proteins that mediate these effects has provided insight into this complex process and
diseases that occur when it is perturbed. External inﬂuences on epigenetic processes
are seen in the effects of diet on long-term diseases such as cancer. Thus, epige-
netic mechanisms seem to allow an organism to respond to the environment through
changes in gene expression. The extent to which environmental effects can provoke
epigenetic response is a crucial question which is still largely unanswered.
5
How Chromatin Arrangements Inﬂuence Gene
Expression
Chromatin is the substrate engaged by the molecular mechanisms responsible for
replication, recombination and transcription in the eukaryotic cell nucleus. Chro-
matin structure is fundamental to the mechanisms of these processes and undergoes
modiﬁcations to facilitate their regulation and progression. The nucleosome is the
fundamental repeating unit of chromatin. Arrays of nucleosomes compact to form a
30 nm chromatin ﬁber (Boi, 2007; 2011a, 2011b, 2021).
The fundamental building block of chromatin is the nucleosome comprising 157–
240 bp of DNA, to each of the four core histone proteins, and a single linker histone
H1/H5. The nucleosome core is the greater part of the nucleosome and contains 147
base pairs of DNA wrapped in 1.67 left-handed superhelical turns around the histone
octamer. Arrays of nucleosome in their most compact form constitute the 30 nm
chromatin ﬁber. The crystal structure of the nucleosome core particle reﬁned to 1.9A
(Avogadro) resolution reveals the details of DNA conformation as well as all the
direct and the water-mediated histone-contacts. The acute DNA bending induced by
the histone proteins results in an alteration of the form of the double helix every ﬁve

Some Remarks on Epigenetics and Causality in the Biological World
683
base pairs along its superhelical path. Sequence-dependent DNA conformations are
apparent.
The eukaryotic cell contains thousands of genes, only a few of which are expressed
at any one time. The fundamental goal of current work among biologists is to ﬁnd how
genes activation is achieved within the vast genome, which is packed into a highly
condensed state. Genomic organization events in the cells of higher-organisms (but
not bacteria) are achieved via the ordering of chromatin, the structural proteins that
bind DNA, forming a proteinaceous coat around the genetic material.
Chromatin consists of the core histone proteins, linker histones, and non-histones
proteins. The histone core, containing eight protein subunits, is the central structure of
a 206-kiloDalton disc-shaped chromatin structure known as the nucleosome. Nucle-
osomal DNA winds itself 1.65 times around each histone protein core, generating a
structure like knots on a string. The nucleosome particles are spaced by around 200
± 40 bp along the genome. Between nucleosomes, linker histone stabilizes the string
into a solenoid-type structure that compresses the genome.
So, while nucleosome provide the ﬁrst level of compaction of DNA into the
nucleus, the chromatin nucleoﬁlament represents a higher level of compaction that
nucleosome can adopt ultimately resulting in the highly condensed metaphase chro-
mosome. The combined approaches of cell biology and genetics studies have led to
the discovery that within an interphase nucleus chromatin is organized into different
structural and functional territories.
Based on microscopic observations, chromatin has been divided into two distinct
domains, heterochromatin and euchromatin. Heterochromatin was deﬁned as a struc-
ture that does not alter in its condensation throughout the cell cycle whereas euchro-
matin is decondensed during interphase. Typically, in a cell, heterochromatin is local-
ized principally on the periphery of the nucleus and euchromatin in the interior of the
nucleoplasm. One distinguishes constitutive heterochromatin, containing few genes
and formed principally of repetitive sequences located in large regions coincident
with centromeres and telomeres, from facultative heterochromatin composed of tran-
scriptionally active regions that can adopt the structural and functional characteristics
of heterochromatin, such as the inactive X chromosome of mammals.
Chromatin is the basic organizational form of DNA in the eukaryotic nucleus. The
repeat unit of chromatin is the core nucleosome in which 146 base pairs of DNAs’ are
wrapped around the histone octamer that consists of two molecules each of the core
histones H2A, H2B, H3 and H4 (see Figs. 2 and 3). Nucleosomal arrays along the
DNA are proposed to fold into a 30 nm ﬁber upon incorporation of the linker histone
H1. In addition to the canonical histones, histone variants exist that are structurally
related to the normal histones, but are functionally distinct. Another level of chromo-
some compaction is required at mitosis, where condensin and cohesin proteins bind
to chromatin to yield the highly condensed mitotic chromosomes during cell division.
Two main enzymatic activities can be distinguished that regulates chromatin access:
chromatin modifying complexes, and chromatin remodelling complexes, which we
try to describe brieﬂy.
Histone modifying complexes play an essential role in the structural organization
and functional regulation of the chromosome. The term “chromatin modiﬁcation”

684
L. Boi
describes posttranscriptional modiﬁcations on the histones. Potential modiﬁcations
include histone acetylation, methylation, phosphorylation, ubiquitylation, sumoy-
lation and ADP-ribosylation. Most modiﬁcations were originally observed on the
N-terminal tails of histones. Histone modiﬁcations may affect chromatin structure
directly by altering DNA-histone interactions within and between nucleosomes, thus
changing higher-order chromatin structure. An alternative, more recent model is
that combinations of histone modiﬁcations present an interaction surface for other
proteins that translate this so-called histone code into a gene expression pattern.
Another important aspect, closely related to the previous—the histone modifying
complexes—concerns the chromatin remodelling complexes. Classically, chromatin-
remodellingfactorshavebeendescribedasactivitiesthat,unlikechromatinmodiﬁers,
leave the biochemical make-up of the nucleosomes unaffected. The remodellers
either change the location of the nucleosome along a particular DNA sequence, or
create a remodeled state of the nucleosome that is characterized by altered histone-
DNA interactions. Recent work, however, has signiﬁcantly broadened the spectrum
of their activities by adding the complete removal of histones as well as histone
exchange to the palette of reactions catalyzed by chromatin remodelling complexes.
In these reactions, remodellers use the energy freed by ATP hydrolysis to loosen
DNA-histone contacts and thus to facilitate the movement of the nucleosome.
From the previous remarks, it appears clearly that the topological form of DNA
molecule, the structural modiﬁcation of the chromatin and the spatial architecture of
the chromosome are events which have an important inﬂuence on how gene become
expressed and the genome functions in cells. Moreover, these three levels of orga-
nization of organism’s nuclear components are deeply interrelated, they obey to
many complexes systems of regulatory co-factors, and they further affect globally
the physiology and metabolism of cells (Smet-Nocca et al., 2006). Among these
different families of proteins regulatory complexes, the remodellers of chromatin
structure play a fundamental role in replication and repair of DNA sequences and in
the transcriptional and post-transcriptional activities of the entire genome (Scherer
and Jost, 2007).
6
Organisms and Environment
Niche construction is the process whereby organisms, through their activities and
choices, modify their own and each other’s niches. By transforming natural selection
pressures, niche construction generates feedback in evolution at various different
levels. Niche-constructing species play important ecological roles by creating habi-
tats and resources used by other species and thereby affecting the ﬂow of energy and
matter through ecosystems—a process often referred to as “ecosystem engineering.”
An important emphasis of niche construction theory (NCT) is that acquired charac-
ters play an evolutionary role through transforming selective environments. This is
particularly relevant to human evolution, where our species has engaged in extensive

Some Remarks on Epigenetics and Causality in the Biological World
685
environmental modiﬁcation through cultural practices. Humans can construct devel-
opmental environments that feed back to affect how individuals learn and develop
and the diseases to which they are exposed. Let us make a brief introduction to NCT
and illustrate some of its more important scientiﬁc and philosophical implications
for the human sciences.
The organism inﬂuences its own evolution, by being both the object of natural
selection and the creator of the conditions of that selection. The conventional view
of evolution is that species, through the action of natural selection, have come to
exhibit those characteristics that best enable them to survive and reproduce in their
environments. Although environmental change may trigger bouts of selection, from
the standard evolutionary perspective it is always changes in organisms, rather than
changes in environments, that are held responsible for generating the organism–envi-
ronment match that is commonly described as “adaptation.” Organisms are generally
perceived as being molded by selection to become better suited to their environments.
Under this perspective, adaptation is always asymmetrical; organisms adapt to their
environment, never vice versa.
The niche-construction perspective in evolutionary biology, as proposed by
Lewontin (1983), contrasts with the conventional perspective by placing emphasis
on the capacity of organisms to modify environmental states. Thus, “Organisms do
not adapt to their environments; they construct them out of the bits and pieces of
the external world” (Lewontin, 1983, 280). In so doing, organisms co-direct their
own evolution, often but not exclusively in a manner that suits their genotypes, in
the process modifying patterns of selection acting back on themselves as well as on
other species that inhabit their environment. Early advocates of related arguments
include Conrad Waddington (Waddington, 1959) and Brian Goodwin.
This emphasis on the modiﬁcation of habitat and resources by organisms is shared
by ecologists who emphasize the signiﬁcance of “ecosystem engineering,” by which
organisms modulate ﬂows of energy and matter through environments. Such engi-
neering activity can have signiﬁcant impacts on community structure, composition,
and diversity. Young beavers, for example, inherit from their parents not only a local
environment comprising a dam, a lake, and a lodge but also an altered community of
microorganisms, plants, and animals. In this vein, Martinsen et al. (1998) found that
the browsing of cottonwood trees by beavers stimulates elevated levels of defensive
chemicals in the report growth and that these chemicals in turn are sequestered and
used by leaf beetles for their own defense. Conversely, other invertebrates are driven
out by the chemicals.
More generally, living organisms interact, indirectly, via engineered abiotic
components, creating “engineering webs,” which affect the stability of ecosystems as
well as drive “eco-evolutionary feedbacks”. The ﬁeld of “eco-evolutionary dynam-
ics” emphasizes that ecological and evolutionary changes are intimately linked and
may often occur on the same time scales. Many of the ecological processes that
trigger evolutionary episodes depend on niche construction and ecological inher-
itance. Ecological inheritance does not depend on the presence of environmental
“replicators” but merely on intergenerational persistence (often through repeated

686
L. Boi
acts of construction) of whatever physical—or, in the case of humans, cultural—
changes are caused by ancestral organisms in the local selective environments of
their descendants. This is relevant to conservation and biodiversity goals because
the anthropogenic environmental changes precipitated by humans (e.g., habitat
degradation, deforestation, industrial and urban development, agricultural prac-
tices, livestock grazing, and pesticide use) are primarily examples of human niche
construction/ecosystem engineering, which destroys the engineering control webs
that underlie ecosystems.
This process of niche construction provides a second evolutionary route to estab-
lishing the adaptive ﬁt, or match, between organism and environment. From the
niche-construction perspective, such matches need not be treated as products of a
one-way process, exclusively involving the responses of organisms to environmen-
tally imposed problems. Instead, they should be thought of as the dynamical products
of a two-way process involving organisms both responding to “problems” posed by
their environments and solving some of those problems, as well as setting themselves
some new problems by changing their environments through niche construction
(Odling-Smee & Laland, 2011; Odling-Smee & Turner, 2011).
This is not meant to imply that niche construction theory (NCT) always anticipates
a perfect synergy between the features of an organism and the factors in its selective
environment. It does not. In criticizing static adaptive-landscape concepts prevalent
in evolutionary biology, the father of NCT, Lewontin (1983), described the evolution
of a population as resembling an individual walking on a trampoline. Each change
in the organism, as with each step, inevitably deforms the selective landscape. Like
Lewontin, we argue here that this metaphor is an apt characterization not only of
evolution but also of development. All living organisms construct aspects of their
world, and in doing so they do not just respond to environments by being driven
to higher levels of ﬁtness through selection. They also fashion new strategies and
devices (both trough action and perception), changing the environment in which they
and others about them grow, develop, and learn, frequently in ways that rescript the
pattern of natural selection acting back on their population as well as on other species
that cohabit their niche.
Of course, evolutionary biologists are well aware that organisms modify environ-
ments. The difference between the niche-construction perspective and conventional
evolutionary perspectives is far subtler than the recognition, or failure to recognize,
organism-mediated environmental change. The developmental biologist Bateson
(1988, 191) captures nicely the point we are making: Many biologists (including
myself) have unthinkingly accepted the Darwinian image of selection, with nature
picking those organisms that ﬁtted best into the environments in which they lived.
The picture of an external hand doing all of the work is so vivid that it is easy to
treat organisms as if they were entirely passive in the evolutionary process. That is
not, of course, to suggest that any biologist would deny that organisms, and animals
especially, are active. But the notion of “selection pressure” does subtly downplay the
organisms’ part in the process of change… When developmental issues are recoupled
to questions about evolution, it becomes much easier to perceive how an organism’s
behaviour can initiate and direct lines of evolution.”

Some Remarks on Epigenetics and Causality in the Biological World
687
The key—and indeed subtle—distinction between the two perspectives is that one
views niche construction as a cause of evolutionary change as opposed to an effect
of a prior cause (namely, natural selection). Niche construction, then, is a process
rather than merely a product. Organisms and environments are treated by NCT as
engaged in reciprocally caused relationships (Laland et al., 2011) that are negoti-
ated over both ontogenetic and phylogenetic timescales, entwined in, to coin a very
apt phrase from developmental systems theory, “cycles of contingency” (Oyama
et al., 2001). Moreover, niche construction is a developmental process, and the
niche-construction perspective in evolutionary biology is all about exploring the
evolutionary ramiﬁcations of coupling this particular developmental process with
natural selection.
Many biologists have unthinkingly accepted the Darwinian image of selection,
with nature picking those organisms that ﬁtted best into the environments in which
they lived. The picture of an external hand doing all of the work is so vivid that it is
easy to treat organisms as if they were entirely passive in the evolutionary process.
That is not, of course, to suggest that any biologist would deny that organisms, and
animals especially, are active. But the notion of “selection pressure” does subtly
downplay the organisms’ part in the process of change. When developmental issues
are recoupled to questions about evolution, it becomes much easier to perceive how
an organism’s behaviour can initiate and direct lines of evolution.
One implication is that niche-constructing organisms can no longer be treated
as merely “vehicles” for their genes because they also modify selection pressures
in their own and in other species’ environments. In the process, they can introduce
feedback to both ontogenetic and evolutionary processes. That this active, construc-
tive conception of the role of organisms in evolution, and indeed in ontogeny, ﬁts
well with conceptualizations of human agency that are widespread within the human
sciences.
A second implication is that there is no requirement for niche construction to result
directly from genetic variation in order for it to modify natural selection. Humans
can and do modify their environments mainly through cultural processes, and it is
this reliance on culture that lends human niche construction a special potency. We
stress, however, that humans are far from unique in engaging in niche construction,
as some of the architects of the modern synthetic theory originally claimed. Niche
construction is a very general process, exhibited by all living organisms, and species
do not require advanced intellect or sophisticated technology to change their world.
The general replacement of a single role for phenotypes in evolution (as gene-
carrying vehicles) by the dual role (also encompassing environmental modiﬁcation
and regulation) envisaged by NCT removes from cultural processes any claim to a
unique status with respect to their capacity to transform natural-selection pressures.
Nonetheless, cultural processes provide a particularly powerful engine for human
niche construction. Moreover, this dual role for phenotypes in evolution does imply
that a complete understanding of the relationship between human genes and cultural
processes must acknowledge not only genetic and cultural inheritance but also take
account of the legacy of modiﬁed selection pressures in environments.

688
L. Boi
Every species is informed by naturally selected genes, and many animals are also
informed by complex, information-acquiring ontogenetic processes such as learning
or the immune system, but humans, and arguably a few other species (depending on
how culture is deﬁned), are also informed by cultural processes.
The three domains are distinct but interconnected, with each interacting with, but
notcompletelydeterminedby,theothers.Thatis,learningisinformedby,butnotfully
speciﬁed by, genetic information, and cultural transmission may be informed by, but
again, not completely speciﬁed by, both genetic and developmental processes. Genes
may affect information gain at the ontogenetic level, which in turn inﬂuences infor-
mationacquisitioninthecultural domain. Inaddition, ontogeneticprocesses—partic-
ularly learning—may be affected by cultural processes, whereas population-genetic
processes may be affected by both ontogenetic processes and cultural processes when
humans modify environments, generating selective feedback to each process.
Niche construction modiﬁes selection not only at the genetic level but also at
the ontogenetic and cultural levels as well, with consequences that not only feed
back to the constructor population but also modify selection for other organisms.
Human niche construction, through modiﬁcation of the environment, creates artifacts
and other ecologically inherited resources that not only act as sources of biological
selection on human genes but also facilitate learning and mediate cultural traditions.
For example, the construction of villages, towns, and cities creates new health hazards
associated with large-scale human aggregation, such as the spread of epidemics.
An important aspect of the alewife system is the fact that human cultural niche
construction—here the damming of rivers—is responsible for generating landlocked
ﬁsh populations, with their alternative foraging habits. In other words, anthropogenic
activity has triggered a cascade of ecological and evolutionary events. Many social
scientists are interested in such consequences of human activity. Indeed, social scien-
tists frequently have essentially the same objective as ecologists: they, too, often wish
to trace causal inﬂuences through ecosystems, but with the focus on human niche
construction and the ecological or evolutionary episodes this anthropogenic change
precipitates.
7
Reductionism and Emergence
The reductionist method consists in analyzing a large part biological system by
dissecting it into their constituent parts and determining the mechanistic (physico-
chemical) connections between the parts (Bains, 2001; Cornish-Bowden et al., 2006;
Cornish-Bowden and Cárdenas, 2005). They assume that the isolated molecules and
their structure have sufﬁcient explanatory power to provide an understanding of the
whole system. This radical deterministic standpoint was advocated by Crick (1970)
by claiming that “The ultimate aim of the modern movement in biology (he refers
of course to molecular biology) is to explain all biology in terms of physics and
chemistry.” Such reductionist mindset arises from the belief that because biological
systems are composed solely of atoms and molecules, without the inﬂuence of other

Some Remarks on Epigenetics and Causality in the Biological World
689
kinds of forces or laws, it should be possible to explain them using the physicochem-
ical properties of their individual components, down to the atomic level. The most
extreme manifestation of the reductionist view is the belief that is held by neurosci-
entists that consciousness and mental states can be reduced to chemical reactions that
occursinthebrain(Sperry,1980;Eccles,1986;PopperandEccles,1977;Liljenström,
2016). In the recent decades many biologists have become increasingly critical of
the idea that biological systems can be fully explained using only physics and chem-
istry (Polanyi, 1968; Rosen, 1985; Buiatti, 2000; Noble, 2006). And, in fact, there
is now important evidence that the biology, development, physiology, behaviour or
fate of a human being cannot be adequately explained by the reductionist standpoint
that considers only (classical or not) physical and chemical laws. A more open and
integrative approach considers biology as an autonomous discipline that requires its
own entities and concepts that are not (necessarily and completely) found in physics
and chemistry.
Biological complexity and speciﬁcity results from the way in which single compo-
nents like molecules, genes and cells self-organize and function together when consti-
tuting a whole (a tissue, an organ, an organism), say a whole system including
different subsystems (Rosen, 1977; Kacser, 1986; Mazzochi, 2012). Not only the
interactions between the parts and the inﬂuence from the environment (think of
epigenetic factors, both chemical and spatial, that mediate the complex relationship
between the genomes and the micro- and macro biophysical environments), but also
the systemic properties of the whole that exert an action on the components, give
rise to new features, such as network behavior and functional properties, which are
absent in the isolated components (Letelier et al., 2011).
This means that we need to consider ‘emergence’ as an effective new concept
that complements ‘reduction’ when reduction fails, and allow to take into account
those speciﬁc systemic properties of the whole responsible for biological organiza-
tion and regulation at higher levels. Emergent properties to not result from properties
pertaining to simple components of biological systems. They resist any attempt at
being predicated or deduced by explicitly calculation or any other analytical means.
In this regard, emergent properties differ from ‘resultant’ properties, which can be
predicted from lower-level components. “For instance, the resultant mass of a multi-
component protein assembly is simply equal to the sum of the masses of each indi-
vidual component. However, the way in which we taste the saltiness of sodium
chloride is not reducible to the properties of sodium and chlorine gas. An impor-
tant aspect of emergent properties is that they have their own causal power, which
is not reducible to the powers of their constituents. For instance, the experience of
pain can alter human behavior, but the lower-level chemical reactions in the neurons
that are involved in the perception of pain are not the cause of the altered behavior,
as the pain itself has a causal efﬁcacy” (Van Regenmortel, 2004). Advocating the
reductionist idea of ‘upward causation’ means to maintain that molecular compo-
nents and states sufﬁce to determine higher-level processes occurring in biological
systems. However, without denying a certain role of methodological reductionism
in science, today we are led to recognize the important role played by the concept
of emergence in many ﬁelds of the natural and life sciences, (Humphreys, 1997) as

690
L. Boi
well as to accept ‘downward causation’ by which higher-level systems and processes
inﬂuence lower-level conﬁgurations and entities. Emergence is essentially linked to
the intrinsic and peculiar complexity of living systems. The existence of emergent
properties is an outcome of the complexity of living systems. In other words, in
order to solve the increasingly complexity, linked to the stages of the developments
of tissues and organs and the construction of global physiological systems, living
multicellular organisms self-organize giving thus rise to newly, needed regulatory
and functional properties (Mesarovic et al., 2004).
8
Many Levels of Causation Are Needed for Thinking
the Biological Complexity and Functionality
Many theoretical ideas and experimental ﬁndings in life science over the last three
decades lead to review profoundly the ideas about properties and behaviors of biolog-
ical systems. Among them, maybe the most important, is the principle of causality in
biological sciences, as it has been conceived by molecular biology. This fundamental
issue is raised by Denis Noble when he asks: “Must higher level biological processes
always be derivable from lower level data and mechanisms, as assumed by the idea
that an organism is completely deﬁned by its genome? Or are higher level properties
necessarily also causes of lower level behavior, involving, actions and interactions
both ways?” (Noble, 2011, 1). According to Noble, “downward causation is neces-
sary and this form of causation can be represented as the inﬂuences of initial and
boundary conditions on the solutions of the differential equations used to represent
the lower level processes. (…) A priori, there is no privileged level of causation.
(…) Biological relativity can be seen as an extension of the relativity principle in
physics by avoiding the assumption that there is a privileged scale at which biological
functions are determined” (idem).
There is increasingly evidence, experimental and theoretical, of the existence of
downward causation from larger to smaller scales. Today, one is enabled to visualize
exactly how multilevel ‘both-way’ causation occurs. There is not a priori reason why
one level in a biological system should be privileged over other levels when it comes
to causation. There are various forms of downward causation that regulates lower
level components in biological systems.
Looking more closely to molecular biology, the essence of the central dogma is
that ‘coding’ between genes and proteins in one-way (Werner, 2007; Shapiro, 2009).
It would be better the word ‘template’ to ‘coding’ since ‘coding’ already implies a
program. The concept of a genetic program is indeed one of the most relevant problem
of molecular biology because there is no a genetic program at all. The argument runs
as follow (for more details, see Noble, 2011). The sequence of DNA triplets form
templates for the production of different amino acid sequences in proteins. Amino
acid sequences do not form templates for the production of DNA sequences. What
was shown by Crick, Watson and their followers is that template works in only one

Some Remarks on Epigenetics and Causality in the Biological World
691
direction, which makes the gene appear primary. So, what the genome really causes?
The coding sequences form a list of proteins and RNAs that might be made in a
given organism. According to Noble, “These parts of the genome form a database of
templates. To be sure, as a database, the genome is also extensively formatted, with
many regulatory elements, operons, embedded within it. These regulatory elements
enable groups of genes to be coordinated in their expression levels. And we know
that the non-coding parts of the genome also play important regulatory functions. But
the genome is not a ﬁxed program in the sense in which such a computer program
was deﬁned when Monod and Jacob introduced the idea of ‘the genetic program’ in
the sixties. It is rather a ‘read-write’ memory that can be organized in response to
cellular and environmental signals. Which proteins and RNAs are made when and
where is not fully speciﬁed. This is why it is possible for the 200 or so different cell
types using exactly the same genome. A heart cell is made using precisely the same
genome in its nucleus as a bone cell, a liver cell, pancreatic cell, etc. Impressive
regulatory circuits have been constructed by those who favor a genetic program view
of development, but these are not independent of the ‘programming’ that the cells,
tissues and organs themselves uses to epigenetically control the genome and the
patterns of gene expression appropriate to each cell and tissue type in multicellular
organism.” (Noble, op. cit., 3; see also Noble, 2008).
The important point to stress is that the circuits of major biological functions
necessarily include non-genome elements. This tells us that the genome alone is far
from being sufﬁcient. Barbara McClintock ﬁrst described the genome as ‘an organ
of the cell’ (McClintock, 1984). Indeed, DNA sequences do absolutely nothing until
they are triggered to do so by a variety of transcriptions factors, which turn genes ‘on
and off’ by binding to their regulatory sites, and various other forms of epigenetic
control, including methylation of certain cytosines and interactions with the tails of
the histones that form the protein backbone of the chromosomes. All of these, and
the cellular, tissue and organ processes that determine when they are produced and
used, ‘control’ the genome (Misteli, 2007). In the neurosciences, a good example of
downward causation is what neuroscientists call electro-transcription coupling, since
it involves the transmission of information from the neural synapses to the nuclear
DNA (Murphy, 2009).
So, there is strong evidence that the genome does not completely determine the
organisms. Multi-cellular organisms use the same genome to generate all the 200 or
so different types of cell in their bodies by activating different expression patterns.
The regulatory parts of the genome are essential in order the genome be activated.
The mechanisms and patterns of activation are just as much part of the organism’s
construction and the genome itself. It is time to recognize that there exist various
forms of downward causation that regulates lower level components in biological
systems. In addition to the controls internal to the organism, we also have to take into
accounttheinﬂuenceoftheenvironmentonallthelevels.Causationis,therefore,two-
way. A downward form of causation is not a simple reverse form of upward causation.
It is better seen as completing a feedback loop that expresses a functional integra-
tion of the various levels of causation, including in particular the concentrations and
locations of transcription and post-transcription factors, and the relevant epigenetic

692
L. Boi
inﬂuences. All those forms of downward causation naturally take into account the
role of cell and tissue signaling in the generation of organizing principles involved in
embryonic induction, originally identiﬁed in the pioneering work of Hans Spemann
and Ilde Mangold (Spemann & Mangold, 1924; De Robertis, 2006). The existence
of such induction is itself an example of dependence on boundary conditions, that is
those conditions which deﬁne what constraints are imposed on a biological system by
its environment. That because boundary conditions are somehow involved in deter-
mining initial conditions (the state of the components of the system at the time at
which we start to analyzing and modelling it), they can therefore be considered as a
form of downward causation. The induction mechanisms emerge as the embryo inter-
acts with its environment. Morphogenesis cannot be explained only by the genome
(Goodwin et al., 1993). Putted in different terms, the emergence of new morpholog-
ical and physiological forms in the embryo of a human being cannot be derived and
understood from the level of the genome.
There is real (‘strong’) emergence because contingency beyond what is in the
genome, i.e. in its environment, also determine what happens at the higher level
of morphogenesis. Multi-cellular organisms are multi-level systems, and each level,
from molecules and cells to tissues and organs, possesses a speciﬁc organization with
increasing complexity when one passes to higher order systems. This organization
has causal power. The idea of multicellular causation considers seriously the fact that
complex organization of highest levels, such as the global properties and activity of
cells and the systemic properties and state of organisms, may act on the functions
of the components, particularly genes and proteins. Downward causation leads us
to shift our focus away from the gene as the unit of development and evolution to
that of the whole organism (Moreno and Umerez, 2000). It might be that the concept
of downward causation will play an important role in the reappraising of the mind–
body problem (how and why mental states may act on neural states), and in the
philosophy of perception and action (perceptual global effects, intentionality, free
will, etc.). Finally, we need to stress that one of the major theoretical and experimental
outcomes of multilevel modelling is that causation in biological systems runs in both
directions: upward from the genome and downward from all other levels. There are
feed-forward and feedback loops between the different levels of causation.
9
Conclusion
The ﬁrst goal of this paper was to stress the important fact that the speciﬁcity of
complex biological activity does not arise from the speciﬁcity of the individual
molecules that are involved, as these components frequently function in many
different processes. For instance, genes that affect memory formation in the fruit
ﬂy encode proteins in the cyclic AMP (camp) signaling pathway that are speciﬁc to
memory. It is the particular cellular compartment and environment in which a second
messenger, such a camp, is released that allow a gene product to have a unique effect.
Biological speciﬁcity results from the way in which these components assemble

Some Remarks on Epigenetics and Causality in the Biological World
693
and function together. More precisely, we tried to showing that complex biological
levels of functionality result from self-organized processes. For self-organization to
act on macroscopic cellular structures, three requirements must be fulﬁlled: (i) a
cellular structure must be dynamic; (ii) material must be continuously exchanged;
and (iii) an overall stable conﬁguration must be generated from dynamic compo-
nents. Interactions between the parts, as well as inﬂuences from the environment,
give rise to new features, such as network and collective behaviors which are absent
in the isolated components (Hess and Mikhailov, 1994; Kauffman, 1993; Karsenti,
2008; Misteli, 2001). Consequently ‘emergence’ has appeared as a new concept
that complements ‘reduction’ when reduction fails. Emergent properties resist any
attempt at being predicted or deduced by explicitly calculation or any other means.
In this regard, emergent properties differ from resultant properties, which can be
deﬁned from low-level conﬁgurations and information. For instance, the resultant
mass of a multi-component protein assembly is simply equal to the sum of the mass
of each individual component. However, the way in which we taste the saltiness of
sodium chloride is not reducible to the properties of sodium and chloride gas. An
important aspect of emergent properties is that they have their own causal power,
which is not reducible to the power of their constituents. The key concepts here are
those of ‘organization’ and ‘regulation’, ﬁrst of all because organization and regu-
lation become cause in the living matter of morphological, functional and mental
novelties. According to the principle of emergence, the natural and living worlds
are organized into stages and levels that have evolved over different evolutionary
times through continuous and discontinuous processes. Reductionists advocate the
idea of ‘upward causation’ by which molecular states generally bring about higher-
level phenomena, whereas proponents of emergence admit ‘downward causation’ by
which higher-level systems may inﬂuence lower-level conﬁgurations. All along the
article we will stress the philosophical importance of admitting ‘downward causa-
tion’ in the analysis of complex living systems (i.e. presenting and ever-increasing
coupled activity of plasticity and complexity) by showing that chromatin forms and
its structural modiﬁcations play a crucial role in the increasing complexity of gene
regulatory networks, in the emergence of cellular functions and in development, as
well as in the neurocognitive plasticity.
Our second goal was to emphasize the fundamental fact that organisms are more
than, and a reality profoundly different from the genes that look after their assembly.
Mechanical, chemical and cultural inputs from the environment, epigenetic cues, also
have an effect on the ﬁnal phenotype. In fact, continued environmental inﬂuences on
theadultphenotypecontinuetoaffectitscharacteristics.Theopenquestioniswhether
the epigenetic cues can become causative agents of phenotypic modiﬁcations. Within
a biological multi-level, astonishing complex reality, higher levels result from lower-
level processes (genes up to phenotype), and lower levels result from higher-levels
processes (organism’s properties to epigenetics mechanisms of genes expression and
regulation), so that upward and downward causation are in different ways and in both
directions deeply interlaced. Some epigenomic cues seem to be assimilated into the
genome, as already C. H. Waddington showed (Waddington, 1953). The evolved
genome therefore incorporates epigenomic cues or the expectation of their arrival.

694
L. Boi
Genomes are more than linear sequences, in fact, they exist as elaborate spatial and
physical structures, and their functional properties are strongly determined by their
cellular organization and by the interactions organisms develop with the environment
(Sarà, 2002; Boi, 2009; Aguilera et al., 2010).
The key distinguishing characteristic of the eukaryotic genome is its tight pack-
aging into chromatin, a hierarchically organized complex of DNA and histone and
non-histone proteins. How genome operates in the chromatin context is a central
question in the molecular genetics of eukaryotes. The chromatin packaging consists
of different levels of organisation. Every level of chromatin organisation, from nucle-
osome to higher-order structure up to its intranuclear localization, can contribute to
the regulation of gene expression, as well as affect other functions of the genome,
such as replication and repair. Concerning gene expression, chromatin is important
not only because of the accessibility problem it poses for the transcription apparatus,
but also due to the phenomenon of chromatin memory, that is, the apparent ability
of alternative chromatin states to be maintained through many cell divisions. This
phenomenon is believed to be involved in the mechanism of epigenetic inheritance,
an important concept of developmental biology.
References
Aguilera, O., Fernadez, A. F., Munoz, A., & Fraga, M. F. (2010). Epigenetics and environment: A
complex relationship. Journal of Applied Physics, 109, 243–251.
Ayala, F., & Dobzhansky, T. (Eds.). (1974). Studies in the philosophy of biology. University of
California Press.
Bains, W. (2001). The parts list of life. Nature Biotechnology, 19, 401–402.
Ballestar, E., & Esteller, M. (2005). The epigenetic breakdown of cancer cells: From DNA
methylationtohistone modiﬁcation. ProgressinMolecularandSubcellularBiology,38,169–181.
Bateson, P. (1988). The active role of behavior in evolution. Evolutionary Processes and Metaphors,
6(3), 191–207.
Bhalla, U. S., & Iyengar, R. (1999). Emergent properties of networks of biological signaling
pathways. Science, 283, 381–387.
Bock, W. J., Wahlert, G. V. (1965). Adaptation and the form-function complex. Evolution, 19,
269–299.
Bock, W. J. (1998). The nature of explanations in morphology. American Zoologist, 28, 205–215.
Boi, L. (2009). Epigenetic phenomena, chromatin dynamics, and gene expression. New theoretical
approaches in the study of living systems. Rivista Di Biologia/biology Forum, 103(4), 27–58.
Boi, L. (2021). A reappraisal of the form—Function problem. Theory and phenomenology. Theory
in Biosciences, 140, 39–68.
Boi, L. (2005). Topological Knot models in physics and biology. In: Geometries of nature, living
systems and human cognition. New interactions of mathematics with natural sciences and
humanities (pp. 203–278). World Scientiﬁc.
Boi, L. (2007a). Geometrical and topological modeling of supercoiling in supramolecular structures.
Biophysical Reviews and Letters, 2(3), 1–13.
Boi, L. (2007b). Sur quelques propriétés géométriques globales des systèmes vivants. Bulletin
d’Histoire et d’Épistémologie des Sciences de la Vie, 14, 71–113.

Some Remarks on Epigenetics and Causality in the Biological World
695
Boi, L. (2011a) Plasticity and complexity in biology: Topological organization, regulatory protein
networks, and mechanisms of genetic expression. In G. Terzis & R. Arp (Eds.), Information and
living systems: Philosophical and scientiﬁc perspectives (pp. 287–338). The MIT Press.
Boi, L. (2011b). When topology meets biology ‘for life’: Remarks on the way in which topological
form modulate biological function. In Bartocci, C., Boi, L., & Sinigaglia, C. (Eds.), New trends
in geometry, and its role in the natural and life sciences (pp. 241–302) Imperial College Press.
Buiatti, M. (2000). Lo stato vivente della materia. Le frontiere della nuova biologia. UTET.
Campbell, D. (1974). Downward causation in hierarchically organized biological systems. In F.
J. Ayala & T. Dobzhansky (Eds.), Studies in the philosophy of biology: Reduction and related
problems (pp. 179–186). University of California Press.
Cornish-Bowden, A. (2006). Putting the systems back into systems biology. Perspectives in Biology
and Medicine, 49(4), 1–9.
Cornish-Bowden, A., & Cárdenas, M. L. (2005). Systems biology may work when we learn to
understand the parts in terms of the whole. Biochemical Society Transactions, 33(3), 516–519.
Cornish-Bowden, A., Cárdenas, M. L. Letelier, J.-C., Soto-Andrade, J., & Guínez Abarzúa, F.
(2004). Understanding the parts in terms of the whole. Biology of the Cell, 96, 713–717.
Cremer, T., Cremer, M., Dietzel, S., Müller, S., Solovei, I., & Fakan, S. (2006). Chromosome
territories—A functional nuclear landscape. Current Opinion in Cell Biology, 18, 307–316.
Crick, F. H. C. (1970). The central dogma of molecular biology. Nature, 227, 561–563.
De Robertis, E. M. (2006). Spemann’s organizer and self-regulation in amphibian embryos. Nature
Reviews Molecular Biology, 7(4), 296–302.
Eccles, J. C. (1986). Do mental events cause neural events analogously to the probability ﬁelds of
quantum mechanics? Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series B: Biological Sciences,
227, 411–428.
El-Hani, C. N., & Emmeche, C. (2000). On some theoretical grounds for an organism-centered
biology. Property emergence, supervenience, and downward causation. Theory in Biosciences,
119(3), 234–275.
Emmeche, C. (1997). Aspects of complexity in life and science. Philosophica, 59, 41–68.
Esteller, M. (2008). Epigenetics in cancer. The New England Journal of Medicine, 358(11), 1148–
1159.
Fraga, M. F., Ballestar, E., Paz, M. F., et al. (2005). Epigenetic differences arise during the lifetime
of monozygotic twins. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America, 102, 10604–10609.
Goodwin, B. C., Kauffman, S., & Murray, J. D. (1993). Is morphogenesis an intrinsically robust
process? Journal of Theoretical Biology, 163(1), 135–144.
Hall, B. K. (1970). Cellular differentiation in skeleton tissues. Biology Reviews, 45, 455–484.
Hammond, S. M., Caudy, A. A., & Hannon, G. J. (2001). Post-transcriptional gene silencing by
double-stranded RNA. Nature Reviews Genetics, 2, 110–119.
Herring, S. W. (1993). Formation of the vertebrate face: Epigenetic and functional inﬂuences.
American Zoologist, 33(4), 472–483.
Hess, B., & Mikhailov, A. (1994). Self-organization in living cells. Science, 264, 223–224.
Ho, S.-M., Johnson, A., Tarapore, P., Janakiram, V., Zhang, X., & Leung, Y.-K. (2012). Environ-
mental epigenetics and its implications on disease risk and health outcomes. Epigenetics, 53(3–4),
289–305.
Holliday, R. (1987). The inheritance of epigenetic defects. Science, 238, 163–170.
Holliday, R. (1994). Epigenetics: An overview. Developmental Genetics, 15, 453–457.
Horrobin, D. F. (2003). Modern biomedical research: An internally self-consistent universe with
little contact with medical reality? Nature Reviews, 2, 151–154.
Humphreys, P. (1997). How properties emerge. Philosophy of Science, 64(1), 1–17.
Jablonka, E., & Lamb, M. J. (1989). The inheritance of acquired epigenetic variations. Journal of
Theoretical Biology, 139(1), 69–83.
Jacob, F. (1970). La logique du vivant. Gallimard.

696
L. Boi
Kacser, H. (1986). On parts and wholes in metabolism. In G. R. Welch & J. S. Clegg (Eds.), The
organization of cell metabolism (pp. 327–337). Plenum Press.
Kardong, K. V. Epigenomics: The new science of functional and evolutionary morphology. Animal
Biology, 53(3), 225–243.
Karsenti, E. (2008). Self-organization in cell biology: A brief history. Nature Reviews Molecular
Cell Biology, 9, 255–262.
Kauffman, S. (1993). The origins of order. Self-organization and selection in evolution. Oxford
University Press.
Konishi, M. (1965). Effects of deafening on song development in American robins and black-headed
grosbeaks. Zeitschrift für Tierpsychologie, 22(5), 584–599.
Konishi, M. (1965). The role of auditory feedback in the control of vocalization in the white-crowned
sparrow. Zeitschrift für Tierpsychologie, 22(7), 770–783.
Laland, K. N., et al. (2011). Cause and effect in biology revisited: Is Mayr’s proximate-ultimate
distinction still useful? Science, 334, 1512–1516.
Lanyon, L. E. (1980). The inﬂuence of function on the development of bone curvature: an
experimental on the rat tibia. Journal of Zoology (London), 192, 457–466.
Lederberg, J. (1958). Genetic approaches to somatic cell variation: Summary content. Journal of
Cellular and Comparative Physiology, 52, 383–401.
Letelier, J. C., Cárdenas, M. L., & Cornish-Bowden, A. (2011). From L’Homme Machine to
metabolic closure: Steps towards understanding life. Journal of Theoretical Biology, 286(1),
100–113.
Lewontin, R. C. (1983). Gene, organism, and environment. In D. S. Bendall (Ed.), Evolution from
molecules to men (pp. 273–285). Cambridge University Press.
Liljenström, H. (2016). Multi-scale causation in brain dynamics. In R. Kozma & W. J. Freeman
(Eds.), Cognitive Phase Transitions in the cerebral cortex—Enhancing the neuron doctrine by
modeling neural ﬁelds (pp. 177–186). Springer International Publishing Switzerland.
Lillie, R. S. (1940). Biological causation. Philosophy of Science, 7(3), 314–336.
Lorenz, K. (1965). Evolution and modiﬁcation of behavior. Chicago University Press.
Marler, P. (1990). Song learning: The interface between behaviour and neuroethology. Philosophical
Transactions: Biological Sciences, 329(1253), 109–114.
Martinsen, G. D., Driebe, E. M., Whithman, T. G. (1998). Indirect interactions mediated by changing
plant chemistry: beaver browsing beneﬁts beetles. Ecology, 79(1), 192–200.
Mazzochi, F. (2012). Complexity and the reductionism-holism debate in systems biology. Systems
Biology and Medicine, 4(5), 413–427.
McClintock, M. (1984). The signiﬁcance of responses of the genome to challenge. Science, 226,
792–801.
Mesarovic, M. D., Sreenath, S. N., & Keene, J. D. (2004). Search for organizing principles:
Understanding in systems biology. Systematic Biology, 1(1), 19–27.
Misteli, T. (2001). The concept of self-organization in cellular architecture. The Journal of Cell
Biology, 155(2), 181–185.
Misteli, T. (2007). Beyond the sequence: Cellular organization of genome function. Cell, 128,
787–800.
Morange, M. (2000). A history of molecular biology. Harvard University Press.
Moreno, A., & Umerez, J. (2000). Downward causation at the core of living organization. In P.
B. Andersen, C. Emmeche, N. O. Finnemam, & P. V. Christiansen (Eds.), Downward causation
(pp. 99–117). University of Arhus Press.
Murphy, N., Ellis, G. F. R., & O’Connor, T. (Eds.). (2009). Downward causation and the
neurobiology of free will. Springer.
Murray, P. D. F. (1936). Bones: A study of the development and structure of the vertebrate skeleton.
Cambridge University Press, London.
Neuman, Y. (2008). Reviving the living: Meaning making in the living systems. Elsevier.
Noble, D. (2002). Modeling the heart–from genes to cells to the whole organ. Science, 295, 1678–
1682.

Some Remarks on Epigenetics and Causality in the Biological World
697
Noble, D. (2006). The music of life. Oxford University Press.
Noble, D. (2008). Genes and causation. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A, 366,
1125–1139.
Noble, D. (2010). Biophysics and systems biology. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society
A, 368, 1125–1139.
Noble, D. (2011). A theory of biological relativity: No privileged level of causation. Interface Focus,
1–10.
Odling-Smee, F. J., & Laland, K. N. (2011). Ecological inheritance and cultural inheritance: How
are they and how they differ? Biological Theory, 6, 220–230.
Odling-Smee, F. J., & Turner, J. S. (2011). Niche construction theory and human architecture.
Biological Theory, 6(3), 283–289.
Oyama, S., Grifﬁth, P. E., & R. D. Gray (Eds.). (2001). Cycles of contingency: Developmental
systems and evolution. The MIT Press.
Polanyi, M. (1968). Life’s irreducible structure. Science, 160(3834), 1308–1312.
Popper, K. (1974). Scientiﬁc reduction and the essential incompleteness of all science. In F. Ayala &
T. Dobzhansky (Eds.), Studies in the philosophy of biology (pp. 259–284). University of California
Press.
Popper, K., & Eccles, J. C. (1977). The self and its brain, an argument for interactionism. Springer.
Prigogine, I., & Nicolis, G. (1971). Biological order, structure and instabilities. Quarterly Reviews
of Biophysics, 4, 107–148.
Prochiantz, A. (2012). Qu est-ce que le vivant? Seuil.
Rosen, R. (1977). Complexity as a system property. International Journal of General Systems, 3,
227–232.
Rosen, R. (1985). Organisms as causal systems which are not mechanism: An essay into the nature
of complexity. In R. Rosen (Ed.), Theoretical biology and complexity (pp. 165–203). Academic
Press.
Sarà, M. (2002). L’integrazione di genotipo e fenotipo alle soglie del 2000. 4, 181–208.
Scherer, K., & Jost, J. (2007). Gene and genome concept. Coding versus regulation. Theory in
Biosciences, 126, 65–113.
Shapiro, J. A. (2009). Revisiting the central dogma in the 21st century. Annals of the New York
Academy of Sciences, 1178, 6–28.
Smet-Nocca, C., Paldi, A., & Benecke, A. (2006). De l’épigénomique à l’émergence morphogéné-
tique. In P. Bourgine & A. Lesne (Eds.), Morphogénèse. L’origine des formes (pp. 153–178).
Belin.
Spemann, H., & Mangold, I. (1924). Über Induktion von Embryonalanlagen durch Implantation
artfremder Organisatoren. Archiv Für Mikroskopische Anatomie Und Entwicklungsmechanik,
100(3–4), 599–638.
Sperry, R. W. (1980). Mind-brain interaction: Mentalism, yes; dualism, no. Neuroscience, 5, 195–
206.
Strohman, R. C. (1997). The coming Kuhnian revolution in biology. Nature Biotechnology, 15,
194–200.
Van Regenmortel, M. H. V. (2004a). Biological complexity emerges from the ashes of genetic
reductionism. Journal of Molecular Recognition, 17, 145–148.
Van Regenmortel, M. H. V. (2004b). Reductionism and complexity in molecular biology. EMBO
Reports, 5(11), 1016–1020.
Waddington, C. H. (1953). Genetic assimilation of an acquired character. Evolution, 7, 118–126.
Waddington, C. H. (1957). The Strategy of the Genes, George Allen & Unwin, London.
Waddington, C. H. (1959). Evolutionary systems–animals and human. Nature, 183, 1634–1638.
Waddington, C. H. (1961). The nature of life. Allen & Unwin.
Walleczek, J. (Ed.). (2000). Self-organized biological dynamics and nonlinear control. Toward
understanding complexity, chaos and emergent function in living systems, Cambridge University
Press.

698
L. Boi
Washburn, S. L. (1947). The relation of the temporal muscle to the form of the skull. The Anatomical
Record, 99, 139–248.
Webb, G. J. W., Cooper-Preston, H. (1989). Effects of incubation temperature on crocodiles and
the evolutionary reptilian oviparity. American Zoologist, 29(3), 953–971.
Werner, E. (2007). How central is the genome? Science, 317, 753–754.
West-Eberhard, M. J. (2005). Phenotypic accommodation: Adaptive innovation due to devel-
opmental plasticity. Journal of Experimental Zoology Part B: Molecular and Developmental
Evolution, 304, 610–618.
Wicken, J. S. (1984). On the increase in complexity in evolution. In M.-W. Ho & P. T. Saunders
(Eds.), Beyond Neo-Darwinism (pp. 89–112). Academic Press.
Wolkenhauer, O., & Green, S. (2013). The search for organizing principles as a cure against
reductionism in systems medicine. The FEBS Journal, 280, 5938–5948.

Can Agency Be Reduced to Molecules?
Raymond Noble and Denis Noble
1
Introduction
We all feel what it is like to make a choice. We have a sense of volition, or that
our actions and our choices are purposeful, but also that we make them to achieve
objectives which we have decided. We act for reasons that we have created, even
where these reasons involve hopes, fears, desires, loves and hates, or other emotions.
Jack may choose to walk with Jill because he’s in love with her and wishes to be with
her. We know the difference between being compelled to act in a particular way, and
doing so of our own free will. We therefore think we are, at least partly, agents of
our own destiny. We will call that ability agency, the ability to act and choose what
we wish to do, subject to what is physically possible.
We chose to write this chapter for this book; but was this choice an illusion?
Could our actions be entirely explained from molecular events? Our answer to this
question is that it cannot. We might be able to explain how we behaved as we did, but
we would have a limited understanding of why we did so. Our reasons for writing
this chapter are two-fold; not only to argue that reasons and emotions can inﬂuence
events at the molecular level, but also to explain how.
Scientists who think that our molecular make-up makes agency impossible there-
fore also conclude that our feeling of agency is itself an illusion. Thus the evolutionary
biologist, Jerry Coyne, author of the popular book Why Evolution is True, writes:
R. Noble
Institute for Women’s Health, University College London, London WC16AU, UK
e-mail: r.noble@ucl.ac.uk
D. Noble (B)
Department of Physiology, Anatomy & Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3PT, UK
e-mail: denis.noble@dpag.ox.ac.uk
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
S. Wuppuluri and I. Stewart (eds.), From Electrons to Elephants and Elections,
The Frontiers Collection, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-92192-7_37
699

700
R. Noble and D. Noble
The illusion of agency is so powerful that even strong incompatibilists like myself will
always act as if we had choices, even though we know that we don’t. We have no choice
in this matter. But we can at least ponder why evolution might have bequeathed us such a
powerful illusion.1
We profoundly disagree with Coyne’s conclusion.
The molecular biologist James Watson2 is reported to have said, “There is only
science, physics: everything else is social work.” This can be interpreted in two
ways. First, that all effective causation has to be at the material level. Or, second,
that what happens at the social level, the level of inter-relationships, is signiﬁcant
in causing events. Thus we need both for a full explanation. However, we doubt
that this is what he meant. Watson’s implication is clear. Social interactions between
organisms, including humans, are viewed as vague processes that cannot carry a hard
scientiﬁc basis, because they are non-material. In this view, molecules are seen as the
hard basis of our being and the level at which all causation occurs; thus the molecular
level is always where we should look for explanations of what we decide to do.
2
How Did Western Science Come to Deny Agency?
The origin of this denial of agency is deeply embedded in Cartesian dualism and
represents a profound misunderstanding of the nature of life. Descartes ﬁrst published
his notion of the "beast machine" in his discours de la méthode in 1637 in which
he regarded organisms as machines or automata, and thus creating for humans the
dualist separation of mind and body.
A mechanistic view of organisms might be understandable in the context of the
fascination with automata by scientists during the Renaissance, when truly remark-
able mechanical devices were being conceived using cogs, wheels, pulleys, pistons
and springs. Using extraordinary ingenuity, the German Mathematician & Inventor
Johannes Muller von Konigsberg created a series of wonderful contraptions, amongst
which was a famous mechanical ﬂying eagle, while Leonardo da Vinci built a
mechanical lion, so life-like that it could shake its tail, open its mouth, walk and even
rear up on its hind legs. But this period of understanding of physics and mechanics
created also a cultural trap. Life is not a mechanical machine, and we cannot trace
causality back through its cogs and wheels. The mechanical toys of da Vinci and
Muller were closed systems; Life is not. Living organisms are open, ongoing process
of change and redevelopment. Where life has pulleys and levers, it must continu-
ously seek to replenish and maintain them. This drives its function and its motivation;
and its self-being, and in doing so it must solve problems involving choices. Yet a
powerful residue of the mechanistic view of life still has its hold on modern science
1 Coyne (2014).
2 Watson, J.D. This is the common version of the quote, documented by Stephen Rose in his book
Lifelines.

Can Agency Be Reduced to Molecules?
701
and thought and notions of causality, but where the cogs and wheels have been
replaced by molecular structures.
This materialist view produces a false dichotomy between our psychosocial being
and our physical being. Yet these are inseparable in the living process. Life is a
process of maintaining integrity and as such is the origin of purpose in functionality.
We humans have a sense of our being, of our integrity, and of what it is we are doing.
This is a sense, just as vision and hearing, touch and smell are senses. We have little
trouble attributing such senses to other organisms, even though we cannot ourselves
see their seeing or hear their hearing. Indeed, so much of our understanding of how
our senses work comes from studies on non-human organisms. Yet we are reluctant
to attribute our sense of purpose to them.
3
Agency Has a Firm Modern Scientiﬁc Basis
Recently, we have analysed this issue in a series of articles,3 and we do so from a
solid scientiﬁc basis. Our articles show:
• Even when we take the molecular view at face value, for example by constructing
mathematically strict accounts of what is happening at the molecular level, it is
easy to show that it is inadequate to provide causal closure. It cannot, even on its
own terms, succeed in predicting what we will do when we act as agents.
• The molecular level is far from determinate. Atoms and molecules do not behave
like hard billiard balls clicking around with each other in totally predictable ways.
On the contrary, at the molecular level stochasticity, randomness, reigns.
• The interpretation of biological processes following the concept of the Central
Dogma of molecular biology, in a straight causal line from DNA to RNA to
protein, is incorrect, and has been shown to be so by molecular biology itself.
• Stochasticity is used by organisms functionally, both in unconscious and in
conscious processes. These processes even give organisms a role in their own
evolution. Organisms then become partly directional, both in how they act, and
in how they inﬂuence evolution.
Usingthesepoints,itispossibletooutlinehowagencycanbegivenaphysiological
basis, and is therefore far from a vague concept. We go so far as to conclude that
it is mathematically and physically necessary that organisms should be agents. In
organisms there can be no causal closure at the molecular level. As the logician of
science, Karl Popper concluded “all life is problem solving.”4
We will develop our argument in several stages.
3 Fully listed at the end of this chapter.
4 Popper (1999).

702
R. Noble and D. Noble
4
Biological Relativity: A Consequence of Organisms Being
Open Systems
Living organisms are open systems. They are continually exchanging energy and
matter with their environment. Nothing in organisms is isolated from the outside
world. That is as true of DNA as it is true of all molecules and systems in organ-
isms. An organism that is prevented from exchanging energy and matter with its
environment becomes dead.
One of the obvious consequences of being an open system is that the organism is
subject to causation from outside (beyond) itself. Life is an interaction between the
organism and its environment, which leads to two consequences. Life itself changes
its environment. And it is itself inﬂuenced by it.
Many of those inﬂuences are social—the ways in which organisms interact with
each other. Those interactions have molecular consequences, to be sure. Everything
does. When you type instructions into your computer, they will produce changes
at the level of electrons, atoms and molecules. But those instructions have causal
power by virtue of the logic of what you are telling the machine to do. Similarly,
organisms signal to each other and those signals have molecular consequences. But
that is not what the signals mean nor do the molecular effects reveal the intent of the
organism sending them. That requires an organism to interpret and anticipate what
others intend to do.
The consequence of life being an open system therefore forces us to recognise
the existence of levels of organisation above that of the organism alone. Having
done that, it is relatively easy to see that the organism itself is also a set of levels of
organisation: molecular, cellular, tissues, organs and systems. Each has their logic of
operation that constrains the levels below to conform to that logic. This conformity
to higher-level logic must be true since all multicellular organisms evolved from
unicellular ones. The cells that did this then, in effect, traded their independence for
the constraints of multicellular co-operation. We know what happens when those
constraints break down. We call it cancer.
The existence of levels of organisation and of causality between them leads to what
we call the principle of biological relativity. By ‘relativity principle’ in this context,
we mean distancing ourselves in our theories from speciﬁc absolute standpoints
for which there can be no a priori justiﬁcation. The principle was ﬁrst applied and
developed in physics. From Copernicus and Galileo through to Poincaré and Einstein,
the reach of this general principle of relativity has been progressively extended by
removing various absolute standpoints in turn. People realized that those standpoints
represent privileging certain measurements as absolute, for which there is and could
be no basis. There is no centre of the universe, and no absolute frame of reference
from which to measure speeds of movement. Even were all science to be just physics,
we cannot avoid the consequences of the relativity principle.

Can Agency Be Reduced to Molecules?
703
Molecules cannot therefore form a privileged level of organization from which
everything else is completely caused. All levels of organisation have causal conse-
quences. If you train as a professional athlete, the training will produce changes in
RNA levels that in turn control the amounts of protein you produce. That is how you
produce larger and more powerful muscles. But the RNA changes depend on you
making the decision to train.
5
Consequences for the Central Dogma of Molecular
Biology
The current concept of genetics tends to confound different ways in which genes are
used and created, leading to a confused understanding of agency, or denial that it
exists.
5.1
Consequences for Organisms as Agents
The predominant view in modern science is gene-centred, so much so that it has
entered our common language; Genes or DNA are referred to as "a code" or "a
blueprint" and even as ‘a book of life’, not just determining the form we take, our
anatomy and physiology, but also our behavioural characteristics. It feeds into our
philosophy and politics with concepts such as "the selﬁsh Gene". This has its origin
in what became "the central dogma": a linear sequence of causality from gene to
characteristic and behaviour, but not the reverse, that our behaviour can alter our
genes. It gives privileged causality to genes.
This privileging of genetic causality involves a fundamental misinterpretation of
what molecular biology has shown. The molecular biologist Francis Crick produced
the ﬁrst version of the Central Dogma in 1958,5 as a one-way track from DNA to
RNA to proteins: DNA →RNA →proteins, contending that it could not work the
other way. Nevertheless, he had to reformulate his Central Dogma in 1970 after the
discovery that RNAs could be reverse transcribed into DNA, and inserted into the
genome. This is signiﬁcant because it provides a way in which the organism can
inﬂuence its genome. The ﬁrst arrow works both ways, from DNA to RNA and from
RNA to DNA. Crick’s revised version reads:
The central dogma of molecular biology deals with the detailed residue-by-residue transfer
of sequential information. It states that such information cannot be transferred back from
protein to either protein or nucleic acid.6
5 Crick (1958).
6 Crick (1970).

704
R. Noble and D. Noble
It beggars belief that this statement could be comprehensible! Not least since it
is a statement for which there is no evidential basis. There is nothing in a genome
sequence that tells us what it means, or why it could be regarded as information.
It is the organism that does that. Without assigned meaning it could be just junk
data, as indeed was once thought to be the case for 80% of DNA. That idea is no
longer credible. To put it bluntly, the Central Dogma was an idea, an interpretation,
which has, nevertheless, had a profound inﬂuence on our thinking and our behavior,
as though it is an experimentally established ﬁnding. To emphasise this point we
have italicized the terms ‘such information’ and ‘from protein’ since it is uncertain
whether Crick meant that no control can pass from the organism to the genome. In
fact, even in Crick’s time, it was obvious that such control of DNA must exist to
produce the many different patterns of gene expression, which enable many different
phenotypes (e.g. many different cell types, such as heart cells, renal cells etc. in the
same body) that are generated from the same genome.
5.2
Consequences for the Nature-Nurture Debate
Such is the hold of the gene-centred view in the nature versus nurture debate that
science has often tried to attribute percentages or proportionate causality to the genes
or environment. For example, in intelligence, where it has been suggested that it is,
perhaps, 60% genes, 40% nurture. But what is this a percentage of? We might say
that a cake has, say, 5% marzipan, 1% icing, 94% cake mix. But what percentage
of the cake is the cook? This makes it appear that there is 0% left for the chef! Ask
any gourmet whether this is true. The decision, for example, to add brandy to the
mix, or not, appears to have no role, because it is an immaterial idea. Yet it is what
makes this cake the chef’s cake, as well as all the other decisions, a smidgeon of this
and a smidgeon of the other, that the chef has up his sleeve from past experience, or
simply on a creative whim. It is almost impossible to attribute what proportion is the
recipe on the page and what proportion is the ingenuity of the chef. The error here is
to separate the genome from the living organism. The genome is an integral part of
the living organism and its interactions with its environment. Separating the genome
out in this way is another example of a false dualism. In this case, a bit of the system
that controls the rest of the system, as if it is not itself controlled by that system.
The living organism is the chef, and not the genome. The genome is not a separate
functional entity, whereas the organism is, or at least it has a functional integrity of
which the genome is but a part.
Consider the nature of molecular arrangements that would enable us to create this
page.Theywouldbeintheformoflivingagentsthatcanmakethenecessarydecisions
and think through the ideas and put them into words. Organisms are not simply an
aggregate of their molecules, and they are in a process of continuous creativity during
their lifetimes, not prisoners of their genes. While genes may be involved in creating
a facility for action, they do not determine a speciﬁc action. We would not conclude
that Leonardo da Vinci’s Mona Lisa or Beethoven’s ﬁfth symphony could be derived

Can Agency Be Reduced to Molecules?
705
from the genes of their creators, rather than the organised entities of Da Vinci and
Beethoven themselves. This point applies to the control that organisms have over
what they do as agents through their lifetimes. Whilst it may involve changes in the
expression of genes it does not require major changes in the genome.
It is not the function of genes to determine any particular kind of behaviour. Their
function is to enable particular proteins and RNAs to be formed. So genes cannot be
said, for example, to determine whether we are selﬁsh, or to rule out certain types
of behaviour, such as those that can be considered altruistic. In any given instance
of a behaviour, or a choice, it would not be necessary for any changes in genes or
any direct involvement of genes. In contrast, behaviour has been shown to alter gene
expression, such as when social interaction leads to changes in development that
then makes it more likely that certain types of behaviour will persist in a group. We
are social beings and our interactive behaviour is the glue that binds together the
groups to which we belong. For example, mutual stroking which leads to the release
of endorphins and a feeling of well-being. We nurture others as well as ourselves
in a mutual cooperative, the precise arrangement of which in any given time cannot
and is not programmed in our genes. For example, the tools that we invent enable
us to do things in ways that previous generations could not. This is true not only for
us but for many other species, such as when chimpanzees use and modify stones to
more readily crack nuts, which has been shown to be culturally derived rather than
genetically determined.
Even if genes are signiﬁcant in determining our behaviours, given the number of
social species, there would have to be genes creating behaviour that outweigh any
that may be speciﬁc to selﬁshness, else one has to resort to the idea that it is selﬁsh
to be cooperative simply because it maintains genes in a gene pool. In this case, the
closest we get to any kind of true altruistic behaviour is that which is considered
reciprocal in a “you scratch my back and I’ll scratch yours” kind of way. Certainly
in many animal species we see mutual grooming, which is important in bonding and
social group cohesion; if anything this encourages less selﬁshness. Given that genes
are used in cooperative processes none of them would truly be regarded as “selﬁsh”.
That, of course, is if you believe that genes cause behaviour. In any event few genes
have been found to map speciﬁcally to any particular trait or characteristic. And
certainly since the Selﬁsh Gene was promoted none has ever been found to map to
selﬁshness. If you deﬁne whether genes are selﬁsh by virtue of being in the gene pool
then this means nothing in relation to behaviour. It is simply a deﬁnition that must
be true by the way in which it is deﬁned. There is therefore no reason to suppose that
a gene would be found speciﬁcally for selﬁshness above all other traits, particularly
when behavioural traits are complex, not simple.

706
R. Noble and D. Noble
6
Genes Cannot Be Selﬁsh, People Choose Whether to Be
Selﬁsh or Cooperative
No doubt we can be selﬁsh, by deﬁnition that would have to involve a choice to be so,
depending on the context and circumstances. But any individual who might be selﬁsh
on one occasion and giving or altruistic on another does not change genes between
these two occasions. In fact the genes of somebody who might be regarded as selﬁsh
are little different if at all from those who are regarded as not selﬁsh. I might be selﬁsh
in taking the last strawberry, but I might also feel guilty about having done so. Is
there also a guilty gene? On another occasion I might choose to give the strawberry
to someone else simply because it is the last one. Whether or not our actions are
regarded as selﬁsh or altruistic depends on the belief we have about their outcomes
when we decide to act in such a way. A decision cannot be regarded as selﬁsh or
otherwise without taking account of the motivation or reasons for the action taken.
Itmightbeargued,asgene-deterministsdo,thatweareinherentlyselﬁsh.Consider
this text from the very beginning of The Selﬁsh Gene:
This book is mainly intended to be interesting, but if you wish to extract a moral from it, read
it as a warning. Be warned that if you wish, as I do, to build a society in which individuals
cooperate generously and unselﬁshly towards a common good you can expect little help
from biological nature. Let us try to teach generosity and altruism, because we are born
selﬁsh. Let us understand what our selﬁsh genes are up to, because we may then at least
have the chance to upset their designs, something which no other species has ever aspired
to. (Dawkins, 1976, The Selﬁsh Gene, p. 3)
Dawkins correctly sees that any inherent biological propensity can be outweighed
by social factors such as education and culture. But he is doing so from an incorrect
understanding of any such propensity. Most organisms are not “born selﬁsh”. They
are born needful, of course, but most are born into co-operative groups. There are no
genes that are “up to” anything. They are mere bits of chemicals that can’t have any
intentions. Note also that the text assumes Cartesian dualism—“something which no
other species has ever aspired to”—which is to give humans, and only humans, the
power of agency. This was Descartes’ mistake, which has misled Western philosophy
and science for centuries. It is high time that it should be abandoned.
The question why a particular instance of behaviour occurs is different from the
question of why certain behaviours will persist in a population over generations. So,
for example, the reason why Jack accompanies Jill up the hill to fetch a pail of water
may in large part be because he is in love with her and he wishes to be with her. But
his love may have other consequences in maintaining the integrity of the population.
Thus we cannot conclude from this that “maintaining genes in a gene pool” was
uppermost in the mind of Jack when deciding to accompany Jill. In any event, genes
are used to maintain the integrity of the organism; other than being in organisms and
being used by organisms, there is no gene pool in the sense in which it can be said
that we behave in order to maintain it. Furthermore, the principle advantage of sexual
reproduction is that it shakes the genes around, not that it maintains them. Thus, a
consequence is not necessarily a cause of behaviour, unless the behaviour is done

Can Agency Be Reduced to Molecules?
707
speciﬁcally to bring about the consequence. This is why simply counting genes in
the “gene pool” will not give us the reason for any particular instance of behaviour.
It is said that necessity is the mother of invention. However, nature is the mother
of necessity. Need drives creativity in our behaviour or in what we do but as we will
see it also drives evolution. Although the precise mechanisms may be different and
occur over different time periods, both can be directional and purposeful.
7
Life is Problem-Solving
Life is the source of all problems. Many of these are created by the way in which
we interact with each other and are culturally expressed. For many, we create social
solutions that involve the ingenuity of many of us, and often trans-generationally.
Music is a vital human cultural expression which has clearly evolved from generation
to generation and is continually generating new styles. We see also in relation to this
an evolution of the instruments that are used to perform and interpret the myriad
of compositions. For example, the development of the piano which enabled a huge
expansion of orchestral capability, but it is also seen in the trumpet. The trumpet
illustrates also a major point we are making which is that it is a tool crafted to play
melodic lines.
A trumpet has three valves which can be used in combination to alter the length of
the tubing in play and from this an almost inﬁnite number of melodies can be played.
The valves are not a “code”, they are a tool invented so that a trumpet can do this.
Life is similarly creative. The functioning is analogue not digital. We cannot ﬁnd the
melodies in the valves, but we can use them to produce them. Thus it is also with
our genes. Our choice of melody and expression from moment to moment during a
performance is not written in our genes.
7.1
Consequences for Evolution
Life creates problems that are, on the one hand in the here and now, which involved the
kinds of choices, decisions and actions we have discussed, which affect individuals
and groups of individuals. But in a continually changing environment many problems
are faced by the species as a whole and could be said to be ecological. Evolution is
a process of addressing these constraints. But these changes will involve changes in
structure and function and functionality. We argue that this process is creative in its
nature and can involve major changes in the organisation of genes.

708
R. Noble and D. Noble
By contrast the standard theory of evolution, neo-Darwinism, rules out any such
directed re-organisation. All DNA changes are assumed to be purely random. Yet the
experimental evidence shows that sequences of any length of DNA can be moved
around the genome either directly as DNA or indirectly via RNA. Way back in the
1930s and 1940s Barbara McClintock showed that such transfers do occur in plants
in response to environmental stress. This was why, on winning the Nobel Prize for
mobile genetic elements in 1983, she referred to the genome as a
highly sensitive organ of the cell, monitoring genomic activities and correcting common
errors, sensing the unusual and unexpected events, and responding to them, often by
restructuring the genome.7
Comparative sequencing of genomes from many different species ranging from
yeast to man reported in the 2001 Nature report on the ﬁrst full draft of the human
genomesequence8 (InternationalHumanGenomeMappingConsortium2001)shows
that reorganisation of DNA happened during evolution The gene sequences for both
transcription factor proteins and chromatins show precisely this kind of massive
genome re-organisation involving very long functional sequences. The length of
these segments (transposons) shows that this could not have happened by the gradual
accumulation of point mutations, as proposed in the standard theory of evolution.
The Chicago biochemist James Shapiro was responsible for showing that the
processes of gene reorganization discovered by Barbara McClintock also occur
in bacteria and has since developed the ﬁeld of what he calls natural genetic
engineering.9 He writes:
It is difﬁcult (if not impossible) to ﬁnd a genome change operator that is truly random in
its action within the DNA of the cell where it works. All careful studies of mutagenesis
ﬁnd statistically signiﬁcant non-random patterns of change, and genome sequence studies
conﬁrm distinct biases in location of different mobile genetic elements. (Evolution, A view
from the 21st century, page 82)
7 McClintock (1984).
8 Lander et al. (2001).
9 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Natural_genetic_engineering

Can Agency Be Reduced to Molecules?
709
Evidence of large functional cut-and-paste changes in genomes during evolu-
tion. The different symbols represent functional domains of a chromatin protein
that has evolved by domain accretion as species as different as yeast, worm, ﬂy, and
human have diverged from their common ancestors.10 The stars indicate the domains
that have moved around and been incorporated into the functionality of the similar
(homologous) protein in the different species protein. As more domains get incor-
porated the functionality of the protein is extended. The chances of such changes
occurring through random accumulation of point mutations is exceedingly low. The
better explanation is that organisms under stress have initiated genome reorganisation
through transposing and connecting up existing segments of DNA.
8
The Harnessing of Chance in the Immune System
Random variation is creatively harnessed at all levels in living systems and is an
essential ingredient of all guided processes. For example, the immune system uses
random variations in DNA to produce creative non-random functional, i.e. targeted,
results.
The immune system protects the body against invading viruses, bacteria and other
infectious agents by producing speciﬁc reactions against them. This creative process
continues throughout the life of an organism. It is essential precisely because living
systems are open and not closed, interacting continually with the environment. The
immune system achieves this by producing molecules called immunoglobulins that
can grab hold of invading viruses, bacteria or other infectious agents even if it has
never encountered them before. When the invading body is new the immune system
10 The original ﬁgure is from Fig. 41 in Lander et al. (2001). The meaning of each domain is also
listed there.

710
R. Noble and D. Noble
will produce a new immunoglobulin. The proteins (antibodies) that can catch hold
of invaders (antigens) are all constructed on the same plan. There is a long part of the
molecule that enables it to locate itself in the organism’s cells where it latches onto
the foreign body. The structure of this part is produced unchanged. Any mutations
in that part would stop it working as an antibody. The other part is variable and
mutation is restricted to that part. This is achieved by extremely rapid mutation of
the DNA sequence used in its production. Like keys in a lock, these are selected to
be speciﬁc to the antigen. But for this remarkable process we would not exist. This is
an example, par excellence, of a system response to environmental stress involving
changes in DNA sequence. The mutations are accelerated in the variable part, and
only that part, of the genome that forms the template for an immunoglobulin protein.
So far as is known, these mutations occur stochastically, and what is modiﬁed is
the speed at which they occur. However, the location in the genome is certainly not
a matter of chance. The functionality, in this case, lies precisely in targeting the rele-
vant part of the genome. The arrival of the antigen itself activates the hypermutation
process, and the binding to a successful antibody triggers the proliferation of those
cells that make it. Thus, the system targets the speciﬁc antigen. Even more remark-
ably, all the functionality in the rest of the genome is also maintained. Considering
the vast size of the entire genome, this is pin-point targeting requiring highly speciﬁc
feedback processes to be successful. By holding correct parts of the immunoglob-
ulin sequence constant, the system ﬁnely tunes the rapid mutation to occur in only
a tiny part of the entire genome. Such tuning is one way in which organisms can
dynamically respond to environmental change.
There are two key processes involved here. One is the hypermutation, the other
is maintaining the integrity of the DNA sequences. This is also a continuous active
process because random changes are occurring all the time. The hypermutation is
achieved by lifting the restraint imposed by the system. Organisms also need to do the
reverse, which is to protect against unwanted random change. The way in which this
is achieved is that their biological networks buffer the organism from the majority
of these molecular changes at the genetic level. Thus, the great majority of random
genome changes have negligible effects.
9
Integrating the Forms of Biological Causation
Our diagram illustrates the relationships and forms of causation involved.

Can Agency Be Reduced to Molecules?
711
Figure illustrating the role of physiological functional networks (sometimes called gene 
regulatory networks GRN) in buffering organisms against dysfunctional molecular 
variations in the genome. The original 1958 formulation of the Central Dogma is shown 
by the blue arrows. DNA is viewed as a self-replicator (the curved arrow bottom left) 
which can be used to make RNAs, in turn used to make proteins. Both products then 
form the functional networks in the cells of the body, together with many other 
molecules that are not produced using DNA templates.  
Key to ϐigure 
Blue arrows: 1958 version of Central Dogma
Orange arrows: additions in 1970 version of Central Dogma
Green arrows: Epigenetic control of DNAexpression and sequences
Purple arrow:  Control of protein folding
Black arrows: Environmental effects onfunctional networks 
Open Black arrows: Influence of organisms on the environment
In 1970, the discovery that RNAs could be back-translated into DNA shook the
foundations of the Central Dogma. Crick was therefore forced to modify his one-
way causal concept. He did so simply by adding the orange arrows. RNA can also
self-replicate, and insert DNA into the genome. But even this reformulation did not
recognise what was already known: (1) That the same genome can be commanded to
make hundreds of different cell forms in the body. (2) DNA can be reorganised when
organisms are under stress. The downward pointing green arrows represent these
forms of causation. In addition, the networks themselves are subject to many forms
of environmental inﬂuence. Through this inﬂuence the genome can be sensitive to

712
R. Noble and D. Noble
the environment. It is not isolated. The massive re-organisation of the hereditary
molecular material (DNA) had already been demonstrated experimentally by an
American plant scientist, Barbara McClintock, many years previously. Even in 1970
therefore it was already known that DNA is controlled and edited by organisms.
Later, it became clear that DNA is not a crystal-like self-replicator. Even replication
is under the control of the organism. As we have already noted above, McClintock
correctly said when she received her Nobel Prize in 1983: “The genome is an organ
of the cell.”
10
The One-Eyed Watchmaker
In Chap. 3 of his book, The Blind Watchmaker,11 Richard Dawkins produces his
famous Weasel program. He estimated that a monkey writing out 28 characters
randomly on a typewriter would require much more than the whole lifetime of the
universe to arrive by pure chance at a correct 28 letter sequence to match Shake-
speare’s text, “METHINKS IT IS LIKE A WEASEL”. But if each correct char-
acter were to be held constant between successive generations of random typing, it
would require only a modest number (43) of iterations to achieve a correct result.
The program resembles the operation of an old-fashioned three-wheel fruit (slot)
machine. If the target for a reward is, say, three lemons and a spin of the wheels
produces two, the best strategy might be to hold the wheels with the two lemons and
spin the remaining wheel until that also shows a lemon. The number of ‘wheels’ (28
in the Weasel example) doesn’t change the principle of this mechanism.
We agree with Dawkins that completely random processes with no ‘hold’ or
similar ‘guiding’ mechanism would require impossibly long periods of time for
successful evolution to occur.
We nevertheless show in our articles that organisms and populations of organisms
do have identiﬁable and empirically testable goals, and that variations on the theme
of the Weasel program found experimentally in nature, show this to be true. The key
to understanding why we differ from neo-Darwinists on this matter lies in multi-level
feedback processes that have been shown to exist which enable organisms and popu-
lations to direct the evolutionary process in response to stimuli from the environment
and so achieve the inheritance of acquired characteristics. These feedback processes
require analysis of function at a high (systems) level, e.g., networks, cells, tissues,
organs and the organism as a whole in interaction with the environment, including
other organisms. Multi-level feedback is a requirement of goal-directed behaviour.
A purely gene-centric view would not ‘see’ such feedback. Empirical tests used
routinely in physiology and engineering can identify the feedback processes. Such
feedback is an essential feature of physiological function. Imagine walking without
it. Our function is goal-directed. We avoid objects and walk to meet others.
11 Dawkins (1986).

Can Agency Be Reduced to Molecules?
713
11
Limitations of the Modern Synthesis
The standard theory of evolution, The Modern Synthesis, is predicated on the undi-
rected, slow process of gene mutation. There are many reasons why this produces
an inadequate understanding. We have already pointed to the role of transposition
as demonstrated by Barbara McClintock and of targeted mutation. There are several
additionalprocessesbywhichdirectedevolutionoccurs:epigenetics,culturalchange,
niche construction and adaptation. Evolution is an ongoing set of iterative interac-
tions between organisms and the environment. Evolution is a continuous organic
process. Directionality is introduced by the agency of organisms themselves as the
one-eyed watchmakers. Evolution itself also evolves.
The Modern Synthesis views the environment as a passive ﬁlter for the adaptability
of individual organisms. This ignores the ecological reality that organisms are in
continuous process of creating this environment. Whether or not the analogy with a
ﬁlter is correct, it is not passive. The separation of the organism from the environment
is a mistake that ignores the ecological interactions, cohabitations, etc. that produces
not a passive ﬁlter for adaptability but an active one. Cooperation in ecological
systems is as signiﬁcant a feature as competition between individuals, and survival
depends upon it. It is seen not only in social groups of the same species but also
in cooperation of individuals or groups across species. For example, a ﬁsh working
cooperatively with an octopus to obtain food, each has a faculty the other does not
and thus cooperation has its reward. It involves a mutual anticipation of the behavior
and the intention of the other. Intention is a major feature of situational logic. It is
a feature of their environment at the social level. The actions of such cooperative
groups will in turn inﬂuence the ﬁtness of the individuals whether or not it is the
individual or the group that is selected through evolution, it is their mutual behaviour
and not their selﬁshness that is being selected. Thus it is perfectly feasible to argue
that there is as much a selection pressure on behaviour, which might be considered
altruistic as it would be selﬁsh. What matters in evolution is not the survival of genes
in a gene pool, but of organisms and ecosystems. Only organisms and ecosystems
have any say or inﬂuence on what survives. We are the environment!
The standard view of evolution has emphasised a distinction between vehicle
(organism) and replicator (genes). This yet again tries to introduce a false dichotomy.
Genes cannot replicate without organisms and in any event replication is not the
key ingredient in evolution; the key ingredient is change. One of the features of
reproduction is not that it produces like for like but that it enables environmental
inﬂuences to bring about changes across generations in response to pressure. Some
of this, for example in mammals, will occur in early development in the womb,
where it is inﬂuenced by the nutritional and social environment of the mother. It is
sometimes argued that such changes do not persist across many generations but this
simply begs the question over how many generations they would need to persist to
be of signiﬁcance. Whatever is the answer to that, it cannot be denied that this is
an active process physiologically not a passive one. It brings about a reﬁnement of
adaptation to the anticipated environment of the developing organism. Furthermore,

714
R. Noble and D. Noble
Waddington’s experiments on fruit ﬂies in the 1950s showed that genetic assimilation
could occur in as few as fourteen generations.
12
How Organisms Make Choices: Harnessing Chance
in the Nervous System
In the introduction we noted that we have a sense of volition, or that our actions and
our choices are purposeful, but also that we make them to achieve objectives that we
have decided. This is not an illusion. It is a powerful sense of our being; and much
of our action is driven by this sense. Yet science seems to have a problem with this
particular sense. We have an unquestioned sense of vision. We can tell each other
what it is we see. Of course what we see might be an illusion, a trick of the mind;
that would be true of all our senses. We have a sense that it is we that make choices.
When we wait at a bus-stop we do so generally in anticipation of the arrival of a bus
that would take us to a destination. We may be wrong. The bus may not arrive or we
may get on the wrong bus. But by virtue of that this is not an illusion any more than
it is when we see the bus when it arrives. So how do we do this? It would be difﬁcult
to give a precise answer to this for any of our senses. Science is still unraveling
the details of the processes involved. This is no reason then to reject this sense of
being, of choosing. It just means that we have more to study. But the clues lie in the
organization of living systems. There is no reason to believe that there is anything
unusual in the neuronal and synaptic processes that would be involved, other than
their precise location and precise organization.
To consider this sense of being and choice as an illusion would ignore that much
of what happens in the world around us results from the assumption that it isn’t.
We can discuss our choices with each other and make a reasonable case for further
choices. If this were an illusion, the words on this page would have no impact on the
reader. So why is there a problem with accepting such agency? Perhaps it is that it
opens a Pandora’s box, for if agency exists, we could act for reasons that cannot be
determined by studying or counting genes, or any other molecules. Indeed, this is
why the idea is so liberating. This does not mean that considerable constraints on the
exercise of such liberty do not exist. We can only work on the ground of the possible.
But through it we might, through ingenuity, make possible that which initially may
appear not to be so. We can solve problems.
13
Relevant Processes in the Brain, Including the Cerebral
Cortex
Life is inherently creative because it must continuously replenish to maintain itself.
As Plato reminds us, all things are in ﬂux, a constant process of change.

Can Agency Be Reduced to Molecules?
715
Heraclitus, I believe, says that all things pass and nothing stays, and comparing existing
things to the ﬂow of a river, he says you could not step twice into the same river. (Plato
Cratylus 402a = A6)
At about the same time (c 500 BC) as Heraclitus, Siddarttha Gautama (the Buddha)
was expressing the same idea of conditioned arising—nothing is experienced inde-
pendently of its conditions, all is in ﬂux. In China also, Daoism was so similar that
when Buddhism entered China the similarity was recognized.
This process of ﬂux creates a problem for life but also its solution. Life harnesses
this change to meet the challenges it faces in a continually changing environment.
Indeed, the central nervous system of organisms is functionally organized to respond
to change, particularly in sensing the environment.
Our senses do not passively receive stimuli and interpret them. There is an ongoing
dynamic and interactive anticipation of the world about us (ideas), which is moulded
by the senses in a continuously creative process. What we see is not the individual
photonsinteractingwithourmolecules,weseetheinterpretation.Ifwecouldseeindi-
vidual photons we would see a stochastic mess. Moulding of the sensory experience
begins even at the level of the ﬁrst-order sensory cells. This enables a ﬁne-tuning of
the sensory experience. Such ﬁne-tuning enables the organism to distinguish between
different sounds of similar frequency and amplitude. The organism tunes into its envi-
ronment. However, the signal does not then reach the auditory cortex directly and
considerable processing takes place along the auditory pathway. This is so for all
our sensory experiences. We suggest that this creative process is only possible by
harnessing stochastic processes within the central nervous system.
Our proposals have two major requirements that are testable experimentally.
The ﬁrst is that stochasticity should exist at multiple levels of organisation. In the
case of the cerebral cortex, considered to be deeply involved in conscious activity,
the experimental evidence is extensive. The most extensive recent account is to be
found in Edmund Rolls’ Cerebral Cortex, Principles of Operation,12 Chap. 5 on “The
noisy cortex: stochastic dynamics, decisions and memory.” Nerve impulses occur in
a probabilistic way, usually conforming to a Poisson distribution. Rolls writes:
The spiking [impulse] activity is approximately Poisson-like … because the neurons are held
close to (just slightly below) their ﬁring threshold, so that any incoming input can rapidly
cause sufﬁcient further depolarisation to produce a spike.
As Rolls notes, this gives great plasticity to the nervous system. This sensitivity
is analogous with the extraordinary plasticity of the immune system. Of course the
process by which the plasticity is achieved is different. The immune system depends
on randomness created by switching down the error-correction in replication of gene
sequences, the nervous system depends on the natural stochastic behaviour in the
region of excitation thresholds, which can be controlled by inhibitory and excitatory
synapses, which may allow or not transmission to occur in selected pathways. This
could allow the creation of multitudes of processing networks in decision-making.
12 Rolls (2017).

716
R. Noble and D. Noble
This plasticity can underlie two other features that Roll’s draws attention to. First,
it can be used by memory systems in the brain, again in a way analogous to the
memory created by immune system success in developing an appropriate antibody.
Second, it can be used to create many forms of behavioural outputs in response to an
environmental challenge. Rolls points to the fact that stochasticity guarantees that
the response will never the same, like the running.
What seems to us to be still missing is not so much the ability to produce novel
reaction to the same environmental stimulus, but to have the option of choosing
between multiple possible responses in the light of what best ﬁts the environmental
challenge. That process requires the equivalent of the choice process in the immune
system. That must also involve neuronal processes. What precisely these processes
are needs attention. However, if we dismiss choice as an illusion it is unlikely that this
attention will be given. It is surprising therefore that the possibility of such choice is
dismissed without any evidential basis and the usual processes of scientiﬁc enquiry.
A similar idea was proposed many years ago in the work of Gerald Edelman.
Edelman ﬁrst worked on the immune system and was responsible for working out
the structure of immunoglobulins and to distinguish between their nearly constant
basic structure and the variable ‘grabbing’ part, which has to be variable to become
adapted to any new antigen, and then depends on a choice process between the
many new immunoglobulins produced. He naturally wondered whether there might
be a similar ability of the nervous system to generate multiple possible responses
to an environmental challenge from which a choice can be made that conforms to
normative social criteria.
His proposal13 was that groups of neurones could represent the available options
for action from which a selection could be made. He called this idea the theory of
neuronal group selection. If he had kept just that title, his theory might have fared
better than it has. Unfortunately, he also called it Neural Darwinism, which can imply
that he saw it as an evolutionary mechanism. This is how Francis Crick interpreted
it when he dismissed the whole idea on the basis that it did not contain separate
‘replicator’ and ‘vehicle’.14
As we use the idea, it does not need a replicator. It is a hypothesis about alternative
action options from which a selection can be made. Similar ideas have also been used
by Ginsburg and Jablonka in their 2019 book The Evolution of the Sensitive Soul.15
14
Conclusion
In summary, we believe that the theory of Agency we have developed recently is
capable of explaining the phenomenon, is plausible, and is compatible with existing
neuroscience research. It is time for reductionists to cease claiming that science
13 Edelman (1978).
14 Crick (1989).
15 Ginsburg and Jablonka (2019).

Can Agency Be Reduced to Molecules?
717
justiﬁes eliminating agency from our view of life. The discoveries of molecular
biology have unambiguously shown that scientiﬁc theories that deny agency have
been undermined. Ironically, therefore, they have been undermined by scientiﬁc
investigations at the molecular level—the very level that was claimed to justify them.
But they were never plausible anyway. They could only be made to seem plausible
by misusing the language of metaphors and other similes. The Selﬁsh Gene and
gene-centricity should be buried as an aberration of Western science, steeped as it is
in a mechanistic view of life.
15
Relevant Source Literature
This article is based on a series of articles we have published recently. All our source
references can be found in these publications:
1.
The physiology of agency Can Reasons and Values Inﬂuence Action: How
Might Intentional Agency Work Physiologically? 2020 Journal for General
Philosophy of Science. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10838-020-09525-3.
2.
“Active” Darwinism and Karl Popper Rehabilitation of Karl Popper’s ideas on
evolutionary biology and the nature of biological science. In Karl Popper: His
Philosophy and Science. Springer–Nature 2021 In press.
3.
Boundaries and causation Biological Relativity Requires Circular Causality but
Not Symmetry of Causation: So, Where, What and When Are the Boundaries?
Frontiers in Physiology. 2019. 10, 827.
4.
Emergent properties A–mergence of biological systems. In The Routledge
Handbook of Emergence. 2020. 387–399. 2020.
5.
How organisms make choices. Harnessing stochasticity: How do organisms
make choices? 2018. Chaos 28,106,309.
6.
Is evolution blind? Was the Watchmaker Blind? Or Was She One–Eyed? 2017.
Biology, 6, 47.
7.
Harnessing of Stochasticity Evolution viewed from physics, physiology and
medicine. 2012 Interface Focus, 7, 20,160,159.
8.
The principle of Biological Relativity A theory of biological relativity: no
privileged level of causation. 2012. Interface Focus. 2, 55–64.
9.
Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Agency Forum: Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Artiﬁcial
Agency and Artiﬁcial Life. 2019. RUSI Journal, Vol. 164, No. 5, July.
The complete set is available as a pdf download on the webpage: https://www.
denisnoble.com/wp-content/uploads/2021/01/Harnessing-Collection.pdf.

718
R. Noble and D. Noble
References
Coyne, J. A. (2014). What scientiﬁc idea is ready for retirement? https://www.edge.org/response-
detail/25381. Retrieved October 12, 2020.
Crick, F. H. C. (1970). Central dogma of molecular biology. Nature, 227, 561–563.
Crick, F. H. C. (1989). Neuronal Edelmanism. Trends in Neurosciences, 1989(12), 240–248.
Crick, F. H. C. (1958). On protein synthesis. Symposia of the Society for Experimental Biology, 12,
138–163. pmid: 13580867.
Dawkins, R. (1986). The Blind Watchmaker: Why the evidence of evolution reveals a universe
without design. W. W. Norton & Company.
Edelman, G. M. (1978). Neural Darwinism. Basic Books.
Ginsburg, S., & Jablonka, E. (2019). The evolution of the sensitive Soul. MIT Press.
Lander, E. S., Linton, L. M., Birren, B., Nusbaum, C., Zody, M. C., Baldwin, J., Devon, K., Dewar,
K., Doyle, M., FitzHugh, W., Funke, R., Gage, D., Harris, K., Heaford, A., Howland, J., Kann, L.,
Lehoczky, J., LeVine, R., McEwan, P., & McKernan, K. (2001). Initial sequencing and analysis
of the human genome. Nature, 409, 860–921.
McClintock, B. (1984). The signiﬁcance of responses of the genome to challenge. Science, 226,
792–801.
Popper, K. (1999). All life is problem solving. Routledge.
Rolls, E. T. (2017). Cerebral cortex, principles of operation. Oxford University Press.

The Epistemology of Life Understanding
Living Beings According to a Relational
Ontology
Marta Bertolaso and Héctor Velázquez
1
Introduction
For our understanding of the material world, its laws, principles of organization
and structure advances, it seems increasingly unfeasible to consider reductionism
an adequate epistemological approach to account for complex phenomena and
dynamics. Although it conveniently simpliﬁes the description of reality, it invari-
ably leaves the feeling that it has prevented us from understanding the profound
differences that exist among natural entities. One of the ﬁelds that has most strongly
resisted the reductionist approach is the study of the living being. In this text we
will address some reasons for thinking that holism is not a valid alternative to reduc-
tionism as an approach to understanding the world of life. We will also discuss why
it is not enough to refer to the systemic perspective of complexity as more complete
than mechanicism for understanding what distinguishes living beings from other
entities (chemical, physical) that exist in nature. We argue that not only is a new
epistemology necessary for us to understand the speciﬁcities of life but also that it
should move towards a new ontology that explains how and why life is an irreducible
reality and provides a much more uniﬁed understanding of the other natural spheres.
The epistemological success of mechanicism lies in the simplicity of its approach
to reality since with a minimum of elements it allowed a maximum of knowledge
about the object studied. For mechanicism, every natural system is composed of (i)
M. Bertolaso (B) · H. Velázquez
Research Unit of Philosophy of Science and Human Development, Università Campus
Bio-Medico, Via Alvaro del Portillo, 21, 00128 Rome, Italy
e-mail: m.bertolaso@unicampus.it
H. Velázquez
e-mail: hector.velazquez@umayor.cl
H. Velázquez
Director Centro de Sociedad Tecnológica y Futuro Humano, Facultad de Humanidades,
Universidad Mayor de Chile, Santiago, Chile
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
S. Wuppuluri and I. Stewart (eds.), From Electrons to Elephants and Elections,
The Frontiers Collection, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-92192-7_38
719

720
M. Bertolaso and H. Velázquez
parts, (ii) interaction criteria connecting them, and (iii) a resulting whole, regardless
of whether we are talking about micro, medium or macrophysical reality (Velázquez,
2020).
According to mechanicism, time is not a leading variable. This position made it
possible to achieve one of the highest aspirations of the human mind: to know the
past (deduction) and the future (forecast), just by knowing the present, with the same
precision with which we describe nature right now. In this way, from a mechanistic
point of view, to increase our knowledge of nature it is only necessary to advance in
the detailed identiﬁcation of its parts (if we have better scientiﬁc instrumentation, we
can identify more parts), as well as their interaction, criteria (natural laws) and the
description of the resulting whole (the solar system, a cell, the circulatory system, a
megacity, etc.).
The identiﬁcation of parts, interaction criteria, and a resulting whole under this
scheme allows a hierarchization of these elements: there are central, derivative, and
tangential parts, according to the role they play in the system; a classiﬁcation that
can vary according to the approach: seen from another perspective, what appears as
the central part in one context can be completely tangential in another. For example,
universal gravitation can be central to explaining the three-body problem involving
the planet Earth, the moon and the sun, while the size of the lunar crater Copernicus
would be completely tangential here. But gravitation can be tangential if what we
are studying is the distribution of asteroid density impacts on the lunar surface. Here
the ground structure would be central.
With the replacement of mechanicism by the explanation of nature in complex
sciences and through systemic models, time became the protagonist and the mere
enumeration of parts became an interaction criterion, and everything turned out to be
insufﬁcient. The entity of the system is interpreted as the dynamic result of its inter-
action with the environment. It is a closed system if this interaction is poor and only
results in a resistance of the environment to maintain its existence (like the rocks that
receive the water along a cliff). It is an open system if through interaction the system
assimilates the environment and makes it part of itself while leaving something of
itself in the environment (as in the world of life with nutrition and ﬂourishing).
Based on this type of complexity, nature is interpreted as a changing dynamism over
time with sensitivity to the variation of the initial conditions, unfolding towards the
formation of structures, rhythms, and patterns (structural and temporal).
In its description of the physical world, the complex systems model loses the
power of forecasting and deduction which are so important in mechanicism. On the
other hand, its description of nature as a changing, evolving, structuring and dynamic
system is closer to what is a physical reality. Nature understood as a complex system
is a network of nodes where every interaction is equally the protagonist and in which
ontologically no node is more important than another: there is a mutual causality
of all the elements involved in the system, and none of them can escape dynamic
interaction with the environment.
The vision of nature as a complex adaptive and evolutionary system afﬁrms that
a reinterpretation of the physical world (as a replacement for mechanicism) is useful
to understand any of the natural systems that it is intended to explain: the material

The Epistemology of Life Understanding Living Beings According …
721
world, living beings, conscious entities and even cultural, social, or urban ones. Its
proposal is, as in the age of mechanicism, to provide an all-encompassing vision
that accounts for how the changing reality that constitutes the cosmos in any of its
variants is integrated and functions.
However, systems may not account for the ‘ontological’ dependencies that a
natural entity has on its context or environment and within its own structural
dynamics. And it runs the risk of focusing solely on causal interdependence among
members of the natural network. However, what is usually addressed as ‘context
dependency’ is much more than a mere interaction with the environment: it explains
not only the structure of a natural entity (emergence) but its speciﬁc stability (essence)
which is more fundamental from a metaphysical point of view. In other words, as an
interpretation of the natural world, systems’ complexity runs the risk of becoming
the new mechanicism: an explanatory model that homogenizes the explanandum and
describes nature without paying attention to the ’relative’ dependencies/speciﬁcities,
which single out the entities.
2
Debating the Dynamics of Life
2.1
Reductionism Versus Holism: Limits in the Debate
When we talk about reductionism, the philosophical debate initially focuses on the
different dimensions that have been historically articulated as follows (Ayala, 1974;
Ayala & Arp, 2010).
(i)
Methodological reductionism applied to the biological sciences, understood
as a process of decomposition and re-composition of a system or entity, aims
to explain dynamic features of development, understood as a combination
of cell cycle, metabolism and cell communication. In this sense, molecular
biology has been the paradigmatic biological approach to the living organism
in the last century. Through this approach, the process of life, i.e. the func-
tional integration of different levels of the biological complex organization,
can be explained even at the lowest possible level. The question of how the
‘lowest possible level’ should be understood is what forced the debate about
thepossibilityofanepistemologicalandontologicaldebateaswell.Thereﬂec-
tion about the epistemological status of an analytical point of view evolved in
the debate about levels of analysis and mesoscopic way of thinking (Bertolaso,
2013b; Bizzarri et al., 2019; Green & Batterman, 2017). However, when the
possibility of considering the ‘lowest level’ in ontological and metaphysical
terms was explored, major problems arose about the double implicit aim to
deduce how explanations of molecular dynamics which are biologically rele-
vant arise only by investigating physical–chemical processes in virtue of their
privileged explanatory value.

722
M. Bertolaso and H. Velázquez
(ii)
Epistemological reductionism has been typically related to inter-theoretical
reduction, so that it would be possible to replace one theory T with another
theory T’ which is more ‘explanatorily’ powerful (Brigandt & Love, 2017)
Theories and experimental laws in this case get reduced when they turn out
to be special cases of theories and laws formulated in some other branch
of science (Bertolaso, 2016). However, there has been a progressive shift in
the philosophical discussion from theories to explanations and the role that
mechanicism, emergent properties and biological concepts play in explaining
biological phenomena. Nonetheless, under the still inherited empiricism and
materialism in (philosophy of) life sciences epistemological reductionism
eventually takes the form of a question about whether one theory about the
world will be achieved once the world structure is described regardless of
whether this is done in terms of mechanicism, systems, and networks.
(iii)
Ontological reductionism relates to the reﬂection about what exists. Taking
into consideration different kinds of empiricism and materialism that
concurred to shape this third kind of reductionism, we can say that it argues
that organizational properties distinguish inanimate entities (e.g. stones) and
living entities (e.g. cells, elephants, bacteria colonies, etc.). This position
could be compatible with both reductionist and anti-reductionist positions
and has opened major current discussion about complexity and how it should
be managed and understood.
Transversally to different accounts of theory and explanatory reductions (cfr. Brig-
andt & Love, 2017) Sect. 4), there is a context dependency argument. It has become
more and more evident in the empirical ﬁeld that the effects of molecular processes
depend on the functional context in which they occur. Such arguments against reduc-
tionism stress the fact that “one molecular kind can correspond to many higher level
kinds (…) that higher level biological structures and processes can be (and typically
are) realized by different kinds of molecular processes, so that many molecular kinds
can correspond to one higher level kind (…) because biological processes must be
represented before they can be explained (Sarkar, 1998), two further features become
salient as issues for explanatory reduction: temporality and intrinsicality”. In both
cases of temporality and intrinsicality, the debates are shaped by the evidence of
what we call ‘incompleteness’ of the causal chain. The discussion about temporality
highlights the hierarchical structure of temporal processes focusing on the function-
structure relationship of living entities and, especially of developmental processes.
Reference to space-temporal dynamics that take the form of functional-structural
models and arguments have mediated the debate about higher level features (e.g.,
tissue organization structures and dynamics) that might causally explain lower-level
features at a later time (e.g., gene expression patterns, etc.). Or as Mitchell observed
(2009), components of a biological system (e.g. amino acid in a protein or DNA basis
in a gene) are usually causally insufﬁcient even if they are sufﬁcient constitutionally.
From a mereological viewpoint of the biological dynamics, the debate therefore has
focused on different kinds of composition and aggregation, and decomposability of
hierarchical structures often relying upon or moving from the debate already engaged

The Epistemology of Life Understanding Living Beings According …
723
in by Herbert Symon and Pattee about hierarchies and systems. However, as has
been discussed in Love and Bringdant 2017 (see also Craver, 2009; Kauffman, 1971;
Wimsatt, 1974; Winther, 2011) the functional-structural decomposition of a system
is not a univocal enterprise and generates competing and complementary representa-
tions of the parts. Behavior often opens up the discussion about functional-structural
relationships.
Similarly, Wimsatt (1980) decades ago already highlighted how “every investiga-
tion must divide a system from its environment and that methodological reductionism
favors attributions of causal responsibility to internal parts of a system rather than
those deemed external (see also Wilson & Craver, 2007)” (Sandford encyclope-
dia….). Temporal, compositional relationships assume in different ways that nested
part-whole relations are predicated on a prior individuation of a system from its envi-
ronment (ibidem). Although this line of thought relates to the context-dependency
argument against reductionism, it also emphasizes the importance of “functional
dependency relations uncovered by attending to temporality in addition to structural
organization” (ibidem).
As Nagel already noted in 1961, what is investigated under the terms of space-
temporal dynamics and organizations in life sciences is a mode of organization or a
type of order. Craver and Bechtel (2007) rightly noted that we should also consider
the possibility of diachronic aspects of part-whole and interlevel relations. Scientiﬁc
explanations, in fact, usually invoke causal processes that involve components at
several levels of biological organization as is in fact the case in morphogenetic
processes. As reported by Love and Bringdant (2017), this is the core reason why
development is a persisting biological topic for reductionism: “During ontogeny
there are causal interactions over time among parts and activities (both homogeneous
and heterogeneous) to bring about new parts and activities (both homogeneous and
heterogeneous), eventually generating an integrated adult (whole) organism”.
As we can see from this short review of problems with reductionism and context
dependency issues that arise when we consider biological dynamics and their causal
relevance in developmental and biological processes more in general, there are two
aspects that merit special attention. First, all these debates to different extents move
from a mereological view of living organisms and entities. This assumption is legiti-
mated by the evidence that empirical sciences work by acting on things and parts and
is clearly inﬂuenced by the inherited rejection of a vitalist approach in life sciences.
No scientist would in fact claim that living processes are the effect of a non-material
entity or vital force (Ayala, 1974). Similarly, the debate about physicalism ended
up in a clue de sac when trying to assert that obtaining a satisfactory explanation
of a phenomenon by reducing it to its smallest components is not only useless but
also impossible (e.g. Ernst Mayr, 2004). Reduction in this view is based on invalid
hypotheses and should be eliminated from the scientiﬁc vocabulary.
Second, the causal relevance of diachronic and synchronic dynamics in shaping
the biological processes, also in their hierarchical features, brought about a reﬂec-
tion on the epistemological and ontological status of the emergent properties and
organizational features of living entities especially in their dynamic aspects such as
in developmental processes.

724
M. Bertolaso and H. Velázquez
Processual viewpoints came to the forefront (Dupré & Nicholson, 2018) while the
functional integration and coupling of biological processes became the most inter-
esting explananda both in life sciences and in the philosophical reﬂection on them.
Organisms are thus considered physiological units that exhibit a coordinated behavior
and integrated systemic dynamics (reviewed in Militello, 2021) although “current
deﬁnitions of functional integration do not provide a criterion (or norm) to distin-
guish different biological organizations on the basis of their internal physiological
integration”.
Systemic viewpoints, typically acknowledged as anti-reductionist stands, thus
currently lead and shape contemporary debates about the possibility of explaining
physiological individuality and biological autonomy, following the contributions in
the ﬁeld of relevant authors such as Varela (1979), Maturana and Varela (1980), Rosen
(1991), Collier (2000), Kauffman (2000), Moreno and Mossio (2015). The debate
about disentangling autonomy from independency from surroundings is currently
focused on how we can acknowledge and explain that the internal behavior of an
organism is not ‘determined’ by contextual factors. Two fundamental dimensions
of autonomy in this regard have been described in Militello (2021): “the constitu-
tive processes (e.g. metabolism and gene transcription and translation) that allow a
biological organization to self-maintain, and the interactive processes (e.g. senso-
rimotor capacities and inter-organism communication) that enable an organism to
interact with the environment according to its own internal norms (Moreno & Mossio,
2015; Mossio & Moreno, 2010)”.
Finally, as Love and Bringdant (2017) argue, because temporality and intrinsi-
cality are not captured by a focus on mereology alone, “different kinds of reduc-
tionism rather than a uniﬁed account of reduction or overarching dichotomies of
“reductionism” versus “anti-reductionism” (or “holism”)” should be endorsed so that
“any single conception of reduction appears inadequate to do justice to the diver-
sity of phenomena and reasoning practices in the life sciences. The multiplicity and
heterogeneity of biological subdisciplines only reinforce this argument and suggests
to some that we should move beyond reductionism entirely”.
The context-dependency argument against reductionism has taken the form of
a debate about causality in life sciences which brings up again the question about
the peculiar status of temporality in the life sciences and also about the possibility
for us to understand life from a philosophical viewpoint. Prior to determinations of
whether reductive explanations succeed or fail, questions of representational choice
and adequacy need to be addressed explicitly. As one of us argued (Bertolaso, 2016),
when spatiotemporally continuous causal processes are at work no unique explana-
tory tool is either necessary or sufﬁcient, and a theory of explanation that captures
several different possibilities is needed. As Woodward (2010) claims: “depending
on the details of the case, description or causal explanation can be either inappropri-
ately broad or general, including irrelevant details, or overly narrow, failing to include
relevant details. Which level is most appropriate will be in large part an empirical
matter”. Following Bertolaso (2016), we suggest that an ‘empirical matter’ should
be understood in a wider sense: it is not just an empirical practical problem (what is
possible here and now) but a rational problem that starts with a question like ‘why

The Epistemology of Life Understanding Living Beings According …
725
this behavior and not another one’. “Pragmatic reasons in scientiﬁc practice are
embedded with the effort to identify mesoscopic levels where objective and subjec-
tive dimensions of science meet. And the structural and functional dimensions of
the system cannot be separated. They are captured differently by the deﬁnition of
the system and by the functional behavior of the parts” (ibidem). Thus, as (not only)
Love and Bringdant (2007) note, the scientiﬁc questions and the related choices of
the working level inﬂuence both the results obtained and the form of the explanation,
but such choices depend on a judgment about the patterns of correlations that have
an explanatory relevance for that speciﬁc scientiﬁc question.
The theoretical principles on which a model’s architecture is conceived, therefore,
should look at not only how biological dynamics are explained at the different levels
of biological organization, but mainly how the speciﬁc regulation and dependencies
work among them. Here emerges the relevance of theoretical concepts in biological
sciences (see below Section on relative and relational terms in biology). We argue, in
this regard, that a relational ontology is necessary to ground both the conceptual and
explanatory aspects of any systemic attempt to explain dynamics (Bertolaso & Ratti,
2018, ch 1, p. 10): “A relational ontology emphasizes the fact that even properties
that seem to be ‘internal’ are actually relational. This is because a relational ontology
assumes that the identity of the objects depends strictly on the existence of the web of
relations an object is embedded in” Therefore, “in order to understand what certain
biological entities (e.g., genes, proteins) do, we need to recreate the web of relations
they are usually part of (ibidem)”. That is, “[a] relational ontology holds that relations
are prior—both conceptually and explanatory—to entities, and that in the biological
realm entities are deﬁned primarily by the context they are embedded within—and
hence by the web of relations they are part of” (ibidem ch. 1, p. 1.).
The crucial importance of history for understanding living systems has been
discussed by one of us: “Now it is necessary to introduce a further distinction between
dynamics and history. Dynamical systems are described by trajectories in suitable
phase space, but dynamics by themselves do not include a distinction between the
before, the after, and the irreversible changing of the system. As in the case of a
gas in a bottle, an observer who plays the reverse motion of each molecule would
see nothing unusual, no “before” and no “after”. The time arrow, the history, and
the improbability of events of the reverse-motion ﬁlm come into play only taking
into consideration the boundary conditions. The dynamic approach just associates
a clock to the degrees of freedom of a system, but it is insufﬁcient for measuring
the global structural changes. To get these ones requires, instead, the observing
of the constraints’ stratiﬁcation/modiﬁcation, which is precisely the history of the
system” (Licata, 2015, p. 47 quoted in Bertolaso, 2016). Moreover, the philosoph-
ical discussion of emergence is often focused on the properties of ‘wholes’ that are
evaluated as emergent with respect to the properties of ‘parts’. “Downward causa-
tion is, consequently, evaluated as some kind of causal inﬂuence of whole properties
over parts properties. Yet, several important cases in scientiﬁc practice seem to be
pursuing hypotheses of parts properties emerging from wholes properties, inverting
the instinctive association of emergence with wholes” (Bertolaso, 2017). Further-
more, “some areas of reﬂection which are very important for emergence, e.g., the

726
M. Bertolaso and H. Velázquez
philosophy of consciousness, do not allow the mapping of properties onto part-
whole organizations. The conceptual puzzle is solved by constructing a framework
that disentangles the mereological dimension (parts–whole, micro–macro) from the
superventional dimension (basal-supervenient). By liberalizing the space-temporal
allocation of emergent properties, the proposed dual framework could better capture
the way in which emergence and downward causation are addressed in scientiﬁc
practice” (ibidem).
In summary, all the debates mentioned above concerning reductionism versus
anti-reductionism approaches rely upon a mereological view and account of biolog-
ical dynamics, always producing a reductionist-vitalist tension. Moreover, anti-
reductionist approaches, stressing a systemic viewpoint and relevance for emergent
properties and for downward causation do not explain what “the whole is more
than the parts” actually means, in part because of the mereological assumptions.
Therefore, we suggest that a uniﬁed epistemology that can account properly for
the ontology of functional integrations, developmental processes, etc., should move
from the consideration that “the whole is different from (that is, also in some sense
‘more’ than) the parts”. Parts and wholes have different epistemological and onto-
logical statuses which are precisely the aspects that make biological explanations so
peculiar in their functional, space-temporal representations.
2.2
Relational Ontology: An Alternative Proposal
to the Reductionism-Holism Debate
What is missing in the above debates is a deeper understanding of ‘differences’
in the biological realm and of their dynamic stability, and of the convergence on
the context’s (causal) relevance in biological explanations, whether reductionist or
systemic. A multiplicity of interactions on each level and a multiplicity of different
levels of biological organization enter into deﬁnitions of the explanatory entities
(either parts or wholes/systems although from different perspectives), as is logical
considering the speciﬁcity of the reductionist and antireductionist views. However,
there are elements present in both reductionist and antireductionist formulations
that may allow for convergence on systemic visions characterized, as mentioned in
Sect. 2 by (i) deﬁnition of the functional analysis system, using operational theo-
retical notions such as morphogenetic ﬁeld, functional landscapes, stemness, etc.;
(ii) circularization of the causal argument and context relevancies in the explanatory
process referring to (iii) hierarchical organizations and integrative processes. Epis-
temological convergences towards systemic explanations, not following the scientist
but the philosophers (Ayala & Arp, 2010, p. 14; Fox Keller, 2010; Dupré, 2010) can
be described in terms of (i) a large number of and interactions among the parts; (ii)
dependence on the identity of the parts and the interactions among them by effects at
levels of higher order; (iii) robustness and adaptability of biological structures; (iv)
hierarchic (multi-scale) organization of biological systems.

The Epistemology of Life Understanding Living Beings According …
727
However, as already mentioned, in molecular models the conceptualization of
‘part’asanobjectofstudyandthedeﬁnitionofasystembasedonitscomponents,lead
to explanations always and only in terms of discrete parts. The context in which these
parts operate is irrelevant biologically (additional factors can always be expressed
in terms of new cellular factors) and epistemologically (as context does not enjoy
an epistemological status itself and thus cannot enter the explicative argument).
However, once the system is identiﬁed, e.g., a cell or a tissue or a neuronal network,
the way in which the genome or the brain is divided into functional parts (oncogenes
and tumor-suppressor genes, in the ﬁrst case; functional areas in the second case)
shows how these parts are nevertheless subjected to the operational properties of the
whole.Thisisalsocommontoorganicistmodelsthroughthenotionofmorphogenetic
ﬁelds.
Thisaspectofhistoricalconvergencetowardoperationaldeﬁnitionsandtheimpor-
tance of the context in the identiﬁcation of the system allows us, then, to focus on
the properties of the functional ﬁeld represented by the model itself. The dynamics
involved here refer to the co-variation of various factors that are inherently bound to
each other and that vary in inter-dependent ways over time. Systems thus framed are
deﬁned as different levels of order because they present unitary properties at every
level that arises, not only from the properties of the components but also from the
special relationships among them.
Therefore, thedeﬁnitionof thesystem, if reductionist, is giveninterms of parts and
their interactions, while in the antireductionist framework it is expressed in terms
of organizational or functional relationships. This latter organizational dimension
is however in some sense recovered in the reductionist perspective by deﬁning,
for example, cells’ inactive/agency terms (for example, tumor cells do things, they
move, they proliferate—in a permissive context—for which the deﬁnition of the
part (gene) plays a functional role within the whole (cell, in this case). This trend,
however, already implies an antireductionist approach, at least at the epistemological
level. The ﬁrst dimension, on the other hand, is already present in the concrete
methodological approach of antireductionist models, which is articulated through
the study of molecules and their interactions, showing how systemic antireductionist
models can integrate the analytical perspective once the level of analysis of the
phenomenon has been identiﬁed (see also the synthetic perspective, in Bertolaso,
2011, 2013, Bizzarri et al., 2019).
Asoccursinantireductionistmodels,forexampleusingtheconceptofthemorpho-
genetic ﬁeld, the initial question turns on the context and the ability to identify func-
tional states with causal roles connected to them. It is not sufﬁcient for ontological
antireductionism to maintain that, if one must describe the behavior of a complex
system, the most efﬁcient way is not to specify the material component but to individ-
uate the functional subsets of the system. This level of description is common to both
perspectives. However, while all explanatory models converge on explanations of this
type, the reductionist ones usually run into experimental paradoxes that concern the
relevance of context for the explanatory potential of the identiﬁed systems. In other
words, one might say that there is another aspect of the contextual element that resists
an explanation carried out only in functional terms and calls for a non-reductionist

728
M. Bertolaso and H. Velázquez
stance which is even more radical than the one accepted by epistemic approaches that
individuate functional states independently of their molecular structure. There is, in
fact, a difference between the functional organization of a system and the stability of
a system as such. The persistence of the latter depends on the particular part-whole
organization and not simply on the relation among parts. When we use an operational
deﬁnition, we refer to the former of the two organizations, which presents a hierarchic
structure. We ﬁnd here the three characteristics that have been stated also for reduc-
tionist models but that have neither a justiﬁcation nor a unity within the reductionist
paradigm. The scientiﬁc/explanatory question posed in terms of functional states and
causality will in fact run into not only epistemological but also ontological problems.
Many reductionists, however, intentionally ignore this integration of epistemological
and ontological, whilst such integration is underestimated by many antireductionists
who are not ready to take it into consideration and to clarify its consequences.
From an epistemic point of view, context is relevant not because it determines
the identity of the parts, but because it allows one to consider one point of view as
privileged and then to state it in terms of the signiﬁcance of the parts. In biology this
is expressed in terms of functional attributes that have meaning only if they refer to
the space-temporal location in which the effects are coherent and signiﬁcant with
respect to the question that is asked to nature, even if only implicitly.
The context in this case indicates what ‘separates’, regarding the identity of the
system, and what ‘puts into relation’ the system with other systems according to
its operational specialization. A cell, a tissue, an organ, or an organism can then be
deﬁned from an organizational point of view, as an open self-referential system. Such
a system can also be deﬁned from a causal point of view as a context of effects, where
we do not ﬁnd a cause that relates the local entities and deﬁnes the organization, but
where we ﬁnd a relational organization that is itself causal.
In its ontological framework, the context indicates the set of conditions that makes
it possible for a speciﬁc property of a part or a relation amongst parts to be efﬁcacious
and signiﬁcant in determining the evolution of the system. It is precisely because of
the normativity imposed by the system that we can a posteriori identify the above
mentioned relation and recognize it as an effect brought about, for example, by
feedback mechanics or as an effect that can be reproduced. From an ontological
point of view, the context is therefore constitutive in the relation amongst the parts,
but it is so from an epistemological point of view. We can recognize it indirectly
in the relations amongst the parts as a condition for the normativity of their causal
relation.
According to a manipulative account of causality (Woodward, 2003), the above
mentioned perspective inversion is implicit in the asymmetry of the causal relation
by means of intervention or background conditions that have an ontological role in
determining the causal relation itself. This is in accord with what Buzzoni has noted in
analyzing the relation of temporality and causality from an operational point of view:
“Causes and effects are, without a doubt, ﬁrstly concepts, i.e. they are a construction
of the mind and are picked up by our practical theoretical interests. (…) It depends
on us to create them, to develop them and to make them fruitful to illuminate reality
starting from our theoretical-practical interests, but it does not depend on us that

The Epistemology of Life Understanding Living Beings According …
729
that be the cause and the effect relative to the theoretical-practical interests that have
been ﬁxed” (Buzzoni, 2008, p. 48). To proceed in a contrary way would mean, in
fact, adopting a reductionist perspective, with all of its paradoxes that sooner or later
would be pried open by the bio-logical reality.
The relative dimension of context allows one also to understand why multiple real-
izability is not a strong argument for antireductionism, while the fact that a molecular
entity can perform different functions depending on the context is. Systemic expla-
nations are always functional, but the identiﬁcation of the part is subordinated to its
functional deﬁnition, which, in turn, is determined by the context.
In systemic ontology, for example, the problem of multiple realizability becomes
a question posed by the multi-unity that characterizes dynamical systems, biological
systems, and their evolution. Natural selection works on this multi-unity because
these systems carry information and signiﬁcance for themselves and identity for the
environment. Finally, the dependence-relation that is ultimately the testing ground
for irreducibility in the hierarchical organization of a complex system is carried on
in epistemology by the relevance of the context and in ontology by the operational
deﬁnitions that characterize systems.
How can we move towards a relational ontology? We have seen that the episte-
mological reductionist positions attempt to explain complex biological dynamics in
terms of molecules and their alterations so that sooner or later the processes can be
explained and understood in molecular terms. The molecular circuits that are respon-
sible for the biological processes are the focus of research. However, as discussed
above, in the scientiﬁc practice reductionist models often ignore the lowest level of
biological organization in descriptions and explanations of these phenomena, settling
at a level where relevant processes appear as a not completely autonomous molecular
process, and where other contextual elements play a role in various stages. From an
epistemological point of view the scientiﬁc question ‘why’ a given process happens
pushes toward the identiﬁcation of an emergent phenomenon that retains the most
appropriate level for its explanation, suggesting that this has a stability that takes
priority over the speciﬁc functional properties of the parts. It is the behavior of the
parts, as components of a complex phenomenon, which refer to a speciﬁc organi-
zation that is intrinsically linked to a system that we identify as tissue, brain, etc.
through properties that were not present at lower levels.
In other words, the reductionist models seek emergence even if they try to explain
it only by means of an analytical procedure and in molecular terms (Bertolaso,
2012). Therefore, a reductive explanation is not only incomplete but also funda-
mentally inadequate for the atomistic and mereological assumption of ontological
reductionism that underlies this approach to scientiﬁc work. As podes by Nicholson,
biological atomism "postulates a basic indivisible unit of life and seeks to explain the
physiological and morphological constitution of all living beings’ operation in terms
of these fundamental units. The activity of a living organism is thus conceived as
the result of its activities and the interactions of its elementary constituents, each of
which individually already exhibits all the attributes proper to life" (Nicholson, 2010,
203). The result is a system in which the elements count only for their properties,
and the system is understood to be a mere aggregation. We will use the term ‘set’ for

730
M. Bertolaso and H. Velázquez
this kind of system: an aggregation of elements deﬁned by what unites them, even
if this is only the membership to the set itself. This might imply that the limits of
reductionist models to account for the (ir)reversibility of the biological processes and
phenotypes (e.g., tumor latency, the onset of metastatic organic control, etc.) are due
to their attempt to defend an ontological rather than an epistemological reductionism.
This is an argument for admitting not only the insufﬁciency but also the inadequacy
of philosophical reductionism for understanding complex biological phenomena. At
the same time, the considerations presented above lead to a revaluation of the context
and its epistemological and ontological roles, allowing for a deeper understanding
of the limits of reductionism and its paradoxes in light of the importance of the
context in the deﬁnition of the analyzed system. The advantage, however, of moving
the study of a phenomenon from the molecular to an organizational level is that it
provides a vision that is more systemic rather than holistic, this latter requiring at
least an appeal to the organism as a whole as a causal system itself. The emergent
phenomenon is no longer attributed to the aggregation of parts, but to their integra-
tion. In this sense, the context has a relevance that is not based on temporal priority
but rather is concomitant with the organization of the parts, as for example in the
tooth generation. This integration is local and deﬁned by a speciﬁc organization: of
the mandible for the tooth, of the pancreas for the beta-cell in producing insulin, of
the brain in allowing neurons’ activity, etc. The functional identity of the parts is
determined by the context in which they operate.
The stronger epistemological implication is then that of the passage of a system
(as a set) to a System (as an entity) characterized a priori with respect to its parts,
but the behavior of which can be later described, at least partially also in terms
of parts and their connections. Such a system is constructed by means of its parts
without relying on them completely. Therefore, in an organization, understood as a
set of relationships, the parts can be replaced without being inert with respect to the
system.
There is a mutual co-determination which leaves a level of uncertainty (Bertolaso,
2012), such that systems owe their dynamism to their parts, while their unity is due
to their speciﬁc organization. These principles, already known to embryologists at
the beginning of the last century, are formalized today via the notions of ‘ﬁeld’
and ‘attractor’ in biology. This implies a new vision and mutual integration of the
concepts of system, hierarchical organization, and level of complexity. In fact, it
has rightly been observed that: “Levels of organization have a variety of properties
which make them rich in ontological and epistemological consequences (…) [T]heir
merely empirical status is probably more a product of the fact that they haven’t
yet been taken seriously by any of the dominant philosophical views. In fact, these
properties of levels are closely connected in ways which make the features of levels
and their analysis not just a contingent empirical matter” (Wimsatt, 2007, p. 206)”.
This also means that opting for a systemic mindset involves thinking not only
in terms of the system—understood as a dynamic interaction of parts—but also of
the entity—an operational unit—in which the mutual dependence and order of the
constituents follow in a speciﬁc way. A more analytical discussion of these issues is
beyond the scope of this paper, but it is at this level that a reﬂection is required on

The Epistemology of Life Understanding Living Beings According …
731
the principles governing the change and the evolution of a system, ultimately from
at least a biological point of view, the relationship between systems and subsystems.
The holistic issue, therefore, is relevant in e.g. organicism because it is systemic in
the most peculiar sense, in that it is able to take into account the historical dimension
of the organism and the diachronic as well synchronic emergence of new properties
at higher levels of organization. The possibilities of this thesis, however, are rooted
in a relational ontology of the levels.
Such a systemic view is the best tool for interpreting reality when considered as
an approach, a way of thinking that arises from the convergence between our under-
standing and the way things are represented and constructed. This avoids the risk of an
inﬁnite regression of the argument about the relevance of the context which can lead
to a universal holism, which is—at least scientiﬁcally—counterintuitive, since what
we study are always objects which, also by virtue of their systemic hierarchically
and organized dimension, have their own ontological status.
From an epistemological point of view, the convergence of the analytic and
synthetic perspectives relies on the existence of local entities that are spatially-
temporally deﬁned. It is, therefore, simpler to speak of emergence in terms of local
ontologies that represent objects also according to empirical knowledge. Because of
itsdualanalyticandsyntheticcomponent,thesystemicperspectiveadmitsagradation
of knowledge and a degree of undetermination of the system, which Corvi deﬁnes as
the “unsaturated dimension that qualiﬁes any real system” (Corvi, 2010). The notion
of the organism becomes an asymptotic concept that refers to the combination of two
aspects of each system: determinism and indeterminism, but this is done according
to a relationship that does not refer to anything other than the system itself. From this
perspective, the context becomes an ontological category. The advance is therefore
conceptual. The important intuition behind the new perspective has to do with the
ability to focus on the relationships themselves, described in terms, for example, of
morphogenetic ﬁelds, and not as parts or interactions. Understanding how the set of
parts works within the material constitution of the entity that performs these oper-
ations is an important issue that an atomistic approach is not able to capture when
analyzing the parts to explain the whole. Within a ﬁeld, the parts do not stop having
their autonomy but also contribute to the analytical perspective. This reconciliation
is possible only if the view of the whole or of the system is not interpreted in a
closed or dogmatic way but as the regulative ideal that permits us to re-open the
scientiﬁc discourse whenever necessary. The systemic approach shows its heuristic
and explanatory power more in framing the problem rather than providing solutions
to it (Bertolaso, 2012). Indeed, by its very nature it calls for a plurality of solutions
that complement and integrate each other.
This explains also why within an antireductionist perspective of biological
processes we can ﬁnd multiple models that do not contradict each other. They treat
different aspects or different scales of the phenomenon, without running into contra-
dictions and paradoxes, but by stimulating the development of research in new direc-
tions. The reﬂection, then, is on the discovery of biological information and its
speciﬁc organization.

732
M. Bertolaso and H. Velázquez
3
Elements for a New Epistemological Model
In the previous section, we looked at how reductionism and its related debate focused
mainly on the problem associated with a view of the biological ﬁeld in terms of
‘lower levels of analysis’ and in molecular terms. Consistently reductionism has
been designated by its proponents as a research strategy but also as a philosophical
and metaphysical position. They hold that “there are no nonphysical events, states,
processes, and so biological events, states, and processes are ’nothing but’ phys-
ical ones. This metaphysical thesis is one reductionist share with antireductionists”
(Rosenberg, 2007, p. 120: quoted in Bertolaso, 2012). This was a consequence of the
general tendency in the empirical sciences towards procedures by reductions. What
this means in biology is the basis of our reﬂection. The discovery of the molecular
basis of genetic and reproductive processes seemed to give a stronger philosoph-
ical foundation to such empiricism and physicalism. As a result, an explanatory and
conceptual tool of biology, such as the gene, was ‘entiﬁed’ and its functional dimen-
sion lost the explanatory role of accounting for an effect starting from a cause that
was deﬁned in terms of the effect itself. Genes are, in fact, functionally deﬁned.
Nonetheless, the same gene can have several names/functions, which creates the
difﬁculty known in the literature as a ‘one-many issue’ or ’context dependence of
functional activities’. It also raises the question of ‘circularity of notion of function’
(Bertolaso, 2013a, 2016).
The fundamental bias is to consider development as the result of cell proliferation
and differentiation and not differentiation as a dimension of organic development and
growth. The cellular differentiation process underlying the morphogenetic process, in
fact, is not self-consistent from a biological or even epistemological point of view. To
give an example, any stem cell is highly dependent on its space–time position in the
organism. Once extracted from this ’biological context’ it loses its stem properties to
follow differentiation processes common to every other somatic cell. That is, it loses
the division asymmetry that characterizes the stem cells’ proliferation. Furthermore,
the very deﬁnition of staminality refers precisely to this peculiar ontological status of
some cells compared to others. Similarly, tumor cells lose their context dependency.
The useless search for common/fundamental molecular and functional proper-
ties of cancer cells, moreover, shifts for example the question about carcinogen-
esis (cancer exists because cells proliferate abnormally) to the characterization of
the elements involved. The biological question on development, be it normal or
aberrant (for example, neoplastic), becomes a question about the concrete element
(thing), in which, as in classical physics, the thing is identiﬁed with its size. However,
deﬁning and dealing with differences remain the challenging endeavor of the biolog-
ical sciences. The difﬁculty becomes deﬁning the criteria for establishing what
should be considered a ’same’ or ’common property’ among different biological
entities. Thus, when the epistemological issues underlying the notion of biological
heterogeneity—with the similarities and differences that this concept implies—are
neglected or underestimated, problems immediately arise with the identity of the
parts, which has no solution within an atomistic view.

The Epistemology of Life Understanding Living Beings According …
733
Given that there is no molecular product or functional activity that uniquely char-
acterizes stem cells or cancer cells or neuronal cells, the impossibility of identifying
the explanatory parts—in terms of nucleonic sequence or functional properties)—
usually forces scientists to introduce ‘contextual factors’ into the explanatory argu-
ment. On one hand, the environment or micro-environment becomes the (causally)
decisive element to explain the process, from the ’mereological’ to the ’ecological’
explanation. On the other hand, if a mechanism must still be found to explain a ‘how’
question (how a process takes place, etc.) the system under observation is typically
framed in biological conceptual/operational terms: tissues, functional attractors or
landscapes, functional ﬁelds, etc. No activities are directly attributed to such ‘enti-
ties’. Only functional features or capabilities are recognized. This means assuming
that the biological entities that play the explanatory role have those properties as an
instantiation of a larger class of biological identity, which instead possesses those
properties by virtue of itself, i.e., in a primitive and essential way (consider, for
example, the deﬁnition of stem cells or cells of the immune system). Biological
explanations, especially in the molecular ﬁeld, are usually of this type. They do not
askquestionsaboutessentialproperties,butratherpresupposethem.Thisessentiality,
however, refers to a feature that is a capacity and that is semantically encapsulated
in the present participle verb form (ending with -ing) when talking about the living
being. The question ’what does that do?’ meaning ’how is that so’ requires iden-
tifying speciﬁc differences in the biological explanation that is, a speciﬁcation of
what makes this instantiation something other than the ’type’ to which it belongs in
a broader sense.
Relative terms, therefore, in biology have their epistemological foundation in the
relational ontology that characterizes biological processes and the identiﬁcation of
systems that allow their study. In the scientiﬁc language, there is a functional emer-
gent property that deﬁnes biological individuality from an explanatory point of view
(mesoscopic level: Bizzarri et al., 2019) and there are constitutive relationships that
justify the conceptualization of the explanans in relative terms (Bertolaso, 2016).
For this reason, paradigmatically in cancer biology where cancer is understood as
a problem of the normal developmental processes of the organism, the conceptu-
alization of the tumor cell involves two levels of epistemological analysis: that of
the relative terms for which differentiation is more relevant in the explanation of
the process than proliferation, and that of the relational terms that explains why—in
the impairment of the differentiation process—a property (P, for proliferation) re-
emerges as a dimension of the broader class of biological entities (C, for cell) from
which C * (i.e. a tumor cell) also derives and that has this property by default. This
predicate is explained by identifying some aspect of the speciﬁc nature of the entity
(cells) that is responsible for it (property). In cancer biology, the original belonging of
each cell to the organism—both in a genealogical and ecological/functional sense—is
what explains its proliferative status as a default state.
Let us now spell out more in detail the dimensions that allow for a normal develop-
mental process. At all biological levels, a peculiar functional integration is at work
and maintains the coupling of processes that for example in cancer are compro-
mised. In cancer, in fact, proliferation, differentiation and migration are decoupled

734
M. Bertolaso and H. Velázquez
leading to a neoplastic growth of cells. That is, in bot in cells and in cells within
an organism (metazoan) there is a speciﬁc interdependence between metabolic and
genetic processes, signaling and regulatory mechanisms. But in the latter case (meta-
zoan) such interdependence acquires interesting features shedding light on the kind
of integration that characterizes living organisms more in general. We propose to
organize those processes through the following dimensions:
• Genealogical (genetic and epigenetic dynamics)
• Functional (metabolism)
• Contextual (micro-environmental constraints) (Fig. 1).
Given the above arguments, it is easier to understand why, in scientiﬁc prac-
tice scientists ﬁnd it useful to combine an instructive and a permissive causality
(Woodward, 2010) to explain how a living environment can shape the path that leads
complex processes (such as mental health, drug treatment, tissue organization, etc.)
and increases the likelihood of achieving such a goal. There are factors that seem to
act primarily through a permissive causality by boosting, for example, neural plas-
ticity (i.e., the ability of the brain to change itself), allowing afterward for instructive
interventions to produce beneﬁcial effects or not (Branchi & Giuliani, 2020).
How are the relational epistemology and causal issues in biological sciences
actually linked in a relational ontology understood as epistemology? The insufﬁ-
ciency of an essentialist philosophy for biology has already been discussed by other
authors (Godfrey-Smith, 2008) as well as in other areas of scientiﬁc research on the
Fig. 1 Conceptual representation of the three dimensions (in green) that are combined and coupled
in the dynamic stability (in red) that characterizes living entities, paradigmatically organisms. Their
reciprocal dependence is ontologically and epistemologically asymmetric as discussed in the above
sections. Topological laws hold their peculiar status as we shown in other studies. The collapse of
the three dimensions, in fact, follow a ‘time dependent’ (t*) path that embodies a rhythm of rhythms
that can be independently investigated as an object of inquiry in itself. Such t* variable is here
represented by the inclination of the spiral. For further epistemological and empirical implications
of this image see Bertolaso (2016), Fig. 1.2 and 5.3 and Bizzarri et al., (2019); for implications in
complexity and organizational sciences, see Bertolaso (2021)

The Epistemology of Life Understanding Living Beings According …
735
natural world. It is known, for example, how the mechanistic rationalism of classical
mechanics went into crisis in the face of the radical relational dimension brought
to light by the discovery of chaos: knowing the evolution of a minimally complex
system requires that we consider interactions with objects that are on the other side
of the planet. Quantum mechanics has also highlighted relational structures when
focusing on lower scales of the phenomena, the very interaction of the measure
modiﬁes the known object. Instead of a representation based on objects as different
essences, a conception of reality as relations must be introduced (Bertolaso, 2016).
In the biological sciences, there are issues that admit a causal determinism of
some kind while requiring relational categories to describe it in a more radical sense
(e.g. development, cancer biology). There is also a relational dimension in our way
of knowing the world that allows us to understand more deeply the epistemological
status of biological explanations. Combining these two aspects entails expanding the
notion of causality through which we usually work in biological sciences (efﬁcient
causes to explain mechanisms) to grasp how relationships are made up in nature and
the way in which we conceptualize them. This approach goes beyond efﬁcient causes
and is closer to formal causes.
Growth and development dynamics involve the co-variation of factors that are
intrinsically (or causally) linked to each other: they vary over time in a mutually
dependent way. The systems deﬁned in this way are organizational levels because
at each level they present unitary properties that emerge not only from the proper-
ties of the components but from the particular relationships among them (Bertolaso,
2013a). By organizational levels we mean those expressions that imply an element
of repeated and repeatable order (patterns) and that are usually deﬁned, in the biolog-
ical sciences, in functional terms (tissues, etc.). This is consistent with what Duprè
points out, namely that “properties of constituents cannot themselves be fully under-
stood without a characterization of the larger system of which they are part” (Duprè,
2010). Here the epistemological relevance of the context emerges again, but from
the perspective of its characterization.
The question of the ‘whole that is greater than the sum of the parts’ is overcome in
favor of a view that captures relations as causal, allowing us to return to the speciﬁc
relationship between parts and wholes in terms of mutual dependence and autonomy
(co-determination reciprocal of the elements of a system). The whole is a part, in turn,
in a different way from the parts that constitute it. If what determines the transition
from a set of elements to a real system is the organization, that is, the "network of
relationships between the elements, and of the structure, which constitutes one of the
possible applications and implementations of the organization” (Lenoci, 2010), what
allows us to study a whole even in terms of its parts without contradiction is that the
mutual determination that exists between the parts and the whole is not symmetrical.
The dependence of the parts on the whole is not stated in the same way as the
dependence of the whole on the parts. Only formally can we assume that the mutual
determination is such that the systems owe their dynamism to the replaceable parts,
while they owe their unity to the organization. The multi-unity that is evident in
biological differentiation processes is due to a systemic determination in a space
and a time that change in a way in which they are strictly dependent on each other.

736
M. Bertolaso and H. Velázquez
The issues thus move from the epistemological to the ontological level, asking for
a philosophical foundation (justiﬁcation) of a relational ontology of levels which is
characterized, at an epistemological level, by a hierarchical organization.
Systemic issues can be put in dialogue with those of the reductionism-anti-
reductionism debate for their ontological implications, which are not in favor of
a further articulation of the holistic argument, but of the recovery of a notion of
being through an operational and relational perspective. This perspective admits
discontinuities in the world and in the modalities of the dependence of the parts on
the whole. Parts’ transformation depends on their origin and on the way in which
they arrange themselves.
The role of the context and its relationship with the parts requires, therefore,
a ﬁnal conceptual clariﬁcations. In mechanicism, context is a scenario in which
phenomena occur; it is absolute and inﬁnite, like a slate without boundaries. The
relationship between mechanicism and context with respect to parts that interact
with each other according to physical laws is an anecdotal presence. It is not even
a condition of possibility because context is where phenomena occur and although
context precedes phenomena, it does not cause phenomena to inﬂuence one another
but just gives them a scenario in which to occur. Within mechanicism, there is more
context than parts in the same way that there is more ocean than there are boats.
If we consider nature as a complex system, the context is much more than a
scenario: it is the concomitant result of causal interactions. It is a frame, a network,
a set of nodes in a relation that would not exist if interactions did not occur. In
this conception, there is no more context than phenomena, and facts cannot occur
without a causal plot being generated. In addition, the context is dynamic, changing
over time. It happens as the events take place (as, for example, the evolution of cosmic
space–time or the dynamics of a hurricane). However, although the difference and
explanatory richness of the mechanistic scheme are palpable, there are phenomena
where this conception of nature as a complex system does not correctly reﬂect the
true role of context.
A living being is a material entity whose parts are integrated to form a unique,
peculiar, singular being that preserves its structure in a world in which processes tend
to destruction and disorder. But this unique entity that preserves its structuring can
export its own form through proliferation that generates a great diversity of forms.
None of these elements could be justiﬁed without interaction with the context, which
is not a mere scenario and that does not appear when life is reproduced but does
something very different: it brings unity to the living being but also persistence.
Relational ontology assumes that there is an intrinsic belonging of organisms and
their components to the environment or context in which they develop, and that this
context is subject of causal interactions with the organisms.
However, in this mutual involvement, there is not only a win–win process, but
the context that articulates the relationships and give rise to the living organism
(which is information) causes all entities within the context to share some structuring
and dynamism, while at the same time deploying towards a plural set of forms.
What occurs here is very similar to the original notion of information suggested by
Aristotle when he spoke of morphé: a constitutive structuring element of a whole,

The Epistemology of Life Understanding Living Beings According …
737
which realizes its speciﬁcity while at the same time keeping it open to variation and
the proliferation of new structures. Which is precisely what asymmetric reciprocity
consists of (Bertolaso laso, 2016). In this sense, it is essential for the understanding
of relational ontology to consider that the context works as a formal cause (morphé)
and not only as a scenario or plot. It is a set-up, an articulator, a detonator, but not the
phenomena themselves. That is why there is a relationship with asymmetry between
context and phenomenon, and not just mutual interaction, as complex system theory
suggests.
An additional observation: understanding what form means in this context is
conditioned by the notion of part. Aristotle had established with good intuition that
part is what remains as a result of a process of division. In the integration of certain
phenomena or entities there are members which are fundamental (even irreducible),
that make up a certain reality but not as mere aggregation or a mereological sum of
parts but as essential constituents which he names. Here the form (morphé) performs
an integration not of the parts (which are the result of physical division), but of
the elements (speciﬁc minimum parts) that are what make up the subject, the body.
Morphé of a ship, for example, functionally integrates elements: rudder, sails, hull;
not parts, which will always be successively divisible. A living being according to
this perspective is understood as a subject whose intra- and extra-contextual causal
relationship give it unity over time based on the information.
Without specifying the role of information and its function within biology and
dynamic stability, it is difﬁcult to show the relevance of the paradigm of relational
ontology. Information should be, in fact, understood, at this point not as communi-
cation of a code or instructions, but as an integrator of stable structuring over time.
Therefore, a relational ontology seems to designate the way in which the living being
exists, as a subject that not only occurs in a global context but is also an articulated
and concomitant result with it, as is the case of all the members of the same organism.
4
Conclusion: Revising the Reductionism-Holism Debate
Biology is a science that, from its beginnings, has always had difﬁculty deﬁning its
object of research and study. On the one hand, there is the question of life; on the other
hand, there is the question of how far biology can be considered a science in the sense
of the so-called exact sciences, that is, those sciences in which prediction and control
go together. Nevertheless, we call biology the science that studies those objects that
we refer to as living beings and that we characterize by a speciﬁc movement of
growth and development (through genetic and metabolic processes).
We deal with entities, with different degrees of individuality (that we deﬁne in
terms of functional integration of the parts), but that are united by continuous and
autonomous activity. That is, in the way we relate to the biological world there
are always these two dimensions: one that refers to a constitutive activity (which
identiﬁes what it is) and one that refers to a functional activity (which speciﬁes
what it does). We ﬁnd these dimensions, in conceptual and explanatory terms, at

738
M. Bertolaso and H. Velázquez
various scales in the biological sciences, from genes to unicellular organisms, from
organisms to ecosystems.
Philosophical problems began to arise when we started explaining this peculiar
movement of growth of organisms—the result of the convergence of constitutive
activity (praxis) and functional (poiesis)—from a mereological perspective, that is,
having to recompose an emerging behavior through the functional integration of the
parts. This process of explaining the biological world inevitably soon showed its
limits. Assuming the materialistic and naturalistic compromise that has dominated
both the scientiﬁc and philosophical debate of the twentieth century, the position
taken for granted is that science has to deal with material objects and is committed
to offering naturalistic explanations that are based on some intrinsic property of the
system and independent of the observation of the researcher.
Typically, this question has permeated the debate about the nature of species and
function, organism and ecosystem. The evolutionary perspective of the natural world
brought these ﬁelds of inquiry together so that most of biology became ’evolutionary
biology’. The search, in fact, for principles of order, wanting to avoid a vitalist
position and having no alternative to mechanistic ones, could not but end up in a
genetic determinism where, always for positivist assumptions, the notion of gene
coincided with that of nucleotide sequence and speciﬁc functional activity.
The emergence and development of embryology and systems biology have revived
old questions about the nature of the difference between living organisms and the
other entities we observe in the world. They have also revived questions about the
traceability of the principles that govern the former and those that apply to the latter,
thus providing a comprehensive explanation of phenomena typically associated with
the living world in physical terms. The fundamental question returned to being about
the principles of order and organization of living systems (Bertolaso, 2013a). The
methodological and ontological questions converge in philosophical reﬂection on
the question about what reductionism is possible in biology or what the funda-
mental philosophical assumptions of non-reductionist or systemic perspectives are
(Bertolaso, 2013b).
The relational epistemology described above, in contrast to system as well as to
mechanisms, not only makes explicit the way in which entities interact with each
other within the historical whole (organized complexity) but also aims to be a way
of understanding what nature is, not just how it shows itself to us. That is, it analyses
natural entities as the result of a dynamic articulation among their origin, context, and
function, particularly manifested in the ﬁeld of life. The complex systemic method-
ology (which assumes its epistemology as an ontology) does not distinguish between
different systems to show how each one is speciﬁc, singular, irreducible, but rather
considers all natural systems (inert, living, conscious, social, etc.,) as homogeneous
entities.
Does the proposed relational ontology serve to better understand natural reality,
over and above complex system theory and mechanicism? Answering this question
implies considering the dynamic identity of a natural being, as well as the articulation
among their three dimensions of origin, context and function, which are maintained
over time but which result in diverse and original beings, in such a way that each

The Epistemology of Life Understanding Living Beings According …
739
of them can be understood in its speciﬁcity. Is this approach appropriate for under-
standing other areas of reality, beyond living beings? (culture, social behaviour, etc.).
To answer this question, it would be necessary to identify in each of these areas of
reality what its articulation of origin, context, and function would be. This model is
thus presented not as a mere metaphor or allegory about understanding living beings,
but as an analogical tool that looks to identify the common elements that generate in
nature different realities although with similar patterns.
References
Ayala, F. J. (1974). Introduction. In F. J. Ayala & T. Dobzhansky (Eds.), Studies in the philosophy
of biology (pp. vii–xvi). University of California Press.
Ayala, J., & Arp, R. (2010). Contemporary debates in philosophy of biology. Wiley-Blackwell.
Bertolaso, M. (2011). Hierarchies and causal relationships in the interpretative models of cancer.
In Special Issue “Causation and Disease in the Post-Genomic Era”. History and Philosophy of
the Life Sciences, 33(4), 389–396.
Bertolaso, M. (2012). La Dimensione non Riduzionista del Riduzionismo nella Ricerca Sperimen-
tale Dai Modelli Molecolari a Quelli Sistemici nella Ricerca sul Cancro. Rivista di Filosoﬁa
Neo-Scolastica, 4, 687–705
Bertolaso, M. (2013a). Sull’irriducibilità della prospettiva sistemica in biologia. Un’analisi delle
convergenze dei modelli interpretativi del cancro, in “Strutture di Mondo. Il pensiero sistemico
come specchio di una realtà complessa.” (Urbani Ulivi L.) (Vol. II, pp. 143–169). Il Mulino.
Bertolaso, M. (2013b). How science works. Choosing levels of explanation in biological sciences.
Aracne s.r.l.
Bertolaso, M. (2016). Philosophy of cancer—A dynamic and relational view. Springer Series in
“History, Philosophy and Theory of the Life Sciences”.
Bertolaso, M. (2017). Uncoupling mereology and supervenience: A dual framework for emergence
and downward causation. In “Causality and Explanation in Scientiﬁc Practice” (Evandro Agazzi,
Marco Buzzoni Eds), Axiomathes, 27(6), 705–720.
Bertolaso, M., & Ratti, E. (2018). Conceptual challenges in the theoretical foundations of systems
biology. In M. Bizzarri (Ed.), Systems biology, series: Methods in molecular biology (Vol. 1702,
pp. 1–13). Springer.
Bertolaso, M. Complexity and management: Epistemic insights from life science in handbook of
philosophy. Handbook of Philosophy of Management (Eds. M. Dibben, M. Segal) (in press).
Bizzarri,M.,Giuliani,A.,Pensotti,A.,Ratti,E,&Bertolaso,M.(2019).Co-emergenceandcollapse:
the mesoscopic approach for conceptualizing and investigating the functional integration of
organisms. Frontiers in Physiology https://doi.org/10.3389/fphys.2019.00980
Branchi, I., & Giuliani, A. (2020). Shaping therapeutic trajectories in mental health: Instructive
versus permissive causality. European Neuropsychopharmacology, 43, 1–9 (2021).
Brigandt, I., & Love, A. (2017). Reductionism in biology. In E. N. Zalta (Ed.), The Stanford Encyclo-
pedia of Philosophy (Spring 2017 Edition). https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2017/entries/
reduction-biology/
Buzzoni, M. (2008). «Causalité et temporalité du point de vue opérationnel», relazione tenuta
al «Colloque de Cerisy: La notion de temps dans sous tous ses aspects», in Epistemologia.
An International Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 2008, Special Issue 14: Time in the
Different Approaches/Le temps appréhendé à travers différentes disciplines), Actes des Entretiens
de l’Académie Internationale de Philosophie des Sciences (Cerisy-la-Salle, 4–9 Octobre 2007),
pp. 45–58.

740
M. Bertolaso and H. Velázquez
Collier, J. D. (2000). Autonomy and process closure as the basis for functionality. In J. L. R.
Chandler & G. van der Vijver (Eds.), Closure: Emergent organisations and their dynamics
(pp. 280–290). Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences.
Corvi, R. (2010). Dall’olismo epistemologico al pensiero sistemico, In Urbani Ulivi L Strutture di
mondo. Il pensiero sistemico come specchio di una realtà complessa. Il Mulino.
Craver, C. F. (2009). Mechanisms and natural kinds. Philosophical Psychology, 22, 575–594.
Craver, C. F., & Bechtel, W. (2007). Top-down causation without top-down causes. Biology and
Philosophy, 22, 547–563.
Dupré, J. (2010). It is not possible to reduce biological explanations to explanations in chemistry
and/or physics. In J. Ayala & R. Arp (Eds.), Contemporary debate in philosophy of biology.
Wiley-Blackwell.
Dupré, J., & Nicholson, D. (2018). Everything ﬂows: Towards a processual philosophy of biology.
Oxford University Press.
Fox Keller, E. (2010). It is possible to reduce biological explanations to explanations in chemistry
and/or Physics? In J. Ayala & R. Arp. (Eds.), Contemporary debate in philosophy of biology.
Wiley-Blackwell.
Godfrey-Smith, P. (2008). Reduction in real life. In J. Hohwy & J. Kallestrup (Eds.), Being reduced:
New essays on reduction, explanation, and causation (pp. 52–74). Oxford University Press.
Green, S., & Batterman, R. (2017). Biology meets physics: Reductionism and multi-scale modeling
of morphogenesis. Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part c: Studies in History and
Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical Sciences, 61(February), 20–34.
Kauffman, S. A. (1971). Articulation of parts explanations in biology and the rational search for
them. Boston Studies in the Philosophy of Science, 8, 257–272.
Kauffman, S. (2000). Investigations. Oxford University Press.
Lenoci, M (2010). Introduction in ’Strutture di mondo - Il pensiero sistemico come specchio di una
realtà complessa’, Lucia Urbani Ulivi (Ed). Il Mulino, Bologna
Licata, I. (2015). Incertezza. Un approccio sistemico. In L. Urbani Ulivi (Ed.), Strutture di Mondo
(Vol. III, pp. 35–73 and 46–47). Il Mulino
Maturana, H., & Varela, F. J. (1980). Autopoiesis and cognition. The realization of the living. Reidel
Publishing.
Mayr, E. (2004). What makes biology unique? Cambridge University Press.
Militello, G. (2021). Ph.D. Thesis on structural and organisational conditions for the appearance of
a functionally integrated organisation in the transition from prokaryotic to eukaryotic cell.
Mitchell, S. D. (2009). Unsimple truths: Science, complexity and policy. University of Chicago
Press.
Moreno, A., & Mossio, M. (2015). Biological autonomy: A philosophical and theoretical enquiry.
Springer.
Mossio, M., Moreno, A. (2010). Organisational closure in biological organisms. In P Huneman &
C. T. Wolfe (Eds.), The concept of organism: Historical, philosophical, scientiﬁc perspectives,
History and Philosophy of the Life Sciences, 32(special issue), 269–288.
Nagel, E. (1961). The structure of science: Problems in the logic of scientiﬁc explanation. Harcourt,
Brace & World.
Nicholson, D. J. (2010). Biological atomism and cell theory. Studies in History and Philosophy of
Biological and Biomedical Sciences, 41(202–211), 203.
Rosen, R. (1991). Life itself. A comprehensive enquiry into the nature, origin and fabrication of
life. Columbia University Press.
Rosenberg, A. (2007) Reductionism (and anti reductionism) in biology. In D. L. Hull & M. Ruse
(Eds.), The Cambridge companion to the philosophy of biology. Cambridge University Press.
Sarkar, S. (1998). Genetics and reductionism. Cambridge University Press.
Varela, F. J. (1979). Principles of biological autonomy. North Holland.
Velázquez, H. (2020). ¿Qué es la naturaleza? Introducción ﬁlosóﬁca a la historia de la ciencia (2a
ed.). Porrúa.

The Epistemology of Life Understanding Living Beings According …
741
Wilson, R. A., & Craver, C. F. (2007). Realization. In P. Thagard (Ed.), Philosophy of psychology and
cognitive science (Handbook of the philosophy of science, Vol. 12) (pp. 31–54). Elsevier/North
Holland
Wimsatt, W. (1974). Complexity and organization. In K. F. Schaffner & R. S. Cohen (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 1972 Meeting of the Philosophy of Science Association (pp. 67–86). D. Reidel.
Wimsatt, W. (1980). Reductionistic research strategies and their biases in the units of selection
controversy. In T. Nickles (Ed.), Scientiﬁc discovery: Case studies (pp. 213–259). D. Reidel.
Wimsatt, W. C. (2007). Re-engineering philosophy for limited beings: Piecewise approximations
to reality. Harvard University Press.
Winther, R. G. (2011). Part-whole science. Synthese, 178, 397–427.
Woodward, J. (2003). Making things happen—A theory of causal explanation. Oxford University
Press.
Woodward, J. (2010). Causation in biology: Stability, speciﬁcity, and the choice of levels of
explanation. Biology and Philosophy, 25, 287–318.

Holism and Reductionism
in the Illness/Disease Debate
Marco Buzzoni
, Luigi Tesio
, and Michael T. Stuart
1
Introduction. The Two Souls of Medicine
and the Illness-Disease Dichotomy
1.1
Medicine: Two Souls for a Single Science
Dissatisfaction with biomedicine, and more generally with a medicine modelled
after and depending upon biomedical sciences and technology, is spreading more
and more; not only among patients (who often are turning to “alternative”, “holistic”
or “complementary” forms of medicine), but also among health care professionals
and, particularly, medical doctors (cf. Cole & Carlin, 2009). On the one hand, medical
doctors retain the ambition to be scientists—an ambition which is also reﬂected in
the English language (they are also designed by the term “physician”, whose Greek-
Latin origin, “physicus”, means “the one who knows nature”, i.e., the scientist in its
M. Buzzoni (B)
Dipartimento di Studi Umanistici, Università degli Studi di Macerata, Macerata, Italy
e-mail: marco.buzzoni@unimc.it
L. Tesio
Department of Biomedical Sciences for Health, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milano, Italy
e-mail: luigi.tesio@unimi.it
Department of Neurorehabilitation Sciences, Istituto Auxologico Italiano, IRCCS, Milano, Italy
M. T. Stuart
Institute of Philosophy of Mind and Cognition, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University,
Taipei, Taiwan
e-mail: mikestuart@nycu.edu.tw
Department of Philosophy and Centre for Philosophy of Science, University of Geneva, Geneva,
Switzerland
Centre for Philosophy of Natural and Social Science, London School of Economics and Political
Science, London, UK
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
S. Wuppuluri and I. Stewart (eds.), From Electrons to Elephants and Elections,
The Frontiers Collection, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-92192-7_39
743

744
M. Buzzoni et al.
widest sense). On the other hand, many physicians and healthcare professionals are
aware of the need of personalizing the traditional and biomedical model of medicine
(cf. Engel, 1978: 169; Glick, 1981 p. 1037; Willis, 1989; Marcum, 2008), a need
that is reﬂected by the term “clinician”, faithful to its Greek origin, clìno, probably
meaning bending towards, or lying on, the sufferer’s bed.
It is therefore no accident that in the literature of the last decades about the status
of medicine, there is a new awareness that an adequate notion of medical praxis
requires an integrative position, which mediates between the analytic-reductionist
and the normative-holistic perspective (cf. Wyss, 1986; Nordenfelt, 1986, 1997a,
1997b, 2013; Christian, 1989; Hahn, 2000: 35–53; Pieringer & Fazekas, 2000: 89–
111; Marcum, 2008; Larkin et al., 2011: 318–337). This is not a recent demand. Karl
Jaspers already fully understood, as early as 1919, the importance of reconciling
the two “souls” of medicine (Jaspers, 1919: 59), i.e., the analytical-reductionist and
the holistic-normative, or, the scientiﬁc-technological (practised by the physician)
and the clinical (practised by the clinician). Jaspers’s problem fully corresponds to
today’s physician-clinician antinomy. The associated need to reconcile the scientiﬁc
soul and the clinical soul of medicine (on which see also Jaspers, 1958: 1038, Engl.
Transl., 255) is as (or more) urgent today as it was in Jaspers’s time.
1.2
The Illness-Disease Dichotomy: A Part-Whole Puzzle
Now, since the duplicity of attitudes towards the patient corresponds roughly to what
we usually designate as “disease” and “illness”, it is possible to take an important
step towards achieving the just-mentioned goal if the relationship between these two
meanings of malady is correctly set up (the word “malady” will be used here in
the most generic sense, which includes not only “disease” and “illness”, but also
“sickness”, and the sense of being unﬁt or unable to do what you want to, when you
want to). As Cassell noted in 1976, the technological revolution, by fueling the hope
of curing many maladies, has contributed to an increasing differentiation between
what could be treated by technological means (with an often excessive conﬁdence
and hope) and illness, something which is subjective, it is something the person
“lives through” as a whole, and therefore does not ﬁt into the categories of rigorous
technoscience. Typically, prospects for successful treatment were signiﬁcantly less,
when not wholly abandoned:
The success of medicine has created a strain: the doctor sees his role as the curer of disease
and "forgets" his role as a healer of the sick, and patients wander disabled but without a
culturally acceptable mantle of disease with which to clothe the nakedness of their pain.
(Cassell, 1976: 27)
Notwithstanding the ongoing debate about disease and illness, there is some agree-
ment that “disease” and “illness” are the key concepts of the opposite trends, the
analytical-reductionist and the holistic-normative, in conceiving both malady and
medicine. From this point of view, the mentioned demand for an integrative position

Holism and Reductionism in the Illness/Disease Debate
745
concerning the status of medicine, which combines the analytic-reductionist with
the normative-holistic perspective, must also be raised for the distinction between
disease and illness.
1.3
Can a Human Science Be a Science? Human Sciences
and Objectivity
As just noted, clarifying the relation between the two faces of malady expressed by
the terms “disease” and “illness” is crucial for creating an integrative view capable
of overcoming the opposition between the reductionistic-analytical and the holistic-
normative perspective of medicine. However, the demands for such an integrative
view must not only be connected with ethical reasons or reasons of practical desir-
ability (which will not be taken into consideration here), but ﬁrst of all with episte-
mological and methodological reasons, intrinsically linked to the status of medicine
as a science: human, yet science. Medicine, in every aspect of its activity (including
its disciplinary and institutional organisation), must reconcile the scientiﬁc-objective
and impersonal dimension (mainly expressed by the term “disease”) with its clinical
and personal dimension (mainly expressed by the term “illness”). This, as we shall try
to show, is required by the nature of medicine as a human science, a nature that must
also be taken into account in order to increase its own degree of scientiﬁcity, objec-
tivity, or intersubjective controllability. Obviously, medicine is not to be considered
a human science in the restrictive sense that it must be “humanitarian” (a welcome
property, of course), but as having a methodologically speciﬁc object of investiga-
tion, that is, beings which are biological organisms, and, at the same time, operate as
more than mere biological organisms, that is—to remain as neutral as possible with
respect to a difﬁcult philosophical debate—as cultural-biological entities.
We propose to show that there is an aspect of “illness” that is central in both dimen-
sions of medicine. This aspect is at once objective and intersubjectively controllable,
yet also characteristic of the human sciences and not completely reducible to the
natural sciences. Speciﬁcally, illness depends not only on the physical and biochem-
ical reality of the patient’s body, but it includes the cultural side, which is always
involved in the particular way in which patients live, and respond to their own expe-
rience of illness. The way in which patients live their illness, both on a personal and
sociallevel,isnotonlyinﬂuencedbynaturalconstraints(suchasthefactofpossessing
a certain body structure or, to put it as Boorse does, a certain “species design”), but
also by law-like cultural constraints. Even the domain of the experience of illness,
like those dealt with by the other human sciences, is subjected to regularities that add
to, and interfere with, those that physical and biochemical investigations highlight. It
is only by taking them into account, therefore, that it is possible to increase the ability
of medicine to prevent, diagnose and treat illnesses in an increasingly effective way.
In other words, the interpersonal and social side of illness can and must be investi-
gated from the point of view of medicine as a science. Both the bio-physician and

746
M. Buzzoni et al.
the clinician cannot ignore, each from their own point of view, the patient’s attitude
towards their illness and the development of the patient’s ways of coping with the
illness, which are not only of paramount importance for any therapy, but also for
any diagnosis. An approach to medicine that would try to leverage exclusively the
biological aspect of the disease (as was for example the explicit intent of Boorse’s
famous essay of 1977, in accordance with a naturalistic-statistical view of biological
normality inaugurated by Claude Bernard in 1865), would not only be a medicine
that would break that physician–patient alliance, which obviously no medicine can
disregard, but it would be a medicine unaware of its nature as a human science.
1.4
The Treatment Plan
The present paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes two important but
opposite conceptions: health and malady (understood as a lack of, or contrary to,
health: see, e.g., Sadegh-Zadeh, 2012: 153–154). It explores certain difﬁculties with
each, which together lead to a kind of antinomy, which, as shown in Sect. 3, also
affects the few attempts to offer an integrative view of health and malady (the most
importantofwhichisperhapsthatofWakeﬁeld:seee.g.,1992,2007,2014,and2015).
Section 4 shows that the strengths of both the naturalistic, analytic-reductionist and
the normative, holistic-humanistic conceptions can be preserved, on different levels,
if one understands in what sense medicine is a human science. Section 5 considers
the case of statistics (seen as a process of generalising from individual observa-
tions) when applied to human sciences. Section 6 builds a proposal for epistemic
reconciliation and integration of naturalistic and normative standpoints.
2
Health, Disease, Illness: Analytic-Naturalistic Versus
Holistic-Normative Perspectives
2.1
Two Accounts of Health and Malady
Two main accounts of health and malady are distinguishable in the literature, even
if this distinction runs the risk of a certain oversimpliﬁcation (cf. Simon, 2007
and Kingma, 2014). The two key concepts that correspond to these two different
conceptions of health and malady are “illness” and “disease.”
On the one hand, the ﬁrst view—sometimes deﬁned as naturalism, or an analytic-
naturalistic perspective—puts particular emphasis on the term “disease”, something
which can and ought to be objectively, scientiﬁcally ascertained and localized within
the patient’s body. This is very clear in the thought of Christian Boorse, the best-
known and most discussed exponent of such a naturalistic view. According to Boorse,
we have to distinguish between “illness”, which is a concept dependent on a cultural

Holism and Reductionism in the Illness/Disease Debate
747
context, and “disease” (or “pathology”, as he prefers since 2014: see Boorse, 2014),
a descriptive, non-normative concept, whose main elements are biological function
and statistical normality. “Disease” could be deﬁned as
a type of internal state which is either an impairment of normal functional ability, i.e., a
reduction of one or more functional abilities below typical efﬁciency, or a limitation on
functional ability caused by environmental agents. (Boorse, 1977: 567; cf. Boorse, 2014:
683–684)
Typical or normal performance is deﬁned by the concept of “species design”:
Our species and others are in fact highly uniform in structure and function; otherwise there
would be no point to the extreme detail in textbooks of human physiology. This uniformity
of functional organization I call the species design. (Boorse 1997: 557; see also Boorse,
2014: 39)
From this point of view, Boorse opts to understand the concept of health as the
absence of disease:
Health as freedom from disease is then statistical normality of function, i.e., the ability to
perform all typical physiological functions with at least typical efﬁciency. This conception
of health is as value-free as statements of biological function.1
More generally, it might be said that, as far as “disease” is concerned, it is possible
to distinguish two main components: from the point of view of its contents, essen-
tial ingredients of “disease” are biochemical, genetic, and functional-physiological
(in short: biological) elements, so that ‘disease’ may be observed, examined, and
measured in an intersubjectively testable way; however, from the point of view of
its social-cultural-linguistic classiﬁcation, what a ‘disease’ is, is determined by the
theoretical lenses and the particular practices of health professionals: in this sense,
because they are the undesirable conditions that health professionals de facto happen
to treat, diseases vary over time with evolving historical and social conditions (see
e.g., Boorse, 1977, Kleinman, 1988: 4; Aho & Aho, 2008; Sadegh-Zadeh, 2012: 151–
153; on this point see also Grmek’s important notion of “pathocoenosis” (Grmek,
1983, Engl. Transl., 2–3).
On the other hand, according to a second view—which ﬁnds its pivot in the
term “illness” and is sometimes deﬁned using a normativist or holistic-humanistic
perspective—both health and malady must be deﬁned by an explicit or implicit choice
or convention concerning the goals we have for our own lives. In this connection it
is generally held that the term “illness” encompasses feelings, beliefs, and attitudes
regarding bodily and mental conditions that overtake and impede us in performing
the tasks and in the interpersonal interactions of our life (e.g., we may be unable
to walk or drive because of back pain) (see e.g., Kleinman, 1988: 3; Aho & Aho,
2008: 3; Hofmann, 2017: 16). This is the reason why disability (more precisely, any
limitation in whole-person activities, as per the World Health Organisation deﬁnition:
World Health Organisation, 2001) has to be considered here as a form of illness.
1 Boorse (1977): 542. Though interpreted variously, Boorse’s conception has been taken up by
several authors: see, e.g. Taljedahl (1997), Williams (2007) (who treats disease in terms of distortions
of standard cellular network processes), and Ananth (2008).

748
M. Buzzoni et al.
Heretoowemaydistinguishtwomaincomponents.Ontheoneside(fromthepoint
of view of its contents) important ingredients of “illness” are psychological states
such as pain, suffering, anxiety, fear, and behavioural disturbances like disability: all
phenomena being undesired and medically treated, not less than bone fractures and
myocardial infarctions. In this respect, the relationship between illness and health
surfaces clearly. On the other hand (from the point of view of its social-cultural-
linguistic classiﬁcation), what an illness is, is determined by a lived experience, both
at the personal and social levels.2
An important point in this context is that illness is usually connected to the whole-
ness of the individual person’s feelings (which in turn largely reﬂect the interpersonal
and social relationships in which the person is involved). This point was ﬁnally trans-
posed by the World Health Organization (WHO) into its famous deﬁnition of health
(“a state of complete physical, mental and social well-being and not merely the
absence of disease or inﬁrmity”), whose defects do not exclude that it had the merit
of connecting the ‘normal functioning’ of the body to the more general well-being
of human life, considered both in its psychological and social dimension.3
The distinction we have been drawing has been concisely expressed by Cassell
in writing that “[d]isease […] is something an organ has; illness is something a man
has.”4 With a more explicit reference to the subject of our paper, Nordenfelt spoke of
two perspectives from which ‘health’, ‘disease’, and other similar concepts may be
interpreted: the “analytic” (or “atomistic-biological”)—sometimes deﬁned as natu-
ralism—and the “holistic” (or “holistic-humanistic”) perspective. From the former
2 In this last case, in accordance with the work of Parsons about the “sick role” (Parsons 1951,
1975), “sickness” is the more often used term, but it will be included here under the umbrella of
“illness”, which emphasizes the interpersonal and social aspect (consistent with this, in common
parlance, is calling work absences due to health care problems “sick” leave). On this point see also
Twaddle (1968, 1994a, 1994b), who was one of the ﬁrst authors to distinguish between disease,
illness, and sickness.
3 Callahan (1973: 86). For the second view, see e.g., Veatch (1973: 524–5), Engelhardt (1975,
1984, and 1996), Margolis (1976); Schaefer (1976: 20–21); Engel (1978); Whitbeck (1981a; 1981b;
1981c), Nordenfelt (1984, 1986, 1995, 1997a, 1997b), Reznek (1987), Pörn (1993), Wieland (1995,
2002), Fulford (2001). As far as the notion of "illness" is concerned, phenomenological literature is
also very important, starting from Merleau-Ponty (1945) up to the most recent works, among which
see at least Zaner (1981), Toombs (1992), Aho and Aho (2008), and Svenaeus (2000, 2014). But
already in antiquity Seneca had given voice to “illness” by trying to deﬁne maladies in subjective
terms: “Triae haec in omni morbo gravia sunt, metus mortis, dolor corporis, intermissio voluptatum.”
(Epistulae morales ad Lucilium, 78, 6.).
4 See Cassell (1976: 27). The relation between a focal localization of malady and its pervasive
affection of the self, reﬂects itself in the English language, which distinguishes between “pain”
and “ache”: one speaks of knee pain and skin pain, but of headache, toothache and stomachache,
and depending on his/her experience, the patient may speak of back pain or backache. Neo-Latin
languages have difﬁculties in recognizing this distinction: for instance, there were problems trans-
lating into Italian a famous English questionnaire asking whether your pain is of “aching” quality.
The proposed solution was translating “aching” as “dà sofferenza” (“it makes you suffer”) (Maiani
and Sanavio 1985). However, both in English and in Italian, “suffering” deﬁnes a domain much
wider than “suffering because of pain” does. In building a back pain questionnaire including the
“aching pain” item, the Authors found that only some of the Italian participants perceived “dà
sofferenza” as a speciﬁc qualiﬁer, rather than a synonym, for pain (Tesio et al., 1997).

Holism and Reductionism in the Illness/Disease Debate
749
perspective, a person is mainly regarded “as a complicated biological organism with
a vast number of interacting parts”, and the central concepts are biological, chemical,
and statistical; from the latter, “man is taken to be fundamentally a social agent, a
complete human being acting in society. On such a platform the theory construc-
tion will primarily use humanistic or social concepts. The concept of a person is
central, so are the concepts of action and goal.” (Nordenfelt, 1986: 281) From the
former perspective, again, “one directs one’s attention to particular parts of the human
organism, and considers their structure and function”; from the latter, “one focuses
on the state of the human being as a whole, and judges whether he or she is healthy.”
(Nordenfelt, 1995: xiii) In this latter sense, health
has its locus on the level of the whole person. A human being as a whole can be healthy. It
is not molecules or tissues which are healthy. We may say metaphorically that a heart or a
lung is healthy, but what we then mean is that this heart or lung contributes to the health of
the whole person. (Nordenfelt, 1997a: 244)
2.2
Irreconcilable Perspectives?
Despite attempts to heal the disease/illness dichotomy, it remains deeply rooted in
contemporary medicine. Take the cases of disability and mental health. The World
Health Organisation periodically updates the International Classiﬁcation of Diseases
(ICD), used worldwide in epidemiology and clinical practice (for the latest, 11th
version see: https://www.who.int/classiﬁcations/classiﬁcation-of-diseases; accessed
Dec28th 2021). Biological “diseases” are loosely related to functional consequences
at the whole-person level, i.e., the level of behaviours and psychological states.
Therefore, in 1980, the WHO strove to separate the “functioning” of body parts
(related to “impairments”) from the functioning of the person as a whole with respect
to the outer world (related to “disabilities” and “handicaps”). In this sense, a brain
junction gap caused by an infarction would be an impairment, while the reduced
capacity to walk or to communicate (i.e., needs shared by all human beings) would
represent disabilities, and ﬁnally, if an individual person needed to abandon a job, or
be absent from school, this would be a handicap. In 2001, for the WHO, “disabilities”
became “activity limitations”, and “handicaps” became “participation restrictions”,
but the distinction with respect to impairments (a whole-parts distinction) remained
sharp. And again, both the WHO and the American Psychiatric Association (2013)
do not speak of mental “diseases” but of mental “disorders” instead.
It is therefore no accident that the ensuing discussion has brought to the fore a kind
ofantinomy,whicharisesfromconsideringonesideofhealthormaladyinabstraction
from the other. Against the internal coherence of a merely descriptive-naturalistic
account of disease, it has been argued that having a particular digestive or breathing
system, and/or particular reproductive organs, represents already a potential set of
behavioural patterns or norms to be followed by an organism, and these norms are

750
M. Buzzoni et al.
indirectly brought to light whenever the ‘normal’ functional ability of an organ is
reduced or limited to some extent.5
In other words, simply claiming that some body functions are fundamental already
assumes that they were embedded in a teleological system of aims or values, and
the assertion that an organ functions well already presupposes that this is something
which we should preserve in its present state. No appeal to a particular species design
can avoid a rationally unjustiﬁable jump from ‘is’ to ‘ought’.
2.3
Splitting the Normal and the Pathological
As we have just mentioned, the inherently normative nature of any kind of “nor-
mality” has already been asserted by some authors. However, to be fair, Boorse is
much more aware of the difﬁculties facing his account than his critics have usually
assumed. His proposal is that neither the mere recourse to the species design (ulti-
mately appealing to a Darwinian ﬁtness-selection model, see Garson, 2016) nor to
statistical normality provides a satisfactory deﬁnition of health or disease. Both are
necessary to do this.
But here it can be said that two mistakes fail to make a truth. It is not so much a
question of solving the problems raised by some counterexamples, some of which
Boorse admits that he has to solve with an ad hoc exclusion (speciﬁcally, the case of
“universal diseases”, such as dental caries and some geriatric or epidemic diseases,
which are usually seen as pathological in spite of their being statistically very frequent
phenomena: cf. Boorse, 1977: 566–567). Instead, it is a question of recognising that,
in order to establish what health and disease are, the construction of a statistic is
never value-free.
You cannot statistically determine what the nature of ‘health’ is in itself, since the
production of statistics necessarily presupposes certain choices concerning the vari-
ables to be normalized and the “weight” to be assigned to these variables: these proce-
dures, in turn, depend on evaluative elements (to say nothing of the choice of more
sophisticated statistical models relying on complex assumptions). Any modelling is
in itself a theoretic-normative process: for example, see the statistical ‘war’ between
5 Cf. above all Canguilhem (1972) (which, in a certain sense, can be regarded as a worthy ante
litteram critique of Boorse), Toulmin (1976), and Fedoryka (1997). Important pages have, however,
been written on several occasions by Engel on this point (see for example 1978 and 1979). Engel put
into question a biomedical model which requires both that disease be dealt with as an entity inde-
pendent of social behaviour (which implicitly assumes mind–body dualism), and that behavioural
deviations from the population’s mean are to be explained only on the basis of biochemical or neuro-
physiological processes (which implicitly assumes reductionism). O’Leary’s thesis that Engel’s
“bizarre insistence that dualism and reductionism are one and the same view” (O’Leary 2020), is a
misunderstanding of Engel’s basic idea, which is very simple: if one accepts a dualistic paradigm
such as the Cartesian one, one also accepts the idea that only the body (mechanistically conceived),
as opposed to the soul (which is immaterial), can fall ill, but then, the tendency naturally follows
according to which the doctor must only deal with the body and neglect the mind: which is precisely,
in medicine, the reductionism combined with the dualism of which Engel spoke.

Holism and Reductionism in the Illness/Disease Debate
751
frequentists and Bayesians (cf. Mayo, 2018), and the recent surge against researchers’
faith in arbitrary levels of “statistical signiﬁcance”, which are still the benchmark for
decisions in most biomedical research (Amrhein et al., 2019).
2.3.1
Statistics Is Value-Laden
The natural environment is constantly changing (though, usually, very slowly
comparedtothedurationofahumanlife),sothatstatistical‘norms’,inacertainsense,
must adapt: consider, as an example, how climate change and food availability impact
the biological features and “diseases” of all living beings. However, the normative
nature of statistics has in medicine further and distinct reasons, acting along the time-
frame of human (and even individual) history (on this point see above all Canguilhem,
1972 and Wieland, 1995). First, humans modify—in accordance with their interests
and values—not only the natural environment, but also one another. It follows that
the range of ‘normal’ values changes depending on new discoveries, social atti-
tudes and political contexts, and the recognition itself of a given phenomenon as
‘normal’ (or, as a ‘disease’) is historically variable. In a society where body weight
was assigned a great biological value there would be more tolerance of higher values
than of lower ones. You would accept as ‘normal’ a positive statistical deviation
from the average body weight much more in a society where thinness is an aesthetic
ideal. To take another example, only in the late 1970’s did people begin to seriously
consider “essential” hypertension as a “disease” in itself (the cause is still unknown,
for which reason it is deﬁned “essential”), but ‘normal’ values were very lenient,
and very high pressure levels were accepted in elderly people. Nowadays, “essen-
tial” hypertension is considered as one of the most important causes of mortality
and disability (Saklayen & Deshpande, 2016), and has generated huge statistical
studies, which have set a much more restrictive range of ‘normality’. But perhaps
the best example to show that the recognition of a given phenomenon as ‘normal’
(or, as a ‘disease’) is historically variable, is the “disease” drapetomania—which
was supposed to induce slaves to run away and abscond (Cartwright, 1851/2004).
Nowadays,noEthicalCommitteewouldauthorizestudiesondrapetomania(although
forms of slavery, unfortunately, still exist; see https://news.un.org/en/tags/modern-
slavery, accessed Dec 28 2021). In the same vein, homosexuality has long been
classiﬁed as a psychiatric disorder. Nowadays, no Ethical Committee would autho-
rize studies on the effectiveness of drugs claimed to correct “sexual orientations”.
The latter are no longer classiﬁed as “diseases” or “mental disorders”, for either the
World Health Organisation or the American Psychiatric Association.
In other words, not only does each statistical parameter depend on interests and
values, both of which vary from individual to individual and from society to society,
but—morecrucially—interestsandvaluescanneverbecapturedentirelybystatistics,
because these interests and values are key driving forces in changing the social
environment as an essential ingredient of the criterion of normality. “Normality”
is a value judgment as far as it describes ranges of societal tolerance not less than
frequencyranges. Animportant lessontobedrawnfromtheexamples providedabove

752
M. Buzzoni et al.
is not only that statistics cannot produce data that are completely neutral because they
are based on the “nature” of things, but also that every statistic and every medical
classiﬁcation presupposes moral choices that, if they are to be made responsibly,
require a rational debate not only on what the natural data or regularities are, but also
on the values that we want to place at the basis of social (co)existence.
2.3.2
Statistics and Individuals Depend on One Another
However, there is at least one more reason—and perhaps this is even more important
in our epistemological and methodological context—that in one way unites, but in
another distinguishes (again as normative) the use of statistics in the human sciences.
There are no statistics concerning human behaviour (including those concerning
illness or disease) that are not built from and controlled by resorting to, individual
cases, that is, to the interpretation of individual behaviours or actions. To know
whether a statistically signiﬁcant number of patients have reacted positively to a
therapy, one has to interpret not only signs, but also the patient’s own answers to the
clinician’s questions. And this is not only the case when checking the effectiveness
of a particular psychotherapy, but also the effectiveness of a vaccine or of a surgical
operation.6
2.3.3
Is Paralysis of Lower Limbs a Pathology?
A simple thought experiment may serve to illustrate both points. Let us assume a
highly developed technological society where people move, for short as well as long
distances, by transport beams that send an individual’s molecules from one place to
another and reassemble the molecules upon arrival (for this example, cf. Buzzoni,
2003). As for the ﬁrst point—that is, that statistical “normality” is value-laden, it
can be easily deduced from what has been said: in such a society, an individual
with both lower limbs paralyzed—or somebody suffering from any “pathology”
involving a walking impairment—may be considered healthy or “normal” to the
extent that he or she achieves the main objectives assigned to its individual members
by that society; stated otherwise, he/she is healthy from the standpoint of “activity
limitations”. More speciﬁcally, the person might not be disabled, according to the
WHO glossary (Prodinger et al., 2016). As regards the second point—that statistics
depend on considerations of individuals about themselves and other people-suppose
you need to measure that person’s level of independence in daily life (Tesio et al.,
2002, 168–176) or satisfaction with life (Franchignoni et al., 1999). Cumulative
questionnaires are needed (either self-administered or not) like in any measurement
of behaviours, attitudes or perceptions (Tesio, 2003). These measures run the risk
6 The relevance of patients’ perspective is indeed more and more acknowledged in biomedical
research: see the development of “patient reported outcome measures-PROMS” (Crossnohere et al.,
2020).

Holism and Reductionism in the Illness/Disease Debate
753
of being biased by the author’s perspective (e.g., which items are selected for the
questionnaire, and who determines their scores?) yet, they cannot be replaced by, say,
biomechanical or neurophysiological measurements at the lower limbs (see Sect. 5
below for development of this idea). In using this perspective to ascertain whether a
given person with paralysed or otherwise injured lower limbs has to be regarded as
reallyhealthy,onewouldalreadyhaveoversteppedtheboundsofamerelynaturalistic
dimension of health and illness, for one would need to interpret reﬂections given by
human beings about themselves and other people.
2.4
Illness and Disease Are Not Fully Independent
One advantage of a biological deﬁnition of disease is that it can explain why a patient
can be conﬁdent in estimations of their health, despite the fact that pathological
changes are taking place in the body. A tumour can remain asymptomatic or regress
spontaneously without necessarily having any effect on the subjective well-being of
a person. The function of the immune organs is another illustration of the fact that the
concept of health ought to refer to more than the level of subjective well-being. As
Taljedahl (1997) noted against Nordenfelt (1993), when immune organs exert their
capacity to combat infection,
they may give rise to symptoms that are transiently incapacitating, i.e., the expressions of
bad health. Yet, these symptoms of bad health are in a sense also the expressions of good
health. (Taljedahl, 1997: 68)
However, it can be easily shown that the relative ‘objectivity’, or even inde-
pendence, of certain natural processes that occur in us, cannot justify any purely
biological concept of disease. One can only conceive of the possibility of objec-
tive pathologies existing in the nature of things by indirectly connecting them with
a subjective illness, which—in accordance with our past experience—indicates an
objectively detectable disease. In a word, a disease is deﬁned as a disease because
it is acknowledged that sooner or later, in at least some of the affected people, it
will lead to an illness. A skin nevus is not called a disease: although it is when it is
recognised that it can become a skin tumour. A laboratory ﬁnding enables a physi-
cian to diagnose a disease not yet noticed by the patient, because the physician—in
contrast to the patient—knows how to rank that ﬁnding in the context of a typical
medical history. The physician can come to an assessment without having to rely
on symptoms which occur later and are then felt subjectively, only because they
know that, in the past, other individuals with similar, at ﬁrst equally inconspicuous
ﬁndings developed (inter)subjectively detectable symptoms after a certain period
of time: this remains the necessary methodological starting point for an objective
concept of disease. Without a direct or an indirect reference to these symptoms, that
is, by entirely excluding the subjective feelings of illness, no laboratory result would

754
M. Buzzoni et al.
ever be a meaningful (bio)marker of anything that might be called a “disease”.7
Before one can methodologically reconstruct a disease as the biological counterpart
of illness, illness must be felt as such by some person, who, moreover, may have
reached the awareness of being ill only through other people. If these “others” are
scientists, the person’s illness can be framed in a taxonomic system of diseases (let
us encase here also syndromes, i.e., sets of signs and symptoms, into the disease
concept).
In a pathoanatomical dissection one does not see a disease or a diseased organ.
One can just see an anatomical peculiarity, a difference from reference norms, to
which one can attach the sense of a disease exclusively because, consciously or
unconsciously, one relates them to ideas of unwanted suffering and death, which
epistemologically precede the corresponding biological, metrical and behavioural
reality (in this sense, pathology, as a normative concept, precedes physiology, as a
naturalistic concept). But these ideas of suffering and death cannot be formed apart
from the interpretation of the reports and the conduct of other people with whom
one is in personal and social interaction. In this sense, the scientiﬁc-reductionist or
atomistic-biologicalnotionofdiseasedcellsororgansdependsontheholistic-clinical
or holistic-humanistic conception of the illnesses of human persons.
Finally, as far as the functioning of the immune system is recalled, a high fever is
anything but a state of subjective well-being, but the fact remains that even in this case
symptoms may be considered as expressions of good health. With Canguilhem, one
mightsaythat“anomaly”(comingfromaGreekwordmeaning“irregular”,“uneven”,
“rugged”) is not “abnormality”. Physicians are worried about “anergic” patients,
unable to increase their temperature when needed. Fever may be welcome whenever
we know that it may be designed to preserve the patient’s health as subjective well-
being, and the ability to pursue the fundamental goals of their life, including survival.
2.5
Disease Is Not Enough for a Human Science; Nor Is
Illness
So far, we have seen the difﬁculties inherent to the objective biological conception
of malady as disease. At ﬁrst glance, these difﬁculties might seem to point in the
direction of a more normative and socially conditioned concept of health. As we
have already mentioned, many attempts in recent decades to move in the direction
of a holistic-humanistic perspective of malady are based on the concept of an ability
to act in such a way as to enable the attainment of one’s goals. For example, health
can be deﬁned as an equilibrium between personal capacities, social environment,
and a person’s “high-ranking projects in the life-plan” (Pörn, 1984, 1993), or a
person’s “vital goals” (Nordenfelt, 1984; see also Nordenfelt, 1986, 1995, 1997a,
1997b; Engelhardt, 1975 and 1984; Whitbeck 1981a, 1981b). Given that projects
7 On this, see Kumbhare and Tesio (2020); see also Buzzoni (2003). In particular, as far as
“biomarkers” are concerned, see Buchner et al. (1999), and Taylor and Elston (2009).

Holism and Reductionism in the Illness/Disease Debate
755
and goals are predicates of the person as a whole—and not of isolated molecules,
cells or organs—, these theories of health, as already mentioned, are regarded as
“holistic-humanistic”, rivals to “atomistic-biological” ones.
However, on closer inspection, even a holistic-humanistic and culturally oriented
conception of health and malady lends itself to serious objections. Paradoxically, one
could even say that certain aspects of a cultural conception of health and malady,
which privilege it over naturalistic accounts, also constitute a weakness. If one admits
that health and malady only depend on historically changing cultural values, they
seem to lose all scientiﬁc relevance. In other words, if one admits that a patient’s
attitude towards their own disease frequently inﬂuences the success of the therapy
to such an extent that a biological therapy itself becomes ancillary if not useless, the
fundamental pillar of any objective control of the procedures that medicine uses to
reliably treat patients falls. Moreover, this variability is increased by other problems
that have their origin in what distinguishes the human sciences (or even the ‘human-
ities’) from the natural sciences, the “soft” from the “hard” sciences, that is, in the
mediation by human consciousness.
Patients can report symptoms or present with behaviours unsupported by biolog-
ical alterations, e.g., reﬂecting malingering or unconscious somatisations. These
represent a severe challenge, mostly because the wealth of modern instrumental
diagnostics inﬂates the risk of false positives for a known “disease”. In other cases,
the therapy could be prejudiced by the patient’s knowledge of it. The widespread
knowledge of psychoanalytic theory, for example, could be a great obstacle to this
form of therapy, for patients can use it to reinforce their resistance to the unveiling
of their actual unconscious motives.8 Surely, one seeks to obviate this problem by
control groups and double, or even triple blind experiments, where neither physician
nor patient (nor the researcher who evaluates the results) know who gets what. Yet,
no matter what degree of sophistication one’s methods of experimental control attain,
the placebo effect will always interfere to some degree with the effectiveness of a
treatment (on the difﬁculties of a deﬁnition of placebo, see e.g. Howick, 2016; for
technicalities, see Benedetti, 2021). Faith-healing through pilgrimages has long been
recognized by medicine as effecting unexplained recovery from somatic manifesta-
tions of psychological illnesses (Charcot, 1892). On the other side of the same coin,
cases have long been recognized in which illness or even death may follow curses,
an extreme variant of the so-called nocebo effect (Cannon, 1942).
All this is a serious weakness in the holistic-humanistic conception of malady.
No doubt, we need an objective, intersubjectively veriﬁable, socially (and perhaps
legally) recognized concept of health. But given the important and unavoidable point
made by the holistic-cultural perspective about health and malady, on what basis
8 See Legrand (1975). The psychiatric disorders leading to various clinical conditions, sometimes
very severe, sometimes mimicking familiar diseases or impairments, and sometimes rather weird,
have been variously deﬁned since the ﬁrst distinction between malingering and “hysteria” made by
Jean-Martin Charcot in 1890 (Harris 2005). From the Freudian concept of symptoms representing
a “conversion” of unconscious conﬂicts to the contemporary concept of semi-organic, “neuro-
functional” disorders (Demartini et al., 2016), the pendulum never ceased to swing between a
psychological and a neurologic interpretation.

756
M. Buzzoni et al.
can we assert that a person is healthy or unhealthy in some intersubjectively testable
sense?
The opposition of the two views about health and malady seems to end in an
antinomy without any way out. The holistic-humanistic perspective apparently could,
on one hand, show the naturalistic notion of disease to be untenable because it is
unavoidably value-laden; but on the other hand, the demand for culturally changing
decisions, values and norms seems to deprive the notions of health and illness of any
genuinely scientiﬁc value.
2.6
A Recent Attempt to Heal the Old Gap
A recent debate has refreshed the illness-disease antinomy. The debate originated
from a concern about the symptom of central fatigue, i.e., fatigue unrelated to
exercise. This symptom is a common component of many illnesses, among which
is Chronic Fatigue Syndrome (which, embracing the “somatic” perspective, is
also called myalgic encephalomyelitis). On the one hand, discussing this concept,
Sharpe and Greco (2019) insisted on the possibility of an "illness without disease".
This is a concept whose validity is repeatedly admitted in the literature. For example,
Hofmann (2017) notes, “there are no necessary connections” among disease, illness,
and sickness, any of which, though de facto often occurring jointly, may perfectly
well “occur without the others” (Hofmann, 2017: 18).
On the other hand, Wilshire and Ward (2020) claimed that the notion of ‘illness
without disease’ is methodologically problematic and accused Sharpe and Greco of
using the distinction between illness and disease “to identify a problem space that is
not amenable to medical interventions at all, but rather must be addressed through
social and/or psychologically based interventions”. The notion of “illness without
disease”“canleadtounwarrantedcausalassumptions”asitseemstoassumethat“any
experience not directly predicted by a disease model is necessarily of psychosocial
origin” (Wilshire & Ward, 2020: 532; for more details on this debate, see Tesio &
Buzzoni, 2020).
It might be objected that Wilshire and Ward’s criticism of Sharpe and Greco
glosses over several important distinctions. In particular, instead of thinking of illness
and disease “in terms of the hierarchical difference between subjective (or mental)
and objective (or physical) realities,” Sharpe and Greco “propose that we could think
of them in terms of different degrees and forms of abstraction from the totality of what
is real.” (Sharpe & Greco, 2019: 185) However, though one may accept that both
the experience of illness and what is usually called disease are “abstractions”, it is
still necessary to raise the question about the nature of the relationship between such
abstractions as well as between them and the rest of reality: how are such abstractions
connected with one another? And how can their connection be investigated in an
intersubjectively reproducible and testable way?
Precise answers to these questions will be sought in vain in Sharpe and Greco’s
paper. In order to ﬁll this gap they ought to provide a clear view about the causal

Holism and Reductionism in the Illness/Disease Debate
757
relationshipthatexistsbetweenthedifferentresultsofourabstractions,andespecially
between, on the one hand, the experience of “illness”, and on the other, that aspect
of reality which is the organic correlate of what is usually referred to as “disease”
(and it goes without saying that if we do not wish to forsake science for magic and
ﬁction, then this causal relationship should be such that, at least in principle, it can
be made the object of an intersubjectively testable investigation).
On the other hand, however, Wilshire and Ward cannot accommodate one of the
most important claims made by Sharpe and Greco, namely, that what is usually
designated as the subjective, or better, normative-humanistic, dimension of health
is relatively autonomous. Experiences of illness are real as long as they are ‘lived
through’: in this sense, illness cannot be understood adequately only in terms, for
example, of biological mechanisms, even if it is always possible to ﬁnd some biolog-
ical mechanism (at least some neural electric or metabolic activity) that is related to
it and can be the subject of scientiﬁc investigation.
2.7
Healing the Gap by Rethinking Causality
Now, a ﬁrst necessary step to answer this question in a satisfactory way is a more
ﬂexible, context- or perspective-oriented conception of causality. It is an important
step, since it allows a psychological factor to be the cause of another psycholog-
ical or even biological factor, and vice versa, rather than only speaking in terms of
organic causes. To claim that this (bi-directional) interaction is not possible would
be contrary to available evidence. It is a well-known fact that ‘subjective’ states can
inﬂuence biological features, and this inﬂuence can be more or less direct. In the more
direct version, it could take the form of changed biological parameters. For instance,
‘stress’ (admittedly a form of ‘illness’) can cause detectable changes in blood steroid
concentration and immune markers (for a review, see Yaribeygi et al., 2017). In other
cases, the inﬂuence of ‘illnesses without disease’ on the purely biological aspect
of malady can be mediated by the personal, behavioural, and social context; for
instance, depression appears to be more a cause than an effect of adolescent obesity,
a condition associated with a broad series of related diseases.9
It is important to stress that no direction of the causal vector should be privileged
a priori. Instead, it can only be determined following experimental evidence. The
9 See Byrne et al. (2015). From this point of view, O’Leary’s idea that a nonreductive dualism
requires a clear distinction between “psychiatric care” and “medical care” is untenable. It can be
dangerous to provide only psychiatric care to patients in need of medical care (O’Leary 2020), but
also to provide only medical care to patients in need of additional psychiatric care. By “psychiatric”,
here, it is intended any form of “words only”, relational treatment, from psychological counselling
to formal psychoanalytic approaches. O’Leary’s nonreductive dualism, as in the case of Wilshire
and Ward (2020), also seems to lack a contextual and pragmatic conception of causality, i.e., one
which does not limit a priori the directions of the causal vector. If we change the point of view and
the interests of the investigation, it is in principle possible to trace a clinical picture back to causal
links that refer, in different proportions to both biological and cultural reality.

758
M. Buzzoni et al.
experience of illness is a real thing that manifests within, and interacts with, the
context of human existence. On the one hand, we see that there are decisive causal
chains that go from the molecular to the cellular level to processes at the tissue level,
whichinturnarecausallyrelatedtoprocessesattheorganlevel,whichagaininﬂuence
processes at the perceptual, behavioural, psychological and social level. On the other
hand, however, in other circumstances and thanks to other pragmatic interests, we
can see that processes at the biochemical level of cells are causally conditioned by
processes at the tissue or organ level (see e.g., the “Tissue Organization Field Theory”
of carcinogenesis developed by Soto & Sonnenschein, 2004, 2006, 2011), which in
turn may be inﬂuenced by those at the interpersonal and social level.
Identifying the chemical or electrophysiological correlates of a psychiatric
‘disorder’ can be of fundamental therapeutic importance, but the possibility that
words (which modify biological correlates) may be an essential ingredient of a
therapy can never be excluded. The importance of observation and experiment should
not make us forget that to cast aside the use of the spoken word in medicine was
a unilateral, although perhaps historically necessary choice, which Virgil famously
expressed by his deﬁnition of medicine as “the silent art” (muta ars).10
In this sense, the concept of illness encompasses the “pathology” not only of
“psychologically-intangible” entities like feelings, emotions, and perceptions, but
also of any observable behaviour that can be ascribed to a person as a whole. (By
the way, there are no psychological states we can know, if not manifested through
motor behaviour: consider, at a minimum, the blinking eye of dramatic “locked-
in” syndromes). Any form of disability is, actually, a form of illness: it is “lived
through” by the person. A unidirectional bottom-up view of causality may distort
the interpretation of behavioural results associated with biological treatments. For
example, electrostimulation of the spinal cord has been claimed to allow the recovery
of autonomous walking (with the help of rollators or parallel bars) in some chronic
spinal cord injured patients (Angeli et al., 2014). It was objected, however, that
learning a skilful use of the upper limbs might foster the transmission of force to
the lower limbs, thus eliciting proper muscular reﬂexes (Tesio & Scarano, 2021):
learning is a property of the person, not of the spinal cord.
2.8
An Open Challenge: Intersubjective Control
This viewpoint solves the problem of the possibility of causal inﬂuences between
different levels of biological organization and in an important sense returns to the
point of view of common sense. However, as we have just mentioned, this still
10 On this aspect of the history of Western Medicine, see Laín Entralgo (1970: xxi). A word of
caution is in order, however. Care must be taken in avoiding extreme reliance on “word-based”
medical approaches, at the expenses of biological approaches. For instance, the interesting proposal
of “narrative Medicine” (Charon, 2006) should not be embraced uncritically. In any case, it must
be left to experimental science deciding to which ring of the causal chain the available treatments
can be optimally applied.

Holism and Reductionism in the Illness/Disease Debate
759
does not solve the problem of intersubjective controllability which afﬂicts cultural
conceptions of health and malady. There is no doubt that, if diagnosis and assessment
of potential treatments are to be based only on the symptoms explicitly felt by the
patients, or on their overall behaviour, or on the aims that they set themselves, or say
they set themselves, they would be very variable, to the point of escaping generali-
sation and intersubjective controllability. To this should be added that malady is not
somethingwecanestablishcompletelyonourown,asisolatedindividuals,butalways
involves a social element. As noted by Talcott Parsons, illness may legitimately be
regarded as a type of deviant behaviour (see the above comment on disability) which
involves a particular social role: it is a claim upon others to be “taken care of” and
relieves one of blame, shame and of certain social obligations, but it imposes duties
to seek therapy from experts (Parsons, 1951: 283–297). Now, this dependence on the
social recognition of malady by the community is also a factor of relativity, which
must be somehow reconciled with the intersubjectively controllable nature of formal
medical assessment.
Some authors have attempted to resolve this problem with an eclectic position,
conceding something to the opposite perspective. In the next section, we shall brieﬂy
examine one of the most important attempts to develop a hybrid model of disease,
that of Jerome C. Wakeﬁeld’s “harmful dysfunction model”.
3
Wakeﬁeld’s “Harmful Dysfunction Model” of Health
and Disease. A Way Out?
3.1
Against the Nurture-Nature Dichotomy
According to Wakeﬁeld’s model, originally developed for mental disorders but then
generalised to all types of medically treated conditions, two requirements have to be
met in order for something to count as a disorder: (1) an (evolutionarily determined)
objective biological failure or dysfunction of an organ or body part has occurred; and
(2) the dysfunction must cause a particular social harm (Wakeﬁeld, 1992: 3, 2007:
149–156; Wakeﬁeld, 2014; Wakeﬁeld, 2015).11
Even in the case of Wakeﬁeld’s model it can be said that, paradoxically, its greatest
value is also its greatest weakness. It tries to integrate into a single model both the
objective-organic and the interpersonal and social dimensions of malady, but because
of its eclecticism, it is ultimately exposed to the objections that both parties raise one
against the other.
On the one hand, the strength of this model lies in the fact that Wakeﬁeld makes
everyeffortnottohypostatizethedistinctionbetweenthenaturalandculturalspheres:
11 It should be noted that to some extent the main idea of Wakeﬁeld’s model was anticipated by
Robert M. Veatch, who also argued that health should be deﬁned as “an organic condition of the
body judged by the social system of meaning and value to be good.” (Veatch 1973: 78).

760
M. Buzzoni et al.
the contemporary understanding of brain plasticity means there is plenty of room for socially
sculpted neurobiological changes not only since antiquity, but locally. The understanding of
normality and pathology is [...] necessarily an understanding of the dance between evolved
human nature and cultural inﬂuences. Moreover, evolutionary accounts are not limited to
genetic and brain-matter levels. Thoughts and emotions are as biologically real as genes
and neurons and have naturally selected features that operate at the representational level.
(Wakeﬁeld, 2015: 351)
In the endeavour to overcome the nurture-nature (or the genes-environment)
dichotomy, Wakeﬁeld is more and more supported by the growing evidence that
acquired phenotypes (including behaviours and competences) can indeed be trans-
mitted through “epigenetic” mechanisms working much faster than foreseen by the
classic Darwinian paradigm (see on this, e.g., Crews et al., 2014, and Jablonka &
Lamb, 2014).
On the other hand, however, he fails to answer satisfactorily the question of when
a social change leads to a disease in the properly medical sense. His answer is that,
[w]hen culture exploits human variability and malleability—mental or physical—to sculpt
human beings in socially desired ways, [...] the socially desired result is not a disorder if
there is no socially deﬁned harm. (Wakeﬁeld, 2015: 352)
It is clear that this only shifts the problem without solving it: we do not yet have
a criterion to distinguish between health and disease, because we do not yet know
how to distinguish between the changes of human beings that involve and those that
do not involve social harm.
Wakeﬁeld therefore tries to identify such a criterion, which he believes he has
found in overly rapid social changes, which do not allow for the evolutionary
adaptation of human cognitive structures:
the construction process can be pursued so relentlessly that damaging side effects occur
that constitute true disorders. For example, the chronic stress of contemporary competitive
educational and occupational environments that wring as much productivity as possible from
the naturally talented can cause anxiety disorders in the vulnerable. Castel’s characterization
of at least some standard OCD [sc.: obsessive-compulsive disorder] cases would presumably
ﬁt here as genuinely disordered casualties of autonomy training. (Wakeﬁeld, 2015: 352)
As we can see, what causes the disorder is the fact that cultural evolution affecting
biological structures does so much faster than the subsequent biological adaptation
process, which, so to speak, cannot keep pace. But the criterion is clearly unsatis-
factory. How can we distinguish between changes that are too rapid from those that
are not? The only criterion here seems to be the emergence of a social harm, without
which no health problems arise. A vicious circle seems evident.
Moreover, Wakeﬁeld rightly wants us to distinguish between correct and incorrect
assessments of social harm: psychiatry becomes an oppressive social control if one
incorrectly labels socially valued outcomes as natural and then classiﬁes variations
that fail to manifest the socially desirable features as disorders (see the above example
of‘drapetomania’)(Wakeﬁeld,2015:353).Butthis,onreﬂection,showsthatitisonly
a value judgement that ultimately determines what we consider or do not consider a
disease and, secondly, that biological modiﬁcations induced by a different cultural

Holism and Reductionism in the Illness/Disease Debate
761
environment can and sometimes must be practically encouraged or, on the contrary,
rejected and fought against.12
From this point of view, all the difﬁculties mentioned above regarding a normative
and cultural notion of what health and malady are, remain. Wakeﬁeld’s model, in
fact, does not tell us how it is possible to limit the problematic factors that undermine
any attempt to establish in an intersubjectively controllable way whether something
produces an authentic or only apparent “social harm”. The difﬁculty is not gotten rid
of, but merely shelved.
3.2
Opening a Crack in the Vicious Circle: Margolis’s Model
An interesting variant of hybrid models of disease, which has not been discussed
in the literature as much as its theoretical depth would warrant, was developed by
Joseph Margolis. He rightly insisted that distinctions are smaller than they might
seem at ﬁrst glance: since the human body has changed over millennia relatively
little as compared with social institutions, “the functional norms of somatic medicine
are relatively conservative (unlike the norms of law)” because they are intimately
connected with fundamental human abilities (Margolis, 1976: 575).
This model admits that one cannot speak of health or illness/disease unless one
assumes the existence of fundamental objectives of human life with respect to which
the functioning or non-functioning of our organism is a necessary condition. But
in this model the achievement of these fundamental objectives requires, in a fairly
uniform way, in the various societies, the possession of certain skills related to the use
of our body in the environment in which we live, which would explain the relatively
transcultural and ahistorical value of certain pathologies: the use of the hands to
grasp objects and intervene for a thousand different reasons on the environment that
surrounds us is so important that hardly an injury, deterioration or decrease in the
functionality of our hands will not be considered as pathologic, and supported as a
disease in all societies, across all ages.
Now, one can object to this position that the uniformity we are talking about is,
in fact, only prevalently transcultural and ahistorical. Strictly speaking, there is no
natural mechanism (be it physical, biological, chemical, etc.) that is not immersed in
a cultural dimension that changes it in various ways. And it is always with an implicit
or explicit reference to this cultural mediation that we can speak of health and malady
in humans. Take the example of the difﬁculty or incapacity to read (dyslexia), clearly
a neural biological problem, which could be detected and named a “disorder” only
12 Deformities resulting from binding of women’s feet (Chan, 1970) and children emasculation to
obtain castrati singers (Hatzinger et al., 2012) were not considered social harms for many centuries,
before these practices were formally banned. The same holds for female genital mutilation, which
is still widely practiced in various socio-cultural contexts (see: https://www.unwomen.org/en/dig
ital-library/publications/2020/07/a-75-279-sg-report-female-genital-mutilation, accessed Dec 28
2021).

762
M. Buzzoni et al.
in a social context where some literacy is expected from the population: in fact, it
was “discovered” in Germany, only in 1887.13
To sum up, despite some biological constraints, health remains largely relative
to persons, to their interpersonal and societal environment, to a meaningful relation
with it, to custom, and convention. And it is precisely this measure of wide variability
that raises the problem of the intersubjective controllability of our judgements about
health and malady in different societies and in different historical periods. Moreover,
as Engel never tired of pointing out, social values do not merely infuse the appraisal
of biological dysfunctions, but they also infuse the various and individual ways that
one responds to those dysfunctions (Engel, 1960, e.g. pp. 466–467). We seem to have
fallen back again into the antinomy highlighted already in Sect. 2.
As we shall see in the next section, in order to solve this problem satisfactorily—in
addition to a pragmatic and contextual theory of causality, which we cannot dwell on
here (see in particular Buzzoni, 2014 and Tesio & Buzzoni, 2021)—it is necessary
not only to allow that illness, in some cases, can powerfully inﬂuence its organic
basis (and therefore the “disease”), but also to understand how this interaction is
not arbitrary, but responds to regularities which, although different from those of
the natural sciences and proper instead to human sciences, can be ascertained in an
intersubjectively controllable way.
4
Medicine as a Human Science
4.1
Human Sciences: Habits as Law-Like Regularities
Everything we have said so far about the cultural aspect of health and malady seems
to suggest that it is impossible to satisfy one of the basic prerequisites of any empir-
ical and scientiﬁc notion, namely that of being intersubjectively controllable. The
problem now is: How far, and in what form, is it possible to reconcile the unpre-
dictable variability of the way in which the individual patient or particular groups
of patients experience their health and illness with the equally undeniable organic-
objective basis of their lives (and whose importance lies at the basis of the very notion
of “disease” as opposed to illness). It has already been hinted that the answer to this
question lies, at least to some extent, in the answer to another question: In what sense,
and to what extent, is medicine a “human science”? As already mentioned, the term
human should not be taken as a synonym for “humanitarian”, but in the more clas-
sical sense instead, meaning a science that studies the ways in which human beings
(classiﬁed as Homo sapiens sapiens), throughout their history, manifest themselves
in various ways of coping with the natural and social environment.
Now, the answer to the question just raised (and the justiﬁcation of our claim
about the unity and distinction between analytical and holistic perspectives) can only
13 For a history of dyslexia, “both an ongoing psychological diagnosis and a social construct”, see
https://dyslexiahistory.web.ox.ac.uk/brief-history-dyslexia, accessed Dec 28th 2021.

Holism and Reductionism in the Illness/Disease Debate
763
be satisfactorily given if a fundamental characteristic of medicine, which it shares
with other human sciences (such as psychology, sociology and, as a borderline case,
historiography itself) is brought to light. This is not the place to give a comprehensive
outline of the epistemological and methodological status of the human sciences. But
we do want to insist on a point without which the link defended here between unity
and distinction, and between the analytical and holistic perspectives on health and
disease would remain suspended in the void, and speciﬁcally, without philosophical
justiﬁcation (for a more adequate justiﬁcation of the brief hints that follow, see
Buzzoni, 1989, 2010).
The subject matter of the human sciences is the result of a peculiar process of
sedimentation of that which was wanted or done in the past by human beings. Typical
focii includehabitsconcerningactionandthinkingestablishedbyfrequentrepetition,
more or less consciously transmitted to descendants. Human relationships are based
on a more or less unconscious tissue of habits, regarding acting or thinking conditions
both at the individual and the collective level. These habits are quasi-mechanisms
on which institutions, traditions and customs are based, or, to put it another way,
usually we follow these habits quasi-mechanically and unconsciously, for which
reason they are very difﬁcult to avoid. The regularity and predictability of human
habit grounds talk of the “bureaucratic (mega)machine”, the “machinery of justice”,
the “market machinery”, and the like. More precisely, human actions depart mostly
to a negligible extent from these habits, so that one is able to subsume such actions
under general—psychological, sociological, etc.—law-like regularities in order to
explain them.
While, in this respect, the rules concerning human actions are analogous to the
scientiﬁc laws of nature, they can at any time be revoked by becoming aware of
them. This makes it possible for human beings to modify, improve or sometimes even
entirely (or better, almost entirely) suspend or change psychological, sociological,
ethnological, medical, etc., regularities. Psychoanalysis is paradigmatic of this, but
everyday life also repeatedly conﬁrms the possibility of suspending routines as ﬁxed
ways of thinking or doing things. By contrast, you can change a Ptolemaic model of
astronomy in favour of a Copernican one, but no change of attitude can suspend the
relative Sun-Earth motion itself.
In other words, human actions always have two sides. One side consists largely
of unconscious routines and quasi-automatisms governed by law-like regularities or
rules, and this allows a scientiﬁc explanation of human actions; the other side persis-
tently dissolves the routines or quasi-automatisms in new courses of action. The
two sides are not separate, but dialectically connected. Far from being inconsistent
with one another, each of the sides presupposes the other, and each is necessary for
the appropriate interpretation of the other: the possibility in principle of suspending
(relatively) unconscious rules or habits is indeed the other side of a de facto depen-
dence of our will on these rules or habits, without which, on reﬂection, no free action
would be possible.
Now, if we apply these considerations to the above theses regarding the rela-
tionship between the analytical-reductionist and the holistic-humanistic perspective
on health and malady, as well as the relationship between “illness” and “disease”,

764
M. Buzzoni et al.
we are in a position to identify an important, but usually neglected characteristic of
medicine as a human science.
4.2
Why Medicine Can Be a Science
Aswehavesketchedabove,theculturaldimensionofhumanactionsconsiststoavery
great extent in unconscious, law-like habits, and this makes it possible to recognise
intersubjectively testable connections not only between some symptoms and some
objectively ascertainable processes in the ill body, but also in the various, individual
as well as collective ways to respond to illness (as the lived experience of bodily
and mentally painful and/or disabling processes) and to the often, but not always,
diagnosed disease (and thus to the associated statistics and/or organic dysfunctions).
The powerful inﬂuences exerted by the cultural, subjective-interpersonal and social,
dimension on the organic dimension of malady and health are not arbitrary; on the
contrary, they obey laws which, even though different from natural or empirical
laws (because they are made, accepted, modiﬁed, or rejected by human beings),
they are sufﬁciently stable to make possible predictions and explanations similar to
those of the experimental sciences. For example, on the one side, dyslexia would not
be a medical problem in an imaginary future society where information might be
transmitted electronically from brain to brain with no mediation of written words.
But in spite of the fact that perhaps reading will not be a human task in a science
ﬁctional future, dyslexia will likely be considered a medical problem deserving a
rigorous scientiﬁc approach for many generations to come.
From this point of view, if we deﬁne illness as the lived experience of bodily and
mentally unwanted painful and/or disabling processes, medicine must be concerned
with more than “diseases” and “illness” in the most common (for example in
Boorse’s) sense. Medicine must also be explicitly concerned with the more or less
law-like ways in which patients as persons (as well as the members of their families
or wider social environment) respond to illness and disease. In other words, not only
illness as the lived experience of bodily and mental processes, such as respiratory
wheezes, abdominal cramps, painful joints, and stuffed sinuses (see e.g., Kleinman,
1988: 3–4), but also the law-like attitudes of patients about how best to deal with
illness (in its wider sense, including disabilities) and with the associated practical
problems in daily living. To the extent that the illness and disease, as well as their
classiﬁcations, depends upon such attitudes and reciprocal expectations (and upon
conventions, policies, social norms and roles constituted by those attitudes and expec-
tations), they should be studied as part of the genuine subject-matter of medicine as
a human science, with the technical speciﬁcities that this nature requires.

Holism and Reductionism in the Illness/Disease Debate
765
4.3
The Speciﬁcity of a Human Science
The cultural inﬂuences on illnesses and diseases (as well as on their classiﬁcations)
we have stressed in the preceding section do not exclude the possibility of formulating
law-like regularities concerning the object of medicine. However, they impose some
methodological precautions and constraints. As already mentioned, while in one
sense the rules concerning human actions are analogous to the scientiﬁc laws of
nature, in another sense they differ in principle from them, because they can at
any time—in principle entirely, but de facto only to some extent—be suspended by
any individual becoming aware of them (this possibility is conﬁrmed not only by
psychoanalytic and neuroscientiﬁc inquires into tacit knowledge, but also by our
everyday experience).
The methodological counterbalance of this possibility that is typically used in
the humanities is, so to speak, a second-level use of the statistical tool, which is of
interest here only insofar as it depends on reasons other than those for which statis-
tics has been adopted in the natural sciences. In fact, the conventional bio-statistics
aimed at summarizing data and making inferences on the observed measures may be
regarded as a ‘ﬁrst-level’ strategy: necessary, but not sufﬁcient, in the human sciences
(including medicine). The further second-level, here, includes two peculiarities:
(a)
the need for a circular statistical approach moving from individuals to
populations and vice versa, and
(b)
the need for statistical inference on the nature of the variable under study.
The biological effect of an intervention (e.g., a given drug) interacts with
the socially-inﬂuenced, yet highly individual, subject’s psychology. Consistently
enough, drug research necessarily requires experimentation on humans. Of course,
tests on humans are needed because biological speciﬁcities must be taken into
account. Another reason, however, and of more interest here, is that the person’s
variables must be taken into account: they converge in determining effect modi-
ﬁers such as treatment compliance, life habits, proneness to the placebo effect, and
the like. Trial designs, therefore, should include such variables, which are of little
to no use in studies on animals. One may object that individual peculiarities, both
biological and behavioural, can be conditioned out through proper use of population
statistics (e.g., the placebo effect can be neutralized by randomisation to the treatment
and placebo arms of the study), thus making research practice on humans similar
to practice in the natural sciences. However, statistics on data (e.g., means, standard
deviations, etc.) wipe out fundamental information on the reasons why individual
responses did vary: a critical ﬂaw given that as a rule clinicians treat single cases.
For this reason, medicine needs statistical methods to estimate what is the degree of
uncertainty (modelled as error) surrounding single measurements and their changes
in individuals: an uncertainty-error typically larger than that affecting population
means (see Tesio, 2012a). Whereas statistics on forces and temperatures can give
us a glimpse into the nature of the variable, the same does not hold, for instance,
for statistics on “depression”, “quality of life”, “pain”, “balance” and the like: for

766
M. Buzzoni et al.
an investigation into the existence and nature of these requires a “second-level” of
inference.
The necessity for all human sciences (including medicine) to resort to speciﬁc
statistics is not the result of overly complex subject matters. In other words, it is
not due to some unavoidable ignorance of all the relevant factors and the relations
between them (as is usually the case in the natural sciences). Rather, the necessity
results from something intrinsically connected to the nature of the human sciences’
subject matter: one must resort to statistics because one cannot abstract entirely from
personal consciousness, which is a relevant causal factor unknown per deﬁnitionem.
Since the rules we ﬁnd in the human sciences can change or dissolve, these sciences,
including medicine, are under an obligation to inspect constantly the validity of
the rules on which their predictions and explanations are based, both by indirect,
statistical, and direct, clinical-empirical methods. The statistical approach is, as it
were, the best available counterweight to the risk, which always hangs over the
human sciences, of investigating the ‘wrong’ subject-matter, a subject-matter that
could at any time change because it is partially self-made, and therefore escapes
the generalisations so far successfully applied to it. The particular character of the
“laws” of the human sciences in general is thus closely connected to the duty of
these disciplines to test and support their assertions not only directly, with reference
to particular cases, but also indirectly, by means of speciﬁc statistics. It should be
clear that the issue of statistics is of critical relevance to our discourse, so that a
digression is needed.
5
Replicating the Illness/Disease Dichotomy: Statistics
from Biology to Behaviour
It may be useful to recall that nowadays, by “statistics”, two wide domains of human
knowledge are intended. Boldly stated, the ﬁrst includes the algebraic techniques
used to describe, summarize, or predict some measures and their uncertainty (descrip-
tive and inferential statistics, respectively). The second domain includes the logic of
the experimental set-up, fostering reliable inferences about the causal rather than
the merely associative nature of the relationships across variables (“trial design”, in
medical jargon). For instance, computing means and tracing a regression line are
algebraic; adopting a double-blind protocol is an essential component of trial design.
Looking at the algebra, it must be noticed that Claude Bernard, the founder of
contemporary “experimental” medicine (see e.g., Bernard, 1865), did not like infer-
ential statistics (already highly developed at his time). He saw biological processes as
deterministic (after all, they were seen as results of chemical/physical phenomena),
so that the predictions allowed by authentic laws should be free from uncertainty.
He conceived the deviance of observed results from expected ones (paradoxically)
as the effect of imperfections in the experiments and/or the assumed law of nature.

Holism and Reductionism in the Illness/Disease Debate
767
To many contemporary clinicians, algebraic statistics still appear as a sort of compli-
cated cosmetic surgery done to embellish imperfect data, or to over-simplify empir-
ical reality.14 The alarm has been raised that “in medicine today uncertainty is
generally suppressed and ignored, consciously and subconsciously” (Simpkin &
Schwartzstein, 2016). Uncertainty in medicine has been the topic of philosophical
discourse (Djulbegovic et al., 2011), and of proposals for new training regimens for
medical students (Tonelli & Ross Upshur, 2019).
The problem cannot be solved as long as two key points are overlooked.
First, biological statistics, the one (scarcely, indeed) taught to clinicians, is based
on population summaries (e.g., means or medians) whereas clinical practice faces
single and entire, much less predictable, individuals.15
Second, whole-person variables are much less regular (i.e., there are more pecu-
liarities/idiosyncrasies), compared to biological variables, for the reasons expressed
above. To overcome this difﬁculty, in the early twentieth century, psychology married
statisticsandgeneratedabranchnowcalled“psychometrics”,althoughtheword“per-
sonmetrics” might be more appropriate (Tesio, 2003). Psychometrics, in turn, coined
the term “latent variables” (or latent traits) to indicate variables (such as perceptions,
abilities, attitudes) than can be ascribed to a whole person, only. These variables have
an inherent variability-instability, within and between subjects, going beyond the
variability caused by both biological instability and measurement errors, and related
to the “interaction between person and situation” (Steyer et al., 1999). Boldly stated,
“noises” of both biological and relational origin interact in the manifestations of such
variables. Pain, depression, memory, language, continence, balance, voluntary force,
fatigue, all may manifest themselves in potentially inﬁnite circumstances, and with
variable intensity. These properties are much more indirectly observable than body
weight, nerve conduction velocity, or glucose concentration, and inferences must
be done on a very limited set of observations, usually lumped together in cumula-
tive questionnaires. These provide scores that simply report counts of observations
(e.g., how many yes or no answers one gives to questions listed in a questionnaire).
How much of the latent variable is represented by “yes = 1” to different questions
is unknown, so that models are required to infer true linear measures from the so-
called raw scores. Uncertainty is increased by the fact that the very existence of the
14 Statistical verbiage does not help. The word “regression” has a disagreeable ﬂavour, although it
deﬁnes perhaps the most popular procedure. By “regressing” the data you lose dimensions: points
dispersed in a volume can be regressed to a plane; point dispersed in a plane can be regressed to a
line. Means and medians themselves are a form of regression: you lose a line and obtain a point.
The statistical language of uncertainty is no more reassuring: “standard error”, “conﬁdence limits”,
“hypothesis testing”, all apparently point towards unavoidable approximation in attaining scientiﬁc
“truth”.
15 It may look paradoxical that both chemistry, physics and biology on the one side, and epidemi-
ology, on the other side, deal with abstract “mean” entities, be they molecules, cells or citizens.
Individual differences are managed as sources of “variance” with respect to the primary object of
study, using more or less the same statistical principles (see Tesio2019). By contrast, single persons
are the object of clinical practice. Applying to persons the same experimental paradigms valid for
electrons and elections may be highly misleading. Renouncing any statistical control, however,
conﬁnes observations in the limbo of anecdotes.

768
M. Buzzoni et al.
“latent” variables is debatable: there is always the risk that we are cramming into the
questionnaire items that just reﬂect the author’s opinion (if not prejudice), so that
the variable is imagined rather than discovered (items “form” rather than “reﬂect”
the latent variable, according to the psychometric jargon). This ontological problem
thus adds to the problem of quantitative estimation (Borsboom et al., 2003).
The trial design also requires a particular approach. The armamentarium typical
for biological research (e.g., randomization to “true” vs “control/placebo” treat-
ment; double blind treatment/assessment) does not ﬁt the individual, customized,
multifactorial and relational (in short: clinical) approach to illness.
All of the above peculiarities, however, represent technicalities and not onto-
logically irreconcilable differences between a truly quantitative/experimental and
a purely qualitative/descriptive approach. These problems are well known to the
world of the so-called “soft” or “human” sciences (from psychology to education
and marketing), and elegant formal solutions have been proposed that allow inves-
tigators to apply scientiﬁc rigour to both the algebra (e.g., Tesio, 2003) and the
trial design of “statistics” (Shadish, Cook, & Campbell, 2002) in these ﬁelds of
human knowledge. Simply put, medicine is eager to snub the know-how of the “soft
sciences”, thus unnecessarily slowing down the possibility of scientiﬁc discovery in
conditions where illness is just as relevant as (and often more accessible than) disease
(Tesio, 2019). Measuring the effects of treatments in terms of both biological and
behavioural changes, and in terms of number of patients changed rather than “mean”
changes, may lead to more rational decisions (for an example, see Zamboni et al.,
2018) .
The illness standpoint on human suffering is prioritized by “alterna-
tive”/“complementary” forms of medicine. “Alternative” is the more adequate adjec-
tive for those approaches that do not accept the link to contemporary experimental
method (Tesio, 2012b). In so doing, they free the treatment of illness from any formal
obligations with respect to the treatment of disease. Not surprisingly, “alternative”
medicine is rising in popularity, whereas “alternative” biology, physics, chemistry,
if they exist at all, are much less popular.
6
Reconciling Individual Observations and Statistics
6.1
The Circle of Extraclinical and Clinical Knowledge
We can now better formulate the scope and limits of Boorse’s deﬁnition of disease.
On the one hand, there is an element of truth in his insistence on the use of statistics in
the deﬁnition of the concepts of disease and health. As we have said, the dependence
in principle of any general ‘rules’ on the consciousness of the individual patient
represents a factor of uncertainty that cannot be completely eliminated in medicine,
insofar as it is a science of humans. In some cases, cultural and social variability
will be minimal (when highly effective methods and instruments are found to solve

Holism and Reductionism in the Illness/Disease Debate
769
problems related to the functions of our bodies that are fundamental in most cultural
circumstances). In other cases, however, for example in the psychiatric context, it will
usually be very difﬁcult to minimize uncertainty (especially in cases of psychological
features that are easily exposed to the inﬂuence of culture and political power). But
in all cases this uncertainty can be (to varying degrees) limited by applying the
appropriate statistical tools as a methodical counterweight, in order to ascertain that
the conjectured rules are true of at least a signiﬁcant number of individual cases
(‘signiﬁcant’ with respect to our purposes).
But, on the other hand, the converse is also true, and it brings to light the limits of
Boorse’s naturalistic concept of disease. A deﬁnition of disease or health cannot be
based on statistics and/or biology alone because it cannot be entirely separated from
considerationsoftheoverallbehaviour,whetheranalyticorholistic,oftheindividuals
to whom we wish to ascribe a state of health or disease. The main reason is simple.
There is no human statistic that is not based on the interpretation of individual cases.
The statistical test of the efﬁcacy of a biological therapy cannot entirely take place
without data obtained in the clinical setting by means of the clinical method, a vast
domain in itself (Piantadosi, 2017), because one can ascertain only in the clinical
encounter whether the patient’s change occurred or not. For example, paceGrünbaum
(1984), to ascertain whether a single case of mental illness can be classed as a case of
paranoia, one must presuppose a deﬁnition and an operationalization of ‘paranoia’
that is at least implicitly clinical (Buzzoni, 1989). Deﬁning not only a “disease”,
but also a “syndrome” or a “disorder” implies extracting regular associations of
signs and symptoms from many single patients, in which different sets of signs and
symptoms occur. Extraclinical tests can never entirely free themselves from clinical
ones. There are no statistics on human subjects that can leave aside an interpretative
understanding of the single cases on which they must ultimately be grounded. A
pathologist or a physiologist cannot even begin their research without presupposing
the existence and at least the partial reliability of clinical results (a reliability, as we
have pointed out, that is also based on the law-like connections that medicine shares
with the other human sciences).
We come here to a general conclusion: even though there are many ways to reduce
the subjective-cultural variability of a patient’s behaviour and to measure appropri-
ately the quantity of their “latent” traits, one must bear in mind that all of this must
be in the end tested by resorting to single cases again, all of which are mediated and
partially obfuscated by the presence of consciousness. The search for objective rela-
tions clashes with difﬁculties that one can always try to minimize, but never wholly
eliminate. If, in a sense, the reliability of clinical tests presupposes the reliability
of extraclinical tests, in another sense, extraclinical tests presuppose the reliability
of clinical ones. Or, to put it another way, the growing success of population- and
evidence-based medicine (Greenhalgh et al., 2014) is epistemologically and method-
ologically well-grounded, but only if one does not neglect that this approach, in an
important sense, in inherently dependent on clinically-based evidence.

770
M. Buzzoni et al.
6.2
Making Virtuous a Vicious Circle
Does the swinging from individual to statistical population means imply a vicious
circle? The answer is no: not only from a hermeneutic, but also from an operational
point of view, it is easy to acknowledge that there are not only vicious, but also
virtuous circles, in which self-correcting or spiraliform procedures take place, with
qualitatively new results, which each procedure alone could not produce. There is
an obvious but important sense in which a reciprocal presupposing is not vicious. A
circle is not operationally vicious if each of its elements (or actions)—even though
similar in almost all respects—is different from at least one viewpoint. Such a differ-
ence makes it possible for each element to support the other (or others) in obtaining a
novel effect, in a spiraliform progress. Everyday life offers plenty of examples. One
cannot make a playing-card stand on a table in a slanted position, but this happens
when one playing-card leans against another, and vice versa. For playing-cards (or the
relative actions that are to be performed on them) are similar from many viewpoints,
but are different at least with respect to their inclination at a particular time and place.
In this sense, building a house of cards is a good example of procedures in which
an action presupposes another action (and vice versa), and yet each action could not
attain the intended result without the reciprocal one. The same organs (e.g., brain,
muscles, sensory organs, etc.) can be studied from the perspective of their homeo-
static biology within the body or, from the perspective of their capacity to provide the
individual with active interactions with the external world (Tesio, 2020). In a similar
way,eventhoughsimilarinmanyrespects(bothapproachesaimatthemaintenanceor
restoration of health of concrete people, both recognise experimental evidence as the
ultimate criterion for the reliability of their statements, etc.), the analytic-reductionist
perspective (based on biochemical or physical research and statistical analysis) and
the holistic-humanistic perspective (based on clinical methods) are different from
various viewpoints: they operate in different contexts, on different variables, give
different importance to generalized truths and particular events, etc. More precisely,
if on the one hand the analytical-naturalistic perspective on health and malady must
be subordinated (so to speak ethically and ‘teleologically’) to the holistic-humanistic
one, on the other hand the latter must be ﬁlled (so to speak ‘mechanistically’) with
intersubjectively controllable empirical contents.
There is therefore no vicious circle in using clinical results to formulate statistics
or in using laboratory values to correct the subjective-cultural elements that are
involved in the maintenance or restoration of health. As one does not need a hammer
to forge a hammer, so considerations about the illness of the patient and the ways they
respond to it need not be deﬁnitively established in order to reinforce extraclinical
(biochemical and statistical) considerations, and vice versa. They must only claim a
provisional degree of certainty, tentatively assumed to acquire a further, additional
one.16
16 It is of interest that biostatistics is revitalizing the study of single cases as an important source of
knowledge (Gabler et al., 2011), taking up a long tradition in psychometrics (Tesio, 2012a). Both
in biostatistics and psychometrics, knowledge acquired from population studies may be fed back,

Holism and Reductionism in the Illness/Disease Debate
771
6.3
Reconciling Singularities and Regularities
We have tried to show that the variability of individual clinical assessments is not
unlimited. Even the clinical response of the individual patient can in reality never
completely escape (and indeed is usually inﬂuenced by) factors exhibiting the same
kind of regularity that is typical of the laws of the human sciences. The interpersonal-
cultural dimension does not exert an arbitrary or unpredictable inﬂuence on the
organic dimension of health and malady; on the contrary, its inﬂuence obeys regu-
larities which (although different from the natural ones, because they are constantly
modiﬁed by human beings) are sufﬁciently stable to make possible intersubjective
statements about human health and all the concepts that are closely connected to it:
prevention, diagnosis, prognosis, therapy, etc. Only by adding this piece does Wake-
ﬁeld’s position (see above, Sect. 3) become sustainable. It is only by adding this
element that we can understand in what sense the “social harm” in Wakeﬁeld’s model
of “harmful dysfunction” also possesses scientiﬁc and intersubjective value. Without
this element, his position remains close to common sense, but it also remains hope-
lessly eclectic and insufﬁciently well-supported. The same holds for Canguilhem’s
position: if any statement about “the normal and the pathological” is irremediably
value-laden, medicine will never be a science. We contend that it can be, if essen-
tially the same scientiﬁc method is applied to the person, though with the method-
ical corrections (and the proper modesty) made necessary by the different variables
observed (i.e., behavioural-holistic vs biological-analytic).
From this point of view, the problems connected with the possibility of an
intersubjectively controllable deﬁnition of health and malady are, at least in prin-
ciple, solved: they do not necessarily make such a deﬁnition impossible, since it is
possible to exploit regularities in contexts that are more strongly conditioned by the
material-organic base, as well as in those that are more sensitive to cultural inﬂuence.
Exploiting these regularities can guarantee a certain intersubjective controllability.
How far this intersubjective controllability extends cannot be decided a priori. It is
decided by the researcher (including the clinician themself), i.e., the scientist at work,
when they give us reproducible and therefore intersubjectively controllable results
in ﬁelds that until then have not yet been included in scientiﬁc knowledge, precisely
because they lacked this fundamental property.
This makes it possible to limit to a great extent the uncertainty that is natural
to the human sciences, although we must be aware that it can never be completely
eliminated. No matter how sophisticated control methods become—to limit ourselves
to what is perhaps the sharpest example—the placebo effect will always interfere to
some extent with the therapeutic efﬁcacy of a treatment. In the same vein, we cannot
exclude a priori that certain antibiotics may have different effects with respect to
certain social groups (and a fortiori with respect to particular patients) than those
through proper algorithms, into single-case designs. This creates a virtuous circle bridging the gap
between the ‘scientiﬁc’ status of population studies and the merely anecdotal evidence of individual
observations, which are so relevant in clinical practice. The issue has been expanded upon for the
speciﬁc case of physical medicine and rehabilitation medicine in (Tesio, 2019).

772
M. Buzzoni et al.
that have been shown in the populations where they have been used until now:
which is because behavioural and social features are no less important than genetics.
But just the awareness that medicine is a human science in the sense defended
here may lead to concrete improvements for real medical practice, both clinical-
individual and biomedical-statistical: what is called for is some awareness that we
must establish from time to time if and how much the status of human science has
or has not inﬂuenced our categorisations, diagnoses and therapies, and therefore in
which direction we have to look for improvements both of biomedical knowledge
and clinical practice.
7
Conclusion
In the literature of the last decades about the status of medicine, a new awareness
has grown that an adequate notion of medical praxis requires an integrative position,
which combines the analytic-reductionist with the normative-holistic perspectives
on health and illness/disease. We have tried to show that it is possible to take an
important step towards such an integrative view, if the relationship of unity and
distinction between what we usually designate as ‘illness’ and ‘disease’ is correctly
set up.
The demand for such an integrative view is a result not only of ethical consid-
erations (which were not discussed here), but perhaps even more fundamentally for
epistemological and methodological reasons, intimately connected with the status of
medicine as a science of humans. In this connection, the key idea has been that the
variability in the ways in which patients experience and respond to their illnesses—
which is emphasized by the holistic-normative views about health and malady—is
subject to regularities that may be investigated in an intersubjectively testable way.
On the one hand, this variability—which originates in what distinguishes all human
from natural sciences, that is, in the personal human consciousness on which all
law-like relations of human and cultural reality depend in principle—undermines
the scientiﬁcity, i.e., the intersubjective controllability, of medicine. On the other
hand, however, this variability can be methodologically counterbalanced by the fact
that the cultural domain of illness, like the objects of other human sciences, is subject
to regularities that may be investigated in an intersubjectively testable way. Because
these regularities add to, and may interfere with, those that biological research inves-
tigates, medicine cannot ignore its nature as a human science. It must be concerned
not only with “diseases” and “illness” in the most common (for example in Boorse’s)
sense, but also with the ways in which patients as persons (as well as the members of
their families or wider social environment) respond to malady and associated prac-
tical problems in everyday life. Insofar as such attitudes and expectations (as well
as conventions, policies, social norms and roles constituted by those attitudes and
expectations) inﬂuence the criteria of illness (and disease), they must be studied as
part of the genuine subject-matter of medicine as a science.

Holism and Reductionism in the Illness/Disease Debate
773
Although there is a factor of uncertainty that cannot be completely eliminated in
medicine, insofar as it is a science of humans, this uncertainty can be (to varying
degrees) limited by applying appropriate statistical tools as a methodical counter-
weight, in order to ascertain that the conjectured rules are true of at least a signiﬁcant
numberofindividualcases(‘signiﬁcant’withrespecttoourpurposes).Inthisconnec-
tion, it is important to note that a deﬁnition of disease or health cannot be based on
statistics and biology alone because it cannot be entirely separated from consider-
ations of the overall behaviour, whether analytic or holistic, of the individuals to
whom we wish to ascribe a state of health or disease. The main reason is that there is
no human statistic that is not based on the interpretation of individual-clinical cases.
The statistical test of the efﬁcacy of a biological therapy cannot entirely take place
without data obtained in the clinical setting by means of the clinical method, because
one can ascertain only in the clinical encounter whether the patient’s change occurred
or not. Extraclinical tests can never entirely free themselves from clinical ones. Even
though there are many ways to reduce the subjective-cultural variability of a patient’s
behaviours (which are always also interpersonal and social answers to their illness
or disability), and to measure appropriately the quantity of their “latent” traits, one
must bear in mind that all this must be tested, in the end, by resorting to single cases,
where the blurring mediation by consciousness reappears. The search for objective
relations clashes with limits that one can always shift away from, but never wholly
eliminate. It follows that the reliability of clinical tests presupposes the reliability
of extraclinical tests, and extraclinical tests presuppose the reliability of clinical
ones (and vice-versa); or, said otherwise, population- and evidence-based medicine
is epistemologically and methodologically well-grounded only in its synergy with
clinically based evidence.
Funding This work was supported by the Italian Ministry of Education, University and
Research through the PRIN 2017 program “The Manifest Image and the Scientiﬁc Image” prot.
2017ZNWW7F_004 and by the Italian Ministry of Health, “ricerca corrente”, Istituto Auxologico
Italiano-IRCCS, RESET project).
References
Aho, J., & Aho, K. (2008). Body matters. A phenomenology of sickness, disease, and illness.
Rowman & Littleﬁeld, Lanham.
American Psychiatric Association. (2013). DSM-5. Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental
disorders (5th ed.).
Amrhein, V., Greenland, S., & Mcshane, B. (2019). Retire statistical signiﬁcance. Nature, 567,
305–307. https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-019-00857-9.
Ananth, M. (2008). In defense of an evolutionary concept of health: Nature, norms, and human
biology. Ashgate.
Angeli, C. A., Reggie, E. V., Gerasimenko, Y. P., & Harkema, S. J. (2014). Altering spinal cord
excitability enables voluntary movements after chronic complete paralysis in humans. Brain, 137,
1394–1409. https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awu038

774
M. Buzzoni et al.
Benedetti, F. (2021). Placebo effects (3rd ed.). Oxford University Press. https://doi.org/10.1093/
OSO/9780198843177.001.0001.
Bernard, C. (1865). Introduction à l’étude de La Médecine Expérimentale. Baillière, Paris. Engl.
Transl. by H. C. Greene, An introduction to the study of experimental medicine. Schuman, 1949.
Boorse, C. (1977). Health as a theoretical concept. Philosophy of Science, 44, 542–573.
Boorse, C. (2014). A second rebuttal on health. Journal of Medicine and Philosophy, 39, 683–724.
Borsboom, D., Mellenbergh, G. J., & van Heerden, J. (2003). The theoretical status of latent
variables. Psychological Review, 110, 203–219. https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-295X.110.2.203
Bucher, H. C., Guyatt, G. G., Cook, D. J., Holbrook, A., & McAlister, F. A. (1999). Users’ guides to
the medical literature: XIX. Applying clinical trial results A. How to use an article measuring the
effect of an intervention on surrogate end points. Journal of the American Medical Association,
282, 771–778.
Buzzoni, M. (2003). On medicine as a human science. Theoretical Medicine, 24, 79–94.
Buzzoni, M. (2014). The agency theory of causality, anthropomorphism, and simultaneity.
International Studies in the Philosophy of Science, 28, 375–395.
Buzzoni, M. (1989). Operazionismo ed ermeneutica. Saggio sullo statuto epistemologico della
psicoanalisi. Angeli, Milano
Buzzoni, M. (2010). The unconscious as the object of the human sciences. In E. Agazzi & G.
Di Bernardo (Eds.), Relations between natural sciences and human sciences, special issue of
Epistemologia. An Italian Journal for the Philosophy of Sciences (pp. 227–246).
Byrne, M. L., O’Brien-Simpson, N. M., Mitchell, S. A., et al. (2015). Adolescent-onset depression:
Are obesity and inﬂammation developmental mechanisms or outcomes? Child Psychiatry and
Human Development, 46, 839–850. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10578-014-0524-9
Callahan, D. (1973). The WHO deﬁnition of ‘Health’. The Hastings Center Studies, 1(3), 77–87.
(The Concept of Health)
Canguilhem, G. (1972). Le Normale et le pathologique. PUF.
Cannon, W. B. (1942). Voodoo death. American Anthropologist, 44(NS), 169–181
Cartwright, S. A. (1851/2004). Report on the diseases and physical peculiarities of the Negro Race.
In A. Caplan, J. Mccartney, & D. Sisti (Eds.), Health, disease, and illness: Concepts in medicine
(pp. 28–39). Georgetown University Press.
Cassell, E. J. (1976). Illness and disease. The Hastings Center Report, 6(2), 27–37.
Chan, L. M. (1970). Foot binding in Chinese women and its psycho-social implications. Canadian
Pscyhiatric Association, 15, 229–231. https://doi.org/10.1177/070674377001500218.
Charcot, J.-M. (1892). La Foi Qui Guérit. Révue Hebdomadaire, 7, 112–132.
Charon, R. (2006). Narrative medicine. Honoring the stories of illness. Oxford University Press.
Christian, P. (1989). Anthropologische Medizin. Springer.
Cole, T. R., & Carlin, N. (2009). The suffering of physicians. Lancet, 374, 1414–1415. https://doi.
org/10.1016/S0140-6736(09)61851-1
Crews, D., Gillette, R., Miller-Crews, I., Gore, A. C., & Skinner, M. K. (2014). Nature, nurture and
epigenetics. Molecular and Cellular Endocrinology, 398, 42–52. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mce.
2014.07.013
Crossnohere, N. L., Brundage, M., Calvert, M. J., King, M., Reeve, B. B., Thorner, E., Wu, A. W., &
Snyder, C. (2020). International guidance on the selection of patient-reported outcome measures
in clinical trials: A review. Quality of Life Research. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11136-020-02625-z
Demartini, B., D’Agostino, A., & Gambini, O. (2016). From conversion disorder (DSM-IV-TR)
to functional neurological symptom disorder (DSM-5): When a label changes the perspective
for the neurologist, the psychiatrist and the patient. Journal of the Neurological Sciences, 360,
55–56. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jns.2015.11.026
Djulbegovic, B., Hozo, I., & Greenland, S. (2011). Uncertainty in clinical medicine. Philosophy of
Medicine, 16, 259–356. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-444-51787-6.50011-8
Engel, G. L. (1978). The biopsychosocial model and the education of health professionals. Annals
of the New York Academy of Sciences, 310, 169–181.

Holism and Reductionism in the Illness/Disease Debate
775
Engel G. L. (1960). A uniﬁed concept of health and disease. Perspectives in Biology and Medicine,
3, 459–485
Engelhardt, H. T., Jr. (1975). The concepts of health and disease. In H. T. Engelhardt Jr. & S. F.
Spicker (Eds.), Evaluation and explanation in the biomedical sciences (pp. 125–141). Reidel.
Engelhardt, H. T., Jr. (1996). The foundations of bioethics (2nd ed.). Oxford University Press.
Engelhardt, H. T. Jr. (1984). Clinical problems and the concept of disease. In L Nordenfelt & B. L.
B. Ingemar (Eds.), Health, disease, and causal explanation in medicine (pp. 27–41). Reidel.
Fedoryka, K. (1997). Health as a normative concept: Towards a new conceptual framework. The
Journal of Medicine and Philosophy, 22, 143–160.
Franchignoni, F., Tesio, L., Ottonello, M., & Benevolo, E. (1999). Life satisfaction index. American
Journal of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, 78, 509–515.
Fulford, K. W. M. (2001). What is (mental) disease? An open letter to Christopher Boorse. Journal
of Medical Ethics, 27, 80–85.
Gabler, N. B., Duan, N., Vohra, S., & Kravitz, R. L. (2011). N-of-1 Trials in the medical literature:
A systematic review. Medical Care, 49, 761–768. https://doi.org/10.1097/MLR.0b013e318215
d90d
Garson, J. (2016). A critical overview of biological functions. Springer.
Glick, S. M. (1981). Humanistic medicine in a modern age. New England Journal of Medicine, 304,
1036–1038.
Greenhalgh, T., Howick, J., Maskrey, N., Brassey, J., Burch, D., Burton, M., Chang, H., et al. (2014).
Evidence based medicine: A movement in crisis? BMJ, 348, 1–7. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.
g3725
Grmek, M. D. (1983). Les Maladies à l’aube de La Civilisation Occidentale, Payot, Paris, 1983.
Engl. Transl. by M. and L. Mueller, Diseases in the Ancient Greek World. John Hopkins, 1989.
Grünbaum, A. (1984). The foundations of psychoanalysis. University of California Press.
Hahn, P. (2000). Wissenschaft und Wissenschaftlichkeit in der Medizin. In W. Pieringer & F. Ebner
(Eds.), Zur Philosophie der Medizin (pp. 35–53). Springer.
Harris, J. C. (2005). A clinical lesson at the Salpêtrière. Archives of General Psychiatry, 62, 470–472.
https://doi.org/10.1001/archpsyc.62.5.470
Hatzinger, M., Vöge, D., Stastny, M., Moll, F., & Sohn, M. (2012). Castrati singers—All for fame.
The Journal of Sexual Medicine, 9, 2233–2237. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1743-6109.2012.028
44.x
Hofmann, B. (2017). Disease, illness, and sickness. In M. Solomon, J. R. Simon, & H. Kincaid
(Eds.), The Routledge companion to philosophy of medicine (pp. 15–25).
Howick, J. (2016). The relativity of ‘Placebos’: Defending a modiﬁed version of Grünbaum’s
deﬁnition. Synthese, 194, 1363–1396.
Jablonka, E., & Lamb, M. J. (2014). Evolution in four dimensions. Revised Edition. Genetic,
epigenetic, behavioral, and symbolic variation in the history of life. MIT Press.
Jaspers, K. (1919). Psychologie der Weltanschauungen. Springer.
Jaspers K. 1958. Der Arzt im technischen Zeitalter. Klinische Wochenschrift. 36: 1037–1043. Engl.
Transl. by Arthur A. Grugan, The physician in the technological age. Theoretical Medicine 10,
251–267.
Kingma, E. (2014). Naturalism about health and disease: Adding nuance for progress. Journal of
Medicine and Philosophy, 39, 590–608.
Kleinman, A. (1988). Suffering, healing, and the human condition. Basic Books.
Kumbhare, D., & Tesio, L. (2020). A theoretical framework to improve the construct for chronic pain
disorders using ﬁbromyalgia as an example. Therapeutic Advances in Muskuloskeletal Diseases,
12, 1–9. https://doi.org/10.1177/1759720X20966490
Laín Entralgo, P. (1970). The Therapy of the word in classical antiquity. Ed. and transl. by L. J.
Rather & J. M. Sharp. Yale University Press.
Larkin, M., Eatough, V., & Osborn, M. (2011). Interpretative phenomenological analysis and
embodied, active, situated cognition. Theory &amp; Psychology, 21, 318–337.
Legrand, M. (1975). Hypothèses pour une histoire de la psychanalyse. Dialectica, 29, 189–207.

776
M. Buzzoni et al.
Maiani, G., & Sanavio, E. (1985). Semantics of pain in Italy: The Italian version of the McGill Pain
Questionnaire. Pain, 22, 399–405. https://doi.org/10.1016/0304-3959(85)90045-4
Marcum, J. A. (2008). An introductory philosophy of medicine. Humanizing Modern Medicine.
Margolis, J. (1976). The concept of disease. Journal of Medicine and Philosophy 1, 238–255.
Repr. In A. L. Caplan, H. Tristram Engelhardt, Jr. & J. J. McCartney (Eds.), Concepts of health
and disease. Interdisciplinary perspectives (pp. 561–577). Addison-Wesley, 1981 (quotations are
from this edition).
Mayo, D. G. (2018). Statistical inference as severe testing. Cambridge University Press.
Nordenfelt, L. (1997a). Holism reconsidered: a reply to Täljedahl]. Scandinavian Journal of Social
Medicine, 25, 243–245.
Nordenfelt, L. (1997b). On holism and conceptual structures. Scandinavian Journal of Social
Medicine, 25, 247–248.
Nordenfelt, L. (2013). Standard circumstances and vital goals: Comments on Venkata-puram’s
critique. Bioethics, 27, 280–284.
Nordenfelt, L. (1984). Comments on Pörn’s ‘an equilibrium model of health’. In L. Nordenfelt & B.
I. B Lindhahl (Eds.), Health, disease, and causal explanations in medicine (pp. 11–13). Reidel.
Nordenfelt, L. (1986). Health and disease: Two philosophical perspectives. Journal of Epidemiology
and Community Health (1979–), 40, 281–284
Nordenfelt, L. (1995). On the nature of health. An action-theoretic approach (Second revised
edition) Kluwer.
Parsons, T. (1975). The sick role and the role of the physician reconsidered. Milbank Memorial
Fund Quarterly, 53, 257–278.
Parsons, T. (1951). The social system. Collier-Macmillan, London (quotations are from the 1964
edition).
Piantadosi, S. (2017). Clinical trials. A methodologic perspective (3rd ed.) Hoboken, Wiley & Sons
Pieringer, W., & Fazekas, Ch. (2000). Grundzüge einer theoretischen Pathologie. In W. Pieringer &
F. Ebner (Eds.), Zur Philosophie der Medizin (pp. 89–111). Springer.
Pörn, I. (1984). An Equilibrium Model of Health. In L. Nordenfelt & B. I. B. Lindahl (Eds.), Health,
disease, and causal explanations in medicine (pp. 3–9). Springer.
Pörn, I. (1993). Health and adaptedness. Theoretical Medicine, 14, 295–303.
Prodinger, B., Cieza, A., Oberhauser, C., Bickenbach, J., Üstün, T. B., Chatterji, S., & Stucki, G.
(2016). Toward the international classiﬁcation of functioning, disability and health (ICF) reha-
bilitation set: A minimal generic set of domains for rehabilitation as a health strategy. Archives of
Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, 97, 875–884. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apmr.2015.12.030
Reznek, L. (1987). The nature of disease. Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Sadegh-Zadeh, K. (2012). Handbook of analytic philosophy of medicine. Springer.
Saklayen, M. G., & Deshpande, N. W. (2016). Timeline of history of hypertension treatment.
Frontiers in Cardiovascular Medicine, 3, 3. https://doi.org/10.3389/fcvm.2016.00003
Schaefer, H. (1976). Der Krankheitsbegriff. In M. Blohmke, C. von Ferber, K. P. Kisker, & H.
Schaefer (Eds.), Sozialmedizin in der Praxis (pp. 15–31). Enke.
Shadish, W. R., Cook, T. D., & Campbell, D. T. (2002). Experimental and Quasi-experimental
designs for generalized casual inference. Ed. by Houghton Mifﬂin Company. https://doi.org/10.
1198/jasa.2005.s22.
Sharpe, M., & Greco, G. (2019). Chronic fatigue syndrome and an illness-focused approach to care:
Controversy, morality and paradox. Medical Humanities, 45, 183–187.
Simon, J. (2007). Beyond naturalism and normativism: Reconceiving the ‘disease’ debate.
Philosophical Papers, 36, 343–370.
Simpkin, A. L., & Schwartzstein, R. M. (2016). Tolerating uncertainty—The next medical revo-
lution? New England Journal of Medicine, 375, 1713–1715. https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMp1
606402
Soto, A. M., & Sonnenschein, C. (2004). The somatic mutation theory of cancer: Growing problems
with the paradigm? BioEssays, 26, 1097–1110.

Holism and Reductionism in the Illness/Disease Debate
777
Soto, A. M., & Sonnenschein, C. (2006). Emergentism by default: A view from the bench. Synthese,
151, 361–376.
Soto, A. M., & Sonnenschein, C. (2011). A testable replacement for the somatic mutation theory.
BioEssays, 33, 332–340.
Steyer, R., Schmitt, M., & Michael, E. (1999). Latent state-trait theory and re-search in personality
and individual differences. European Journal of Personality, 13, 389–408. https://doi.org/10.
1002/(sici)1099-0984(199909/10)13:5%3c389::aid-per361%3e3.0.co;2-a
Svenaeus, F. (2000). The Hermeneutics of medicine and the phenomenology of health: Steps towards
a philosophy of medical practice. Kluwer.
Svenaeus, F. (2014). The phenomenology of suffering in medicine and bioethics. Theoretical
Medicine and Bioethics, 35, 407–420.
Taljedahl, I. B. (1997). Weak and strong holism. Scandinavian Journal of Social Medicine, 25,
67–69.
Taylor, R. S., & Elston, J. (2009). The use of surrogate outcomes in model-based cost-effectiveness
analyses: A survey of UK health technology assessment reports. Health Technology Assessment,
13(8).
Tesio, L. (2003). Measuring behaviours and perceptions: Rasch analysis as a tool for rehabilitation
research. Journal of Rehabilitation Medicine, 35, 105–115.
Tesio, L. (2012a). Outcome measurement in behavioural sciences: A view on how to shift attention
from means to individuals and why. International Journal of Rehabilitation Research, 35, 1–12.
https://doi.org/10.1097/MRR.0b013e32834fbe89.
Tesio, L. (2012b). Alternative medicines: Yes; alternatives to medicines. American Journal of Phys-
ical Medicine and Rehabilitation, , 92, 542–545. https://doi.org/10.1097/PHM.0b013e318282
c937.
Tesio, L. (2019). 6.3B scientiﬁc background of physical and rehabilitation medicine: Speciﬁcity
of a clinical science. The Journal of the International Society of Physical and Rehabilitation
Medicine, 2, S113–S120. https://doi.org/10.4103/jisprm.jisprm_27_19
Tesio, L., & Buzzoni, M. (2021). Medical Humanities, 47(4), 507–512 https://doi.org/10.1136/med
hum-2020-011873
Tesio, L., Granger, C. V., & Fiedler, R. C. (1997). A unidimensional pain/disability measure for
low-back pain syndrome. Pain, 69, 269–278. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0304-3959(96)03268-X
Tesio, L., Granger, C. V., Perucca, L., Franchignoni, F. P., Battaglia, M. A., & Russell, C. F. (2002).
The FIM™instrument in the United States and Italy: A comparative study. American Journal of
Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, 81, 168–176.
Tesio, L., & Scarano, S. (2021). Ground Walking in Chronic Complete Spinal Cord Injury: Does
Epidural Stimulation Allow “Awakening” of Corticospinal Circuits? A Wide-Ranging Epistemic
Criticism. American Journal of Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation. 100(4), e43–e47. https://
doi.org/10.1097/PHM.0000000000001520.
Tesio, L. (2020). Physical and rehabilitation medicine targets relational organs. International
Journal of Rehabilitation Research, 43(3),193–194 https://doi.org/10.1097/mrr.000000000000
0404.
Tonelli, M. R., & Ross Upshur, R. E. (2019). A philosophical approach to addressing uncertainty in
medical education. Academic Medicine, 94, 507–511. https://doi.org/10.1097/ACM.000000000
0002512
Toombs, S. K. (1992). The meaning of illness a phenomenological account of the different
perspectives of physician and patient. Kluwer.
Toulmin, S. (1976). On the nature of physician’s understanding. The Journal of Medicine and
Philosophy, 1, 32–50.
Twaddle, A. (1994b). Disease, illness, sickness and health: A response to Nordenfelt. In: A.
Twaddle & L. Nordenfelt (Eds.), Disease, illness and sickness: Three central concepts in the
theory of health (pp. 37–53). Linkoping University Press

778
M. Buzzoni et al.
Twaddle, A. (1994a). Disease, illness and sickness revisited. In: Twaddle, A. & Nordenfelt, L.
(Eds.), Disease, illness and sickness: Three central concepts in the theory of health (pp. 1–18).
Linkoping University Press.
Twaddle, A. (1968). Inﬂuence and illness: Deﬁnitions and deﬁners of illness behavior among older
males in Providence, Rhode Island. Ph.D. dissertation, Brown University, Providence, RI.
Veatch R.M. 1973. The Medical Model: Its Nature & Problems. The Hastings Center Studies, 1(3)
(The concept of health): 59–76. Repr. In A. L. Caplan, H. T. Engelhardt, Jr. J. J. McCartney
(Eds.), Concepts of health and disease (pp. 523–544). Addison-Wesley.
Wakeﬁeld, J. C. (1992). The concept of mental disorder: On the boundary between Biological Facts
and Social Values. American Psychologist, 47, 373–388.
Wakeﬁeld, J. C. (2007). The concept of mental disorder: Diagnostic implications of the harmful
dysfunction analysis. World Psychiatry, 6, 149–156.
Wakeﬁeld, J. C. (2014). The biostatistical theory versus the harmful dysfunction analysis, part 1: Is
part-dysfunction a sufﬁcient condition for medical disorder? Journal of Medicine and Philosophy,
39, 648–682.
Wakeﬁeld, J. C. (2015). Social construction, biological design, and mental disorder. Philosophy,
Psychiatry &amp; Psychology, 21, 349–355.
Whitbeck, C. (1981c). What is diagnosis? Some critical reﬂections. Metamedicine, 2, 319–329
Whitbeck, C. (1981b). On the aims of medicine: Comments on ‘philosophy of medicine as the
source for medical ethics. Metamedicine, 2, 35–41
Whitbeck, C. (1981a). A theory of health. In A. L. Caplan, H. T. Engelhardt, Jr., & J. J. McCartney
(eds.), Concepts of health and disease (pp. 611–626). Addison-Wesley
Wieland, W. (1995). Philosophische Aspekte des Krankheitsbegriffs. In V. Becker & H. Schipperges
(Eds.), Krankheitsbegriff Krankheitsforschung, Krankheitswesen (pp. 59–76). Springer.
Wieland, W. (2002). The character and mission of the practical sciences, as exempliﬁed by medicine.
Poiesis &amp; Praxis, 1, 123–134.
Williams, N. E. (2007). The factory model of disease. The Monist, 90, 555–584.
Willis, E. (1989). Complementary healers. In G. M. Lupton & J. M. Najman (Eds.), Sociology of
health and illness: Australian Readings (pp. 259–279). MacMillan.
Wilshire, C., & Ward, T. (2020). Conceptualising illness and disease: Reﬂections on Sharpe and
Greco. Medical Humanities, 46, 532–536.
World Health Organisation. (2001). Overview of ICF components. International Classiﬁcation of
Functioning, Disability and Health (ICF). https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0033-1338283.
Wyss, D. (1986). Erkranktes Leben - Kranker Leib. Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht.
Yaribeygi, H., Panahi, Y., Sahraei, H., Johnston, T. P., & Sahebkar, A. (2017). The impact of stress
on body function: A review. EXCLI Journal, 16, 1057–1072.
Zamboni, P., Tesio, L., Galimberti, S., Massacesi, L., Salvi, F., D’Alessandro, R., Cenni, P. P.,
et al. (2018). Efﬁcacy and safety of extracranial vein angioplasty in multiple sclerosis. JAMA
Neurology, 75(1), 35–43. https://doi.org/10.1001/jamaneurol.2017.3825
Zaner, R. M. (1981). The context of the self. Ohio University Press.

About Context, Fiction, and
Schizophrenia
Manuel Rebuschi
1
Introduction
The present paper explores the hypothesis that conversation context management
for persons with schizophrenia not only represents a general challenge but could
potentially serve as a basis for deepening our understanding of the pathology itself.1
It builds on a joint interdisciplinary study of pathological conversations between
schizophrenic patients and psychologists (Amblard et al., 2011; Musiol & Rebuschi,
2007, 2011; Rebuschi et al., 2013, 2014). Research for this study relied on empirical
data and several stages of analyses. In a ﬁrst stage, written transcriptions of recorded
conversations were analyzed to identify relevant discontinuities or inconsistencies.
These selected excerpts were then formally categorized using the semantic and prag-
matic framework of the Segmented Discourse Representation Theory (SDRT) (Asher
& Lascarides, 2003).
Linguistic analysis based on SDRT relies on a narrow notion of context which is
a set of accessible possibilities to allow for the continued interpretation of a conver-
sation. Other notions of contexts include general background, presuppositions and
attitudes of the interlocutors, or even larger sets of features of the material and social
environments (Kleiber, 2009). Individuals with schizophrenia, however, sometimes
exhibit a tendency to use the narrowest level of context in a deviant manner. The
challenge, therefore, is exploring whether this dysfunction can be generalized to
other levels or aspects of conversation contexts to account for general features of
the schizophrenic mind and reasoning. In this work, I propose approaching this spe-
ciﬁc issue by transposing certain insights from a philosophy of language approach
to ﬁction.
1The paper is an updated and extended version of Rebuschi (2017), except for Sect. 2 which has
been reduced.
M. Rebuschi (B)
AHP-PReST (UMR 7117), University of Lorraine, Nancy, France
e-mail: manuel.rebuschi@univ-lorraine.fr
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
S. Wuppuluri and I. Stewart (eds.), From Electrons to Elephants and Elections,
The Frontiers Collection, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-92192-7_40
779

780
M. Rebuschi
The paper is structured in three parts. In Sect. 2, I present the main results of the
interdisciplinary study mentioned above on pathological conversations. In Sect. 3, I
propose an informal hierarchy comprised of three levels of contexts that can be used
for general conversation analysis. In Sect. 4, I describe the fourth level, pragmatic
context. Applied in parallel with semantics of ﬁctional discourse and its use of con-
texts, this new and ﬁnal level may shed new light on our current understanding of
schizophrenia.
2
Breaks in Pathological Conversations
Conversations with people diagnosed as schizophrenic can sometimes seem contra-
dictory.2 In our linguistic analyses we propose to take into account two viewpoints
by building two representations of the same conversation, one for each interlocutor
(Musiol & Rebuschi, 2007). The next issue is then to locate the apparent inconsis-
tencies of the schizophrenic speaker. What consistently emerges from conversations
with schizophrenic people is the apparent occurrence of contradictions, which man-
ifest in frequent conversational breaks or discontinuities. In some cases, these breaks
occur at times when the schizophrenic person gives the appearance of accepting (and
generating) contradictory judgments. How can we account for this?
2.1
Locating Failures
Locating conversational breaks depends on perspective. From the ordinary speaker’s
point of view, failures are spontaneously placed in semantics and seen as mere contra-
dictions in the semantic content of their utterances. However, postulating logicality
for schizophrenics leads us to take into account their own viewpoints on conversation,
where failures must be grounded elsewhere.
In line with other theorists, Sass (1994) denies that the reality-testing deﬁcit,
usually included among the symptoms of schizophrenia, adequately characterizes the
thinking of schizophrenic subjects. The reality-testing deﬁcit can act as an obstacle
to reality that would result in the production of false and contradictory beliefs. Sass
disputes this notion since it brings the deﬁcit to the content of mental states, whereas
we should consider that the defect involves the states themselves. To put it in other
words, what is at stake is the mode of presentation of the content rather than the
content itself. According to Sass, where we see beliefs, the schizophrenic entertains
states of a type far less committed vis-à-vis reality. For Campbell (2001), these
are framework propositions, a concept which can be approached through Searle’s
background capacities (Henriksen, 2013; Searle, 1992).
2 This section is taken from a joint paper with Rebuschi et al. (2014). Those interested by formal
or empirical details should refer to this article.

About Context, Fiction, and Schizophrenia
781
According to Sass, the mental attitude of schizophrenics is closed to that under-
lying philosophical solipsism as per Wittgenstein. Let us call schizo-beliefs such
belief-like attitudes of schizophrenics. The idea is that, far from objectifying the
contents of his or her schizo-beliefs, the subject would tend to subjectivize them,
that is to say, deny them any genuine status. This is consistent with widespread ques-
tioning of perceptions implied by the radical skepticism of solipsism. The delusional
thoughts and states resulting from perceptions are treated in the same fashion, as
schizo-beliefs rather than beliefs.
How does playing on the container (the type of mental state) allow us to remove
contradictions from the content? This is difﬁcult to describe given that schizo-beliefs
are characteristic of schizophrenic thinking. They belong to a type of mental state
that non-schizophrenics do not have, which explains the difﬁculty in understanding
(e.g. through empathy) schizophrenic subjects.
Pragmatic inconsistencies. The strategy we develop for the analysis of conversa-
tions is not based on a new classiﬁcation of mental states.3 However, we agree with
Sass that the problem of schizophrenic thinking, as expressed in conversation, is not
a problem of inconsistency of content. We postulate that schizophrenic speakers con-
form perfectly to classical logic. But we place the deviance of rationality in the rules
of language use, i.e. in language conventions of rhetorical and pragmatic types. The
way contents are structured (for a particular type of mental state in Sass’s approach
to delusion, by such pragmatic relations in the analysis of pathological conversa-
tions we develop) is an essential component of rationality. In short, rationality is not
reducible to logicality.
Our empirical analyses focus on transcripts of one-on-one conversations between
schizophrenic individuals (extraordinary subjects) and a psychologist (ordinary sub-
ject).Theseconversationsleadtobreakswhichareperceivedbytheordinarysubjects,
but not necessarily by the schizophrenic interlocutor causing them. The analysis
involves constructing representations of conversations based on the formalism of
SDRT. These representations include two levels: semantic representation (i.e. the
content of the conversation), and pragmatic representation (i.e. a tree modeling the
hierarchical structure of the speech acts that constitute the conversation).
To analyze pathological conversations, we propose the systematic construction
of two simultaneous conversational representations, one for each interlocutor. On
the schizophrenic’s side, according to the principle of charity, there are no semantic
contradictions. If there are failures, they occur at the pragmatic level, via violation of
SDRT tree construction rules. The situation is different relative to the other side. In
the conversations studied, the ordinary speaker is a psychologist asked to continue the
interview. She does so in such a way as to repair the conversational structure after a
break that would normally cause the interruption of a conversation. We then assume a
corresponding postulate according to which the construction of a representation must
respect pragmatic constraints. This option causes the appearance of inconsistencies
at the semantic level.
3 However we will come back to Sass’s idea in Sect. 4.

782
M. Rebuschi
The duality of conversational representations reﬂects the duality of views of the
conversation: the schizophrenic subject seems to contradict ordinary subjects, so the
conversation works, but the representation of the co-constructed world is inconsis-
tent (in third-person terms). Conversely, because the schizophrenic person’s conver-
sational dysfunction is pragmatic in nature, their representation of the world built
through the conversation does not suffer from this defect (ﬁrst-person point of view).
2.2
Formalizing Empirical Data
SDRT combines two levels of analysis in order to account for the interpretive process
at work in conversations: semantic content and conversational pragmatics. The ﬁrst
is analyzed via Segmented Discourse Representation Structures (SDRSs) inspired
by the DRSs of Discourse Representation Theory (DRT), which is a syntactic con-
struction updated by conversational ﬂow (Kamp & Reyle, 1993). Conversation also
implies pragmatic relations between speech acts, the complexity of which gives rise
to a hierarchical structure ﬁrst described in linguistics in the 1980s (Roulet et al.,
1985). We formalize this structure with the rhetorical relations in SDRT.
The rhetorical structures of SDRT link the actions of speakers and are represented
as hierarchical trees with vertical, horizontal and diagonal relations depending on the
type under consideration. The tree structure (hierarchical ordering) encodes proper-
ties of the discourse and can be used to resolve semantic effects (e.g. prediction of
attachment sites or resolution of anaphora). A discourse relation is viewed as a binary
relation between speech acts. A narration is thus typically a horizontal relationship
(same hierarchical level), as well as the answer to a question, while an elaboration is a
vertical relationship (subordinated to what it elaborates on) and a question an oblique
relationship (vertical, and thus subordinated, but also horizontal because requiring
an answer).
The tree is updated throughout the discourse. Each subsequent intervention by
one of the interlocutors is supposed to be related to the conversational representation
already built. The structure offers general constraints affecting the attachment sites.
The main constraint is the so-called right-frontier constraint, forcing the connection
to the nodes located on the right side of the tree.
In order to formalize pathological conversations, we made two conjectures:
1. Schizophrenics are logically consistent; therefore, conversational breaks occur
in the construction process of the pragmatic structure of conversations (i.e., on
the rhetorical relationships between SDRSs); and
2. Underspeciﬁcation (ambiguity) plays a central role in these failures, which could
be summarized by the slogan: A choice is never deﬁnitive!
The ﬁrst conjecture is nothing but the implementation of the principle of char-
ity. The second conjecture, which is primarily based on empirical observation, is a
heuristic for the location of remedial strategies in action by the ordinary speaker.
When there is the appearance of discontinuity, the speaker uses the underspeciﬁed

About Context, Fiction, and Schizophrenia
783
relations in order to maintain the pragmatic consistency of the dialogue. In other
words, the ﬂexibility of underspeciﬁed relations enables one to build a conversa-
tional representation under any circumstance.
The formalization of conversations is reduced to the elements relevant to our
analysis, which means that we abandon anything that does not seem to play a role
in explaining the breaks. The representation of semantic content is thus stripped
to a minimum, namely to the conversational topic. Each conversational sequence is
indeed built around a theme or Question Under Discussion (QUD), which is the main
contextual element relevant to disambiguating the underspeciﬁed terms.4 In ordinary
conversations, the conversational theme usually changes after a conventional signal
(e.g., “Well, but...” or “Moreover...”), or another form of closure of the current
conversational sequence. Maintaining the ongoing QUD enables the continuation of
a tree, while a QUD shift implies a rise through the tree to relate to a dominant node
which corresponds to a sequence preceding the exchange.
In order to analyze pathological conversations, our formal framework provides
the simultaneous construction of two representations, one for each speaker. For the
schizophrenic person, the postulate of logicality means that the representation is
devoid of contradictions at the semantic level. If there are breakdowns, they operate
at the pragmatic level, with a departure from the rules for constructing the SDRT tree.
For the ordinary speaker, we assume that the construction of the SDRT tree complies
with the usual pragmatic rules. This option causes the appearance of inconsistencies
on the semantic side. According to the “ordinary” subject, the schizophrenic speaker
apparently contradicts the dialogical behavior so that the conversation works, but
the representation of the co-constructed world is inconsistent. Conversely, when we
assume dysfunction in a schizophrenic’s management of pragmatic relations, the
representation of the world built by the conversation does not suffer from this defect.
Analyses of excerpts led us to highlight two transgressions of the standard SDRT
rules: breaks of the right frontier and rises through the structure without any accept-
able closing (inconsistency of representation). For the second phenomenon, it is
indeed common in corpora to identify items that are used both to close a part of the
exchange and to open a new one. But the schizophrenic sometimes does not respect
this dual effect and creates an incomplete representation that is not interpretable in
a usual way.
Bothkindsoftransgressionscorrespondtoaproblemofmanagementofthediscur-
sive context, which in the SDRT framework is constituted by the sites of attachment.
Schizophrenic individuals patently shift the context where ordinary people would
not, or where the latter would not do so without warning their interlocutor. This is
basically a pragmatic inconsistency for it plays at the level of the whole structure
of speech acts. Of course, for an interlocutor who sticks to the standard pragmatic
rules, the schizophrenic way of conversing appears as semantically inconsistent.
4 The fact that many ruptures take place around underspeciﬁed expressions reinforces our choice
to represent the thematic element in the formalization.

784
M. Rebuschi
3
Three Levels of Context
As mentioned in the previous section, empirical data collected from pathological
conversations with schizophrenic people most often involve a play on ambiguities.
Let us give a few examples5:
• the polysemy of “dead”, alternating between literal and symbolic meanings;
• the polysemy of “lost”, alternating between “x is lost” (“I’m lost”) and “x lost y”
(“I lost my friends”);
• indexicals like “here” (underspeciﬁcation between “here in the room” and “here
in hospital”);
• over-ambiguisation, with a play on syntax and neologism (“provocation” that
became “pro-by-vocation”).
This puts underspeciﬁcation at the core of such pathological conversations. It appears
that according to schizophrenic people, an interpretative choice is never deﬁnitive.
There is always the possibility that it will occur again, without warning, whereas for
an ordinary speaker it would usually be considered conclusive. Since underspeci-
ﬁcation resolution depends on contexts at a general level, we can hypothesize that
pathological conversations expose a general problem of context management relative
to interaction. Of course, this idea is not new and can be related to many analyses
according to which schizophrenia is denoted by deﬁcits in context processing (see
e.g. Beaune, 2005; Cohen et al., 1999; Green et al., 2005; Phillips & Silverstein,
2003).
As is recalled by García-Carpintero (2015), there are two major notions of context
in contemporary semantics. The ﬁrst notion is due to Kaplan (1989) who deﬁnes
contexts as sets of parameters such as agent, time, location, possible world, etc. This
is a relatively narrow notion, and well-suited to provide semantic values for indexicals
like “I”, “now”, “here”, “actually”, etc. Predelli (2005) is reluctant to qualify such sets
as context and prefers talking about index. The second notion comes from Stalnaker
(1978). Here context is viewed as “common ground” for conversation. Such a context
corresponds to the common knowledge and presuppositions of the participants in
communication, and it is construed as a set of propositions.
My proposal will roughly draw on the second notion of context. However, I will
not consider context as an indeﬁnite whole and I will not exclusively stay conﬁned
to Stalnaker’s propositional account. I will introduce three kinds or levels of context,
each of which are likely to play a role in resolving underspeciﬁcation:
1. Discursive context (narrow)
2. Presuppositional context (intermediate)
3. Material and social context (large).
5 For a detailed analysis of these examples, see Amblard et al. (2015). An overview of unusual
language impairments displayed by patients with schizophrenia is presented in Convington et al.
(2005).

About Context, Fiction, and Schizophrenia
785
This hierarchy of contexts6 should be considered as a rough guide to make useful
distinctions about what arises in discourse and conversation rather than a clear-cut
theoretical proposal. As I will argue, a conversational break or an inconsistency may
occur as soon as the context is not fully shared between interlocutors. Schizophrenia
would then represent a speciﬁc case of this general scheme. In Sect. 4, I will introduce
a fourth and ﬁnal level which will play a speciﬁc role in my proposal.
3.1
Discursive Context (Narrow)
The ﬁrst level under consideration is the most narrow type of context and is referred
to as discursive context. This is the basic level considered in dynamic conversation
analyses, and is that which we most often referred to in SDRT-based formalizations.
It consists of the previous steps of a discourse available for further interpretation.
Some of its characteristics include:
• discursive context is internal to discourse, i.e. it is a purely linguistic kind of context
(sometimes called cotext);
• it involves all the dimensions of discourse, i.e. syntactic, semantic and pragmatic;
• it includes an interactional aspect: questions require answers, speech-turns, etc.;
• it contains judgments: representations have a semantic content, or at least a the-
matic one.
Within the SDRT theoretical framework, this level of context corresponds exactly
to the active Segmented Discourse Representation Structure (SDRS), to which sub-
sequent language acts can be attached. As such, it offers a number of attachment
sites along the right frontier, which are made available to the speakers. This level of
context is used to solve anaphora and, in some cases, polysemy and homonymy.
For polysemy and homonymy, underspeciﬁed expressions can be disambiguated
by the discursive context in a straightforward manner when the context provides the
QUD like in the following example:
(1)
a “Max wanted to see the river. He went to the bank.”
b “Max needed money. He went to the bank.”
For anaphora resolution, a well-known example by Asher and Lascarides (2003)
is the short (artiﬁcial) discourse:
(2)
“Max had a lovely evening. He had a great meal. He ate salmon. He ate a lot
of cheese. He found it really wonderful.”
Here the anaphoric pronoun “it” cannot refer to the salmon, but could refer to the
cheese, the meal, or the evening. Due to the right-frontier constraint, the sentence
“He ate salmon” is indeed no longer available in the discursive context.
6 Below, I will indifferently write about different contexts or different levels of context.

786
M. Rebuschi
As was mentioned in Sect. 2, schizophrenic persons can have trouble handling
this level of context. Basically, it’s not uncommon for them to occasionally produce
utterances that defy “normal” discursive constraints, which leads to an altered view
of the overarching discursive context.
3.2
Presuppositional Context (Intermediate)
A broader level or kind of context more or less corresponds to what Lewis (1979)
labeled as conversational score or, as mentioned earlier, to Stalnaker’s common
ground. This is the context that makes a language-game possible. Following Gárcia-
Carpintero (2015) we consider this common ground as composed of several “set[s]
of propositions to which speakers are committed”, including not only knowledge or
beliefs and propositions accepted for the purpose of conversation, but also shared
questions that guide their inquiry as well as other possible directives:
• presuppositional context consists in a set of presuppositions shared by the inter-
locutors, with the beliefs or assumptions of the speakers about the world and about
their interlocutors, their common knowledge, shared questions, etc.;
• it is made up of implicit propositional contents, either common or distributed, with
respective shared commitments (either beliefs, or questions, etc.);
• it presupposes a common social context, or a common form of life in its back-
ground.
Presuppositional context is pivotal to mutual understanding between speakers.
One of its functions is to constrain the thematic possibilities or QUDs. It enables the
interlocutors to solve some cases of homonymy and polysemy.
Thematic constraints obviously appear in different social contexts; an academic
will not share the same presuppositional context speaking with her colleagues as she
would, for example, conversing with an interior decorator. As such, an utterance like
the following:
(3)
“I found a nice paper this morning”
would take on different meanings depending on the context.
To consider another example, speaking about Max’s last holidays, and knowing
that Max’s vacation home is near a river or a lake, interlocutors would accommodate:
“He went to the bank”, as in example (1.a) above, even though no explicit link was
introduced in previous discourse, thanks to the presuppositional context.
3.3
Material and Social Context (Large)
This is the largest kind or level of context. It corresponds to the general background
of the conversation, and it is potentially unlimited (Kleiber, 2009). Unlike the two

About Context, Fiction, and Schizophrenia
787
previous kinds of context, this one is neither linguistic nor propositional. It involves
all the mundane features of the environment likely to play a role in determining the
meaning of the conversation:
• material and social context can involve locations, immediate physical environment,
interlocutors’ mutual positions and postures, etc.;
• it includes the social context of the interaction (medical, professional...), the rela-
tionships between interlocutors (parents, patients and nursing staff...), cultural
environment, etc.;
• it ﬁnally includes interlocutors relevant properties: children/adults, pathologies or
not, cognitive skills, memory capacities, etc.
This general background context plays a fundamental role in discourse interpre-
tation, both in indirect and direct manners. It partly determines the presuppositional
context (VanDijk, 2006) and thus plays an indirect role in interpretation. For instance,
conversations with children will involve a set of presuppositions distinctly different
from those characteristic of conversations between adults. However, the material
context obviously plays a direct role in that it offers the referents of deictics (“this”,
“that”...) and pure indexicals (“I”, “you”, “here”...). And some cases of homonymy
or of polysemy can be solved using the same level. Ultimately, this is where we
ﬁnd the parameters constitutive of Kaplan’s contexts or of Predelli’s indices, even if
material and social context cannot be reduced to this narrow and speciﬁc notion.7
4
Schizophrenia and Context Management
It could seem as though the three levels just presented sufﬁce to account for con-
versations in general and for pathological conversations in particular. Analysis of
empirical data shows us that schizophrenic speakers adhere to their own set of rules
regarding the discursive context, effectively enabling them to shift the interpretation
by discounting the usual rules. But there seems to be another factor at play at the pre-
suppositional context level. Do the interlocutors share all of their presuppositions?
Perhaps not. It would appear that this relies instead on a more basic level, a pragmatic
one, that determines the presuppositional context. This pragmatic level may explain
some breaks and gaps occurring in conversations with schizophrenics.
7 However, as is noted by Recanati (2001, p. 86), the semantic value of “here” and “now” might
not exclusively depend on the narrow context but also on the speaker’s intended referent, thus on
the wide context, where “a pragmatic process take[s] place …to determine which narrow context,
among indeﬁnitely many candidates compatible with the facts of the utterance, serves as argument
to the character function”.

788
M. Rebuschi
4.1
A Fourth Level: Pragmatic Context (Intermediate)
Our fourth level determines which kind of language-game is played. It is neither
linguistic, nor propositional, nor mundane, but conventional. As we will see, two
interlocutors need not share the same pragmatic context and this gap can lead to
subtle effects. Let us brieﬂy present its characteristics:
• the pragmatic context can depend on the (material and) social context: a restaurant,
a court, a theater... all these social contexts standardly trigger speciﬁc language-
games;
• it determines the kind of language-game8 that is at stake, hence the kind of speech
acts produced in a conversation: assertions and questions, pretend assertions and
pretend questions, avowals, notiﬁcations, etc.;
• it determines the kind of mental states that are expressed by the speakers’ speech
acts: beliefs, pretend beliefs or imaginings, commitments, etc.
The pragmatic context plays two crucial roles: it can shift the whole presup-
positional context, and as a consequence, it can change the resolution of deictics,
indexicals, and some cases of homonymy and polysemy.
What I call pragmatic contexts are used by philosophers of language to account for
ﬁction (Predelli, 1998). Since pure indexicals like “I” or “here” are rigid designators,
i.e. they denote the same object in every possible world, one cannot explain their
use with a mere ﬁctional modality à la Lewis (1978). The idea is then to conceive
ﬁctional discourse as being a context-shifter. This shifter makes the interlocutors (or
the writer and their readers) switch from a serious pragmatic context to a ﬁctional
pragmatic context.
As expected, several features of interpretation change as a result of such a switch:
1. the value of indexicals: the ﬁctional speaker referred to by the ﬁrst-person pro-
noun “I” is no longer the actual speaker but is instead a ﬁctional narrator;
2. the presuppositional context: the presuppositions, QUDs, etc. are now those
sharedbytheﬁctionalcharacters,andnolongerthoseofthespeakerandlisteners;
3. the value of deictics, i.e. the interpretation of elements belonging to the material
and social context: in the case of ﬁctional context (like theater), one can stage
surrounding objects to assign them with a new function.
Voltolini (2006) considers ﬁction as a paradigmatic case that can be translated to
non-standard uses of indexicals: messages of the form “I am not here now” either
written or recorded on answering machines; historical present as in “Now Hitler
begins his invasion of USSR”; the use of a ﬁrst-person pronoun “I” by the English
translator of an Italian politician... all these examples can be construed as resem-
bling ﬁctional discourse: the context relevant for semantic interpretation is not the
(Kaplanian) context of utterance “but a ﬁctional context, i.e., a context which has at
least one ﬁctional parameter: a pretended agent, or a pretended space, or a pretended
time, or a pretended world...” (Voltolini, 2006, p. 27)
8 Or the kind of interaction in general, which may not be reduced to linguistic interaction.

About Context, Fiction, and Schizophrenia
789
Rather than committing to a uniform ﬁctionalist account of extraordinary contexts,
I will consider the possibility of distinct pragmatic contexts which might include
both ordinary and ﬁctional contexts, and maybe others. Pragmatic contexts roughly
correspond to Goffman’s frames, which can be primary or transformed (Goffman,
1974). Pragmatic contexts need not be shared by the interlocutors for the conversation
to continue. Simple examples would be speakers lying to trusting listeners,9 or some
cases of ﬁction telling, e.g. telling stories about Santa Claus to trusting children.
The conversation can continue naturally but the gap at the pragmatic level entails a
gap at the presuppositional level. In both examples, the speaker can continue without
expressing personal beliefs, but he or she is interpreted as doing so. Hence, according
to the listeners the speaker’s assertions broaden the set of common beliefs, which
might not necessarily be shared by the speaker.
4.2
From Fiction to Schizophrenia
Switching from a serious to a ﬁctional pragmatic context implies several fundamental
shifts. Basically, there is a change of language-game which entails a shift in both
speech acts and mental states:
• speech acts: assertions are replaced by pretend assertions, questions by pretend
questions, etc.;
• mental states expressed by ﬁctional speech acts: beliefs are replaced by pretend
beliefs, i.e. imaginings or even mere suppositions (Whitt, 1985).
This roughly conforms to Walton’s (1990) conception of ﬁction as make-believe.
Within some ﬁctional pragmatic context, i.e., following the rules of some conven-
tional ﬁctional language-game, apparent assertions are not real assertions. Instead,
these are prescriptions to imagine ﬁctional situations. Consequently, they will not
ﬁll the usual presuppositional context, at least not the main subsets of common
knowledge and shared beliefs. Pretend assertions, rather, ﬁll a subset of imagined
propositions speciﬁc to the ﬁctional work under consideration. Entering a ﬁctional
language-game thus entails a shifting of the presuppositional context.
At this point, a general hypothesis can be proposed using the notion of pragmatic
context. Let us assume that there is a schizophrenic language-game. This is a speciﬁc
language-game, which is neither serious, nor ﬁctional, nor poetic, nor humorous –
even if it might share several features with all of them. As with any language-game,
the schizophrenic language-game involves speciﬁc speech acts and mental states:
• speech acts: assertions, or at least a part of them, are replaced by schizo-assertions,
questions by schizo-questions, etc.;
9 For a systematic comparison of pragmatic features of lying and ﬁction in a framework similar to
that of the present paper, see Maier (2018).

790
M. Rebuschi
• mental states expressed by schizophrenic speech acts: beliefs (expressed by asser-
tions) are replaced by schizo-beliefs10 (expressed by schizo-assertions).
Wethushypothesizethatschizophrenicspeakersintroduceaspeciﬁcschizophrenic
pragmatic context, implying a schizophrenic language-game, and in particular
schizo-assertions expressing schizo-beliefs. This new pragmatic context potentially
allows for a switch to occur relative not only to the material and social context, but
to the presuppositional context. In conversation processing, it potentially leads to a
reinterpretation of indexicals, deictics, homonyms and polysemic terms.
Pathological conversations between ordinary and extraordinary schizophrenic
speakers are thus expected to introduce a context gap. This gap is similar to that
which might occur between the pragmatic context of an actor and the corresponding
context of a passer-by with a hidden camera. This is what Goffman labeled mis-
framing (Goffman, 1974). The two interlocutors in this case do not play the same
language-game, and conversation breaks can occur as general conversational expec-
tations will be mismatched.
4.3
More About Schizophrenic Pragmatic Contexts
The idea of a pragmatic context speciﬁc to schizophrenia could account for several
phenomena linked to the pathology, like the patients’ deviant phenomenology and
possible hallucinations.11 Before concluding this paper, we can brieﬂy examine how
fruitful this hypothesis might be.
Schizophreniclanguage-gamescanfairlyeasilybecomparedtoﬁctionallanguage-
games in that imagination plays a certain role in both. In ﬁction, imaginings or pretend
beliefs emerge from pretend assertions, the content of which updates a dedicated sub-
set of the presuppositional context (common ground). On the other hand, according
to some authors like Currie, delusion and hallucination can be compared to “the
misidentiﬁcation of the subject’s imaginings as perceptions and beliefs” (Currie,
2000). If we were to follow this track, the description of the informational content of
a particular delusion or hallucination experienced by an individual with schizophre-
nia would be mistakenly added to the main subset of common beliefs that make up the
common ground – at least from his or her own ﬁrst-person perspective. This impair-
ment in context management need not be considered as a rational failure. It could
instead stem from more basic mechanisms and consist of a metacognitive error at a
subpersonal level, that might enhance a feeling of experiencing real informational
states that are in fact internally generated (Dokic, 2016).
Nevertheless, it seems that delusional states associated with schizophrenia do not
systematically result in beliefs about what is “perceived” by the subject. In many
10 See Sect. 2.
11 It is of course not claimed here that schizophrenia could in some way be reduced to an impairment
in context processing. However, pragmatic contexts offer an insight into conversation analysis that
might be translated to other phenomena.

About Context, Fiction, and Schizophrenia
791
cases, schizophrenic patients behave as though this part of their internal life were
private and relatively independent from their public behavior. Several illustrative
cases are reported by Sass:
One of Eugen Bleuler’s patients was well aware that the voices he heard originated in his own
ears, for he compared these voices to the sound of the sea that can be heard by placing a shell
to one’s ear. It seems that something about the hallucinations and delusions of such patients
sets their delusional worlds apart from the realm of normal, consensual reality. (Sass, 1994,
p. 21)
Schreber insists, however, that such beliefs – he calls them “my so-called delusions” – refer
to a separate realm, one that does not motivate him to act and wherein the usual criteria of
worldly proof or belief do not apply. (Sass, 1994, p. 31)
It would consequently be inconsistent to postulate that every so-called asser-
tion made by someone with schizophrenia is genuine, nor that these represent true
expressions of the speaker’s true belief. Schizophrenic assertions, however, cannot
be equated to ﬁctional or pretend assertions either, because their content is not felt
or experienced as freely created and imagined by the subject. Their status lies some-
where between serious and ﬁctional assertions, and the contents correlatively update
a speciﬁc subset of the given presuppositional context.
Another interesting point is the possible co-occurrence of two or more pragmatic
contexts in the same conversation or interaction. In a conversation about a work
of ﬁction, interlocutors can alternate and even mix ﬁctional and serious pragmatic
contexts, e.g. “On page 72, James Bond killed a Russian spy.” Processing such
conversations is not particularly difﬁcult but does require differentiating ﬁctional
(James Bond killed a Russian spy) from non-ﬁctional (that ﬁctional fact is reported
on page 72 of the book) narratives. A similar juxtaposition of contexts has been noted
in schizophrenia:
[A] feature of schizophrenic patients is what has been called their “double bookkeeping.”
… Rather than mistaking the imaginary for the real, they often seem to live in two parallel
but separate worlds: consensual reality and the realms of their hallucinations and delusions.
A patient who claims that the doctors and nurses are trying to torture and poison her may
nevertheless happily consume the food they give her; a patient who asserts that the people
around him are phantoms of automatons still interacts with them as if they were reals. (Sass,
1994, p. 21)
An exceptional pictorial illustration of the phenomenon is offered by the paint-
ing “Le Pays des météores” (The Land of meteors) by Le Voyageur Français, a
schizophrenic patient of Dr Auguste Marie at the beginning of 20th Century.12 As
can be clearly seen on the reproduction below, the painting is divided into two distinct
parts. In the background there is a natural landscape, painted in a sensible and real-
istic manner; in the foreground, we can see a meteor depicted in a radically different
style, with imaginary and almost dreamlike colors. This painting need not be reduced
to the simple representation of an imaginary land. The co-occurrence of two styles
12 This photograph was taken by the author during the exhibition “La Folie en tête” at the Maison de
Victor Hugo in 2017. The painting belongs to the Collection de l’Art Brut (Lausanne, Switzerland),
and I am grateful for their permission to reproduce it for this work.

792
M. Rebuschi
in the same work strongly suggests that it should be interpreted as a representation
of two parallel universes: the actual world with its natural river and trees, and the
imaginary sphere of the painter with a fantastic meteor.
Looking at such a painting, one could say that “There are meteors and there are no
meteors” so as to reﬂect the painter’s thought. With our framework we can construe
this utterance without assuming any semantic contradiction. The two parts of the
sentence are not involved in the same speech-act or language game. Whereas “There
are meteors” is relevant for the schizophrenic pragmatic context, “there are no mete-
ors” pertains to the ordinary (serious) pragmatic context. The apparent contradiction
can thus be resolved by the play on contexts.
“Le Pays des météores” (Le Voyageur français, 1902)
(Collection de l’Art Brut, Lausanne)
The juxtaposition or superposition of views means that schizophrenics can manip-
ulate several pragmatic contexts in a rather subtle way. Their impairment in context
processing would not come from an inability to play with differently valued contexts.
It is more certainly related to the involuntary production of the speciﬁc pragmatic
context I introduced, involving uncontrolled imaginings not recognized as such.
To sum up: by postulating a schizophrenic pragmatic context, it seems that not
only conversational breaks but other phenomena such as delusion and hallucination
can be accounted for without denying the subject’s consistency.13
13 Other strange cases like depersonalization (Chauvier, 2009) or Cotard’s syndrome (Billon, 2015)
could be accommodated with the same kind of analysis. These cases are paradoxical from a semantic

About Context, Fiction, and Schizophrenia
793
5
Conclusion
Psycholinguistic and formal approaches to understanding pathological conversations
with schizophrenic people can account for conversational discontinuities. These are
perceived as genuine contradictions expressed by ordinary interlocutors, which is the
third-person viewpoint. Assuming the principle of charity, i.e. if we presuppose that
the extraordinary, schizophrenic interlocutors are semantically consistent, effectively
brings us closer to being able to reconstruct a ﬁrst-person viewpoint.
Linguistic modeling sheds light on the major role underspeciﬁed phrases play
in the context of such breaks. Schizophrenic speakers have the capacity to change
the meaning of the same expression multiple times (at least twice, often more) in
conversational situations where ordinary speakers would consider the situational con-
text stabilized. This means that for schizophrenic speakers, the context that enables
conversational interpretation is not as ﬁrmly grounded as it is for other speakers.
In this work, I introduced a distinction between four levels of context with the
objective of gaining a more accurate view of the way schizophrenic interlocutors
proceed in conversations. The idea of a schizophrenic pragmatic context provides an
explanationofsomespeciﬁcitiesintermsofaspeciﬁclanguage-game,whichpresents
several similarities with ﬁctional discourse. Moreover, it explains the occurrence of
shifts between interlocutors in terms of context gaps. Finally, in terms of contexts and
context gaps, applying this new pragmatic context may enable us to draw relevant
connections between psycholinguistic analyses and phenomenological accounts of
schizophrenia.
References
Amblard, M., Musiol, M., & Rebuschi. M. (2011). Une analyse basée sur la S-DRT pour la modéli-
sation de dialogues pathologiques. In Actes de la 18e conférence sur le Traitement Automatique
des Langues Naturelles – TALN.
Amblard, M., Musiol, M., & Rebuschi, M. (2015). L’interaction conversationnelle à l’épreuve du
handicap schizophrénique. Recherches sur la philosophie et le langage, 31, 67–89.
Asher, N., & Lascarides, A. (2003). Logics of conversation. Cambridge University Press.
Billon, A. (2015). Why are we certain that we exist? Philosophy and Phenomenological Research,
91(3), 723–759.
Campbell, J. (2001). Rationality, meaning, and the analysis of delusion. Philosophy, Psychiatry, &
Psychology, 8(2/3), 89–100.
Chauvier, S. (2009). Auto-cognition défaillante ou subjectivation déviante. L’Évolution psychia-
trique, 74, 353–362.
Cohen, J. D., Barch, D. M., Carter, C., & Servan-Schreiber, D. (1999). Context-processing deﬁcits in
schizophrenia: Converging evidence from three theoretically motivated cognitive tasks. Journal
of Abnormal Psychology, 108(1), 120–133.
point of view since the ﬁrst-person pronoun is still expected to refer even though the speaker believes
he or she does not exist. However, this semantic puzzle is not far from those generated by anti-
substantialist accounts of the subject, and can be solved using context shifters (Rebuschi, 2011).

794
M. Rebuschi
Covington, M. A., He, C., Brown, C., Naçi, L., McClain, J. T., Fjordbak, B. S., Semple, J., &
Brown, J. (2005). Schizophrenia and the structure of language: The linguist’s view. Schizophrenia
Research, 77(1), 85–98.
Currie, G. (2000). Imagination, delusion and hallucination. Mind & Language, 15(1), 168–183.
Dokic, J. (2016). Toward a uniﬁed account of hallucinations. Journal of Consciousness Studies,
23(7–8), 82–99.
García-Carpintero, M. (2015). Contexts as shared commitments. Frontiers in Psychology, 6, 1–13.
Goffman, E. (1974). Frame analysis: An essay on the organization of experience. Harper and Row.
Green, M. J., Uhlhaas, P. J., & Coltheart, M. (2005). Context processing and social cognition in
schizophrenia. Current Psychiatry Reviews, 1(1), 11–22.
Henriksen, M. G. (2013). On incomprehensibility in schizophrenia. Phenomenology and the Cog-
nitive Sciences, 12(1), 105–129.
Kamp, H., & Reyle, U. (1993). From discourse to logic: Introduction to model theoretic semantics
of natural language, formal logic and discourse representation theory. Studies in linguistics and
philosophy. Kluwer Academic.
Kaplan, D. (1989). Demonstratives. In J. Almog, J. Perry, & H. Wettstein (Eds.), Themes from
Kaplan (pp. 481–563). Oxford University Press.
Kleiber, G. (2009). D’un contexte à l’autre: aspects et dimensions du contexte. L’Information
grammaticale, 123, 17–32.
Leroy, F., & Beaune, D. (2005). Langage et schizophrénie: intention, contexte et pseudo-concepts.
Bulletin de psychologie, 479, 567–577.
Lewis, D. (1978). Truth in ﬁction. American Philosophical Quarterly, 15(1), 37–46.
Lewis, D. (1979). Scorekeeping in a language game. Journal of Philosophical Logic, 8, 338–359.
Maier, E. (2018). Lying and ﬁction. In J. Meibauer (Ed.). Oxford Handbook of Lying, OUP.
Musiol, M., & Rebuschi, M. (2007). La rationalité de l’incohérence en conversation schizophrène
(analyse pragmatique conversationnelle et sémantique formelle). Psychologie française, 52(2),
137–169.
Musiol, M., & Rebuschi, M. (2011). Toward a two-step formalization of verbal interaction in
schizophrenia: A case study. In A. Trognon, M. Batt, J. Caelen, & D. Vernant (Eds.), Logical
properties of dialogue (pp. 187–225). PUN.
Phillips, W. A., & Silverstein, S. M. (2003). Convergence of biological and psychological perspec-
tives on cognitive coordination in schizophrenia. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 26(1), 65–138.
Predelli, S. (1998). I am not here now. Analysis, 58, 107–115.
Predelli, S. (2005). Contexts. meaning, truth, and the use of language. Clarendon Press.
Rebuschi, M. (2011). Le cogito sans engagement. Igitur, 3(2), 1–25.
Rebuschi, M. (2017). Schizophrenic conversations and context shifting. In P. Brézillon et al. (Eds.),
CONTEXT 2017, Lecture Notes in Computer Science (Vol. 10257, pp. 708–721).
Rebuschi, M., Amblard, M., & Musiol, M. (2013). Schizophrénie, logicité et compréhension en
première personne. L’Evolution psychiatrique, 78(1), 127–141.
Rebuschi, M., Amblard, M., & Musiol, M. (2014). Using SDRT to analyze pathological conver-
sations. Logicality, rationality and pragmatic deviances. In M. Rebuschi et al. (Eds.), Interdisci-
plinary worksinlogic,epistemology,psychology andlinguistics.Dialogue,rationality,formalism.
(pp. 343–368). Springer.
Recanati, F. (2001). What is said. Synthese, 128, 75–91.
Roulet, E., Auchlin, A., Schelling, M., Moeschler, J., & Rubattel, C. (1985). L’articulation du
discours en français contemporain. Peter Lang.
Sass, L. A. (1994). The paradoxes of delusion: Wittgenstein, Schreber, and the schizophrenic mind.
Cornell.
Searle, J. R. (1992). The rediscovery of the mind. The MIT Press.
Stalnaker, R. (1978). Assertion. In P. Cole (Ed.), Syntax and semantics (Vol. 9, pp. 315–332).
Academic Press.
Van Dijk, T. A. (2006). Discourse, context and cognition. Discourse Studies, 8(1), 159–177.
Voltolini, A. (2006). Fiction as a base of interpretation contexts. Synthese, 153, 23–47.

About Context, Fiction, and Schizophrenia
795
Walton, K. L. (1990). Mimesis as make-believe. On the foundations of the representational arts.
Harvard University Press.
Whitt, L. A. (1985). Fictional contexts and referential opacity. Canadian Journal of Philosophy,
15–2, 327–338.

Humanities and Social Sciences

On the Explanation of Social and Societal
Facts
Friedel Weinert
1
Introduction
A long-standing dispute has been raging in the Social Sciences about the level at
which social science explanations should be sought. Traditionally two positions have
opposed each other. Methodological Individualism holds that the explanation of
social phenomena must ultimately be reducible to the level of the actions and motives
of individual social actors in a given social setting. According to this view only indi-
vidual social agents exist. Its aim is to explain social facts by reference to individual
facts. Methodological Holism argues that at least some macro-phenomena can only
be explained by reference to societal facts. Such societal facts (groups, institutions,
states, traditions) or societal wholes have a presence over and above a summation of
the activities of individual social actors. Societal wholes do not exist like tables and
chairs but they constrain individual agents in social life. Over the years many different
versions of these positions have emerged but the above are the standard character-
izations. These opposite positions are qualiﬁed as ‘methodological’ because they
characterize explanatory rather than ontological claims. Everyone is in agreement
that individuals exist but not whether societies, states, institutions ‘exist’ over and
above their individual members. Individuals have motivations, reasons and wills
but it is questionable whether societal wholes do. The emphasis on methodological
individualism/holism sidesteps this metaphysical question. The issue is about expla-
nation: can collective facts be sufﬁciently explained by reducing them to individual
facts about agents?
Such concerns are not the prerogative of arcane philosophical preoccupations.
They are not conﬁned to the ivory tower of philosophical contemplation. For expla-
nations of social and societal facts must be appropriate in order to be successful.
An explanation is inappropriate if it fails to explain the explanandum. It makes an
F. Weinert (B)
University of Bradford, Bradford BD7 1DP, West Yorkshire, UK
e-mail: f.weinert@bradford.ac.uk
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
S. Wuppuluri and I. Stewart (eds.), From Electrons to Elephants and Elections,
The Frontiers Collection, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-92192-7_41
799

800
F. Weinert
explanatory difference if explanations refer to reducible or irreducible facts. On the
otherhand,entrenchedpositionsmaybeunhelpful.Inordertoovercometheexclusive
dichotomy between methodological individualism and holism a pragmatic approach
is more appropriate. It is the social science problems at hand which should determine
the level at which solutions are pitched. A consideration of the opposing positions
will show that in many cases successful explanations must remain on the macro-
level. Explanations in the social sciences employ generalizing models. Therein lies
a certain afﬁnity between the natural and the social sciences.
2
Traditional Methodological Individualism
Methodological individualism insists that social facts must be reduced to the micro-
level; to the level of individual social agents. But a closer analysis shows that it
is neither invariably possible nor desirable to explain social facts in terms of indi-
vidual facts. This impossibility is already built into the assumptions of traditional
methodological individualism. That is, the proponents of methodological individu-
alism themselves make reference to elements, which do not strictly fall within the
remit of their methodology. Consider, for instance, the contributions of Hayek and
Watkins, both of whom were close to Popper, who also defended methodological
individualism. Watkins (1952b: 186) characterizes methodological individualism as
the precept that ‘social processes should be explained by being deduced from princi-
ples governing the behaviour of participating individuals and from analyses of their
situations and not from superindividual “holistic” sociological laws.’ As the last
part of his sentence indicates he associates methodological holism with the belief
that (a) ‘macroscopic laws govern societal wholes’ and (b) that its ‘components can
be deduced from the functions of the components within the whole.’ Let us leave
aside the assertion that methodological holism requires societal laws. It is question-
able whether societal laws even exist. Patterns of behavior or trends do exist but
are not to be confused with natural laws. Social trends can be modiﬁed or reversed,
but natural laws cannot. Human beings are incapable of inﬂuencing the orbits of the
planets but can change their customs, norms and traditions. Watkins (1955: 58) holds
that social phenomena are generated by individuals and must be explained individ-
ualistically. Furthermore, understanding social structures can only be derived from
more empirical beliefs about concrete individuals. Unfortunately, Watkins commits
a non-sequitur. Even if it is admitted that ‘social events are brought about by people’
it does not follow that ‘they must be explained in terms of people.’ We must not
confuse methodological individualism with ontological individualism or method-
ological holism with ontological holism. There is no need to dispute the obvious fact
that ‘social events are brought about by people’ and that ‘social structures are created
by people.’ That is, we can concede that ‘societal wholes’ do not lead an independent
Platonic existence, irrespective of the activities of social agents. But as Durkheim
(1982: Ch. V.2) pointed out, societal systems exercise a constraining function on
social agents. Social agents are necessary but not sufﬁcient for this function. The

On the Explanation of Social and Societal Facts
801
question is one of methodology, not ontology. Are the actions and interactions of
social agents alone sufﬁcient to explain social events, processes and societal struc-
tures? The methodological individualist afﬁrms that rock-bottom explanations are
sufﬁcient, a claim which the methodological holist denies.
In a further publication Watkins (1952a) discusses Weber’s methodology of ideal
types. Max Weber was also committed to methodological individualism. According
to Watkins, Weber held two conceptions of ideal types in succession. In his early
work he employed holistic ideal types which depict salient features of historically
complex states or situations. But in his monumental work Wirtschaft und Gesellschaft
(1921; EconomyandSociety 1978), akeytext of modernsociology, Weber introduced
individualistic ideal types. They model social agents as hypothetical rational actors
in idealized social settings. Both ideal types are models of social situations, which
make abstraction from the messiness of real life and emphasize the typicality in social
life. Holistic ideal types may depict a model of feudalism, capitalism or democracy,
highlighting typical features of such societal institutions. An individualistic ideal
type may depict a model of a typical consumer, a typical conservative voter or a
typical middle-class male. But what is typical in one context may not be typical in
another. That is, the consideration of types may require the inclusion of national or
local characteristics. A typical conservative voter is not the same in every country, as
religious afﬁliations differ. However, there will be similarities, like an appreciation
of tradition and respect for existing institutions. Watkins adds (1952a: 29 [fn2])
that an explanation may be in terms of ‘typical’ dispositions or in terms of speciﬁc
individuals.1 Assertions, like the latter, are reminiscent of J. S. Mill’s psychologistic
individualism. For Mill the ‘laws of the phenomena of society are, and can be,
nothing but the laws of the actions and passions of human beings united in the social
state.’ (Quoted in Hollis, 1994: 10) Hence he derives the phenomena of society
from the phenomena of human nature. But the latter suggestion would reduce the
social sciences to psychology, which was not Weber’s intention. For Weber ideal
types are conceptual models, which describe salient features of the target of the
description (Weinert, 1996). As models they necessarily idealize and abstract, as all
models do in the natural and social sciences. Weber constructed holistic ideal types
(feudalism,capitalism),whichignoreindividualparticularities.Evenhisconstruction
of the Protestant Ethic displays general features. But Watkins (1952a: 42–3) is right
that individual ideal types are reconstructed from typically signiﬁcant dispositions
and typical situations. Thus despite Watkins’ best efforts he has not shown that
explanations of social phenomena are reducible to psychological terms, since ideal
typical explanations involve models which focus on typical features. In his analysis
of Weber’s causal model Ringer comes to a similar conclusion. Weber’s ideal types
can causally explain holistic developments in history.
Weber’s line of analysis allows him to move from methodological individualism to the study
of complex social interactions and organizations. He can stipulate that a state “exists” or
1 Watkins (1952a: 36–40) accepts that psychology makes generalizations but adds that general
knowledge of human behavior must be supplemented by ‘knowledge of peculiar personalities’,
which, however, refer to ‘public and institutional dispositions.’.

802
F. Weinert
“has ceased to exist,” and that is surely to make a statement about a structured collectivity.
(Ringer, 2002: 177)
We encounter a similar vacillation between an avowal of methodological individ-
ualism and the inability to carry it through in other proponents of this methodology.
Both Hayek’s and Popper’s espousal of methodological individualism occurred
against the backdrop of their experience of totalitarianism in the 1930s. Like Watkins,
they associate holistic thinking with an overpowering state, which controls individual
lives. Hayek characterizes ‘collectivism’ as the conscious direction of all forces of
society and warns that methodological collectivism leads to political collectivism
(Hayek, 1964: 91–2). For Hayek methodological individualism also starts from indi-
viduals and their actions (1964: Pt. I, Ch. IV) but he adds that the social sciences
must infer complex phenomena from their constitutive parts. Hayek does not fall
into the trap of psychologism, which always threatens pure forms of methodological
individualism. Hayek afﬁrms that ‘the aim of the social sciences is not to explain
conscious action’. ‘Individual beliefs and attributes’ are not the object of social
science explanations. They constitute the elements from which we ‘build up the
structure of possible relationships between individuals.’ (Hayek, 1964: 39, emphasis
added) Hayek follows Weber in holding that the social sciences construct models of
social phenomena. Hayek returns repeatedly to this emphasis on societal structures,
at which the social sciences aim. Societal wholes are not observable, he states, they
are constructions of the mind.
The social sciences do not deal with ‘given’ wholes but their task is to constitute these wholes
by constructing models from the familiar elements - models which reproduce the structure
of relationships between some of the many phenomena which we always simultaneously
observe in real life. (Hayek, 1964: 56, 68–73; italics in original)
Hayek thus rejects ontological holism, since societal wholes do not ‘exist’. Like
Popper, he recommends the use of methodological individualism as a methodology
of the social sciences. But in order to avoid psychologism and afﬁrm the autonomy
of the social from the natural sciences, he recommends the use of abstracting and
idealizingmodelsinthesocialsciences:‘all thoughtmustbetosomedegreeabstract.’
(Hayek, 1964: 68; italics in original)
3
Ideal Types
We have seen that traditional methodological individualism is motivated by a fear of
totalitarianism, which it associates with holism. Hayek does not clearly distinguish
political collectivism from methodological holism. He does not mention Weber but
he endorses the use of models, which capture the ‘structure’ of social relationships.
Methodological individualism, despite its protestations, cannot fulﬁll its promise to
explain social phenomena solely in terms of individuals—‘their properties, goals
and beliefs’. (Elster, 1982: 453) Even such an attempt will involve abstractions and
idealizations, leading to ‘individualistic ideal types’. But if individualism arose out a

On the Explanation of Social and Societal Facts
803
concern for the individual, now that totalitarianism has receded in the Western World,
what does methodological individualism mean today? The term was introduced by
J. Schumpeter (1908) but elaborated by Max Weber. (Heath, 2020: §1) Weber’s
methodology of ideal types is particularly important in this connection because ideal
types combine understanding and explanation. Weber sought a synthesis between
the French School and the German School. According to the French School, as
defended in the writings of Saint Simon and A. Comte, sociology had to become
‘social physics’. It was modeled on the natural sciences and its aim was a causal
explanation of social phenomena. The German School, as defended by W. Dilthey
and H. Rickert, opposed this scientistic view of the social sciences. According to
Dilthey the methodology of the social sciences was analogous to the discipline of
history, whose main business was the understanding of the past. Hayek also opposed
‘scientism’ in the social sciences: the task of the social sciences was the under-
standing (Verstehen) of social life. Weber was inﬂuenced by the German school. He
was committed to an interpretative sociology whose methodology was based on the
notion of understanding. He stated that ‘social collectivities result from particular
acts of individuals, who alone are meaning-using agents. Only action is subjectively
understandable.’ (Quoted in Heath, 2020: §1) Yet Weber did not reject the call for
causal explanations. He deﬁnes sociology as a
…science concerning itself with the interpretive understanding of social action and thereby
with a causal explanation of its course and consequences. (Weber, 1978: 4)
For Weber, not every type of action is social in character. Social character is
‘conﬁned to cases where the actor’s behaviour is meaningfully oriented to that of
others.’ For instance, the collision of two cyclists or people’s simultaneous opening of
umbrellas does not constitute social action. (Weber Economy & Society 1978: 23) But
the reaction of an individual to other individuals in a social setting constitutes social
action. For Weber social action must both be understandable and explainable. He
dubs this combination of understanding and explanation explanatory understanding.
In addition, Weber proposes a notion of adequate causation, which he considers to
be an appropriate view of causation in the social sciences. It is also based on his
ideal-type methodology.
In order to adhere to explanatory understanding Weber relies on ‘models’ of social
action. Ideal types provide such models. To illustrate how explanatory understanding
works, consider the case of a social scientist who wishes to explain why members of
particular social-economic groups tend to vote for conservative parties in a partic-
ular country. The ﬁrst task of the social scientist is to understand the political system
of the country under investigation, including the make-up of the electorate, polit-
ical constituencies, political programmes, socio-economic conditions, and prevailing
traditions in this country. As the social scientist is not concerned with a particular
voter, A, but with typical conservative voters in that country (or constituency) a
model of such voters, A’, must be constructed. Such a model will depend on such
criteria as age, education, gender, income but at the exclusion of idiosyncratic char-
acteristics which are irrelevant for understanding the model voter’s tendency to cast

804
F. Weinert
her/his vote for the conservative party. Although it is a model, it must capture impor-
tant features of the typical conservative voter. In this respect the model will differ
from country to country. In some countries the model may have to include religious
afﬁliations, republican traditions; in other countries support for the monarchy may
need to be added. Once such a model is in place, it will adequately explain why
A’, a typical voter, will typically vote conservative. It is not a statement about indi-
vidual A, who may have further reasons to vote for a conservative candidate, such as
personal sympathy or loyalty to the party. But the model explains why any individual
A, who shares characteristics with A’, is likely to vote conservative. It is a statement
about the most likely behaviour from the point of view of the social scientist, and
not a prediction. To construct the model A’ the social scientist needs understanding
of typical behaviour which in turn then provides an adequate causal explanation of
the model voter’s voting preferences. The model constructs expected, not predicted
behaviour. Built into Weber’s ideal type methodology is a notion of testing. Like
any other model an ideal type must ‘ﬁt’ reality as closely as possible. The social
scientist may misconstrue typical A’ as a result of misunderstanding the political
situation in the chosen research area. If this occurs and typical A’ fails to correspond
to real A, the model must be adjusted. Weber’s explanatory understanding therefore
avoids psychologism, because it requires understanding of social situations rather
than individual psychology.
But Weber did not only believe that the social sciences could achieve explanatory
understanding of social action. He also believed that the social sciences could provide
causal understanding.
A causal model seeks to relate some occurrence in the social world, which is
regarded as an effect, to prior causal conditions. Looking at Weber’s own work,
his attempt to explain the emergence of capitalism in the West as a result of the
adoption of puritan lifestyles is a striking example of causal analysis in the social
world. But social scientists also seek to explain, say, the origin of the Slave Trade,
the outbreak of World War Two, juvenile delinquency and differential educational
performances. The aim in each case is to isolate as far as possible the actual deter-
minant factors, which are likely to have caused some event in history or the social
world. Social systems, however, are open-ended. The social scientist is faced with
a cluster of potentially determining factors, which could be possible causal condi-
tions. Out of the complex of potential determining factors, the social scientist must
distil a complex of causal relations, which ‘should culminate in a synthesis of the
“real” causal complex’. (Weber 1905/1949: 173) Weber speaks of ‘adequate causa-
tion’ when the social science model meets several conditions: (a) the social scientist
has isolated a number of conditions which are regarded as statistically relevant to
the effect in question; (b) the reconstruction of the social or historical event, on the
part of the social scientist, probably isolates the ‘likely cause of an actual historical
event or events of that type.’ The ideal type model of the causal sequence of social
events therefore depicts an objective possibility. That is, it is objectively possible,
even likely, that the isolated conditions are causally responsible for the occurrence
of the event. The model of the social scientist, which has some claim to probability,
provides the most adequate causal conditions which are likely to have brought about

On the Explanation of Social and Societal Facts
805
the social event in question. How can a social scientist be relatively certain that a
proposed causal model of, say, the outbreak of World War Two, captures the most
adequate conditions, which are most likely to have brought about this event? Weber
insists that ‘it is possible to determine, even in the ﬁeld of history, with a certain
degree of certainty which conditions are more likely to bring about an effect than
others.’ (Weber 1905/1949: 183) The way to achieve this aim is to submit the ideal
typical model of some causal sequence to factual knowledge of a historical or social
event. Thus Weber tests the model against reality. In this manner Weber hopes to
throw light on the ‘historical signiﬁcance’ of the actual determinant factors in the
emergence of some historical event. It is well known that historians and sociologists
disagree about the relevant factors, which can be held responsible for some event in
history or society. But certain factors will be so improbable that they can be omitted
from the causal account. It is implausible, for instance, that the eruption of a distant
volcano will have had an effect on the outbreak of World War II. On the other hand,
new empirical data regarding the outbreak of World War II may well credit some
factors as the relevant ones and discredit others as irrelevant. Thus both explanatory
understanding and adequate causation avoid psychologism.
4
Situational Analysis
Amongst methodological individualists Karl Popper stands out for persistently
warning social scientists of the dangers of psychologism. Popper praises Marx for
having shown the autonomy of the social sciences, and sociology, from psychology.
For Popper (1960: §29, p. 142)
…the social sciences are comparatively independent of psychological assumptions, and (…)
psychology can be treated, not as the basis of all social sciences, but as one social science
among others.
Social relations are not reducible to psychological relations, since social or soci-
etal facts refer to ‘large-scale features of society.’ (Papineau, 1978: 6–9) Such facts
concern the ‘forms of organization in society.’ (Mandelbaum, in Gardiner, 1959:
478; Gellner, in Gardiner, 1959: 501) For if societal facts were reducible, the social
sciences would be in the business of describing the psychological make-up of individ-
uals. But such psychological make-ups are either not generalizable or, if generaliz-
able, they again make use of models. This is also Hayek’s line of argument. Reliance
on psychology would force the social sciences to revert to vague notions like ‘human
nature’ about which little agreement exists. Popper characterizes the ‘fundamental
task’ of the social sciences as the description of ‘man’s social environment’. A social
science oriented towards objective understanding can be developed independently
of all subjective or psychological ideas. (Popper, 1976: 101–2) The main task of the
social sciences, according to a modern view, lies in the explanation of the behaviour
of social systems and phenomena. (Coleman, 1990: 2).

806
F. Weinert
In order to avert psychologism Popper relies on his method of situational analysis
or situational logic. It is a reconstruction of the social situation in terms of the ratio-
nality principle. Popper implicitly uses one of Weber’s ideal types: purposive-rational
action, to promote his version of methodological individualism. Popper writes that
…in most situations, if not in all, there is an element of rationality. Admittedly, human
beings hardly ever act quite rationally (i.e. as they would if they could make the optimal use
of all available information for the attainment of whatever end they many have), but they act,
none the less, more or less rationally; and this makes it possible to construct comparatively
simple models of their actions and inter-actions and use these models as approximations.
(1960: §29, p. 140–1, italics in original)
The social sciences should adopt, according to Popper, ‘what may be called the
method of logical or rational reconstruction or perhaps the zero method’.
By this I mean the method of constructing a model on the assumption of the possession
of complete rationality (and perhaps also on the assumption of the possession of complete
information) on the part of all the individuals concerned, and of estimating the deviation
of the actual behaviour of people from the model behaviour, using the latter as a kind of
zero-co-ordinate’ (1960: 141)
The contrast between model and actual behaviour not only allows gauging the
deviation of the latter from the former but also constitutes a test of the adequacy of
the model in comparison to observed social behaviour.
Wecanconcludethatmethodologicalindividualismdoesnotreducetopsychology
or mental phenomena. It starts from individuals, their actions and interrelation-
ships. But these provide only the data from which social science explanations are
inferred (see Hayek, 1964: Part I, Ch. IV). Today’s emphasis in the social sciences is
either on models (ideal types) or social mechanisms as modes of explanation. Both
methodologies, according to methodological individualism, are grounded in micro-
explanations. The bone of contention in the methodological debates is whether such
micro-explanations are sufﬁcient or necessary to explain social phenomena.
5
Methodological Individualism at Work
We have now left ontological considerations ﬁrmly behind and operate purely on an
explanatory level. If institutional aspects are required at this level, the question of
some form of macro-explanation arises. Even Watkins (1952b: 187) admitted that
individual behaviour need not entail that there is no overall system. But he insisted
that methodological individualism could provide adequate explanations. We have
seen, however, that even methodological individualism requires models to abstract
from individual idiosyncracies. So the question returns whether methodological indi-
vidualism, broadly understood, has the resources to account for societal relations and
their effects on individuals.
There are certainly social situations, which can be handled by methodological
individualism even when it omits reference to psychological dispositions. Weber’s

On the Explanation of Social and Societal Facts
807
analysis of the rise of modern capitalism is often cited as an example of the need for
micro-explanations regarding social phenomena. The basic idea is that the Protestant
Ethic aided the rise of modern capitalism. It was made possible through the central
notion of calling, the fulﬁllment of one’s duty in worldly affairs.
The only way of living acceptably to God was not to surpass worldly morality in monastic
asceticism, but solely through the fulﬁllment of the obligations imposed upon the individual
by his position in the world. That was his calling. (Weber, 1974: 80; cf. Coleman, 1990: 6–9)
As Weber adheres to methodological individualism, he cites individual attitudes
and adherence to strict moral codes as causal factors, which paved the way for the rise
of modern capitalist attitudes. Individuals, following the Protestant Ethic, adopted an
austere lifestyle, spurning all luxury. He characterizes modern capitalism, in contrast
to ‘adventure capitalism’, as the systematic pursuit of proﬁt. Weber matches char-
acteristic features of capitalism (proﬁt maximization and investment) with personal
traits (austerity and saving) and argues that many Protestant individuals displaying
these traits—austere lifestyles—contributed to the rise of modern capitalism. The
money, which individuals did not spend on luxuries, was invested in commercial
activities. Weber uses a bottom-up approach, like rational choice theory, but his
explanation still displays holistic elements. They reside in the attitude of asceticism
and the economic institution of capitalism. At this point it could be asked why Protes-
tant denominations encourage ascetic attitudes and why their collective behaviour
led to capitalism. People were born into a pre-existing religious faith, which shaped
their ascetic outlook on life. Modern capitalism itself was a pre-existing institution,
which determined the commercial behaviour of individuals. Weber’s analysis, then,
makes use of links between micro- and macro-levels.
We need a clearer example of methodological individualism, which is free from
holistic assumptions. Rational choice theory, in its basic form, ﬁts the bill. Indi-
viduals are modeled as rational agents who possess complete information, clear
preferences, make their decisions in terms of a cost–beneﬁt analysis and opt for
the most beneﬁcial choice of action. Their uncoordinated individual actions lead to
a social situation. Consider, for instance, the poor teaching standards in inner city
schools. This social phenomenon is explained by a rock-bottom account, which is the
hallmark of methodological individualism. When public transport to the outskirts of
large cities becomes available, individual middle-class families decide to move to the
suburbs, commuting to their inner-city jobs and leaving poorer communities behind
in the inner cities. Public resources and amenities are then withdrawn from inner-city
schools and invested in educational facilities in the outlying areas. Apart from the
mention of public transport, this bottom-up explanation makes no reference to macro-
phenomena. Nor does it refer to the psychological motivations of the people involved.
There is no need to read their minds. The explanation appeals to the uncoordinated
action of individual families who rationally consider their options and possess the
means to move to the suburbs. It achieves what Weber calls ‘adequate explanation’
of this social fact. That is, it provides a mixture of necessary and sufﬁcient conditions
(=public transport, ﬁnancial means) of the state of inner-city education. The drop in

808
F. Weinert
educational levels is the unintended consequence of the uncoordinated decision of
middle-class families to leave the inner cities (Little, 1991: 15–6).
6
Institutional Individualism
Methodological individualism is a bottom-up approach. In order to be successful, it
needs to explain, not just individual actions and relations, but also institutional facts.
For culture, institutions, traditions, social values and social norms exist and their
functioning needs to be explained. In 1975, Joseph Agassi, a former student of Karl
Popper’s at the London School of Economics, introduced the idea of institutional
individualism, which constituted real progress in the evolution of methodological
individualism. Agassi’s contribution achieved several things: (1) it marked a deﬁnite
departure of methodological individualism from psychologism; (2) it afﬁrmed the
autonomy of the social sciences; (3) it embraced the ‘existence’ or better the ‘reality’
of distinct social entities. Agassi also highlights the shift, in this discussion, from
ontology to methodology and the need for methodological individualism to include
institutional aspects. The position accepts that only intentional individuals exist in
a primary sense; societal entities exist in a secondary sense; they are constraining
realities. Intentional agents are necessary for the existence of societal entities but not
sufﬁcient for their functioning. As Popper (1976: 104) puts it: ‘Institutions do not act;
rather, only individuals act, in or for or through institutions.’ Agassi developed this
approach into institutional individualism. According to this view only individuals
have aims and responsibilities but institutions (culture, states, and traditions) are of
primary importance to the social sciences. They exercise constraints on individuals
but individuals also have the capacity to change social conditions. It is for this reason
that trends exits in the social world, but social ‘laws’ do not. Institutional individ-
ualism therefore presents a middle-way between psychological individualism and
old-fashioned holism. In addition, Agassi seems to have abandoned the commitment
to the rationality principle, which is still present in Popper and Weber. Popper’s situa-
tional analysis requires the attention to both institutional situations and the rationality
principle. The emphasis now shifts to the institutional aspects of human interactions.
Not all human interactions can be explained by reference to a rationality principle,
as crowd behaviour shows.
The Spanish economist Fernando Toboso extended Agassi’s institutional individ-
ualism into a ‘middle mode of explanation’, which makes the abandonment of the
rationality principle explicit. According to Toboso (2001: 9–11; italics in original),
three rules characterize institutional individualism.
• Only persons can pursue aims and promote interests.
• Formal and informal sets of institutional rules affecting interactions among
persons must be part of the explanatory variables.

On the Explanation of Social and Societal Facts
809
• Marginal institutional changes always result from the independent or collective
actions of some persons and always take place within the wider institutional
frameworks.
Institutional individualism is a middle way because it
…yields non-systematic and non-reductionist explanations at the same time as it allows for
the incorporation into economic theories and models many formal and informal institutional
aspects surrounding all human interactions, whether these interactions take place within
stable structures of legal rules and social norms or whether they attempt to change the said
rules and norms.’ (Toboso, 2001: 11)
Toboso’s second rule relaxes institutional individualism still further because it
requires that institutional aspects of society (both formal and informal) be incor-
porated as explanatory variables. For instance, in the famous Milgram experiment
(1961) on obedience to authority such institutional aspects—like the ‘authority of
scientists’—come into play.
Gustave LeBon and Sigmund Freud implicitly appealed to informal rules in their
analysis of crowd behaviour. They established the causal role which crowds have
on the behaviour of individuals. Individuals will often behave differently under the
inﬂuence of a crowd than they would otherwise. Freud explained mass behaviour
through the effect of the mass on the individual’s psychic economy. (Freud, 1921:
117) He observed that crowd behaviour is qualitatively different from the behaviour
of the sum of many individuals. The interaction and interrelation of many individuals
(‘the crowd’) are used as explanatory variables to account for individual behaviour.
The interdependence of social actions produces ‘macro-level outcomes’, which range
widely:fromtheeffectsofindividualactionsonothers,bilateralexchanges,collective
decisions to formal organizations and social control. (Coleman, 1990: 20–3).
By contrast, methodological individualism insists, according to Elster (1982: 453;
italics in original), ‘that all social phenomena (their structure and their change) are
in principle explicable in terms of individuals—their properties, goals and beliefs.’
He adds that it is ‘compatible with beliefs about supra-individual entities or refer-
ence to other individuals.’ Elster’s claim raises the question (a) whether all social
phenomena can thus be explained and (b) whether it is even possible in principle to
ﬁnd such explanations. We have seen that institutional individualism clearly denies
the ﬁrst question. Methodological holism in addition denies the second question.
Institutional individualism enhances methodological individualism by adding insti-
tutional frameworks but does not treat institutions as reducible to individual beliefs
and beliefs. Methodological holism, where applicable, focuses on institutions and
societal structures without reference to individual agents, whose primary existence
it does not deny.

810
F. Weinert
7
Explanatory Holism
Both Hayek and Popper gave holism a bad name by associating it with political
totalitarianism. This opposition has rubbed off on ‘explanatory holism’. Holism can
either be understood in the traditional way as the afﬁrmation that societal ‘wholes’
exist and have distinct aims and interests of their own. It is this strong, implausible
sense, which Hayek, Popper, Watkins and Elster reject. But a weaker sense of holism
holds that the societal set-up shapes individual behaviour. Durkheim defended this
weaker sense of holism when he held that individual social agents are necessary
but not sufﬁcient to create social life. Societal entities exercise a ‘force’ on individ-
uals. This force comes in the guise of traditions, values and norms. Agassi follows
Durkheim when he characterizes institutionalism as the view that ‘social entities are
of primary importance for the social sciences’ and that they amount to more than
the sum of individuals. Institutionalism shares with methodological individualism
the view that only individuals have aims and responsibilities. (Agassi, 1975: 155)
But it also holds that societal entities possess reality. The interdependence of actions
amounts to more than the mere aggregation of individual actions. It is felt in the
force which they exercise. Marx, for instance, regarded the economic structure of
society as fundamental and thought that it determined individual actions. The soci-
ologist Nobert Elias shifted the emphasis to societal aggregates in his famous study
of the ‘civilizing process’. Elias analyzes the emergence of civility (civil behavior,
self-constraint and concern for others) in Western societies. His thesis is that with the
establishment of the modern state and the rational organization of political and social
affairs, there developed parallel internal constraints in individual members of these
societies. According to Elias neither the sociogenesis of the state nor the control
of emotions are the results of deliberate plans. One of the striking aspects of his
study is that the civilizing process—the emergence of civil behavior—is not driven
by rational motives, for instance hygienic concerns. His thesis is that the greater the
interdependence of people the greater the control of psychological drives. He sees
a close link between the emergence of modern societies and changes in personality
structures towards civility.
Each “increase” in restraints and interdependencies is an expression of the fact that the
ties between people, the way they depend on one another, are changing, and changing
qualitatively. This is what is meant by differences in social structure. And with the dynamic
network of dependencies into which a human life is woven, the drives and behavior of people
take on a different form. (Elias, 1982: Ch. 3, VIII., §37, p. 87; italics in original)
Such macro-analyses show that explanations are sometimes needed in the social
sciences, which operate purely on a collective or institutional level. This view could
therefore be called ‘emergent holism’ because societal features can no longer be
reduced, in explanatory terms, to individual behaviour.2 Social aggregates exercise
an effect on typical individuals.
2 In an earlier publication I described Durkheim’s stance as ‘emergent holism’ (Weinert, 2009: 135,
252) because the societal wholes emerge from the relations of individuals and become autonomous
in the sense that they constitute a reality, which has social effects and is more than the sum of

On the Explanation of Social and Societal Facts
811
The existence of human languages illustrates this weaker sense of holism.
A human language needs speakers, human beings, for its practice and survival.
Language speakers are necessary for its continuation. Without them, the language
will become extinct. Note that a language need not be actively spoken in a human
population to survive. Both Latin and ancient Greek survive because they exist in
written form, which experts can read. But a language exists prior to and beyond the
existence of a particular group of speakers. Any individual is born into a linguistic
culture and adopts the language spoken around them. No particular individual is
necessary for the survival of a language. The existence of language rules is the result
of linguistic evolution. They lay down how a language should be spoken at any
particular moment in time. These rules change over time but they permit to distin-
guish correct from indirect usage of the language at any particular stage. Non-native
speakers are corrected by native speakers. Even native speakers make mistakes, as
judged by grammar books. A human language is a social institution, which exists
in the secondary sense. It enjoys an independent reality and exercises constraints on
individual behaviour. But languages evolve, due to the interaction and participation
of the community of language users.
When societal aggregates do all the explanatory work, we arrive at methodological
or explanatory holism. It is not a political doctrine. For, as St. Lukes (1968: 127;
cf. Mandelbaum, in Gardiner, 1959) points out social situations and interrelations
between individuals ‘can be described in non-individual terms without reference to
political holism.’ The issue is methodological holism: whether social relations and
societal institutions can be explained without reference to individual terms. I have
already argued that if methodological individualism is taken to its logical conclusion,
it can explain only some social facts, like the drop in teaching standards in inner city
schools, following the exodus of the middle classes. There are societal facts which
cannot be adequately explained without reference to macro-phenomena. Such supra-
individual explanations may involve ideal types or reference to social mechanisms.
Consider two typical examples of ‘holistic’ explanations.
8
Explanatory Holism at Work
(A)
In 2001, two American economists, following a Swedish study, provided an
explanation of why there was a signiﬁcant drop in juvenile crime rates in
certain parts of the United States in the late 1980s and early 1990s (Levitt &
Donohue, 2001; Fig. 1). They related this drop in crime rates to the legalization
of abortion in many parts of the US in 1973. The Donohue/Levitt hypothesis
argues that the legalization of abortion led to the birth of fewer unwanted
children or children whose parents could not support them. They further argued
individuals at any one time. I was not aware at the time that Coleman (1990: 28) also employs the
language of emergence when he argues that ‘the “system level” exists solely of emergent properties
characterizing the system of action as a whole.’

812
F. Weinert
Fig. 1 The Donohue/Levitt
hypothesis. Source Scientiﬁc
American (December 1999:
14)
that unwanted children are more likely to commit crimes as young adults.
And thus the drop in delinquency rates, starting in 1992, can be linked to the
availability of abortion. This hypothesis was and remains controversial. But
whether true or not, it is an example of an explanation of a societal fact—
the reduction in crime rates—due to another societal fact—the legalization
of abortion. In both cases individuals are involved—legislators and women—
but the explanation concerns macro-phenomena, i.e. abortion and crime rates.
The Donohue/Levitt hypothesis refers to a general social mechanism. If the
authorities in a given society enable certain social or legal situations, certain
predictable effects are likely to happen. In 1999 the Home Ofﬁce in Britain
predicted that the number of burglaries and thefts would increase by almost
a third in a short time span of two to three years. The expected rise in crime
was a consequence of the rise in the young male population in Britain. In this
instance a causal analysis combines with a prediction. The predicted increase
in the number of burglaries and thefts is blamed on an increase in the number
of young adults and a growth in the amount of stealable goods. The latter are
the causal conditions, which are said to lead to the effect, if no other conditions
interfere.
These examples show that the social sciences are able to make statistical predic-
tions. Such predictions become possible when social mechanisms are at hand,
which can account for the production of social facts. The connection between
societal facts and statistical regularities is revealed whenever population statistics
are cited.
The argument in favour of “social facts” is historically connected with the presence of statis-
tical regularities where none can be found at the molecular, individual level. The statistical
regularity can be explained in terms of features of the social situation as a whole, but in
practice it is seldom possible to trace the nexus in individual cases. (Gellner, in Gardiner,
1959: 493)

On the Explanation of Social and Societal Facts
813
Individual 
Poverty
Structural Changes & 
Modernization
Erosion of traditional 
restraint on behaviour
Political Mobilization
Elite Intransigence
Political Instability
Fig. 2 Poverty as a cause of political instability
(B)
Another example of a social mechanism explanation refers to social unrest. It
may be due to a number of factors, such as social, political, economic and envi-
ronmental causes. My particular example deals with social unrest in Albania in
1997, which occurred as a result of a combination of various factors: poverty in
the population is not sufﬁcient to cause social unrest. Individual poverty must
be combined with structural changes in society, which lead to the erosion of
traditional restraint upon behavior. These two factors lead to the development
of political awareness. But it is only when this political mobilization is met
by intransigence on the part of the political class that it results in high-level
instability (Fig. 2; cf. Little, 1991: 28).
9
Social Mechanisms
What arguments do methodological holists offer to support their claim that macro-
explanations of social phenomena are inevitable? Recall Popper’s notion of a problem
situation. A problem situation consists of a perceived problem, background knowl-
edge, available problem-solving techniques and tentative solutions. I say ‘perceived’
problems because the perception of a problem changes over time. What was once

814
F. Weinert
regarded as a problem may have disappeared and be replaced by new problems.
The background knowledge consists of the state of knowledge of a discipline at a
given moment in time. The available techniques consist of statistical analyses, obser-
vations, interviews and commitment to a methodology. Due to his commitment to
methodological individualism and Enlightenment rationality Popper includes in his
model of situational analysis a rationality principle, adopted from Rational Choice
theory. But, as Toboso (2001: 8) points out, institutional individualism need not
make any reference to a rationality principle. The rules of institutional individualism
spell out which institutional aspects are to be considered and how they affect human
interactions. But they do not specify types of rationality, preferences on the part of
individuals or whether consequences of human interactions are intended or unin-
tended. If the emphasis shifts from the individual to the institutional level, we turn to
explanatory holism. Methodological holism afﬁrms that situational analysis requires
societal facts to be explained by macro-explanations.
In the literature various arguments have been put forward in favour of method-
ological holism. They concern either the indispensability of holistic explanations, the
impossibility of translating macro-level theories into individualist theories or argu-
ments which refer to social-level mechanisms (Zahle, 2016). As I have considered
social science explanations either in terms of Weber’s ideal types or social mecha-
nisms I will focus here on these types of explanation. I will then ask how they are
related.
The appeal to social mechanisms is useful because they can be adapted to different
levels and situations. Mechanisms do not possess the unrestricted universality of
laws in the hard sciences. But they exist at a deeper level than mere descriptions or
statistical correlations. There is no agreement in the literature on what constitutes
a social mechanism. But the general idea motivating the search for mechanisms is
that they provide causal explanations. Mechanisms constitute causal links between
surface phenomena and their underlying causes. The term ‘mechanism’ refers to
recurrent processes linking speciﬁed initial conditions to speciﬁc outcomes. State-
ments about mechanisms are generalizing causal propositions (Mayntz, 2004: §2).
It is useful in this context to recall Weber’s notion of adequate causal explanations
in the social sciences. The identiﬁcation of certain factors in a given situation is
regarded as the most likely explanation of a social phenomenon. It is a feature of
the social sciences that such explanations are often contested or subject to modiﬁ-
cations. The asceticism of the Protestant Ethic could be an adequate explanation of
the rise of modern capitalism in mostly Protestant countries. The baby boom of the
1960s could be an adequate explanation of the rise in juvenile crime, as predicted
by the British Home Ofﬁce. Elias’s link between structural changes in society and
the emergence of civility could be an adequate explanation of the civilizing process.
The Donohue/Levitt hypothesis could be an adequate explanation of the drop in
delinquency twenty years after the legalization of abortion. Poverty (etc.) could
be the cause of political unrest. Such explanations may be adequate, but they do
not possess the certainty of causal explanations in physics. They are nevertheless
important because the social sciences need to explain social and societal facts.

On the Explanation of Social and Societal Facts
815
Causal explanations with generative mechanisms constitute important types of
social science explanations. According to Bunge (2004), there are no universal mech-
anisms in the social world, only system-speciﬁc ones. Bunge proposes his CESM
model μ(σ) of a concrete system, σ:
μ(σ) = ⟨C(σ), E(σ), S(σ), M(σ)⟩
(where μ(σ) is the model of the system σ, C(σ) is the set of its parts, E(σ) are envi-
ronmental conditions, S(σ) is the structure of the system and M(σ) is the mechanism,
which spells out a sequence of states). As an example Bunge (2004: 189) cites the
nuclear family:
The most familiar example of a social system is the traditional nuclear family. Its components
are the parents and children; the relevant environment is the immediate physical environ-
ment, the neighborhood, and the workplace; the structure is made up of such biological and
psychological bonds as love, sharing, and relations with others; and the mechanism consists
essentially of domestic chores, marital encounters of various kinds, and child rearing. If any
of the mechanisms breaks down, so does the system.
Mechanisms can operate at various levels. Bunge refers to mechanisms at the
individual level; the avoidance of cognitive dissonance also operates at the micro-
level. When faced with equally attractive choices (say, a holiday in Spain or Italy)
individuals must choose one of the available options. Once the choice has been
made individuals typically ﬁnd reasons why their choice is better than the rejected
alternative. (The sour grapes phenomenon belongs to this category.) Note that the
mechanism of cognitive dissonance explains what typical or average individuals are
expected to do, not what particular individuals will do. The question here is whether
such mechanisms exist at the macro-level. One hint is given by methodological
individualism itself, which accepts that interpersonal relations must be included even
if this methodology is adopted. Popper (1976: 103ff) explains that
…this programme consists of building a model of the social situation, particularly incorpo-
rating the institutional situation the agent confronts when acting, so that the rationality of
his action may be accounted for.
But institutional individualism no longer insists on the rationality principle. As
it also holds that the ‘institutional situation’ presents a ‘reality’ over and above
individual actions, it would be a ‘fatal mistake’ to infer macro-phenomena from
‘motivated individual behaviour’ (Mayntz, 2004: §4). The reason is that interper-
sonal relations involve institutional and structural factors, which, according to both
institutional individualism and methodological holism, put constraints on individual
behaviour. This phenomenon is clearly at work when political parties decide on
their political programmes. It transforms individual views into collective decisions.
Consider, for instance, the Conservative Party in the United Kingdom and its decision
to support Brexit, that is the departure of the UK from the European Union. At ﬁrst
individuals in the Party represented a variety of opinions, between the two extremes
‘leave’ and ‘remain’. But once the Party had agreed on the ‘leave’ option, it became

816
F. Weinert
its ofﬁcial policy. Although some individuals in the party continued to oppose the
collective decision, ofﬁcials began to represent and defend it publicly. The collective
decision constituted constraints on individual members and those who continued to
oppose the collective decision were sanctioned. (For instance, remainer MPs lost
their seats in parliament.) There never was a unanimous consensus even amongst
Conservative MPs regarding Brexit. But once the decision had been adopted, indi-
vidual opinions became irrelevant: the individual views of some had morphed into
the collective decision. Such processes are widespread.
Social mechanisms play an important part in understanding the social world. They
cover economic mechanisms:
The mechanism generating the macro effect “market equilibrium” also depends on structural
features, such as the existence of a plurality of competing producers and the absence of
political price ﬁxing; the rational decisions of individuals to offer or buy are the “material
stuff” of the process, but its shape is determined by these structural elements. (Mayntz, 2004:
251)
And they cover political mechanisms:
Democracy is a social mechanism for resolving the problem of societal decision-making
among conﬂicting interest groups with minimum force and maximum consensus. (Lipset,
1959: 92; quoted in Bunge, 2004: 185)
In all cases, as Mayntz (2004: 251) points out, ‘speciﬁc structural (or institutional)
features are decisive for the generation of aggregate macro-effects by the moti-
vated action of individuals.’ Economic and political mechanisms represent societal
mechanisms.
These examples show that ‘explanatory holism’ does not commit its proponents
to ‘social fact holism’ (List & Spiekermann, 2013: 630). In fact, ontological holism
belongs to the ﬁeld of metaphysics, explanatory holism belongs to methodology. In
the early debates, as we have seen, there often lurked the danger of confusing these
two issues. But Durkheim’s claim that societal facts act as constraints on individual
members of society is compatible with the view that society is made up of individuals
who alone have intentionality. Individuals are, in Durkheim’s phrase, necessary but
not sufﬁcient for the existence of societal facts. For interpersonal relations give rise to
institutional structures and group-level phenomena. The exercise of these constraints
on individuals requires explanation, so does the reality of institutions.
According to a detailed defense of explanatory holism a ‘social system requires
explanatory holism if and only if three jointly necessary and sufﬁcient conditions are
satisﬁed’ (List & Spiekermann, 2013: 639–40):
• Multiple levels of description exist: The system admits lower and higher levels of
description. ‘The lower level of description typically refers to individuals and their
properties, whilst the higher level refers to the properties of social aggregates.’ As
we have seen there are cases where either of these approaches or a mixture of them
is required. If a pragmatic approach is adopted, it becomes the problem-situation,
which determines which level of description is appropriate.

On the Explanation of Social and Societal Facts
817
• Higher-level properties can be realized in multiple ways: ‘The system’s higher-
level properties are determined by the lower-level properties’, which means that
individuals are necessary for social aggregates. But these higher-level properties
‘can be realized by numerous different conﬁgurations of them and hence cannot
feasibly be re-described in terms of lower-level properties.’ If, for instance, ‘we
take a long-term view of social facts or processes over time, which could have
been brought about by different individual actions, then an explanation in terms of
individual-level properties becomes implausible.’ Statistical regularities spring to
mind. In this connection it is convenient to recall that the principle ‘same cause,
same effect’, which works well in the natural sciences, does not work in the
social sciences. For instance, political parties typically aim at or promise the
same effect—namely, the improvement of the lives of the citizens. But the way
they intend to achieve this aim differs widely according to their political agenda,
be it socialist, liberal or conservative. This is also illustrated in the last condition.
• Higher-level causal relations remain invariable through micro-permutations: ‘The
causal relations in which some of the system’s higher-level properties stand are
robust to changes in their lower-level realization.’ For instance, the commitment of
political parties to citizens’ welfare is consistent throughout history and different
political systems. It continues to hold throughout the rotation of individual polit-
ical actors. The survival of a natural language is independent of the employment
of the language by individual speakers. The community of speakers undergoes
constant ﬂuctuations, but the higher-level properties of the language are robust to
changes in individual speakers.
The authors cite the study of ethnic conﬂict and civil war as one example where
explanatory holism is required. It involves the weakness of the state and insurgency of
the population, as was the case in Albania in 1999. A famous example of explanatory
holism is Durkheim’s suicide study (1897). Durkheim found that in certain parts of
Europe the suicide rate rose by 100% between 1856 and 1878. But the recorded
reasons for suicide, i.e. illness, poverty, jealousy remained the same during this
period. So the same ‘causes’ obtained but the effects differed. Durkheim concluded
that the aforementioned psychological factors could not be the true causes of suicide.
The explanation had to be sought in societal factors. The members of a society are
governed by social forces which exist independently of each of them. Durkheim
identiﬁed three different sorts of suicides in terms of three distinct social causes:
Egoistic suicide results from too little social integration; altruistic suicide results
from too much social integration and anomic suicide results from great and rapid
changes in the degree of social integration which leave social agents normless and
disoriented. Durkheim explained each of the social facts about differences in suicide
rates by a societal fact about differences in the degree of social integration (see
Rosenberg, 1995: 132). According to a more recent study, published by the Ofﬁce
for National Statistics in the UK (2015), there is a clear link between austerity and
suicide, between poor employment or underemployment and mental health problems.
Thus there are societal facts, which require macro-explanations. Such higher-level
explanations are needed, for instance, when social scientists consider the evolution of

818
F. Weinert
modern society. Weber led the way by analyzing structural aspects of traditional and
modern societies. But modern industrial societies are now themselves transitioning
to ‘risk societies’, according to Beck (1992) and Giddens (1990). Whilst danger has
always been a feature of life, it mainly struck as natural disasters. A new situation
has emerged; industrialization and modernization have led to self-induced risks: the
threat of global warming, the fear of nuclear war and the risk of overpopulation are
striking examples. Risk becomes transnational. These self-inﬂicted risks result in
reﬂexive modernization, which forces societies to reﬂect on the very effects of their
activities on nature and society. It leads to a questioning of traditional authorities and
an underlying trust in established institutions. This skepticism produces new forms
of risk. If modern societies do indeed evolve towards ‘risk societies’, this evolution
requires macro-level explanations.
10
Social Mechanisms and Ideal Types
Although there are different types of explanations in the social sciences—functional,
statistical, descriptive, causal, partly reﬂecting the different social science disci-
plines—I have focused on ideal–typical and mechanistic explanations. These types
of explanation best illustrate the methodological debates around methodological indi-
vidualism and holism. The question arises how Weber’s ideal type methodology and
the method of social mechanisms are related. Both are models of social systems.
It seems to me that ideal–typical models possess more generality and ﬂexibility
than mechanism models. Explanations in terms of social mechanisms can without
much effort be included in ideal–typical models. But this implies that ideal types can
also be used to explain micro- and macro-phenomena. The latter are exactly the ideal
types, which Watkins dismissed as ‘holistic’. Weber uses such models to describe and
explainmacro-phenomena,likefeudalismandformsofcapitalism.(Cf.Ringer,2002)
But his use of ‘holistic’ models was much more extensive than Watkins considered. It
covered types of bureaucracy and authority, power, world religions and social struc-
tures. Elias’s macro-analysis of the emergence of Western civilization also employs
ideal–typical constructions. They focus on salient features of a historical situation
or social phenomena. It is easy to see that social mechanisms may be included in
the salient features, which the model describes. According to Bunge innovation is
the central mechanism which drives a capitalist economy. Bunge’s CESM model
also includes the components of the system, which are related by the mechanism.
Bunge (2004: 186–8) deﬁnes a system as ‘a complex object whose parts or compo-
nents are held together by a bond of some kind.’ Such a general characterization
of systems applies both in the natural and social sciences. A nice illustration of a
natural system is the solar system: the planets are the components of the system; the
system is held together by the bond of gravity and Kepler’s laws. Darwin also has
systems in mind when he speaks of interdependent systems in the natural world. A
plant supports an insect and the insect needs the plant for its survival. Social and
societal systems are held together by social bonds: institutions, laws, norms, values,

On the Explanation of Social and Societal Facts
819
traditions. The constituents of the systems are either macro-components, like institu-
tions, or micro-components, like social agents. Their interactions create the reality of
societal aggregates, both of which require macro-level explanations. Hence we can
conclude that Bunge’s model is an ideal–typical model, which includes the mech-
anisms of various social systems (family, capitalist economy). Social mechanisms
can thus become part of ideal–typical explanations.
References
Agassi, J. (1975). Institutional individualism. British Journal of Sociology, 26(2), 144–155.
Beck, U. (1992). Risk society. Sage Publications. Translation of the German original: Risikoge-
sellschaft. Frankfurt a. M.: Suhrkamp (1986).
Bunge, M. (2004). How does it work: The search for explanatory mechanisms. Philosophy of the
Social Sciences, 34(2), 169–181.
Coleman, J. (1990). Foundations of social theory. Cambridge University Press.
Durkheim, E. (1982/1895). The rules of sociological method. London: Macmillan.
Durkheim, E. (2006/1897). On suicide. Penguin Classics.
Elias, N. (1982). State formation and civilization—The civilizing process (Vol. II). Blackwell
Publishers.
Elster, J. (1982). The case for methodological individualism. Theory and Society, 11(4), 453–482.
Freud, S. (1921). Group psychology and the analysis of the ego. Complete Works, XVIII (1955),
69–143.
Gardiner, P. (Ed.). (1959). Theories of history. The Free Press.
Gellner, E. (1959). Holism versus individualism in history and sociology. In P. Gardiner (Ed.) (pp,
488–503).
Giddens, A. (1990). Consequences of modernity. Polity Press.
Hayek, F. A. (1964/1955). The counter-revolution of science. The Free Press of Glencoe.
Heath, J. (2020). Methodological individualism. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Hollis, M. (1994). The philosophy of social science. Cambridge University Press.
Levitt, St., & Donohue, J. (2001). The impact of legalized abortion on crime. The Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 116(2), 379–420.
Lipset, S. M. (1959). Political sociology. In R. K. Merton, L. Broom, & L. S. Cottrell (Eds.),
Sociology today: Problems and prospects (pp. 81–114). Basic Books.
List, C., & Spiekermann, K. (2013). Methodological individualism and holism in political science:
A reconciliation. American Political Science Review, 107(4), 629–643
Little, D. (1991). Varieties of social explanations. Westview Press.
Lukes, St. (1968). Methodological individualism reconsidered. British Journal of Sociology, 19(2),
453–482.
Mandelbaum, M. (1959). History and the social sciences. P. Gardiner (Ed.) (pp. 476–488).
Mayntz, R. (2004). Mechanisms in the analysis of social macro-phenomena. Philosophy of the
Social Sciences, 34(2), 237–259.
Papineau, D. (1978). For science in the social sciences. Palgrave Macmillan.
Popper, K., et al. (1976). The logic of the social sciences. In Th. W. Adorno (Ed.), The positivist
dispute in German sociology (pp. 87–104). Heinemann.
Popper, K. (21960/1957). The poverty of historicism. Routledge.
Ringer,F.(2002).MaxWeberoncausalanalysis,interpretationandcomparison.HistoryandTheory,
41(2), 163–178.
Rosenberg, A. (21995). Philosophy of social science. Westview Press.

820
F. Weinert
Toboso, F. (2001). Institutional individualism and institutional change: A middle way. Cambridge
Journal of Economics, 25(6), 765–783.
Watkins, J. W. N. (1952a). Ideal types and historical explanation. The British Journal for the
Philosophy of Science, 3(9), 22–53.
Watkins, J. W. N. (1952b). The principle of methodological individualism. The British Journal for
the Philosophy of Science, 3(10), 186–189.
Watkins, J. W. N. (1955). Methodological individualism: A reply. Philosophy of Science, 22(1),
58–62.
Weber, M. (1978). Wirtschaft und Gesellschaft (1921). English Translation: Economy and society.
University of California Press.
Weber, M. (1905/1949). Objective possibility and adequate causation in historical explanation.
Reprinted in E. A. Shils, & H. A. Finch (Eds.), The Methodology of the Social Sciences: Max
Weber. Glencoe (Ill.) (pp. 164–188). The Free Press (1949).
Weber, M. (1974). Die Protestantische Ethik und der Geist des Kapitalismus (1904–5). English
Translation: The protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism. Unwin University Books.
Weinert, F. (2009). Copernicus, Darwin and Freud. Wiley.
Weinert, F. (1996). Weber’s ideal types as models in the social sciences. In A. O’Hear, (Ed.),
Verstehen and Humane Understanding (pp. 73–93). Royal Institute of Philosophy Supplement:
41. Cambridge UP (1996),
Zahle, J. (2016). Methodological holism. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.

On the Irreversible Journey of Matter,
Life and Human Culture
Diederik Aerts and Massimiliano Sassoli de Bianchi
1
Introduction
Year 2021 could be the one in the course of which some of the mysteries enveloping
antimatter will start to be addressed. Not only about its electromagnetic behavior
(for instance, does antihydrogen have the same spectral lines as hydrogen?) but
also about its gravitational behavior. For the latter, three different experiments are
already planned at CERN: AEgIS (Kellerbauer et al., 2008), ALPHA-g (Bertsche,
2017) and Gbar (Indelicato et al., 2014), to determine if antimatter, likewise matter,
has a positive gravitational charge, or a negative one.
Most physicists believe antimatter normally falls downwards and not upwards,
but the latter hypothesis is not so unlikely, considering it is the main ingredient
of the Dirac-Milne cosmological model (Benoit-Lévy & Chardin, 2012), providing
possible explanations for dark matter and dark energy (Chardin & Manfredi, 2018).
Also, antigravity could explain the “victory” of matter over antimatter. Indeed, being
antimatter forced to rapidly move away from matter, the latter would have remained
protected from the former, by escaping its deadly embrace.
A different possible mechanism, also explaining the existence of our matter-
universe, where structures were able to form despite the destructive menace of anti-
matter, was proposed many years ago by Sakharov (1967), with the hypothesis of
a tiny difference in the production of matter and antimatter, i.e., of a violation of
the baryon number conservation law. According to it, a colossal—out of thermal
equilibrium (Shaposhnikov & Farrar, 1993)—battle between matter and antimatter
D. Aerts (B) · M. Sassoli de Bianchi
Center Leo Apostel for Interdisciplinary Studies, Brussels Free University, Brussels, Belgium
e-mail: diraerts@vub.ac.be
M. Sassoli de Bianchi
e-mail: msassoli@vub.ac.be
M. Sassoli de Bianchi
Laboratorio di Autoricerca di Base, 6917 Barbengo, Switzerland
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
S. Wuppuluri and I. Stewart (eds.), From Electrons to Elephants and Elections,
The Frontiers Collection, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-92192-7_42
821

822
D. Aerts and M. Sassoli de Bianchi
saw the almost complete destruction of both “armies,” with the survival of only a
residual fraction of matter, which then formed the universe in which we live today,
where antimatter only exists in traces and no longer constitutes a danger for present
and future structures.
We have no idea of course if one of the above two scenarios correctly addresses
what is considered to be one of the big problems of modern cosmology. Seeing that
the survival of matter over antimatter has allowed for the construction of complex
structures, thus of life itself, we could say that this question is part of another big
question: that of the very emergence of life and human culture, and its struggle not
to succumb to the omnipresence of disruptive forces, which in classical physics can
be associated with the second law of thermodynamics, and in quantum physics with
the mechanism of decoherence. One of the ideas expressed in this chapter is that in
the context of human culture, both can be connected with the ancient notion of ‘evil’.
In Aerts et al. (2019b), one of us tried to express the above in somehow poetic
terms, with the following suggestive words:
Nobody ever promised that things would be easy, and they are not.
Nobody ever promised that suffering would not be intrinsically part of life, including part
of your life, and it is.
Nobody ever promised differently, namely that each time again problems would arise,
some hard ones, maybe some terribly hard ones, and some less hard ones, and that is how it
is.
Nobody ever promised that it would be possible to solve even the minor ones of these
problems at a ﬁrst try, let stand the harder ones, and so it is.
Nobody ever promised that evil would not be lurking around, mostly even in those places
where it can best hide its nature, and so it is.
The above short description is a good characterization of life in depth and we know why it
is, because we, as human beings, have awaken to it in consciousness.
This is its nature because life is the moment-to-moment irreversible choice and constant
ﬁght against the spontaneous regression to ‘just being’, which on the local level of a human
body we call death.
Every breath, every piece of food, every step, every smile, every embrace, every sprinkle of
love, compassion, collaboration, construction, creation, are little parts of this constant ﬁght
against ‘just being’, or local death, the content of the second law of thermodynamics, and
on a deeper physics level the separation of matter from anti-matter in time.
As little individual humans we are humble participants in this great endeavor of life, this
great enterprise of struggle and ﬁght, this deep endurance of suffering, this never-ending
attempting of solving problems, failing and trying again, and sometimes succeeding in a
local and modest victory.
The deep secret of life is that if you pursue a noble goal all the characteristics of life described
above become the substance of meaning, which is the food of the human mind.
It is the purpose of this chapter to explore the view synthetized in the above lines,
which at ﬁrst sight might be considered to be mainly a “psychological metaphor.”

On the Irreversible Journey of Matter …
823
We believe instead that they have to be taken quite literally, not only psychologically,
but also physically, and biologically. They indeed adequately capture the very special
condition in which all living organisms are, like plants, animals, but also microor-
ganisms, like bacteria, although only we humans have become fully aware of it and,
as we will emphasize, this puts us in a special condition with respect to it.
Fromthepointofviewofphysics,thepotentialpresenceofantimatter,menacingto
annihilate all material structures into light, is an aspect we will consider, as well as the
manifestation of the second law of thermodynamics, which also plays a fundamental
role. Indeed, following this law, isolated systems spontaneously evolve towards a
state of maximum entropy, which is a state of (thermal) equilibrium. Hence, life,
as initially pointed out by Schrödinger (1944) in his famous book “What is Life?”,
is about struggling to stay away from isolation and from the menace of all sorts of
equilibria.
2
Stable an Unstable Equilibrium
Whenwebringtogetheranelectronandaproton,wecaneasilyformahydrogenatom.
What we tend to forget is that this creation of structure can only happen because we
live today, cosmologically speaking, in a relatively peaceful realm, which emerged
from the primordial separation of matter from antimatter. As we mentioned already,
different mechanisms could be at the origin of this separation, which in turn could
be the consequence of an even deeper separation.
One can speculate that the matter–antimatter split was the result, at a much more
fundamental level, of the coming into existence of the very arrow of time, i.e., of the
distinction between past and future, forcing matter and antimatter to move in oppo-
site temporal directions, as suggested for instance by Feynman’s diagrams (Feynman,
1949). Hence, spatial separation would have stemmed from an even deeper separa-
tion, taking place at the temporal level. And we can associate such primordial level
of separation also with the moment when the Higgs ﬁeld conferred a rest mass to
some of the physical entities evolving in those ancient times (Kibble, 2009), hence
allowing for the matter–antimatter duality split.
So, if a hydrogen atom can easily form, this is because the “mother” aspect
of matter (the meaning of the word “matter” comes from the Latin “mater,” i.e.,
“mother”) can today easily play her role in promoting the birth of all sorts of struc-
tures, similarly to a fertile ground. The cosmos, freed from the presence of antimatter,
has become a relatively peaceful island. And as far as we can say, the process is
irreversible, hence, at the global level of evolution of our universe, the process of
‘construction of new structures’ is winning over (is stronger than) the process that
tends to destroy them. But this is not always the case when the ‘construction’ and
‘destruction’ aspects face each other within a same reality layer. In that situation,
the opposite appears to be more likely: we observe a ‘fragility of construction’ and
a remarkable ‘robustness of destruction’.

824
D. Aerts and M. Sassoli de Bianchi
This we might not realize when, say, in our garden, we plant a healthy seed in
a fertile ground and see it grow. Again, this is because our garden is a relatively
peaceful island of stability, where everything threatening the blossoming and growth
of the new seed has been previously evacuated (assuming here that we are good
gardeners). In the wild, that same fertile ground could face moments of extreme
dryness, or become too wet, and generally would have been colonized by numerous
other plants, which being older and stronger can easily take the sun light away from
the newborn, impeding its growth (it is of course just an example).
In other words, with apparent no effort, the universe can bring about new struc-
tures, new forms of complexity, but one should not be fooled by this apparent effort-
lessness, as this can happen only when the right circumstances have already been set
in place, i.e., when local islands of stability have already been created, playing the
role of ‘steppingstones for future progress’.
At the local level, when we are outside of these peaceful islands, what can possibly
come into existence will in general never come into existence, because each new
step is the result of a battle against the pervasive destructuring forces, always at
work, hence, every new structure, every new life form, is to be considered as a true
achievement.
There is here a subtle point to understand. Life requires peaceful islands to unfold
and advance, but at the same time, these very peaceful islands are akin to an aspect
which is precisely what life must constantly ﬁght. As indicated in the above quote,
there is an aspect in reality which can be described as its level of ‘pure existence’,
or ‘pure being’, or ‘just being’. Then, there is a completely different level, that of
‘change’, of ‘evolution’, of ‘becoming’, which is the level inhabited by life itself, to
be here understood in the largest possible meaning of the word.
‘Being’ is always in balance, but ‘life’ is intrinsically ‘not in balance’ and, more
precisely, it is because ‘being is in balance’ that ‘life is not in balance’. The level of
‘being’ manifests as the tendency of reality to always seek a condition of balance,
of sameness. This is really the main characteristic of what we call ‘being’, whose
great ally is therefore the second law of thermodynamics, with its inexorable drive
towards obtaining stable states of equilibrium. On the other hand, ‘life’ manifests as
a constant struggle in always seeking conditions of deep unbalance.
Of course, life is also creation and construction, hence, while trying to promote
conditions of unbalance, without which it could not create anything new, at the same
time life also tries to stabilize its own creations, and in doing so it somehow imitates
the ‘balance seeking behavior’ of the level of ‘being’, although only provisionally.
In other words, life, while seeking unbalance, also creates temporary domains of
stability, which are immediately used as new steppingstones to explore new states
of unbalance, and the creation of all these subsequent steppingstones corresponds
to the ancient ‘instruction mechanism’ of life, and before ‘life’, of ‘matter’, as we
consider here ‘matter’, in the absence of ‘antimatter’, the starting phase of life itself
in this universe.

On the Irreversible Journey of Matter …
825
3
Irreversible Steppingstones
So, reality has a spontaneous tendency to reach states of balance, and this is a charac-
teristic of the ‘level of being’, which as we said has the second law of thermodynamics
as its main ally, and therefore the latter is a major obstacle to life, which constantly
seeks to keep itself from reaching equilibrium. Since it does so by also creating
provisional domains of stability, the illusion of ‘life as a manifestation of balance’
could be easily fostered at the local level, but is just an illusion.
Different from matter, what we generically call ‘light’ (we use here the term in
an extended sense, i.e., to refer to the entire electromagnetic radiation and not just
the tiny portion of it that can be perceived by our human eyes) describes the level of
‘pure being’ (or at least, it is very close to it). This because a photon, being massless,
has no “antimaterial counterpart.” It therefore moves in a domain of reality that is
not touched (or very weakly touched) by the matter–antimatter dichotomy. From that
standpoint, it is not a material entity and does not participate in the life struggle.
Another domain where, possibly, such struggle can be avoided, is the mental
domain. Many ancient traditions, for instance Buddhism, aim in their teachings at
reducing, apparently also with some success, any forms of conﬂict that might emerge
atthemental/conscientiallevel.So,althoughitisclearthatthehumanmindcanreﬂect
conﬂicts that are manifested at the level of the physical body, it is also possible to
assume that minds (but maybe we should better say ‘consciousnesses’) can free
themselves from the struggle that characterize biological life. In other words, it is
not impossible that human minds (a notion that needs here not to be conﬂated with
that of human brains), and possibly also non-human minds, like animal minds, could
belong to a different realm of our reality, one where ‘being and perfect balance’ could
be the default state.
Now, it is because life is an asymmetric ‘out of balance’ state of affairs that it
always seeks new constructions and creations and is intrinsically irreversible. When
the choice of matter over antimatter is made, i.e., of unbalance over balance, of
instability over stability, there is no going back. Of course, the choice always remains
of either using the past steppingstones, i.e., the past unstable local regions of peace
and balance, to move forward and create more advanced ones, or to simply destroy
them.
The biological processes that keep a human body alive and healthy constitutes a
perfect example of such a region of illusionary peace and balance. Changes in the
outerenvironmentcanproduceasuddendeparturefromit,implyingtheabandonment
of the state of health, which can mean the onset of disease, or even the death of the
organisminquestion,orthepromotioninsteadofahigherstateofhealth(forexample,
via transitional processes of hormesis).

826
D. Aerts and M. Sassoli de Bianchi
4
War and Peace
An interesting example of a local steppingstone is the situation where a group of
nations are at peace with one another. Again, the equilibrium is not stable. It is indeed
sufﬁcient that one among these nations starts a war that many of these nations, if not
all, will be automatically pushed away from their previous state of peace. In other
words, there is clearly an asymmetry between the ‘state of war’ and the ‘state of
peace’. The former is much more stable than the latter.
Consider the opposite situation where a group of nations are at war with one
another and that one of them decides to cease ﬁghting and to relate to the other
nations in a peaceful way. Will this affect the latter? Almost certainly not. Indeed, in
a situation of global war, until a sufﬁciently large level of destruction is reached (the
entropic equilibrium), the different parties cannot individually escape its destructive
logic (unless they decide to do so all together), penalty of seeing their own territory
invaded and conquered by the other entities participating in the conﬂict.
In other words, ‘peace’ is like a pencil standing on its tip (unstable equilibrium)
whereas‘war’islikeapendulum(stableequilibrium).Ifasmallimpulseistransferred
to the pendulum, it will quickly return to its original position, while even the smallest
impulse transferred to a pencil balanced on its tip will make it irremediably lose its
original state.
The question that naturally arises is then: If war is a stable attractor state, and
peace is an unstable state, why don’t we always ﬁnd ourselves at war? The reason
is simple: although ‘war’ describes a stable state, it is in the nature of such state to
destroy the previous islands of stability, i.e., the social structures of the countries at
war and, more importantly and more radically, the bodies of the inhabitants of such
countries. It is in this process of ‘search for balance through destruction’ that the
irreversibility of the trajectory of life reveals itself.
Indeed, the only survival possible, or chance of progress, once the material struc-
tures have engaged in that path of struggle that is life, is in the constant ﬁght for the
conquering of new local regions of temporary stability, i.e., of new steppingstones,
otherwise all that has been conquered can be lost. And this is why nations know that
peace is never to be taken for granted, that it requires continuous collective effort to
maintain it and perfect it over time.
5
Instability and Freedom
The instability of the life process, while requiring living beings to make continuous
efforts for their survival, or to be able to meet evolutionary challenges, also offers a
considerable advantage. To illustrate this, consider the example of humans walking
on two feet, rather than a quadruped moving on its four paws. Standing on two feet
is an unstable state: it is not like a pendulum, but more like a pencil standing on its
tip. It is an unstable state locally stabilized by the balance system provided by the

On the Irreversible Journey of Matter …
827
inner ear and its neuronal negative feedback mechanism (allowing the brain to know
the position of the head relative to gravity and its surroundings).
The advantage of unstable states lies precisely in the fact that small disturbances
can make them collapse into very different states (think of the pencil on its tip,
which can fall along all possible directions). This means that unstable systems have
considerable ‘freedom’ in exploring different possibilities. On the contrary, stable
states have no freedom, and this precisely because of their steady balance, which
reduces to almost zero their ‘potentiality level’. And this by the way is also the
reason why unstable states are intrinsically unpredictable, whereas stable states are
deterministic in their evolution.
Of course, when a system opens to a vast set of potentialities, i.e., of ‘collapses
towards different possible outcome states’, many of those will also pose a threat. But
this is the price to pay for freedom. When we walk on two feet, the risk of falling
is much greater than if we walk on four. But having released two out of four limbs
means being able to use them to explore new regions of our reality, in ways that were
previously impossible even to imagine.
Consider again a pendulum as the archetype of balance and stability. Every little
force applied to it will make it spontaneously move back to its original state of
equilibrium. There is almost no freedom involved in this archetype and one could
even state, for the sake of clarity, ‘no freedom at all’ because of ‘pure balance’.
So, if many ‘collapses’, i.e., ‘actualizations of potential outcomes’, are heading
towards disaster, in fact the majority of them, a few will be instead towards the
construction of new steppingstones, i.e., of new islands of local stability. This applies
to all forms of freedom, not only freedom of movement in physical systems, but also,
say, freedom of speech in sociocultural systems, so important for the development of
our modern societies, increasingly focused on verbal and symbolic communication.
But the intrinsic instability of a state of freedom requires those who inhabit it to
never get distracted, because in every instant of their advancement on the path of life,
choices are required that could lead to the construction of new local balances, but
also to self-destruction. Expressed in mythical language, it is about staying aware
of the constant battle between ‘good’ and ‘evil’. The latter will always prevail if
the former takes for granted what was achieved up to that moment. To put it in a
catchphrase: The forces of good, not to succumb to evil, must make of instability their
only stability.
6
The Human Condition
Depending on the context, we can of course replace the above ‘instability-stability’
binomial with that of ‘uncertainty-certainty’, ‘insecurity-security’, ‘vulnerability-
invulnerability’, etc. What is important to observe is that there are many more ways
tobeuncertainthantobecertain,tobeinsecurethantobesecure,tobevulnerablethan
to be invulnerable, and so on. In other words, uncertainty, insecurity, vulnerability,

828
D. Aerts and M. Sassoli de Bianchi
and alike, are just different variations of the instability notion, relating to different
contexts of our human experience.
The notion of instability comes of course from physics, but it extends beyond the
strict domain of physics, because its deﬁnition only relies on the very general notions
of ‘entity’ (or ‘system’) and ‘state’, and it doesn’t matter if the entity in question is
physical, biological, cultural, economic, etc. For instance, it equally well applies if
the entity being studied is, say, the stock market.
Let us recall here what the typical deﬁnition is. An entity is said to be in a ‘state
of stable equilibrium’ if, following an interaction producing a change of its state,
when the interaction stops the entity will evolve back, spontaneously, to its initial
(equilibrium) state. Reciprocally, an entity is in a ‘state of unstable equilibrium’ if,
following an interaction producing a change of its state, when the interaction stops
the entity will move away, spontaneously, from its initial (unstable) state.
Our human condition is certainly different from that of other biological species
evolving on this planet. This is well captured, as we mentioned already, by our
leap towards the ‘upright posture’, which corresponds to a new steppingstone in our
evolutionary path, allowing us to explore new forms of ‘freedom in instability’ and
new ‘provisional and local stabilities’. Most of the other animals on the surface of the
planet have waited too long in their previous region of temporary and local stability,
that of the ‘crawling posture’, or even that of the ‘immobile posture’, if we think of
plants.
We humans, through the upright posture, have freed our hands, and by doing
so could also keep our gaze ﬁxed on the horizon, rather than on the ground. This
produced an additional change of perspective, a new form of instability we could
say: that of being able to see not only the present, what is close to us, but also the
future, which is distant from us, initially in spatial terms, but then, more generally,
and more abstractly, in pure temporal terms. And the future brings with it many new
elements of uncertainty, thus many new instabilities.
All this fostered an evolutionary shift on a purely cognitive level, which involved
brand new critical choices along the way, between ‘construction’ and ‘destruction’,
between ‘good’ and ‘evil’, the former always representing only a small subset of the
totality of all possible choices. Think of the uniqueness of today human condition,
of its newly acquired instabilities and local stabilities. How better to do so than by
considering nuclear energy. Due to progress in physics’ research, humanity has found
a way to harness and unleash that form of energy that was defused in the early times,
when matter was separated from antimatter, in the very beginning of the matter-life
journey.
The drama of our collective choice of unleashing such primordial energy, back in
1945, ﬁrst in the Trinity test then on Hiroshima and Nagasaki, can be appreciated by
observing that it was made in order to ﬁght the advancement of highly destructive
forces, those embodied by Nazism, which at that historical moment certainly were
a faithful representative, within our human culture, of the so-called ‘forces of evil’,
whose goal (almost reached at the time) was to destroy the former islands of stability,
rather than to use them to leap forward.

On the Irreversible Journey of Matter …
829
The danger inherent in this new instability, which was created following the
construction of the bomb, is well expressed by Born (1971), when a few years later
he wrote to his friend Albert Einstein the following: “We’ve really put our foot in it
this time, poor fools that we are, and I am truly sad for our beautiful physics! There
we have been trying to puzzle things out, only to help the human race to expedite its
departure from this beautiful earth!”.
Today, numerous nations possess an enormous destructive power that can easily
destroy all of humanity multiple times, which can be released by simply pressing a
button. So, the constant ﬁght of life against the threat of spontaneous regression to
‘just being’, which does not forgive any distraction, is here expressed by the constant
effort required not to fall into the temptation of ‘pushing that button’. This is certainly
a new dramatic phase of unbalance in the journey of human life. All of humanity,
from the forties of the last century to today, and until a new steppingstone will be
conquered, is in a situation similar to when an alpinist walks on a small ridge between
two cliffs. And of course, we could reason in similar ways when considering other
global menaces that have been promoted by our human activity, such as pandemics
(and we have a tragic example of this with the recent Sars-Cov-2 crisis, still ongoing),
loss of biodiversity, global warming and artiﬁcial intelligence (Harari, 2018).
This intrinsic nature of matter-life, of being based on instabilities instead of stabil-
ities, on out of equilibrium states instead of stable equilibria, is also clearly reﬂected
in those systems where the human component is present, like in economics, where
for instance the inherent instability of the stock market is well known and explains
why very rigid forms of top-down economic models have not worked very well.
More generally, how the different countries and federations are structured plays a
fundamental role in our advancing, as a human society, along the path of matter-life.
In that respect, think of the role played by the different political ideologies, always
bringing with them speciﬁc aspects of stability (via the laws and regulations in force)
and instability (via the freedom that these same laws and regulations allow).
7
An Ontology for Morality
Following the logic of our discussion, we can observe that the codes of conduct
inscribed in human morality (or moralities), distinguishing between right and wrong
behaviors, good and evil, etc., are also mechanisms aimed at creating local islands
of stability, that is, steppingstones on the path of matter-life. There is of course an
enormous range of possibilities to create such islands of stability, hence different
morals can co-exist, playing a similar role in the creation of temporary platforms
of stability, which being temporary are of course also in that sense illusionary (the
illusion being that of considering them permanent when they are not).
Consider the example of robbery. To protect the population from its nefarious
effects, human societies have created conditions such that stealing becomes strongly
discouraged, because thieves are arrested and possibly punished for their acts through
imprisonment. In other words, through the implementation of speciﬁc laws, a realm

830
D. Aerts and M. Sassoli de Bianchi
is created where robbing is not an advice anybody would give to a good friend,
because of the heavy consequences that in all likelihood this would entail.
Of course, discouraging through punishment, by incarceration, is a rather crude
way of creating an island of stability in relation to the destructive mechanisms of
theft. We can easily imagine that as our human societies evolve, sufﬁcient living
conditions will be guaranteed for everyone, so much so that no one will have to steal
anymore to live decently, hence robbery will also be discouraged in this way, through
the creation of a completely different context of life.
Furthermore, it will become possible to discourage theft not just downstream,
as usually done, through the punitive mechanism, but also upstream, by improving
the educational mechanism. And for those who nevertheless fall into the temptation
of stealing, the “punishment” would be that of having to receive a complement of
education, in an environment capable of conveying principles such as for example
a renewed trust in the human potential, to be understood as a force of construc-
tion (good) instead of destruction (evil). Exactly the opposite of what unfortunately
happens in many penitentiaries of so-called advanced countries, which while effec-
tive in isolating the offenders from the rest of society, to protect it, they rarely succeed
in re-educating them to a more positive view of human evolution.
As Nelson Mandela used to say, “It is said that no one truly knows a nation until
one has been inside its jails. A nation should not be judged by how it treats its highest
citizens, but its lowest ones.”
8
Challenging the Common View
We can ask: how widespread are the unstable states of equilibrium of the “pencil
standing on its tip” kind? And considering the importance of these states in the
process of life and its evolution, we can also ask: how widespread is the potential
for life in the fabric of our physical reality? The answer is that it is present at its
most intimate level. This means that in the same way the threat of thermal death is
omnipresent, and living systems have to constantly struggle not to succumb to it,
the resources for escaping from its yoke are also always available to be exploited, at
least within those islands of stability that we have built over time.
To use a quantum language, this is so also because superposition states are ubiq-
uitous (at the micro level, they constantly emerge as a consequence of the linearity of
the Hilbert space). Indeed, a superposition state expresses a situation of potentiality,
where each of the states in the superposition can be actualized. This can happen
each time the entity in question interacts with a suitable context, which in quantum
mechanics is called a ‘measurement context’ and more generally can be called an
‘indeterministic context’ (Aerts, 2002).
In fact, a superposition state is a superposition only in relation to a context which
is able to trigger a collapse into one of its components, and in that respect a quantum
measurement process can be considered as a (weighted) symmetry breaking process,
very similar to that of the pencil standing on its tip and collapsing to the ground

On the Irreversible Journey of Matter …
831
along a speciﬁc (prior to the collapse only potential) direction. So, given a context,
a superposition state is the genuine expression of an unstable equilibrium, where the
indeterministic transition towards one of the states in the superposition is initiated
by the presence of ﬂuctuations in the context, bringing the entity in question into a
more stable state (Aerts & Sassoli de Bianchi, 2014).
Similar situations exist at the macro level, for self-organizing complex systems,
where the collapse phenomenon is usually described by using the notion of ‘bifurca-
tion’. As the values of some order parameters increase, the number of stable solutions
may also increase, forcing the system to select only one among a number of a priori
equivalent solutions, which are more stable attractor states (Heylighen, 2021). So,
there is a deep correspondence between the way macroscopic complex system and
microscopic quantum entities evolve, as regards the role played by indeterministic
contexts producing symmetry breaking processes.
These bifurcations, or collapses, are at the core of the evolution of living systems,
always struggling to ﬁnd new islands of stability, which however are also always
temporary, as the contexts with which an entity interacts are also constantly changing.
In other words, if the path of matter-life is formed by a succession of dynamical
instabilities, interspersed with momentary local stabilities, this is so because it is
also a path of constantly changing contexts, the local stabilities being only deﬁned
with respect to a given context, hence they are always relative and never absolute.
Take again the paradigmatic example of the pencil on its tip. This is a very unstable
state, but only because the pencil is in the context of the gravitational ﬁeld generated
by our planet and is initially aligned along its lines of force. If the context changes, for
instance the pencil is placed in a spaceship, stabilities and instabilities will be deﬁned
by the spaceship directions of acceleration, and a spaceship constantly changing
direction will clearly impose on the pencil a sequence of different indeterministic
contexts. In other words, a stable state relative to a given context might suddenly
become unstable relative to a newly emerging context.
We mentioned the second law of thermodynamics, pushing isolated systems
towards states of equilibrium, as a main obstacle for the way matter-life evolves
along its trajectory of instabilities, strewn with steppingstones of provisional local
stabilities (Schrödinger, 1944). We also said that a quantum superposition state “is”
precisely an unstable equilibrium state, when we consider the presence of uncontrol-
lable ﬂuctuations in its environment (Aerts, 1986; Aerts & Sassoli de Bianchi, 2014).
This means that the mechanism of the second law of thermodynamics is already at
work at the quantum mechanical scale, although research is still ongoing to ﬁne tune
its formulation (Bera et al., 2017; Binder et al., 2018; Popescu et al., 2006).
What we are challenging here is the common view that life would only be about
growth, reaction to stimuli, and reproduction, and that living organisms would always
seek a condition of homeostasis, i.e., of equilibrium. Again, we are not saying that
homeostasis is not key for the survival of an organism. Our thesis is that this does
not capture the essence of what life tries to achieve, by always seeking for new out
of equilibrium states. Our emphasis is on the ‘bifurcation aspect’ of complex living
systems, that is, the way they can access new potentialities and subsequently new
islands of stability through a succession of transitions, this being governed also by the

832
D. Aerts and M. Sassoli de Bianchi
fact that their contexts are constantly changing, hence imposing incessant processes
of adaptation, not only through continuous changes, but also and mostly through
discontinuous ones (jumps, collapses, bifurcations).
That being said, note that even homeostasis is to be understood in a purely dynam-
ical sense, as is clear that complex self-organizing systems, as living systems are, are
open systems continuously exchanging matter and energy with their environment,
supposedly also working at the so-called ‘edge of chaos’ (Packard, 1988). Even
maintaining the status quo, i.e., being able to survive rather than die, is per se a great
challenge. Preserving over time one’s structural integrity is already something not to
be taken for granted, and we all know how difﬁcult this is when we struggle already
in simply maintaining our house in order.
It is not by chance that Jordan Peterson has precisely phrased one of his antidotes
to chaos (i.e., to disorder) by precisely referring to such task, as a way of “ﬁghting
against one’s personal entropy” (Peterson, 2018): “Set your house in perfect order
before you criticize the world,” he writes. Because if we do not pay constant attention,
everything will spontaneously fall apart. We have to constantly clean up our house
in the same way that we have to constantly clean up our life, and our organisms. And
the only way to do so, is to move the dirt that accumulates out of it.
The good news is that ‘moving the dirt outside’ is always possible, despite the
diktat of the second law of thermodynamics. One of the reasons is that our phys-
ical reality has plenty of space. Here we need to emphasize again that a house (an
organism) cannot be kept clean if it remains closed, i.e., if it remains isolated. Even
if the entropy of the entire universe, when considered as a closed system, is doomed
to increase, local regions in it are allowed to keep their entropy low, or even decrease
it, by exchanging matter or energy with their outer space, so that the global increase
of entropy, as per the second law, can be respected.
On our planet, life has achieved the goal of preserving and increasing the structural
order that is necessary for its development by “absorbing order” from the electromag-
netic waves coming from the sun, and by “eliminating disorder” via sending these
same waves back to the cosmos, but with a lower frequency, hence, with a higher
entropy. This is exactly what happens in the process of photosynthesis, initiated
billions of years ago by the cyanobacteria (Brittin & Gamov, 1961).
Note also that, as we said already, in quantum mechanics collapses are possible
because of the formation, prior to the collapse, of superposition states. If on one hand
the quantum superposition of a system with its environment, i.e., its entanglement
with the environment, is what will cause its thermalization (Popescu et al., 2006), the
latter can also be avoided thanks to the collapse mechanisms. In quantum mechanics,
thermalization is an expression of what is called ‘decoherence’, whereas stability
islands are here to be understood as the creation of local ‘domains of coherence’.

On the Irreversible Journey of Matter …
833
9
The Hidden Coherence
It is sometimes claimed that the ﬁnal state of the universe needs to be one of equilib-
rium, the so called ‘thermal death’, and that in this sense life is doomed to fail in its
battle with the second law of thermodynamics, and its quantum analog. This claim,
however, cannot any longer be upheld within the cosmological scheme we presented.
Indeed, it is not at all straightforward which mechanism is the more fundamental one:
that of matter-life going through an irreversible journey over instabilities, using local
islands of stability as steppingstones, or that of symmetry breaking processes starting
from an abundance of superposition states and gradually building up a global stability
island.
An indication that even inside our universe this question is not settled can be
found in the overwhelming quantum coherence that is revealed when, in man-made
laboratories, boson gases are cooled down to temperatures that are so close to the
absolute zero that nowhere in the universe similar conditions are known to exist,
allowing for the creation of the mysterious Bose–Einstein condensates (Anderson
et al., 1995, Bradley et al., 1995, Ketterle & Druten, 1996). The realization of the
latter, and the pure quantum coherence of the atoms participating in the condensate
state, is not only a masterpiece of experimental physics, but also the proof that
humans, guided by the knowledge provided by science, can penetrate into realms
of reality that (as far as we know) were never realized before through natural (non-
human) processes, following the Big Bang.
We will return to this later in the chapter and just want to remark here that this is a
concrete example of how the human cultural evolution can reveal a perfect quantum
coherence hidden in the depths of reality, in this case by shielding the atoms used
in the above-mentioned experiments from the disturbance of the constant random
bombardment from heat photons, which would make the construction of the Bose–
Einstein condensate impossible. The question whether this is or not an essentially
different process from that of human culture creating new material artifacts that had
never existed before, and could never had come to light in a natural way after the Big
Bang, is certainly one opening up to further issues about the nature of reality, worth
to ponder and explore.
Something else we will return to in the chapter, worth mentioning here already,
is that ‘quantum entanglement’ and ‘meaning entanglement’ can give rise to more
powerful ways of creating order than those allowed by the second law of thermody-
namics at the classical level, i.e., mass or energy exchanges with the outside world,
which might shed a very different light on the question of the long distant future of
the whole of reality, including human culture.
It is certainly plausible, within our view, to consider human culture as the contin-
uation of the evolution of life, in turn to be considered as the descendant of the
elementary quantum entities: hadrons and leptons, atoms and molecules. In other
words, we can view the latter as the ancestors of a descent that produced life in
matter. But not all lines of this descent have been able to bring about fruitful forms.
In that respect, gases, liquids and crystals should be considered as evolutionary

834
D. Aerts and M. Sassoli de Bianchi
dead-ends, too stable in our actual macroscopic universe to promote the necessary
instabilities for the path of matter-life to be reinitiated (Aerts & Sassoli de Bianchi,
2018; Aerts & Sozzo, 2015).
Coming back to our actual state of affairs on planet Earth, we can say that life
and human culture have a good chance to win their relentless battle against disorder,
thanks to the existence of a virtually unlimited amount of space. In a famous quote,
Carl Sagan said that “The universe is a pretty big place. If it’s just us, seems like
an awful waste of space.” Well, even if it would be “just for us,” it would still not
be a waste of space, as space is what we need, in order to dispose our present and
future wastes, particularly so if humanity will end up conquering a large portion of
the cosmos (Deutsch, 1997). But life can win its relentless battle against disorder
also thanks to its ability of making the necessary ‘discrete route changes’, using the
available collapse/bifurcation mechanisms. And the full potentiality for these further
impulses along the road of life, dotted with steppingstones, is today to be found in
human culture, in its ability to acquire additional knowledge via the protective guide
of the methods of science (to be understood in a non-reductive sense).
10
The Global Scenario
So, the descendants of the microscopic constituents of matter are to be found both in
living matter and in human culture (downsizing the importance of the macroscopic
material universe as regards the essence of the life process and its evolutionary
trajectory). But also, quantum theory indicates that the microscopic entities, in most
of their states, are non-spatial. This means that matter-energy, in its macroscopic
form, and our whole material universe, have only apparently reached a huge local
stability. Indeed, it follows from our interpretation of quantum superposition that our
spatiotemporal material universe is only a portion of a much vaster non-spatial and
non-temporal reality (Aerts, 1999; Sassoli de Bianchi, 2020).
Also, as we mentioned in the beginning of this chapter, we do not have yet an
established physical theory able to explain the absence of antimatter in our material
universe. Such theory would probably also provide the missing explanation of the
very existence of our universe. But whatever the details of such theory will be, we can
generally think to the global situation as resulting from a cosmic symmetry breaking
process, where a superposition between matter and antimatter has been collapsed
toward the actual ‘only matter state’ of our universe. In that sense, our material
universe would just be a “local” steppingstone of a global (cosmic) evolutionary
process, in which the mechanisms of ‘actualization of potential properties’ plays a
central role, at all levels of manifestation, no less important than that played by the
classical (in the sense of non-quantum-like) Darwinian mechanisms (Aerts & Sassoli
de Bianchi, 2018; Gabora & Aerts, 2005).
As we mentioned already, we probably touch here at aspects related to the nature
of time itself, if we understand matter as ‘moving forward in time’ and antimatter as
‘moving backwards in time’. A possibility is that time, space and irreversibility would

On the Irreversible Journey of Matter …
835
have jointly come into existence with matter and life. In other words, irreversibility
would start when matter irreversibly separates from antimatter, introducing in our
reality a temporal permanent arrow.
Only light (i.e., electromagnetic phenomena) would be immune to that arrow,
being an entity existing independently of the coming into existence of time, space,
matter and energy. This explains why light behaves so atypically when we observe it
from the particularity of our matter-life trajectory and of the spatial theater in which
it unfolds. This atypicality is for instance manifested in the fact that the light speed
is always the same in every reference frame. This is so because ‘light’ is just ‘being’,
whereas time and space are constructed around those entities that participate in the
matter-life trajectory. In that respect, time and space are to be considered a very
peculiar emergent aspect of our reality (Aerts, 1999, 2018).
In our human journey, we tend to only focus on stabilities and balances (and we
tend to forget they are only local and temporary), but we should never forget about
the existence of a bigger historical perspective to our evolution as matter-energy
entities. Also, we should keep in mind the crucial difference between the substance
of ‘being’ and the substance of ‘matter-life and human culture’, with its very peculiar
trajectory. To some extent, some of the features of ‘being’ can also be applied to the
‘matter-life and human culture’ trajectory, but this is so only because of the existence
of the local regions of stability, in which for some time ‘life’ and also ‘human culture’
can resemble ‘being’, i.e., ‘balance’. But as we have already repeated several times,
it is just a local resemblance, and therefore only a partial one.
This is similar to how a curved spacetime resembles, if we only look at it locally,
to a ﬂat spacetime. Its curvature can only be felt when we look at things from a
sufﬁciently global perspective. With the life trajectory it is the same. We need to
observe it using a global perspective, to understand that it describes a very particular
state, very different from the default state of thermal equilibrium.
11
Concentration of Meaning
If our considerations about the essence of the ‘matter-life and human culture’
phenomenon might be considered relatively credible when applied to our human
bodies and to the material vehicles of manifestation of other living creatures, as we
mentioned already less evident is the situation as regards human minds and human
consciousnesses. Should they also be included in the same “ﬁght or perish” evolu-
tionary scenario of the matter-life processes? Maybe not fully, but it is likely that a
similar scenario is to be considered for at least a part of our cognitive functions, if for
instance we consider, and take seriously enough, the emergent ﬁeld called ‘quantum
cognition’, where cognitive phenomena are shown to be quite effectively modeled
using the formalism of quantum theory (Aerts et al., 2013, 2016; Busemeyer & Bruza,
2012; Haven & Khrennikov, 2013; Wendt, 2015).
Since there are reasons to believe that thermodynamics has its roots in the quantum
probabilities, i.e., that the probabilities of statistical mechanics, and therefore the

836
D. Aerts and M. Sassoli de Bianchi
second law of thermodynamics, can be obtained directly from the quantum proba-
bilities, so that entropy would be a meaningful concept even for individual quantum
systems (Beretta et al., 1984; Hatsopoulos & Gyftopoulos, 1976), this means that
the menace of the second law also applies to cognitive entities, if it is true that the
quantum formalism (or a generalization of it) describes them equally well than the
microphysical entities (i.e., they should also be understood as bona ﬁde quantum
entities).
The more so if we also consider that there are reasons to believe that our physical
world could in fact also be conceptual in nature, although distinct from the realm of
human concepts. This is at least the hypothesis at the foundation of the ‘conceptuality
interpretation of quantum mechanics’ (and of relativity theory), which is currently
under investigation (Aerts & Beltran, 2020; Aerts et al., 2020).
Note that this hypothesis is not the result of an ‘ad hoc and top-down’ assumption,
child of the metaphysical tastes of those who have formulated it. It really came about
because of purely technical reasons, related to the similarity in behavior between
quantum micro-entities and conceptual entities. In particular, concepts are also char-
acterizedbyanontologicalHeisenberg’suncertaintyprinciple,sinceaconceptcannot
be maximally concrete and maximally abstract at the same time, and similarly to
quantum entities, they can also be truly indiscernible, they can establish meaning
connections, reminiscent of the entanglement phenomenon, etc. (Aerts et al., 2020).
So, in the light of the conceptuality interpretation, the existential threat that the
second law represents, i.e., the increase of entropy of a system when it isolates itself
and ceases to struggle for its survival and evolution, translates in the cognitive domain
in the threat of knowledge destruction, of a growth of ignorance, a loss of meaning
information, as in ultimate analysis ‘meaning’ would be the constitutive substance of
‘matter, life and culture’. In that respect, the evolution of life can be truly conceived
as a process of ‘concentration of meaning’, where ‘meaning’ is also to be understood
as a process of ‘creation of coherence’, under the constant threat of the environmental
‘decoherence processes’.
To better explain what we mean, let us give an example. A city, with its cultural
realizations and happenings, is to be considered an environment with a high concen-
tration of meaning, i.e., where coherence is densely present, mostly at its center. But
moving from the center outwards, one can also ﬁnd garbage belts, at the outskirts of
the city, which are instead a good example of how things can decohere. If we walk
in the town library, we can ﬁnd books on the shelves and tables that can be read by
visitors, all well-kept and classiﬁed. Everything in the library, both in terms of how
the books are organized and their semantic content, is an expression of perfect coher-
ence, and visitors have to follow a well-deﬁned ‘meaning trajectory’ when coming
to the library to ﬁnd and consult a book.
Compare now the above with a walk where waste dumps are located, in the
outskirts of the city. There as well one might ﬁnd books, but mostly in the form
of pieces of volumes that have become unreadable because of their deterioration,
or in the form of single pages torn from books. These fragments have lost all their
meaning, their coherence, with the exception maybe of some meaning still remaining
at a more “microscopic” level, in those pages where paragraphs can still be read and

On the Irreversible Journey of Matter …
837
the original meaning content grasped (note however that reading a paragraph, or even
an entire page, does not mean being always able to grasp its full meaning, as this
might require the full context provided by the missing paragraphs, or pages).
Our macroscopic, material and spatiotemporal universe, is rather similar to this
waste dump. Indeed, it is only in the micro-realm of particles, atoms and molecules,
that a full quantum coherence has been preserved, while in the macro-realm the
heat photons are constantly randomly ﬂying around, bouncing off the surfaces of
planets, with the consequence that little quantum coherence is left there, with the
exception of the surface of our planet Earth (and of the surface of planets where life
and culture might have emerged in a similar way), where ﬁrst biological life and
then human culture came into existence, restoring in this way the presence of a high
concentration of meaning-coherence. This up to the point of accessing a level of
quantum coherence that was never realized following the Big Bang, when physicists
created the ﬁrst Bose–Einstein condensates, by protecting the boson gas from the
bombardment of the heat photons with an efﬁciency never achieved before (Aerts &
Sassoli de Bianchi, 2018; Aerts & Sozzo, 2015; Anderson et al., 1995; Bradley et al.,
1995; Ketterle & Druten, 1996).
Returning to the conceptuality interpretation, note that it contemplates the exis-
tenceofafundamentalduality,thatof‘mindandlanguage’,whichatthephysicallevel
translates into the duality of ‘matter and force ﬁelds’, i.e., of ‘fermions and bosons’.
Following the hypothesis of supersymmetry (Martin, 1988), such duality would not
be fundamental, whereas for the conceptuality interpretation it is plausible (although
not strictly necessary) that it could be older than our spatiotemporal universe. Note
that we know from Hamiltonian mechanics that a remarkable symmetry exists
between ‘space and time’ and ‘momentum and energy’. Such symmetry is however
not any more effective in the spatiotemporal universe we inhabit, where energy and
momentum are not part of the “canvass,” but are the properties attributed to the
material entities evolving on that canvass. Hence, a fundamental and very ancient
symmetry breaking must have taken place, possibly even before the beginning of our
universe, and because of that our standard view of reality, based on having minds
strictly connected with material macroscopic bodies, should be considered to be a
parochial one.
The above discussion brings with it, as is inevitable, further big questions, like:
what is the nature of the symmetry breaking that has caused us to end up into such
a niche, where time and space are ‘extensions’, whereas momentum and energy are
properties of entities living inside such extensions? Although it is difﬁcult to directly
answer this question, if we assume that the nature of our physical reality is conceptual,
that is, governed by meaning, we can observe that there is a deep correspondence
between the idea of symmetry breaking centered around the ‘coming into existence
of macroscopic matter’ and the corresponding ‘coming into existence of time and
space’, and the symmetry breaking manifesting at the level of the logical connectives
‘and’ and ‘or’ (Aerts, 2013).
Indeed, the connective ‘and’ tends towards extension, whereas the connective ‘or’
penetrates inwards. If, for example, we say ‘chair and another chair’, and we consider
them to be objects, then the combination ‘chair and another chair’ needs extended

838
D. Aerts and M. Sassoli de Bianchi
space to exist compared to the situation of a single chair. On the other hand, if we say
‘chair or another chair’, we are immediately outside of time and space. An object A
‘or’ another object B is in fact no longer an object, but a concept. So, the notion of
‘object’ breaks the symmetry between the connective ‘and’ and ‘or’, whereas such
symmetry remains intact in the more abstract realm of concepts. Indeed, connecting
two concepts by means of the ‘or’ connective simply leads to a more abstract concept,
while connecting two concepts via the ‘and’ connective gives rise to a more concrete
concept (Aerts et al., 2020).
Our hypothesis is that the above symmetry breaking (which took place in the sedi-
mentation process going from the more abstract level of concepts to that of objects,
with the latter to be considered as the limit case of maximally concrete concepts)
mirrors what took place in the creation of our spatiotemporal material universe. In
other words, time and space would result from the working of the ‘and’ connective,
bringing concepts together in a spatiotemporal way, whereas the connective ‘or’
allowed for the creation of entities, systems and organisms, with an inside in which
the ‘or’ quantum-like dynamics dominate.
12
Concluding Remarks
Summing up, we have put forward the view that the split-up between matter and
antimatter, following the Big Bang, marked the coming into existence of past and
future and the beginning of life in our universe as we know it, with its constant
struggle to ﬁnd new states of imbalance, while conquering provisional domains of
stability to be used as evolutionary steppingstones.
We have argued that the struggle in question is the endless ﬁght against the second
law of thermodynamics, at the scales of both classical physics and quantum physics,
and the presence of antimatter, and decoherence, at the even deeper quantum scale.
We remarked already that some ﬁne tuning is still needed at the quantum level
for a complete formulation of the second law of thermodynamics (Bera et al., 2017;
Binder et al., 2018), but the way we put forward its role here remains essentially valid.
Additionally, in the quantum case the ‘exchange ﬂows of matter or energy between
a system and its environment’, necessary to keep the entropy of the system low, can
take the form of the ‘entanglement correlations’, giving rise to different structural
possibilities, as a consequence of the von Neumann entropy being applicable instead
of the Boltzmann entropy.
More concretely, for quantum systems, if a system is in a product (non-entangled)
state, the entropy of the system is just the sum of the entropies of the subsystems,
as in the case for classical systems. But when the subsystems become entangled, the
von Neumann entropy of the composite system will be generally lower than the sum
of the entropies of the subsystems, as quantum entropy is subadditive (Araki & Lieb,
1970). One can easily check this by considering a bipartite system formed by two
spin one-half entities in a singlet state, which has minimal quantum entropy while its
two subsystems have maximum quantum entropy. This means that at the quantum

On the Irreversible Journey of Matter …
839
level a more general and powerful mechanism of ‘order creation’ is available as
a consequence of the possibility of ‘entanglement connections’ than what ‘matter
and energy streams’ can give rise to on the classical level, i.e., a composite system
can acquire more order than all of its subsystems, due to the entanglement of these
subsystems.
Takingintoaccount‘quantumcognition’,thismorepowerfulwayofordercreation
also exists at the cultural level, and in our Brussels research group we have put
forward explicit examples of ‘cognitive entanglement situations’ where this more
general and powerful way of order construction can be identiﬁed (Aerts & Sozzo,
2011, Aerts et al., 2019a). Hence, at the cultural level, similarly to the quantum level,
‘concentration of meaning’ can be an expression of ‘meaning entanglement’, i.e., of
a meaning-connection between different parts of a composite system that creates a
situation of relative order and stability.
In that respect, different from the non-living entities, the living ones (the cultural
layer being interpreted as a continuation of the biological one) are those that are
able to protect themselves from death, not in the sense of becoming immortal (at
least, not at the individual level), but in the sense of being able to shield themselves
for long enough from all sorts of decoherence processes, like the incessant random
bombardment of heat photons on the surface of the planet. This in order to preserve
and enhance their inner organization and participate in the construction of always
more advanced islands of stability.
In the case of humanity, this protective capacity has evolved to the level of
exploiting the amplifying effect of our nervous systems, with the advent of human
cognition, language and cultural evolution, allowing to transfer to the macro level
the ‘quantum coherence’ that is inherent to the micro level. So, in ultimate analysis,
what we have called in this chapter ‘islands of stability’ are ‘island of concentration
of meaning’, ‘islands of knowledge’, as knowledge and meaning are what provide
the necessary support to ﬁght against the present and future adverse environmental
conditions, thus allowing for an unlimited evolutionary reach.
Said this, it is worth also emphasizing that ‘islands of stability’ are useful only if
they are also ‘islands of morality’, as is clear that knowledge is of little use if we do
not know in which direction to apply it, that is, if it lacks the historical perspective
offered to us when we contemplate and fully appreciate the cosmic battle of life
against the menace of a regression to the dimension of ‘pure being’; a battle that
probably started with the matter–antimatter primordial separation and still continues
today through our struggle against the second law of thermodynamics (and so, it
would be incorrect to think that biological complexity only started from single-cell
organisms).
Only with such cosmic-historical perspective it becomes possible to have access
to an ontology for morality and its principles, so as to equip ourselves with a reliable
moral compass, which can guide us in the choices that await us in the future.
We invite the reader, at this point, to read the quote in the Introduction once again,
as a short poetic description, and suggestion, of a moral founded on the knowledge
we presented in this chapter. Indeed, knowing that in our human condition we are
profoundly and inevitably bound to traveling along an irreversible trajectory, dashed

840
D. Aerts and M. Sassoli de Bianchi
with steppingstones of only local and temporary stability, it undoubtedly leads us
to contemplate a very different ontology than that of not possessing the perspective
offered by such knowledge. The last sentence of the quote, “The deep secret of life is
that if you pursue a noble goal all the characteristics of life described above become
the substance of meaning, which is the food of the human mind,” can now be better
understood and appreciated, we hope, in the light of what we have tried to explain.
In that respect, we also hope that the present essay may represent a small contri-
bution in the direction of a more objective demarcation between what the ancients
indicated with the terms of ‘good’ and ‘evil’, i.e., between the forces of ‘construction’
and ‘evolution’, and those that instead promote the ‘destruction’ and ‘involution’ of
every possible structure.
References
Aerts, D. (1986). A possible explanation for the probabilities of quantum mechanics. Journal of
Mathematical Physics, 27, 202–210.
Aerts, D. (1999). The stuff the world is made of: Physics and reality. In D. Aerts, J. Broekaert, & E.
Mathijs (Eds.), Einstein meets Magritte: An Interdisciplinary Reﬂection (pp. 129–183). Springer.
Aerts, D. (2002). Being and change: Foundations of a realistic operational formalism. In D. Aerts, M.
Czachor, & T. Durt (Eds.), Probing the structure of quantum mechanics: Nonlinearity, nonlocality,
probability and axiomatics (pp. 71–110). World Scientiﬁc.
Aerts, D. (2018). Relativity theory refounded. Foundations of Science, 23, 511–547. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s10699-017-9538-7
Aerts, D., & Beltran, L. (2020). Quantum structure in cognition: Human language as a boson gas
of entangled words. Foundations of Science, 25, 755–802.
Aerts, D., & Sassoli de Bianchi, M. (2014). The extended Bloch representation of quantum
mechanics and the hidden-measurement solution to the measurement problem. Annals of Physics,
351, 975–1025.
Aerts, D., & Sassoli de Bianchi, M. (2018). Quantum perspectives on evolution. In S. Wuppuluri &
F. A. Doria (Eds.), The map and the territory: Exploring the foundations of science, thought and
reality (pp. 571–595). Springer, The Frontiers collection.
Aerts, D., Gabora, L., & Sozzo, S. (2013). Concepts and their dynamics: A quantum-theoretic
modeling of human thought. Topics in Cognitive Science, 5, 737–772.
Aerts,D.,SassolideBianchi,M.,&Sozzo,S.(2016).OnthefoundationsoftheBrusselsoperational-
realistic approach to cognition. Frontiers of Physics, 4, 17. https://doi.org/10.3389/fphy.2016.
00017
Aerts, D., Aerts Arguëlles, J., Beltran, L., Geriente, S., Sassoli de Bianchi, M., Sozzo, S., & Veloz,
T. (2019a). Quantum entanglement in physical and cognitive systems: A conceptual analysis and
a general representation. The European Physical Journal Plus, 134, 493. https://doi.org/10.1140/
epjp/i2019-12987-0
Aerts, D., Ekeson, K. W., Schneider, V., & Sassoli de Bianchi, M. (2019b). The secret of life.
AutoRicerca, 18, 21–107.
Aerts, D., & Sozzo, S. (2011). Quantum structure in cognition: Why and how concepts are entangled.
In D. Song, M. Melucci, I. Frommholz, P. Zhang, I. Wang, & S. Arafat (Eds), Quantum interaction.
QI 2011. Lecture Notes in Computer Science 7052 (pp. 116–127). Springer. https://doi.org/10.
1007/978-3-642-24971-6_12
Aerts, D., & Sozzo, S. (2015). What is quantum? Unifying its micro-physical and structural appear-
ance. In H. Atmanspacher, C. Bergomi, T. Filk, & K. Kitto (Eds), Quantum interaction. QI 2014.

On the Irreversible Journey of Matter …
841
Lecture Notes in Computer Science 8951 (pp. 12–23). Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
319-15931-7_2
Aerts, D., Sassoli de Bianchi, M., Sozzo, S., & Veloz, T. (2020). On the conceptuality interpretation
of quantum and relativity theories. Foundations of Science, 25, 5–54.
Aerts, D. (2013). La mecànica cuántica y la conceptualidad: Sobre materia, historias, semántica y
espacio-tiempo. Scientiae Studia, 11(2013), 75–100. https://doi.org/10.1590/S1678-316620130
00100004. Translated from: Quantum theory and conceptuality: Matter, stories, semantics and
space-time. arXiv:1110.4766 [quant-ph].
Anderson, M. H., Ensher, J. R., Matthews, M. R., Wieman, C. E., & Cornell, E. A. (1995).
Observation of Bose-Einstein condensation in a dilute atomic vapor. Science, New Series, 269,
198–201.
Araki, H., & Lieb, E. H. (1970). Entropy inequalities. Communications in Mathematics Physics,
18(2), 160–170.
Benoit-Lévy, A., & Chardin, G. (2012). Introducing the Dirac-Milne universe. Astronomy &amp;
Astrophysics, 537, A78. https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/201016103
Bera, M. N., Riera, A., Lewenstein, M., & Winter, A. (2017). Generalized laws of thermodynamics
in the presence of correlations. Nature Communications, 8, 2180. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-
017-02370-x
Beretta, G. P., Gyftopoulos, E. P., Park, J. L., & Hatsopoulos, G. N. (1984). Quantum thermo-
dynamics. A new equation of motion for a single constituent of matter. Nuovo Cimento B, 82,
169–191.
Bertsche, W. A. (2017). Prospects for comparison of matter and antimatter gravitation with ALPHA-
g. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A, 376, 20170265.
Binder, F., Correa, L. A., Gogolin, C., Anders, J., & Adesso, G. (Eds.). (2018). Thermodynamics in
the quantum regime. Springer.
Born, M. (1971). The Born-Einstein letters. Correspondence between Albert Einstein and Max &
Hedwig Born from 1916 to 1955 with commentaries by Max Born. The Macmillian Press Ltd.
Bradley, C. C., Sackett, C. A., Tollett, J. J., & Hulet, R. G. (1995). Evidence of Bose-Einstein
condensation in an atomic gas with attractive interactions. Physical Review Letters, 75, 1687–
1690. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.75.1687
Brittin, W., & Gamov, G. (1961). Negative entropy and photosynthesis. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 47, 724–727.
Busemeyer, J. R., & Bruza, P. D. (2012). Quantum models of cognition and decision. Cambridge
University Press.
Chardin, G., & Manfredi, G. (2018). Gravity, antimatter and the Dirac-Milne universe. Hyperﬁne
Interactions, 239, 45. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10751-018-1521-3
Deutsch, D. (1997). The fabric of reality. The Penguin Press.
Feynman, R. P. (1949). The theory of positrons. Physical Review, 76, 749.
Gabora, L., & Aerts, D. (2005). Evolution as context-driven actualization of potential. Interdisci-
plinary Science Reviews, 30, 69–88. https://doi.org/10.1179/030801805X25873
Harari, Y. N. (2018). 21 lessons for the 21st century. Spiegel & Grau.
Hatsopoulos, G. N., & Gyftopoulos, E. P. (1976). A uniﬁed quantum theory of mechanics and
thermodynamics Part i. Postulates. Foundations of Physics, 6, 15–31.
Haven, E., & Khrennikov, A. Y. (2013). Quantum social science. Cambridge University Press.
Heylighen, F. (2021). Entanglement, symmetry breaking and collapse: correspondences between
quantum and self-organizing dynamics. Foundations of Science. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10699-
021-09780-7
Indelicato, P., et al. (2014). The Gbar project, or how does antimatter fall? Hyperﬁne Interactions,
228, 141.
Kellerbauer, A., et al. (2008). Proposed antimatter gravity measurement with an antihydrogen
beam. Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research Section b: Beam Interactions with
Materials and Atoms, 266, 351.

842
D. Aerts and M. Sassoli de Bianchi
Ketterle, W., & van Druten, N. J. (1996). Bose-Einstein condensation of a ﬁnite number of particles
trapped in one or three dimensions. Physical Review A, 54, 656–660. https://doi.org/10.1103/Phy
sRevA.54.656
Kibble,T.(2009).Englert-Brout-Higgs-Guralnik-Hagen-Kibblemechanism.Scholarpedia,4,6441.
https://doi.org/10.4249/scholarpedia.6441
Martin, S. P. (1988). A supersymmetry primer. In G. L. Kane (Ed.), Advanced series on directions
in high energy physics. Perspectives on supersymmetry (pp. 1–98). World Scientiﬁc.
Packard, N. H. (1988). Adaptation toward the edge of Chaos. University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign.
Peterson, J. B. (2018). 12 rules for life. An Antidote to Chaos. Random House.
Popescu, S., Short, A. J., & Winter, A. (2006). Entanglement and the foundations of statistical
mechanics. Nature Physics, 2, 754–758.
Sakharov, A. D. (1967). Violation of CP invariance, C asymmetry, and baryon asymmetry of the
universe. Journal of Experimental and Theoretical Physics Letters, 5, 24–27.
Sassoli de Bianchi, M. (2020). A non-spatial reality. Foundations of Science. https://doi.org/10.
1007/s10699-020-09719-4
Schrödinger, E. (1944). What is life? The physical aspect of the living cell. Based on lectures
delivered under the auspices of the Dublin Institute for Advanced Studies at Trinity College,
Dublin, in February 1943. Cambridge University Press 1967.
Shaposhnikov, M. E., & Farrar, G. R. (1993). Baryon asymmetry of the universe in the minimal
Standard Model. Physical Review Letters, 70, 2833–2836. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.
70.2833
Wendt, A. (2015). Quantum mind and social science. Cambridge University Press.

Architecture and Big Data: From Scale
to Capacity
Nana Last
Without fanfare, the late 1990s saw the construct of scale slip quietly from its
cardinal role in orchestrating architecture production to be tacitly replaced by
capacity. Ushered in via computing technologies, whose spotlight masks the breadth
of this transformation, this changing of the guard saw the central ordering system
of architectural production effectively move from its traditional linear, physical, and
visual underpinnings to processes based in nonvisible orderings. In this process,
scale’s inculcated architectural logic of discrete units came to be supplanted by a
performance-driven capacity—the greatest amount of information processed in the
least amount of time. Part of a broader scientiﬁc and cultural transformation of
complex ordering principles that structure human-information interactions, within
a decade, the impact of this development has become apparent: the emergence of
capacity as architecture’s fundamental orchestrating determinant of production has
unwittingly set the stage for big data to enter in the hollow core opened up by
capacity’s drive for content.
The technological overtones of this transformation, however, do not tell the full
story. Rather, big data proves to be a broad, supra-disciplinary concept that extends
beyond computation to establish itself as a wide-ranging cultural technology. Born of
the union of advanced computing technologies and the amassing of diverse and near-
endless quantities of information, big data is a rapidly emerging cultural technology
that goes beyond introducing new procedures into existing modes of cultural and
scientiﬁc production—it embeds those into the core of operations, and in so doing,
transforms them. Not conﬁned to a set of computational methods, it orchestrates a
mode of engagement with the subject matter. For architecture, this contributes some-
thing other than the next chapter in its history; the advance of big data’s approach
across disciplines disrupts settled domains of activity to raise the question: history of
what? Examining the shift in architecture’s guiding principles from scale to capacity
N. Last (B)
School of Architecture, University of Virginia, Campbell Hall 421, Charlottesville, VA 22904, US
e-mail: ndl5g@virginia.edu
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
S. Wuppuluri and I. Stewart (eds.), From Electrons to Elephants and Elections,
The Frontiers Collection, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-92192-7_43
843

844
N. Last
suggests an answer: big data’s association with the discipline merges two of archi-
tecture’s evolving histories—the ordering principles of narrative and technology1 as
they are intertwined in the relaying, reception, and formation of information.
Architecture’s shift from scale to capacity both forms and is the sign of the central
operative mechanism in the discipline’s adoption of computational and algorithmic
logics. Scale has a twofold meaning that is key to its operations in architectural
production. It designates both a proportional relation between two sets of dimen-
sions and a graduated measure of relative size, extent, or degree. This constitutive
duality allows scale to connect between two spheres of measure or modes of being
as well as to order activities or things within a given domain. Architectural prac-
tice has long conjoined these meanings to one another in a way that has come to
be seen as natural. Acting across realms, scale’s ﬁrst sense determines the propor-
tional relationship of the architectural representation to what it represents. As such,
architectural plans and sections, in being drawn to speciﬁc scales, institute a form of
speciﬁcity between drawing and what is represented, wherein, say, one-eighth inch
or one-sixteenth inch equals one foot. The larger the scale (as in, one-quarter inch
equals one foot, for example, rather than one-sixteenth inch), the larger the resulting
representation. Traditionally, this practice tacitly led to scale’s second role of orga-
nizing architecture’s production process according to a certain ranked order in the
development or incorporation of information.
With information as the hinge between the two parts, scale’s traditional enabling
logic is thus threefold: material, informational, and procedural. The ﬁrst part of
scale—the proportional representation—relays information between the physical
world represented and the representation. The second acts within the realm of repre-
sentation by incrementally incorporating amounts of information according to a
given procedural order. Taken together, the resulting scalar logic all but dictates an
order of design development. To make details visible, or to represent larger projects,
requires larger drawings; the larger the representation, the larger its brute physical
correlate of sheet of paper. This manner of connecting a representation to what it
represents thereby yielded an order based in a progressive classiﬁcation of size and
importance in relation to the physical world and information. Through this process,
the speciﬁc scale of the drawing effectively dictated the amount of detail or informa-
tion included. In practice, then, the two components of scale merged. This routinely
meant that, for example, early design stages with limited information, or site plans
covering large areas, were drawn at smaller scales such as one-thirty-second inch.
Conversely, details or partial views, such as building sections, necessitated repre-
sentations at a larger scale to develop and make more detailed information visible.
Consolidated in what can be thought of as scalar logic, the twofold workings of scale
effectively created a series of correspondences that tied type of representation to
1 I am thinking here of these terms, narrative and technology, with their standard dictionary deﬁni-
tions: narrative is a spoken or written account of connected events and technology is the application
of scientiﬁc knowledge for practical purposes, or a manner of accomplishing a task especially using
technical processes, methods, or knowledge. In this I am particularly concerned with how narrative
produces a speciﬁed order. I address this in my forthcoming book, tentatively entitled From Text to
Algorithm: Architecture and Big Data.

Architecture and Big Data: From Scale to Capacity
845
information relayed to stage of design development. In this process, scale supplies
the functional lynchpin in this web of relations, correlating physical size of repre-
sentation to quantity and type of information relayed. Scalar logic thus instituted a
bond between architectural drawing and the world according to a ﬁxed, readily and
visually comprehensible set of principles that suture the describing and inscribing of
reality to a speciﬁed set of correspondences.
Scalar logicremaineddominant inarchitectural productionuntil theascendancyof
computer-based drawing loosened scale’s overarching grip on project development.
Architecture’s frequently recounted history with computing technologies2 is one of
ﬁrst explicitly embracing computer-aided drawing and, later, computational logics.3
With the adoption of the widespread use of computers, digital drawings began to
replace hand drawings. Digitally produced architectural drawings, while remaining
toscale,comeintobeinginanopen-endeddigitalspacethatobliteratesanynotionofa
ﬁxed correspondence between representation size and represented—either on screen
or paper. This disrupts the material component of scalar logic, as the physical size of a
drawingnolongermatters.Whiledigitallyproduceddrawingsremainedconceptually
proportional—to scale—the actual size of the visible image on the screen or when
printed was no longer ﬁxed. As a result, the impact of scale’s ﬁrst meaning, its
proportional relation, was diminished. In a Deleuzean act of reterritorialization, while
digital space dissociates information from any ﬁxed physical size, it associates it to
a capacity to process large amounts of information in a compressed period of time
that coupled with the development of computationally driven architecture strategies
to lead to capacity’s emergence as a dominant ordering principle overseeing design
production.
If scale acts relationally, both across and within realms, capacity, in designating
maximums of containment or production, is both more self-contained and more
2 Architecture’s frequently recounted history with computing technologies dates to the early 1990s’
popular software Form Z and Rhino, and its often-cited ﬁrst generation of digital designers, Gregg
Lynn and Bernard Cache.
3 An early entry into this break with scalar logic’s centrality appeared as a fascination with the
geometryoffractals.PopularizedinarchitecturebyPeterEisenmanamongothers,fractalgeometries
are inﬁnitely complex patterns that are self-similar across all scales so as to impart the same character
to each part as to the whole. Unique in a number of ways, fractals straddle the line between being
a naturally occurring state and an abstract construct. They appear in the geometry of coastlines,
snowﬂakes, and crystals, on the one hand, and are computer generated through feedback loops
(as with the Mandelbrot Set), on the other. But it is their signature self-similarity that counters
long-standing scalar logic. Rather than ﬁx a certain amount of information to a given size, self-
similarity allots equal amounts of information at each scale, up or down. For architectural practice,
fractals offered a tantalizing image of a nonscalar ordering principle; their distinctive geometric
narrative constitutes an intermediary stage in the breakdown of scalar logic and a simultaneous
shift to an emphasis on patterns, providing a mediating stage between scale and capacity. Although
architecture’s foray into fractals was limited, the fascination with them suggests a desire to disrupt
long-held notions of scale, representation, and materiality. Any substantial impact on the discipline,
however, was quickly eclipsed by the soon-to-be-had, thoroughgoing technological developments
in architecture, and its turn to computers and computational logics in the following two decades.
The early 2000s saw a fascination with patterns that similarly exhibited a desire to move away from
scalar logic.

846
N. Last
absolute. As digital drawings became not merely produced on computers, but also
computationally driven, computational capacity became more and more of a factor in
production. Greater capacity allowed for both more complex drawings and for more
to be achieved in less time. Less tied to linearly ordered, sequential increments than to
a liminal determinant, capacity does not predominantly hold architecture to consid-
erations of its known physical or informational terrain. Rather, it introduces criteria
that favor relations between information to speed and time, rather than to physical
size and spatial distance. Although this transformation directly alters scale’s propor-
tional component, it had an even larger and more consequential impact on scale’s
second component: internal ordering that structures how, when, and in what form
information may become incorporated into the architectural design processes. Ques-
tioning when information enters the design process couples with new technologies
to force the rethinking of what information can enter, as well as at what stage it
enters. Challenging or changing what information can—or should—be incorporated
into architecture, and in what forms this might occur, ultimately forces the discipline
to rethink the relations it bears (or deﬁnes) to the broader world.
And this is where big data enters.
“Big data” is a shorthand label for processes in which advanced computation,
software algorithms, and statistical methods of analysis are applied to contemporary
society’s immense volumes and varieties of digital data. What gives the term its
piquancy is that the label, which began gaining currency around 2008, denotes not
just quantity, but also method or logic. As a method, it is not ﬁxed to a speciﬁc disci-
pline. In many ways, then, its adoption is unbounded; its very logic deﬁes disciplinary
or other boundaries, with its processes only limited by availability of data, speed of
computation, and underlying algorithm. Distinguishing big data is its twofold poten-
tial to conglomerate diverse forms of traditional and nontraditional data sources while
simultaneously instituting previously unseen approaches to digital analysis within
existing practices.4 In doing so, big data’s procedures are at least as revolutionary as
its information-processing capacity. Driving big data’s absorption across disciplines
is its inherent promise to unearth otherwise undetectable patterns within amassed
data. This potential to mine data for answers to fundamental questions has led some
to deem big data science’s fourth paradigm.5 Unlike modern empirical science’s
reliance upon compressing data from limited samples into generalized explanatory
models of natural phenomena,6 big data’s processes need neither compression nor
4 These sources include crowdsourced, social, and other digitally available data from websites,
blogs, tweets, data trails, social network communications, sensor data, and other data, and are
collected largely without quality control. They span social, economic, political, and environmental
spheres to envelop traditional informational sources along with surveillance and communications
technologies. The resulting agglomeration spans from scientiﬁc principles, at one end, to the
production of biopolitical subjects through surveillance and tracking, at the other.
5 See, for example, Tony Hey (2009).
6 Big data spans two branches of predictive modeling. Both branches share the goal of using data to
learn about some phenomena, but differ in the volume, velocity, and variety of data processed, and
the degree and type of human involvement. At one pole of this spectrum is machine learning, which
employs algorithms that learn from data without relying on rules-based programming, and, as its

Architecture and Big Data: From Scale to Capacity
847
generalization. In lieu of these procedures, data-driven sciences employ algorithms
to either mine data for unseen patterns beyond human apprehension7 or to directly
search data to serve as precedents for the behavior of current phenomena.8 Big data’s
ready popularization across disciplines and media, however, shows it to designate
something beyond discrete methods of data mining. It offers disciplines the ability
to do more than navigate vast quantities of disorganized data, and to utilize them to
advantage.
While capacity is central to big data, determining the speed, extent, and breadth
of data that can be searched and utilized, big data’s logic does more than build on
capacity. In a reciprocal process, the importing of big data’s methods into a disci-
pline or practice—including architecture—upsets pre-existing procedures (and their
contained histories); in so doing, it transforms the disciplines embracing them. The
injection of data-driven logics into architecture begins by turning scale’s structured
order inside out to frontload information and emphasize production. If scalar order
acted to visualize ﬁxed correspondences, big data’s order is multifarious, haphazard,
unseen, unvisualized, and potentially unvisualizable. Big data has no need for scale’s
traditional enabling logic, that connected the material, informational, and procedural
to one another. Instead, by reimagining the operations of what had been the unstated
glue of scalar logic (information), it disrupts the preordained correspondence of
scale’s constructed ordering of physical proportional relationship to information to
procedural order.
For architecture, the advent of big data discloses a history of architectural
responses to increasing modes and quantities of available information, one that has
already yielded an array of approaches for introducing or incorporating data into
its practices. In the ﬁrst decades of the twenty-ﬁrst century, prior to the widespread
introduction of data-driven methods designed for the purpose, nascent attempts to
grapple with contemporary society’s overwhelming ﬂood of information appear in
the widespread efforts (both in architecture and other disciplines/practices) to corral
data into maps, charts, graphs, and timelines. In reaction to the eruption and avail-
ability of digital data’s vast and unruly ﬁeld outside of disciplinary or other order, a
host of common visualization methods appeared everywhere in attempts to process
disparate information into readily legible images. In architecture, their upsurge
signals a profession grappling with ways to incorporate and compress increasing
name suggests, it requires few assumptions and minimal human intervention. Machine learning
uses computers to parse trillions of collected observations to ﬁnd patterns hidden in data. Its goal is
to directly transpose data into predictions so as to simultaneously learn from past events and predict
future ones by discovering complex patterns beyond human comprehension. The second approach
is held by statistical modeling, which employs mathematical equations to look for relationships
between variables. Based on a set of assumptions, the method requires the modeler to understand
the relation between variables. But there are no hard lines between the approaches, as each learns
from the other.
7 Harvey J. Miller and Michael F. Goodchild (2015).
8 Big data thus fundamentally distinguishes itself from forms of science that relied on generalized
models formed by compressing a limited number of observations into a universal model. Data-
driven methods need neither limit the number of observations nor compress the accumulated data
into a generalized model.

848
N. Last
amounts of newly malleable data into its practices. By transforming the potentially
meaningless—and certainly unmanageable—accumulation of data into something
meaningful, constructing readily comprehensible images of data serves a number
of purposes, including alleviating anxiety over the discipline’s standing in face of
technological, intellectual, and epistemological advances in society.
In a manner comparable to scale’s proportional functioning, these methods sutured
realms together. By contrast, however, they highlight the correspondence of informa-
tion across realms, rather than spatial or material relations. Omnipresent timelines,
for example, encapsulate and envision data as linear pairings of dates to events.
In amassing relevant material and molding it into a deﬁnitive history, timelines,
charts, diagrams, graphs, etc., act as mediators that situate architectural projects into
a broader narrative that acknowledges the need to connect to information beyond its
bounds. Acting as a frame to architectural projects, this range of procedures consti-
tutes a state between competing modes of ordering information, in which informa-
tion mediates, migrates between, or is shared by disciplines and the broader society.
Such approaches, however, typically harbor an asymmetric logic: they respond to the
digital amassing and availability of information with an analog mentality of turning
that information into readily recognizable images of history or other contexts, images
in which a discipline sits neatly within a pre-existing and surrounding ﬁeld of events.
If timelines and charts aim to make information visible and legible, the logic and
methods of big data disrupt the correspondence of a discipline to its surrounds, visu-
alized or otherwise. It acts on a discipline’s relations from both ends—altering how
we conceive of information and how we conceive a discipline, negating both scalar
logic’s proportional correspondence that connects across realms and its concomitant
predetermined order of practice within a realm. As a result, the relation between
linearly ordered timelines (which necessarily rein in information) to the unruliness
and vastness of emerging data constitutes as much a disconnection as a connection.
In constituting associations across realms, scalar logic situated human beings
between the realm of the represented world and the act of representing it, making the
construction of human subjectivity inseparable from the design process. Against this,
the reliance on big data’s computer-driven, algorithm-based methods are valuable,
exactly because they operate in ways humans cannot. The question, then, is: what
is the effect of this on human subjectivity? Implicitly and explicitly, by employing
advanced technologies to detect patterns outside of what humans can visualize, big
data methods realign traditional relations between meaning and information. This
dissociation severs the relationship of information to the visual and comprehensible
realm. The institution of new procedures unsettles established modes of processing,
ordering, relaying, and structuring information and, with them, their entrenched
hierarchies.Ratherthanaimtocurbtheplenitudeofinformation,data-drivenmethods
readily exploit it. Unlike other methods for processing information to make it legible,
big data’s use of algorithms need not remake data over in the image of a more humanly
comprehensible visual order associated with texts, graphs, or charts. The resulting
misﬁt of old and new orders highlights the interface between forms of information
and modes of practice.

Architecture and Big Data: From Scale to Capacity
849
Propelled by computer-driven algorithms and ushered in with a lexicon of data,
algorithms, and performance, the shift to capacity questions what the bounds of
a given discipline are, and how that boundary functions. Scale and capacity each
establish distinct approaches to the subject matter that serve to mediate the ways in
which the discipline responds to various modes and types of information. Whereas
scalar’s linear logic places the architect as director of the process and producer of
meaning, capacity’s data-driven logics frontload information, emphasize production,
and de-emphasize subjectivity. The entry of big data, with its inherent promise to
advance knowledge by detecting patterns and relations (beyond those humans can
comprehend), challenges the functioning and identity of disciplines following its
methods. The use of algorithms dominates these data-driven enterprises. Focusing
on algorithmic operations eschews the ambiguous and thorny acts of interpretation
associated with projects that focus on producing meaning or narrative, replacing
the goal of engaging with a human-produced or -centered narrative with that of
achieving an unbiased, scientiﬁc, data-driven approach. This is even the case when
the approach is in service of a more human-centrically deﬁned end. Data-driven
approaches, in which problem solving is key, necessarily deﬁne speciﬁc goals or
outcomes. The move to algorithm-based, data-driven methods thus proceeds from
the emphasis on meaning and representation that dominated the 1980s’ embrace of
architecture-as-text to a performance-focused, algorithm-driven process. This shift
in process affects the producer as well. Adhering to its logics undergirds a move
away from understanding the intellectual human as an interpreter or elucidator of
meaning to one who directly heeds data; from one who engages in interpretation, and
controls the inﬂux of information, to one who follows algorithms into an otherwise
unnavigable territory. Pronouncing this change, architecture projects engaging these
methods frequently proclaim not just a different set of procedures, but a different set
of goals.
In fundamentally changing our relationship to information, big data instigates
an ontological shift in who we are.9 When architecture meets big data, it couples
big data’s implicit resituating of the human being in relation to knowledge with
the broader spatio-social situating of humans that forms the traditional province of
architecture. That is, it couples an epistemological and methodological resituating of
the subject with the notably material and ontological one. Architecture projects that
engage big data necessarily enter into this conﬂuence, bringing this epistemological,
methodological realm into fruition or actualization. The results so far have effectively
split architecture’s subjectivity into two forms (manifest as two loci of subjectivity):
the subjectivity of the architect/designer/producer, on the one hand, and the subjec-
tivity of the architecture user, on the other. This division sends the components
of subjectivity (which scale’s inherent duality had sutured together) on divergent
paths. Architecture’s responses to big data, explicit or not, have so far extended this
split, generating projects and practices divided between emphasizing methods and
9 This repositioning has, itself, been partially buried under the onslaught of discussions that grapple
witharchitecturalontologyinitsmaterialratherthanepistemologicalformoverthepasttwodecades.

850
N. Last
the changed subjectivity of the designer or those highlighting the roles of informa-
tion and technology in society that spotlight the subjectivity of the user. Big data’s
broader challenge to traditional forms of subjectivity animates the rift in subjectivity
that scalar logic—in tying the producing subject to the experiencing one (when
presupposing a universal subjectivity)—covered over. While scalar’s proportional
aspect secured the relation of an internal order to a larger world—with the architect
as producer at its helm—architecture’s adoption of big data’s logics raises the ques-
tion of how the discipline’s emerging methods—how its modes of describing and
inscribing reality—relate to its forms of production. To ask this question another way:
what information can architecture now incorporate in its practices, and how might
this be done? How can the discipline deﬁne, describe, and incorporate these new,
variant forms and myriad quantities of information? And with that, what information
is seen to lie within architecture’s domain of action? This last concern, historically
discussed around issues of autonomy, is here rethought in relation not to the possible
autonomy of the discipline, but rather to autonomy’s theoretical impossibility in the
age of big data.
Neither big data nor architecture’s intersections with it, however, are monolithic.
Interfaces between architecture and big data have so far manifested two main cate-
gories. Each strain presents a characteristic approach to understanding where and
how information enters the project and how it relates to humans, technology, or the
environment. This can be thought of as the models of association each engenders,
with the ﬁrst seeking to adopt data-driven methods and the second actively imagining
the social situating of data in contemporary society. In seeking to adopt, incorporate,
or emulate big data’s methods as a central component of architecture’s practice, the
ﬁrst group transforms the role, and with it the subjectivity, of the designer. Against
this, the second approach develops architecture projects that consider and manifest
complex interactions between humans, data, technology, and society, all of which
highlight the subjectivity of the architecture user.
Architecture practices in this ﬁrst category adopt big data’s aims and methods for
much the same reasons other disciplines do: to increase the amount of information
they can utilize toward responding to complex situations and to optimize results.
The hallmark of this category is method and the frontloading of information in the
architecture process. Projects in this category combine various computational strate-
gies and digital analytics to approach architecture through a lens of performativity,
problem solving, and optimization of structural, material, and operational faculties.
As with big data’s methodology, these practices look to data-driven methods to
optimize results, and they achieve those results while simultaneously removing or
minimizing human-associated bias.
A series of consequences follow from this. A primary effect of introducing big
data operations into architecture is to disrupt the very idea of how, when, and in what
form information enters the design process. While scalar logic focused on linear accu-
mulation of information, algorithm-driven big data frontloads information, throwing
architecture’s more established order of production into disarray. This effectively
transposes information from its scalar positioning as something akin to later-stage
architectural details, to an initiating premise in the form of algorithms, data sets, and

Architecture and Big Data: From Scale to Capacity
851
parameters that span materials, structures, environmental conditions, social uses,
and more. In this transposition, big data’s methodology eschews scale’s carefully
constructed correspondences, replacing the linear accrual of information with the
ability to search varied and unordered accumulations of data. Big data’s injecting
quantities of speciﬁc information at the start of the process, without generalizations,
visualizations, or other forms of human direction, haphazardly rearranges previously
orderedproceduresandrelations.Whathadbeenvisualizableandsequentialbecomes
amalgamated within unseen, algorithmic, and computational processes. While incor-
porating these processes requires practices in this group to confront the changing role
and subjectivity of the designer in the wake of science’s fourth paradigm, they do
not, however, automatically consider the changing role of the architecture user.
Rather than subscribe to big data’s methods, the second category takes varied
approaches that mix processes and sources of collecting and aggregating data with
data-driven technologies to resituate, enter into, and reveal relations between humans
and the amassing of data. Less focused on new design methods, the projects employ
data, as both a component of the project and producer of experience, to present a new
locus of subjectivity—the user deﬁned in relation to information and data. Projects in
this group actively situate and make visible (or legible) data in contemporary society.
Toward this, information repeatedly appears in process rather than ﬁxed, as though
it were in the middle of being absorbed, released, found, or formed over time. The
resulting architectural interventions utilize information and data as design elements,
frequently as constitutive of social functions. In doing so, they implicitly situate the
project and its users amidst a data-saturated world.
Within each category, two stages of development are already apparent, with the
latter one incorporating more technologically advanced uses of data. In some ways,
the clearest impact of both the use of data-driven methods and the focus on data
within a project arises most sharply in the earlier phase. Additionally, the newness
of the methods and their lack of ﬁt with existing logics (which implicitly reveal their
status) couple with explicit statements that proclaim their stance. The effect of this is
to highlight the mechanisms and processes at work before they become completely
absorbed in later projects. This intermediate stage most sharply manifests the shift
from scale to capacity that, itself, began decades prior to architecture’s broad adoption
of digital modes of production and well in advance of big data’s methods. Capacity’s
centrality follows on the heels of the emergence of the hegemony of immaterial
and instantaneous measures that the French cultural and urban theorist Paul Virilio
addressed in his 1991 essay, “The Overexposed City.”10 The essay discusses the ways
in which technical developments in computation and communication had already
transformed the city, historically deﬁned by the physical determinants that are the
traditional province of architecture, into an organism organized by the immaterial
measures that are the hallmark of advanced technology.It contends that advanced
technology’s emergence inserted a wedge between architecture’s historical material
and cultural functioning and the operations of the social realm that supports it.
10 Paul Virilio (1997), 381–90.

852
N. Last
Some of the earliest examples from the ﬁrst category come from the architec-
ture ﬁrm MVRDV, whose aspirations and reasoning provide a clear link between
Virilio’s observations and big data’s methods. Echoing Virilio, the ﬁrm claims: “Due
to ever-expanding communications networks and the immeasurable web of interre-
lationships they generate, the world has shed the anachronism ‘global village’ and is
transforming into the more advanced state of the ‘metacity.’”11 Rather than strive for
meaning, the rhetoric common to MVRDV and other design ﬁrms in this group looks
to shed any remaining representational or narrative skeleton that formed a corner-
stone of much of architecture’s previous undertakings. Enacted prior to the coining
of the term, MVRDV’s work shares big data’s focus on employing data, embracing
what they lovingly dub “pure data.” Behind this approach is their ﬁnding that the
economic and spatial possibilities of the current world situation are so complex that
“statistical techniques seem the only way to grasp its processes.”12 Turning to data
allowed MVRDV to more readily integrate socio-cultural, economic, and environ-
mental issues into the early stages of the design process, becoming the means for
producing what they call “datascapes.” MVRDV consolidated this approach in their
1999 book of theoretical projects Metacity/Datatown. The premise of this work is
to utilize data and information as active creators in the design process. The book
presents its projects as the inevitable and scientiﬁc result of data, predictive tech-
niques, procedures, and research methodologies through which data becomes the
consolidator of a diverse range of concerns and types of information.
While short of big data’s full computational potential, MVRDV’s projects’ mix
of data-compiling, statistically based methods couples with their goal of a project of
pure data, to transform the architecture process and, with it, the role of the designer.
Their method is distinctly hybrid. They ﬁrst frontload information in the form of
aggregated statistical data and then utilize that data to inform architectural diagram-
ming exercises that modify and literally form the data into spatial conﬁgurations.
Their process begins by investigating relevant facts, including laws, regulations,
conditions, experiences, available ﬁnancing, client needs, and any number of other
things.13 Used to generate the data set, these facts are, themselves, transformed into a
set of diagrams, which in turn become aggregated by superimposing one on the other.
The superimposed diagrams constitute the spatial and theoretical framework for the
project. In transforming various types of data into spatial conﬁgurations, diagram-
ming acts as an intermediary between the data and the resulting architectural form.
MVRDV describes this process as an iterative, rational one employing statistical
spatial data and diagrammatic exercises. The iterative aspect develops through feed-
back loops in which the results are evaluated and used to form new iterations. In
developing this method, they move architecture decisively away from the realm of
meaning and representation characteristic of the text-driven architecture of the 1980s
and early’90 s and toward a “pure” state, scientiﬁc and data-driven—moved, that is,
11 MVRDV (1999), 16.
12 Winy Maas (MVRDV), (2010), 249. They state that “by selecting and connecting data according
to hypothetical prescriptions, a world of numbers turns into diagrams.”.
13 Michele Costanzo (2006), 60.

Architecture and Big Data: From Scale to Capacity
853
from scale’s linear accrual of information to capacity’s (and big data’s) increased
computational and algorithmic strategies. They make this explicit, rejecting outright
the terms underlying textual as well as more traditional approaches to architecture,
proclaiming: “Datatown” is a “city that knows no given topography, no prescribed
ideology, no representation, no context. Only huge, pure data.”14 While unhesi-
tatingly introducing this thinking, they also acknowledge its uncertain outcomes,
issuing the still-unanswered question: “What agenda emerges from this numerical
approach?”.15
More recently, some architecture practices have moved closer to fully adopting
big data methods by employing computational methods to incorporate increased
amounts of data, frontloading information and looking to machine learning as the
primary driver of the design process. As with machine learning in other ﬁelds, this
use of algorithms to guide the design process transforms it. Frontloading complex
and varied information combined with a reliance on algorithm-driven computation
further repositions the role of the designer in the design process. Such an approach,
at least in principle, completely breaks with scalar logic. Rather than take existing
data and statistics and turn them into architecture via familiar exercises (if data-
driven/diagrammatic, as with MVRDV), such practices look to complex computation
to orchestrate increasing amounts and varieties of data and optimize the design’s
resulting performativity. Examples include practitioners, such as Michael Hensel or
Achim Menges, who each employ advanced computational methods to strive for a
comprehensive, computational approach to design capable of achieving an otherwise
unattainable level of complexity.
Menges, for example, has designed a series of pavilions, modeled on the func-
tioning of an array of biological models such as lobster skeletons or the hardened
forewings of ﬂying beetles. His 2016 design for a robot-built pavilion for the V & A
Museum in London models its web-like, carbon-ﬁber canopy on elytra, a material
found in the hardened forewings of ﬂying beetles. Far removed from the idea of
adding material and other information speciﬁcs as late-stage design development,
the speciﬁcity of a material modeled on elytra’s performative potential becomes the
starting point for conceiving a pavilion design whose canopy combines tradition-
ally discrete functions to serve as architectural envelope, load-bearing structure, and
environmental interface. From the onset, Menges’s approach integrates performative
goals with material and structural functioning in relation to the project’s environment.
This process necessarily frontloads what traditional methods developed incremen-
tally. That information is used toward realizing speciﬁc goals in the ﬁnal design. Far
removed from the idea of incrementally accruing detailed and discrete information,
these practices are premised on an aggregative understanding of information in the
design process.16
Beyondtheshapingofarchitecturaloutcomes,themorethedisciplineincorporates
big data’s methods, the more those methods challenge the traditional role and practice
14 Garcia, 249.
15 Ibid.
16 See, for example, Achim Menges (2011), 198–210.

854
N. Last
of designers. Menges both acknowledges and embraces this. Echoing the rhetoric
around big data, he describes his design for a pavilion as offering “a glimpse of the
transformative power of the fourth industrial revolution currently underway, and the
way it again challenges established modes of design, engineering and making.”17 As
Menges stresses, this places “the designer in an alternative role”—one needed in the
face of computation—“one that is central to enabling, moderating, and inﬂuencing
truly integral design processes and requires novel abilities and sensitivities.”18
Likely a matter only of time, architecture’s full adoption of big data’s methods still
remains limited, relying upon the existence of a wealth of relevant data to mine that
the discipline lacks. These current limitations, however, raise interesting questions
of the relation a discipline bears to types of information. While the absorption of big
data’s methods may largely point toward performativity and optimization, it need
not be so constrained. The existence of big data leads us to the question—asked
on a much wider scale than was previously possible—of what data is relevant for
inclusion. The relation of the category of practices employing data-driven methods
to that of ones situating data in society forms a microcosm of the concern with
what information is relevant to the discipline. A clue to the relation between these
two strains of architectural approach surfaced in French anthropologist Claude Lévi-
Strauss’smid-twentiethcenturystructuralstudyofmyth.AtthecoreofLévi-Strauss’s
analysis of myth are a set of diagrams that transform myth into a spatio-temporal,
grid-based matrix. The diagrams’ fundamental functioning hinges on Lévi-Strauss’s
method for converting linear narrative into a spatial array that maintains narrative
order while rendering it visually secondary to its structure/meaning. The diagrams
function by being readable in two ways: the temporal and linear order associated
with narrative and the spatial structure tied to the myth’s (underlying) meaning. To
do this, the diagrams maintain narrative order, but subsume it to the myth’s underlying
pattern of relations.
Lévi-Strauss’s method, here, is key. It begins by including all versions of the
myth in the analysis, thus nullifying the search for the correct or original version.
Lévi-Strauss then proceeds (à la Freud’s analysis of dreams) by breaking each myth
into small, discrete, narrative elements. Following his dictum that repetition makes
the structure apparent, he analyzes the narrative elements in search of repeated
themes and arrays them to show these newly discovered relations: the myth’s pairs
of repressed binaries.
Notably, Lévi-Strauss’s process for re-envisioning of myth bears a twofold, and
prescient, relation to big data. Both begin by multiplying the amount of available
data (by including all versions of a myth), then search the expanded data pool for
patterns (structure). This method allows the diagrams to unearth hidden patterns
across a myth’s many variants. Over half a century later, the core of big data’s
methods employs algorithm-driven functions to search aggregated data for hidden
patterns. While this comparison may initially seem too great a leap, Lévi-Strauss
explicitly recognized the association to enhanced computational ability, pronouncing
17 Quoted in Kim Megson (2016).
18 Menges, “Integral Formation,” 199.

Architecture and Big Data: From Scale to Capacity
855
that his process of analysis—the detecting of underlying structure or patterns within
myth—would be greatly advanced by the assistance of IBM equipment.19
There is a second way that Lévi-Strauss’s analysis becomes relevant to architec-
ture’s relations to big data. Along with methodology, it points to how the advance
of knowledge brings about potential social upheaval. By connecting method to the
socialstandingofnewinformation,theanalysisofmythalsosuggeststiesbetweenthe
two categories of architectural responses. Getting to the core of this, Lévi-Strauss’s
structural analysis shows that myth fulﬁlls a particular purpose: it acts to maintain
traditional identity in the face of social disruptions wrought by scientiﬁc, technolog-
ical, and other changes.20 This happens as myth suppresses the incompatible, contra-
dictory ideas at its core—beneath a coherent narrative surface. Lévi-Strauss’s study
reveals not just that new knowledge and technology question established relations
and hierarchies across society, but that they do so by introducing ordering principles
outside of, or in contrast to, existing ones. Architecture’s status as an amalgam of
spatial, temporal, and social performance presents a uniquely sensitive territory to
changes and potentials across these registers. Projects in the second group addressing
this provide ways of framing the issues raised by projects in the ﬁrst. They show how
the absorption of these methods is part and parcel of its social positioning—including
upheaval—with the one necessarily invoking the other. From them it becomes clear
that while architecture’s relations of information, computation, and architecture, in
readily appearing as a “purely” technological and practical undertaking, may mask
big data’s social and cultural functioning, they in no way eradicate it.
The second main strain of architectural responses to big data emphasizes data less
as method and more as content, pointing to the cultural impact and possibilities stem-
ming from the introduction of vast quantities and increased access to information into
architecture, its sites and roles in society. One of the hallmarks of these is data’s emer-
gence as an explicit component of the architecture and orchestrator of the subject’s
experience. Manifestations of data in these projects mediate the subject’s complex
of social relations. While data remains integral to the design, in these instances it is
less about frontloading information in the design process than moving data to the
forefront of the architecture. From within the project, data emerges as formative of
both project and user experience. Data moves from input to output, transformed from
its operative role in the design process to an active component within the architecture
project. As architectural component it appears in various guises, visible, sensible,
audible, tangible, or directive of human action. In becoming explicitly utilized as a
material or architectural component, data is transformed into an active, visualized,
spatialized, and operative element. With this shift, the projects move away from the
ﬁrst group’s concern with the subjectivity of the architect/producer, to a concern
with the subjectivity produced by the project and experienced by the user—a subject
generated in, around, or by data.
19 Claude Lévi-Strauss (1986), 821.
20 Wittgenstein raises this important issue in Sect. 125 of his Philosophical Investigations, which
concludes by stating: “The civil status of a contradiction, or its status in civil life: there is the
philosophical problem.” (Ludwig Wittgenstein, 1953).

856
N. Last
Projects in this group simultaneously question and recognize human input and
interactions with data and data-driven and responsive technologies. By consciously
positioning and manifesting data’s, information’s, and technology’s evolving roles
in society, these projects introduce complex intersections between machine learning,
data, computation, and human-directed experience. In raising issues surrounding the
social impacts of big data, more, say, than using data for a variety of ends (including
complex problem solving or material optimization), they emphasize architecture’s
relations to big data as a cultural technology, rather than the use of it as a speciﬁc
method. These projects develop territories concerned with data and technology’s
status in the world, in which architecture is not just responding to and incorporating
methods developed elsewhere (or even exploiting them for speciﬁc ends), but also
conditioning, visualizing, and postulating (big) data’s social acting.
Diller and Scoﬁdio’s 2002 Blur Building provides an early moment of this
thinking. Its mix of data, experience, and elusive form bracket social experience
between computation and data while envisioning the result of that interaction.
Located at the base of Switzerland’s Lake Neuchatel, the Blur Building was a tempo-
rary pavilion for Swiss EXPO 2002. Measuring in extent some three hundred feet
wide, two hundred feet deep, and sixty-ﬁve feet high, the pavilion was composed of
an open-air platform enveloped in an artiﬁcial atmospheric cloud formed by a ﬁne
mist of ﬁltered lake water. As if animating Duchamp’s Large Glass and its two-part
construction of desire and identity, the Blur pavilion is a machine for transforming
data into experience. While many aspects were never instituted as designed, data
underlies both the pavilion’s intended material and social operations. In doing this,
it implicitly acknowledges the larger discussion of data’s role in society as well as in
architecture. Both the pavilion’s ephemeral—if overwhelming—materiality and the
visitor’s experience are data-directed. The precarity of its material existence testi-
ﬁes to its merging of layers of information and material to yield experience. This
happens in distinct components that are aggregated in the experience of the pavilion.
To sustain the cloud, the pavilion’s fog output is governed by data gathered from
its built-in weather station. The weather system monitors the lake’s shifting climatic
conditions—temperature, humidity, and wind direction and speed—turning environ-
mental data into substance by using it to determine the amount of mist the system
must generate to sustain the cloud. In this way, the pavilion acts as an active inter-
face between its information-gathering ability, its self-monitoring, and its geographic
condition in the lake.
Visitor experience was equally designed to be data driven. The architects created
a prescribed sequence for the pavilion’s visitors. It was to commence on land, with
visitors logging into a computer and ﬁlling out a personality questionnaire. Their
responses were then to be uploaded to the cloud’s computer network and deposited
in a smart raincoat, dubbed a “braincoat.” Donned by visitors as protection from the
wet environment, the idea of the braincoats was their dual material and data function,
storing personality proﬁles while protecting wearers from the mist. Braincoat on, the
visitors walk down the four-hundred-foot-long ramp and enter the pavilion. At that
point, the cloud diminishes vision and the braincoats take over where human vision
fails. By searching data for compatibility between nearby proﬁles, the braincoats

Architecture and Big Data: From Scale to Capacity
857
direct anonymous interactions between visitors.21 In paired correlative moves, they
utilize technology to mine data to see what humans cannot, and then transform the
data into human sensorial cultural codes, which the braincoats present as the visual
array of warm to cool colors, or the audible one of accelerated or decelerated pings.
The braincoats thereby ﬁrst assess and then visually and audibly signal degrees of
compatibility between visitors by changing from cold blue-green to warm red and
accelerating its emission of audible pings as visitors near proﬁle matches. Visitors
are then left to follow the colors and sounds to meet their digitally determined match.
Upon reaching the deck above the cloud, the coats are deactivated, and human vision
again assumes control. Visitors then complete the sequence by returning to land,
logging out, and receiving a password for future access to their experience on the
pavilion’s website. Blur thus stages associations between the logic of data and a
visualized human experience that build on the interdependence of personal narra-
tive and its translation into digital technology and socio-spatial relations. Through
these processes, Blur actively produces itself. It becomes a machine for correlating
phenomena and data, mixing information with experience, technology with narrative,
initially treating each of these as discrete and mappable entities with distinct origins,
and then merging them to produce a socio-spatial/materio-environmental blur.
If Blur’s proposed data-framed experience was, unfortunately, incompletely
fulﬁlled, over the past decade a growing number of practices have enlisted newly
available technology to simultaneously enact and emphasize relations between
humans and data. In these, inherently interactive processes such as feedback loops,
sensors, social media streams, and other responsive technologies ﬁgure prominently.
Still early in this phase, narrative, while frequently invoked, is done so in a limited
manner, yet it is developing a set of characteristics. Notably, a number of projects lay
the groundwork for open-ended narratives as extensions of modes of data collection
and distribution. Based in social media, they relocate information and communi-
cation from Blur’s proposed realm of personal narrative and discrete interactions
between individuals to that of digitally reiﬁed social relations.
A more recent wave of projects use increasingly advanced data-driven methods to
create various interactions amongst humans, data, and technological, social, mate-
rial, and environmental components. Projects designed by Future Cities Lab, for
example, utilize big data’s aggregative basis, as in their installations Datagrove 2012
and Murmur Wall 2015.22 These employ responsive technologies to create socio-
technological experiences and feedback loops, mixing data from the immediate phys-
ical environment with more far-ﬂung forms of social media. Surpassing in complexity
the lights and sounds emitted from Blur’s braincoats, the installations function by
transforming data into architectural components. The projects convert sensor-based
21 Discussing Blur, Wolfe writes that it leads to the question of “[w]ho is doing the experiencing,”
that is, “Who, in phenomenological and political terms, are ‘we,’ exactly?” (Cary Wolfe, 2010),
219.
22 Datagrove was an installation located in the courtyard of an historic California Theater, as part
of the ZERO1 “Seeking Silicon Valley” 2012 Biennial.

858
N. Last
information and data streams into animated LED light and digital text displays, inter-
woven with the installations to create continuously evolving interfaces. The projects
become material repositories of immaterial (and potentially nebulous) data. The force
of these projects is their transforming of data collection and activation from method
into architectural and atmospheric components. While Blur had ﬁxed and individu-
alized data input, which was then mapped through a computational database, these
projects aim to inseparably intertwine individuals with one another and the data
they emit—more akin to big data’s aggregative, and unseen, logic. By sharing and
redistributing information, they emphasize the technologies and systems themselves.
As if in direct manifestation of Virilio’s urban observations, the projects enact the
spatial collapse of the local architectural manifestation into the broader urban and
social environment. Using information and communication’s immaterial entities—
now visually and audibly manifest—they connect the project beyond its physical
site in ways that trouble any remaining distinction between project and context.23
Despite all the emphasis upon information and communication in these projects,
the information is all but emptied of speciﬁcity, transformed largely into reference
to communication, on the one hand, and potential commentary on contemporary
society’s relations of information, on the other.
If the ﬁrst category extols big data’s rhetoric of embracing machine learning
and eschewing narrative, the second one, in showing data-human relations, neces-
sarily invokes narratives of some kind. This leads to the question: what narratives?
In building on the social amassing of information, such projects include the social
as a critical component from the outset. Blur, for example, invokes overt narra-
tives of association, emanating from a reductive data/digital version of “what is the
personal,” and orchestrated by lights and pings that direct the visitor through the
vision-obscuring mist of the “cloud.” By contrast, Future Cities Lab’s use of social
media less directly orchestrates social relations than it creates a place for them to be
noted—a place beyond the grasp of those within the physical limits of the project,
emanating from what in the past would have been seen as context. The resulting state
points to the existence of a subject suspended between that of spectator and that of
active contributor.
By ﬁnding patterns in accumulated data that humans cannot see, the methods
central to big data signal a cultural shift in the history between human relations and
what we produce. While big data’s computational-algorithmic logic has no need to
visualize its workings, humans frequently do for a variety of reasons and purposes.
Against this status arises the interesting problem of how we might comprehend and
“visualize” big data, not just use its results. This is particularly the case, as big data
is founded on the idea that we no longer need to visualize such processes. That is, we
no longer need to produce the universal, generalized laws that empirical science built
itself upon. Those laws were, of course, visualizations of various sorts24 that allowed
23 This thinking extends the logic of Jacques Derrida’s 1972 essay “Signature Event Context.” See
Jacques Derrida (1993), 1–23.
24 For example, C. S. Peirce grouped algebraic equations with other visual images and called them
“icons”.

Architecture and Big Data: From Scale to Capacity
859
for the prediction of the behavior of natural phenomena, but also allowed for a way
of seeing and understanding the phenomena themselves.25 Big data’s methods, its
very usefulness, belies the intermediary processes that served as human entry points
into natural and artiﬁcial systems alike.
While the focus on performance largely and vehemently rejects the recourse to
representation, analogy, and meaning, those aspects nevertheless arise. An interesting
issue arises here in context with the possibilities and problems for envisioning big
data. One response suggests architecture invent at least temporary images or spatial
constructs to describe the recently developing logics and social structures wrought by
big data that challenge traditional orders or inscriptions and descriptions of reality.
This need, of course, is not unique to the discipline. Consider how—in order to
mediate between old and new modes of operating—a set of organizational analo-
gies have accompanied advances in computation into new territories, as keeping pace
with increases in computational capacity creates problems for description. As capac-
ities advanced—as megabytes gave way to terabytes and petabytes—organizational
analogies also worked to keep pace, developing from the neatly ordered folders, ﬁle
cabinets, and library analogies26 to today’s “cloud,” which describes both storage
location and lack of readily visualizable formal organization of information.
In this light, Blur’s cloud is both suggestive of the digital realm—materialized in
ephemeral form—and supplies an architectural/environmental image to do just that.
Blur’s very elusiveness proves informative. It raises questions of precisely what is
elusive and what is not—agency, vision, deﬁning the personal, to name a few possibil-
ities. Blur makes the question of elusiveness palpable in relation to information, data,
society, individuals, and social interactions. Its prescribed sequence (akin to narra-
tion or scale) for entering and leaving the pavilion brackets the inchoate experience
of the cloud between the acts of logging on and off, activating and deactivating the
braincoats, revealing and obscuring personal information. An array of other projects
actively associate experience with data and technology, often wielding cycles that
mix varieties of input, methods of aggregation, and layers of complexity. In place
of Blur’s prescribed sequence that bracketed disorienting experience with precise
technology, these offer no speciﬁc starting or ending point, leaving it unclear as to
whether humans or technology are the driver.
More broadly, architecture’s range of responses to the advent of big data questions
the discipline’s functioning in the world. Is it problem solving? Is it about making
propositions? How does it situate the input of data and information in relation to
25 One might here begin to think of Freud’s development of a system to see the unconscious, a
system that in many ways Lévi-Strauss appropriated for his analysis of myth. However, big data
itself, in being a form of analysis based on computational ability beyond the human—rather than a
repressed, unconscious, but still very human way of thinking—offers a whole new level of challenge.
26 At the “petabyte scale, information is not a matter of simple three and four dimensional taxonomy
and order but of dimensionally agnostic statistics.” This calls for us to lose the “tether of data as
something that can be visualized in its totality,” to which Wired magazine notes that organizational
analogies seem to have been exhausted. See Chris Anderson, “The End of Theory: The Data Deluge
Makes the Scientiﬁc Method Obsolete,” Wired, June 23, 2008, https://www.wired.com/2008/06/pb-
theory/.

860
N. Last
the design process or to the experience of the design? Rather than move entirely
beyond questions of meaning, big data’s absorption into architecture cannot help
but raise new ones. The introduction of a new ordering procedure, as with big data,
dislodges architecture’s accustomed procedures and, hence, its potential social roles,
revealing some and masking others. On a procedural level, what the frame of big data
allows us to see is that scale provided a method to control the input of information
into the design process, as a ﬁxed scalar logic controlled not just the quantity of
information and rate of its inclusion, but, effectively, the type of information as well.
Big data thus queries architecture’s status, the question of what stuff it is grappling
with—information and materiality, order and environment, procedures and patterns.
It opens up a history related to the procedures it disrupts. Through its advent, we
see how scalar logic made a series of crucial correspondences seem natural, against
which big data upsets that naturalness and, in so doing, provides an entry point for
history.27
References
Hey, T. (2009). The fourth paradigm: Data-intensive scientiﬁc discovery, in S. Tansley, & K. Tolle
(Eds.). Microsoft Research.
Miller, H. J., & Goodchild, M. F. (2015). Data-driven geography. GeoJournal, 80, 449–461.
Virilio, P. (1997). The Overexposed City. In N. Leach (Ed.), Rethinking architecture: A reader in
cultural theory (pp. 381–390). Routledge.
MVRDV, Metacity/Datatown (1999). MVRDV/010 Publishers, p. 16.
Maas, W. (20100). (MVRDV), “Metacity/Datatown,” in The diagrams of architecture, in M. Garcia
(Ed.), (p. 249), Wiley.
Costanzo, M. (2006). MVRDV works and projects 1991–2006, Skira Editore S.p.A., p. 60.
Menges, A. (2011). Integral formation and materialisation: Computational form and material gestalt.
In A. Menges & S. Ahlquist (Eds.), Computational design thinking (pp. 198–210). Wiley.
Megson, K. (20 May 2016). “ ‘The fourth industrial revolution is underway’: Achim Menges
launches robot-built pavilion at V&A,” CLADnews.
Lévi-Strauss, C. (1986). “The structural study of Myth,” in Critical Theory Since 1965, in H.
Adams, & L. Searle (Tallahassee: Florida State University Press,), 821.
Wittgenstein, L. (1953). Philosophical Investigations, trans. G. E. M. Anscombe, Macmillan.
Wolfe, C. (2010). “Lose the building,” in What is posthumanism?. University of Minnesota Press,
p. 219
Derrida, J. (1993). “Signature event context,” in Limited Inc., (pp. 1–23). Northwestern University
Press.
27 My forthcoming book on this topic will address the issue of the relations between ideology,
history, subjectivity, and science that stem from architecture’s engagement with big data as the
fourth scientiﬁc paradigm. To this end, I discuss how the two components of subjectivity become
reassociated in this process.

Being or Tea?
Annika Döring and José Ordóñez García
Kakuzo Okakura, in his essay The Book of Tea, maps several aspects of Asian lifestyle
by referring to its tea-culture. Later, the German philosopher Martin Heidegger was
accused of having plagiarized them in his most famous book Being and Time:
Before moving back to Japan at the end of his studies, Professor It¯o handed Heidegger a
copy of Das Buch vom Tee, the German translation of Okakura Kakuz¯o’s The Book of
Tea, as a token of his appreciation. That was in 1919. Sein und Zeit (Being and Time) was
published in 1927, and made Heidegger famous. Mr. It¯o was surprised and indignant that
Heidegger used Zhuangzi’s concept without giving him credit. Years later in 1945, Professor
It¯o reminisced with me and, speaking in his Shonai dialect, said, ‘Heidegger did a lot for me,
but I should’ve laid into him for stealing’. There are other indications that Heidegger was
inspired by Eastern writings, but let’s leave this topic here. I have heard many stories of this
kind from Professor It¯o and checked their veracity. I recounted this story at a reception held
after a series of lectures I gave in 1968 at the University of Heidelberg at the invitation of
Hans-Georg Gadamer. Japanese exchange students attended these lectures, and I explained
that there were many other elements of classical Eastern thought in Heidegger’s philosophy
and gave some examples. I must have said too much and may even have said that Heidegger
was a plagiarist (Plagiator). Gadamer was Heidegger’s favorite student, and we ended up not
speaking to each other for 4 or 5 years because he was so angry with me.1
Indeed, regarding the content, there are topics both thinkers refer to, like death
and truth.2 But Okakura and Heidegger have a totally different understanding of what
they mean when they refer to these topics. Whereas, for example, death to Okakura
1 Imamichi, Tomonobu (2004). pp. 123–124.
2 See Okakura, Kakuzo (1956), Heidegger, Martin (1962)1. 212001.
We thank Francesca Brencio, Jon Rea, and Marcus Novaes for helpful comments and translation.
A. Döring (B) · J. O. García
Universidad de Sevilla, Seville, Spain
J. O. García
e-mail: ordogar@us.es
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
S. Wuppuluri and I. Stewart (eds.), From Electrons to Elephants and Elections,
The Frontiers Collection, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-92192-7_44
861

862
A. Döring and J. O. García
means rebirth,3 death to Heidegger means “[T]he ‘end’ of Being-in-the-world”,4 so
they mention the same terms in profoundly—and irreconcilably—different contexts.
We will ﬁrst provide an overview of the content of Okakura’s The Book of Tea,
with a focus on the topics that are relevant for Heidegger as well, then provide an
overview of Heidegger’s Being and Time with a focus on the same topics. Based on
this, we will compare the writings with one another afterwards. We will point out
that, albeit the wording is similar, the (cultural) context in which both refer to these
shared topics, is totally different. The contextual differences will clarify that, despite
the similarities regarding the topics, the contents of The Book of Tea and Being and
Time are different as well.
1
Heidegger: An East for west5; Being and Time:
An Orientation for Existence
The abuse of tea as a sign of weakness in the face of emotions puts us directly in
relation to the ways that we ﬁnd ourselves in the world: the more tea consumption,
the more restlessness, the more surrendered to the affection that arises from other-
ness. This is what Heidegger deﬁnes as state-of-mind, an existential (Existentiell)
characteristic of the Dasein (being there), fundamental and determinant of his daily
life. This state-of-mind belongs to the ontological order, whose factual phenomenon
is mood and the attunement. So, we can establish the following terminological arc:
temple, affectivity, emotion and feeling. “Temple” is usually understood as the ener-
getic fortress and the serene courage to face difﬁculties and risks6; “affectivity” is the
set of feelings, passions and emotions of a person7; “emotion” is understood as the
intense and temporary change of the mood, intense and ﬂeeting, pleasant or painful,
which is accompanied by a certain somatic incidence8; and “feeling” is the fact or
effect of feeling something or feeling himself (e.g.: “he lets himself be carried away
3 Okakura, Kakuzo (1956). p. 128.
4 Heidegger, Martin (1962)1. 212001. p. 276 f.
5 Among many others, there are texts in Spanish such as El oriente de Heidegger, of Carlo
Saviani (Herder, Barcelona, 2004), La palabra inicial, of Hugo Mújica (Trotta, Madrid, 1995)
other Filósofos de la nada. Un ensayo sobre la escuela de Kioto, of James W. Heisig (Herder,
Barcelona, 2002), on Heidegger’s inﬂuence on Eastern thought. It is well known how well received
the conference Was ist Metaphysik (Vittorio Klostermann, Frankfurt a. M., 1981) in ﬁgures
of Japanese thought such as Nishida Kitarô, one of the founders of the Kyoto School, together
with Tanabe Hajime and Nishitani Keiji. However, we have no evidence that Heidegger paid much
interest to Eastern thought, beyond the well-known anecdote of his attempt to approach Lao Zi’s
Tao te King, an approach of which we can see a certain resonance in his work Aus der Erfahrung
des Denkens (Günter Neske, Pfullingen, 1954).
6 Diccionario de la Real Academía Española (RAE).
7 Ibid.
8 Ibid.

Being or Tea?
863
by his feelings”).9 All are phenomena derived from the state-of-mind, as a generic
structure of existence, which takes place in each case in a certain way. But in all of
them we ﬁnd that they are governed by the spontaneity, the involuntary, that is, it
is about genuine phenomena, determinant and irreducible to rationality (excessive
ﬁxation on tea).
The existing is always affected by something or someone, although there are
those who may or may not feel affected by a certain phenomenon: there are those
who are affected by the result of a soccer match and those who not, because other
things affect them. Prejudices, as well as experience, will inﬂuence in affectivity,
they are its condition of possibility, hence the importance of Das Vor-Verstehen and
Die Auslegung.
It is, therefore, a faculty inherent to existence. For this reason, it is possible that
there are those who are deprived of it. The deprivation is only possible in those who
“should have”, but do not. Affective coldness is not deprivation, but precisely an
affective state with certain characteristics. A different case is that of some extreme
pathologies such as, for example, autism, in which there is no affectivity in the strict
sense, but rather a nervous, automatic reaction. With Heidegger, we can say that the
phenomenon of State-of-mind is totally radical. It is the engine of existence, the fuel
of daily life.
The affective phenomena to which Dasein does not usually take much account, due
to its ﬂeeting irruption, frequently go unnoticed, despite the fact that they are decisive
in daily occupation. So, the affectivity takes part of, and determines, our existence.
Therefore, Heidegger can afﬁrm: “Dasein always has some mood (gestimmt ist)”.10
However, and due to this characteristic, the existing one can experience a kind of
affective indeterminacy that is commonly manifested in the form of boredom (Über-
druss). This way of ﬁnding itself has the peculiarity of lacking a cause, not because
there is none, but because the existing one is incapable of ﬁxing it on some motive.
Thus, boredom, experienced as a burden (Last),11 happens, succeeds, occurs, in the
same way as time and being. And the cause is ignored, because boredom (Überdruss)
is not a conquest of knowledge, but a way of ﬁnding oneself in the world prior to
any occupation; it lacks will and intention, as it is an intimate, irruptive experience.
That is why boredom is not “resolved” with knowledge, but with description, that is
to say, with the discourse that puts the tedious in front of the existing, expressing the
tediousness, opening it, letting it be. Boredom takes us just like that, and selfhood
ceases to be an active value to become a burden. In boredom one does not ﬁnd attrac-
tion or interest in what surrounds him. It is a way of being in the world, but without
mooring, without occupation, without desire. Instead of will there is laziness, which
should not be confused with detachment.
One talks about moods from a certain state of mind. Hence, the mood cannot be
treated as an object (Gegenstand) for a subject, since the own subject ﬁnds himself
subjected to his existential condition, in which the mood is originally constitutive
9 Ibid.
10 Being and Time Blackwell Publishers Ltd. (2001. p. 172)
11 Ibid.

864
A. Döring and J. O. García
and constituent. Here the experience of consciousness as self-consciousness is not
valid, in the manner of Hegel, because it is not a question of the necessary recognition
of otherness, but precisely of the irreducible to knowledge, since it is not a question
of knowledge but of a “ﬁnding himself”, and here the otherness does not allude to
another existing one, but, at most, to an estrangement linked to the selfhood. This,
taken from affectivity, has had itself as something that is a difﬁculty, a bore. In other
words, this affective indeterminacy is not the absence of affect, as we have already
pointed out, but the presence of its indeterminacy in the strict sense, that is to say: a
lack of determination to take charge of selfhood. However, here it is important not
to lose sight of that “one does not know”12 in relation to Dasein as a burden (Last).
Why? The meaning of this statement refers to the fact that the existing one has taken
the being of his there (Da) as a burden (Last), that is to say, he ignores why the being
of the “there” manifests himself as tedious (überdrüssig), as something indifferent
to me. The answer to why Heidegger founds it in the primacy originally from moods
over knowledge. This, the knowledge, is a secondary phenomenon, of second order,
compared to the state of mind:
And Dasein cannot know anything of the sort because the possibilities of disclosure which
belong to cognition reach far too short a way compared with the primordial disclosure
belonging to moods, in which Dasein is brought before its Being as "there".13
Thus, it is clear the involuntary character of the moods in the face of the decision
for knowledge, that is to say: that the desire of knowing is going to be legitimized,
or it will simply be possible, as a result of a certain mood, in an affective way of
ﬁnding oneself. It is, then, as checked in Being and Time to thematize the a-thematic,
to account for what “happens to me”, in “how” I feel. That is why Heidegger limits
himself to describing the “how” the existing one ﬁnds itself in boredom (Überdruss)
and thematizes it phenomenologically: the being of “There” (Da) as “burden” (Last).
Therefore, the ontological fundamentum of boredom is burden. In this regard, it must
be added that the exposition on this subject is presented, perhaps, in the ﬁrst person –
or so it should be, not to be seen as a theorization, but as an “existential” description–,
in other words, that it must be Heidegger himself who is describing “how” his state
of mind is, or has been, while writing Being and Time in Todtnauberg’s hut. From his
existential experiences, he abstracts the common existentials (existentiell), from the
ontic-ontological to the pre-ontological, or in other words: from the factual ontic-
existential concretion derived from the generic ontological-existential temple. And
this movement where the world arises is ﬁltered by that determination; therefore, the
world arises through a way of ﬁnding oneself, and, by doing so, it is interpreted: “In
this «how one is», having a mood brings Being to its «there»”.14
The avoidance before the state of mind conforms the state of openness of the
existing one before him. In this way, it is as Heidegger tells us, that we ﬁnd ourselves
sustained in a certain temple just like that, de facto, and, therefore, in an open dispo-
sition that is not consequence of a decision, but that is an already accomplished fact
12 Ibid.
13 Ibid.
14 Ibid.

Being or Tea?
865
to which we let it “speaks” to us or for what we silence ourselves by not taking
account of him. However, not paying attention is part of our deal with the affective
disposition:
In an ontico-existentiell sense, Dasein for the most part evades the Being which is disclosed
in the mood. In an ontologico-existential sense, this means that even in that to which such a
mood pays no attention, Dasein is unveiled in its Being-delivered-over to the “there”. In the
evasion itself the "there" is something disclosed.15
Somehow, die state-of-mind and die Geworfenheit (disposedness and thrownness) go
hand in hand, since that “one does not know” opens to this “Da” in its Geworfenheit,
because it is perceives “what it is”, however, it does not know its “from where” and its
“where. “ This Geworfenheit is a way of feeling derived from boredom (Überdruss).
In it, experiencing existence as a burden (Last) leads to that feeling of Geworfenheit,
which can be expressed like this: I am here, I know it, but I don’t know for what or
why, neither what I have to do. In der Überdruss (disgust) one knows what it is, but
ignores what it has to be, that is, der Entwurf (thrown) appears there under the cloak
of perplexity, astonishment, fear or impotence. There is only possibility, nothing
more, that is to say: the knowing that one has that he needs to be something, or
rather: doing something to be someone. It is another way of insisting on the original
being thrown the existing one into its affective condition:
Factically, Dasein can, should, and must, through knowledge and will, become master of
its moods; in certain possible ways of existing, this may signify a priority of volition and
cognition. Only we must not be misled by this into denying that ontologically mood is
a primordial kind of Being for Dasein, in which Dasein is disclosed to itself prior to all
cognition and volition, and beyond their range of disclosure.16
It is an interpretation of Heidegger –guided by der Überdruss– that, because it is
mediated by der Entwurf, (thrown) is considered factual, but dramatic, due to the
ausweichenden Abkehr (evasive turning away) with which Dasein behaves in relation
to die state-of-mind. Therefore, and to a certain extent, the development of knowledge
in Heidegger has its origin in die Be-sorgnis (care/concern), of which he makes his
Besorgen. A Be-sorgnis that is existential compared to the common and ordinary,
that is merely banal.
2
State-Of-Mind an Originary West
The reﬂection, then, can only aspire to account for experiences, of what has been
lived, which is of the order of facticity, hence Heidegger’s turn towards language and,
speciﬁcally, of his interest in poetry, whose expressionist character (especially that of
Hölderlin, but also that of G. Benn, R. M. Rilke, S. George, or G. Trakl) could seem to
him a kind of experiential phenomenology, insofar as it is not limited to being a mere
15 Ibid., 173–174
16 Ibid., 175

866
A. Döring and J. O. García
description, but is a pure event: letting be what happens transforming language into
a commemorative action. And here, poetry can be considered as the western version
of the eastern ﬁxation on tea. In this sense, it seems correct to afﬁrm that, as a result
of the pre-eminence of affectivity in relation to occupation, it is possible that it is
precisely die state-of-mind what guides our decision towards a certain occupation.
Heidegger reminds us in the lecture What is philosophy?, quoting Aristotle, that
the temple of mood that characterized the philosophizing of the Greeks (Heraclitus
and Parmenides, above all) was das Erstaunen17 (astonishment). Does this mean that
alreadyinBeingandTimeisdeterminedtheaffectiveeastofeverythingtobeoccupied
in the world with entities? So it is. And not only that, Heidegger also understands
that the thinking of our time must also be determined by a certain temple of mind. It
is not clear that anguish must be that temple, despite the fact that Heidegger gives it a
pre-eminence in that work and, above all, it is the affect that most accurately comes
to represent our relationship with the knowledge of death. So the anguish –in the
period that culminates in Being and Time– is at that moment the temple that sustains
Heidegger’s thinking, insofar as it is shown as the gateway to Dasein as entity:
How far is anxiety a state-of-mind which is distinctive? How is it that in anxiety Dasein
gets brought before itself through its own Being, so that we can deﬁne phenomenologically
the character of the entity disclosed in anxiety, and deﬁne it as such in its Being, or make
adequate preparations for doing so?18
And why is die Angst the gateway to Dasein and not others? In principle, and
according to the letter of the text, because it is about Dasein as such, not about a
certain Dasein in a certain occupation and with a certain sex or gender. No, here
we are dealing with the privileged entity, since its privilege is based on its temporal
dimension, on its destiny as such, the root of the knowledge of (das) Vorbei, of the
knowledge of death. Dasein knows this, but chooses what to do with the knowledge
that it puts before itself. This is the difference that Heidegger seems to point out to us:
the anguish that is experienced occurs in everything that exists, but not all existing
one takes care of it in an authentic sense, but, in most cases, the answer consists
in forgetting it and even live turning your back on it: “It turns away from itself in
accordance with its ownmost inertia [Zug] of falling”.19
However, as a gateway to Dasein from factuality, that is, as it is given and shown
withoutfurther(toHeidegger),anguishputstheLeibintheKörper,since,otherwise,it
would not be a question of an affective phenomenon “lived”, “felt”. Thus, Heidegger
establishes that die Angst is what puts us before the ontic dimension of Dasein.
Consequently, he has to justify and give a reason why die Angst is a fundamental
mood. It is because it places Dasein before its selfhood, its most proper being. That
is, in die Angst it is constituted as the original encounter/return to the selfhood (of
which we do not want to know in the daily occupation), a selfhood that alludes to the
totality of Dasein (its mortality), since it is its own being the one who interpellates
17 Was ist das die Philosophie? Neske, Pfullingen, 1984, s. 26.
18 Op., cit, 228
19 Ibid., 229

Being or Tea?
867
itself, a being who is now faced with the pure “possibility” (Seinkönnen). In die
Angst the Dasein falls apart (die Dasein verfällt) to its selfhood. Thus, perhaps, two
modes of the fall can be distinguished in Heidegger: in the impropriety of the they
das Man and in the appropriation of the Selbst. In the ﬁrst case, Dasein ﬁnds itself
alienated, while in the second it is shown the “since” it was alienated. Because die
Selbstheit is an original and constitutive phenomenon of Dasein –an ontological-
existential phenomenon–, Dasein can be, in the falling apart of the they, deprived of
it –not lacking in it–and thus ﬂee from itself, turn its back to its selfhood, which is
the common and current ontic-existential phenomenon.
All these considerations, which are relative to the unfolding of content in turning
one’s back on selfhood, already indicate how in that ﬂight there is an opening to what
is ﬂeeing from and which constitutes the possibility (Seinkönnen) of ﬂight. Well, here
lies the justiﬁcation for taking die Angst as a privileged State-of-mind. However,
despite this privilege, Heidegger warns that this privilege is, in principle, only a mere
statement: “It might be contended that anxiety performs some such function”.20 One
difﬁculty in this sense is that Angst and Furcht are generally confused and identiﬁed.
Due to this ambiguity, it is necessary to differentiate and clarify the singularity, the
meaning, of each one, establishing the das Wovor of the Furcht and the Wovor of
the Angst (fear). The following paragraph is clear about it:
But one is not necessarily ﬂeeing whenever one shrinks back in the face of something or
turns away from it. Shrinking back in the face of what fear discloses-in the face of something
threatening-is founded upon fear; and this shrinking back has the character of ﬂeeing. Our
Interpretation of fear as a state-of-mind has shown that in each case that in the face of which
we fear is a detrimental entity within-the-world which comes from some deﬁnite region but
is close by and is bringing itself close, and yet might stay away. In falling, Dasein turns away
from itself. That in the face of which it thus shrinks back must, in any case, be an entity
with the character of threatening; yet this entity has the same kind of Being as the one that
shrinks back: it is Dasein itself. That in the face of which it thus shrinks back cannot be
taken as something ‘fearsome’, for anything ‘fearsome’ is always encountered as an entity
within-the-world.21
That is to say, and in short, die Furcht is to the ontic-existential just as die Angst
is to the ontological-existential. So, the original thing is not fear, but Die Angst of
which fear is a possibility. All ontic fear is possible thanks to ontological anguish. If
at this point we want to bring into play die ontologische Differenz (ontological differ-
ence), perhaps it is possible to interpret it in this other mode of difference: anguish
(in relation to being: indeterminate) and fear (in relation to entity: determined). We
believe that the conviction of the die Furcht is a phenomenon made possible by die
Angst is basically due to the knowledge of death, whose affect is the temporality.22
Why? Because, for Heidegger, die Angst is the affective experience that is exper-
imented facing the “encounter” (more event: Ereignis) with the being without the
entity, that is, with that nothingness of entity that we represent ourselves as a result
of our Vorbei: our no longer being in the world.
20 Ibid., 230
21 Ibid.. 230 (185).
22 Cfr., Ordóñez-García, J (2014), pp. 155–169.

868
A. Döring and J. O. García
2.1
Okakura’s Introduction to Eastern (Tea-)Culture
Okakura describes “Teaism”23 as “a religion of aestheticism”.24 He regards tea as an
artwork that requires a skilled person to make the best out of it.25 This is “[t]he truly
beautiful”26 and it needs to be seen in a certain way,27 so Okakura ‘s understanding
of art strongly adresses the recipient:
Our mind is the canvas on which the artists lay their colour; their pigments are our emotions;
their chiaroscuro the light of joy, the shadow of sadness. The masterpiece is of ourselves, as
we are of the masterpiece.28
Okakura refers to the teaplant, regarded by the Taoists as crucial for “the elixir of
immortality”.29 Drinking tea is regarded by him as a catharsis of the body from “all
the wrong of life”.30 Still, referring to the Tao, Okakura quotes Laotse: “[…] I do not
know its name and so call it the Path. With reluctance I call it the Inﬁnite. Inﬁnity is the
Fleeting […].”,31 because to deﬁne, to a Taoist, means to refrain from development,
and therefore ethics would not be absolute.32 Okakura refers to historians from China,
whom he quotes without giving names, saying that they regard “Taoism as the ‘art
of being in the world,’ ”.33
Okakura ends his essay by referring to death: The cherry blossoms gain their
grace within their death, when they let themselves fall from the tree,34 and Okakura
chooses a wording that refers to the Japanese blossoms not only as sentient beings
but also with a free will by stating that they would “freely surrender themselves to
the winds.”35
Tea, in the aesthetics of Eastern life, stands for the enjoyment of beauty,36 and the
ethical or religious humbleness that values the small things and living entities such
as ﬂowers.37 Its aesthetics are to be seen in the way a human being forms a unity
with the culture and society he is a member of:
Great as has been the inﬂuence of the tea-masters in the ﬁeld of art, it is as nothing compared
to that which they have exerted on the conduct of life. Not only in the usages of polite society,
23 Okakura, Kakuzo (1956). P. 3.
24 Ibid.
25 Ibid. p. 25.
26 Ibid.
27 Ibid. p. 107
28 Ibid.
29 Ibid. p. 28.
30 Ibid. p. 34.
31 Ibid. p. 50.
32 Ibid. p. 53.
33 Ibid. p. 58.
34 Ibid. p. 146.
35 Ibid.
36 Ibid. p. 3.
37 Ibid. p. 123 ff.

Being or Tea?
869
but also in the arrangement of all our domestic details, do we feel the presence of the tea-
masters. Many of our delicate dishes, as well as our way of serving food, are their inventions.
They have taught us to dress only in garments of sober colors. They have instructed us in
the proper spirit in which to approach ﬂowers. They have given emphasis to our natural love
of simplicity, and shown us the beauty of humility. In fact, through their teachings tea has
entered the life of the people.38
2.2
A Comparison
Getting to the context ﬁrst, it is to say that Okakura‘s The Book of Tea is an essay
in which he refers to Asian culture. He mentions several aspects of this culture and
explains them, although not in depths, by means of a series of narratives. Okakura
aims at evoking an understanding for Asian culture: “When will the West understand,
or try to understand, the East?”39 In his The Book of Tea he explains the East by its
tea-culture, that he links to aesthetics, Zennism and Taoism—to art, religion and a
certain understanding of ethics. Heidegger, on the contrary, in Being and Time, avoids
ethical and religious aspects completely. Okakura identiﬁes himself with Eastern
culture: “Our writers […]”,40 “We Asiatics […]”,41 “You may laugh at us [the
Asians] for having ‘too much tea’, but may we not suspect that you of the West
have ‘no tea‘ in your constitution?”42 – just to give a few examples. Heidegger does
the contrary: He makes clear that the others are not only the people from whom we
distinguish ourselves, but also the society with which we surround ourselves and
identify with: “Everyone is the other, and no-one is himself.”43 Heidegger calls this
“the real dictatorship of the ‘they’ ”44 Okakura appeals for self-sacriﬁce, by referring
to Laotse´s saying about the vacuum:
Vacuum is all potent because all containing. In vacuum alone motion becomes possible. One
who could make of himself a vacuum into which others might freely enter would become
master of all situations. The whole can always dominate the part.45
Okakura refers “to the Code of the Samurai—the Art of Death which makes our
soldiers exult in self-sacriﬁce”.46 Death, to Okakura, means to be reborn.47 Death,
according to Heidegger, limits the lifetime of a person: “[…] Being, to be made
38 Ibid. p. 154 f.
39 Ibid. p. 8.
40 Ibid. p. 9.
41 Ibid. 8
42 Ibid. p. 12.
43 Heidegger, Martin (1962)1. 212001. p. 165.
44 Ibid. p. 164.
45 Okakura, Kakuzo (1956). p. 60.
46 Ibid. p. 7.
47 Ibid. p. 128.

870
A. Döring and J. O. García
deﬁnite in an existential way by Being-towards-death.”.48 The ﬁnite limitation of
one ‘s own personal life calls for self-realisation:
In the anticipatory revealing of this potentiality-for-Being, Dasein discloses itself to itself
as regards its uttermost possibility. But to project itself on its ownmost potentiality-for-
Being means to be able to understand itself in the Being of the entity so revealed-namely, to
exist. Anticipation turns out to be the possibility of understanding one’s ownmost [emphasis
in original] and uttermost potentiality for-Being-that is to say, the possibility of authentic
existence [emphasis in original]. The ontological constitution of such existence must be made
visible by setting forth the concrete structure of anticipation of death.49
Okakura, on the contrary, writes about “polite amusements”.50 To Okakura, the
commitment to traditions is aesthetical: “Teaism is a cult founded on the adoration
of the beautiful among the sordid facts of everyday existence. It inculcates purity
and harmony, the mystery of mutual charity, the romanticism of the social order.”51
Okakura refers to a dialogue between a Taoist named Soshi and Soshi´s friend,
in which Soshi speaks about the happiness of swimming ﬁsh.52 When his friend
replies that Soshi could not know whether the ﬁsh were happy or not, because he is
a human, Soshi answers that his friend was not Soshi, so “ ‘how do you know that I
do not know that the ﬁshes are enjoying themselves?’ “.53 Soshi´s answer contains
three logical fallacies; the petitio principii –the burden of proof and the tu quoque.
Heidegger´s understanding of truth is different:
Thus truth has by no means the structure of an agreement between knowing and the object
in the sense of a likening of one entity (the subject) to another (the Object).54
To Okakura, art must be a crucial aspect of Asian tea-culture, since he dedicates a
whole chapter of The Book of Tea to art. The beholder, to Okakura, is the important
reference when he talks about artworks.55 Okakura links aesthetics to a life that
respects and is organized around traditions and social hierarchies.56 Heidegger, on
the contrary, points out the importance of minding not to lose oneself within social
structures that refrain us from our own individual self-being:
What is decisive is just that inconspicuous domination by Others which has already been
taken over unawares from Dasein as Being-with. One belongs to the Others oneself and
enhances their power. ‘The Others’ whom one thus designates in order to cover up the fact
of one’s belonging to them essentially oneself, are those who proximally and for the most
part ’are there’ in everyday Being-with-one-another.57
48 Heidegger, Martin (1962)1. 212001. p. 277.
49 Ibid. p. 307.
50 Okakura, Kakuzo (1956). p. 3.
51 Ibid.
52 Ibid. p. 66.
53 Ibid.
54 Heidegger, Martin (1962)1. 212001. p. 261.
55 Okakura, Kakuzo (1956). p. 103 ff.
56 Ibid. 1906. p. 3.
57 Heidegger, Martin (1962)1. 212001. p. 164.

Being or Tea?
871
Okakura refers to the exported tea:
The afternoon tea is now an important function in Western society. In the delicate clatter
of trays and saucers, in the soft rustle of feminine hospitality, in the common catechism
about cream and sugar, we know that the Worship of Tea is established beyond question.
The philosophic resignation of the guest to the fate awaiting him in the dubious decoction
proclaims that in this single instance the Oriental spirit reigns supreme.58
In the West, tea is consumed and enjoyed, but certainly not worshipped. Certainly,
Okakura appreciates the export of tea.59 Heidegger is convinced that artworks—
he never said he would consider tea as one —should not be transported like other
goods60:
Everyone is familiar with artworks. One ﬁnds works of architecture and sculpture erected
in public places, in churches, and in private homes. Art-works from the most diverse ages
and peoples are housed in collections and exhibitions. If we regard works in their pristine
reality and do not deceive ourselves, the following becomes evident: works are as naturally
present as things. The picture hangs on the wall like a hunting weapon or a hat. A painting-
for example van Gogh’s portrayal of a pair of peasant shoes- travels from one exhibition to
another. Works are shipped like coal from the Ruhr or logs from the Black Forest. During the
war Hölderlin’s hymns were packed in the soldier’s knapsack along with cleaning equipment.
Beethoven’s quartets lie in the publisher’s storeroom like potatoes in a cellar.61
For Okakaura, “the art of living”62 means to ﬁt into the social surrounding,63
while Heidegger writes about the “real dictatorship of the ‘they’.”.64
As shown, Okakura in The Book of Tea and Heidegger in Being and Time both
refer to topics like truth and art, but they do this in completely different contexts and
therefore write about different contents.
3
Conclusion
Sein und Zeit revolutionized the philosophical panorama of Europe, although its
inﬂuence also reached countries in the American continent and some intellectuals
in Asia. Until then, no one had been interested in the human being in such original
manner, as rigorous and profound, at least within the university world. Thus, with this
work, Heidegger picks up the challenge of the Delphic oracle proposed to Socrates
and takes charge of “know yourself”, thus establishing the singular characteristics—
which he will call formal or existentiell indicators—of all “existing one” where it can
be found and wherever it is. But the most signiﬁcant thing, in our view, is that, with
58 Okakura, Kakuzo (1956). p. 13.
59 Ibid.
60 Regarding Heidegger´s view on art and home see also: Döring, Annika; Horden, Peregrine (2018).
61 Heidegger, Martin (2002). : p. 2f.
62 Okakura, Kakuzo (1956). p. 61.
63 Ibid. p. 3.
64 Heidegger, Martin (1962)1. 212001. p. 164.

872
A. Döring and J. O. García
this work, the disciple of Husserl puts before our eyes what constitutes us as such
and which, at the same time, is constituent. To put it in some way, this ouvre tells us
“how” we are and that, for this very reason, we cannot go “beyond” our singularities,
from our ways of being. Hence we cannot consider Sein und Zeit as a metaphysics,
an anthropology, or a kind of basic psychology. That existence (ec-sistere) is what
deﬁnes and determines Dasein in its factual existence, already supposes an authentic
declaration of intent regarding the path that Heidegger is going to travel alone and
on the fringes of the gloomy and sparse academic world, in that period, dominated
by neo-Kantianism. The thematization of ordinary and basic life as it is shown,
uncovering the unthinkable of what “is” considered to be self-evident, constitutes
Heidegger’s undeniable merit: he thematized the historically a-thematized, in the
same way that Freud dealt with something so unedifying morally, in his time, like
sexuality.
With the establishment of existentiells we ﬁnd the guiding referents, which have
to indicate and determine the meaning and the response in relation to our choices
and decisions. It is, therefore, the guide to development along life. Because, it seems,
our entire vital adventure must not lose sight of the Wie of our way of being, that
which represents, from an ethical perspective, the horizon of our possibilities. What
does this reveal to us? In my view, something as simple as it is difﬁcult: that we
cannot—and in most cases we should not—go against what constitutes us or, in
other words, try to live, act and update in each case, those indicative indicators that
are formal as common, but unique as their own and appropriate to our character.
The fact that we do not know “how” (Wie) we are does not mean that we are not
determined by what we are. Not knowing that we are mortal does not prevent us from
dying from any circumstance, so we do not die from a disease, but because we are
mortal, although it is true that, without the disease, without a fortuitous accident, it is
not possible for that fundamental characteristic to be revealed. The Sein zum Tode is
our east, while die Zeitlichkeit is precisely the Wie of existing while our end does not
occur, our Vorbei. Thus, living is going through temporality knowing our destiny,
which is none other than that indicated by the possibility of the impossible. The
orientation of existentiells is not aimed at a happy life, but a serene life. Faced with
the merely irruptive states of happy moments, which are basically Dionysian and, as
such, alien to the principle of individuation, die Gelassenheit, on the contrary, is the
ethical conviction capable of shaping existence by establishing it in temporality. It,
die Gelassenheit, is the affective response, from the choice and the decision (in front
of the das Man), revealing itself, in this way, as the true east of the existing one, that
is, of the one who knows what wie is and seeks not to forget it by making your life
the testimony of its possibility.

Being or Tea?
873
References
Döring, A., Horden, P. (2018). Heidegger as Mediterraneanist. In Y. Elhariry, & E. Tamalet Talbayev
(Eds.), Critically Mediterranean. Temporalities, Aesthetics, and Deployments of a Sea in Crisis
(pp. 25–43). Cham: Palgrave Macmillan.
Heidegger, M. (1954). Aus der Erfahrung des Denkens. Pfullingen: Günter Neske.
Heidegger, M. (1962). Being and Time. Translated by J. Macquarrie & E. Robinson. Oxford:
Blackwell. 212001.
Heidegger, M. (1981). Was ist Metaphysik? Frankfurt a. M.: Vittorio Klostermann.
Heidegger, M. (1984). Was ist das die Philosophie? Neske.
Heidegger, M. (2002). The Origin of the Work of Art. In Heidegger, M (Ed.), Off the Beaten Track.
Translated by J. Young & K. Haynes. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Heisig, J. W. (2002). Filósofos de la nada. Un ensayo sobre la escuela de Kioto. Barcelona: Herder.
Imamichi, T. (2004). In search of wisdom: One philosopher’s journey. Translated by Mary E. Foster.
Tokyo: International House of Japan.
Lao Zi: Tao te King.
Mújica, H. (1995). La palabra inicial. Madrid: Trotta.
Okakura, K. (1956). The Book of Tea. Rutland: C. E. Tuttle Co.
Ordóñez-García, J. (2014). Heidegger and the notion of prescience (Vorwissenschaft) as existential
propaedeutic. (Part 1: The affection of the time), Estudios de Filosofía, nº 50, Universidad de
Antioquia (Colombia), pp. 155–169.
REAL ACADEMIA ESPAÑOLA. (2021). Diccionario de la lengua española, 23.5. https://dle.
rae.es.
Saviani, C. (2004). El oriente de Heidegger. Barcelona: Herder.

Art is Critical
John D. Barrow
Human beings are good at ﬁnding all the ways in which to be creative within
prescribed limits—painting inside a rectangular frame, writing only in iambic
pentameters or in sonnet form. Scientists sometimes like to study how that creativity
occurs, what it achieves, and where to look for inspiration. The scientiﬁc method has
two facets. Coming up with ideas and hypotheses are processes that have no rules at
all. But the process by which those ideas are subsequently tested again the evidence
has a fairly rigid set of rules. Whereas artistic creation strives to be individualistic and
unique, science is not like that. Most scientiﬁc discoveries would have been made
soon by someone else if the ﬁrst discoverers had not done their work. Sometimes that
discovery by others would have happened very soon afterwards but in other cases a
very long interval of time might need to pass before others passed that way again.
This is why ‘science is We but art is I’.
Many artists are nervous about scientiﬁc analysis. They fear its success, worried
that art might lose its power, or they might be diminished, if the psychological roots of
their work and its impact on us were exposed. They might even be right to be worried.
Unbridledreductionism—‘musicisnothingbutthetraceofanair-pressurecurve’—is
a surprisingly common world view that should be given no encouragement. However,
one also ﬁnds the equally mistaken contrary view that science has nothing to offer
the arts: that they transcend all attempts to capture them objectively. Indeed, many
scientists see the creative arts as entirely subjective activities but enjoy them no less
for all that.
As science has started to come to grips with the study of complexity, it is natural
that it will encounter artistic creations, like music or abstract art, because they have
interesting things to teach us about the development of complexity in the forms that
we ﬁnd so appealing. E. O. Wilson has suggested that the link between science and
art can be made closest when both are viewed from the vantage point of the study and
J. D. Barrow (B)
DAMTP, Centre for Mathematical Sciences, Cambridge University, Cambridge, UK
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
S. Wuppuluri and I. Stewart (eds.), From Electrons to Elephants and Elections,
The Frontiers Collection, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-92192-7_45
875

876
J. D. Barrow
appreciation of complexity: ‘The love of complexity without reductionism makes art;
the love of complexity with reductionism makes science.’1
There is a further interesting feature of complex phenomena that sheds light upon
what it is we like about many forms of art that we value most. If we allow a stream of
grains to fall vertically downwards on to a tabletop then a pile of sand (or rice grains)
will steadily grow. The falling grains will have haphazard trajectories as they tumble
over the others. Yet, steadily, the chaotically unpredictable falls of the individual
grains will build up a large orderly pile. Its sides steepen gradually until they reach
a particular slope. After that, the slope gets no steeper. The special ‘critical’ slope
will continue to be maintained by regular avalanches of all sizes, some involving
just one or two grains, but other rarer events producing a collapse of the whole
side of the pile. The overall result is striking. The haphazard falls of the individual
grains have organised themselves to produce a stable, orderly pile. In this ‘critical’
state the overall order is maintained by the chaotic sensitivity of the individual grain
trajectories. If the pile was on an open tabletop then eventually the grains would start
falling off the sides of the table at the same rate that they drop from above. The pile
would be always composed of different grains: it is a transient steady state.
The robustness of the overall shape of the pile that exists despite the sensitivity of
the individual grain trajectories is very suggestive of what it is we like about many
artistic creations: a sensitivity to small changes in the face of overall structural robust-
ness. A ‘good’ book, ﬁlm, play or piece of music is one that we want to experience
again. The ‘bad’ work is one that we don’t. Why do we want to see a great theatrical
work like The Tempest, or hear a Beethoven symphony, more than once? It is because
small changes in production—different actors, modern dress, new styles of direction,
or different orchestras and conductors—create a completely new experience for the
audience. Great works are sensitive to small changes in ways that enable them to
give you a new and pleasurable aesthetic experience. There is novelty et the overall
order is maintained. They seem to exhibit a type of criticality. And this combina-
tion of unpredictability in the presence of predictability—stability maintained by
instability—is something that we seem to ﬁnd artistically very appealing.2
Notes
1.
Wilson (1998).
2.
Further a more extensive discussion of the interactions between mathematics
and many aspects of the arts see also Barrow (2014).
References
Wilson, E. O. (1998). Consilience. Knopf.
Barrow, J. D. (2014). 100 Essential things you didn’t know about maths and the arts. Bodley Head.

