Quantum Communication
527
Q
Primary Literature
1. H. Yukawa: On the Interaction of Elementary Particles. Proc. Phys. Math. Soc. Jpn. 17, 48
(1935)
2. M. Gell-Mann: Symmetries of Baryons and Mesons. Phys. Rev. 125, 1067 (1962)
3. G. Zweig: An SU(3) Model for Strong Interaction Symmetry and its Breaking, CERN-TH-401,
and An SU(3) Model for Strong Interaction Symmetry and its Breaking. 2, CERN-TH-412,
NP-14146. Published in ‘Developments in the Quark Theory of Hadrons.’ Volume 1. Edited by
D. Lichtenberg and S. Rosen. (Nonantum, MA, Hadronic, 1980)
4. O. W. Greenberg: Spin and Unitary Spin Independence in a Paraquark Model of Baryons and
Mesons. Phys. Rev. Lett. 13, 598 (1964)
5. C. N. Yang and R. L. Mills: Conservation of Isotopic Spin and Isotopic Gauge Invariance.
Phys. Rev. 96, 191 (1954)
6. J. Schwinger: A Theory of Fundamental Interactions. Ann. Phys. (N.Y.) 2, 407 (1957)
7. S. L. Glashow: Partial Symmetries of Weak Interactions. Nucl. Phys. 22, 579 (1961)
8. S. Weinberg: A Model of Leptons. Phys. Rev. Lett. 19, 1264 (1967)
9. A. Salam: Weak and Electromagnetic Interactions. Published in ‘Elementary Particle Theory,
Relativistic Groups and Analyticity.’ Edited by N. Svartholm. (Stockholm, Almqvist and
Wiksell, 1968, pp. 367–377)
10. G. ’t Hooft: Renormalizable Lagrangians for Massive Yang-Mills Fields. Nucl. Phys. B 35,
167 (1971)
11. H. D. Politzer: Reliable Perturbative Results for Strong Interactions? Phys. Rev. Lett. 30, 1346
(1973)
12. D. J. Gross and F. Wilczek: Ultraviolet Behavior of Non-Abelian Gauge Theories. Phys. Rev.
Lett. 30, 1343 (1973)
13. J. I. Friedman and H. W. Kendall: Deep Inelastic Electron Scattering. Annu. Rev. Nucl. Part.
Sci. 22, 203 (1972)
14. H. Fritzsch, M. Gell-Mann, and H. Leutwyler: Advantages of the Color Octet Gluon Picture.
Phys. Lett. B 47, 365 (1973)
15. K. A. Milton and I. L. Solovtsov: Analytic Perturbation Theory in QCD and Schwinger’s Con-
nection Between the Beta Function and the Spectral Density. Phys. Rev. D 55, 5295 (1997)
[arXiv:hep-ph/9611438]
16. K. G. Wilson: Conﬁnement of Quarks. Phys. Rev. D 10, 2445 (1974)
Secondary Literature
17. I. J. R. Aitchinson and A. J. G. Hey: Gauge Theories in Particle Physics, 2nd Ed. (Adam Hilger,
Bristol, 1989)
Quantum Communication
Michel LeBellac
In our everyday world, almost all the information exchanged, stored and processed
is encoded in the form of discrete entities called bits, which take by convention the

528
Quantum Communication
values zero or one. In the computers and optical ﬁbers of today’s information and
communication technology, the bits are carried by electric currents or light beams,
corresponding to macroscopic ﬂuxes of  electrons or photons ( light quantum)
respectively, and they are stored in memories of various kinds, for example, mag-
netic. Although the basic physics which underlies the operation of a transistor or
a laser is quantum physics, each elementary bit corresponds to a large number of
elementary quantum systems, and its behavior can be described classically due to
the strong coupling to the environment.
In the past twenty years, physicists have been able to manipulate with an increas-
ing accuracy individual quantum objects, such as photons, atoms, neutrons. . . This
opens the way for using quantum two-state systems to exchange, store and process
information, by selecting two orthogonal states spanning the  Hilbert space of
states: using  Dirac’s notation for the state vectors, one of the states, |0⟩, encodes
the value zero of the bit, the other one, |1⟩, the value one. In this article, we shall
discuss three aspects of quantum communication: quantum cryptography, quantum
dense coding and quantum teleportation.
An elementary example of quantum two-state system is given by photon polar-
ization, where one may choose a basis of linearly polarized states and associate,
by convention, the vertical polarization (↕) with the value zero of the bit and the
horizontal polarization (↔) with the value one. Storing information with individ-
ual photons is still far beyond present technical capabilities, but transmission of
information is easy to implement. The two people exchanging information being
conventionally called Alice and Bob, Alice may send Bob individual photons which
are either vertically polarized, or horizontally polarized. Any message written in bi-
nary language is a series of 0s and 1s, and the message 0110101 will be encoded in
the sequence of photon polarizations ↕↔↔↕↔↕↔, which will be sent via, for
example, an optical ﬁber. To read the message (see Fig. 1), Bob uses a polarizing
beamsplitter to separate the photons of vertical and horizontal polarization, and two
detectors tell him whether the photon was horizontally or vertically polarized: each
photon carries one bit of information. Although this technique has a rather poor ef-
ﬁciency compared to standard bit transmission via photon pulses in optical ﬁbers, a
Detector
P
P
laser
Alice
Bob
(a)
(b)
Attenuator
Fig. 1 Schematical depiction of the BB84 protocol. A laser beam is attenuated such that it sim-
ulates individual photons. A laser is used for practical reasons: it would be safer to use a single
photon source, but these sources are not yet available commercially. A birefringent plate selects
the polarization, which can be rotated by means of Pockels cells P. The photons are either verti-
cally/horizontally polarized (a) or polarized at ±45o (b)

Quantum Communication
529
Q
few hundreds of kbit s−1 as compared to tens of Gbit s−1, we shall see later on that
it can be modiﬁed in order to ensure the security of the transmission.
A quantum two-state system which can be used to store, process or transmit bits
of information is called a quantum bit, or qubit: see [4]–[6] for an overview. We may
hope for some gain by going from bits to qubits, because, in contrast to classical bits,
we can build linear  superposition |ϕ⟩of states |0⟩and |1⟩, for example vertically
and horizontally polarized states, | ↕⟩≡|0⟩and | ↔⟩≡|1⟩
|ϕ⟩= cos θ
2 |0⟩+ e iφ sin θ
2 |1⟩
(1)
Since the angles θ and φ in (1) can vary continuously, it may seem that a qubit
contains much more information than a classical one (in fact an inﬁnite amount of
information!). However, we must use an orthogonal basis for measurement, and the
result of the measurement will always be zero or one, whatever the basis, so that
our hopes of getting more from a qubit than from a classical bit look unfounded.
This pessimistic observation is conﬁrmed by Holevo’s theorem [1]: N qubits may
transmit at most N bits of information. Fortunately,  entanglement will allow us
to bypass this theorem.
The simplest application of quantum communication is quantum cryptography,
as it uses only single qubits, at least in its most elementary version. Moreover, it is
the only application which is now coming on the market. ‘Quantum cryptography’
is a catchy phrase, but it is somewhat inaccurate. A better terminology is quantum
key distribution (QKD). In fact, there is no encryption of a message using quantum
physics; the latter is used only to ensure that the key needed in secret key systems
of encryption is not intercepted by a spy, so that quantum cryptography solves the
problem of secure key distribution. Of course, this problem does not exist in public
key systems, such as RSA (Rivest, Shamir and Adleman) encryption, whose secu-
rity relies on the difﬁculty of ﬁnding the prime factors of a large integer. As we have
seen, a message, encrypted or not, can be transmitted using the two orthogonal lin-
ear polarization states of a photon, but, in addition, we shall make use of the basic
laws of quantum physics in order to be sure that the message has not been inter-
cepted. Two complementary (incompatible) bases are chosen at random by Alice,
for example {| ↕⟩, | ↔⟩} and {|
↔
⟩, |
↔
⟩}, where
|
↔
⟩≡|+⟩=
1
√
2

| ↕⟩+ | ↔⟩

|
↔
⟩≡|−⟩=
1
√
2

| ↕⟩−| ↔⟩

(2)
to send Bob photons of four types, either polarized vertically (↕) or horizontally (↔)
in the ﬁrst basis, or polarized along axes rotated by ±45o in the second basis: (
↔
)
or (
↔
), corresponding to the values zero and one of the bit respectively. Similarly,
Bob analyzes the photons sent by Alice using the same orthogonal bases chosen at
random. After recording a sufﬁcient number of photons, Bob publicly announces
the sequence of bases he has used, but not his results. Alice compares her sequence
of bases to Bob’s and publicly gives him the list of bases identical with his. About
half of the bits, those corresponding to a different choice of bases, are rejected, and

530
Quantum Communication
then Alice and Bob are certain that the values of the other bits are the same. These
are the bits which will be used to construct the key, and they are known only to Bob
and Alice, because an eavesdropper only knows the list of bases and not the results.
The protocol we have described is called BB84, from the names of its inventors
Bennett and Brassard [2].
We still need to be sure that the message has not been intercepted and that the
key it contains can be used without risk. Alice and Bob choose at random a subset of
their key and compare publicly not only their choice of bases, but also the bit values.
The consequence of interception of the photons by a spy would be a reduction of the
correlation between the values of their bits. The security of the protocol depends on
the fact that a spy cannot ﬁnd out the polarization state of a photon unless he knows
beforehand the basis in which it was prepared. Of course, the raw process which
we have just described does not take into account the possibility of errors, which
must be corrected thanks to a classical error correcting code, while a second classi-
cal process, called privacy ampliﬁcation, ensures the secrecy of the key, even if an
eavesdropper has been able to correctly guess some of the bits. As optical ﬁbers do
not allow one to control the direction of polarization over large distances, in practice
qubits are encoded in the phase of the photon  wave function, and Mach-Zehnder
interferometers are used to ﬁx the phase at one end of the line and to measure it at
the other end. Rates of transmission of 50 kbit s−1 have been reached over distances
up to 100 km. Other quantum cryptography protocols have been proposed, which
use either three incompatible bases, or entangled states.
Let us now turn to multi-qubit systems, which will be used for dense coding
and teleportation. Unlike the classical case, most of the information contained in
a generic quantum mechanical system is stored in the form of  correlations be-
tween its subsystems. Dense coding and teleportation make essential use of these
correlations. Let us recall that a two-qubit state which cannot be written as a tensor
product is called an entangled state. A convenient orthogonal basis in the Hilbert
space HA ⊗HB of two qubits A and B is the so-called Bell’s basis, made of the
four Bell states
|0⟩=
1
√
2
(|0A ⊗0B⟩+ |1A ⊗1B⟩) = (σ0A ⊗IB)|0⟩
(3)
|1⟩=
1
√
2
(|1A ⊗0B⟩+ |0A ⊗1B⟩) = (σ1A ⊗IB)|0⟩
(4)
|2⟩=
1
√
2
(−|1A ⊗0B⟩+ |0A ⊗1B⟩) = (iσ2A ⊗IB)|0⟩
(5)
|3⟩=
1
√
2
(|0A ⊗0B⟩−|1A ⊗1B⟩) = (σ3A ⊗IB)|0⟩
(6)
where σ0 = I and the σis are the  Pauli spin matrices.
Dense coding and teleportation rely on the use of measurements in the Bell basis.
How to perform such a measurement is not a priori obvious because one is limited to

Quantum Communication
531
Q
measuring individual qubits. The ﬁrst step consists of disentangling the Bell states
thanks to a quantum logic gate called a control-NOT, or cNOT gate. Quantum logic
gates are unitary operations acting in the Hilbert space of one or several qubits. The
cNOT gate is a two-qubit quantum gate, acting in HA⊗HB which has the following
action on a two-qubit state
cNOT|xA ⊗yB⟩= |xA ⊗(xA ⊕yB)⟩
(7)
where xA, yB = 0, 1 and ⊕is addition modulo 2; x is the control bit and y the target
bit. It is important to observe that the cNOT gate is not a tensor product MA⊗MB of
two operators MA and MB: this is precisely the reason why this gate may transform
a tensor product |ϕA ⊗ϕB⟩into an entangled state, or vice-versa.
We also need the Hadamard gate H, which is a unitary transformation on indi-
vidual qubits; when H is applied to an eigenstate |0⟩or |1⟩of σ3, the result is an
eigenstate |±⟩(2) of σ1, σ1|±⟩= ±|±⟩
H|0⟩=
1
√
2
|0⟩+ |1⟩ = |+⟩,
H|1⟩=
1
√
2
|0⟩−|1⟩ = |−⟩
(8)
and conversely, since H2 = I, H|+⟩= |0⟩, H|−⟩= |1⟩.
To measure in the Bell basis, we ﬁrst apply a cNOT gate, followed by a Hadamard
gate on qubit A. A measurement of the two qubits sketched in Fig. 2 (a) will give
a result in the form (xA, yB) and the four possible results will be in one-to-one
correspondence with the Bell states
|0⟩⇐⇒(0A0B)
|1⟩⇐⇒(0A1B)
|2⟩⇐⇒(1A1B)
|3⟩⇐⇒(1A0B)
(9)
Dense coding works as follows (Fig. 2 (b)): Alice and Bob share an entangled
pair AB of qubits, for example in the state |0⟩. Alice wants to send Bob two bits of
¾iA
qubit A
qubit B
Bob
S
Alice
S
A
A
A
B
C
a
b
c
H
B
Bob
classical
Alice
Fig. 2 (a) Measurement in the Bell basis: a cNOT gate, where A is the control bit and B the
target bit, is followed by a Hadamard gate applied on qubit A. The diagrams are read from left to
right, in the direction opposite to that of the operator products. (b) Dense coding: Alice applies
σiA on qubit A and Bob performs a Bell measurement on the AB pair. S is a source of entangled
particles. (c) Quantum teleportation: Alice makes a Bell measurement on the AB pair. The classical
communication channel is represented by a dashed line

532
Quantum Communication
information by exchanging only one qubit, the two bits being encoded in a number
i, i = 0, 1, 2, 3. She applies to qubit A the operator σiA, i = 0, 1, 2, 3, see (3)-(6).
Then Bob receives one of the four states (3)–(6) and he measures the AB pair in
the Bell basis, as explained above. From the measurement result, he will be able to
ﬁnd the value of i. Dense coding seems to bypass Holevo’s theorem, but there is no
contradiction, because the assumptions needed in the proof of the theorem explicitly
exclude that Alice and Bob share an entangled pair.
Quantum teleportation [3] allows one to transport quantum information from
one location to another, without any physical transfer of the associated quantum-
information carrier. To give an example of another physical realization of qubits, let
us assume that the qubits are now carried by the  spin states of spin 1/2 particles,
and that Alice wishes to transfer to Bob the information about the spin state |ϕA⟩of
a particle A (Fig. 2(c))
|ϕA⟩= λ|0A⟩+ μ|1A⟩
|λ|2 + |μ|2 = 1
(10)
which is unknown to both partners, without sending him this particle directly. The
principle of information transfer consists of using an auxiliary pair of entangled
particles B and C of spin 1/2 shared between Alice and Bob. Particle B is used
by Alice and particle C is sent to Bob (Fig. 2 (c)). Particles B and C may be, for
example, in the entangled spin state |BC
0
⟩. The initial three-particle state |ABC⟩
can be written in terms of the Bell states of the AB pair
|ABC⟩=1
2|AB
0
⟩⊗(λ|0C⟩+ μ|1C⟩) + 1
2|AB
1
⟩⊗(λ|1C⟩+ μ|0C⟩)
+ 1
2|AB
2
⟩⊗(λ|1C⟩−μ|0C⟩) + 1
2|AB
3
⟩⊗(λ|0C⟩−μ|1C⟩)
(11)
Alice measures the previously unentangled AB pair in the Bell basis: the mea-
surement projects particle C in a state which is directly linked to its result. If, for
example, Alice ﬁnds the state |AB
1
⟩, then she knows that Bob is going to receive
particle C in the state
|ϕC⟩= λ|1C⟩+ μ|0C⟩
and she will be able to inform Bob by a classical channel (for example, a telephone)
of the quantum state of qubit C. If necessary, Bob can apply a suitable rotation
in order to recover the original state (10). Notice that Bob ‘knows’ the spin state
of particle C only once he has received the result of Alice’s measurement. This
information must be sent by a classical channel, at a speed at most equal to that of
light. There is therefore no instantaneous transmission of information at a distance.
As possible applications, quantum teleportation could be used to build quantum
relays for long distance quantum cryptography,or to provide a way for distant qubits
in a quantum computer to interact without the requirement of physical proximity.

Quantum Computation
533
Q
Primary Literature
1. A. H. Holevo: Some estimates of the information content transmitted by a quantum communi-
cation channel, Probl. Pered. Inform. 9, 3 (1973)
2. C. Bennett and G. Brassard: Quantum cryptography: Public key distribution and coin tossing,
Proceedings of IEEE conference on computers, systems and signal processing, Bangalore, India,
p. 175 (1984)
3. C. Bennett, G. Brassard, C. Cr´epeau, R.Jozsa, A. Peres and W. Wootters: Teleporting an un-
known quantum state via dual classical and EPR channels, Phys. Rev. Lett. 70, 1895 (1993)
Secondary Literature
4. M. A. Nielsen and I. L. Chuang: Quantum computing and quantum information (Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge 2000)
5. M. Le Bellac: A short introduction to quantum computation and quantum information
(Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 2006)
6. G. Jaegger: Quantum information: an overview (Springer 2007)
Quantum Computation
Michel LeBellac
By using speciﬁc properties of quantum mechanics:  superposition principle and
 entanglement, quantum computers can outperform classical ones when carrying
out certain type of computation, see [5]–[7] for an overview. The basic information
unit processed by a quantum computer is the qubit, a two-state quantum system
living in a  Hilbert space where one can choose an  orthonormal basis of two
vectors |0⟩and 1⟩. If we wish to store in a qubit register an integer x, 0 ⩽x ⩽2n−1
x = 2n−1xn−1 + 2n−2xn−2 + · · · + 2x1 + x0
(1)
with xi = 0 or xi = 1, we need n qubits from which we construct the tensor product
state
|x⟩= |xn−1 ⊗xn−2 ⊗· · · ⊗x1 ⊗x0⟩
(2)
State vectors of the form (2) form a basis of the 2n-dimensional space H⊗n called
the computational basis, and it might be concluded, because of the superposition
principle, that an n-qubit register is able to encode 2n states at the same time. How-
ever, a measurement of the n-qubits will give only one result corresponding to one
of the states (2), and the challenge of quantum computation is to use interference
and entanglement in order to exploit this exponentially growing information.

