Quantum Statistics
611
Q
Primary Literature
1. W. Pauli: Die allgemeinen Prinzipien der Wellenmechanik. In Handbuch der Physik, ed. by H.
Geiger and K. Scheel (Springer, Berlin 1933, Vol. 24, 98)
2. E. Schr¨odinger: Die gegenw¨artige Situation in der Quantenmechanik. Naturwiss. 23, 823–828
(1935)
3. S. Weigert: Quantum Time Evolution in Terms of Non-Redundant Probabilities. Phys. Rev. Lett.
84, 802–805 (2000)
4. K. Vogel and H. Risken: Determination of quasiprobability distributions in terms of probability
distributions for the rotated quadrature phase. Phys. Rev. 40, 2847–2849 (1989)
5. D. T. Smithey, M. Beck, M. G. Raymer, and A. Faridani: Measurement of the Wigner distribution
and the density matrix of a light mode using optical homodyne tomography: application to
squeezed states and the vacuum. Phys. Rev. Lett. 70, 1244–1247 (1993)
6. W. K. Wootters and B. D. Fields: Optimal state-determination by mutually unbiased bases. Ann.
Phys. 191, 363–381 (1989)
Secondary Literature
7. U. Leonhardt: Measuring the Quantum State of Light (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
1997)
8. M. Paris and J. ˇReh´aˇcek (eds.): Quantum State Estimation (Springer 2004)
9. L. M. Artiles, R. D. Gill, and M. I. Gut¸ˇa: An invitation to quantum tomography. J. R. Statist.
Soc. B 67, 109–134 (2005)
Quantum Statistics
Arianna Borrelli
In quantum statistics, the behaviour of quantum systems with a large number of
degrees of freedom (e.g. an assembly of many particles) is investigated with the
help of statistical considerations [1]. Although in principle analogous to classical
statistical mechanics, the statistics of quantum systems requires more caution than
the classical one.
There are two main differences between the classical and the quantum case, and
they are linked to the  Heisenberg uncertainty principle and to the  indistin-
guishability of quantum particles of the same kind. According to the uncertainty
principle, even the most complete description of the state of a quantum system
will not allow unique predictions for the values of all observable quantities. This
intrinsically quantistic uncertainty has to be carefully combined with the classical
uncertainty due simply to our ignorance of the state of the system. This task is ac-
complished by employing the formalism of  state operator and  density matrix.
Moreover, when two or more quantum particles of the same kind (e.g. photons
 light quantum;  electrons) are present in a system, the number of the sys-
tem’s possible states must be determined by a counting procedure different from

612
Quantum Statistics
the one employed in the classical case. This requirement is variously described
as“indistinguishabiliy”,“ identity” or “permutivity” of quantum particles.
The earliest forms of quantum statistics to emerge were two counting procedures
for indistinguishable particles which established themselves as physically signiﬁ-
cant around the middle of the 1920s: the statistics of  Bose–Einstein (1924) and
that of  Fermi-Dirac (1925–1926). From the late 1920s onward, with the develop-
ment of the formalism of the state operator, a more general formulation of quantum
statistics became possible [2, 3].
In quantum mechanics, having maximum information about a system means
knowing that it is in a pure state ( states, pure and mixed) described by a speciﬁc
state vector |ψ⟩in  Hilbert space. In this case, only quantum uncertainty enters
the picture. Otherwise, the system is said to be in a  mixed state characterized by
a probability distribution over all possible state vectors |ψα⟩, and it is described by
a state operator ρ. Given an  orthonormal basis |i⟩, any vector |ψα⟩can be written
as
|ψα⟩= 
i aα
i |i⟩.
A mixed state can thus be deﬁned by a probability distribution P(α) over the sets
{aα}. The relevant state operator ρ is then represented in the basis |i⟩by the density
matrix:
ρij = 
α P(α) aα
i aα ∗
j
= ⟨aia∗
j ⟩,
where ⟨⟩represents the average according to the distribution P(α). The diagonal
elements ρii of the density matrix give the probability of ﬁnding the system in the
state |i⟩. Using state operator and density matrix, the average value of any observ-
able can be computed keeping into account both quantum and statistical uncertainty
at the same time [4].
To perform quantum statistical computations, it is necessary to make some initial
assumptions on P(α). In analogy to the classical case, all possible pure states of a
system are considered equally probable if no other information is available (postu-
late of equiprobability). For quantum systems in thermal equilibrium, the density
matrix ρij is assumed to be diagonal when the chosen basis vectors |i⟩are energy
eigenstates. If the energy of the system is conserved, this means that ρ will not
change with time. A sufﬁcient condition for having ⟨aia∗
j ⟩= 0 for i ̸= j is for the
relative phases of the coefﬁcients ai to be distributed randomly (postulate of random
phases). See also  Generalization of Quantum Statistics.
Primary Literature
1. K. Huang: Statistical Mechanics (Wiley, New York 1963, 183–205)
2. R. C. Tolman: The Principles of Statistical Mechanics (Oxford University Press, Oxford 1938)
3. D. ter Haar: Elements of Statistical Mechanics (Rinehart, New York 1956)
4. K. Blum: Density Matrix Theory and Applications (Plenum, New York 1981)

