Subcellular Compartmentalization for
Neurobiology: Focusing on the Axon
Agata Blasiak, Devrim Kilinc, and Jean-Michel Peyrin
Contents
1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Isolation of Axons from Their Cell Bodies. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1
Campenot Chambers. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
Microﬂuidic Compartmentalization. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Experimental Models with Isolated Axons. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.1
Concentration Gradients. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Axonal Mechanics and Transport. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.3
Electrical and Optogenetic Stimulation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.4
Axon Alignment and Isolation Facilitate Automated Analyses. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4
Co-culture of Axons with Other Cell Types. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
5
Descriptive Neuronal Networks. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
5.1
Microcontact Printing of Homogenous Neuronal Networks. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
5.2
Microﬂuidic Devices for Neuronal Network Formation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
6
Isolation of Axons in 3D. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
7
Future Directions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
References. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
A. Blasiak ()
Department of Biomedical Engineering, National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore
e-mail: agata.blasiak@nus.edu.sg
D. Kilinc ()
Université de Lille, Inserm, CHU Lille, Institut Pasteur de Lille, U1167 - Risk factors and
molecular determinants of aging-related diseases (RID-AGE), Lille, France
e-mail: devrim.kilinc@pasteur-lille.fr
J.-M. Peyrin ()
Sorbonne Universités, Faculte des Sciences et Technologie, CNRS UMR 8246, INSERM U1130,
Neurosciences Paris Seine, Institut de Biologie Paris Seine, Paris, France
e-mail: jean-michel.peyrin@sorbonne-universite.fr
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2023
N. V. Thakor (ed.), Handbook of Neuroengineering,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-16-5540-1_1
3

4
A. Blasiak et al.
Abstract
A functional nervous system integrates the coordinated activity of millions of
individual neurons and their tightly regulated communication with nonneuronal
tissues. Here, we describe in vitro subcellular compartmentalization, spatial and
ﬂuidic, to focus on the axon for fundamental neurobiology research and for
modeling neuropathological conditions. We further discuss various engineering
techniques incorporated into compartmentalized devices and the multichamber
devices for studying remote interactions of axons with other cells, neuronal
and nonneuronal. Axons, which can extend to substantial distances, connect
cell bodies to their targets and propagate signals within neuronal networks or
between the nervous and other systems of the body. As such, axons have been
extensively studied as potential entry points for external interventions such as
recording and modulating neuronal signals. To accomplish those tasks, in vitro
neuron cultures should reﬂect the spatial organization in vivo and permit the
axons to be studied in isolation from their cell bodies. Compartmentalization
has already been incorporated into three-dimensional in vitro models. With
continued support from the engineering ﬁeld, compartmentalized neuron cultures
are expected to be integral elements of the system-on-a-chip and, eventually,
human-on-a-chip devices.
Keywords
Microﬂuidics · Axon isolation · Microﬂuidic neuron culture ·
Compartmentalization · Disease models · Multielectrode array · Axonal
transport · Axon injury · Neurodegenerative diseases · In vitro
neuroengineering
Abbreviations
2D
Two-dimensional
3D
Three-dimensional
CNS
Central nervous system
DRG
Dorsal root ganglion
ECM
Extracellular matrix
GFP
Green ﬂuorescent protein
MEA
Microelectrode arrays
MSCs
Mesenchymal stem cells undergoing osteoblastogenesis
NGF
Nerve growth factor
PDMS
Poly(dimethylsiloxane)
PNS
Peripheral nervous system
RFP
Red ﬂuorescent protein

Subcellular Compartmentalization for Neurobiology: Focusing on the Axon
5
1
Introduction
Human nervous system is composed of individual building blocks called neurons.
This statement is widely accepted to be true and is taught as early as in primary
school. What is common knowledge today was a subject of a heated scientiﬁc
discussion merely 130 years ago. The pioneers of neuroscience believed that the
nervous system was one, continuous entity. It took the work of extraordinary
scientists to demonstrate that it was the opposite. One of the biggest advocates of the
“neuron doctrine” was Santiago Ramon y Cajal. Cajal used Camillo Golgi’s staining
method to visualize the nervous system and provided morphological descriptions
and drawings (some still used in textbooks), presenting the nervous system as a
network of individual cells – neurons. Neurons themselves were described as highly
polarized units with cell bodies (somata) and axons with growth cones at their
tips [1, 2], Cajal’s discoveries on nervous system morphology, on single neuron
polarization, and on growth cones granted him the Nobel Prize in Medicine in
1906 (shared with Golgi). With technological advancements, new tools became
available and contributed to these ﬁndings. Cell culture and electron microscopy
were used to study the morphology of the neuron and helped describe in great
detail its subcellular regions: synapses, dendrites, soma, axons, and growth cones.
Neurons were found to be one of the most polarized cells. The distance between
the tip of an axon and the soma can be signiﬁcant: up to several centimeters in the
brain and up to 1 m in the peripheral nervous system (PNS). As such, the soma
and distal axons experience different milieux – they experience different physical
environments, respond to different biomolecules, and interact with different cell
types. The various stimuli that an individual neuron is exposed to along its length
are indispensable for the correct development and functioning of the entire nervous
system.
Conventional in vitro model systems that involve growing cells in simple culture
dishes expose all subcellular regions to the same culture media. The subcellular
environment can be modulated by locally administrating soluble biomolecules
using a micropipette or carefully positioning secreting cells. However, in these
applications, the spatiotemporal control of the biomolecule concentration is highly
limited due to diffusion. Additionally, commonly used types of neurons, such as hip-
pocampal, cortical, and dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons, are more viable when
cultured at high densities. The dense architecture of overlapping cell bodies and
neurites encumbers the identiﬁcation of subcellular regions, such as growth cones,
and makes it difﬁcult to probe these regions in discrete experimental paradigms.
The global response to a local treatment is also not easy to decipher – which cell
body belongs to the treated axon? As a result, researchers tend to probe neurons at
younger ages (thus having shorter axons), growing in regions with lower density,
or use another neuron subtype altogether. To more closely mimic the in vivo condi-
tions, the in vitro model system should replicate the spatial and ﬂuidic isolation of
somata and distal axons and allow for their independent treatment and observation.

6
A. Blasiak et al.
Fig. 1 The principle and major applications of compartmentalized in vitro model systems for axon
biology. Spatial and ﬂuidic compartmentalization of distal axons and cell bodies replicates the in
vivo conditions. Somatic and axonal milieux are independently controlled. Compartmentalized
devices are used in a variety of experimental models ranging from isolating axons to forming
neuronal networks, from creating axon co-cultures to engineering axonal behavior
The ﬁrst, simple compartmentalized in vitro model system was proposed 40 years
ago by Robert B. Campenot, who mounted a physical barrier that stopped cell
bodies but allowed axons to grow underneath and pass from one culture chamber
to another [3]. Some 25 years later, Noo Li Jeon’s group reproduced Campenot
chambers in the form of an easy-to-assemble microﬂuidic device [4–6]. It ignited
the popularization of the compartmentalized in vitro devices in a variety of forms,
targeted at different applications (Fig. 1). Today, the spatial and ﬂuidic isolation of
axons from their somata is used both for fundamental research and when modeling
neuropathological conditions (Sect. 2). Additional experimental methods can be
incorporated into the compartmentalized model system to study and/or modulate the
axon behavior, making it even more versatile (Sect. 3). Additional cell populations
can be included to enable studying axon-cell interactions – either with other cell
types to study tissue innervation (Sect. 4) or with other neurons to create neuronal
networks (Sect. 5). The evolution of compartmentalized devices does not stop here:
the ﬁrst steps have already been taken to bring the compartmentalized in vitro model
systems into three dimensions (Sect. 6).
In summary, the discovery of neuron polarity substantiated the development
of compartmentalized in vitro model systems, whose evolution has been fueled

Subcellular Compartmentalization for Neurobiology: Focusing on the Axon
7
Table 1 Examples of experimental models based on isolated axons
Category
Approach
Concentration
gradients
Pressure-driven ﬂow [33]
Passive diffusion
In media [35]
In gel [37–39]
Mechanical injury
Diffuse axonal injury
Compression [50]
Stretch [51]
Axotomy
Vacuum aspiration [5, 19]
Chemical axotomy [19]
Laser microdissection [49]
Mechanical
stimulation
Shear stress [33, 41]
Magnetic tweezers force
application
Receptor-bound particle [35]
Internalized nanoparticles [43, 44]
Substrate modulation
Permissivity cues [46–48]
Nanotopography [45]
Axonal transport
Mitochondria [48, 52]
Growth factors
BDNF [53, 54]
GDNF [27]
NGF [55]
Neurotoxic molecules
β-amyloid [56]
HIV glycoprotein [57]
Prion protein [58]
α-synuclein [59]
Synthetic nanoparticles [60, 61]
Activity induction
Electrical stimulation [65, 66]
Optogenetic stimulation [68–70]
by technological progress. The union of neuroscience and engineering brought us
closer to replicate (and manipulate) nervous system behavior in health and disease
(Table 1).
2
Isolation of Axons from Their Cell Bodies
The idea for neuronal compartmentalization is simple: to introduce a physical
barrier that permits thin neurites but stops bulky cell bodies from crossing from
one culture chamber to the other. The barrier can take multiple forms: a divider
mounted over grooves (Campenot chambers), a wall with microchannels casted in
an elastomer (compartmentalized microﬂuidic devices), a porous ﬁlter, or a porous
gel. The ﬁrst two methods are the most popular due to their simplicity and versatility.
Parallel alignment of axons facilitates tracking axonal signal propagation, collecting

8
A. Blasiak et al.
hundreds of data points, and applying automated image analysis. Those methods
are discussed in more details below. The porous ﬁlter and the porous gel function
as barriers in three-dimensional (3D) models and are discussed in Sect. 6. Another
approach for creating spatial isolation is substrate micropatterning with biologically
active molecules. This method allows orienting axonal outgrowth [7] and steering
growth cones for axon guidance studies [8]. Such models and methods have
been popular for creating neuronal networks as discussed in Sect. 5. However,
the subcellular milieux are deﬁned by the preprinted patterns and lack temporal
resolution. The subcellular regions are not ﬂuidically isolated.
2.1
Campenot Chambers
The device proposed by Campenot had a simple design (Fig. 2a). It was fabricated
by scratching multiple parallel microgrooves in the ﬂoor of a cell culture dish
and sealing a three-chamber Teﬂon divider’ on top of it. Sympathetic neurons
plated in the middle (somatic) chamber, extended axons via the microgrooves,
and crossed under the Teﬂon piece into the side (axonal) chambers (Fig. 2b).
Campenot added nerve growth factor (NGF) to either somatic or axonal chambers
and observed the axonal response in the axonal chamber. The results showed that
NGF was required in the axonal, but not in the somatic milieu to support distal
axon growth [3], and that the axonal response to NGF did not directly involve
somatic mechanisms [9–11]. These early experiments suggested that axons have
a certain level of autonomy in their response to the microenvironment. Multiple
studies that followed validated this conclusion and showed that neurites have mRNA
localized to their terminal sites [12] and can locally synthesize proteins [13],
including a vast spectrum of building blocks needed to sustain growth [14–16]. Our
understanding of spatiotemporal regulation of translation and local protein synthesis
in axons obtained from compartmentalized cultures substantiates the need for these
devices.
2.2
Microﬂuidic Compartmentalization
Campenot chambers have been used to study various aspects of axon biology.
However, the real breakthrough came when soft lithography – a method commonly
used for fabricating microﬂuidic devices – was adapted for the preparation of
the compartmentalized system. Jeon’s group used a microfabricated silicon wafer
to mold a silicone elastomer that featured two chambers connected by parallel
microgrooves. The elastomer was then sealed against a glass coverslip such that
the microgrooves formed microchannels [4–6] (Fig. 2c and d). The elastomer used
was poly(dimethylsiloxane) (PDMS), a translucent, inert, biocompatible, and gas-
permeable polymer [17]. Soft lithography allows precise control of the feature
dimensions with a resolution of a few microns, and it is reproducible, inexpensive,
and fast [18]. By decreasing the microchannel length to less than a millimeter, Jeon’s

Subcellular Compartmentalization for Neurobiology: Focusing on the Axon
9
Fig. 2 Distal and intermediate axon isolation. (a) Schematics of the Campenot chambers. (b)
Axons in the somatic chamber of Campenot chambers extend along the parallel scratches scored
on the ﬂoor of the culture dish and cross under the grease barrier into the axonal chambers. (c)
Schematics of bichamber microﬂuidic compartmentalized device. (d) An exemplary image of
neurons in a bichamber microﬂuidic device showing β-III tubulin (green), actin ﬁlaments (red),
and nuclei (blue). Axons in the somatic chamber cross through the microchannels into the axonal
chamber. Dashed line indicates the distal end of the axonal chamber. Scale bar = 200 μm. (b–e)
are enlarged areas marked in image (a). Scale bars = 20 μm. (e) An exemplary image of neurons
in a trichamber microﬂuidic device showing β-III tubulin (green), MAP 2 (red), and nuclei (blue).
Axons in the somatic chamber cross into the intermediate axonal chamber before reaching the distal
axonal chamber. Scale bar = 50 μm. Inset: the fabricated trichamber microﬂuidic device ﬁlled
with different dyes added to each chamber. (a) and (b) were adapted by permission from Springer
Nature Customer Service Centre GmbH: [29], Copyright Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2009;
(c) was adapted by permission from Springer Nature Customer Service Centre GmbH: [30],
Copyright Biomedical Engineering Society 2012; (d) was adapted from [26] under license CC BY
4.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/); (e) was adapted by permission from Springer
Nature Customer Service Centre GmbH: [19], Copyright The Author(s) 2010

10
A. Blasiak et al.
group isolated neurites of the central nervous system (CNS) neurons, which extend
shorter axons compared to PNS neurons used by Campenot [4]. The robustness and
design ﬂexibility of soft lithography support fabricating compartmentalized systems
with more complex geometries, e.g., trichamber devices, which allow isolation of
intermediate and distal axonal fractions (Fig. 2e) [19].
In contrast to fundamental neuroscience, which was the focus of Campenot,
Jeon’s group used the compartmentalized device to create an axonal injury model.
Isolated axons were axotomized via vacuum aspiration, without directly exposing
the somata to mechanical damage. Complete axotomy was replaced with subtler
insult methods to model the effects of neurotoxicity on axons, especially the “dying
back” axon degeneration. Compartmentalized devices were used to demonstrate
that axons are more sensitive than cell bodies to locally applied chemotherapy
drugs (e.g., vincristine [20] and paclitaxel [21]) and are now common for modeling
chemotherapy-induced peripheral neuropathy [22]. In turn, cell bodies were more
sensitive than axons to induction of excitotoxicity: application of high glutamate
concentration into the somatic chamber caused higher distal axon degeneration
than its direct application into the axonal chamber [23]. Subcellular differences in
toxic sensitivity support using compartmentalized devices to model neurotoxicity in
axons, but also to develop neuroprotection strategies speciﬁc to axons [24, 25].
Compartmentalization has also been used to investigate axon-soma communi-
cation. Researchers observed molecular changes (e.g., gene expression, protein
translation/localization, second messenger signaling) in one chamber, following
intervention in the opposite chamber. For example, cell bodies were shown to
remotely regulate axon growth response to a guidance cue by observing local (i.e.,
in the stimulated chamber) and long-range (i.e., in the opposite chamber) changes in
second messenger dynamics and receptor membrane trafﬁcking [26]. Axon align-
ment and deﬁned orientation further allow direct visualization of axon-soma com-
munication and characterization of signal propagation in terms of direction, velocity,
and efﬁciency. This experimental paradigm has been used for tracking damage pro-
gression [27], action potentials [28], and trafﬁcking of cargo (described in Sect. 3.2).
3
Experimental Models with Isolated Axons
Compartmentalized neuron cultures have been combined with a number of exper-
imental or “engineering” approaches to decipher various aspects of neurobiology.
One of the earliest applications of microﬂuidics in cell culture is the formation of
concentration gradients. Microﬂuidic designs including a source chamber and a sink
chamber in their circuitry effectively generate linear concentration gradients across a
central chamber. This approach has been extended into exposing neurons, as well as
isolated axons, to gradients of molecules of interest, such as chemoattractants and
chemo-repellents. Another area of research that beneﬁted from subcellular com-
partmentalization is neuronal mechanobiology. Isolated axons have been subject
to pulling forces, nanotopographical cues, and various forms of mechanical injury.
Parallel alignment of developing axons and the ﬂuidic isolation of their growth

Subcellular Compartmentalization for Neurobiology: Focusing on the Axon
11
cones in compartmentalized neuron cultures greatly facilitated the study of axonal
transport. Finally, modern tools of neurobiology, such as electrical and optogenetic
stimulation of neurons, have been applied in combination with compartmentalized
cultures. In this section, we will discuss these techniques in detail.
3.1
Concentration Gradients
Microﬂuidic devices provide additional means of microenvironmental control, such
as imposing chemical gradients. Concentration gradients are important aspects of
axon guidance in vivo, where growth cones are typically exposed to chemotactic
gradients which guide them to their targets. Gradients of substrate-bound or freely
diffusing cues can be imposed by ﬂow-based devices, such as those with cascaded
mixing stages that produce linear or nonlinear concentration gradients perpendicular
to the ﬂow direction [31, 32]. However, this approach is not very suitable for
neurons, which are very sensitive to ﬂow shear stress, unless the ﬂow rate is
kept very low. One such system utilizes multiple chambers separated by parallel
microchannels to effectively generate source and sink chambers between which
gravity-driven ﬂow takes place [33]. Gradients of substrate-bound or freely diffusing
cues can also be imposed based on passive diffusion [34, 35]. The latter has
previously been achieved by ﬂanking a culture chamber with source and sink
channels (interconnected via parallel microchannels) to study the axonal growth
speed and direction of individual neurons in a Netrin-1 gradient [36] and of DRG
neurospheres in an NGF gradient [37]. However, it may be important to expose
ﬂuidically isolated axons, but not their somata, to chemotactic gradients, such that
the molecule of interest only affects the growth cones locally and does not affect
the somata. Here, two possible gradient directions emerge: one where the gradient
is parallel to the axon growth direction, i.e., parallel to microchannels which the
axon crosses (Fig. 3b) [35], and one where the gradient is perpendicular to the
axon growth direction (Fig. 3a) [33]. One major drawback of these diffusion-based
gradient generators is that they are functional for a limited period of time, as the
diffusion tends to equalize source and sink concentrations. An approach to extend
this period is to use 3D hydrogels which stabilize the diffusion and to use cells
secreting the molecule of interest, such as ﬁbroblasts that secrete Netrin-1 [38]. In
fact, imposing the molecular gradient through 3D gels permits the precise control
of the gradient steepness, allowing for additional complexity [39].
3.2
Axonal Mechanics and Transport
Microﬂuidic neuron compartmentalization devices facilitated certain experiments
that are otherwise very costly in terms of time and effort required. Mechanical
stimulation of axonal growth cones is one subject that has great potential to
beneﬁt from subcellular compartmentalization [40]. For example, shear stress due
to pressure-driven ﬂow through the microchannels of a bichamber device has been

12
A. Blasiak et al.
Fig. 3 Examples of complementary experimental techniques using compartmentalized neurons.
(a) Isolated axons exposed to a stable Netrin-1 gradient perpendicular to microchannel direction
(ﬂuorescence intensity or green shading in the top) turn toward the source after exiting the
microchannels (arrowheads). (b) Isolated axons exposed to a Semaphorin 3A gradient that is
parallel to microchannel direction (red shading), imposed by the diffusion of this molecule from
the distal chamber toward the somatic chamber. Axons facing the Semaphorin 3A gradient exhibit
stalling and deviation. Application of pN-level forces (arrows) to growth cones tow axons against
the gradient only when the force-generating pathways are locally inhibited. (c) Axon bundles
connecting two organotypic hippocampal slices exhibit rapid undulation (arrows) and axonal
beading (arrowheads), when subjected to uniaxial strain injury. (d) Growth cone uptake and
axonal retrograde transport of polystyrene nanoparticles (red) in a bichamber microﬂuidic chip.
Time-lapse images show the track (orange line) of a nanoparticle (yellow arrowheads) undergoing
fast axonal transport in a microchannel. Transported nanoparticles can be observed in the cell
body compartment (white arrowheads). (e) Isolated optogenetic stimulation of axons and somata
in separate chambers is made possible through carbon black-darkened PDMS. (a) and (c) were
adapted from [33] and [51], respectively, with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry;
(b) was adapted from [35] under license CC BY 4.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/); (d) was adapted from [60]; (e) was adapted with permission from [69]; Copyright 2016
American Chemical Society

Subcellular Compartmentalization for Neurobiology: Focusing on the Axon
13
shown to slow down or accelerate axonal growth and exhibited a synergistic effect
when combined with NGF chemotaxis [41]. Shear stress can also be applied using
microﬂuidic channels after axons exit the microchannels: forces as low as 1 pN
acting perpendicular to the axon elongation direction have been shown to deviate
growing axons from their paths [33]. Highly controlled forces can be applied to
cells by using magnetic tweezers technique. Magnetic particles coated with select
ligands attach to the target molecules on cell surfaces and exert precisely controlled
forces on these speciﬁc targets in response to an external magnetic ﬁeld [42].
Microﬂuidic compartmentalization facilitated the targeting of multiple growth cones
with NCAM-coated magnetic particles, which were able to deliver forces in the
range of several pNs to pull on tens of growth cones in parallel (Fig. 3b) [35]. When
combined with local axonal inhibition of force-related pathways, this miniscule
force level was able to overcome the repulsion induced by gradients of diffusing
and surface-bound cues [35]. An alternative to this approach is to load neurons
with magnetic nanoparticles and apply forces from within. This way, the polarity
of cultured neurons [43] and neuron-like cells can be modulated [44]; however,
the number of nanoparticles loaded, and therefore the amount of force applied,
cannot be controlled. Besides force application, topography and permissivity of the
substrate can also modulate the mechanical behavior of the axonal growth cone.
For example, nanotopographical cues have been presented to isolated axons in a
bichamber neuron culture device [45]. Permissivity cues can be applied in the entire
axonal compartment [46] or patterned via microcontact printing prior to bonding
the microﬂuidic device [47, 48].
A popular application area of compartmentalized neuron culture devices has
been mechanical injury. The original bichamber design has been used to induce
axotomy by applying vacuum aspiration in the axonal chamber which severed axons
at microchannel exits [5]. A trichamber device has been developed to localize the
axotomy to a narrow segment of the axon – using detergent to sever the exposed
axon segment– leaving both proximal and distal segments intact [19]. More precise
axotomy has been achieved by laser microdissection of individual axons inside
the microchannels [49]. Other applications have been geared toward diffuse axonal
injury, which can be induced by compressing oriented axons in microchannels [50]
or by stretching axons interconnecting two hippocampal slices, which were oriented
in such a manner to form anatomically relevant connections (Fig. 3c) [51].
Another popular application area of compartmentalized devices has been axonal
transport studies, which beneﬁt from (i) the isolation of distal axons and cell
bodies, which helps identifying if the transport is retrograde or anterograde,
depending on which compartment the cargo to be transported is introduced, and
(ii) the parallel alignment of axons in microchannels, which facilitates the real-
time observation of transport events. The classical bichamber microﬂuidic device
has been used to study the axonal transport of various targets: mitochondria [48,
52]; growth factors such as BDNF [53, 54], GDNF [27], and NGF [55]; neurotoxic
species such as β-amyloid [56], HIV glycoprotein [57], prion [58], and α-synuclein
[59]; and synthetic nanoparticles (e.g., charged polystyrene nanoparticles (Fig. 3d)
[60] or lanthanide-doped upconversion nanoparticles [61]). Analysis of axonal

14
A. Blasiak et al.
transport using compartmentalized cultures can easily be adapted to study neuron-
to-neuron [62] and myoblast-to-neuron [27] protein transfer paradigms. As opposed
to axonal transport, dendritic transport requires sophisticated microﬂuidic designs
with deﬁned neuronal polarity [63].
3.3
Electrical and Optogenetic Stimulation
A major advantage of compartmentalized neuron cultures is the ability to stimulate
isolated axons independent of their cell bodies. Besides chemical and mechanical
stimulation, which was discussed in earlier sections, isolated axons have also been
electrically and optogenetically stimulated. Neurons and muscle cells are excitable
(or electrically active) cells. For example, electrically stimulating human neural
crest stem cells in vitro by placing them between two electrodes improved their
differentiation into Schwann cells, which promoted axonal regeneration in vivo
following their transplantation to an injured sciatic nerve [64]. This principle has
been applied to a bichamber microﬂuidic chip device, by inserting the electrodes
into opposite cell chambers, housing neurons, and oligodendrocyte precursor cells,
respectively: Electrical stimulation using direct current only affected those neurons
that have an axon in the opposite chamber and promoted their myelination [65].
By placing the electrodes in one chamber only, a selected subcellular region can be
stimulated in isolation [66].
Optogenetics, the activation of light-sensitive ion channels in living cells, can
be considered a versatile alternative to electrical stimulation as it eliminates the
electrical wiring altogether. Optogenetic stimulation of compartmentalized neurons
has been demonstrated by infecting neurons in one chamber with lentiviruses
encoding channelrhodopsin-2 and shining blue light to their axons in the opposite
chamber [67]. This approach has been since used to stimulate entire cell culture
chambers to study signaling between two hippocampal neuron populations [68] and
to study myelination of axons in a compartmentalized neuron – oligodendrocyte
precursor cell co-culture model [69, 70]. The innovative use of opaque PDMS in the
latter work allowed for the isolated stimulation of a cell chamber that was in close
proximity to a non-stimulated cell chamber [69, 70] (Fig. 3). More sophisticated
models, such as the 3D co-culture of embryonic stem cells differentiated into
motoneurons and C2C12 myoblasts, greatly beneﬁt from optogenetic stimulation
which provides faster and more controlled stimulation compared to chemical
stimulation, where the molecules are required to diffuse through the 3D hydrogel
environment to reach their targets [71].
3.4
Axon Alignment and Isolation Facilitate Automated Analyses
When axons exit the barrier into the axonal chamber, they are evenly distributed
along the chamber wall, and their initial orientation and growth direction are
predeﬁned. Thanks to the lack of cell bodies in the axonal chamber, automated

Subcellular Compartmentalization for Neurobiology: Focusing on the Axon
15
morphometric analyses can be applied with improved efﬁciency. Additionally,
compartmentalized devices can sustain axon alignment in the axonal chamber
via micropatterned stripes of adhesive molecules [5] or by microgrooves in the
chamber’s ﬂoor [72]. This further facilitates automated image analysis, which saves
time and effort and minimizes human bias [72].
Another advantage of the compartmentalized system is obtaining a large number
of measurements from a single experiment. Microchannels align axons in a way
that the positions of multiple individual growth cones can be easily identiﬁed and
tracked over time. Given that multiple microﬂuidic devices can be arranged on the
microscope stage, over 1,000 axons can be imaged in a single microscopy session,
saving cost, time, and effort. In addition, collecting a high number of data points
permits performing distribution analyses. For example, neuron subpopulations have
been identiﬁed based on the growth response of their axons to a guidance molecule
solely through population statistics [73]. Large sample sizes and population analyses
provide more comprehensive understanding of axon growth behavior compared to
traditional axon guidance experiments, which are typically performed with less
than 50 axons. Similarly, tracks of transported cargo can be generated for parallel
axons in multiple neighboring microchannels in a single imaging session, allowing
distribution analysis to be conducted [74]. Based on this principle, compartmental-
ized neuron culture has been incorporated into a high-throughput drug screening
platform in which candidate molecules can be tested for their capacity to modulate
synaptogenesis [75].
In summary, compartmentalized in vitro model systems were developed to repli-
cate the spatial compartmentalization of neurons observed in vivo. This approach
has been appreciated for its simplicity, robustness, and – more recently – acces-
sibility, thanks to the emergence of soft lithography-based microﬂuidic devices.
Studying the axonal response to local interventions without the interference from
other subcellular regions is highly relevant to fundamental neuroscience and disease
modeling.
4
Co-culture of Axons with Other Cell Types
Neuronal somata are organized in clusters, either within the dorsal cavity (CNS)
or in ganglions (PNS), and their main interaction partners are other neural cells,
glia and vascular endothelia. PNS axons extend away from these clusters into
distant body parts and either stimulate or receive signals from target tissues.
Compartmentalized in vitro model systems replicate this spatial arrangement by
incorporating various interaction partners into the axonal chamber (Table 2). The
ﬂuidic isolation due to long microchannels allows the culture of two different cell
types in one device by independently tailoring the culture conditions for neuronal
somata and for cells co-cultured with the axons. Our understanding of axon-cell
interactions is based on physical, biochemical, and indirect evidences. Physical
interactions can be identiﬁed by directly visualizing speciﬁc markers of contact
sites (e.g., bungarotoxin for the neuromuscular junction [27], domain markers

16
A. Blasiak et al.
Table 2 Examples of co-culture of isolated axons with other cell types
Category
Device type
Number of
compartments
Co-cultured cell type
Glial cells
Campenot chamber
3
Schwann cells [81]
Microﬂuidic
3
Microglia [82]
2
Oligodendrocytes [77, 83,
85]
Schwann cells [76]
Astrocytes [84]
Muscle cells
Microﬂuidic
Multiple
Cardiomyocytes [86]
2
C2C12 cells [87]
Skeletal myoblasts [27, 88,
89]
Skeletal system
Microﬂuidic
2
MC3T3-E1 osteoblasts [90]
Mesenchymal stem cells
undergoing
osteoblastogenesis [91]
Tooth germs [92]
Epidermal cells
Microﬂuidic
2
Keratinocytes [80]
Cancer cell lines
Microﬂuidic
2
Prostate cancer [78]
Pancreatic cancer [78, 79]
Breast cancer [78]
Virus detector cells
Campenot chambers
3
PK15 porcine kidney cells
[93, 94]
Microﬂuidic
2
Vero epithelial cells [93, 95]
for nodes of Ranvier [76]), or morphological changes (e.g., sheath formation by
myelinating cells [77], myotube formation by myoblasts [27], axonal penetration
[78, 79], alignment, and branching [80]). Biochemical interactions can be detected
via immunostaining or analyzing the culture media: the release of cAMP [77] or
BDNF [81] by neurons to induce myelination or the release of GDNF by muscle
cells to support innervation [27]. Finally, the axon-cell interaction can be determined
from indirect evidence – changes in axons, the morphology [82], transport [27,
76], protein expression and localization [76, 81], etc., or changes in co-cultured
cells, maturation [77, 83], calcium dynamics [27, 84], microglia migration [82],
myotube contraction [27], etc. Regardless of the approach, compartmentalized
systems greatly facilitated co-culture of various cell types with isolated axons.
Glia are key players in the development and regulation of the nervous system.
Compartmentalized devices have been used to study several aspects of axon-glial
cell interaction: axon myelination by oligodendrocytes (in CNS) [77, 83, 85] or by
Schwann cells (in PNS) [76, 81]; migration, debris cleaning, and support of axon
regeneration by microglia [82]; and the inﬂuence of axonal presence on astrocytes’
calcium dynamics [84]. Axon-glia interactions are often studied in trichamber
devices, where an intermediary segment of the axon – region of myelination in
vivo – is recreated in the central chamber. The effects of distal axonal or somatic
inputs can be studied without directly interfering with the axon-myelin contact site.

Subcellular Compartmentalization for Neurobiology: Focusing on the Axon
17
Tissue innervation has been successfully modeled in bichamber devices. Axons
isolated from their cell bodies interact with various target cells: muscle cells,
bone cells, skin cells (physiological models) or cancer cells, and virus detector
cells (pathological models). Forming contacts with axons affects the maturation,
morphology, and behavior of the target cell, e.g., muscle cells display longer
and stronger contractions that are synchronized with neuronal activity [27], and
mesenchymal cells differentiate into osteoblasts [91]. In turn, the interaction with
the nonneuronal cells affects axonal morphology and transport, e.g., epidermal
cells increase axonal branching [80], and muscle cells support neuronal survival
by releasing GDNF, which is taken up by the axons and undergoes active axonal
transport [27]. Compartmentalized in vitro model systems have been used to study
pathological innervation of tumors. On one hand, axons support cancer cell attach-
ment and guide cancer cell migration [78]. On the other hand, cancer cells actively
recruit axons into their microenvironment [78, 79]. Finally, bichamber devices can
be used to model spreading of viruses in the nervous system. Upon infection of cell
bodies in the somatic chamber, viruses undergo axonal anterograde transport and
spread into detector cells, which in response express ﬂuorescent proteins [93].
Axon-cell interactions are not limited to one partner only. The role of myelination
in virus spread has been studied in a trichamber device where intermediary axon
segments (in the central chamber) were co-cultured with Schwann cells and distal
axon segments (in the distal chamber) were cultured with virus detector cells [96]. In
summary, subcellular compartmentalization allows increasing the complexity of the
system in a spatially relevant organization with the goal of creating a physiologically
accurate in vitro model (Fig. 4).
5
Descriptive Neuronal Networks
Subcellular compartmentalization of neurons allows the formation of neuronal
networks between neuron populations that connect with each other with or without
predeﬁned connectivity rules. There is tremendous interest in in vitro models
of descriptive neuronal networks, since network formation is not only the basis
of a functional nervous system but also the prime target for progressive neu-
rodegenerative diseases. In this section, we will describe approaches to induce
compartmentalized descriptive network formation to study development and disease
mechanisms.
5.1
Microcontact Printing of Homogenous Neuronal Networks
While primary neurons seeded on a permissive 2D substrate spontaneously self-
organize as random networks exhibiting spontaneous and controllable neuronal
activity, obtaining ordered neuronal networks with controlled topography is a long-
lasting task. Historically, the ﬁrst attempts to obtain ordered neuronal networks were
performed using microcontact printing to constrain axonal and dendritic outgrowth
on permissive substrate (usually polylysine or laminin or attractive or repulsive

18
A. Blasiak et al.
Fig. 4 Compartmentalized devices to study axon-cell interactions. (a) Myelination in a
compartmentalized in vitro model system. Axons of sensory neurons (green, stained for
neuroﬁlaments) cross into the axonal compartment where they are co-cultured with Schwann
cells. Axons are myelinated within 8 days of culture in myelination-promoting media. The inset
shows axonal segments at higher magniﬁcation that are positive for myelin base protein (red), a
marker of myelination. Scale bar = 100 μm. (b) Axons of sensory neurons (green, stained for
β3-tubulin) cross to the axonal chamber where they are co-cultured with keratinocytes (red, stained
for cytokeratin 5) for 6 days. The right panel is a close-up of the region marked in the axonal
chamber. Scale bars = 100 μm. (c) Axons of sensory neurons (green, stained for β3-tubulin) cross
to the axonal chamber where they are co-cultured with bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells
undergoing osteoblastogenesis (MSCs, red, stained for actin ﬁlaments) for 7 days. Arrows point
to neurites. The right panel is a close-up of the innervated MSCs. DAPI stain shows nuclei (blue).
Scale bars = 100 μm (left panel), 50 μm (right panel). (d) Axons of motor neurons (red, stained
for NFM) plated in the somatic chamber with glial cells (green, stained for GFAP, panel A) cross
to the axonal chamber and interact with myoblasts (blue, stained for desmin, panel B), which over
time develop into myotubes (panel C). Scale bars = 20 μm (top panels), 50 μm (bottom panels).
(e) Three-color infection of neuronal cultures with axons co-cultured with the detector cells.

Subcellular Compartmentalization for Neurobiology: Focusing on the Axon
19
cues either alone, in proximity, or in combination with adhesive molecules).
Different methods can be used to pattern these substrates such as stamping, ﬂuidic
micropatterning, plasma etching of dried polylysine, or micromolding in capillaries.
These approaches allowed to obtain electro-active grids of network conﬁguration,
consisting of neurons of a single neuronal subtype, connected in a bidirectional
manner [97–100].
One of the major applications of these constrained networks has been to combine
micropatterned platforms with microelectrode arrays (MEA), i.e., micropatterning
adhesive islets directly on top of the electrodes, in order to study information
ﬂow in network motifs under spatial constrains via recording extracellular ﬁeld
potentials [101]. However, one of the major drawbacks is that neuronal positioning
is progressively lost after several days of culture, as neurites may extend beyond the
patterned motifs, neurons may migrate out of their initial position, and mechanical
tension between connected neurons may detach cells from the permissive patterns.
To circumvent these problems, strategies using nonpermissive co-patterning in
areas outside the polylysine motifs [102] or combining chemical and mechanical
constrains [103] have been proposed. Recent reﬁnements, such as using spatially
deﬁned micropatterns composed of developmental cues or speciﬁc geometrical
motifs, have been used to control neurite directionality and thus enhanced the
control of network topology on patterned chips [104]. In a very elegant work,
triangle-shaped patterns and sophisticated co-patterning techniques have been used
to obtain complex network topologies, which allowed the construction of living
logical operators [105]. This principle has been further reﬁned to study directional
signal propagation and synaptic dysfunction in 1D networks [106–108]. Interest-
ingly, patterns with optimized geometries have also been proven to permit the
control of dendritic versus axonal differentiation, thus allowing to control network
topologies at an unprecedented level [109].
However, for now, beyond the proof-of-principle stage, these techniques resulted
in mixed success in their routine use for biological research. Beside the escape
of neurites from the patterned motifs (due to degradation of deposited material or
increased neurite tension), there are two main drawbacks associated with these tech-
◀
Fig. 4 (continued) Neuronal cell bodies extend neurites under two sequential barriers. Epithelial
cells are plated onto the isolated neurites in the axonal chamber 1 day before infecting neuronal
cell bodies with viruses. Left panel: neuronal cell bodies infected with a mixture of HSV-1 that
expresses mCerulean, EYFP, or mCherry. A composite image showing all three ﬂuorescence
channels is presented with the phase-contrast image (inset). Right panel: the detector cells in
the axonal chamber at 48 h after neuronal somata infection for ﬂuorescence expression. Scale
bars = 50 μm (left panel), 100 μm (right panel). (f) Axons (green, stained for Tuji1) cross to
the axonal chamber where they are co-cultured with cancer cells (red, stained for panCK). DAPI
stain shows nuclei (blue). Scale bars = 100 μm. (a) was reprinted from [76] Copyright 2012, with
permission from Elsevier; (b) was adapted from [80]; (c) was adapted from [91] under license CC
BY 4.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/); (d) was adapted from [89] Copyright 2013,
with permission from Elsevier; (e) was adapted from [93]; (f) was adapted from [78]: Yifeng Lei,
Jun Li, Nuoxin Wang, et al. An on-chip model for investigating the interaction between neurons
and cancer cells. Integrative Biology (2016) 8 (3): 359–367, https://doi.org/10.1039/c5ib00309a.
Reproduced by permission of Oxford University Press

20
A. Blasiak et al.
niques: First, they require complex system designs on a case-by-case basis, because
each neuronal subtype responds to a unique set of guidance cues and survives
only at speciﬁc cell densities. Moreover, one technique may be relevant to build
networks of a particular neuronal subtype, but the same technique may prove to be
very difﬁcult to build networks composed of different neuronal subtypes. Second,
in such experimental platforms, further accessibility of the local microenvironment
and neuronal subcellular compartments are limited, such that it is difﬁcult to address
these independently. These drawbacks have eventually been overcome by the use of
microﬂuidic devices that permit subcellular compartmentalization.
5.2
Microﬂuidic Devices for Neuronal Network Formation
The proof of principle demonstrating that primary neurons could be compartmental-
ized in vitro with axon tips growing in a remote, ﬂuidically isolated chamber invoked
a very intuitive experiment where neurons were seeded in both chambers. Indeed,
following their seminal work, the ﬁrst attempts to reconstruct neuronal networks in
microﬂuidic chips were proposed by Jeon’s group [110]. Based on the principle that
dendrites grow shorter distances than axons, they developed a microﬂuidic device
composed of three chambers interconnected by microchannels of different lengths
allowing synaptic connections between two neuron populations to be established
in a speciﬁc chamber. This allowed to demonstrate that Hippocampo-Hippocampal
networks can be formed in such systems and that synapses forming between axons
and dendrites arriving from remote chambers can be ﬂuidically manipulated in an
independent manner [110]. One of the drawbacks of this initial system was that due
to the symmetric geometry of the ﬁltering microchannels, both neuronal populations
seeded in remote chambers can cross-connect to each other in a bidirectional
manner. Surface coating with an extracellular matrix (ECM) component speciﬁcally
in one chamber – thereby creating an ECM gradient between the two neuronal
populations – has been shown to decrease such bidirectional connections, by
generating asymmetric cell culture conditions [56].
An alternative strategy has been developed based on the observation that grow-
ing axons respond speciﬁcally to mechanical constrains: asymmetric, funneling
microchannels were designed that enforced axonal outgrowth directionality between
two cell culture chambers interconnected by arrays of the so-called axonal diodes,
allowing to reconstruct fully oriented cortico-striatal neuronal networks [111].
While the original “diode” design resulted in axonal ﬁltration with a selectivity of
97% at the initial period of the network culture, further observations showed that
directional selectivity was dependent on the neuronal subtypes and dropped with cell
culture time. Further work enhanced the selectivity by modifying the microchannel
geometry, e.g., adding arrowheads to promote directional growth [112]. Recently,
an innovative strategy termed “return to sender” has been developed, which is
based on forcing axons to take U-turns as they follow microchannel edges, to build

Subcellular Compartmentalization for Neurobiology: Focusing on the Axon
21
oriented neuronal networks with increased stability [113]. The latest version of this
microsystem ensures 100% directional selectivity over long periods of culture [114]
(Fig. 5).
Studies on the neurophysiological properties of the reconstructed networks show
that functional connectivity between different neurons can be obtained and easily
manipulated by pharmacological treatments [111] or optogenetic stimulation [68]
and be recorded by MEA interfacing [115]. For example, recent work demonstrated
that reconstructed cortico-striatal networks exhibit coordinated ensemble activities
integrating glutamatergic and dopaminergic neurotransmission, which recapitulate
some of the properties of brain slice preparations [116]. Microﬂuidic networks have
proven to be useful to study neuronal network development and neurophysiology,
and their use has mostly focused on modeling disease-related conditions. Indeed,
a reconstructed neuronal network with ﬂuidically isolated network nodes is espe-
cially suited to study processes involved in transsynaptic degeneration phenomena
that are proposed to occur in a majority of neurodegenerative syndromes [117,
118]. Microﬂuidic networks have therefore been used to study Alzheimer’s and
Parkinson’s disease-related processes [119–123], which were recently proposed
to be caused by protein dissemination along networks. A very intuitive follow-
up would be to implement culture of networks composed of human neurons. A
proof of principle has recently been provided, where neuronal networks, composed
of cortical neurons derived from human-induced pluripotent stem cells, can be
reliably obtained. This model showed that α-synuclein aggregates that stem from
Parkinson’s disease-related disorders actively propagate along human neuronal
pathways through a prion-like process [124]. This and similar studies to follow will
pave the way for the in vitro reconstruction of human-derived neuronal pathways,
which will lead to a paradigm shift in experimental models (Table 3).
6
Isolation of Axons in 3D
Two-dimensional (2D) cell culture is a simple and cost-effective approach for
studying the nervous system. However, 2D cultures lack the complexity of the
human nervous system and therefore have a limited relevance to the human body.
Animal models offer this complexity, but are not only expensive but also entail
uncertainties during the clinical translation of the ﬁndings. 3D in vitro models offer
a middle ground between the oversimpliﬁed 2D in vitro models and complex, but
at times not-so-relevant animal models. As in 2D models, compartmentalization
in 3D improves mimicking the spatial organization of the nervous system. Two
methods have been established for compartmentalization in 3D: incorporating a
porous membrane as the barrier and culturing neurons in porous gels (Table 4).
The porous membrane is used either in the form of conventional Boyden
chambers [145] or in a multilayered setup in vertically oriented cultures. In the latter,
neurons were plated on a membrane placed over a coverslip coated with a layer of

22
A. Blasiak et al.
Fig. 5 Ordered neuronal networks. (a) Microcontact printing of ﬂuorescent poly-L-lysine allowed
growing neurons on a hexagonal connective pattern. (b) Micropatterned hippocampal neurons
grown on unidirectional triangular daisy chains. Each neuron islet connects to the following
one through the funneling part of the triangle (top panel). The triangular pattern imposes
unidirectional information ﬂow from one islet to the other, as estimated from calcium imaging.
Scale bars = 50 μm. (c) Three hippocampal neurons seeded on a geometric pattern enforce
directional growth on dendrites vs axons. While axons only follow straight lines, dendrites follow
oscillating lines, effectively recreating a minimalistic, looped network. Scale bar = 50 μm. (d)
Two independent neuron populations, one expressing green ﬂuorescent protein (GFP neuron)
and one expressing red ﬂuorescent protein (RFP neuron), were grown in separate chambers
of a bichamber microﬂuidic chip. Middle panel shows neurons from both populations sending
axons through rectangular microchannels connecting the chambers. Scale bar =150 μm. Bottom
panel shows axons (not visible) interacting with dendrites (green, stained for MAP 2) and
creating a bidirectional neuronal network with synaptic contacts (red, stained for presynaptic
marker Bassoon (BSN)). Scale bars = 21 and 3 μm for left and right images, respectively.

Subcellular Compartmentalization for Neurobiology: Focusing on the Axon
23
Matrigel. Neurites grew downward, through the membrane’s pores. At the end of
the experiment, the membrane was peeled off to remove the cell bodies, leaving
the Matrigel with a neuritic fraction for analysis [146] (Fig. 6). This method is
advantageous for collecting substantial amounts of subcellular material, e.g., axonal
mRNA or protein, but it is not compatible with live microscopy and does not allow
for the real-time modulation of the axonal milieux, i.e., treatment with a drug is only
possible by loading the gel prior to cell plating. The membrane provides a partial
ﬂuidic isolation of axons – it slows down the diffusion of molecules embedded in a
gel, but only partially the media from mixing.
When seeded in porous gels, dissociated neurons show limited mobility. As
a consequence, somata concentrate around seeding position, while their neurites
penetrate through the gel’s pores away from the cell seeding position and become
spatially isolated [147]. Porous gels can incorporate topographical features that
direct axonal growth, e.g., toward forming neuronal networks [148, 149] (Fig. 6).
The disadvantage of porous gels as a compartmentalization barrier is the limited
ﬂuidic isolation. For a short distance, the molecules may cross from one subcellular
region to another by diffusing through the gel barrier. At the same time, the gel
density limits the ability for a ﬁne, real-time control of subcellular milieux as
possible in 2D microﬂuidic cultures. Speciﬁc milieu in gel cultures is generated
either by deﬁning local gel composition prior to cell plating [147] or by inducing
ﬂuid ﬂow/controlled diffusion through the gel [38].
An additional barrier was introduced to address weak ﬂuidic isolation in gel
cultures: a PDMS chamber was ﬁlled with porous gel and divided by silicon grease
barrier that provided a ﬂuidic seal while allowing the axons to pass, effectively
generating a 3D bichamber culture system. It was used to study peripheral nerve
repair in organotypic spinal cord culture [150] (Fig. 6). Porous gels are also
◀
Fig. 5 (continued) (e) Microﬂuidic “axon diode” device composed of three independent cell
culture chambers, separated by asymmetric funneling microchannels. Cortical neurons seeded
in the left chamber sent their axons (green, stained for α-tubulin) to a narrow central chamber
that reached the distal chamber seeded with striatal neurons. Dendrites in the left and distal
chambers were stained with MAP 2 (red). A unidirectional cortico-striatal network can be
established and used for disease modeling (e.g., through minute perfusion of detergent in the
central chamber induces instant axotomy of cortical ﬁbers, which leads to transsynaptic cell
death). Scale bar = 10 μm. (f) Microﬂuidic device to establish a unidirectional hippocampo-
hippocampal network based on the “return to sender” strategy. Axons growing in microstructured
areas followed the edges of arched microstructures according to the angle between their elongation
direction and the encountered shape: the axons from the receiving culture encountered the concave
sides of the arches, followed the structure, and returned to their original chamber. The axons
from the emitting culture encountered the convex sides of the arches, overshot the structure,
and crossed into the opposite chamber. Careful design of arches allowed the establishment of
strictly unidirectional networks between two or more neuronal populations. (a) was reproduced
from [98] with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry; (b) was adapted from [106]; (c)
was reproduced from [104]; (d) was reprinted from [110, 76] Copyright 2010, with permission
from Elsevier; (e) was adapted from [117] under license CC BY 4.0 (https://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/); (f) was adapted from [114] Copyright 2018, with permission from Elsevier

24
A. Blasiak et al.
Table 3 Examples of axonal isolation for generating descriptive neuronal networks. MEA:
multielectrode array
Category
Study type
Recording technique
Micropatterned
networks, mono-cultures
Functional connectivity of
multi-nodal networks
Commercial MEA, 60
channels [125]
Calcium imaging
[105–108]
Long-term neuronal plasticity
Custom MEA, 64 channels
[126]
Microﬂuidic device,
single chamber
Proof of concept
Calcium imaging [127]
Network recording
Custom MEA, 60 channels
[128, 129]
Neuronal activity
Commercial MEA, 60
channels [130]
Microﬂuidic device,
multichamber with
axonal separation
Axonal recording
Custom MEA,
multichannel [131]
HD-MEA, 11011 channels
[28, 132]
Axonal recording, conduction
velocity
Custom MEA, 108
channels [133]
Custom MEA, 60 channels
[134]
Interneuronal coupling
Commercial MEA, 60
channels [135]
Microﬂuidic device,
multichamber,
multicomponent
networks
Axonal recording, conduction
velocity
Custom MEA, 60 channels
[136]
Interneuronal coupling
Commercial MEA, 60
channels [137, 138]
Disease modeling
Calcium imaging [123]
Optical stimulation of axonal
outgrowth and conduction velocity
Commercial MEA, 60
channels [139]
Functional connectivity
Commercial MEA, 60
channels [112, 140]
Custom MEA, 60 channels
[115]
Calcium imaging [111,
116, 117, 141]
Multi-well/ multi-nodal
Proof of concept
Custom MEA,
multichannel [142, 143]
Functional connectivity
Commercial MEA, 60
channels [144]

Subcellular Compartmentalization for Neurobiology: Focusing on the Axon
25
Table 4 Examples of isolation of axons in 3D
Barrier type
Device type
Spatial isolation
Fluidic isolation
Porous membrane
Boyden chambers [145]
Yes
Weak
Vertical culture; the membrane
is sandwiched between two
gel layers [146]
Yes
Partial
Porous gel
Single gel layer [38]
Partial
Weak
Organoid cultures in single gel
layer [71, 152, 153]
Partial
Weak
Multilayer gel structures
[147–149]
Yes
Weak
Silicon grease
3D bichamber culture system
[150]
Yes
Yes
Silk scaffold
Modular brain-on-a-chip
system [154, 155]
Yes
Partial
commonly used in organoid cultures (reviewed in [151]). Neurons derived from
human stem cells (embryonic or induced pluripotent) can be cultured in clusters,
termed spheroids. Over time, these spheroids emit neurites in all directions. Axons
can then interact with other cell types, e.g., endothelial cells and muscle cells, to
form neurovascular [152] (Fig. 6d) and neuromuscular [71, 153] units, respectively,
or form neuronal networks with other neuron populations. 3D neuronal cultures
can be arranged in a modular fashion toward creating brain-on-a-chip systems, e.g.,
independently prepared units of 3D cultures of neurons from different brain regions
can be stacked together to recreate brain-like architectures [154, 155] (Fig. 6e).
7
Future Directions
Compartmentalization greatly improved in vitro models of the nervous system
and contributed to our understanding of its functioning in physiological and
pathological conditions. The basic 2D compartmentalized neuron cultures are
commonly used in fundamental neuroscience research. To our knowledge, culturing
neurons in spatially distinct microenvironments does not affect their functioning at
the individual neuron level, but modulates their network behavior. New substrate
coatings and cell culture methods are being developed to tailor the system to suit
a wide variety of neurons: animal and human, PNS and CNS, and primary, cell
line-derived, and stem cell-derived. Thanks to its modular design, the compartmen-
talized device continues to evolve to suit new research questions as enabled by
emerging biotechnologies, e.g., descriptive networks of speciﬁc neuronal subtypes
derived from human iPSCs or CRISPR/Cas gene editing to model neuropsychiatric

26
A. Blasiak et al.
Fig. 6 Subcellular compartmentalization of neurons in 3D. (a) Neurite isolation through layer-
by-layer culture technique. Porous membrane functions as an isolation barrier that stops cell
bodies but allows neurites to pass through and grow into a layer of Matrigel underneath. (b) 3D
rendering of two connected neuron populations (hippocampal CA3 and CA1 regions) after 21 d
immunostained to visualize dendrites (red, stained for MAP 2), axons (green, stained for SMI 312),
and nuclei (blue, Hoechst). Scale bar = 200 μm. (c) Organotypic culture of spinal cord section
(green, genetic expression of green variant of yellow ﬂuorescent protein)). The cell bodies and
vertical axons remain in the somatic chamber, while the horizontal axons cross through the grease
barrier (red) into an axonal chamber where they interact with the nerve graft. The inset shows
the device schematic. (d) Motoneuron (MN) spheroids (green, stained for tubulin) co-cultured
with endothelial cells (EC, purple, stained for CD31). The center of the MN spheroid is marked
with a red circle in each panel. (e) 3D-assembled modular tissue structures. The assembly of six
concentric donuts of silk scaffold, shown in original color (1) and dyed with food coloring (2). For
modular neuron constructs, each donut was seeded with primary rat cortical neurons and cultured
independently prior to assembly. Neurons in different donuts were stained live with different dyes:
DiI (red) or DiO (green). Panels 3 and 4 show two three-layered modular constructs, and panel 5
shows neurons at the interface. Scale bars = 1 mm. (a) was adapted from [146] Copyright 1992
Society for Neuroscience; (b) and (d) were adapted from [148] and [152], respectively, under
license CC BY 4.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/); (c) was adapted from [150]
Copyright 2014, with permission from Elsevier; (e) was reproduced from [155]

Subcellular Compartmentalization for Neurobiology: Focusing on the Axon
27
disorders. Compartmentalized devices are and will be particularly relevant to any in
vitro application that requires localized modulation and investigation of subcellular
neuronal regions.
Compartmentalized in vitro model systems have improved greatly, thanks to
engineering advances, and are likely to continue to do so in the future. However,
accessibility of the technology and the associated costs remain to be the major
limitations on their use in neurobiology. New engineering approaches are being
developed to overcome the problems related to the use of microﬂuidics (reviewed in
[156]). For example, preassembled plastic devices may replace PDMS and further
popularize the use of compartmentalized devices through signiﬁcant cost reduction
[157, 158]. The reﬁnement of the 3D printing technology will support developing
cultures with tailored geometries: ﬁrst attempts have already been made in two
distinct directions: (i) 3D printing of compartmentalized devices [96] and (ii) 3D
printing of neuronal and nonneuronal cells directly in custom arrangements [159].
Similarly, alternative methods have been proposed for compartmentalization, e.g.,
ﬂuorocarbon oil barriers with superior ﬂuidic seal [160]. These and other emerging
technologies will support the overall goal – building physiologically relevant in vitro
models of neuronal interactions – to study those occurring in the human body.
Compartmentalized in vitro model systems have evolved from spatial isolation
of single neurons into modular, 3D brain-on-a-chip devices. The next step toward
physiological relevance will be to build nervous system-on-a-chip, and eventually
human-on-a-chip, devices, where multiple organ models will be interconnected
(reviewed [161]). Such a system may be highly modular – depending on the
application and the level of complexity required, such that different “organs” are
incorporated into one setup [162]. As the nervous system innervates all human
tissues, it would be an indispensable element of a comprehensive human-on-a-chip
device. This would require the ﬁne control of somata and axon positions and a
tight regulation of their respective microenvironments. The exact form of neuronal
compartmentalization in putative nervous system-on-a-chip and human-on-a-chip
concepts is yet to be realized.
References
1. Cajal, S.R.: Notas anatómicas I. Sobre la aparición de las expansiones celulares en la médula
embrionaria. Gac. Sanit. Barc. 12, 413–419 (1890)
2. Tamariz, E., Varela-Echavarria, A.: The discovery of the growth cone and its inﬂuence
on the study of axon guidance. Front. Neuroanat. 9, 51 (2015). https://doi.org/10.3389/
fnana.2015.00051
3. Campenot, R.B.: Local control of neurite development by nerve growth factor. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 74(10), 4516–4519 (1977)
4. Taylor, A.M., Blurton-Jones, M., Rhee, S.W., Cribbs, D.H., Cotman, C.W., Jeon, N.L.:
A microﬂuidic culture platform for CNS axonal injury, regeneration and transport. Nat.
Methods. 2(8), 599–605 (2005). https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth777

28
A. Blasiak et al.
5. Taylor, A.M., Rhee, S.W., Tu, C.H., Cribbs, D.H., Cotman, C.W., Jeon, N.L.: Microﬂuidic
multicompartment device for neuroscience research. Langmuir. 19(5), 1551–1556 (2003).
https://doi.org/10.1021/la026417v
6. Park, J.W., Vahidi, B., Taylor, A.M., Rhee, S.W., Jeon, N.L.: Microﬂuidic culture platform
for neuroscience research. Nat. Protoc. 1(4), 2128–2136 (2006). https://doi.org/10.1038/
nprot.2006.316
7. Scott, M.A., Wissner-Gross, Z.D., Yanik, M.F.: Ultra-rapid laser protein micropatterning:
screening for directed polarization of single neurons. Lab Chip. 12(12), 2265–2276 (2012).
https://doi.org/10.1039/c2lc21105j
8. von Philipsborn, A.C., Lang, S., Bernard, A., Loeschinger, J., David, C., Lehnert, D.,
Bastmeyer, M., Bonhoeffer, F.: Microcontact printing of axon guidance molecules for
generation of graded patterns. Nat. Protoc. 1(3), 1322–1328 (2006). https://doi.org/10.1038/
nprot.2006.251
9. Campenot, R.B.: Local control of neurite sprouting in cultured sympathetic neurons by nerve
growth factor. Brain Res. 465(1–2), 293–301 (1987)
10. Campenot, R.B.: Regeneration of neurites on long-term cultures of sympathetic neurons
deprived of nerve growth factor. Science. 214(4520), 579–581 (1981)
11. Campenot, R.B.: NGF and the local control of nerve terminal growth. J. Neurobiol. 25(6),
599–611 (1994). https://doi.org/10.1002/neu.480250603
12. Toma, J.G., Rogers, D., Senger, D.L., Campenot, R.B., Miller, F.D.: Spatial regulation of
neuronal gene expression in response to nerve growth factor. Dev. Biol. 184(1), 1–9 (1997).
https://doi.org/10.1006/dbio.1997.8515
13. Holt, C.E., Schuman, E.M.: The central dogma decentralized: new perspectives on RNA
function and local translation in neurons. Neuron. 80(3), 648–657 (2013). https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.neuron.2013.10.036
14. Vance, J.E., Pan, D., Campenot, R.B., Bussiere, M., Vance, D.E.: Evidence that the major
membrane lipids, except cholesterol, are made in axons of cultured rat sympathetic neurons.
J. Neurochem. 62(1), 329–337 (1994)
15. Posse de Chaves, E., Vance, D.E., Campenot, R.B., Vance, J.E.: Axonal synthesis of
phosphatidylcholine is required for normal axonal growth in rat sympathetic neurons. J. Cell
Biol. 128(5), 913–918 (1995)
16. Eng, H., Lund, K., Campenot, R.B.: Synthesis of beta-tubulin, actin, and other proteins in
axons of sympathetic neurons in compartmented cultures. J. Neurosci. 19(1), 1–9 (1999)
17. Sia, S.K., Whitesides, G.M.: Microﬂuidic devices fabricated in poly(dimethylsiloxane)
for biological studies. Electrophoresis. 24(21), 3563–3576 (2003). https://doi.org/10.1002/
elps.200305584
18. McDonald, J.C., Whitesides, G.M.: Poly(dimethylsiloxane) as a material for fabricating
microﬂuidic devices. Acc. Chem. Res. 35(7), 491–499 (2002)
19. Kilinc, D., Peyrin, J.M., Soubeyre, V., Magniﬁco, S., Saias, L., Viovy, J.L., Brugg, B.:
Wallerian-like degeneration of central neurons after synchronized and geometrically reg-
istered mass axotomy in a three-compartmental microﬂuidic chip. Neurotox. Res. 19(1),
149–161 (2011). https://doi.org/10.1007/s12640-010-9152-8
20. Ravula, S.K., Wang, M.S., McClain, M.A., Asress, S.A., Frazier, B., Glass, J.D.:
Spatiotemporal localization of injury potentials in DRG neurons during vincristine-
induced axonal degeneration. Neurosci. Lett. 415(1), 34–39 (2007). https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.neulet.2007.01.009
21. Yang, I.H., Siddique, R., Hosmane, S., Thakor, N., Hoke, A.: Compartmentalized microﬂuidic
culture platform to study mechanism of paclitaxel-induced axonal degeneration. Exp. Neurol.
218(1), 124–128 (2009). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.expneurol.2009.04.017
22. Pease-Raissi, S.E., Pazyra-Murphy, M.F., Li, Y., Wachter, F., Fukuda, Y., Fenstermacher, S.J.,
Barclay, L.A., Bird, G.H., Walensky, L.D., Segal, R.A.: Paclitaxel reduces axonal Bclw to
initiate IP3R1-dependent axon degeneration. Neuron. 96(2), 373–386. e376 (2017). https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2017.09.034

Subcellular Compartmentalization for Neurobiology: Focusing on the Axon
29
23. Hosie, K.A., King, A.E., Blizzard, C.A., Vickers, J.C., Dickson, T.C.: Chronic excitotoxin-
induced axon degeneration in a compartmented neuronal culture model. ASN Neuro. 4(1)
(2012). https://doi.org/10.1042/AN20110031
24. Tegenge, M.A., Rajbhandari, L., Shrestha, S., Mithal, A., Hosmane, S., Venkatesan, A.:
Curcumin protects axons from degeneration in the setting of local neuroinﬂammation. Exp.
Neurol. 253, 102–110 (2014). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.expneurol.2013.12.016
25. Ferreira, I.L., Bajouco, L.M., Mota, S.I., Auberson, Y.P., Oliveira, C.R., Rego, A.C.: Amyloid
beta peptide 1-42 disturbs intracellular calcium homeostasis through activation of GluN2B-
containing N-methyl-d-aspartate receptors in cortical cultures. Cell Calcium. 51(2), 95–106
(2012). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ceca.2011.11.008
26. Blasiak, A., Kilinc, D., Lee, G.U.: Neuronal cell bodies remotely regulate axonal growth
response to localized Netrin-1 treatment via second messenger and DCC dynamics. Front.
Cell. Neurosci. 10, 298 (2016). https://doi.org/10.3389/fncel.2016.00298
27. Zahavi, E.E., Ionescu, A., Gluska, S., Gradus, T., Ben-Yaakov, K., Perlson, E.: A compart-
mentalized microﬂuidic neuromuscular co-culture system reveals spatial aspects of GDNF
functions. J. Cell Sci. 128(6), 1241–1252 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.167544
28. Lewandowska, M.K., Bakkum, D.J., Rompani, S.B., Hierlemann, A.: Recording large
extracellular spikes in microchannels along many axonal sites from individual neurons. PLoS
One. 10(3), e0118514 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0118514
29. Campenot, R.B.: NGF uptake and retrograde signaling mechanisms in sympathetic neurons
in compartmented cultures. Results Probl. Cell Differ. 48, 141–158 (2009). https://doi.org/
10.1007/400_2009_7
30. Kim, H.J., Park, J.W., Byun, J.H., Vahidi, B., Rhee, S.W., Jeon, N.L.: Integrated microﬂuidics
platforms for investigating injury and regeneration of CNS axons. Ann. Biomed. Eng. 40(6),
1268–1276 (2012). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10439-012-0515-6
31. Dertinger, S.K., Jiang, X., Li, Z., Murthy, V.N., Whitesides, G.M.: Gradients of substrate-
bound laminin orient axonal speciﬁcation of neurons. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 99(20),
12542–12547 (2002). https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.192457199
32. Irimia, D., Geba, D.A., Toner, M.: Universal microﬂuidic gradient generator. Anal. Chem.
78(10), 3472–3477 (2006). https://doi.org/10.1021/ac0518710
33. Taylor, A.M., Menon, S., Gupton, S.L.: Passive microﬂuidic chamber for long-term imaging
of axon guidance in response to soluble gradients. Lab Chip. (2015). https://doi.org/10.1039/
c5lc00503e
34. Dupin, I., Lokmane, L., Dahan, M., Garel, S., Studer, V.: Subrepellent doses of Slit1 promote
Netrin-1 chemotactic responses in subsets of axons. Neural Dev. 10(1), 5 (2015). https://
doi.org/10.1186/s13064-015-0036-8
35. Kilinc, D., Blasiak, A., O’Mahony, J.J., Lee, G.U.: Low piconewton towing of CNS axons
against diffusing and surface-bound repellents requires the inhibition of motor protein-
associated pathways. Sci. Rep. 4, 7128 (2014). https://doi.org/10.1038/srep07128
36. Bhattacharjee, N., Li, N., Keenan, T.M., Folch, A.: A neuron-benign microﬂuidic gradient
generator for studying the response of mammalian neurons towards axon guidance factors.
Integr. Biol. (Camb.). 2(11–12), 669–679 (2010). https://doi.org/10.1039/c0ib00038h
37. Romano, N.H., Lampe, K.J., Xu, H., Ferreira, M.M., Heilshorn, S.C.: Microﬂuidic gradients
reveal enhanced neurite outgrowth but impaired guidance within 3D matrices with high
integrin ligand densities. Small. 11(6), 722–730 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1002/smll.2014
01574
38. Kothapalli, C.R., van Veen, E., de Valence, S., Chung, S., Zervantonakis, I.K., Gertler, F.B.,
Kamm, R.D.: A high-throughput microﬂuidic assay to study neurite response to growth factor
gradients. Lab Chip. 11(3), 497–507 (2011). https://doi.org/10.1039/c0lc00240b
39. Xu, Z., Fang, P., Xu, B., Lu, Y., Xiong, J., Gao, F., Wang, X., Fan, J., Shi, P.: High-throughput
three-dimensional chemotactic assays reveal steepness-dependent complexity in neuronal
sensation to molecular gradients. Nat. Commun. 9(1), 4745 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41467-018-07186-x

30
A. Blasiak et al.
40. Kilinc, D., Blasiak, A., Lee, G.U.: Microtechnologies for studying the role of mechanics
in axon growth and guidance. Front. Cell. Neurosci. 9 (2015). https://doi.org/10.3389/
fncel.2015.00282
41. Kumamoto, J., Kitahata, H., Goto, M., Nagayama, M., Denda, M.: Effects of medium ﬂow on
axon growth with or without nerve growth factor. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 465(1),
26–29 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.07.104
42. Kilinc, D., Lee, G.U.: Advances in magnetic tweezers for single molecule and cell biophysics.
Integr. Biol. (Camb.). 6(1), 27–34 (2014). https://doi.org/10.1039/c3ib40185e
43. Kunze, A., Tseng, P., Godzich, C., Murray, C., Caputo, A., Schweizer, F.E., Di Carlo, D.:
Engineering cortical neuron polarity with nanomagnets on a chip. ACS Nano. 9(4), 3664–
3676 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1021/nn505330w
44. Riggio, C., Calatayud, M.P., Giannaccini, M., Sanz, B., Torres, T.E., Fernandez-Pacheco, R.,
Ripoli, A., Ibarra, M.R., Dente, L., Cuschieri, A., Goya, G.F., Raffa, V.: The orientation
of the neuronal growth process can be directed via magnetic nanoparticles under an
applied magnetic ﬁeld. Nanomedicine. 10(7), 1549–1558 (2014). https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.nano.2013.12.008
45. Kilinc, D., Blasiak, A., Baghban, M.A., Carville, N.C., Al-Adli, A., Al-Shammari, R.M.,
Rice, J.H., Lee, G.U., Gallo, K., Rodriguez, B.J.: Charge and topography patterned lithium
niobate provides physical cues to ﬂuidically isolated cortical axons. Appl. Phys. Lett. 110(5),
053702 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4975304
46. Hur, E.M., Yang, I.H., Kim, D.H., Byun, J., Saijilafu, X.W.L., Nicovich, P.R., Cheong, R.,
Levchenko, A., Thakor, N., Zhou, F.Q.: Engineering neuronal growth cones to promote axon
regeneration over inhibitory molecules. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 108(12), 5057–5062
(2011). https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1011258108
47. Shi, P., Nedelec, S., Wichterle, H., Kam, L.C.: Combined microﬂuidics/protein patterning
platform for pharmacological interrogation of axon pathﬁnding. Lab Chip. 10(8), 1005–1010
(2010). https://doi.org/10.1039/b922143c
48. Kim, H.J., Park, J.W., Byun, J.H., Poon, W.W., Cotman, C.W., Fowlkes, C.C., Jeon,
N.L.: Quantitative analysis of axonal transport by using compartmentalized and surface
micropatterned culture of neurons. ACS Chem. Neurosci. 3(6), 433–438 (2012)
49. Habibey, R., Golabchi, A., Latiﬁ, S., Difato, F., Blau, A.: A microchannel device tailored to
laser axotomy and long-term microelectrode array electrophysiology of functional regenera-
tion. Lab Chip. 15(24), 4578–4590 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1039/c5lc01027f
50. Hosmane, S., Fournier, A., Wright, R., Rajbhandari, L., Siddique, R., Yang, I.H., Ramesh,
K.T., Venkatesan, A., Thakor, N.: Valve-based microﬂuidic compression platform: single
axon injury and regrowth. Lab Chip. 11(22), 3888–3895 (2011). https://doi.org/10.1039/
c1lc20549h
51. Dolle, J.P., Morrison 3rd, B., Schloss, R.S., Yarmush, M.L.: An organotypic uniaxial
strain model using microﬂuidics. Lab Chip. 13(3), 432–442 (2013). https://doi.org/10.1039/
c2lc41063j
52. Lu, X., Kim-Han, J.S., O’Malley, K.L., Sakiyama-Elbert, S.E.: A microdevice platform for
visualizing mitochondrial transport in aligned dopaminergic axons. J. Neurosci. Methods.
209(1), 35–39 (2012). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneumeth.2012.05.021
53. Olenick, M.A., Dominguez, R., Holzbaur, E.L.F.: Dynein activator Hook1 is required for
trafﬁcking of BDNF-signaling endosomes in neurons. J. Cell Biol. (2018). https://doi.org/
10.1083/jcb.201805016
54. Poon, W.W., Blurton-Jones, M., Tu, C.H., Feinberg, L.M., Chabrier, M.A., Harris, J.W., Jeon,
N.L., Cotman, C.W.: Beta-amyloid impairs axonal BDNF retrograde trafﬁcking. Neurobiol.
Aging. 32(5), 821–833 (2011). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2009.05.012
55. Zhang, K., Osakada, Y., Vrljic, M., Chen, L., Mudrakola, H.V., Cui, B.: Single-molecule
imaging of NGF axonal transport in microﬂuidic devices. Lab Chip. 10(19), 2566–2573
(2010). https://doi.org/10.1039/c003385e
56. Li, W., Xu, Z., Xu, B., Chan, C.Y., Lin, X., Wang, Y., Chen, G., Wang, Z., Yuan, Q., Zhu, G.,
Sun, H., Wu, W., Shi, P.: Investigation of the subcellular neurotoxicity of amyloid-beta using

Subcellular Compartmentalization for Neurobiology: Focusing on the Axon
31
a device integrating microﬂuidic perfusion and chemotactic guidance. Adv. Healthc. Mater.
6(7), 1600895 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1002/adhm.201600895
57. Berth, S., Caicedo, H.H., Sarma, T., Morﬁni, G., Brady, S.T.: Internalization and axonal
transport of the HIV glycoprotein gp120. ASN Neuro. 7(1) (2015). https://doi.org/10.1177/
1759091414568186
58. Magalhaes, A.C., Baron, G.S., Lee, K.S., Steele-Mortimer, O., Dorward, D., Prado, M.A.,
Caughey, B.: Uptake and neuritic transport of scrapie prion protein coincident with infec-
tion of neuronal cells. J. Neurosci. 25(21), 5207–5216 (2005). https://doi.org/10.1523/
JNEUROSCI.0653-05.2005
59. Freundt, E.C., Maynard, N., Clancy, E.K., Roy, S., Bousset, L., Sourigues, Y., Covert, M.,
Melki, R., Kirkegaard, K., Brahic, M.: Neuron-to-neuron transmission of alpha-synuclein
ﬁbrils through axonal transport. Ann. Neurol. 72(4), 517–524 (2012). https://doi.org/10.1002/
ana.23747
60. Lesniak, A., Kilinc, D., Blasiak, A., Galea, G., Simpson, J.C., Lee, G.U.: Rapid growth cone
uptake and dynein-mediated axonal retrograde transport of negatively charged nanoparticles
in neurons is dependent on size and cell type. Small. 15(0), 1803758 (2019). https://doi.org/
10.1002/smll.201803758
61. Zeng, X., Chen, S., Weitemier, A., Han, S., Blasiak, A., Prasad, A., Zheng, K., Yi, Z., Luo, B.,
Yang, I.H., Thakor, N., Chai, C., Lim, K.L., McHugh, T.J., All, A.H., Liu, X.: Visualization
of intra-neuronal motor protein transport through upconversion microscopy. Angew. Chem.
Int. Ed. Eng. (2019). https://doi.org/10.1002/anie.201904208
62. Dujardin, S., Lecolle, K., Caillierez, R., Begard, S., Zommer, N., Lachaud, C., Carrier,
S., Dufour, N., Auregan, G., Winderickx, J., Hantraye, P., Deglon, N., Colin, M., Buee,
L.: Neuron-to-neuron wild-type Tau protein transfer through a trans-synaptic mechanism:
relevance to sporadic tauopathies. Acta Neuropathol. Commun. 2, 14 (2014). https://doi.org/
10.1186/2051-5960-2-14
63. Liot, G., Zala, D., Pla, P., Mottet, G., Piel, M., Saudou, F.: Mutant Huntingtin alters retrograde
transport of TrkB receptors in striatal dendrites. J. Neurosci. 33(15), 6298–6309 (2013).
https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2033-12.2013
64. Du, J., Zhen, G., Chen, H., Zhang, S., Qing, L., Yang, X., Lee, G., Mao, H.Q., Jia, X.: Optimal
electrical stimulation boosts stem cell therapy in nerve regeneration. Biomaterials. 181, 347–
359 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biomaterials.2018.07.015
65. Yang, I.H., Gary, D., Malone, M., Dria, S., Houdayer, T., Belegu, V., McDonald, J.W.,
Thakor, N.: Axon myelination and electrical stimulation in a microﬂuidic, compartmentalized
cell culture platform. NeuroMolecular Med. 14(2), 112–118 (2012). https://doi.org/10.1007/
s12017-012-8170-5
66. Lee, H.U., Blasiak, A., Agrawal, D.R., Loong, D.T.B., Thakor, N.V., All, A.H., Ho,
J.S., Yang, I.H.: Subcellular electrical stimulation of neurons enhances the myelination of
axons by oligodendrocytes. PLoS One. 12(7), e0179642 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1371/
journal.pone.0179642
67. Jokinen, V., Sakha, P., Suvanto, P., Rivera, C., Franssila, S., Lauri, S.E., Huttunen, H.J.: A
microﬂuidic chip for axonal isolation and electrophysiological measurements. J. Neurosci.
Methods. 212(2), 276–282 (2013). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneumeth.2012.10.013
68. Renault, R., Sukenik, N., Descroix, S., Malaquin, L., Viovy, J.L., Peyrin, J.M., Bottani, S.,
Monceau, P., Moses, E., Vignes, M.: Combining microﬂuidics, optogenetics and calcium
imaging to study neuronal communication in vitro. PLoS One. 10(4), e0120680 (2015). https:/
/doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0120680
69. Lee, H.U., Nag, S., Blasiak, A., Jin, Y., Thakor, N., Yang, I.H.: Subcellular optogenetic
stimulation for activity-dependent myelination of axons in a novel microﬂuidic compartmen-
talized platform. ACS Chem. Neurosci. 7(10), 1317–1324 (2016). https://doi.org/10.1021/
acschemneuro.6b00157
70. Blasiak, A., Nag, S., Yang, I.H.: Subcellular optogenetic stimulation platform for studying
activity-dependent axon myelination in vitro. Methods Mol. Biol. (Clifton, NJ). 1791, 207–
224 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4939-7862-5_16

32
A. Blasiak et al.
71. Uzel, S.G., Platt, R.J., Subramanian, V., Pearl, T.M., Rowlands, C.J., Chan, V., Boyer,
L.A., So, P.T., Kamm, R.D.: Microﬂuidic device for the formation of optically excitable,
three-dimensional, compartmentalized motor units. Sci. Adv. 2(8), e1501429 (2016). https://
doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.1501429
72. Park, J., Kim, S., Park, S.I., Choe, Y., Li, J., Han, A.: A microchip for quantitative analysis
of CNS axon growth under localized biomolecular treatments. J. Neurosci. Methods. 221,
166–174 (2014). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneumeth.2013.09.018
73. Blasiak, A., Lee, G.U., Kilinc, D.: Neuron subpopulations with different elongation rates
and DCC dynamics exhibit distinct responses to isolated Netrin-1 treatment. ACS Chem.
Neurosci. 6(9), 1578–1590 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1021/acschemneuro.5b00142
74. Hogue, I.B., Jean, J., Esteves, A.D., Tanneti, N.S., Scherer, J., Enquist, L.W.: Functional
carboxy-terminal ﬂuorescent protein fusion to pseudorabies virus small capsid protein VP26.
J. Virol. 92(1) (2018). https://doi.org/10.1128/JVI.01193-17
75. Shi, P., Scott, M.A., Ghosh, B., Wan, D., Wissner-Gross, Z., Mazitschek, R., Haggarty, S.J.,
Yanik, M.F.: Synapse microarray identiﬁcation of small molecules that enhance synaptogen-
esis. Nat. Commun. 2, 510 (2011). https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms1518
76. Zhang, Y., Bekku, Y., Dzhashiashvili, Y., Armenti, S., Meng, X., Sasaki, Y., Milbrandt,
J., Salzer, J.L.: Assembly and maintenance of nodes of ranvier rely on distinct sources of
proteins and targeting mechanisms. Neuron. 73(1), 92–107 (2012). https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.neuron.2011.10.016
77. Malone, M., Gary, D., Yang, I.H., Miglioretti, A., Houdayer, T., Thakor, N., McDonald, J.:
Neuronal activity promotes myelination via a cAMP pathway. Glia. 61(6), 843–854 (2013).
https://doi.org/10.1002/glia.22476
78. Lei, Y., Li, J., Wang, N., Yang, X., Hamada, Y., Li, Q., Zheng, W., Jiang, X.: An on-chip model
for investigating the interaction between neurons and cancer cells. Integr. Biol. (Camb.). 8(3),
359–367 (2016). https://doi.org/10.1039/c5ib00309a
79. Sinha, S., Fu, Y.Y., Grimont, A., Ketcham, M., Lafaro, K., Saglimbeni, J.A., Askan, G.,
Bailey, J.M., Melchor, J.P., Zhong, Y., Joo, M.G., Grbovic-Huezo, O., Yang, I.H., Basturk,
O., Baker, L., Park, Y., Kurtz, R.C., Tuveson, D., Leach, S.D., Pasricha, P.J.: PanIN
neuroendocrine cells promote tumorigenesis via neuronal cross-talk. Cancer Res. 77(8),
1868–1879 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-16-0899-T
80. Tsantoulas, C., Farmer, C., Machado, P., Baba, K., McMahon, S.B., Raouf, R.: Probing
functional properties of nociceptive axons using a microﬂuidic culture system. PLoS One.
8(11), e80722 (2013). https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0080722
81. Ng, B.K., Chen, L., Mandemakers, W., Cosgaya, J.M., Chan, J.R.: Anterograde trans-
port and secretion of brain-derived neurotrophic factor along sensory axons promote
Schwann cell myelination. J. Neurosci. 27(28), 7597–7603 (2007). https://doi.org/10.1523/
JNEUROSCI.0563-07.2007
82. Hosmane, S., Tegenge, M.A., Rajbhandari, L., Uapinyoying, P., Ganesh Kumar, N.,
Thakor, N., Venkatesan, A.: Toll/interleukin-1 receptor domain-containing adapter inducing
interferon-beta mediates microglial phagocytosis of degenerating axons. J. Neurosci. 32(22),
7745–7757 (2012). https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0203-12.2012
83. Park, J., Koito, H., Li, J., Han, A.: Microﬂuidic compartmentalized co-culture platform for
CNS axon myelination research. Biomed. Microdevices. 11(6), 1145–1153 (2009). https://
doi.org/10.1007/s10544-009-9331-7
84. Gao, Y., Broussard, J., Haque, A., Revzin, A., Lin, T.: Functional imaging of neuron–
astrocyte interactions in a compartmentalized microﬂuidic device. Microsyst. Nanoeng. 2,
15045 (2016). https://doi.org/10.1038/micronano.2015.45
85. Prasad, A., Teh, D.B.L., Blasiak, A., Chai, C., Wu, Y., Gharibani, P.M., Yang, I.H., Phan,
T.T., Lim, K.L., Yang, H., Liu, X., All, A.H.: Static magnetic ﬁeld stimulation enhances
oligodendrocyte differentiation and secretion of neurotrophic factors. Sci. Rep. 7(1), 6743
(2017). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-017-06331-8
86. Takeuchi, A., Nakafutami, S., Tani, H., Mori, M., Takayama, Y., Moriguchi, H., Kotani, K.,
Miwa, K., Lee, J.K., Noshiro, M., Jimbo, Y.: Device for co-culture of sympathetic neurons

Subcellular Compartmentalization for Neurobiology: Focusing on the Axon
33
and cardiomyocytes using microfabrication. Lab Chip. 11(13), 2268–2275 (2011). https://
doi.org/10.1039/c0lc00327a
87. Park, H.S., Liu, S., McDonald, J., Thakor, N., Yang, I.H.: Neuromuscular junction in a
microﬂuidic device. Conf. Proc. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc. 2013, 2833–2835 (2013). https:/
/doi.org/10.1109/EMBC.2013.6610130
88. Ionescu, A., Zahavi, E.E., Gradus, T., Ben-Yaakov, K., Perlson, E.: Compartmental microﬂu-
idic system for studying muscle-neuron communication and neuromuscular junction mainte-
nance. Eur. J. Cell Biol. 95(2), 69–88 (2016). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejcb.2015.11.004
89. Southam, K.A., King, A.E., Blizzard, C.A., McCormack, G.H., Dickson, T.C.: Microﬂuidic
primary culture model of the lower motor neuron-neuromuscular junction circuit. J. Neurosci.
Methods. 218(2), 164–169 (2013). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneumeth.2013.06.002
90. Neto, E., Alves, C.J., Sousa, D.M., Alencastre, I.S., Lourenco, A.H., Leitao, L., Ryu, H.R.,
Jeon, N.L., Fernandes, R., Aguiar, P., Almeida, R.D., Lamghari, M.: Sensory neurons and
osteoblasts: close partners in a microﬂuidic platform. Integr. Biol. (Camb.). 6(6), 586–595
(2014). https://doi.org/10.1039/c4ib00035h
91. Silva, D.I., Santos, B.P.D., Leng, J., Oliveira, H., Amedee, J.: Dorsal root ganglion neurons
regulate the transcriptional and translational programs of osteoblast differentiation in a
microﬂuidic platform. Cell Death Dis. 8(12), 3209 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41419-
017-0034-3
92. Pagella, P., Neto, E., Jimenez-Rojo, L., Lamghari, M., Mitsiadis, T.A.: Microﬂuidics co-
culture systems for studying tooth innervation. Front. Physiol. 5, 326 (2014). https://doi.org/
10.3389/fphys.2014.00326
93. Taylor, M.P., Kobiler, O., Enquist, L.W.: Alphaherpesvirus axon-to-cell spread involves
limited virion transmission. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 109(42), 17046–17051 (2012).
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1212926109
94. Ch’ng, T.H., Enquist, L.W.: Neuron-to-cell spread of pseudorabies virus in a compartmented
neuronal culture system. J. Virol. 79(17), 10875–10889 (2005). https://doi.org/10.1128/
JVI.79.17.10875-10889.2005
95. Liu, W.W., Goodhouse, J., Jeon, N.L., Enquist, L.W.: A microﬂuidic chamber for analysis of
neuron-to-cell spread and axonal transport of an alpha-herpes virus. PLoS One. 3(6), e2382
(2008). https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0002382
96. Johnson, B.N., Lancaster, K.Z., Hogue, I.B., Meng, F., Kong, Y.L., Enquist, L.W., McAlpine,
M.C.: 3D printed nervous system on a chip. Lab Chip. 16(8), 1393–1400 (2016). https://
doi.org/10.1039/c5lc01270h
97. Corey, J.M., Wheeler, B.C., Brewer, G.J.: Compliance of hippocampal neurons to pat-
terned substrate networks. J. Neurosci. Res. 30(2), 300–307 (1991). https://doi.org/10.1002/
jnr.490300204
98. Hardelauf, H., Sisnaiske, J., Taghipour-Anvari, A.A., Jacob, P., Drabiniok, E., Marggraf, U.,
Frimat, J.P., Hengstler, J.G., Neyer, A., van Thriel, C., West, J.: High ﬁdelity neuronal
networks formed by plasma masking with a bilayer membrane: analysis of neurodegenerative
and neuroprotective processes. Lab Chip. 11(16), 2763–2771 (2011). https://doi.org/10.1039/
c1lc20257j
99. Wheeler, B.C., Corey, J.M., Brewer, G.J., Branch, D.W.: Microcontact printing for precise
control of nerve cell growth in culture. J. Biomech. Eng. 121(1), 73–78 (1999)
100. Wyart, C., Ybert, C., Bourdieu, L., Herr, C., Prinz, C., Chatenay, D.: Constrained synaptic
connectivity in functional mammalian neuronal networks grown on patterned surfaces. J.
Neurosci. Methods. 117(2), 123–131 (2002)
101. Samhaber, R., Schottdorf, M., El Hady, A., Broking, K., Daus, A., Thielemann, C.,
Stuhmer, W., Wolf, F.: Growing neuronal islands on multi-electrode arrays using an accu-
rate positioning-muCP device. J. Neurosci. Methods. 257, 194–203 (2016). https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jneumeth.2015.09.022
102. Hardelauf, H., Waide, S., Sisnaiske, J., Jacob, P., Hausherr, V., Schobel, N., Janasek, D., van
Thriel, C., West, J.: Micropatterning neuronal networks. Analyst. 139(13), 3256–3264 (2014).
https://doi.org/10.1039/c4an00608a

34
A. Blasiak et al.
103. Yamada, A., Vignes, M., Bureau, C., Mamane, A., Venzac, B., Descroix, S., Viovy, J.L.,
Villard, C., Peyrin, J.M., Malaquin, L.: In-mold patterning and actionable axo-somatic
compartmentalization for on-chip neuron culture. Lab Chip. 16(11), 2059–2068 (2016).
https://doi.org/10.1039/c6lc00414h
104. Roth, S., Bugnicourt, G., Bisbal, M., Gory-Faure, S., Brocard, J., Villard, C.: Neuronal
architectures with axo-dendritic polarity above silicon nanowires. Small. 8(5), 671–675
(2012). https://doi.org/10.1002/smll.201102325
105. Feinerman, O., Rotem, A., Moses, E.: Reliable neuronal logic devices from patterned
hippocampal cultures. Nat. Phys. 4, 967 (2008). https://doi.org/10.1038/nphys1099
106. Albers, J., Toma, K., Offenhausser, A.: Engineering connectivity by multiscale micropat-
terning of individual populations of neurons. Biotechnol. J. 10(2), 332–338 (2015). https://
doi.org/10.1002/biot.201400609
107. Feinerman, O., Segal, M., Moses, E.: Signal propagation along unidimensional neuronal
networks. J. Neurophysiol. 94(5), 3406–3416 (2005). https://doi.org/10.1152/jn.00264.2005
108. Feinerman, O., Segal, M., Moses, E.: Identiﬁcation and dynamics of spontaneous burst
initiation zones in unidimensional neuronal cultures. J. Neurophysiol. 97(4), 2937–2948
(2007). https://doi.org/10.1152/jn.00958.2006
109. Tomba, C., Braini, C., Wu, B., Gov, N.S., Villard, C.: Tuning the adhesive geometry of
neurons: length and polarity control. Soft Matter. 10(14), 2381–2387 (2014). https://doi.org/
10.1039/c3sm52342j
110. Taylor, A.M., Dieterich, D.C., Ito, H.T., Kim, S.A., Schuman, E.M.: Microﬂuidic local
perfusion chambers for the visualization and manipulation of synapses. Neuron. 66(1), 57–68
(2010). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2010.03.022
111. Peyrin, J.M., Deleglise, B., Saias, L., Vignes, M., Gougis, P., Magniﬁco, S., Betuing, S., Pietri,
M., Caboche, J., Vanhoutte, P., Viovy, J.L., Brugg, B.: Axon diodes for the reconstruction of
oriented neuronal networks in microﬂuidic chambers. Lab Chip. 11(21), 3663–3673 (2011).
https://doi.org/10.1039/c1lc20014c
112. Gladkov, A., Pigareva, Y., Kutyina, D., Kolpakov, V., Bukatin, A., Mukhina, I., Kazantsev,
V., Pimashkin, A.: Design of cultured neuron networks in vitro with predeﬁned connectivity
using asymmetric microﬂuidic channels. Sci. Rep. 7(1), 15625 (2017). https://doi.org/
10.1038/s41598-017-15506-2
113. Renault, R., Durand, J.B., Viovy, J.L., Villard, C.: Asymmetric axonal edge guidance: a new
paradigm for building oriented neuronal networks. Lab Chip. 16(12), 2188–2191 (2016).
https://doi.org/10.1039/c6lc00479b
114. Courte, J., Renault, R., Jan, A., Viovy, J.L., Peyrin, J.M., Villard, C.: Reconstruction of
directed neuronal networks in a microﬂuidic device with asymmetric microchannels. Methods
Cell Biol. 148, 71–95 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1016/bs.mcb.2018.07.002
115. Moutaux, E., Charlot, B., Genoux, A., Saudou, F., Cazorla, M.: An integrated microﬂu-
idic/microelectrode array for the study of activity-dependent intracellular dynamics in
neuronal networks. Lab Chip. 18(22), 3425–3435 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1039/c8lc00694f
116. Lassus, B., Naude, J., Faure, P., Guedin, D., Von Boxberg, Y., Mannoury la Cour, C., Millan,
M.J., Peyrin, J.M.: Glutamatergic and dopaminergic modulation of cortico-striatal circuits
probed by dynamic calcium imaging of networks reconstructed in microﬂuidic chips. Sci.
Rep. 8(1), 17461 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-35802-9
117. Deleglise, B., Lassus, B., Soubeyre, V., Doulazmi, M., Brugg, B., Vanhoutte, P.,
Peyrin, J.M.: Dysregulated neurotransmission induces trans-synaptic degeneration in
reconstructed neuronal networks. Sci. Rep. 8(1), 11596 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41598-018-29918-1
118. Warren, J.D., Rohrer, J.D., Schott, J.M., Fox, N.C., Hardy, J., Rossor, M.N.: Molecular
nexopathies: a new paradigm of neurodegenerative disease. Trends Neurosci. 36(10), 561–
569 (2013). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tins.2013.06.007
119. Tran, H.T., Chung, C.H., Iba, M., Zhang, B., Trojanowski, J.Q., Luk, K.C., Lee, V.M.:
Alpha-synuclein immunotherapy blocks uptake and templated propagation of misfolded
alpha-synuclein and neurodegeneration. Cell Rep. 7(6), 2054–2065 (2014). https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.celrep.2014.05.033

Subcellular Compartmentalization for Neurobiology: Focusing on the Axon
35
120. Deleglise, B., Magniﬁco, S., Duplus, E., Vaur, P., Soubeyre, V., Belle, M., Vignes, M., Viovy,
J.L., Jacotot, E., Peyrin, J.M., Brugg, B.: Beta-amyloid induces a dying-back process and
remote trans-synaptic alterations in a microﬂuidic-based reconstructed neuronal network.
Acta Neuropathol. Commun. 2, 145 (2014). https://doi.org/10.1186/s40478-014-0145-3
121. Takeda, S., Wegmann, S., Cho, H., DeVos, S.L., Commins, C., Roe, A.D., Nicholls, S.B.,
Carlson, G.A., Pitstick, R., Nobuhara, C.K., Costantino, I., Frosch, M.P., Muller, D.J., Irimia,
D., Hyman, B.T.: Neuronal uptake and propagation of a rare phosphorylated high-molecular-
weight tau derived from Alzheimer’s disease brain. Nat. Commun. 6, 8490 (2015). https://
doi.org/10.1038/ncomms9490
122. Brahic, M., Bousset, L., Bieri, G., Melki, R., Gitler, A.D.: Axonal transport and secretion
of ﬁbrillar forms of alpha-synuclein, Abeta42 peptide and HTTExon 1. Acta Neuropathol.
131(4), 539–548 (2016). https://doi.org/10.1007/s00401-016-1538-0
123. Wang, Y., Balaji, V., Kaniyappan, S., Kruger, L., Irsen, S., Tepper, K., Chandupatla, R.,
Maetzler, W., Schneider, A., Mandelkow, E., Mandelkow, E.M.: The release and trans-
synaptic transmission of tau via exosomes. Mol. Neurodegener. 12(1), 5 (2017). https://
doi.org/10.1186/s13024-016-0143-y
124. Gribaudo, S., Tixador, P., Bousset, L., Fenyi, A., Lino, P., Melki, R., Peyrin, J.M., Perrier,
A.L.: Propagation of alpha-synuclein strains within human reconstructed neuronal network.
Stem Cell Rep. (2019). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.stemcr.2018.12.007
125. Alagapan, S., Franca, E., Pan, L., Leondopulos, S., Wheeler, B.C., DeMarse, T.B.: Structure,
function, and propagation of information across living two, four, and eight node degree
topologies. Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol. 4, 15 (2016). https://doi.org/10.3389/fbioe.2016.00015
126. Suzuki, I., Yasuda, K.: Detection of tetanus-induced effects in linearly lined-up micropat-
terned neuronal networks: application of a multi-electrode array chip combined with agarose
microstructures. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 356(2), 470–475 (2007). https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.bbrc.2007.03.006
127. Kane, K.I.W., Moreno, E.L., Hachi, S., Walter, M., Jarazo, J., Oliveira, M.A.P., Hankemeier,
T., Vulto, P., Schwamborn, J.C., Thoma, M., Fleming, R.M.T.: Automated microﬂuidic cell
culture of stem cell derived dopaminergic neurons. Sci. Rep. 9(1), 1796 (2019). https://
doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-34828-3
128. Bifﬁ, E., Menegon, A., Piraino, F., Pedrocchi, A., Fiore, G.B., Rasponi, M.: Validation of
long-term primary neuronal cultures and network activity through the integration of reversibly
bonded microbioreactors and MEA substrates. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 109(1), 166–175 (2012).
https://doi.org/10.1002/bit.23310
129. Yamamoto, T., Shimazu, K., Tamura, N., Watanabe, S., Hamaguchi, K.: Autonomic nervous
functions in Alzheimer type and multi-infarct dementia – a hemodynamic study. Rinsho
Shinkeigaku. 30(9), 1020–1022 (1990)
130. Bifﬁ, E., Piraino, F., Pedrocchi, A., Fiore, G.B., Ferrigno, G., Redaelli, A., Menegon, A.,
Rasponi, M.: A microﬂuidic platform for controlled biochemical stimulation of twin neuronal
networks. Biomicroﬂuidics. 6(2), 24106–2410610 (2012). https://doi.org/10.1063/1.3699975
131. Wang, L., Riss, M., Buitrago, J.O., Claverol-Tinture, E.: Biophysics of microchannel-enabled
neuron-electrode interfaces. J. Neural Eng. 9(2), 026010 (2012). https://doi.org/10.1088/
1741-2560/9/2/026010
132. Lewandowska, M.K., Radivojevic, M., Jackel, D., Muller, J., Hierlemann, A.R.: Cortical
axons, isolated in channels, display activity-dependent signal modulation as a result of tar-
geted stimulation. Front. Neurosci. 10, 83 (2016). https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2016.00083
133. Shimba, K., Sakai, K., Isomura, T., Kotani, K., Jimbo, Y.: Axonal conduction slowing induced
by spontaneous bursting activity in cortical neurons cultured in a microtunnel device. Integr.
Biol. (Camb.). 7(1), 64–72 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1039/c4ib00223g
134. Habibey, R., Latiﬁ, S., Mousavi, H., Pesce, M., Arab-Tehrany, E., Blau, A.: A multielectrode
array microchannel platform reveals both transient and slow changes in axonal conduction
velocity. Sci. Rep. 7(1), 8558 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-017-09033-3
135. Pan, L., Alagapan, S., Franca, E., DeMarse, T., Brewer, G.J., Wheeler, B.C.: Large extracel-
lular spikes recordable from axons in microtunnels. IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng.
22(3), 453–459 (2014). https://doi.org/10.1109/TNSRE.2013.2289911

36
A. Blasiak et al.
136. Hong, N., Joo, S., Nam, Y.: Characterization of axonal spikes in cultured neuronal networks
using microelectrode arrays and microchannel devices. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 64(2),
492–498 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1109/TBME.2016.2567424
137. Kanagasabapathi, T.T., Ciliberti, D., Martinoia, S., Wadman, W.J., Decre, M.M.: Dual-
compartment neuroﬂuidic system for electrophysiological measurements in physically segre-
gated and functionally connected neuronal cell culture. Front. Neuroeng. 4, 13 (2011). https:/
/doi.org/10.3389/fneng.2011.00013
138. Kanagasabapathi, T.T., Franco, M., Barone, R.A., Martinoia, S., Wadman, W.J., Decre,
M.M.: Selective pharmacological manipulation of cortical-thalamic co-cultures in a dual-
compartment device. J. Neurosci. Methods. 214(1), 1–8 (2013). https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.jneumeth.2012.12.019
139. Jang, J.M., Lee, J., Kim, H., Jeon, N.L., Jung, W.: One-photon and two-photon stimulation of
neurons in a microﬂuidic culture system. Lab Chip. 16(9), 1684–1690 (2016). https://doi.org/
10.1039/c6lc00065g
140. Poli, D., Wheeler, B.C., DeMarse, T.B., Brewer, G.J.: Pattern separation and completion
of distinct axonal inputs transmitted via micro-tunnels between co-cultured hippocampal
dentate, CA3, CA1 and entorhinal cortex networks. J. Neural Eng. 15(4), 046009 (2018).
https://doi.org/10.1088/1741-2552/aabc20
141. MacKerron, C., Robertson, G., Zagnoni, M., Bushell, T.J.: A microﬂuidic platform for the
characterisation of CNS active compounds. Sci. Rep. 7(1), 15692 (2017). https://doi.org/
10.1038/s41598-017-15950-0
142. Claverol-Tinture, E., Ghirardi, M., Fiumara, F., Rosell, X., Cabestany, J.: Multielectrode
arrays with elastomeric microstructured overlays for extracellular recordings from patterned
neurons. J. Neural Eng. 2(2), L1–L7 (2005). https://doi.org/10.1088/1741-2560/2/2/L01
143. Claverol-Tinture, E., Cabestany, J., Rosell, X.: Multisite recording of extracellular potentials
produced by microchannel-conﬁned neurons in-vitro. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 54(2), 331–
335 (2007). https://doi.org/10.1109/TBME.2006.880903
144. Forro, C., Thompson-Steckel, G., Weaver, S., Weydert, S., Ihle, S., Dermutz, H., Aebersold,
M.J., Pilz, R., Demko, L., Voros, J.: Modular microstructure design to build neuronal networks
of deﬁned functional connectivity. Biosens. Bioelectron. 122, 75–87 (2018). https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.bios.2018.08.075
145. Wu, K.Y., Hengst, U., Cox, L.J., Macosko, E.Z., Jeromin, A., Urquhart, E.R., Jaffrey, S.R.:
Local translation of RhoA regulates growth cone collapse. Nature. 436(7053), 1020–1024
(2005). https://doi.org/10.1038/nature03885
146. Torre, E.R., Steward, O.: Demonstration of local protein synthesis within dendrites using a
new cell culture system that permits the isolation of living axons and dendrites from their cell
bodies. J. Neurosci. 12(3), 762–772 (1992)
147. Kunze, A., Giugliano, M., Valero, A., Renaud, P.: Micropatterning neural cell cultures in
3D with a multi-layered scaffold. Biomaterials. 32(8), 2088–2098 (2011). https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.biomaterials.2010.11.047
148. Kim, S.H., Im, S.K., Oh, S.J., Jeong, S., Yoon, E.S., Lee, C.J., Choi, N., Hur, E.M.: Anisotrop-
ically organized three-dimensional culture platform for reconstruction of a hippocampal
neural network. Nat. Commun. 8, 14346 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms14346
149. Bang, S., Na, S., Jang, J.M., Kim, J., Jeon, N.L.: Engineering-aligned 3D neural circuit
in microﬂuidic device. Adv. Healthc. Mater. 5(1), 159–166 (2016). https://doi.org/10.1002/
adhm.201500397
150. Siddique, R., Vyas, A., Thakor, N., Brushart, T.M.: A two-compartment organotypic model of
mammalian peripheral nerve repair. J. Neurosci. Methods. 232, 84–92 (2014). https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jneumeth.2014.05.005
151. Choi, J.H., Cho, H.Y., Choi, J.W.: Microdevice platform for in vitro nervous sys-
tem and its disease model. Bioengineering (Basel). 4(3) (2017). https://doi.org/10.3390/
bioengineering4030077

Subcellular Compartmentalization for Neurobiology: Focusing on the Axon
37
152. Osaki, T., Sivathanu, V., Kamm, R.D.: Engineered 3D vascular and neuronal networks in
a microﬂuidic platform. Sci. Rep. 8(1), 5168 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-
23512-1
153. Osaki, T., Uzel, S.G.M., Kamm, R.D.: Microphysiological 3D model of amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis (ALS) from human iPS-derived muscle cells and optogenetic motor neurons. Sci.
Adv. 4(10), eaat5847 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.aat5847
154. Kato-Negishi, M., Morimoto, Y., Onoe, H., Takeuchi, S.: Millimeter-sized neural building
blocks for 3D heterogeneous neural network assembly. Adv. Healthc. Mater. 2(12), 1564–
1570 (2013). https://doi.org/10.1002/adhm.201300052
155. Tang-Schomer, M.D., White, J.D., Tien, L.W., Schmitt, L.I., Valentin, T.M., Graziano, D.J.,
Hopkins, A.M., Omenetto, F.G., Haydon, P.G., Kaplan, D.L.: Bioengineered functional brain-
like cortical tissue. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 111(38), 13811–13816 (2014). https://
doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1324214111
156. Millet, L.J., Gillette, M.U.: New perspectives on neuronal development via microﬂu-
idic environments. Trends Neurosci. 35(12), 752–761 (2012). https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.tins.2012.09.001
157. Paranjape, S.R., Nagendran, T., Poole, V., Harris, J., Taylor, A.M.: Compartmentalization of
human stem cell-derived neurons within pre-assembled plastic microﬂuidic chips. J. Vis. Exp.
147 (2019). https://doi.org/10.3791/59250
158. Nagendran, T., Poole, V., Harris, J., Taylor, A.M.: Use of pre-assembled plastic microﬂuidic
chips for compartmentalizing primary murine neurons. J. Vis. Exp. 141 (2018). https://
doi.org/10.3791/58421
159. Lozano, R., Stevens, L., Thompson, B.C., Gilmore, K.J., Gorkin 3rd, R., Stewart, E.M., in het
Panhuis, M., Romero-Ortega, M., Wallace, G.G.: 3D printing of layered brain-like structures
using peptide modiﬁed gellan gum substrates. Biomaterials. 67, 264–273 (2015). https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.biomaterials.2015.07.022
160. Brewer, B.M., Shi, M., Edd, J.F., Webb, D.J., Li, D.: A microﬂuidic cell co-culture platform
with a liquid ﬂuorocarbon separator. Biomed. Microdevices. 16(2), 311–323 (2014). https://
doi.org/10.1007/s10544-014-9834-8
161. Lee, S.H., Sung, J.H.: Organ-on-a-chip technology for reproducing multiorgan physiology.
Adv. Healthc. Mater. 7(2) (2018). https://doi.org/10.1002/adhm.201700419
162. Loskill, P., Marcus, S.G., Mathur, A., Reese, W.M., Healy, K.E.: muOrgano: a Lego(R)-like
plug & play system for modular multi-organ-chips. PLoS One. 10(10), e0139587 (2015).
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0139587

