Studies in Applied Philosophy,
Epistemology and Rational Ethics
John R. Shook
Sami Paavola   Editors
Abduction 
in Cognition 
and Action
Logical Reasoning, Scientific Inquiry, 
and Social Practice

Studies in Applied Philosophy, Epistemology
and Rational Ethics
Volume 59
Editor-in-Chief
Lorenzo Magnani, Department of Humanities, Philosophy Section, University of
Pavia, Pavia, Italy
Editorial Board
Atocha Aliseda
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México (UNAM), Mexico, Mexico
Giuseppe Longo
CNRS - Ecole Normale Supérieure, Centre Cavailles, Paris, France
Chris Sinha
School of Foreign Languages, Hunan University, Changsha, China
Paul Thagard
University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Canada
John Woods
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada

Studies in Applied Philosophy, Epistemology and Rational Ethics (SAPERE)
publishes new developments and advances in all the ﬁelds of philosophy,
epistemology, and ethics, bringing them together with a cluster of scientiﬁc
disciplines and technological outcomes: ranging from computer science to life
sciences, from economics, law, and education to engineering, logic, and mathe-
matics, from medicine to physics, human sciences, and politics. The series aims at
covering all the challenging philosophical and ethical themes of contemporary
society, making them appropriately applicable to contemporary theoretical and
practical problems, impasses, controversies, and conﬂicts. Our scientiﬁc and
technological era has offered “new” topics to all areas of philosophy and ethics – for
instance concerning scientiﬁc rationality, creativity, human and artiﬁcial intelli-
gence, social and folk epistemology, ordinary reasoning, cognitive niches and
cultural evolution, ecological crisis, ecologically situated rationality, consciousness,
freedom and responsibility, human identity and uniqueness, cooperation, altruism,
intersubjectivity and empathy, spirituality, violence. The impact of such topics has
been mainly undermined by contemporary cultural settings, whereas they should
increase the demand of interdisciplinary applied knowledge and fresh and original
understanding. In turn, traditional philosophical and ethical themes have been
profoundly affected and transformed as well: they should be further examined as
embedded and applied within their scientiﬁc and technological environments so to
update their received and often old-fashioned disciplinary treatment and appeal.
Applying philosophy individuates therefore a new research commitment for the
21st century, focused on the main problems of recent methodological, logical,
epistemological, and cognitive aspects of modeling activities employed both in
intellectual and scientiﬁc discovery, and in technological innovation, including the
computational tools intertwined with such practices, to understand them in a wide
and integrated perspective. Studies in Applied Philosophy, Epistemology and
Rational Ethics means to demonstrate the contemporary practical relevance of this
novel philosophical approach and thus to provide a home for monographs, lecture
notes, selected contributions from specialized conferences and workshops as well as
selected Ph.D. theses. The series welcomes contributions from philosophers as well
as from scientists, engineers, and intellectuals interested in showing how applying
philosophy can increase knowledge about our current world. Initial proposals can
be sent to the Editor-in-Chief, Prof. Lorenzo Magnani, lmagnani@unipv.it:
• A short synopsis of the work or the introduction chapter
• The proposed Table of Contents
• The CV of the lead author(s).
For more information, please contact the Editor-in-Chief at lmagnani@unipv.it.
Indexed by SCOPUS, zbMATH, SCImago, DBLP.
All books published in the series are submitted for consideration in Web of Science.
More information about this series at http://www.springer.com/series/10087

John R. Shook
• Sami Paavola
Editors
Abduction in Cognition
and Action
Logical Reasoning, Scientiﬁc Inquiry,
and Social Practice
123

Editors
John R. Shook
Philosophy and Science Education
University at Buffalo
Amherst, NY, USA
Sami Paavola
Faculty of Educational Sciences
University of Helsinki
Helsinki, Finland
ISSN 2192-6255
ISSN 2192-6263
(electronic)
Studies in Applied Philosophy, Epistemology and Rational Ethics
ISBN 978-3-030-61772-1
ISBN 978-3-030-61773-8
(eBook)
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-61773-8
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2021
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the Publisher, whether the whole or part
of the material is concerned, speciﬁcally the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations,
recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microﬁlms or in any other physical way, and transmission
or information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dissimilar
methodology now known or hereafter developed.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this
publication does not imply, even in the absence of a speciﬁc statement, that such names are exempt from
the relevant protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
The publisher, the authors and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information in this
book are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the publisher nor the
authors or the editors give a warranty, expressed or implied, with respect to the material contained
herein or for any errors or omissions that may have been made. The publisher remains neutral with regard
to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
This Springer imprint is published by the registered company Springer Nature Switzerland AG
The registered company address is: Gewerbestrasse 11, 6330 Cham, Switzerland

Introduction
This book gathers together in one volume fresh essays offered from the frontiers of
research into the logic and practice of abduction. The publication of this collected
volume could not be more timely. In many ways, abduction has become established
and essential to many ﬁelds beyond logic and philosophy of science. However, at
the same time, the provocative implications of abduction and the precise workings
of abductive thinking offer more and more puzzles and problems.
Abductive inference, with its emphasis on anticipatory guessing, predictive
learning, and imaginative hypothesis, broadens the scope of the cognitivist reper-
toire for understanding human reasoning and action. As cognitivism views intel-
ligence in general, knowledge’s growth must involve cognitive processes for
learning. Rejecting cognitivism entirely is not a fruitful agenda, since inference, fast
or slow, is involved with any information processing and animal learning more
complex than mere associative conditioning and pattern recognition.
If cognitivism in a stricter sense assumes that cognition’s work is a separate
matter apart from anything else the organism is interacting with, abduction presents
a serious challenge. As pragmatism has reiterated, little about intelligence is
comprehensible after presuming that thought occurs independently from other life
activities. When abduction is taken seriously as a vital mode of inference, it is far
easier to understand the full power of cognition, as a functional stage within a larger
process of learning with various kinds of engagements to the environment.
Abduction in its primary sense is a mode of inference. Inference is truly worthy
of careful and exhaustive study. Taking inference seriously, it is found to be per-
vasive across learning: sensible intuitions arise from fast or hidden inferences;
memorization would be chaotic without inferential checks for consistency; and
cogent rationalizing requires inferential links between facts and convictions. For
humans, explicit inferential reasoning that modiﬁes belief and leads toward
knowledge is quite different from intuiting, memorizing, or rationalizing. Intuition
presents factual matters for belief, but their plausibility relies on intimate famil-
iarity. Memorization accepts unfamiliar facts on trust for expanding belief.
Rationalization seeks relevant facts to support established belief. Inference for
learning transcends all three by seeking out facts beyond the familiar and favored
v

that may strengthen the credibility of a hesitant guess. Where inference goes,
abduction may become involved.
In human reasoning, good reasoning should be conducive to knowledge. Proper
deduction and induction have been upheld as high standards of justifying certain
and probable knowledge. Since abduction is the source of original hypotheses, why
should abduction be omitted from the analysis of knowledge? Intelligence at its
most strenuous tries to acquire new knowledge, placing high demands on inference
that mere intuition, memorization, and rationalization can never satisfy. To never go
beyond available facts is to never learn something new. Inferential learning, unlike
simpler modes, cannot take for granted the paired sides of inference: What shall be
the relevant facts, and what may be a reasonable idea? Both parts will change
during novel learning.
Strict cognitivism, by supposing that deduction and induction exhaust the main
modes of explicit inference, reaches its dead-end here. Neither deduction nor
induction in their classic form can yield adequate accounts of novel learning. Valid
deduction may enlighten the deducer, but valid deduction in themselves is not
enlarging knowledge itself. The probabilities of induction go a little farther than
accumulated facts, but correlations cannot by themselves engender conceptions of
unobserved causes. A third primary mode of hypothetical inference must be at work
with original knowledge about anything beyond what may be evident and already
accepted. This third mode was labeled as abduction by scientist and philosopher
Charles S. Peirce originally in the 1860s (although then with a different name), and
it played a major role in most everything philosophical that he produced during the
rest of his life.
Abduction as a distinctive and legitimate mode of inference was overlooked by
both empiricisms and rationalisms throughout the eighteenth and nineteenth cen-
turies and ignored as just diversionary or fallacious by research on scientiﬁc
methods during much of the twentieth century. That neglect is no longer the case.
A familiarity with abduction is now common across many disciplines, and denials
of abduction’s signiﬁcance for methodology, knowledge advancement, and scien-
tiﬁc reasoning are heard far less frequently. Beyond logic itself, many areas of
philosophy are reinvigorated by the study of abduction and its contributions to
cognition, such as epistemology, practical reasoning, creativity, action theory, and
decision theory. Abduction also has a central place in semiotics, linguistics, com-
munications, rhetoric, and philosophy of language.
The cognitive sciences have accordingly been inﬂuenced heavily, especially
where cognitive psychology and its research into perceptual recognition and belief
revision are intersecting with computational sciences devoted to information theory,
computational logic, artiﬁcial intelligence, machine learning, distributed intelli-
gence systems, and robotics. Behavioral and social sciences are also attending to
abductive reasoning where educational methods, agent decision theory, research on
practices, and interpreting methodologies are key. Empirical research concerning a
variety of types of abductive processes has been slow to emerge, but now quickly
growing due to interest from so many ﬁelds.
vi
Introduction

In parallel with this growing attention to abduction across various disciplines,
there has also been a proliferation of puzzles about abduction. Differing interpre-
tations and applications for abduction have arisen, which is a welcome sign of its
conceptual fertility. Yet many fundamental questions about abduction remain open.
How is abduction speciﬁcally manifested in human cognition and intelligence? Are
there different types of abduction, and if so, how might they be classiﬁed and
related? Would abduction be expected to proceed quite differently in application
within in different areas of research? What are the concrete roles and responsibilities
attached to abduction during the course of empirical inquiry and scientiﬁc dis-
covery? Can abduction be a logic of discovery? Can it be a valid mode of infer-
ence? How abduction is manifested in practical processes of inquiry? How does
abduction actually work for various sorts of methodologies that relate to the con-
duct of human practices?
These sorts of key issues and questioning opportunities are taken up in this
volume’s chapters. Starting with Peirce, how should his original formulations of
abduction receive accurate elaborations? Peirce’s voluminous amount of texts has
left room for various interpretatations and applications of abduction. Novel con-
ceptions of abduction suggest revised understandings of other views on thought and
learning in turn. Going further, alternative conceptions of abduction have been
formulated, extending and surpassing Peirce’s writings on abduction. Some chap-
ters present new methods and tools for formalizing abduction, of potential use in
schematizations for thinking, problem-solving, learning, and skill improvement.
Presently, there are a variety of interpretations of abduction which can be connected
with ways of classifying distinctive forms of abduction. These interrelationships
soon prove to become quite complex, going beyond abduction in itself, to explore
mixed forms of reasoning and inferences involved with a broad range of practical
activities.
In past decades, much of the logical and philosophical literature about abduction
concentrated on comparing schematizations of abductive inference with formal-
izations for deductive and inductive inferences and evaluating criteria of validity or
degrees of probable truth. These are still important issues, and some chapters take
notice of them. Beyond schematics, most of the chapters concentrate more on the
dynamics of abduction applied for inventive enterprises through various means.
This dynamic outlook on abduction permits further questions to be raised about
abduction’s roles in imagination, discovery, and creativity.
This volume covers the “state-of-the-art” opportunities in this interdisciplinary
area of research on abduction. Its fourteen chapters are composed by a total of
nineteen authors or co-authors, working in eleven countries around the world. Our
contributors have long been at the forefront of discussions on abduction, and they
now offer their updated approaches to the issues that they regard as central to
abduction’s contemporary relevance. All important areas of research about
abduction are addressed, from its origins with C. S. Peirce, its broad relevance to
inferential reasoning and scientiﬁc methods, and its enrichment of core problems in
the cognitive and behavioral sciences. Parts of the book cover interlinked interests,
but they are grouped under four bigger themes.
Introduction
vii

Part One on “Analyzing Abduction” presents papers about different sorts of
abduction where they are most frequently found. In Chapter “Are there Types of
Abduction? An Inquiry into a Comprehensive Classiﬁcation of Types of Abduction,”
Jorge Alejandro Flórez explores ways of classifying types of abduction. He discusses
Peirce’s hesitance of making subdivisions of abduction and contrasts this to later
suggestions about various types of abduction. He concludes by adding his own
classiﬁcation about interesting kinds of abduction based on abductive syllogisms. In
Chapter “Practical Abduction for Research on Human Practices: Enriching Rather
Than Testing a Hypothesis,” Sami Paavola interprets abduction in relation to studies
on human practices. He argues that the Peircean idea of abduction, as the ﬁrst phase of
inquiry that calls for further testing, is not the most apt idea for practice studies.
Practical experimentation follows a different kind of logic closer to the Deweyan idea
of a working hypothesis, or alternatively the method of ascending from the abstract to
the concrete where abduction has a continuous role throughout the research process.
In Chapter “Abductive Spaces: Modeling Concept Framework Revision with
Category Theory,” Rocco Gangle, Gianluca Caterina, and Fernando Tohmé describe
how their model of abduction is interpretable as a representation of a community
trying to retain commitments through modiﬁcations that appear to be needed for
dealing with obstacles. This model offers a way to understand reasonable processes
available for creative problem-solving by a social group.
Part Two on “Developing and Applying Peirce’s Abduction” focuses on inter-
preting Peirce’s abduction and relating it to other scholars’ work. In Chapter
“Abduction as “Leading Away”: Aristotle, Peirce, and the Importance of Eco-
cognitive Openness and Situatedness,” Lorenzo Magnani discusses the background
of situated abduction that can be discerned in Aristotle’s texts. Magnani’s own
eco-cognitive model (EC-Model) of abduction enlarges on that theme with his
“optimization of eco-cognitive openness and situatedness.” More attention should
be paid to “discoverability” and “diagnosticability” in abductive results. In Chapter
“Methodeutic of Abduction,” Francesco Bellucci and Ahti-Veikko Pietarinen
analyze the meaning of “methodeutic” for understanding Peircean abduction and
Peirce’s conception of pragmatism. They argue that methodeutic for Peirce con-
tributes essentially to the security of abduction, and they present three maxims as
the bedrock of Peirce’s methodeutic of abduction: experientiality for security,
simplicity for uberty, and economy for advantageousness of reasoning. In Chapter
“Peirce, Russell and Abductive Regression,” John Woods contrasts Peirce and
Bertrand Russell on the search for logical foundations of mathematics. He explores
the relevance of abduction for philosophy of mathematics, in the context of an early
twentieth-century debate over logicism. A resemblance between Peirce on abduc-
tion and Russell’s “regressive method” to ﬁnd premises of mathematics may not be
as close as it seems.
Part Three on “Abduction, Mathematics, and Logic in Creative Discovery”
analyzes and applies abduction with regard to creativity and creative reasoning. In
Chapter “The Place of Logic in Creative Reason,” Atocha Aliseda argues on behalf
of the thesis that logic and creativity do not exclude each other. This concerns
viii
Introduction

especially the possibility and practice of ampliative, or synthetic reasoning—that is,
abduction. Aliseda sorts through Peirce’s primary conceptions of abduction and his
later views on the possibility of the logic of discovery. In Chapter “On Abducing
the Axioms of Mathematics,” Woosuk Park sharply distinguishes abduction from
inference to the best explanation (IBE), in preparation for a discussion of mathe-
matical discovery. Park disputes the idea that IBE explains the role of the axiom of
choice in mathematics. By contrast, abduction supplies a better account of dis-
covering and justifying mathematical axioms. In Chapter “Abduction, Complex
Inferences, and Emergent Heuristics of Scientiﬁc Inquiry,” John Shook discrimi-
nates complex modes of abduction needed for creative scientiﬁc discovery. As
Peirce indicated, scientiﬁc methods of postulation and justiﬁcation combine itera-
tions of deduction, induction, and abduction, which together heighten the credibility
of well-tested hypotheses. This “procedural abduction” attains levels of heuristics,
higher than pseudo-science, which justify scientiﬁc realism about postulated enti-
ties. In Chapter “Abduction, The Logic of Scientiﬁc Creativity, and Scientiﬁc
Realism,” John Shook turns to the role of scientiﬁc communities which creatively
re-conceive hypothesized entities during stages of inquiry that apply procedural
abduction. According to the methodology of procedural abduction, any dichotomy
between the logic of discovery and the logic of justiﬁcation is dissolved. In con-
sequence, the abductive methodology of scientiﬁc communities and the credible
realism of scientiﬁc entities are mutually dependent.
Part Four on “Human Reasoning and Theories of Cognition” concentrates on
novel interpretations of abduction in relation to theories of human cognition and
reasoning. In Chapter “Abduction and the Logic of Inquiry: Modern Epistemic
Vectors,” Jay Schulkin reminds us how thinking is undertaken by a brain opti-
mizing for predictive accuracy and successful activity. Problem-solving and
adaptive behaviors guided by the plasticity of neural functioning would naturally
take the form of abductions, performed under constraints of time and energy
availability. In Chapter “Abductive Inference, Self-Knowledge, and the Myth of
Introspection,” Eric Charles and Nicholas Thompson analyze Peircean critique
of the Cartesian approach to introspection. They argue that our self-knowledge
requires similar inferential processes in order to attain judgments about the minds of
others. These processes are, in an important sense, results from abductive inference.
In Chapter “The Role of Collections of Objects in Abduction,” Patricia Turrisi
offers her deliberations about the meaning of objects of thought, especially material
objects for abductive investigation. She gives various examples of collecting
activity and resulting collections where (material) objects are central. These are
examples of Peircean logica utens, that is, acts of reasoning without formal logical
systematization. In Chapter “Our Themes on Abduction in Human Reasoning: A
Synopsis,” Emmanuelle-Anna Dietz Saldanha, Steffen Hölldobler, and Luís Moniz
Pereira take for their topic the evident gap between actual human reasoning and
classical logic. Rather than abandoning logic as a way to model how people think,
Introduction
ix

cognitive theory should be supplemented by abduction. Their original Weak
Completion Semantics makes better sense of the ways that people manage to make
reasonable sense.
John R. Shook
jshook@pragmatism.org
Sami Paavola
sami.paavola@helsinki.ﬁ
x
Introduction

Contents
Analyzing Abduction
Are There Types of Abduction? An Inquiry into a Comprehensive
Classiﬁcation of Types of Abduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
Jorge Alejandro Flórez Restrepo
Practical Abduction for Research on Human Practices:
Enriching Rather Than Testing a Hypothesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
Sami Paavola
Abductive Spaces: Modeling Concept Framework Revision with
Category Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
Rocco Gangle, Gianluca Caterina, and Fernando Tohmé
Developing and Applying Peirce’s Abduction
Abduction as “Leading Away” . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
Lorenzo Magnani
Methodeutic of Abduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
107
Francesco Bellucci and Ahti-Veikko Pietarinen
Peirce, Russell and Abductive Regression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
129
John Woods
Abduction, Mathematics, and Logic in Creative Discovery
The Place of Logic in Creative Reason . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
149
Atocha Aliseda
On Abducing the Axioms of Mathematics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
161
Woosuk Park
xi

Abduction, Complex Inferences, and Emergent Heuristics
of Scientiﬁc Inquiry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
177
John R. Shook
Abduction, the Logic of Scientiﬁc Creativity, and Scientiﬁc Realism . . .
207
John R. Shook
Human Reasoning and Theories of Cognition
Abduction and the Logic of Inquiry: Modern Epistemic Vectors . . . . . .
231
Jay Schulkin
Abductive Inference, Self-Knowledge, and the Myth
of Introspection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
247
Eric Phillip Charles and Nicholas S. Thompson
The Role of Collections of Objects in Abduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
263
Patricia Turrisi
Our Themes on Abduction in Human Reasoning: A Synopsis . . . . . . . .
279
Emmanuelle-Anna Dietz Saldanha, Steffen Hölldobler,
and Luís Moniz Pereira
xii
Contents

Contributors
Atocha Aliseda Instituto de Investigaciones Filosóﬁcas, National Autonomous
University of Mexico, México, Mexico
Francesco Bellucci University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy
Gianluca Caterina Endicott College, Beverly, MA, USA
Eric Phillip Charles American University, Washington, USA
Emmanuelle-Anna Dietz Saldanha Faculty of Computer Science, Dresden,
Germany
Jorge Alejandro Flórez Restrepo Universidad de Caldas, Manizales, Colombia
Rocco Gangle Endicott College, Beverly, MA, USA
Steffen Hölldobler Faculty of Computer Science, Dresden, Germany;
North-Caucasus Federal University, Stavropol, Russian Federation
Lorenzo
Magnani Department
of
Humanities,
Philosophy
Section
and
Computational Philosophy Laboratory, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy
Sami Paavola Faculty of Educational Sciences, University of Helsinki, Helsinki,
Finland
Woosuk Park Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Daejeon,
South Korea
Luís Moniz Pereira NOVA Laboratory for Computer Science and Informatics,
Departamento de Informática, Faculdade de Ciências e Tecnologia, Universidade
Nova de Lisboa, Caparica, Portugal
Ahti-Veikko Pietarinen Tallinn University of Technology, Tallinn, Estonia;
Research University Higher School of Economics, Moscow, Russia
xiii

Jay Schulkin Department of Neuroscience, Georgetown University, Washington,
USA
John R. Shook University at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY, USA
Nicholas S. Thompson Clark University, Worcester, USA
Fernando Tohmé UNS-CONICET, Bahia Blanca, Argentina
Patricia Turrisi University of North Carolina, Wilmington, USA
John Woods University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada
xiv
Contributors

Analyzing Abduction

Are There Types of Abduction?
An Inquiry into a Comprehensive
Classiﬁcation of Types of Abduction
Jorge Alejandro Flórez Restrepo
Abstract This chapter enquires into the possibility of having types of abduction.
In the two ﬁrst sections, it explores the classiﬁcation of types of abduction given by
Peirce (although he paradoxically argued as well that abduction has no divisions)
and those given by scholars, such as Thagard, Eco, Hoffman, Schurz, Aliseda, and
others. The journey across their suggestions of types of abduction permits not only
to see the number and deﬁnition of those types, but it also permits to identify the
criteria according to which those classiﬁcations were obtained. In the last section,
the author evaluates those suggestions and uniﬁes the criteria used by the scholars in
order to propose that abduction is a very proliﬁc and varied inference.
It is paradoxical that Peirce claimed both that there are two types of abduction and that
abduction has no divisions. Most of the time, he asserted that there was just one type
of abduction. In his early writings he analyzed logical inferences from a syllogistic
point of view and he found that abduction only has a unique form in which a Result
and Rule are premises and they conclude a Case; and in his late writings he never
included types of abduction because he used what I call the categorical principle
of degeneracy to achieve those classiﬁcations. Abduction was always considered by
him as a ﬁrstness and therefore, it is not subject of further classiﬁcations; it remains
as single and unique. Instead, deduction considered as a secondness can be divided
into two types (theorematic and collorarial), and induction considered as a thirdness
can be divided into three types (rudimentary, qualitative, and quantitative). Even his
further divisions make deduction have three types, induction six types, but abduction
remains always with a unique form.
J. A. Flórez Restrepo (B)
Universidad de Caldas, Manizales, Colombia
e-mail: jorgealejandro.ﬂorez@ucaldas.edu.co
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2021
J. Shook et al. (eds.), Abduction in Cognition and Action, Studies in Applied
Philosophy, Epistemology and Rational Ethics 59,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-61773-8_1
3

4
J. A. Flórez Restrepo
This is contradictory with his assertions in two different passages that abduction
has two types depending upon conditions of time and consciousness. It is also contra-
dictory with the proposal of several scholars who from the 1980s to nowadays have
proposed a multitude of types of abductions.1
This article, then, is an inquiry that attempts to resolve this paradox. Its aim ﬁrstly
is to evaluate and to expose Peirce’s arguments to postulate mainly that abduction
is an inference that has no types, and also to expose those two passages in Peirce’s
late writing (1903 and 1909) where he explored the possibilities of having two types
of abduction. The second part of this text is intended to evaluate the arguments of
contemporary scholars in order to postulate types of abductions. It is not my intention
to defend Peirce tenaciously for even he is open to reevaluating his position due to
his fallibilism. Instead, the inquiry that this article offers on the topic of types of
abductions is open to arguments for and against. Therefore, in the third section, I
will explore a theory of types of abduction based on the information acquired in the
two ﬁrst sections.
1
Peirce on Types of Abduction
Charles S. Peirce considered that “the chief business of the logician is to classify
arguments; for all testing clearly depends on classiﬁcation” (EP1, 186).2 In fact,
one of the branches of logic that he developed the most was Speculative Grammar,
which observes the nature of signs and classiﬁes their types. He attempted several
classiﬁcations of signs and inferences during his life, but a constant characteristic
of those classiﬁcations is that abduction has no subdivisions. Instead, induction and
deduction have different subdivisions and in all those attempts of classiﬁcation, he
hesitated among different names and numbers for those subdivisions.
The classiﬁcatory aim of logic was exposed since his ﬁrst article The New List
of Categories (1868). There Peirce proposed the following classiﬁcation of signs
(included inferences):
1For a complete list of different proposals of types of abduction, see Paavola 2006.
2The references to Peirce’s work are abbreviated as follows:
CP
Collected Papers of Charles Sanders Peirce, edited by C. Hartshorne, P. Weiss (volumes
1–6), and A. Burks (volumes 7–8) (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1931-58),
followed by volume and paragraph number.
EP
The Essential Peirce: Selected Philosophical Writings, edited by N. Houser and C. Kloesel, 2
vols. (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1992), followed by volume and page number.
L
Reference to the correspondence of Peirce.
MS
Peirce manuscripts in Houghton Library, followed by a Robin number and page number.
RLT Reasoning and the Logic of Things, edited by Kenneth Laine Ketner (Cambridge, Mass.
Harvard University Press, 1992), followed by page number.
W
Writings of Charles S. Peirce: A Chronological Edition, edited by Max Fisch et al.
(Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1982), followed by volume and page number.

Are There Types of Abduction? An Inquiry …
5
Sign o 
Representamen
Likeness (Icon)
Index
Symbol
Term
ProposiƟon
Argument
Hypotesis
InducƟon
DeducƟon
As can be seen, the third element is always divided into three other elements. At
that time, abduction was called Hypothesis, and none of the three types of arguments
are further divided. An internal analysis of arguments made in his article ‘Deduction,
InductionandHypothesis’from1878didnotproduceanyclassiﬁcatoryoutput.There
he proposed a syllogistic manner of analyzing arguments according to which the ﬁrst
proposition of a syllogism is a Rule, the second proposition is a Case, and the third
proposition is a Result. Thus, a deduction is deﬁned as a syllogism in which a case
is subsumed in a rule to derive a result, induction is a syllogism that relates a case
and a result to derive a rule, and a Hypothesis is a syllogism that derives a case
by means a rule and a case. The analysis consisted in showing that the syllogistic
form of induction and hypothesis corresponds to the inversion of the propositions
of a deduction (see Table 1). The syllogistic account of logical inferences in his
early years does not allow for any particular division within deduction, induction or
abduction.
Thirty years later, Peirce abandoned the syllogistic approach to analyzing logical
inferences (I will expose below the reasons he had in order to abandon the syllo-
gistic analysis), and he took another path in order to analyze logical inference. The
new criterion of analysis of logical inference is the role each of them plays in the
scientiﬁc method. Abduction has a role of proposing a hypothesis, deduction has
the role of tracking its consequences, and induction has the role of proving those
consequence with experiments. Thus, the three logical inferences occupy an order
of ﬁrst, second and third. It is under this framework that Peirce began to state a
Table 1 Syllogistic account
of logical inferences
Deduction
Induction
Hipotesis
Major premise
Rule
Case
Rule
Minor premise
Case
Result
Result
Conclusion
Result
Rule
Case

6
J. A. Flórez Restrepo
clear classiﬁcation of types of inferences in his article “On the Logic of Extracting
the History of Ancient Documents” (1902), and continued to develop it over the
years ending with his attempt in his article “A Neglected Argument for the Reality
of God” (1908). These attempts at a classiﬁcation follow the categorical principle
of degeneracy by which all ﬁrstness is unique and simple; all secondness is a rela-
tion, a reaction, or a comparison, and, therefore, they take the forms of genuine
and degenerate secondnesses; and all thirdness is a relation, unity, and generality,
and, therefore, they take the forms of genuine and two degenerate thirdnesses (see
EP2:160–61). From 1901 to 1908, each separate classiﬁcation states that abduction
is ﬁrst, deduction is second, and induction is third. What varies between the different
classiﬁcations is Peirce’s establishment of subdivisions for deduction and induction.
In consequence, abduction has not any kind; it is a unique and undivided kind of argu-
ment. Instead, deduction has two kinds: corollarial and theorematic; and induction
has three kinds: crude, qualitative and quantitative. Editors of the Collected Papers
realized that abduction has no subdivisions and said:
His divisions, which reveal not only how his signs are classiﬁed, but why, for example, there
is only one kind of abduction, two kinds of deduction, and three kinds of induction, are
determined in part by the following principle: that which is a Second is divisible into two
parts, of which one is itself divisible into two parts, etc., and that which is a Third is divisible
into three parts, one of which is a First, another of which is a Second, (and thus divisible into
two parts), and the last a Third, which is itself divisible into threes, and so on, apparently
without end. (CP4, Introduction)
Similarly, Sami Paavola concludes that
Peirce did not usually make any subdivisions in relation to abduction, and he seemed to be
undecided if there are any. He even mentioned that he had found “no essential subdivision of
Abductions” (Peirce PPM 276–277, 1903). A similar remark can be found at MS 764 (n.d.):
“I have not been led to recognize any logical division of them [Retroductions]” (p. 31). [12].
Those are the reason Peirce considered abduction to have no divisions. However,
as was mentioned, there are two passages in his late writings where he discusses that
there are two types of abduction (not the same in both passages). The ﬁrst passage
corresponds to the ﬁnal lecture he delivered in Harvard at 1903:
The third cotary proposition is that abductive inference shades into perceptual judgment
without any sharp line of demarcation between them; or, in other words, our ﬁrst premises,
the perceptual judgments, are to be regarded as an extreme case of abductive inferences, from
which they differ in being absolutely beyond criticism. The abductive suggestion comes to
us like a ﬂash. It is an act of insight, although of extremely fallible insight. It is true that
the different elements of the hypothesis were in our minds before, but it is the idea of
putting together what we had never before dreamed of putting together which ﬂashes the
new suggestion before our contemplation.
On its side, the perceptive judgment is the result of a process, although of a process
not sufﬁciently conscious to be controlled, or, to state it more truly, not controllable
and therefore not fully conscious. If we were to subject this subconscious process
to logical analysis, we should ﬁnd that it terminated in what that analysis would
represent as an abductive inference, resting on the result of a similar process which

Are There Types of Abduction? An Inquiry …
7
a similar logical analysis would represent to be terminated by a similar abductive
inference, and so on ad inﬁnitum (EP2, 227; CP. 5, 181).
ItisclearthatPeirceisestablishingtwotypesofabduction:thatwhichisconscious,
controlled, and open to criticism; and that which is unconscious, uncontrolled and
beyond criticism. There is a continuous range of abductive inferences that goes from
conscious to unconscious process “without any sharp line of demarcation between
them”. Consciousness and unconsciousness are the two limits of this continuous
process; therefore, more than only two deﬁned and determined points, abduction has
an inﬁnite range of possibilities and degrees of consciousness.
The second passage is an unpublished manuscript (MS 637) from 1909 that
corresponds to his intended book on Meaning. He states that there are two types
of abduction, namely, practical and scientiﬁc retroduction:
The logical rules of inference from a surprising fact to a hypothetical state of things that
would explain it involves a complexity of conditions, one of which is how much time can
be allowed for coming to one’s conclusion. A general who during a battle must instantly risk
the existence of a nation either upon the truth of a certain hypothesis or else upon its falsity,
must perforce go upon his judgment at the moment; and his doing so is in so far logical that
all reasoning is based upon a tacit assumption that Nature in the sense of the aggregate of
truth, is conformed more or less to something similar to the reasoner’s Reason. This kind
of inference may be called Practical Retroduction. It is ordinarily called a Presumption.
If on the contrary, indeﬁnite time can be allowed for judging of the truth of an explanatory
hypothesis, the most favorable conclusion is that the consequences of that hypothesis that
are susceptible of veriﬁcation should be subjected to a systematic and thorough test. This
which may be called Scientiﬁc Retroduction will be subject to considerations of economy.
If, for example, a supposition far from reasonable, yet still possible, would explain a physical
phenomenon, and if, in case it be incorrect, there is a way of disproving it at little expenditure
of either time, energy, or any other valuable, then it may be worthwhile to clear the ground
by taking up the investigation of it forth with. It will be remarked that the result of both
Practical and Scientiﬁc Retroduction is to recommend a course of action. (MS 637, 1909;
bold words added).
It is evident that Peirce distinguished between two kinds of abduction or retro-
duction, as it was called at that time: practical and scientiﬁc abduction. The criterion
of distinction is the time available to resolve the doubt or surprising fact (see Niño,
201–202). The dual distinction only considers a long period of time or a short period
of time, but between them, there can be a range of many possible differences. It is not
the same the urgency that a doctor has in an ER for getting into the right diagnosis,
that the urgency of deciphering a route to take into a complex transportation system
in a city we are not familiarized with. Both are practical matters, and the time is not
unlimited, but the consequences of erring in the hypothesis are different. Thus the
spectrum of possibilities between a short and long period of time is inﬁnite. In fact,
following Peirce’s synechism, it is possible to conceive that the difference between
a practical and a scientiﬁc abduction is just a question of degree. Or where is the
borderline that divides a practical and scientiﬁc inquiry?
Another important remark from this paragraph at MS 637 is that Peirce mentions
that abduction depends on the “complexity of conditions”. These conditions are the
criteria according to which types of abduction can be derived. In this passage, he
says that time is one of those conditions, but from his remark at Harvard Lecture, we

8
J. A. Flórez Restrepo
can include also that consciousness is another condition. Moreover, it is possible to
think of more conditions, and so, it is possible to have a complete theory of types of
abduction. This will be discussed in the last part of this inquiry. For the moment, lets
us focus on the opinions of other scholars on types of abduction and see what other
criteria or complex conditions do they use in order to make those distinctions.
2
Contemporary Scholars on Types of Abduction
2.1
Two Types of Abduction
The ﬁrst proposal of types of abduction made by contemporary scholars follows
Peirce’s remarks of two types of abduction. Thagard [18] was the ﬁrst in considering
the possibility of two kinds of abduction and called them Hypothesis or inference
to a Case and abduction or inference to a Rule. Bonfantini and Proni [4] say it is a
distinction that comes from Peirce himself who wrote about a low-level abduction
close to sensation (they mean the perceptual judgment mentioned above), and high-
level abduction that has the nature of argument which is close to scientiﬁc inquiry
(see Bofantini and Proni [4, 129]). They add that the ﬁrst type is involved in police
investigations, for from a particular crime a particular cause can be inferred (1988:
126). The second type is involved in scientiﬁc inquiry, in which “the aim is to ﬁnd a
fundamental theoretical law of general application or (more often) to ﬁt an anoma-
lous fact into the applicability of a fundamental law by rearranging the “intermediary
law”. Although Eco rejects this distinction, he postulates it as follows: the ﬁrst kind
of abduction “starts from one or more surprising particular facts and ends at the
hypothesis of another particular fact which is supposed to be the cause of the former
(this seems to be the case of criminal detection).” Whereas the second type of abduc-
tion “starts from one or more surprising particular facts and ends at the hypothesis
of a general law (this seems to be the case of all scientiﬁc discoveries)” [6, 204].
It seems that Thagard, Bofantini, and Proni confuse the two criteria already
mentioned by Peirce in the two separated passages quoted above. They considered
that the unconscious abduction represented in the perceptual judgments (low-level
abduction) is the same type of the practical matters that lack enough available time,
instantiated in a detective investigation. Perhaps they thought that the unconscious
and uncontrolled type of abduction was due to the lack of time. But this is not the
case; the perceptual judgments are unconscious and beyond criticism, because that
is their nature. Although someone had plenty of time for observing or experiencing
something, the perceptual judgment will continue to be unconscious. Those scholars
did not realize they were facing not two types of abduction but perhaps four types.
One important thing they mention is that there can be two different types of
abduction depending on the type of conclusion they reach, either a Case or a Rule.
Although they confuse those two types of abduction with the other types proposed
by Peirce, it is important to point out that this distinction can enrich the criteria of

Are There Types of Abduction? An Inquiry …
9
dividing types of abduction. If abduction concludes a case or a particular fact, they
thought, this was the feature that makes it practical; and if an abductive inference
concludes a Rule, that is, a law, this was the feature that makes it scientiﬁc. But
remember that this was not Peirce’s argument. The distinction between a practical
and a scientiﬁc abduction depends upon the time available or the urgency with which
one needs to reach a conclusion. Likewise, he never would have said that abduction
can conclude Rules because that belongs exclusively to induction. Nonetheless, I
underline that perhaps this distinction between a particular fact and a law can be
one of those elements of the “complexity of conditions” that can derive types of
abduction.
So far, then, we have three criteria that allow dual distinctions for abduction:
consciousness, time, and types of conclusion. Let’s keep this in mind for the last part
of this inquiry.
2.2
Three and Four Types of Abduction
Despite the way that Bofantini and Proni proposed in the ﬁrst part of their paper “To
Guess or not to guess” that there is a dual division of abduction, they concluded at
the end of the paper that there are three types of abduction that do not coincide with
the two types above mentioned. They say:
[It] is necessary to distinguish three principal types of abduction, with three ascending
degrees of originality and creativity:
ABDUCTION TYPE ONE –the mediation law to use for inferring the case from the result
is given in an obligant and automatic or semiautomatic way.
ABDUCTION TYPE TWO –the mediation law to use for inferring the case from the result
is found by selection in the available encyclopedia;
ABDUCTION TYPE THREE –the mediation law to use for inferring the case from the result
is developed de novo, invented. It is in this last type of abduction that real guesswork comes
in. (1988, 133–134).3
Umberto Eco [6] accepted Bofantini and Proni’s suggestion of three types of
abduction and added a fourth type. He named them as follows:
1. Hypothesis or overcoded abduction: The law is given automatically or semiau-
tomatically.
2. Undercoded abduction. The rule must be selected from a series of equiparable
rules put at our disposal by the current world knowledge.
3. Creative abduction. The law must be invented ex novo. To invent a law is not so
difﬁcult, provided our mind is “creative” enough.
3In a posterior article, Bofantini extended this proposal, particularly the third type, (Bonfantini,
1993: 326–327; cf. Bonfantini, 1987: 69, 112; Niño, p. 265), which is divided into three subtypes.
Nonetheless, since the whole proposal is going to be criticized below, there is no need to enter into
details of these further distinctions, for they also fall into the general critique.

10
J. A. Flórez Restrepo
4. Meta-abduction. It consists in deciding as to whether the possible universe
outlinedbyour ﬁrst-level abductions is thesameas theuniverseof our experience.
(see Eco [6, 210–220])
As can be seen, Bofantini’s, Proni’s and Eco’s division of three ﬁrst types of
abduction is based on the syllogistic analysis of inferences as composed by a rule,
a case, and a result. According to it, a Hypothesis is a syllogism that derives a case
by means a rule and a case. Bofantini’s, Proni’s and Eco’s division of the three ﬁrst
types of abduction focusses in the Rule (one of the premises), law or “mediating
law” as they call it, and attempt to determine its nature. Hence, they claim that, in
the ﬁrst type of abduction, the rule or law is obligant or given automatically; in the
second type, the law is selected from the “available encyclopedia” or “current world
knowledge”; and in the third type, the law is invented.4
Some difﬁculties are presented in this triadic distinction based on the nature of
the law. First, how does it establish the three different types of rules or laws? Is this
distinction sound and consistent? The ﬁrst type of law is obligant. Are not all laws
obligant? Is it not the nature and deﬁnition of law to obligate all particular cases
subsumed in it? Whether the law is selected or invented (second and third type) is a
law and it must be obeyed by all particular cases covered by it. The second type of
law is selected from the “available encyclopedia”, namely, it is a law that we already
know. Is this different to the ﬁrst type of laws (obligants)? This seems to be a false
dichotomy; an obligant law can be already known, and all known laws have to be
obligant. Therefore, the ﬁrst and second types of abduction do not establish any real
distinction.
The third type of law is invented. This is the most complex question that this
distinction raises, for it creates, from my point of view, a circular argument. It says
that creative abduction is made after a law is invented. Is not the purpose of abduction
to create or conjecture laws or conceptions? Is not also a purpose of abduction to
take us from lack of knowledge to knowledge? If a law must be invented before
abduction can take place, then a previous abduction must be made, and so on. What
kind of abduction should be done before ‘creative abduction’ takes place? Therefore,
‘creative abduction’ is a petitio principium and its application makes a regression ad
inﬁnitum.
Secondly, another difﬁculty that this distinction presents is that it focuses only in
the rule or law. What happens with the other premise (result) and with the conclusion
4A similar distinction between the second and third type of abduction is made by Campos [5] and
Magnani [10] (see also, [17, 202]). Campos states that there are two types of abduction, namely:
a ‘habitual abduction’ and a ‘creative abduction’. Magnani [10] distinguishes between ‘selective
abduction’ that chooses the best hypothesis among a manifold of hypothesis already known, and
‘creative abduction’ that introduces new concepts and laws. They are similar to Eco’s ‘undercoded
abduction’ and creative abduction’ because they focus on the nature of the second premise, rule
or law. Campos’ ‘habitual abduction’ and Magnani’s ‘selective abduction’ are that inference that
results when the law is already known and the surprising fact is explained under that law. ‘Creative
abduction’ is that in which the law is unknown, and, therefore, a law must be conjectured before
proceeding to explain the surprising facts [5]. Consequently, the critiques that I am about to present
on Eco’s distinction include also Campo’s and Magnani’s distinction.

Are There Types of Abduction? An Inquiry …
11
(case)? Would not be this other premise also obligant, selected and invented? If this
were the case, then it would not be three types of abduction but twenty-seven (33),
depending on the nature of its propositions (either premises or conclusion).
Thirdly, the classiﬁcation of the law as obligant, selected and invented imitates the
modal distinction between: possible, actual, and necessary. In the case of Peirce, it
refers to his theory of categories according to which ﬁrstness is possible, secondness
is actual, and thirdness is necessary. Hence Bofantini’s, Proni’s and Eco’s distinction
is upside down; the ﬁrst type of abduction should be the invented one, for it is mere
possibility; the second type is the selected one for it is an actual law; and the third
type of abduction should be necessitating or obligant as they call it.
The ﬁrst objection is sufﬁcient to consider that those distinctions (obligant,
selected, and invented) do not have any consequence in establishing types of abduc-
tion. Regardless of the origin or nature of the law, the abduction that uses such a
law as a premise does not have any change. The nature of inference depends on the
habit according to which it passes from the premises to the conclusion. The nature
or the origin of the premises does not modify the nature of the inference. A deduc-
tion, for instance, can have false premises, included a false law, such as “all men are
ﬂying beings”, and still conclude necessarily and validly that “Socrates is a ﬂying
being”. Thus, abduction can have whatever premises one prefers (obligant, selected,
or invented) and still it can suggest or conjecture that an event belongs to a rule.
In consequence, I reject entirely this procedure to determine types of abduction.5
It is based on a triadic distinction that is not sound; it lacks completeness for it
only takes into account the nature of the Rule (second premise); it lacks precision in
determining the order in which those distinctions should be made; and therefore it
lacks coherence with Peirce’s categories.
The fourth type of abduction by Eco, or meta-abduction, should be rejected as well
for it surpasses the frontier of abductive reasoning. It takes the place of the verifying
step of inquiry that Peirce identiﬁes with induction. To decide if abduction is the same
as the universe of experience is the same as verifying or proving. The contact with
experience belongs only to induction, for induction is the inference asking nature
if the hypothesis is true or not. Obviously, this verifying step is indispensable in
every inquiry, and every abduction must be tested, but its veriﬁcation corresponds
to induction. In conclusion, Eco’s division of four types of abduction should not be
accepted.
Thagard [19] also claims there are four kinds of abduction, but unlike Eco’s classi-
ﬁcation, this division depends on the nature of the conclusion of the abductive infer-
ence. These four kinds are called simple, existential, rule-forming, and analogical
abductions. He deﬁnes them as follows:
Simple abduction produces hypotheses about individual objects (…). Existential abduction
postulates the existence of previously unknown objects, such as new planets. Rule-forming
5Paavola is also a critique of this procedure. He says: “I think it is not, for example, clear in which
sense “creative” abduction can start totally “ex novo”, and if overcoded abduction is more inductive
than abductive, and if meta-abduction is a distinct type of abduction (or rather a second-order
abduction).” (2006, pp. 49–50).

12
J. A. Flórez Restrepo
abduction produces rules that explain other rules and hence is important for generating theo-
ries that explain laws. Finally, analogical abduction uses past cases of hypothesis formation
to generate hypotheses similar to existing ones. [19]
This new classiﬁcation by Thagard [19] is an extension of his classiﬁcation of
two types of abduction commented supra [18]. There he considered one type as an
inference to a Case and a second type as an inference to a Rule, that is, there were two
types of abduction depending upon the types of conclusions they reach. Now, this
new classiﬁcation enlarges this same distinction and claims that the particular facts
concluded through abduction can be either known and observable (simple abduction)
or unknown and unobservable (existential abduction). For instance, if you see a group
of young men outrageously dressed, then you may conclude they are rock musicians,
basedontherulethatallrockmusiciansdressoutrageously;thisisasimpleabduction.
But if an astronomer sees that the orbit of Uranus is perturbed, it may be concluded
that there is another planet that is unobserved which happens to be Neptune; this is
an existential abduction (see Thagard [19]).
The third type proposed by Thagard is that which concludes rules, theories, or
general laws. It cannot be a simple generalization in which a rule like all A are B is
postulated in order to explain why a particular A is B. “The ﬁrst is problematic and
does not seem to play any role in theory formation. In it, we postulate the rule that all
A are B to explain why a particular A is B. The second is a combination of abduction
and generalization” [19]. Hence, rule-forming abduction should not be confused with
generalization or induction. For example, the next syllogism concludes a universal
statement, but it is not a rule-forming abduction: Michael dresses outrageously;
Michael is a rock musician; therefore, all rock musicians dress outrageously. This
is clearly an induction. It is a syllogism in the third ﬁgure that concludes a general
proposition. It is precisely what Aristotle indicated as induction (Prior Analytics, II,
23) and it is exactly what Peirce called a perfect form of induction (see W1: 177,
179, 262–264; and MS 741, p. 11 ff.; Cf. Flórez [8, 42–50]).
The abduction to rules that Thagard actually accepts is that in which a general-
ization is mixed with an explanation. “Abduction to rules works like: if PI forms the
abduction that the F that is x is also H because that would explain why is G, it can
naturally generalize that all F are H.” (1988, 59). The difference for induction and
simple generalization is that the syllogism of an abduction to rule also includes the
explanation of the facts exposed in the premises, not just their generalization. Hence,
abduction to a rule and induction has the same syllogistic form, but, as Thagard recalls
it, “not all induction is an inference to an explanation” (Ibid). Thagard’s example of
abduction to rules is the inference to the law “all sounds are waves” based on the
characteristics of sound that will be explained if sound is a wave.
The fourth type of abduction by Thagard is analogical abduction. It consists in
postulating hypothesis similar to other satisfactory and successful hypotheses. “Once
a theory has established itself, scientists frequently want to use similar kinds of
explanations.” (1988, 60). For instance, if Sherlock Homes has already resolved
cases with the hypothesis that a criminal had a particular motive, it is plausible to
conjecture that a new crime was committed also with a particular motive. Another

Are There Types of Abduction? An Inquiry …
13
example is “how the great success of Newtonian mechanics made most scientists
of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries strive to give mechanical explanations of
phenomena” (Ibid). Similarly, Thagard claims that apparently Darwin’s hypothesis
of evolution of species was based on the analogy with the artiﬁcial selection by
breeding (Cf. [19]).
Thagard’s classiﬁcation of 1988 is sounder than Eco’s but it is incomplete for it
is based only on the types of conclusions that abductive inferences render; it does
not pay attention to the evidence or premises on which they are based. Moreover,
the fourth type or analogical abduction does not correspond to the same criteria with
which the three ﬁrst types of abduction were distinguished. Analogical abduction
does not pay attention to the types of conclusion but to the guiding principle that
rules abduction. Notice that any of the three ﬁrst types of abduction can be analogical.
So, it is necessary to identify exactly what is the criterion that determines this clas-
siﬁcation and to identify some other types of inferences that this criterion permits.
Consequently, Thagard’s criteria will be considered in the ﬁnal part of this inquiry
but they should be extended and complemented.
2.3
Eleven Types of Abduction
The extension of these criteria was precisely proposed by Schurz [17]. Threefold and
fourfold divisions of abduction tried so far were based separately either in the nature
of the intermediary law (second premise or rule) or in the nature of the conclusion
reached. Schurz [17] proposes a more extensive classiﬁcation based on these two
criteria already expressed by other scholars, plus a third criterion or dimension, as
he calls them:
1. The kind of premises or evidence available to make abductive inferences. The
alternatives here are two: there are either facts or laws.
2. The kind of conclusion that is abducted. Here there are basically three alterna-
tives: the conclusion is either a fact or a law, and the facts can also be divided
into observable facts or unobservable facts.
3. “The beliefs or cognitive mechanisms which drive the abduction.” The alterna-
tives here are three: the abduction is driven by law, scientiﬁc theories, or causal
uniﬁcation (see 2008, 205).
If these options are combined, there appear four genera of abduction: 1. Factual
abduction; 2. Law abduction; 3. Theoretical model abduction, and 4. Second order
existential abduction. Some of these genera are subdivided; for instance, factual
abduction has three species: (a) observable fact abduction, (b) First order existential
abduction, and (c) Unobservable fact abduction. Instead, law abduction and theo-
retical model abduction has no subdivisions. Finally, the fourth genus has more
subdivisions that the others. The next chart shows all those types of abduction. The
ﬁnal subdivision is that which constitutes a deﬁnite type of abduction (their name are

14
J. A. Flórez Restrepo
in italics), and therefore, Schurz’s classiﬁcation can be summarized in eleven types
of abduction.
The ﬁrst genus is factual abduction. It is deﬁned by Schurz as that inference in
which “both the evidence to be explained and the abducted hypothesis are singular
facts. Factual abductions are always driven by known implicational laws going from
causes to effects, and the abducted hypotheses are found by backward reasoning,
inverse to the direction of the lawlike implications.” (2008, 206) The best examples
of this type of abduction are detective investigations, for a crime scene is a fact and
the conjectured hypothesis is also a fact. For sake of brevity, I am not going too
deeply into the subclasses of factual abduction (see [17]). As can be seen in Table 2,
all factual abductions coincide in their general structure.
The second genus is law abduction. As its name indicates, this type of abduction
is that which is supported and driven by law, and more importantly, it concludes
laws. Given two general statement such as ‘whatever contains sugar is sweet’ and
‘all pineapple is sweet’, it is possible to conjecture the law: “All pineapple contains
sugar”.6
The third genus is theoretical model of abduction. Schurz explains it as: “The
explanandum of a theoretical-model abduction is typically a well-conﬁrmed and
reproducible empirical phenomenon expressed by an empirical law (…). The abduc-
tion is driven by an already established scientiﬁc theory which is usually quanti-
tatively formulated. The abductive task consists in ﬁnding theoretical (initial and
boundary) conditions which describe the causes of the phenomenon in the theoret-
ical language and which allow the mathematical derivation of the phenomenon from
the theory” (2008, 213). So the difference between law abduction and theoretical
model abduction lies on the difference between law and theory. Schurz explains
theoretical model abduction as the work of normal science, in Kuhn’s terms (2008,
213). A theory is explained by Schurz as the work on a normal science (Kuhn) in the
sense in which a normal science always want to explain an anomaly in terms of the
dominant theory.
The fourth genus is called second order existential abduction. It is the one that
has more subdivisions; they depend mostly upon the mechanism that drives the
inferences, either extrapolation, analogy, or, pure uniﬁcation. Thus, the ﬁrst species
of second order existential abduction is micro part abduction, and it is deﬁned as the
extrapolationoftheknowledgeonehasonthemacroscopicworldanditisconjectured
that the microscopic world is similar. The best example of this type of hypothesis is
precisely the atomistic world view. The second subspecies of second order existential
abduction is analogical abduction. As its name indicates, this is an abduction driven
by analogy. It is the same analogical abduction proposed by Thagard [19]. The next
subspecies of second-order existential abduction is hypothetical cause abduction. It
has two types; the ﬁrst one conjecture the existence of an unobservable cause and it
is driven by speculation (no particular law, theory, or background); the second type
6According to Schurz, this type of abduction is what Aristotle had in mind in Posterior Analytics
I, 34. This passage is what I consider is the true origin of abduction in Aristotle (see Flórez [7,
272–277]).

Are There Types of Abduction? An Inquiry …
15
Table 2 Schurz’s classiﬁcation of eleven kinds of abduction (see [17])
Kind of abduction
Evidence to be
explained
Product of abduction
Abduction is driven by
Factual abduction
or retroduction
Observable-fact abduction
Facts
Observable facts
Known laws
1st order existential abduction
Facts
Observable facts
Known laws
Unobservable Fact abduction (historical abduction)
Facts
Unobservable facts
Known laws
Law abduction
Empirical laws
New laws
Known laws
Theoretical model abduction
General
empirical laws
New theoretical models Known theories
2nd order
existential
abduction
Micro-part abduction
Laws
New laws or new
theories with new
concepts/microscopic
composition
Theoretical background
knowledge/extrapolation
of background and
knowledge
Analogical abduction
Laws
New laws or new
theories with analogical
concepts
Analogy with background
knowledge
Hypothetical Cause
abduction
Speculative abduction
Laws
Hidden unobservable
causes
Speculation
Common cause
abduction
Strict common
cause abduction
Laws
Hidden common
causes/new theoretical
concepts
Causal uniﬁcation
Statistical factor
abduction
Laws
Hidden common
causes/new theoretical
concepts
Causal uniﬁcation
Abduction to
reality
Introspective
phenomena
Hidden common
causes/concepts of
external reality
Causal uniﬁcation

16
J. A. Flórez Restrepo
is conjectures a common cause and it is driven by the search of causal uniﬁcation (it
does not require any background knowledge). The latter has some other subdivisions
that I am not going to expose for the sake of brevity (see [17]).
In conclusion, Schurz’s classiﬁcation presents a series of criteria that allows clas-
sifying types of abduction. The criterion of the product of abduction, either a fact
or a law, was already considered by Thagard [18, 19], although Schurz includes the
variable of the fact being observable or unobservable. The other two criteria are novel
and they seem very promising. To consider the type of premises or evidence avail-
able to make the abductive inference is important. Bofantini, Proni, and Eco based
their classiﬁcation on the types of laws included in the premises; but they neglect the
possibility of an abduction based entirely in particular facts. The last criterion is the
most novel one, for it includes “The beliefs or cognitive mechanisms which drive
the abduction.” It seems that it refers to the ‘guiding principle’ that Peirce claims to
drive every inference. He says:
The particular habit of mind which governs this or that inference may be formulated in a
proposition whose truth depends on the validity of the inferences which the habit determines,
and such a formula is called a guiding principle of inference. Suppose, for example, that we
observe that a rotating disk of copper quickly comes to rest when placed between the poles of
a magnet, and we infer that this will happen with every disk of copper. The guiding principle
is, that what is true of one piece of copper is true of another. Such a guiding principle with
regard to copper would be much safer than with regard to many other substances – brass, for
example. (EP1, 112)
Peirce did not mention any particular kind of guiding principle, although he recog-
nizes there can be plenty of them: “A book might be written to signalize all the
most important of these guiding principles of reasoning.” Schurz recognizes six of
those habits of mind or guiding principles: a law, scientiﬁc theories, background
knowledge, analogy, speculation, and causal uniﬁcation.
2.4
Fifteen Types of Abduction
Hoffman [9] works on Schurz’s classiﬁcation enlarging and reclassifying other types
of abduction. Hoffmann’s classiﬁcation reaches a total of ﬁfteen types of abduction.
He criticizes Schurz’s criteria to determine types of abduction for they “simply do
not allow for one coherent list” (2010, 579). Hoffmann’s classiﬁcation is based only
on the following two criteria:
1. There are ﬁve things that can be abductively inferred: facts (observable or unob-
servable), types, laws, theoretical models, and systems of representation. [9, 579,
584]
2. There are three different procedures by which abduction can be made: ﬁrst,
selective abduction according to which an explanatory hypothesis from a given
database; Second, personal creative abduction according to which a new explana-
tory hypothesis is made (P-creative); and third a collective creative abduction

Are There Types of Abduction? An Inquiry …
17
Table 3 Hoffman’s ﬁfteen kinds of abduction (Source Hoffman [9, 585])
Selective abduction:
hypothesis already
exists in our minds
P-creative: hypothesis
is new for us, but it
exists already in
culture
H-creative: hypothesis
is historically new
The explanatory
hypothesis is a new
fact
Selective fact
abduction
P-creative fact
abduction
H-creative fact
abduction
The explanatory
hypothesis is a new
type or concept
Selective type
abduction
P-creative type
abduction
H-creative type
abduction
The explanatory
hypothesis is a law
Selective law
abduction
P-creative law
abduction
H-creative law
abduction
The explanatory
hypothesis is a
theoretical model
Selective model
abduction
P-creative model
abduction
H-creative model
abduction
The explanatory
hypothesis is based on
a new system of
representation
Selective
meta-diagrammatic
abduction
P-creative
metadiagrammatic
abduction
H-creative
metadiagrammatic
abduction
according to which a new explanatory hypothesis is made that no one else has
made in history (H-creative).
If these two criteria are combined, ﬁfteen types of abduction result (ﬁve things
to be inferred multiplied for three procedures). Consequently, Hoffman adds a ﬁfth
genus of abduction to the four main genera of abduction proposed by Schurz. His
new genus is called “meta-diagrammatic abduction” (2010, 574, 579–584). Every
genus is deﬁned by the reference to the ﬁrst criterion of things inferred: factual
abduction, type abduction, law abduction, theoretical model abduction, and meta-
diagrammatic abduction. Moreover, every genus has three species according to the
three procedures: selective, P-creative and H-creative (Table 3).
Although Hoffman offers a more comprehensive classiﬁcation of types of abduc-
tion than that of Schurz, he neglects the criterion of the types of premises. He focuses
only on the explanatory hypothesis (conclusions) and the guiding principles that drive
inferences. This last criterion is even diminished with respect to the progress made
by Schurz who proposed six guiding principles. Hoffman’s distinction among selec-
tive, P-creative and H-creative suggests Bofantini, Proni and Eco’s distinction among
obligant, selective and creative abduction. It does not really focus on guiding prin-
ciples, for it focuses on the origin of the intermediary law that rules the inference.
The origin can be from either a given data (selective) or a new law for the inquirer
(P-creative) or something completely new for everyone (H-creative).
Finally, the last proposal by a contemporary scholar that will be discussed is
Aliseda [1], who despite the fact does that she not propose a classiﬁcation of types of
abduction, she indeed enlists three different parameters, as she calls them, which will
allow a further classiﬁcation and can be compared with the other criteria proposed by

18
J. A. Flórez Restrepo
Peirce and other scholars. “Our aim is not to classify abductive processes, but rather
to point out that several kinds of these are used for different combinations of the
above parameters” (2016, 48). Those parameters are, ﬁrst, the inferential parameter
that “sets some suitable logical relationship among explananda, background theory,
and explanandum” (2016, p. 46). This parameter is similar to the guiding principle or
principle that drives the abductive inference. She claims that the inference parameter
“ranges over such diverse values as probable inference (, α ⇒probable φ), in which
the explanans renders the explanandum only highly probable, or as the inferential
mechanism of logic programming (, α ⇒prolog φ).” (2016, 46)
The second parameter is the kind of phenomenon (ϕ) that triggers the abductive
inference. Namely, it refers to the starting point that forces the abductive inferences.
Aliseda distinguishes between two types of triggers: novelty and anomaly. Peirce
had thought that the only trigger of abduction is a surprising fact. Aliseda, instead,
thinks that surprise is a relative concept for it depends on the background knowledge
everyone has. Hence, in order to be more precise, she distinguishes between two
types of surprising facts: novelty is a surprising fact that is consistent with theory,
whereas anomaly is a surprising fact that is inconsistent with theory.
Abductive Novelty:  ⇒φ,  ⇒¬φ
φ is novel. It cannot be explained ( ⇒φ), but it is consistent with the theory ( ⇒¬φ).
Abductive Anomaly:  ⇒φ,  ⇒¬φ.
φ is anomalous. The theory explains rather its negation ( ⇒¬φ). (2016, 47).
The third parameter is the abduction product or outcome; in other words, it is
the type of conclusion or explanatory hypothesis that is derived from abduction. She
recognizes three types of outcome: facts, rules, or theories.
Aliseda did not commit to a classiﬁcation of types of abduction; but it is easy to
see that if those three parameters were combined, there would be eighteen types of
abduction: three inferential parameters multiplied by two triggers give as a result six
types of abduction, and those six types multiplied by three types of outcomes give
as a result eighteen types of abduction.
Conclusively, the journey across proposals of types of abduction (see Table 4)
has allowed us to identify different criteria to distinguish kinds of abduction. Peirce
himself knew there was a “complexity of conditions” (MSS 637) to determine abduc-
tive inferences, and he identiﬁed only two of those conditions: ﬁrst, available time or
urgency to reach a conclusion with which he distinguishes between a practical and
a scientiﬁc retroduction; and second, consciousness and the possibility of criticism
with which an abduction is made, so he distinguished between perceptual judgments
and abduction. Thagard recognizes in the types of conclusion a new criterion of clas-
siﬁcation; ﬁrst he postulates only two types: either an abduction concludes cases or
particular facts, or it concludes rules or laws (1978). Later he postulates that partic-
ular facts can be either observable or unobservable, that abduction can conclude laws,
and that abduction can be made analogically (1988). Bofantini, Proni, and Eco focus
their analysis in another criterion: the nature of the intermediary law, second premise

Are There Types of Abduction? An Inquiry …
19
Table 4 Classiﬁcation of types of abduction according to their afﬁnity
Peirce
(1903)
Bofantini
and Proni
1
Peirce
(1909)
Bofantini
and Proni
2
Eco
Campos
[5]
Magnani
[10]
Thagard
[18]
Thagard [19]
Schurz [17]
Hoffman [9]
Perceptual
judgment
Low-level
abduction
Practical
retroduction
Abduction
type 1:
obligant
law
overcoded
abduction:
obligant law
Hypothesis
or
abduction
to a case
Simple
abduction
Observable
fact
abduction
Factual
abduction
Selective fact l
abduction
Factual abduction
Abduction
type 2:
selected
law
Undercoded
abduction:
selected law
Habitual
abduction
Selective
abduction
1st order
existential
abduction
P-creative fact
abduction
Abduction
type 3:
invented
law
Creative
abduction:
invented
law
Creative
abduction
Creative
abduction
Existential
abduction
Unobservable
fact
abduction
(historical
abduction)
H-creative fact
abduction
Meta
abduction:
decision
whether the
conjecture
corresponds
to
experience
Abduction
or
abduction
to a rule
Rule-forming
abduction
Law abduction
Selective type
abduction
Type abduction
Abduction
Scientiﬁc
abduction
Scientiﬁc
retroduction
Theoretical model
abduction
P-creative type
abduction
Micro-part
abduction
Second
order
existential
abduction
H-creative type
abduction
Analogical
abduction
Analogical
abduction
Selective law
abduction
Law abduction
Speculative
abduction
P-creative law
abduction
(continued)

20
J. A. Flórez Restrepo
Table 4 (continued)
Peirce
(1903)
Bofantini
and Proni
1
Peirce
(1909)
Bofantini
and Proni
2
Eco
Campos
[5]
Magnani
[10]
Thagard
[18]
Thagard [19]
Schurz [17]
Hoffman [9]
Strict
common
cause
abduction
H-creative law
abduction
Statistical
factor
abduction
Selective model
abduction
Theoretical model
abduction
Abduction to
reality
P-creative model
abduction
H-creative model
abduction
Selective meta
diagrammatic
abduction
Meta-diagramamatic
abduction.
P-creative
meta-diagrammatic
abduction
H-creative
meta-diagrammatic
abduction

Are There Types of Abduction? An Inquiry …
21
or rule on which every abduction is based. Thus, they postulate that laws can be obli-
gant, selective, or invented [4, 133–134; 6, 206–207]. Moreover, Eco added a fourth
type whose criterion is not the nature of the law, but the possibility of coincidence
of the conclusion with experience. Aliseda [1] claims there are three parameters:
inferential parameters (probabilistic or programming), triggers (novelty or anomaly)
and outcome (facts, laws or scientiﬁc theories). Schurz [17] proposes three criteria
some of which were already proposed; ﬁrstly, he considers the kind of premises
abduction possesses, either facts or laws; secondly, he considers the kind of conclu-
sion abduction reaches, observable facts, unobservable facts or laws; and thirdly,
he considers the cognitive mechanism that drives abduction: law, scientiﬁc theories
or causal uniﬁcation. Finally, Hoffmann [9] recognizes two criteria of distinction:
ﬁrstly, the conclusion of explanatory hypothesis abduction reaches facts (observable
or unobservable), types, laws, theoretical models, and systems of representation.
Secondly, procedures by which abduction can be made; he identiﬁes three kinds
of procedures: from a given database; from a new personal explanatory hypothesis
(P-creative); and from a new historical explanatory hypothesis (H-creative).
3
A Conjecture of Types of Abduction Based on Previous
Criteria
Now, a comprehensive classiﬁcation of types of abduction should take into account
many of these criteria, except for those that were already rejected in the previous
section. A way of organizing these criteria is through a distinction between external
and internal conditions of abduction. Thus, internal conditions are those that belong
to the syllogistic or argumentative form of the abductive inference such as the nature
of the premises and the nature of the conclusions. External conditions are those
circumstantial criteria such as time, consciousness, triggers, and guiding principles.
Before entering to analyze internal and external conditions of abductive inferences,
it is necessary to say that with this distinction there can be made a possible response
to Peirce’s paradox according to which types of abduction are postulated but it is
asserted several times that abduction has one only type. It seems that Peirce thought
that the internal conditions of an abductive inference are the same; in his early
account he considered that the formal structure of abduction is a syllogism in the
second ﬁgure that attempts to infer a Case, and in his mature account is always a
hypothetical syllogism of the form:
The surprising fact, C, is observed;
But if A were true, C would be a matter of course,
Hence, there is a reason to suspect that A is true.7
Therefore, he never considered that the internal conditions of an abductive infer-
ence were relevant; but the external condition of time and consciousness can modify
7EP2: 231; CP 5. 189.

22
J. A. Flórez Restrepo
the abductive inference. In other words, for Peirce, a practical or scientiﬁc retroduc-
tion always have the same structure, the difference is only how much time there is
available to reach a conclusion; or a perceptual judgment or an abduction properly
also has the same structure (if they were formalized) but the only difference is that
one is controllable and made consciously, but the other is uncontrollable. Conse-
quently, it seems that when Peirce advocates for a unique type of abduction from a
categorical point of view, he is referring to the internal conditions. Whereas when
he advocates for two types of abduction he is referring to the external conditions.
The internal conditions are referred entirely to the syllogistic form of inferences.
In his early account of inference, Peirce took this path but he never considered types
of abduction; moreover, later on his career, he considered the syllogistic account
of inferences as not relevant. He said: “I was too much taken up in considering
syllogistic forms and the doctrine of logical extension and comprehension, both
of which I made more fundamental than they really are.” (CP2. 102 from 1902).
Likewise, he said that “I do not think, however, that this formal way of deﬁning
InductionandAbductionbyreferencetothesyllogismconveysmuchideaoftheirreal
nature except to a mind that has penetrated very deeply into the nature of syllogism”
(MS 475, ISP12-17, 1903). Peirce did not reject this kind of analysis at all but
recognized it to be not as fundamental and important.8 At this respect, says Niño:
“On the other hand, it is important to point out that Peirce just says that that ‘formal
presentation’ of abduction and induction is not ‘very communicative’ for someone
no familiarized with syllogisms. He does not say that it is erroneous, confusing,
refuted or overcome to understand them in that way. Moreover, he says, once again,
that forging a hypothesis to explain observed facts is the inference of the minor
premise by means of the major and the conclusion. In other words, abduction is the
inference of an antecedent through a consequence (rule) and a consequence (result)”
[11, p. 175. Translation is mine].9
This, once again, can be the reason why Peirce only considered the external
conditions of time and consciousness but neglected the internal conditions of the
syllogistic account. The external conditions make him think that there are two types
of abduction, and the neglect of internal conditions make him think there are no types
of abduction. And so, the paradox with which this inquiry started is solved (at least
for me the doubt ceased).
Now, if we, despite Peirce’s neglect, pay attention to the internal condition of the
syllogistic account, then we can include the criteria proposed by other scholars. In
particular, we can synthesize those proposals in two main criteria:
8Belluci (2018, 2) consider instead that the syllogistic account of inferences was incorrect
whatsoever.
9Por otra parte, hay que notar que Peirce sólo dice que esa ‘presentación formal’ de la Abducción y
de la Inducción no es ‘muy comunicativa’ para alguien no familiarizado con el silogismo. No dice
que sea erróneo, confuso, refutado o superado entenderlo así. Además, dice, una vez más, que el
forjar una hipótesis para explicar hechos observados es la inferencia de la premisa menor a partir de
la premisa mayor y la conclusión. Es decir, la Abducción es la inferencia de un antecedente (Caso)
a partir de una consecuencia (Regla) y un consecuente (Resultado).

Are There Types of Abduction? An Inquiry …
23
1. The types of premises or evidence on which an abductive inference is based:
there can be particular facts or laws.
2. The type of conclusions or explanatory hypothesis that results from the abductive
inference: there can be also particular facts or laws.
These two criteria, as you can see, are related to the quantity and quality of
propositions and that precisely is what the syllogistic account of logical inferences
does. Peirce’s presentation of the syllogistic account (1878) did not explore entirely
the possibilities of different types of propositions. I suggest that an extension of the
syllogistic account can convey types of abduction based on distinctions on types of
premises and types of conclusion.
As was already mentioned, the syllogistic account of inferences states a general
form to abduction (hypothesis) as a syllogism that derives a Case by means a Rule
and a Result. It is so because it takes each proposition of the syllogism and regardless
the quantity or quality of those propositions, it assigns them a function: either a rule,
a case, or a result. But if all those characteristics are taken into account, then the
same number of valid syllogism that Aristotle and the medieval thinkers found for
deduction can be also assigned to induction and abduction but with the propositions
reversedorrelocated.Inthegeneraldescriptionofthethreetypesofarguments,Peirce
stated that deduction is identiﬁed as Barbara, induction as Baroco and abduction
as Bocardo (see EP1, 190). But in a speciﬁc determination of every form of the
proposition, then deduction has twenty-four types (Aristotelian and Theophrastean
syllogisms, such as Barbara, Celarent, Darii, Ferio, etc.). It seems valid to me that
the same sort of deductive syllogisms make the same number of inductions and
abductions with the proposition reversed. And since induction is a reversed deduction
thattriestoinfertheruleormajorpremisefromacaseandaresult,andsinceabduction
is a reversed deduction that infers a case by means of a result and a rule, then there
are as many valid types of abductions and inductions as there are valid moods and
ﬁgures of deductive syllogism.
Peirce’s example on his article “Deduction, Induction, and Hypothesis” from
1878, starts with a deductive syllogism in Barbara and reversing its proposition
obtains its corresponding induction and abduction (Table 5).
Table 5 Symmetry of the three kinds of inferences (Charts constructed from the article “Deduction,
Induction, and Hypothesis” (1878), EP1: 188)
Deduction
Induction
Abduction
Major premise
All the beans from this
bag are white (rule)
These beans are from
this bag (case)
All the beans from this
bag are white (rule)
Minor premise
These beans are from
this bag (case)
These beans are white
(result)
These beans are white
(result)
Conclusion
These beans are white
(result)
All the beans from this
bag are white (rule)
These beans are from
this bag (case)

24
J. A. Flórez Restrepo
This procedure executed by Peirce is instantiated only by a deductive syllogism
of Barbara (Mood AAA, and ﬁgure 1), and it derives an inductive syllogism AAA-
3, and it derives an abductive syllogism AAA-2. This procedure indicates that it is
possible not only to reverse the propositions of a syllogism Barbara. My proposal is
that it is possible to extend it to all twenty-four valid deductive syllogisms accepted
by tradition. For the sake of brevity, I limit the following exercise to abduction, but
it is clear that it can also be extended to induction (Table 6).
Table 6 Types of abduction according to the reversal of the same propositions of deduction
Deductive syllogisms
Abductive syllogisms
First ﬁgure
Barbara
All M is P (rule)
All S is M (case)
All S is P (result)
Second ﬁgure
All M is P (rule)
All S is P (result)
All S is M (case)
AAA-2
Barbari
All M is P
All S is M
Some S is P
All M is P
Some S is P
All S is M
AIA-2
Celarent
None M is P
All S is M
None S is P
None M is P
None S is P
All S is M
EEA-2
Celaront
None M is P
All S is M
Some S is not P
None M is P
Some S is not P
All S is M
EOA-2
Darii
All M is P
Some S is M
Some S is P
All M is P
Some S is P
Some S is M
AII-2
Ferio
None M is P
Some S is M
Some S is not P
None M is P
Some S is not P
Some S is M
EOI-2
Second ﬁgure
Baroco
All P is M
Some S is not M
Some S is not P
First ﬁgure
All P is M
Some S is not P
Some S is not M
AOO-1
Cesare
None P is M
All S is M
None S is P
None P is M
None S is P
All S is M
EEA-1
Cesaro
None P is M
All S is M
Some S is not P
None P is M
Some S is not P
All S is M
EOA-1
Camestres
All P is M
None S is M
None S is P
All P is M
None S is P
None S is M
AEE-1
Camestros
All P is M
None S is M
Some S is not P
All P is M
Some S is not P
None S is M
AOE-1
(continued)

Are There Types of Abduction? An Inquiry …
25
Table 6 (continued)
Deductive syllogisms
Abductive syllogisms
Festino
None P is M
Some S is M
Some S is not P
None P is M
Some S is not P
Some S is M
EOI-1
Third ﬁgure
Bocardo
Some M is not P
(rule)
All M is S
Some S is not P
Second ﬁgure
Some M is not P
Some S is not P
All M is S
OOA-2a
Darapti
All M is P
All M is S
Some S is P
All M is P
Some S is P
All M is S
IAA-2*
Datisi
All M is P
Some M is S
Some S is P
All M is P
Some S is P
Some M is S
IAI-2*
Disamis
Some M is P
All M is S
Some S is P
Some M is P
Some S is P
All M is S
IIA-2*
Felapton
None M is P
All M is S
Some S is not P
None M is P
Some S is not P
All M is S
OEA-2
Ferison
None M is P
Some M is S
Some S is not P
None M is P
Some S is not P
Some M is S
OEI-2*
Fourth ﬁgure
Bamalip
All P is M
All M is S
Some S is P
Fourth ﬁgure
All P is M
Some S is P
All M is S
IAA-4
Calemes
All P is M
None M is S
None S is P
All P is M
None S is P
None M is S
EAE-4*
Calemos
All P is M
None M is S
Some S is not P
All P is M
Some S is not P
None M is S
OAE-4*
Dimatis
Some P is M
All M is S
Some S is P
Some P is M
Some S is P
All M is S
IIA-4*
Fesapo
None P is M
All M is S
Some S is not P
None P is M
Some S is not P
All M is S
OEA-4*
Fresison
None P is M
Some M is S
Some S is not P
None P is M
Some S is not P
Some M is S
OEI-4*
aThe ﬁgure of syllogisms depends mainly on the place of the middle term. Nonetheless, the minor
and major premises depends on the place on the position of the minor and major terms. The minor
term is the subject of the conclusion and the major is the predicate of the conclusion. In order
to comply with these rules, the syllogisms identiﬁed with an asterisk (*) modify the order of the
premises

26
J. A. Flórez Restrepo
Table 7 Thirty-two abductive syllogisms according to types of premisses and types of conclusions
Explanatory hypothesis is a particular
fact
Explanatory hypothesis is
a law
Premises are particular
facts
OOI-2; III-2; III-4
OOA-2; IIA-2; IIA-4
Premises are facts and
laws
AII-2; EOI-2; AOO-1; EOI-1; IAI-2;
OEI-2; OEI-4
AIA-2; EOA-2; AOE-1;
EOA-1; IAA-2; OEA-2;
IAA-4; OAE 4; OEA-4.
Premises are laws
AAI-2; EEI-2; EEI-1; AEO-1; EAO-4
AAA-2; EEA-2; EEA-1;
AEE-1; EAE-4
Accordingly, there are twenty-four abductive syllogisms. The two ﬁrst criteria can
be partially explained with the syllogistic account as was just extended. The twenty-
four different abductive syllogisms show that there can be both, either particular or
universal premises, and, either particular or universal conclusions. But they do not ﬁll
all the possibilities. The next chart (Table 7) shows that these twenty-four syllogisms
ﬁll four options and leave blank two other options. However, the empty options
can easily and necessarily be ﬁlled by means of a deductive principle according to
which a particular follows from a general, as a replica, Peirce would say. Therefore,
if from particular premises it is possible to conjecture a hypothesis that has the
form of a universal proposition, then it is possible also to conjecture a particular
hypothesis. In the same way that from Barbara is possible to deduce Barbari, thus in
an abductive syllogism OOA-2 is possible to derive OOI-2 (those particular replicas
are represented in italics). Consequently, from twenty-four abductive syllogisms, it
is possible to reach thirty-two.
To provide examples of every one of these thirty-two abductive syllogisms would
make this article too long. Then, we may limit it to some very precise examples. The
syllogism AAA-2 can be instantiated with Peirce’s example of beans and Schurz’s
example of law-abduction: if all the beans from this bag are white, and all these beans
are white, therefore, all these beans are from this bag (EP1, 188). And if whatever
contains sugar is sweet and all pineapple is sweet, therefore, all pineapple contains
sugar [17]. The same premises can also suggest particular conclusions such as ‘some
of these beans are from this bag’ and ‘some pineapples are sweet’, and so we have
syllogisms AAI-2 as a replica of AAA-2.
Another example provided by Peirce is that which says: ‘Only governors of
Turkish provinces receive the honor of being surrounded by horsemen holding a
canopy over his head’; ‘In a Turkish province, there is a man upon a horseback,
surrounded by four horsemen holding a canopy over his head’; and ‘Therefore, that
man is a governor of province’ (see EP1, 189). This syllogism corresponds to AII-
2, that is, a syllogism that is based on a fact (when Peirce landed in a seaport in
Turkey saw such a man) and in a law (only governors are greatly honored); and it is
a syllogism whose explanatory hypothesis is a fact (that particular man is a governor
of province). It corresponds also to Thagard’s simple abduction (1988, pp. 54–55)

Are There Types of Abduction? An Inquiry …
27
whose example is ‘all rock-musicians dresses outrageously’, ‘Michael dresses outra-
geously’, therefore, ‘Michael is a rock musician.’ It also corresponds to Thagard’s
existential abduction, which is, according to him the way in which the theory of
phlogiston in chemistry was formulated: ‘every object that contains an element that
is given off, losses weight’, and ‘certain object loses weight’, therefore, ‘there should
be such as element y’ (see 1988, 57–58).
Other examples more strange are those with particular premises and universal
conclusions, such as the abductive syllogism IIA-2. Thus if we know for certain
that in previous cases rich women were murder by their philandering husband, we
may conclude an explanatory law that says that “the murderer of every rich woman
murdered should be her philandering husband”. This kind of syllogism may seem an
induction for it is generalizing particular cases in law, but remember that induction
does not explain the facts, and in this syllogism the achieved law is explanatory.
Perhaps the replica III-2 may seem more abductive, for it will reach a particular
explanatory hypothesis. Thagard’s examples of analogical abduction ﬁt with these
patterns. If a detective knows from a previous case that a rich woman was murdered by
her philandering husband, then in a new case, if another rich woman was also found
dead, he may suspect that this rich woman was also murdered by her philandering
husband.
Other examples that differ greatly from deduction are those abductive syllogisms
that have negative premises. For instance, we can imagine that if none crustaceous
has a tracheal respiration system and none crab has a tracheal respiration system;
then, perhaps crabs are crustaceous. This is an EEA-2 abductive syllogism. Or if the
conclusion is particular such as ‘this particular crab is a crustaceous, then we have
an EEI-2 abductive syllogism.
Similarly, based on the information ‘none planet bright by itself’ and ‘Mars does
not bright by itself’, it may be derived the conclusion ‘Mars is a planet’. This is an
EOI-2 abductive syllogism.
Likewise, it can be strange (from a deductivistic point of view) that from particular
and negative premises something can be inferred. But abductively, this information
can suggest some conclusion. For instance, if we know that ‘Charles is not a friend of
George’, and ‘John is not a friend of George either’, then perhaps we may conclude
that ‘Charles and John are friends’. This is an OOI-2 abductive syllogism. And
perhaps we may risk a more general conclusion and infer that ‘those who are not
friends of the same person are friends to each other’, which correspond to an OOA-2
abductive syllogism.
These examples sufﬁce to show that the internal conditions or criteria that allows
to identifying types of abduction can be found in the syllogistic account of logical
inferences. The procedure employed by Peirce at reversing the proposition of a
deductive syllogism in order to explain abduction and induction can be extended
to all moods and ﬁgure and ﬁnd many more abductive syllogism up to a total of
thirty-two.
Returning to the external condition of classiﬁcation of types of abduction, let’s
recall that Peirce postulate time and consciousness as two criteria, and that, although
he mentioned it, the guiding principles mentioned for further scholars can work as

28
J. A. Flórez Restrepo
Table 8 Four types of
abduction according to two
external conditions
Urgent
Non-urgent
Conscious
1. Conscious and
urgent abduction
2. Conscious and
non-urgent
abduction
Subconscious 3. Subconscious and
urgent abduction
4. Subconscious and
non-urgent
abduction
a third external criterion. Time and consciousness are precise and understandable
and were clearly explained above. I just say again that they are a continuous process
without a clear line of demarcation. There is no marking point in which we can
afﬁrm clearly that a conscious act of thought became unconscious, and an urgent
process became non-urgent. Holding this in mind, we can establish that these two
distinctions are highly relevant to attain a classiﬁcation of types of abduction. They
are compatible with each other; thus a conscious hypothesis can be either urgent
or not urgent. In consequence, from these two distinctions, four different types of
abduction can be revealed (Table 8).
The third external criterion of classiﬁcation depends upon the guiding principle
that rules the inference. Peirce mentioned that every inference follows a guiding
principle but he did not postulate different types of these principles. Instead, other
scholars postulate the following principles: analogy [17, 19], known law, known
scientiﬁc theory, extrapolation of background, speculation, causal uniﬁcation [17],
from a given database or selective; from a new personal explanatory hypothesis
(P-creative); and from a new historical explanatory hypothesis (H-creative) [9].
All these criteria can be combined for they do not contradict with each other
(Table 9).
We obtain thirty-two types of abductive inferences based on internal criteria and
twenty-four types based on external criteria. These numbers can be mixed as well,
for the internal distinctions, as we will see, are not contradictory with the external
ones. In consequence, there can be seven hundred and sixty-eight (768) types of
abduction.
To provide examples of every one of this copious variety of abductive inferences
is a laborious task that would render this text extremely long. It will be a task of the
community of inquirers to test whether all these abductive syllogisms are real or not.
Hence, in order to conclude my inquiry I am going to provide just a few examples with
the syllogism AAA-2. Above it was identiﬁed with the example of ‘All pineapples
contain sugar;’ this particular example can be analyzed as a conscious and non-urgent
inference, whose guiding principle is a law. This same form of syllogism AAA-2
(the same internal conditions) can also have different external conditions such as a
subconscious and urgent inference guided by an analogy. For example, if someone
observes (subconscious and uncontrolled perceptual judgment) that a warm and red
liquid is ﬂowing from an injury; and observes that that injured person lies on the
ﬂoor unconscious can infer that that person was just been stabbed and she needs to
be taken to a hospital right away.

Are There Types of Abduction? An Inquiry …
29
Table 9 Twenty-four types of abduction from three external criteria of classiﬁcation
Conscious and
urgent abduction
Conscious and
non-urgent
abduction
Subconscious
and urgent
abduction
Subconscious
and non-urgent
abduction
Analogy
Analogical
conscious and
urgent abduction
Analogical
conscious and
non-urgent
abduction
Analogical
subconscious
and urgent
abduction
Analogical
subconscious
and non-urgent
abduction
Known laws
Conscious and
urgent abduction
from a law
Conscious and
non-urgent
abduction from a
law
Subconscious
and urgent
abduction from a
law
Subconscious
and non-urgent
abduction from a
law
Known scientiﬁc
theories
Conscious and
urgent abduction
from a scientiﬁc
theory
Conscious and
non-urgent
abduction from a
scientiﬁc theory
Subconscious
and urgent
abduction from a
scientiﬁc theory
Subconscious
and non-urgent
abduction from a
scientiﬁc theory
Extrapolation of
background
Conscious and
urgent abduction
from an
extrapolated
background
Conscious and
non-urgent
abduction from
an extrapolated
background
Subconscious
and urgent
abduction from
an extrapolated
background
Subconscious
and non-urgent
abduction from
an extrapolated
background
Speculation
Speculative
conscious and
urgent abduction
Speculative
conscious and
non-urgent
abduction
Speculative
subconscious
and urgent
abduction
Speculative
subconscious
and non-urgent
abduction
Causal uniﬁcation Conscious and
urgent abduction
from a causal
uniﬁcation
Conscious and
non-urgent
abduction from a
causal
uniﬁcation
Subconscious
and urgent
abduction from a
causal
uniﬁcation
Subconscious
and non-urgent
abduction from a
causal
uniﬁcation
References
1. Aliseda, A.: Abductive Reasoning: Logical Investigations into Discovery and Explanation,
p. 225. Springer, Dordrecht (2006)
2. Aristotle. A.: The basic works of aristotle. In: Mckeon, R. (ed.) The Modern Library, New York
(2001)
3. Aristotle, A.: Categories, On Interpretation, Prior Analytics. Loeb Classical Library, no. 325.
Translated by Harold P. Cooke and Hugh Tredennick. Harvard University Press, Cambridge,
Massachusetts (1938)
4. Bonfantini, M., Proni, G.: To guess or not to guess?. In: Eco, Sebeok (eds.) The Sign of Three,
pp. 164–184 (1988)
5. Campos, D.G.: On the distinction between Peirce’s abduction and Lipton’s Inference to the
best explanation. Synthese 180, 419–442 (2011)
6. Eco, U.: Horns, hooves, insteps: some hypotheses on three types of abduction. In: Eco, Sebeok
(eds.) The Sign of Three, pp. 198–220 (1988)
7. Flórez, J.A.: Peirce’s theory of the origin of abduction in Aristotle. Trans. Charles S. Peirce
Soc. Q. J. Am. Philos. v.50 fasc.2, 265–280 (2014)

30
J. A. Flórez Restrepo
8. Flórez, J.A.: Peirce’s reading on Aristotle’s account of induction. In: Discusiones Filosóﬁcas.
Año 18 Nº 31, julio – diciembre, pp. 41–57 (2017)
9. Hoffmann, M.: Theoric transformations and a new classiﬁcation of abductive inferences. Trans.
Charles S. Peirce Soc. 46(4), 570–590 (2010)
10. Magnani, L.: Abduction, Reason and Science: Processes of Discovery and Explanation.
Springer, New York (2001)
11. Niño, D.: Abducting Abduction: Avatares sobre la comprensión de la abducción de Charles S.
Peirce (Ph.D. Dissertation). Universidad Nacional, Bogotá, Colombia (2007)
12. Paavola, S.: On the Origin of Ideas: An Abductivistic Approach to Discovery (Ph.D. Disserta-
tion.). University of Helsinki, Helsinki-Vantaa (Philosophical Studies from the University of
Helsinki 15). https://www.researchgate.net/publication/47930944_On_the_Origin_of_Ideas_
An_Abductivist_Approach_to_Discovery (2006)
13. Peirce, C.S.: The Charles S. Peirce Papers, Microﬁlmed Edition of C. S. Peirce’s Manuscripts
Preserved at the Houghton Library, Harvard University Library, Photographic Service,
Cambridge, MA, 1966. Quoted following R. Robin, Annotated Catalogue of the Papers of
Charles S. Peirce, University of Massachusetts Press, Amherst, MA (1967)
14. Peirce, C.S.: The Charles S. The Collected Papers of Charles Sanders Peirce. InteLex
Corporation, Charlottesville, VA (1994)
15. Peirce, C.S.: The Charles S. The Essential Peirce: Selected Philosophical Writings. Nathan
Houser and Christian Kloesel, vol. 2. Indiana University Press, Bloomington (1992)
16. Peirce, C.S.: The Charles S. Writings of Charles S. Peirce: A Chronological Edition, vol. 8.
Indiana University Press, Bloomington, c1982<c2010>
17. Schurz, G.: Patterns of abduction. Synthese 164(2), 201–234 (2008)
18. Thagard, P.: Semiosis and Hypothesis Inference in Ch. S. Peirce. Versus, pp. 19–20 (1978)
19. Thagard, P.: Computational Philosophy of Science. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA (1988)

Practical Abduction for Research
on Human Practices: Enriching Rather
Than Testing a Hypothesis
Sami Paavola
Abstract Following C. S. Peirce, abduction is often interpreted as a ﬁrst phase of
inquiry where a hypothesis is formulated requiring testing. I maintain, however, that
a natural scientiﬁc ideal of testing is not the most suitable model for studies on human
practices. Practical experimentation follows a different kind of a logic, and Peirce’s
formulations need to be developed further. I interpret abduction in relation to the
Deweyan idea of a working hypothesis, and the method of ascending from the abstract
to the concrete. Practical abduction is about enriching the working hypothesis instead
of “testing” it in a strict sense. In studies on human practices abduction continues
throughout the research process.
1
Introduction
Studies on human practices or activities have become widely adopted in various
areas of research after 1990s [42]. There are different traditions within theories
of practice with diverse methodological emphases [3, 27]. Richard Bernstein [1]
distinguished four classic approaches to practice: (1) Hegelian tradition followed
by Marx, (2) Peirce’s and Dewey’s pragmatism, (3) concept of practice in existen-
tialism (like Sartre), and (4) in analytical philosophy. This distinction still provides a
useful starting point for different philosophical approaches to practice theories which
must be complemented with a plethora of theories inﬂuenced by sociological theo-
ries (like Bourdieu, Giddens), philosophy (especially Heidegger), and science and
technology studies (especially actor-network theory) [23]. Despite a wide variety of
approaches, it can be argued, that studies on human practices have some common
characteristics. Most of the “practice-based research” or “practice theory” challenges
basic dichotomies, or dualisms prevalent at discussions on methodologies, such as
action versus structure, mind versus body, explanation versus understanding, qualita-
tive versus quantitative research, determinism versus free will, subject versus object,
S. Paavola (B)
Faculty of Educational Sciences, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland
e-mail: sami.paavola@helsinki.ﬁ
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2021
J. Shook et al. (eds.), Abduction in Cognition and Action, Studies in Applied
Philosophy, Epistemology and Rational Ethics 59,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-61773-8_2
31

32
S. Paavola
deductive versus inductive approaches, or theory versus practice (Nicolini 2012, 2–3;
[10], 3; [22]).
There are several classic methodological reconstructions or models on main
phases (or aspects) of the research process such as the hypothetico-deductive model,
inductivism, the method of analysis and synthesis, inquiry models, interrogative
models, the hermeneutic circle, or experimentation. There is an old debate whether
the methodological processes should lean either on natural sciences as giving a
prototypical model for research, or focus on human sciences and speciﬁc features
of human beings thus requiring completely different kinds of approaches compared
to natural sciences. In his classic book “Explanation and Understanding”, Finnish
philosopher G. H. von Wright argued that there is a need for a simpliﬁed method-
ological model of its own for sciences of man which would give a “deﬁnitive alter-
native” to prominent models of natural sciences [46]. Von Wright maintained that
natural sciences are “Galilean” emphasizing causality and the covering law model
of explanation. Sciences of man, in turn, are continuing “Aristotelean” tradition with
teleological explanations (ibid., 1–33). Natural sciences are targeted at “explana-
tion” in the causal sense whereas human sciences at “understanding” and reasons
behind action. According to von Wright human beings are intentional in their action
following normative rules, and this requires a different methodological approach
compared to natural sciences. Von Wright ended up suggesting that practical syllo-
gism provides a methodological kernel for this kind of an alternative where the assent
to the premises entails action (ibid., 26–27).
Following von Wright, it is argued in this paper that studies on human practices
or activities are different to basic ideals of natural sciences emphasizing causal rela-
tionships, explanation, and the so-called covering law model, or subsumption theory
of explanation (ibid., 1–33). A methodological reconstructions are needed that bring
forth the special features of human practices, and ways of investigating them. But
in contrast to von Wright an alternative to natural sciences in this paper is searched
based on studies on transformation of practices rather than on understanding, and on
“practical experimentation” rather than on practical syllogism and teleology. Prac-
tical experimentation and practical abduction are providing a better methodological
reconstruction for practice research. The research on human practices can be seen as
a third tradition [46], or a third “culture” (cf. [43]), and an alternative both to the ideal
of natural sciences and to the ideal of hermeneutically interpreted human sciences.
The focus on practices or activities do not concern just the object of the research.
It could also aim at taking better into account researchers’ own methodolog-
ical practices. Methodologies are always “reconstructions” rather than straightfor-
ward descriptions of the “logic-in-use”, using classic formulations by Kaplan [17].
Practice-based approaches could help making these reconstructions more in line with
real practices of research, and not just reconstructions along the ideals of research.
Methodological models should not just represent a “logic of the ﬁnished research
report” [13] but also help formulating the processes of research.
One aspect of methodology is to give paradigmatic or prototypical reconstructions
of phases or aspects of research in order to give tools for planning, describing and
justifying the research process. In this paper pragmatism and (cultural-historical)

Practical Abduction for Research on Human Practices …
33
activity theory are used as a starting point for developing practice-based recon-
struction of the phases or aspects of the research process. Both pragmatism and
activity theory regard experimentation, transformative practical activity and inter-
vention as essential parts of studying human practices [22]. Pragmatism and activity
theory are natural candidates for providing a theoretical and philosophical basis for
such practice-based methodology that is focusing on practical experimentation and
transformations.
Abductive reasoning can provide one important methodological element for a
methodological reconstruction of studying human practices. This requires, however,
that abduction is interpreted and developed in relation to practice theories. Abduction
was ﬁrst developed by Charles S. Peirce in relation to his version of pragmatism.
One standard interpretation is that abduction is the ﬁrst phase of testing a hypothesis
following basically the ideals of natural sciences ([31], 45–47). It can be maintained,
however, that this is not the most suitable conception for practice research. “Prac-
tical experimenting” should be interpreted differently than the testing a hypothesis
inﬂuenced by the natural sciences. In this paper, a form of abduction (“practical
abduction”) is developed further which would be more in line with the needs of
practice research where theories and practices are enriching each other.
Peirce’s own methodological ideals came from natural sciences and mathematics,
and somewhat from historical research. Peirce’s formulations, however, provide
means to see the relevance of abduction also in the relation to studies on human
practices (and practice research). Abduction related to practices has been used in
empirical research inﬂuenced by cultural-historical activity theory, and pragmatism,
for example, in relation to habits ([28], 77), to tools ([45], 40) to methods of an anal-
ysis “from above” and “from below” ([40], 61). A more philosophically oriented
direction to develop abduction has been to interpret it within practical syllogism
where the conclusion is the intention to do something, instead of a proposition [15,
45]. Magnani has suggested a speciﬁc form of abduction that he calls “manipulative
abduction” which refers to “thinking through doing and not only, in a pragmatic
sense, about doing” ([19], 229). Even if Dewey never referred to abduction as a
speciﬁc form of an inference there lurks, however, a “Deweyan abduction” in several
of his formulations of inquiry and reﬂective thought that may also contribute to the
methodology of practice research [33].
In this paper it is maintained that the focus on practical experimentation has
effects on the interpretation on abduction. In the ﬁrst chapter, Peirce’s basic notions
of abduction in relation to his conception of pragmatism is presented. It is maintained
that Peirce’s formulations are more in line with the ideals of natural science than with
practice research. In the second and third chapter the notions of working hypothesis
and practical experimenting, as well as the method of ascending from the abstract to
the conrete are analyzed as giving ingredients for practical abduction and practical
experimentation. In the forth chapter the characteristics of practical abduction and
differences to Peirce’s typical formulations of abduction are analyzed.

34
S. Paavola
2
Peirce’s pragmatism and abduction
It is not at all obvious how Peirce interpreted abduction in relation to practices, or
pragmatism. In his famous 1903 Harvard lectures Peirce made, however, a close
connection between pragmatism and abduction.
If you carefully consider the question of pragmatism you will see that it is nothing else than
the question of the logic of abduction. That is, pragmatism proposes a certain maxim which,
if sound, must render needless any further rule as to the admissibility of hypotheses to rank
as hypotheses, that is to say, as explanations of phenomena held as hopeful suggestions; and
furthermore, this is all that the maxim of pragmatism really pretends to do, at least so far
as it is conﬁned to logic, and is not understood as a proposition in psychology. (Peirce EP
2:234, 1903).
It is, however, well known that Peirce had conﬂicting views when it comes inter-
preting pragmatism as an approach emphasizing practical matters. This is most
clearly seen in his famous 1898 lectures [37]. When asked to talk on “vitally impor-
tant topics”, Peirce was irritated and seemed to make a clear difference between
scientiﬁcally and practically important matters: “… by my training I am nothing
[but] a scientiﬁc man myself and am quite out of my element in talking about things
vitally important” [37], n. 2 (deleted passage), 284). Dewey’s pragmatism is often
seen more promising when it comes to ﬁnding linkages between practice theories
and pragmatism (see e.g. [20, 2]). It should also be remarked that Peirce’s maxim of
pragmatism is targeted at clarifying concepts (Peirce EP 1: 132, 1878) and not, for
example, at clarifying or developing practices or developing concepts in relation to
practices.
In his manuscripts Peirce formulated an inference called “Practical Retroduction”
where retroduction is an alternative name for abduction (Peirce MS 637). The differ-
ence to “Scientiﬁc Retroduction” here was mainly, however, that in urgent practical
situations the hypothesis must be chosen immediately: “A general who during a battle
must instantly risk the existence of a nation either upon the truth of a certain hypoth-
esis or else upon its falsity, must perforce go upon his judgment at the moment”
(ibid.). Whereas in a scientiﬁc situation “indeﬁnite time can be allowed for judging
of the truth of an explanatory hypothesis” (ibid.). According to Peirce, in science,
questions and hypotheses are always in principle open-ended and future-oriented,
and they can be reconsidered. In practical situations the choices must be made more
immediately.
One standard interpretation of abduction is that it is the ﬁrst phase of inquiry where
a hypothesis is formulated, followed by testing of the hypothesis with deductive and
inductive means (EP 2:75–114, 1901; EP 2:440–442, 1908). Abduction is targeted at
giving a plausible hypothesis but it does not give any security to its conclusions, and
that is why the hypothesis must be tested (EP 2: 440). Testing means examination
of the hypothesis, and deducing conditional experiential consequences which would
follow from its truth (ibid., 441). The last stage is inductive “that of ascertaining how
far those consequents accord with Experience, and of judging accordingly whether

Practical Abduction for Research on Human Practices …
35
the hypothesis is sensibly correct, or requires some inessential modiﬁcation, or must
be entirely rejected (ibid., 442).
Peirce’s emphasis on testing of a hypothesis is good as far it goes. It could be
argued, however, that this kind of a model is simplifying also the picture of natural
scientiﬁc testing. It gives a “clear-cut rationalist picture of experimentation as a
theory-driven activity” ([41], 27) “missing multiple, epistemic, technical, institu-
tional, and social resources involved in giving shape to experimental practice” (ibid.,
140). But in any case, from the point of view of the study of practices, the ideal comes
from a classic view on natural scientiﬁc experiments. There the truth of the hypoth-
esis is assessed based on more or less clear causal relationships. One illustration of
this model is the classic hypothetico-deductive model of inquiry [14].
This kind of testing may be relevant also in human (or social) sciences. But I would
argue, that usually the function of concepts and theories is more instrumental in prac-
tice research from the start. Apparent examples are pedagogical models developed in
educational sciences, or management theories in organizational sciences. They are
not meant so much for giving strict hypotheses on deﬁnite expectations on the conse-
quences to be tested but rather giving means also for practitioners for developing their
practices.
3
Practical experimenting with the working hypothesis
Many formulations of practice research are actually quite close to the idea of hypoth-
esis testing similar to the natural scientiﬁc ideal. One central idea within transfor-
matively oriented practice-based research is that hypotheses need to be tested (or
experimented) in practice (Dewey LW 8, 200–206; [24], 441–442; see also [7], 289).
I argue, however, that the term testing is not the best analogy for practice research. It
is important to see the differences of testing along the ideals of natural science (here
called “natural scientiﬁc testing”) with the ideals of “practical experimenting”. The
ideal of natural scientiﬁc testing aims at controlling and measuring the dependencies
whereas (what is here called) practical experimenting is focusing on implementing
and developing things in practice. In natural scientiﬁc testing the idea is to manipu-
late things in order to demonstrate the causal relationships whereas in the practical
experimenting the idea is not basically to manipulate what is done but to observe
how the practitioners themselves are modifying things [26].
Some formulations by Dewey seem to have a similar intepretation of the meaning
of hypothesis testing than Peirce did. The testing means that on the basis of the
hypothesis, it is observed if certain consequences follow or not. Dewey stated:
The concluding phase is some kind of testing by overt action to give experimental corrobo-
ration, or veriﬁcation, of the conjectural idea. Reasoning shows that if the idea be adopted,
certain consequences follow. So far the conclusion is hypothetical or conditional. (Dewey
LW 8.205; see also MW 6.236-7; MW 9.157; LW 8.200)

36
S. Paavola
The different role of hypotheses starts to be depicted with the notion of a “working
hypothesis”. According to Dewey, the ﬁrst suggestion is treated as a guiding idea, or
a working hypothesis:
The facts or data set the problem before us, and insight into the problem corrects, modiﬁes,
expands the suggestion that originally occurred. (Dewey LW 8, 202, 1933; the emphasis by
SP)
Dewey’s formulation above (How We Think, 1933) does not, however, draw a clear
distinction to the natural scientiﬁc ideal. His examples in the passage above refer to
a physician examining a patient or a mechanic inspecting a piece of complicated
machinery (Dewey LW 8, 202). He presents the concluding phase of the reﬂective
thought to be similar to the ideals of natural scientiﬁc testing:
The concluding phase is some kind of testing by overt action to give experimental corrobo-
ration, or veriﬁcation, of the conjectural idea. Reasoning shows that if the idea be adopted,
certain consequences follow. (Dewey LW 8, 205)
The idea of the working hypothesis was introduced already 1899 by G. H. Mead in
relation to social reforms [22]. According to Mead [21], hypotheses must be treated as
“working hypotheses at the best” requiring further investigation, and being prepared
to unexpected, because of complexity of forces inﬂuencing on social reforms.
It is always the unexpected that happens, for we have to recognize, not only the immediate
change that is to take place, but also the reaction back upon this of the whole world within
which the change takes place, and no human foresight is equal to this.( [21], 369–370)
In the paper Mead gives an impression that testing related to social reform is quite
similar to testing by scientists in the laboratory. However, he also pointedly refers
to one considerable difference to natural scientiﬁc testing. In social world we are
potentially changing things which we at the same time assume to be somehow ﬁxed:
In the physical world we regard ourselves as standing in some degree outside the forces at
work … In society we are the forces that are being investigated, and if we advance beyond
the mere description of the phenomena of the social world to the attempt at reform, we seem
to involve the possibility of changing what at the same time we assume to be necessarily
ﬁxed. (see ibid., 370–371)
In this short paper Mead does not analyze further the difference between testing
in the laboratory and in relation to social reform but he pointed out that “reﬂective
consciousness” by human beings makes a clear difference to natural sciences (ibid.,
371).
Also Dewey had a formulation concerning experimentation where he is making a
clear difference between interpretations concerning (natural scientiﬁc) laboratories
and “method of social matters”:
When we say that thinking and beliefs should be experimental, not absolutistic, we have
then in mind a certain logic of method, not, primarily, the carrying on of experimentation
like that of laboratories [emphasis by SP]. Such a logic involves the following factors:
First, that those concepts, general principles, theories and dialectical developments which
are indispensable to any systematic knowledge be shaped and tested as tools of inquiry.

Practical Abduction for Research on Human Practices …
37
Secondly, that policies and proposals for social action be treated as working hypotheses,
not as programs to be rigidly adhered to and executed. They will be experimental in the
sense that they will be entertained subject to constant and well-equipped observation of the
consequences they entail when acted upon, and subject to ready and ﬂexible revision in the
light of observed consequences. (Dewey LW 2.361–362)
This formulation is more in line with requirements for practical experimentation
than the idea of the natural scientiﬁc model of testing a hypothesis. According to
Dewey,“concepts,generalprinciples,theoriesanddialecticaldevelopments”areseen
as tools of inquiry (not hypotheses to be accepted or rejected) and they are treated as
working hypotheses instead of “programs to be rigidly adhered to and executed”. The
emphasis on working hypotheses means that the hypothesis is tentative but also that
the hypothesis itself is worked with during the process.1 Dewey is talking also here on
“observed consequences” but an important addition is that proposals or hypotheses
are “subject to ready and ﬂexible revision” on the basis of constant observation of
the consequences.
What is then a difference between natural scientiﬁc testing and practical exper-
imenting? I think that there are at least two main differences in Dewey’s as well
as Mead’s alternative formulations on working hypotheses. The ﬁrst one is about
the constant readiness to modify the working hypothesis during the research. In this
sense, the abductive “phase” typically continues throughout the research process.
Practical experimenting requires that the lessons learned from the practical experi-
mentation should be taken into account in the conceptual apparatus. It is not so much
about testing if a certain speciﬁc kind of a conceptual idea works (or not) but about
developing the conceptual idea during the experimentation that seems to capture
essential elements of the phenomena or of the changes studied. And as Mead pointed
out, it is also unexpected reactions from the world which are potentially transforming
the original idea during the experimentation. The second difference is about the role
of a conceptual idea in a comparison to activities and observations. In the ideal of
the natural scientiﬁc testing, the idea is to deduce consequences from the hypothesis.
Practical experimentation is focusing on “transformational practical activity”, being
close to an interventionist approach [22]. Here experimentation requires not only
new practically oriented concepts and organizational models but also new instru-
ments and tools [24], and agency by practitioners [8] oriented at transforming the
material interaction with the environment. The role of tools and cultural remedia-
tion is often neglected by pragmatism but it is emphasized in the cultural-historical
activity theory ([25], 118–119; [24]). Practical experimentation is then not just about
testing conceptual ideas. Rather it is about giving means for developing tools and
instruments with related agency, and inducing the change in practice along with
conceptual development. This kind of research is not just about implementing a
certain kind of an idea but besides that and throughout the process developing novel
conceptual and practical means that would support the development (See also [7]).
1Reijo Miettinen (a personal conversation) suggested this meaning for the term “working
hypothesis”. An implementation of it requires developmental work by practitioners themselves.

38
S. Paavola
4
From testing to enriching: the method of ascending
from the abstract to the concrete
In the tradition of cultural-historical activity theory there is another way of describing
what is happening in this kind of research besides using the notions of testing or
experimentation. The “method of ascending from the abstract to the concrete” is
based on Marx and dialectics ([13, 3]; [4], 243–289). It has not been much applied
in empirical research but rather provided one basis, and an important exemplar,
for activity theoretical formulations of methodology (see [25], 112–117; [7]). For
practice-basedresearchthismethodgivesfertilemeansofdevelopingmethodological
formulations further besides its dialectical uses [44].
It is not easy to present the method of ascending from the abstract to the concrete
brieﬂy because both Ilyenkov’s and Davydov’s presentations of it are conceptually
intricate descriptions with many methodological sub-themes. Miettinen (2000, 111–
112) has analyzed this method in relation to activity theory and basic formulations
by Marx, and presented it succintly with three basic steps:
The study starts from the concrete “chaotic whole”.
It descends, then, to the abstraction of the basic determining categories.
Thirdly, it “rises” again – using the abstraction – to the concrete whole, this time as “a rich
totality of determinations and relations”
Dafermos ([4], 258) depicts the same process dialectically as “a contradictory
unity of two distinct and opposite movements of thinking: a) the movement from
sensory-concrete perception to abstract thinking and b) the ascent from abstract
thinking to the mentally concrete and from mentally concrete to practice.”
Marx’ analysis has been both politically controversial and heated but also giving a
very demanding model for an empirical research (his own analysis of capitalism took
decades) (ibid., 112). Still, it gives one fertile starting point for understanding the
relationship between theoretical concepts and practice. The movement from sensory
concrete to abstract thinking aims at constructing abstract concepts or hypotheses
to be developed further. This is similar to abduction, that is, to produce a promising
hypothesis related to the “chaotic whole”. The further aim is not just to test these
concepts or hypotheses but to reﬁne and enrich the abstraction in relation to practices
(with “mentally concrete”).
An important starting point for Davydov is a difference between an empirical
interpretation of a generalization, and a “theoretical generalization” ([5], 130–137;
see also [39], 84–92). The empirical generalization is based on a “transition from a
description of the properties of a particular object to ﬁnding and singling them out
in a whole class of similar objects” (ibid., 5, 18). This does not capture a theoretical
generalization which is based on a different kind of an abstraction. The theoretical
generalization is based on an analysis of an individual, concrete case: “In reality it
always happens that a phenomenon which later becomes universal originally emerges
as an individual, particular, speciﬁc phenomenon, as an exception from the rule”
([16], 83). A theoretical generalization aims at ﬁnding essential or real features and

Practical Abduction for Research on Human Practices …
39
relationships of things. It reproduces developmental processes and also possibilities
of certain things and their relationships. It ﬁnds connections between things which
before having that generalization are fragmentary or undeveloped.
The distinction between an empirical generalization and a theoretical generaliza-
tion has similarity, or at least a close afﬁnity with Peirce’s early formulations of a
distinction between induction and abduction (respectively). In his early papers Peirce
made a difference between induction and abduction with syllogistic formulations.
Induction is the inference of the major premise (rule) from the minor premise (case)
and the conclusion (result), and abduction the inference of the minor premise (case)
from the conclusion (result) and the major premise (rule) (Peirce CP 5.275–276,
1868; CP 2.623, 1878). In his later works Peirce broadened his conception of induc-
tion but never abandoned his early syllogistic formulations. Typical induction, in line
with this syllogistic formulation, is then about making an empirical generalization.
Case.—These beans are from this bag.
Result.—These beans are white.
Rule.—All the beans from this bag are white.
Abduction is different. It starts (usually) with noticing some curious or anoma-
lous phenomena, and then ﬁnding a hypothesis that would explain them, or make
understandable things which at ﬁrst seemed detached with each other (Peirce EP 1:
188–189, 1878; EP 2: 231, 1903). As N. R. Hanson stated it later, abduction is about
ﬁnding a novel, intelligible or organized “pattern” to solve puzzling phenomena [11,
12]. Induction is based on quite straighforward empirical generalization whereas
abduction requires skills of a detective, that is, by analyzing details and speciﬁcities
of a case, it aims at ﬁnding a qualitatively novel solution that makes anomalous things
understandable and gives means to anticipate some other things.
Abduction and the whole area of the logic of discovery was for long neglected in
the philosophy of science and in methodological literature [31]. There is a similar
tendency in the discussion on the method of ascending from the abstract to the
concrete to neglect the phases of discovery even by Davydov ([5], 129):
With what must such reproduction begin? The very name of its method indicates that one
must go from the abstract, and, actually, “abstract deﬁnitions lead to reproduction of the
concrete by means of thought”
One reason for this neglect might be that these processes of discovery are often
reconstructed afterwards (see [7], 304).
Usually Davydov, however, is emphasizing the whole process, that is, both the
analysis and the way of delineating the abstraction, and the ascent from the abstract
to the concrete again ([5], 137):
In other words, the formation of a conceptual generalization presupposes not only a transition
from the concrete and individual to the abstract and general, but also the reverse transition
from the general and the abstract to the individual and the concrete. (ibid., 12)
In this sense, the whole name of the method should be something like “movement
from the sensory concrete to the abstract, and ascending from the abstract to concrete
in practice”. This would, however, be clumsy as a name!

40
S. Paavola
Yrjö Engeström has interpreted the method of ascending from the abstract to
the concrete for developing the cycle of expansive learning in developmental work
research ([7], 288–289; see also [25], 114–117). In the theory of expansive learning
the ﬁrst phases of collective concept formation includes questioning (“questioning,
criticizing or rejecting some aspects of the accepted practice”) and analyzing the
situation (both tracing the origination and evolution of the activity in question, and
analyzing the actual-empirical situation) which are oriented at developing a model
of a new idea (a “germ cell”) ([7], 288–289). In the cultural-historical activity theory
the phases of producing the germ cell include detailed analyses of the activity in
question from different perspectives and timescales (see also [25], 114–117; [4],
256–259). This is in line with the pragmatist emphasis on deﬁning present activities
fundamentally in relation to the past and to the future, that is, with the irrevocable
past and heading for the future, even though in the pragmatist tradition the historical
analysis is not explicitly included in the method as is the case in the cultural-historical
activity theory ([25], 118).
The phase of ascending from the abstract to the concrete along the model of
expansive learning differs from the Peircean model of testing a hypothesis. It is not a
question of an individual hypothesis that is tested (in a Peircean sense) but practical
experimenting means that a broader model is developed which is then implemented
in practice and reﬂected and developed further. The “germ cell”, a speciﬁc kind of a
working hypothesis, has the essential features or relationships of the new model or
a solution that needs to be practically implemented and developed in the process of
a synthesis ([7], 293). It means that the germ cell idea is transformed into practice;
which is not a simple process.
A theoretical concept is initially produced in the form of an abstract, simple explanatory
relationship, a “germ cell.” This initial abstraction is step-by-step enriched and transformed
into a concrete system of multiple, constantly developing and expanding manifestations. In
other words, the initial simple idea is transformed into a complex new form of practice. ([7],
288)
In this sense, the germ cell is enriched and it “opens up a perspective for multiple
applications, extensions and future developments (ibid., 289). The practical applica-
tion means that the working hypothesis must be complemented with relevant tools
and procedures to be tested in practice [25]. Engeström et al. [7] highlight in their
research case of the home care workers that this “moving to the concrete” means
embodiment and physical enactment. It is then not just about testing an idea or
working with verbal deﬁnitions but about putting the idea in practice in concrete
and tangible ways. In this case these enactments consisted on physically performing
and/or examining movements or exercises needed by the new concept, developing
artifacts of the environment to enhance the concept formation, and using bodily
gestures and facial expressions to enhance an observation, idea, or feeling (ibid.
302–303). Miettinen ([25], 123, 126) has emphasized that the initial hypothesis is
ﬁrst an abstraction which needs to be transformed to a “testable working hypothesis”,
or “practical germ cell” to make it practically experimental.

Practical Abduction for Research on Human Practices …
41
5
Characteristics of practical abduction
How “practical experimenting” is then having an effect on the concept of abduction?
Or is abduction in itself the same, concerning the way how hypotheses are formulated,
but embedded to research on practices and transformation of practices? I maintain
that practical experimenting has an effect at least on the overall methodological
process, and also on the way how abduction is involved in that process. But how to
interpret then practical abduction?
It must be remarked that there are several ways of interpreting abduction as devel-
oped by Peirce and then after Peirce (see [31], 21–55). Besides syllogistic interpre-
tation (see above) and as a ﬁrst phase of inquiry, Peirce treated abduction to be the
same, or close to: (1) guessing, (2) insight, (3) perception and perceptual judgment,
(4) sensations and emotions, (5) conceptions, (6) pattern recognition, (7) the maxim
of pragmatism, (8) the economy of research, (9) interrogation, (10) inference of a
cause from its effect, (11) the category of Firstness, (12) an inference through an
icon, (13) pure play, and musement (see ibid., 46–47). These interpretations do not
necessarily exclude each other but they show different directions for interpreting and
developing abduction.
Peirce had some formulations related to abduction which have afﬁnities to the
method of ascending from the abstract to the concrete, like a formulation of the
maxim of pragmatism:
The elements of every concept enter into logical thought at the gate of perception and make
their exit at the gate of purposive action; and whatever cannot show its passports at both
those two gates is to be arrested as unauthorized by reason. (EP 2:241, 1903)
This is in itself a simple formula but there is an analogy to a methodological
interpretation of the method of ascending from the abstract to the concrete (see Fig. 1)
Both of them are emphasizing practices, ﬁrst, by focusing on “purposive action”
(or “transformative” practices”, and secondly, by interpreting concepts operating in
between perception and purposive action.
My own main interpretation of abduction highlights the dynamic nature of it.
Abduction is a “weak” mode of inference (basically it allows inferences only on
what “may be”) but if used skillfully it has high “uberty” (Peirce’s own term for
“fruitfulness” or “productiveness”) (Peirce CP 8.384–388, 1913; Peirce EP 2:472,
1913). The fruitfulness of abduction is not clear only by looking at “deﬁnitory rules”
of abduction (i.e. what kinds of inferences are permitted with it) but by looking at
“strategic rules” of using abductive reasoning [29]. In games like chess deﬁnitory
rules are the basic rules of the game (for example, how pieces can be moved) but
just by knowing these rules no one is good at playing chess. That requires skills of
playing well, that is, strategic rules. At abductive reasoning, these strategies high-
light the process of putting together abductive arguments while searching fertile or
promising hypotheses. Abduction is reasoning targeted at search processes. These
kinds of abductive strategies include, for example: search for somehow anomalous
phenomena, observing details and little clues, continuous search for hypotheses

42
S. Paavola
Fig. 1 Simpliﬁed elements of a methodological cycle, starting from “chaotic concrete" and
searching analytical concepts to help anticipate and enrich transformative activities and practices.
Adapted from Vetoshkina and Paavola [44]
(or novel explanations, or interpretations), delineating what kind of a hypothesis
is searched for, aiming at ﬁnding explanations that can themselves be explained,
search for “patterns” and connections that ﬁt together ([31], 206–211). These strate-
gies give elements for a “logic of discovery” opening up those processes that both
constrain and instigate the search for novel ideas [31]. This kind of a “Hansonian”
interpretation of abduction highlighting logic of discovery and a play with possi-
bilities is different to interpretations of abduction giving justiﬁcation to explanatory
hypotheses [30].
A strategic approach to abduction highlights its holistic nature. Hypotheses are not
typically searched for only in relation to just individual observations or anomalies
but by taking into account different kinds of clues and constraints, both theoret-
ical and empirical. This ﬁts with studies on practices which are typically aimed at
understanding complex changes of activities happening in different time-scales and
in different “layers” or elements of activities (for example, situational activities,
changes in organizations, changes in national or international rules and guidelines)
(see[44]). Instudies onpractices workinghypotheses areaimedat takingintoaccount
these different elements, or constraints from different directions which makes the
formulation of the working hypotheses also qualitatively challenging.
Peirce, especially in his later writings, emphasized that human beings must have
some kind of a guessing “instinct”, or an insight for ﬁnding fertile hypotheses (Peirce
CP 5.173, 1903). Peirce was speculating that when human mind is developed under
the inﬂuence of laws of universe
it is to be expected that he should have a natural light, or light of nature, or instinctive insight,
or genius, tending to make him guess those laws aright, or nearly aright. (Peirce CP 5.604,
1903)

Practical Abduction for Research on Human Practices …
43
He then speculated on some kind of an “il lume naturale” (a sort of natural bent)
(Peirce CP 1.80–81, c. 1896; CP 1.630, 1898).
Peirce more or less neglected cultural issues, and issues that are nowadays empha-
sized by distributed cognition as a basis for abduction (see [32]). This would be a
natural extension to practical abduction. A culturally oriented alternative is to develop
abduction based on “il lume culturale” rather than on il lume naturale ([2], 134; [31],
196). From the point of view of practice research abductive search is not done just
by insightful individuals but collaboratively, using various kinds of cultural means,
and in a historically changing, material context giving clues and ingredients for new
ideas [32].
In studies of human practices conceptualizations are not separate from prac-
tices. Conceptualizations are engendered in close relationship to practices, and while
implementing novel solutions in practice. They are not so much targeted on testing
a conceptual idea but developing conceptualizations all along the research process
in relation to practices. I think this is one focal meaning of the concept “working
hypothesis” (or the “germ cell”). It means that also the hypothesis itself is under
construction, and potentially re-evaluated. A working hypothesis is giving a rough
outline for a solution that is supposed to be speciﬁed and developed during the
process. This ﬁts nicely with a strategic emphasis on abduction but not with the idea
that abduction is just the “ﬁrst” phase of inquiry. In this kind of practical abduction,
abductive search for better conceptual means of understanding the situation in ques-
tion continues throughout the research process. Often it is as important to ﬁgure out
key problems and issues in the situation as ﬁnding solutions. This means then that the
abductive process continues after the “ﬁrst” phase of ﬁnding a promising hypothesis.
Studies of human practices emphasize reﬂection and evaluation throughout the
research process. It is not just researchers who are supposed to be reﬂecting but also
practitioners involved. This also means that
concepts do not precede action nor do they legitimate actions only after the fact. They serve
as means of making visible already developed possibilities, contradictions and emergent
alternative solutions of a practice ([24], 442)
Engeström has emphasized (by citing Leontjev) that goals of action are often
known only after action and as a result of a long process of acting ([7], 291)2.
Similarly the development of conceptualizations is a long process done in a close
interaction with experiments and actions developed in practice.
Peirce did not have the concept of a “working hypothesis” in his writings, at least
as far as I know. But there is an afﬁnity to N. R. Hanson’s treatment of Peircean
abduction as the logic of discovery. According to Hanson, an important element of
the process of discovery is that the type of the solution can be delineated before the
solution is acquired [13]. The aim is to ﬁnd an organized pattern which takes into
account all relevant issues involved [12]. This process of delineating the type of the
hypothesis has clear similarities to functions of the working hypothesis. It gives an
2Leontjev ([18], 101) is here citing Hegel saying that the individual “cannot determine the goal of
his acting as long as he has not acted …”

44
S. Paavola
outline for a solution that is then targeted to be speciﬁed. The working hypothesis
can be modiﬁed quite a lot during the process if the novel idea forms a relevant new
totality or “pattern”.
As I see it, practical abduction does not need to be tied to explanatory issues.
Peirce had several basic descriptions of abduction where it was closely related to
seeking or adopting explanations:
Hypothesis [abduction] is where we ﬁnd some very curious circumstance, which would be
explained [my emphasis] by the supposition that it was a case of a certain general rule, and
thereupon adopt that supposition (Peirce EP 1: 189, 1878).
… the operation of adopting an explanatory [my emphasis] hypothesis, - which is just what
abduction is … (Peirce EP 2: 231, 1903)
In his early writing Peirce also analyzed abduction as an inference of a cause from
its effects (Peirce W 1:180, 1865). But all basic formulations of abduction are not
tied to explanatory issues, or to seeking causes. Even in the well known formulation
itself, explanation is not mentioned (even if it was present in his description of this
formulation) (See Peirce EP 2: 231, 1903):
The surprising fact, C, is observed;
But if A were true, C would be a matter of course,
Hence, there is reason to suspect that A is true.
This is in line with Gabbay and Woods [9] who have emphasized that abduction
should not cover just explanatory accounts but more broadly transformations of
“ignorance problems”.
This kind of an non-explanatory account of abduction (see [20]) is important for
practice-based research. I would argue that in the study of human practices the search
for hypotheses and novel conceptualizations is not just about seeking explanations
or causes. It is more about conceptualizing key issues in the phenomena in question,
or being able to conceptualize key transformations in activities in question, which
are targeted at developing these phenomena further. These working hypotheses or
germ cells can help making explanations or even point out causes but the purpose of
them is not just that. The idea of natural scientiﬁc testing is based on the idea that
some kind of a causal relationship or an entity is presumed to be involved. But in the
practical experimenting the main idea is rather if some kind of a working hypothesis
is promising enough to be carried out and developed further.
One difference between basic formulations of abduction and practical abduction
is the source of research problems, or puzzles to be studied. The basic formulations
of abduction are bringing forth some kind of an anomaly in the existing knowledge
that instigates the inquiry. The focus is on an intellectual process. The practice-based
research emphasizes the central role of practitioners in the process of formulating
the research problems. In the model of expansive learning the germ cell is based on
analyzing contradictions within and between different activities and activity systems
[7]. In Deweyan pragmatism and in activity theory the commitment to the problems
and perspectives of the people and activities studied is a constitutive and also an
ethical feature of the research ([22], 401–402). It means that people involved in the

Practical Abduction for Research on Human Practices …
45
research have a bigger role at deﬁning the research questions and problems than in
the basic formulations of abduction. But there is no strict dichotomy here. Also in
the practice-based research, the researcher has (or researchers have) a central role in
formulating research questions and research focuses but it is typically done in close
interaction with practitioners.
6
Conclusion
There is a need to develop novel methodological frameworks or reconstructions
taking into account speciﬁcs of what is called here “studies of human practices”, espe-
cially focusing on transformative practical activity. At the introduction of this paper
I referred to G. H. von Wright’s distinction between “explanation” and “understand-
ing” providing, according to him, main models for natural sciences and sciences of
man respectively. Von Wright himself remarked, in passing, that Hegel’s and Marx’s
approaches are providing an anomaly to this distinction ([46], 7–8). They seem to
have elements that are both close to the ideals of natural sciences emphasizing laws
and causality, and to ideals of human sicences with teleological and intentional expla-
nations. The overall argument of this paper is to maintain that practice-based research
does not ﬁt to the dichotomy between explanation and understanding and requires
an area of its own on “practices”. Here the aim of the research is not “explanation”
in line with the covering law model, nor mainly hermeneutic “understanding” but
rather ﬁnding grounds, means, or anticipations for transformative practices. It is
based on transformative ontology (cf. [22]) where practices both resist and enable
human activities.
The Peircean abduction provides fertile additional means for understanding
studies of human practices but not by using standard models of abduction but by
developing formulations of abduction further. Peirce himself was developing abduc-
tion in relation to a traditional picture of a natural scientiﬁc model of testing a hypoth-
esis. It works with cases where there are clear-cut causal relationships involved or
tested. The language of “testing” is used also in practice-based research, and with
good reasons (e.g. Dewey LW 8, 205; [24], 442; [26]). It would be, however, impor-
tant to see a difference between “practical experimenting” within sciences of man,
to the ideals of “natural scientiﬁc testing”.
I have searched elements for practical experimenting from basic procedures of
the method of ascending from the abstract to the concrete used in cultural historical
activity theory, and by developing further Dewey’s (and Mead’s) idea of a working
hypothesis. Working hypotheses have several meanings in this kind of a reconstruc-
tion: 1. They are tentative (they can be accepted or rejected on the basis of the
evidence). 2. They are themselves something that can be modiﬁed during the research
process (some kind of drafts that are meant to be reﬁned or modiﬁed on the basis
of the practical experimentation). 3. They suggest activities which require work and
targeted efforts by those who are using them by developing tools, ways of working,

46
S. Paavola
and related agency. The model of natural scientiﬁc testing is emphasizing mainly the
ﬁrst one of these but practical experimenting requires the other two besides.
The focus on working hypotheses in relation to practical experimenting brings
together the function of practitioners in this kind of a research (what they are doing)
on the one hand, and the epistemological questions concerning the research on the
other hand. The working hypotheses are about transforming existing practices (by
the practitioners) but on the other hand they are tools for researchers to interpret
these practices from the point of view of the research.
Practical experimenting means that concepts are used more instrumentally than
in the ideals of natural scientiﬁc testing. This is not a comment on the truth-value
which these concepts are providing or not providing, but rather of the function of
the concepts as a part of human activities. Concepts are supposed to give practical
and theoretical means and tools for subsequent actions (for practitioners and for
research) not just stating hypothesis on the state of affairs. This also changes the
function of abduction in the research process. Maybe a bit suprisingly, abductive
elements are more prevalent in studies on human practices than in the ideal of natural
scientiﬁc testing. This is because the search for better conceptualizations continues
often throughout the research process. In the natural scientiﬁc testing hypotheses are
meant to be tested (with observations) but in practice research they are more like
working hypothesis to be developed further in relation to emerging practices.
As I see it, the function of methodological reconstructions like practical abduction
orpracticalexperimentingistogivemeansforreconstructingandjustifyingalsothose
fuzzy processes of research where conceptualizations are engendered and remoulded,
not just help formulating the “logic of ﬁnished research report” (cf. [13]). These kinds
of methodological models are still, however, reconstructions. There should be more
empirical research on methodological processes of research in social and educational
sciences (see [44]). I maintain that this kind of a model of practical abduction would
in any case take better into account the characteristics of practise-based research than
standard formulations of abduction.3
References
1. Bernstein, R.: Praxis and action. Contemporary philosophies of human activity. University of
Pennsylvania Press, Philadelphia (1971)
2. Bonfantini, M.A., Proni G.: To guess or not to guess? In: Eco, U., Thomas, A.S. (eds.) The
Sign of Three. Dupin, Holmes, Peirce, pp. 119–134. Indiana University Press, Bloomington
(1983)
3. Buch, A., Schatzki, T. (eds.): Questions of Practice in Philosophy and Social Theory. Routledge,
New York (2018)
4. Dafermos, M.: Rethinking cultural-historical theory. A dialectical perspective to Vygotsky
(Vol. 4). Springer (2018)
3I want to thank Liubov Vetoshkina, Jaakko Virkkunen, and especially Reijo Miettinen for giving
many invaluable comments and suggestions to this paper that deﬁnitely made the article better. All
misinterpretations and omissions are my own.

Practical Abduction for Research on Human Practices …
47
5. Davydov, V.V.: Soviet Studies in Mathematics Education, vol. 2. Types of Generalisation in
Instruction. Published by the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics, Reston Virginia
(1990)
6. Dewey, J.: The collected works of John Dewey, 1882–1953. In: Boydston, J.A. (ed.) Southern
Illinois UP. Published as The Early Works: 1991–1898 (EW), The Middle Works, 1899–1924
(MW), and The Later Works, 1925–1953 (LW). Citations are made with these designations
followed by volume and page number (1969–1991)
7. Engeström, Y., Nummijoki, J., Sannino, A.: Embodied germ cell at work: building an expansive
concept of physical mobility in home care. Mind Cult. Act. 19(3), 287–309 (2012)
8. Engeström, Y., Sannino, A.: Studies of expansive learning: foundations, ﬁndings and future
challenges. Edu. Res. Rev. 5(1), 1–24 (2010)
9. Gabbay, D.M., Woods, J.: The Reach of Abduction Insight and Trial. A Practical Logic of
Cognitive Systems, vol. 2. Elsevier, Amsterdam (2005)
10. Gherardi, S.: How to Conduct a Practice-Based Study. Problems and Methods. Edward Elgar,
Cheltenham, UK (2012)
11. Hanson, N.R.: Patterns of Discovery. An Inquiry into the Conceptual Foundations of Science.
University Press, Cambridge (1958)
12. Hanson, N.R.: Notes toward a logic of discovery. In: Bernstein, R.J. (ed.) Perspectives on
Peirce, pp. 42–65. Yale University Press, New Haven and London (1965)
13. Hanson, N.R.: Is there a logic of scientiﬁc discovery?. In: Feigl, H., Maxwell, G. (eds.) Current
Issues in the Philosophy of Science, pp. 20–35. Holt, Rinehart and Winston, New York (1961)
14. Hempel, C.G.: Philosophy of natural science. Prentice-Hall, inc., Englewood Cliffs, N.J.,
London (1966)
15. Hilpinen, R.: On practical abduction. Theoria 73(3), 207–220 (2007)
16. Ilyenkov, E.V.: The Dialectics of the Abstract and the Concrete in Marx’s Capital. First
published 1960. Translated by Syrovatkin, S. Aakar Books Classics (2017/1960)
17. Kaplan, A.: The Conduct of Inquiry. Methodology for Behavioral Science. Chandler Publishing
Company, San Francisco (1964)
18. Leontjev, A.N.: Activity, consciousness and personality. Englewood Cliffs, Prentice Hall (1978)
19. Magnani, L.: Model-based and manipulative abduction in science. Found. Sci. 9(3), 219–247
(2004)
20. Magnani, L.: Abductive Cognition. The Epistemological and Eco-Cognitive Dimensions of
Hypothetical Reasoning. Springer-Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg (2009)
21. Mead, G.H.: The working hypothesis in social reform. Am. J. Sociol. 5(3), 367–371 (1899)
22. Miettinen, R.: Epistemology of transformative material activity: John Dewey’s pragmatism and
cultural-historical activity theory. J. Theor. Soc. Behav. 36(4), 389–408 (2006)
23. Miettinen, R., Paavola, S., Pohjola, P.: From habituality to change: contribution of activity
theory and pragmatism to practice theories. J. Theor. Soc. Behav. 42(3), 345–360 (2012)
24. Miettinen, R., Virkkunen, J.: Epistemic objects, artefacts and organizational change. Organi-
zation 12(3), 437–456 (2005)
25. Miettinen, R.: Ascending from the abstract to the concrete and constructing a working hypoth-
esisfornewpractices.In:Oittinen,V.(ed.)EvaldIlyenkov’sPhilosophyRevisited,pp.111–129.
Series B: 13. Kikimora Publications, Helsinki (2000)
26. Muurinen, H.: Pragmatismi ja kokeileva lähestymistapa sosiaalityön tiedonmuodostuksessa.
Doctoral Dissertaion, In Finnish. Heikki Waris-instituutin tutkimuksia 2/2019. Helsinki.
Valtiotieteellinen tiedekunta (2019)
27. Nicolini, D.: Practice theory, work, and organization: An introduction. OUP Oxford (2012)
28. Norros, L.: Acting Under Uncertainty. The Core-Task Analysis in Ecological Study of Work.
VTT Publications 546, Espoo (2004)
29. Paavola, S.: Abduction as a logic of discovery: the importance of strategies. Found. Sci. 9(3),
267–283 (2004)
30. Paavola, S.: Hansonian and Harmanian abduction as models of discovery. Int. Stud. Philos.
Sci. 20(1), 91–106 (2006)

48
S. Paavola
31. Paavola, S.: On the Origin of Ideas. An Abductivist Approach to Discovery, Revised and
Enlarged edn. Lap Lambert Academic Publishing, Saarbrücken (2012)
32. Paavola, Sami, Hakkarainen, Kai: Three abductive solutions to the Meno Paradox—with
instinct, inference, and distributed cognition. Stud. Philos. Educ. 24(3–4), 235–253 (2005)
33. Paavola, S.:. Deweyan approaches to abduction? In: Zackariasson, U. (ed.) Action, Belief and
Inquiry. Pragmatist Perspectives on Science, Society and Religion, pp. 230–249. Nordic Studies
in Pragmatism 3. Nordic Pragmatism Network, Helsinki. Available http://www.nordprag.org/
nsp/3/Paavola.pdf (2015)
34. Peirce, C.P.: Collected Papers of Charles Sanders Peirce, vols. 1–6, Hartshorne, C., Weiss, P.
(eds.), vols. 7–8, Burks, A.W., (ed.). Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Mass (1931–1958)
35. Peirce, E.P. (1998) The Essential Peirce: Selected Philosophical Writings, vol. 2 (1893–1913),
The Peirce Edition Project (eds). Indiana University Press, Bloomington and Indianapolis
36. Peirce, M.S.: Manuscripts in the Houghton Library of Harvard University, as identiﬁed
by Richard Robin, Annotated Catalogue of the Papers of Charles S. Peirce. University of
Massachusetts Press, Amherst (1967)
37. Peirce, C.S.: Reasoning and the Logic of Things. Ketner, K.L. (ed.). Harvard University Press,
Cambridge (1992)
38. Peirce, W.: Writings of Charles S. Peirce: A Chronological Edition, 6 vols. (to date), The Peirce
Edition Project (eds.). Indiana University Press, Bloomington (1982–)
39. Pihlaja, J.: Learning in and for Production. An Activity-Theoretical Study of the Historical
Development of Distributed Systems of Generalizing. Yliopistopaino, Helsinki (2005)
40. Rainio, A.P.: Lionhearts of the Playworld: An Ethnographic Case Study of the Development of
Agency in Play Pedagogy. University of Helsinki, Institute of Behavioural Sciences, Studies
in Educational Sciences 233, Helsinki (2010)
41. Rheinberger, H.J.: Toward a history of epistemic things. Synthesizing proteins in the test tube.
Stanford University Press, Stanford, CA (1997)
42. Schatzki, T.R., Knorr Cetina, K., von Savigny, E. (eds.): The Practice Turn in Contemporary
Theory. Routledge, London and NY (2001)
43. Snow, C. P.: The two cultures and the scientiﬁc revolution. Cambridge University Press (1959)
44. Vetoshkina, L., Paavola, S.: From the abstract to the concrete and beyond: the winding road
of constructing a conceptual framework. A manuscript submitted to a special issue in Outlines
(2020)
45. Virkkunen, J.: Developmental interventions in work activities—an activity theoretical inter-
pretation. In: Kontinen, T. (ed.) Development Intervention: Actor and Activity Perspectives.
Center for Activity Theory and Developmental Work Research, Helsinki (2004)
46. Von Wright, G.H.: Explanation and Understanding. Cornell University Press, Ithaca (1971)

Abductive Spaces: Modeling Concept
Framework Revision with Category
Theory
Rocco Gangle, Gianluca Caterina, and Fernando Tohmé
Space is the place.
Sun Ra, cosmic jazz maestro
Abstract A formal model of abductive inference is provided in which abduction is
conceived as expansive and contractive movements through a topological space of
theoretical and practical commitments. A pair of presheaves over the (Heyting alge-
bra) space of commitments corresponds to communities sharing commitments on the
one hand and possible obstructions to commitments on the other. In this framework,
abductive inference is modeled by the dynamics of redistributed communities of
commitment made in response to obstructive encounters. This semantic-pragmatic
model shows how elementary category theory tools can be used to formalize abduc-
tive inference while hewing close to ordinary intuitions about collective agency and
reasoning.
1
Introduction
When avant-garde jazz pianist and orchestra director Sun Ra declares “space is the
place” on the album for the 1974 ﬁlm by the same name, he expresses a thought that
is close to being formally tautological and yet offers signiﬁcant theoretical insight.
R. Gangle (B) · G. Caterina
Endicott College, Beverly, MA 01915, USA
e-mail: rgangle@endicott.edu
G. Caterina
e-mail: gcaterin@endicott.edu
F. Tohmé
UNS-CONICET, Bahia Blanca, Argentina
e-mail: ftohme@gmail.com
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2021
J. Shook et al. (eds.), Abduction in Cognition and Action, Studies in Applied
Philosophy, Epistemology and Rational Ethics 59,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-61773-8_3
49

50
R. Gangle et al.
On the one hand, the concept of “place” or “locus” is, more or less by deﬁnition, rel-
ative to the concept of some “space” that envelops and determines it. “Places” in the
plural are possible only with respect to the unity of some “space” within which they
ﬁnd their places with respect to one another. On the other hand, this banal or obvious
coordination of places within spaces (and, in particular, the overarching unity and
singularity of natural or cosmic space as such) serves as one of the most fundamen-
tal aspects of human experience and thereby becomes a nearly endless source for
metaphors and ﬁgurative modes of orientation within thought. We encourage stu-
dents to think “outside the box”; we deliberate “narrowly” or “broadly” about some
given topic; a philosopher is said to “move” from one doctrinal “position” to another;
a scientist considers a problem from a “higher point of view” or “ﬂattens out” certain
difﬁculties, and so forth.
It is ultimately the structural integration of local places within or according to
the order of more general spaces that provides the basis for the use of “space” as
a general source of metaphors and heuristic frameworks across multiple disciplines
and domains. In this regard, space has served as a long-standing metaphor and model
in philosophy for conceiving and expressing abstract relations among concepts. For
instance, the philosopher Wilfrid Sellars developed an original critique of certain
forms of empiricism by organizing his thought broadly in terms of a distinction
between two conceptual “spaces”: the natural space of causes and the logical space
of reasons [15]. In using this spatial metaphor to mark a conceptual difference, Sellars
stands in a long line of philosophical articulation of conceptual and logical relations
in terms of spatiality, whether geometrical (distance, curvature, congruence) or topo-
logical (continuity, covering, inclusion), that goes back at least to Aristotle and the
Stoics with their use of the spatial concept of “topos” as a way to express common
conceptual and rhetorical “places”. In recent decades, this age-old metaphorization
of relations among concepts as spatial relations has taken a more rigorous mathe-
matical turn with the category-theoretic notion of “topoi” and, more generally, the
concentrated investigation of structures—mutually illuminative—common to logic
and topology [1, 10, 17].
In this chapter we will show how some of the elementary mathematical tools of
category theory provide a useful framework for formalizing the intuition of a concep-
tual space within which the “movements” or “gestures” of abductive inference may
be localized and tracked. Category theory itself is a highly general area of Mathe-
matics that originally emerged within algebraic topology (and thus is naturally adept
for abstract representations of general “spaces”) and yet also lends itself readily to
furnishing formal models for epistemic situations and abductive inferences, among
many other applications [5, 16]. Here, we present a general model of the concepts and
dynamics of communities of agents and practical obstructions varying over logical
“spaces” of pragmatic commitments. The basic tool from category theory that we use
to integrate these three main components of the model is called a presheaf, which is
essentially a mathematical coordination of abstract relational structures (categories)
with concrete realizations of those structures in systems of sets and functions. Within
this framework of presheaves, the epistemic and conjectural situations that charac-
terize abductive inference appear as subclasses of systematic triadic coordinations

Abductive Spaces: Modeling Concept Framework …
51
of commitments, communities and obstructions. The advantage of using category
theory to model these systematic relations is that it abstracts away from unnecessary
concrete details of the objects under investigation in whatever context in order to
examine only the system of relations (which may often be conceived of naturally
as structure-preserving mappings or transformations) structuring the objects them-
selves as representatives of some particular type. In the case of modeling abductive
inference in terms of varying communities and obstructions relative to a space of
commitments, the use of category theory promises to be helpful in understanding
abductive reasoning by representing and analyzing the relevant dynamics at an appro-
priately abstract level of relationality.
The core idea in the present approach involves considering abductive inferences
as movements within spaces constituted by communities of agents deﬁned by their
epistemic and conjectural commitments. The contents of such commitments are
themselves understood as determined by the possible events or states that might
obstruct them. The framework outlined below provides a way to characterize the
anomalies or “surprising events” that give rise initially to an abductive inference and
also to tease apart three parameters or dimensions of the abductive “movement” itself
through conceptual space.
The categorical approach outlined below depends upon the combination or, better,
coordinationoftwoguidingideas,oneprimarilymathematicalandtheotherprimarily
philosophical:
1. The guiding mathematical idea is to use categories of Heyting algebras as the for-
mal theoretical framework for modeling and investigating the systematic logical
relationships among commitments. Heyting algebras are useful for examining
systematic part/whole relationships in a variety of contexts, in particular in ways
that bring to light deep connections between logic and topology [17]. Categories
of Heyting algebras will serve as the abstract “spaces of commitments” through
which abduction “moves”.
2. The guiding philosophical idea involves tracking processes of reasoning in
terms of pragmatic relations among communities of agents and among practical
obstructions that structurally mirror those of systems of commitments. There is
a natural dialectic whereby communities relate to one another “in accord with”
logical entailments of commitments (covariance) and collections of obstructions
are gathered “oppositely” (contravariance). On the one hand, we thus consider
communities in a given population as organized pragmatically via the commit-
ments that they do or do not share. On the other hand, we conceive of processes
of reasoning as organized through a semantic coordination of such pragmatic
commitmentsandobjectiveobstructionsthatrepresentmaterialincompatibilities
with respect to those commitments. This general pragmatic-semantic approach
follows the lead of [3].
We show in what follows how category theory, and in particular presheaves, can
integrate these two basic ideas in a straightforward way and how abductive reasoning
may be modeled in that formal context.

52
R. Gangle et al.
2
Affectivity and Abduction
It is important, ﬁrst, to emphasize some of the difﬁculties that stand in the way of
any project committed to formalizing abduction. Unlike the cases of deductive and
inductive inference, when aiming for a formal model of abductive inference it may
not be entirely clear what the intuitive concept that one is trying to formalize even is.
Working notions of abduction range from very general conceptions that assimilate
even ordinary perception to the schema of abductive inference to very speciﬁc con-
ceptions of abduction as inference to the best explanation (IBE) within some deﬁnite
theoretical context. At the theoretical level, no single framework encompasses all
these approaches, although some proposals have gained traction in local contexts
(for example [2, 11] in the context of belief revision expressed in formal languages).
The study of abduction remains, to speak in Kuhnian terms, pre-paradigmatic. We do
not presume to offer a framework that would serve as such a paradigm, but by taking
a new tack on this old problem we hope to contribute to the ongoing conversation and
the healthy proliferation of points of view out of which a paradigm might eventually
emerge.
Discussions of abduction typically trace both the word itself and the tradition that
stems from it to Peirce [7, 13]. We too take our cue from Peirce’s overall approach to
the problem and begin from the phenomenological experience of abductive inference,
rather than presuming a formal context at the outset. In this regard, Peirce uses dis-
tinctive and idiosyncratic language to formulate his concept of abductive inference.
We present one of his canonical formulations here, separating and enumerating the
argument in three parts and highlighting in italics his more colorful turns of phrase
([13] 5.180–212 in [14] vol. 2, p. 231, numerals and emphases added):
1. The surprising fact, C, is observed;
2. But if A were true, C would be a matter of course.
3. Hence, there is reason to suspect that A is true.
Notice that the phrases highlighted in (1) and (3) employ directly affective lan-
guage. Surprise and suspicion are affective states. To be sure, they may and usually do
possess a cognitive component as well, but such a component is not essential to them.
At least in the case of surprise, one may very well experience the subjective feeling of
surprise before one has conceptually grasped any determinate object to be surprised
at. What makes surprise and suspicion what they are is a more or less deﬁnite kind
of feeling, a sort of existential status or subjective mood, that is, a determinate affect.
If abduction can only be adequately characterized in terms of such affective states,
then attempts to formalize abduction in purely cognitive or propositional terms are
bound, at least in part, to miss the mark.
The affects of surprise and conjectural suspicion depend upon enduring subjective
and pragmatic dispositions that are themselves expressed in complex webs of expec-
tation and attention. One is surprised, for instance, when one’s ordinary expectations
are overturned. Often such expectations remain more or less unconscious, as when
one indifferently “expects” the status quo. Conjectural suspicion tends to be more

Abductive Spaces: Modeling Concept Framework …
53
conscious and focused, but it too can only be understood in terms of dispositions
and expectations that both shift and endure over time. If abduction crucially depends
upon such affective states and pragmatic dispositions, then formal models of abduc-
tion must start from conceptual frameworks distinct from those appropriate to static
propositions or beliefs. The language and conceptual architecture of “commitments”
appears promising in this regard. Commitments, like affects, are complex. They can
involve both conscious and unconscious elements as well as both subjective and
objective determinations. Commitments themselves are not necessarily affective in
a direct manner (it is not clear, for instance, how the commitment to following trafﬁc
laws feels), but due to the typical coordination of subjective and objective poles of
commitment, there is a natural way in which commitments, to the extent that they
can be blocked, assisted, shared, and so forth, become linked in regular and tractable
ways to certain affective states of the agents who hold those commitments.
Such complexity cannot be adequately captured by the coarse-grained structure of
atomic propositions and classical Boolean values, but perhaps it can be represented
to some reasonable degree of faithfulness by the more ﬂexible determinations of
continuities and overlaps of open sets in an appropriate topological space. In line
with this consideration, we present a general pragmatic framework based on the
notion of an abstract space of commitments in which the shades and nuances of
the affective dynamics of abductive inference may be characterized in terms of the
expression of commitments across various communities on the one hand and the
potential obstructions that might arise to those commitments on the other.
A helpful intuition to guide understanding of the formal construction below may
be to think of the space of commitments as organized somewhat like a movable
archery target superposed over some given territory. To possess some degree of com-
mitment to the realization of X relative to various similar and different possibilities
is, metaphorically speaking, to target a region X with some degree of precision with
respect to its neighboring regions. Commitments come in degrees, like concentric
circles on the target, although some commitments are incommensurable, as when
the target is moved to a different (non-overlapping) area. Relaxing a commitment
corresponds to enlarging the target zone X. The more relaxed the commitment, the
easier it then is to hit the target (because the target region is larger). Similarly, sharp-
ened or more specialized commitments correspond to restricting the size of the target
region. Hitting a bullseye is hard because its area of success is so small relative to
the surrounding area of failure. The space of commitments is in this way like a terri-
tory transcribed with a variety of target circles of various sizes, with some separate,
some overlapping, some wholly included in others. A movement through the space
of commitments corresponds to a change from one selected target circle to another,
that is, the relaxation, strengthening or redirecting of the region that counts as a
successful hit. The context-bound signiﬁcance of the various targeted regions will
be determined by how their successful targeting might be blocked or obstructed by
various factors. And collectivities or communities will be determined on the basis of
shared acts of projective targeting.

54
R. Gangle et al.
3
The Formal Framework
The overarching intuition for the following framework is that of a logical space
of commitments, with possible obstructions and actual communities varying over
that space in a reasonable and controlled way. In other words, it may be helpful—in
accordancewiththe“targetmap”metaphoroutlinedabove—tothinkofanyparticular
target region on the map (that is, some particular commitment of whatever degree
of generality or speciﬁcity) as deﬁned on the one hand by a collection of possible
obstacles to attaining it that thereby determine its “meaning” and manifested on the
other hand by a collection of agents who aim at it and thereby concretely realize the
targeting commitment in whatever context. As the target region varies through the
available space (expanding, contracting, shifting position, etc.)—which corresponds
to controlled changes in features of the speciﬁed commitment—the coordinated
collections of obstructions and communities of agents linked to that commitment
will, in the proposed model, vary accordingly.
In the following sections, we will ﬁrst explain how the space of commitments itself
maybeformalizedwithincategorytheoryasacategoryinwhichcommitmentsarethe
objects and entailment relations between commitments are the arrows or morphisms.
When such a category meets certain speciﬁcations (as outlined below), it will consti-
tute a Heyting algebra and may therefore be understood as the abstract representation
of a topological space. We then organize a kind of “semantics” for these categories of
commitments by associating each commitment in the category with a set of obstruc-
tions to that commitment. These are required to respect the entailment relations in an
appropriate way. Finally, we characterize the realizations of categories of commit-
ments by populations that are parceled out into various communities according to the
commitments they share. As with obstructions, the formation of such communities is
required to appropriately respect the entailment relations between the commitments
in the underlying space.
3.1
Commitments
At the basis of the formal model is a space of commitments which arises from
a class of commitments taken together with certain prescribed relations between
pairs of those commitments. We conceive of these relations as arrows going from
one commitment to another. In this way, the logical space of commitments appears
as a directed graph. Given two commitments, say c1 and c2, we have the relation
c1 −→c2 if and only if commitment c1 entails commitment c2. A typical class of
such implications will be generalizations: for instance, commitment to reading War
and Peace entails commitment to reading something written by Tolstoy, which entails
commitment to reading something by either Tolstoy or Dostoevsky. In accordance
with the categorical approach, we refrain from specifying this entailment relation in
itself (considerably simplifying our task!) and attend only to the structural behavior

Abductive Spaces: Modeling Concept Framework …
55
of this relation insofar as it forms a uniﬁed system via its speciﬁable meta-relations.
Thiswillconstitutethesystemofthelogicalspaceofcommitmentsitselfasacategory
and, indeed, a Heyting algebra.
We require the following characteristics to ensure the structural integrity of the
space of commitments. Each requirement is subject to a natural and plausible inter-
pretation in terms of our ordinary intuitions of how commitments are related to one
another1:
1. Each commitment entails itself.
2. Commitment entailment is transitive.
3. Given two commitments, c1 and c2, we have the conjunctive commitment c1 ∧c2
such that any commitment that entails both c1 and c2 also entails c1 ∧c2.
4. Given two commitments, c1 and c2, we have the disjunctive commitment c1 ∨c2
such that any commitment that is entailed by both c1 and c2 is also entailed by
c1 ∨c2.
5. Giventwocommitments,c1 andc2,wehavetheimplicativecommitmentc1 ⇒c2
such that for all commitments x where c1 ∧x entails c2, x entails c1 ⇒c2.
6. There is a “self-contradictory” or “false” commitment ⊥such that ⊥entails
every other commitment.
7. There is a “maximally general” or “always true” commitment ⊤such that any
commitment entails ⊤.
For simplicity’s sake, we also assume that two commitments that mutually imply
one another “collapse” to form a single commitment.2
A note of clariﬁcation is needed for requirement 5: the commitment c1 ⇒c2 can
be thought of as the element that represents the “most general implication” of its type
in the following sense. Consider the collection of all the conjunctive commitments
“generated” by a commitment p (that is, of the form p ∧a for some a), restrict
this collection to those that entail q and call this restricted collection X(p, q). Then
p ⇒q is the least general commitment overall such that it is entailed by every
element of X(p, q). Thus, p ⇒q is the strongest commitment (the least general)
with the property that it is entailed by all of X(p, q) (and is therefore more general
than each of them).
Taken together, these structural requirements on a system of commitments orga-
nized by a relation of entailment induce the formal structure of a category and, indeed,
a Heyting algebra. Of course, this is no accident. We have simply expressed (one
formulation of) the familiar Heyting algebra axioms in terms of commitments and
their entailment-relations.3 This way of proceeding thus uses an abstract mathemat-
1We omit the corresponding formal characterizations for simplicity of presentation.
2From a logical point of view, this assumption amounts to conceiving of the commitment-space as
a Lindenbaum algebra.
3Formally, a Heyting algebra is deﬁned as follows [6]: First, we deﬁne a bounded lattice as a partially
ordered set A in which for every pair a, b ∈A = Ob(A) there exists a supremum or least upper
bound a ∨b and an inﬁmum or greatest lower bound a ∧b and there exists a top and a bottom, 1
and 0, respectively, such that for every a ∈A, a ⪯1 and 0 ⪯a. In categorical terms, the supremum
of a and b is their coproduct a + b, while the inﬁmum is a × b, and the bottom is an initial object

56
R. Gangle et al.
ical characterization of space (at once logical and topological) to make a precise
“spatial metaphor” for systems of subjective commitment. Such an approach will
be justiﬁed to the extent that it will allow for the further construction on its basis
of a more complex theoretical framework that may itself be useful in understanding
abduction.
The diagram below represents a concrete example. It will serve as something of
a “toy model” to exhibit the dynamics of abductive inference in this framework. For
simplicity’s sake, in our example we will consider only theoretical commitments.
This has the advantage of ﬁtting into the familiar conception of abductive inference
quite readily. It has the disadvantage, however, of working within a rather narrow
class of commitments. It should be borne in mind throughout the exposition below
that the dynamics that are characterized in this particular theoretical context are
special cases of a more general class of dynamics within commitments of whatever
type.
From a strictly formal point of view, the diagram shows a lattice of nodes bound by
an maximal node ⊤and a minimal node ⊥. Between these upper and lower bounds
are four nodes labeled H, P, E and N. P is below H and E, and N is below E
(when the arrows are thought of as an order-relation). We omit the identity arrows
that belong to each object (each node) and it should be remembered that every path
of arrows also deﬁnes an arrow because of transitivity.
P
H
E
N
⊤
⊥
such that for every object a, there exists a unique morphism 0 →a. Analogously, the top is a
terminal object such that there exists a unique a →1 for every object a. A Heyting algebra is then a
bounded lattice A with two functors ∧: A × A →A and ⇒: A × A →A, left and right adjoints,
respectively. The interpretation is that given c, a, b ∈A, x ∧a ⪯b is equivalent to x ⪯a ⇒b. In
logical terms, x ∧a is a conjunction between x and a, while a ⇒b is an implication with antecedent
a and consequent b. In categorical terms a ⇒b is the exponential ba.

Abductive Spaces: Modeling Concept Framework …
57
This toy example may be taken to picture Rutherford’s experimentally-based
critique of the “plum-pudding” model of the atom and the scientiﬁc community’s
shift of commitment from that model to a model of atoms with a nucleus [12]. We
consider the space of available theoretical commitments as composed of four regions,
each of which corresponds to a general hypothesis: the homogeneity of matter (H),
theexistenceofelectrons(E),theatomicplum-puddingmodel(P),andthenucleated
atomic model (N). We presume that commitment to P entails commitment to H and
E and that commitment to N entails commitment to E.4 It should be emphasized
that this is no more than a toy model used for expository purposes and is by no means
meant to capture the real complexity of the epistemic issues at stake in this historical
example.
3.2
Obstructions
The Heyting algebra category organizes the entailment relations among the commit-
ments at stake, which correspond to inclusions of open sets in an abstract topological
space. This system of relations is somewhat like the skeleton of a formal syntax. It
tells us only how the commitments in the system are linked to one another via entail-
ment relations, but it tells us nothing of how they should be understood in themselves.
There is no “semantics” (in a rough and intuitive sense) for this abstract “syntactical”
space. We will provide such a semantics by coordinating sets of obstructions with
each commitment in the space.
Truth is the adequation of intellect and thing. Philosophers have tied themselves
into knots trying to clarify just what this relation of “adequation” is and how to test
or verify it. The project of empiricism presumes a sphere of subjective experiences
characterized by their various qualities and an objective world of things with various
properties. Truth occurs when the qualities match up appropriately with the proper-
ties. But this “matching up” which seems at ﬁrst glance so straightforward turns out
to raise a whole host of problems that have occupied philosophy at least since Hume.
One proposal for getting around these problems amounts to shifting the terrain
from subjective representations to subjective commitments. The basis of the link
between mind and world thus shifts from “matching up” to “being compatible with”.
Truth is then lifted to a higher degree of abstraction. It no longer consists of a rela-
tion between a thought and a thing, but is instead conceived as a relation between
a system of relations between thoughts and a system of possibilities among things.
This program was proposed and developed by Wilfrid Sellars in the 1960s and 1970s
4It should be noted that this particular interpretation serves a merely heuristic purpose. The structures
and dynamics discussed in the following sections do not depend upon any particular interpretation of
the commitments in the Heyting algebra presented, only upon the structure of the algebra (category)
itself.

58
R. Gangle et al.
[15] and carried forward more recently by Robert Brandom. It is a research program
characterized, as the title of [4] has it, by the shift from empiricism to expressivism.
It may equally be described as a shift from representationalism to pragmatism. Part
of its power comes from specifying a general practical or pragmatic context of
correlation between subjective commitments and objective conditions and then posi-
tioning traditional philosophical problems surrounding truth and knowledge within
this more general context in terms of speciﬁcally epistemic or alethic commitments.
In our study of abduction we will be concerned primarily with communities, not
individuals, but for purposes of exposition it will be simpler here to consider just
individual commitments. In the following section we will broaden this notion to
include communities.
The core of this program involves the following two-level insight: subjective
commitments are correlated with objective conditions of material compatibility and
incompatibility (level one), and inferences from certain commitments to certain other
commitments correspond (or should correspond) to relations between their correlated
conditions of material compatibility and incompatibility (level two). At level one, for
instance, my commitment to buying an ice cream cone is correlated on the one hand
with a variety of possible ﬂavor preferences, different weather conditions, various
locations, various social settings, etc. (material compatibilities) and on the other hand
with conditions that would block or invalidate such a commitment: lacking sufﬁcient
funds, no ice cream in stock, and so forth (material incompatibilities).
The role of materially incompatible conditions is especially important here. It is
in general impossible to specify all the conditions that are compatible with a given
commitment. The world is, after all, a complicated business, and indeterminately
speciﬁed global diversity is its default state. But it is quite often possible to specify if
not all the conditions that are incompatible with a given commitment, at least a robust
and relatively complete set of local conditions any one of which would be sufﬁcient
to obstruct or compromise that commitment. For example, incompatible (more or
less completely) with the commitment to buying ice cream is (a) not wanting ice
cream, (b) not having enough money to buy ice cream, and (c) not having ice cream
available for sale.
Following roughly in the path of the Spinozist insight omnis determinatio est nega-
tio (“all determination is negation”), correlating subjective practical commitments
with sets of incompatible objective conditions effectively deﬁnes those commitments
in terms of what would exclude them or make them unrealizable.
This lays the ground for the second level of coordinating commitments and con-
ditions. It is clear on the one hand that certain commitments entail certain other com-
mitments. For instance, the commitment to watch a ﬁlm in a movie theater entails
(under normal convivial conditions) the commitment to avoid conversing loudly with
one’s neighbor. It is clear on the other hand that if such entailment relations (and
the inferences they underwrite) are to be non-arbitrary, they must be grounded in
the objective conditions correlated with the commitments they link together. In fact,

Abductive Spaces: Modeling Concept Framework …
59
there is quite natural way to coordinate the entailment relations among commitments
on the one hand and the relations among sets of objective conditions on the other.
When a commitment C1 properly entails some other commitment C2, it is to be
expected that the set of objective conditions incompatible with C2 should be a subset
of the conditions incompatible with C1. In other words, if C2 follows from C1, then
everything incompatible with C2 should be incompatible with C1.
We thus have a general situation that may be pictured in the following way:
C1
C2
⊇
Let us unpack what the diagram expresses. There are essentially two layers: a
base layer and an upper layer. The base or lower layer consists of two nodes or
“objects” representing distinct commitments and an arrow linking them. This arrow is
meant to represent a relation of entailment that holds between the two commitments:
commitment to C1 is understood to entail commitment to C2. Each of the objects in
the lower layer is linked to a oval “ﬁber” in the upper layer. Each of these ﬁbers is
intended to represent the set of objective conditions that are incompatible with the
commitment linked to it below. The key insight is that if indeed C1 entails C2 then
any element of the set of objective conditions incompatible with C2 (an element of
the ﬁber over C2) should also be incompatible with C1 (and thus an element of the
ﬁber over C1). This is because anything that obstructs C2 or makes it impossible
will also by that very fact (given the entailment relation) make C1 impossible. If
commitment C1 can be maintained under conditions that make C2 impossible, then
clearly C1 does not necessarily entail C2. The reasoning here is, in effect, a pragmatic
instantiation of the logical schema of modus tollens.
Only two terms appear in each of the layers in the given diagram. But it should
be noted that the diagram could be extended under the same interpretation and it
would preserve the indicated structure transitively in both the base layer and the ﬁber
layer. In other words, if the base layer were extended by one node so as to express
C1 −→C2 −→C3, this would imply C1 −→C3 by transitivity of implication. The
new base node C3 would be equipped with its own ﬁber of incompatibilities. And if

60
R. Gangle et al.
we designate the ﬁbers over C1,C2 and C3 as F(C1),F(C2) and F(C3) respectively,
then in the upper layer we would (by the same reasoning given above) have the
transitive sequence of inclusion relations F(C1) ⊇F(C2) ⊇F(C3).
So a relation of commitment-entailment in the base layer moving from left to
right (in the diagram) is coordinated with a relation of incompatibility-inclusion in
the upper layer moving from right to left. The important point to note is not the
particular orientation in the given diagram (left to right in the base; right to left in the
ﬁbers) but rather the intrinsic opposition in the two directions relative to one another,
the fact that the relations go in opposite directions. This coordinated opposition
of the direction of one system of relations with respect to some other system of
relations is called, in a formal register, contravariance. In the present context, this
systematic “oppositional parallelism” expresses in a highly general way just how the
obstructive semantics is coordinated with the spatial (topological) syntax. It is the
special character of category theory to exhibit such general mappings of systems of
relations in an immediate and easily formulated manner.
The point is not at all that pragmatic commitments and sets of incompatible
conditions can be perfectly speciﬁed and exhaustively determined in any given case.
They almost certainly cannot, save for the most trivial cases. What matters is the
form of the relation between the implicative relations in the lower or base layer and
the inclusion relations in the upper or ﬁber layer. Category theory is especially useful
in modeling such relations because it abstracts away from isolated determinations of
individuals and attends only to relational and systematic determinations.
We are now prepared to combine (a) the idea that there is a natural contravari-
ance between subjective commitments and objective incompatibilities and (b) the
mathematical structure of Heyting algebras as a way to organize relations among
communities of commitment together in a single integrated framework. The basic
constructionwewilluseisafundamentaltoolwithincategorytheorycalledapresheaf
[8, 9].
We take the example of Rutherford provided above and consider a contravariant
functor from that category into the category Sets⊆.5 We call this functor OB. To each
commitment (object) c in the space of commitments (category) C, we assign the set
OB(c) of possible obstructions to c, represented by an oval on top of c. The dashed
arrows represent inclusion functions between sets (note the contravariance).
5Sets⊆notates the category whose objects are sets and whose arrows or morphisms are all inclusion
functions between sets. This category is a faithful subcategory of the category Set of sets and
functions.

Abductive Spaces: Modeling Concept Framework …
61
P
H
E
N
⊤
⊥
H
OB(H)
It is unnecessary to ﬁll in all the details of this particular mapping, since from
a categorical perspective what is relevant is only that some such mapping has been
speciﬁed. We attend not to the details of what is going on “under the hood” but
instead only to their effects as manifest in the external relations in the speciﬁed
categories. Somewhat as a computer programmer typically works in a relatively
high-level programming language and does not need in general to attend to the
underlying machine code, a theorist of abductive inference may (once the underlying
structural interaction of the commitment space and the obstructions presheaf over it
is understood) effectively take this structure for granted as a well-behaved domain for
conceiving, expressing and testing various abductive dynamics. In order to motivate
the exhibition of abductive inferential dynamics below in terms of our ﬁxed toy
model, we will simply note here that among the obstructions to commitment to the
hypothesis of the “plum-pudding” atomic model (node P in the base category) we
may posit experimental results sufﬁciently similar to those found by Rutherford and
his team. If we label such an experimental obstruction η, then we have the situation
that η ∈OB(P) and {η} ⊆OB(P).
Inaccordancewiththeinsightnotedabove,wewanttospecifythatarrowsbetween
the sets of obstructions represent inclusions of sets. This will ensure the plausibility
of our semantics. But this speciﬁcation comes for free by choosing the category Sets⊆
as our target category. The mathematical infrastructure of category theory ensures the
very coordination of commitment-space “syntax” and “semantics” that is our aim.

62
R. Gangle et al.
3.3
Communities
The coordination of the syntactical space of commitments with the semantic determi-
nations of sets of obstructions lays out a system of potential meaningful commitments
in some given context. But who or what exactly would hold and thus manifest these
commitments? To realize this system of possible commitments as a collection of
actual determinations in a concrete world requires specifying individuals or groups
who would in fact hold these commitments, thus realizing them concretely as actual
subjective commitments. We add this layer of determinations in a way that is parallel
to the procedure followed in determining the semantics of obstructions, but which is
organized in the systematic “direction” opposite to it.
Given a space of commitments, we may consider some population of agents
distributed across that space. To each commitment in the space, we then associate
the collection of agents in the population who actually hold that commitment. In
order to respect the implication-relations among the commitments in the space, it
seems natural to require that any agent who is committed to some commitment c1
must also be committed to c2 if c1 −→c2. Of course in real-world contexts, agents
are—alas—not always logically consistent and may be committed, for instance, to
fostering high-quality public education without at the same time being committed
to funding such education. The purpose of specifying the framework in this way is
not to exclude such possibilities, but only to prescribe an initial “ideal case” in such
a way that different (and perhaps more realistic) scenarios may be speciﬁed relative
to this ideal model.
We thus have a situation parallel but inverse to that of obstructions:
C1
C2
⊆
Toeachcommitmentinacommitmentspace,weassociateacommunitycomposed
of agents who share that commitment. If a commitment implies another commitment,
then the community associated with the former is necessarily committed to the lat-
ter. Thus we have a system of inclusion relations among sets that runs parallel to
the implication arrows in any given commitment space. This situation is that of a
covariant functor from the commitment space (understood as a category) into the
category of Sets⊆of sets and inclusions.

Abductive Spaces: Modeling Concept Framework …
63
WecontinuewiththeexampleofRutherfordprovidedaboveandconsideracovari-
ant functor from that category of theoretical commitments into the category Sets⊆,
having ﬁrst ﬁxed some set P to be our target population set of relevant scientists. We
call this functor COM. To each commitment (object) c in the space of commitments
(category) C, we assign the set COM(c) of individuals in P committed to c. The
dashed arrows represent inclusion functions between sets (note the covariance).
P
H
E
N
⊤
⊥
H
COM(H)
Just as with obstructions to commitments, we do not need to specify exactly
what the constituent elements of these sets and the details of these mappings are.
For present purposes it is enough to specify that COM(P) and COM(N) are non-
empty. By the very fact that the meet P ∧N is ⊥we infer that (in this context)
simultaneous commitment to both these hypotheses is impossible and they thus
represent competing research programs. Thus, COM(⊥) is the empty set.
Theformaldeﬁnitionofaconceptual“space”coordinatingcommitments,obstruc-
tions and communities that will serve as a context for abduction may now be given.
A context for abduction is a Heyting algebra category C equipped with a pair of
functors, namely, a contravariant functor OB : Cop −→Set⊆and a covariant functor
COM : C −→Set⊆such that for all c objects of C COM(c) ∩COM(¬c) = ∅.6
This relatively compact deﬁnition captures a surprisingly robust collection of fea-
6Here, as is standard, ¬c is shorthand for c ⇒⊥.

64
R. Gangle et al.
tures that would be expected of populations of reasonable agents sharing various
commitments that are determined by their entailment-relations on the one hand and
their possible material obstructions on the other. Category theory allows for such
straightforward modeling of systems of structural relations, and here provides a
mathematically rigorous (if highly idealized) topological setting—a precise spatial
metaphor, so to speak—for framing problems and solutions to the theorization of
abductive inference.
Combining the diagrams that are intended to express the two functors OB and
COM into a single integrated diagram, we may picture the sets OB(c) and COM(c)
associated with some commitment c as the lower and upper layers, respectively, of a
singletwo-layerﬁber.Functionsbetweenthesetsinthelowerlayersarecontravariant,
andfunctions betweensets intheupper layers arecovariant. Thecontravariant functor
OB and the covariant functor COM are thus “stacked” one on top of the other. This
does not entail any additional mathematical structure or formalism; it is merely
a convenient visual representation of the two functors considered simultaneously.
Continuing with the case developed above, we thus have the following informal but
suggestive picture:
P
H
E
N
⊤
⊥
H
OB(H)
COM(H)

Abductive Spaces: Modeling Concept Framework …
65
This diagram pictures the structural coordination of (semantic) contravariant
obstructions and (actualized) covariant communities with respect to the space of
(potential) commitments deﬁning a particular theoretical context. The different ways
this diagram could be “ﬁlled in” by deﬁnite functors OB and COM correspond to
the various possible concrete contexts of commitment that might deﬁne a given
timeslice.7
4
Abductive Inferences Within Spaces of Commitments
At last, within the categorical framework we have taken pains to develop it becomes
possible to characterize the structural dynamics of abductive inference. We proceed
in two main steps which correspond to the two subjective affects noted above in
Peirce’s description of abduction. First, we characterize the “surprising event” that
occasions an abductive inference in terms of one or more of the obstructions in
OB(c) for some given commitment c. Then, we characterize the reasonable suspicion
of an abductive hypothesis in terms of three distinct parameters: the redistribution
of committed communities, the reconﬁguration of obstructions coordinated with
particular commitments, and the reﬁnement of the commitment space itself. The
dynamics of an abductive inference may involve modifying any combination of one
or more of these parameters. In all such cases, the categorical framework preserves
overall coherence in the space as a whole as these changes are made.
4.1
The Occasion for Abduction: Surprise
First of all, we may characterize the occasion or instigation for abduction in a straight-
forward manner. Some part of a committed community encounters one or more obsta-
cles to that commitment. Peirce’s “surprising event” in the present framework will
involve two terms, a set of agents and a set of obstructions. A surprising event, from
this point of view, is just a subset of the community committed to some commitment
who encounter a subset of the obstacles that obstruct that commitment.
Formally,givenacontextforabduction,anobstructedcommitmentor“surprise”is
a triple < c, O Bc, COMc > consisting of some commitment c ∈C and sets O Bc ⊆
OB(c) and COMc ⊆COM(c).
7Of signiﬁcant interest, but beyond the reach of the present exposition, is the system of controlled
variation among such concrete timeslices. This system may be formalized in terms of the category
of natural transformations among the relevant pairs of OB and COM functors.

66
R. Gangle et al.
P
H
E
N
⊤
⊥
In this diagram, the lower of the two thick ovals in the ﬁber over P represents
the obstruction η to the plum-pudding model posed by Rutherford’s experimental
data. The upper oval represents a collection of scientists committed to that model
who encounter Rutherford’s data. In the formal framework, these are represented by
a subset of OB(P) and a subset of COM(P) respectively. Let us designate these as
{η} (as in Sect. 3.2) and {σ1, σ2, σ3} (assuming three “surprised” plum-pudding sci-
entists: σ1, σ2, and σ3). Thus, we have {η} ⊆OB(P) and {σ1, σ2, σ3} ⊆COM(P).
Intuitively, the encounter of these three scientists with the data obstructing their
commitment to the plum-pudding model are, ﬁrst of all, surprised to ﬁnd their the-
oretical commitment challenged in this way and, secondly, impelled to revise their
theoretical commitment in light of this obstruction. We will track this latter process
of theoretical revision in the subsequent section.
The dashed ovals in the diagram represent the subsets {σ1, σ2, σ3} ⊆COM(H),
{σ1, σ2, σ3} ⊆COM(E), and {σ1, σ2, σ3} ⊆COM(⊤) on the one hand and the sub-
set {η} ⊆OB(⊥) on the other that are mandated by the structures of the respective
presheaves. It is important to remember that the coherence of the model as a whole
depends upon these covariant and contravariant subset inclusions mirroring the struc-
ture of the underlying category. Local modiﬁcations in the ﬁbers (for instance over
the node P) will for this reason have ramiﬁcations elsewhere in the model. Thus,
local changes will typically induce global updates in the presheaf functors.

Abductive Spaces: Modeling Concept Framework …
67
4.2
The Dynamics of Abduction: Reason to Suspect
The core of abductive inference is a certain kind of subjective response made in
the wake of a surprising event. In particular, an abductive inference requires the
additional ingredient of some motivation to understand or explain the source of
the surprise. This motivational element and its relation to the explanatory power of
the abduced conjecture mark an especially tricky aspect of the overall problem of
modeling and formalizing abduction. We will return to this problem below. For now,
we only suggest that the motivation to explain—which is not reducible to the affect
of surprise but must be adjoined to it—is, at least in principle, describable in terms
of additional modes, or loci, of commitment.
The “spatial” model developed above has three basic aspects: commitments,
obstructions and communities. Each of these aspects is structured by a system of
relations, and the three systems of relations are coordinated with one another by
way of the categorical machinery of presheaves. Accordingly, when conceiving of
abductive inference within this model, three types of movement or change through
its “space” suggest themselves as potential components of abductive revision.8 The
communities may be redistributed; the obstructions may be reconﬁgured; the com-
mitment space itself may be reﬁned. The structural dynamics of these three processes
are sketched below. We propose that a robust theory of abduction should take into
account the interactions and mutual constraints among all three of these coordinated
aspects.
4.2.1
Redistribution of Communities with Respect to Commitments
In the current framework, we conceive of an abductive inference as ﬁrst and foremost
an updating of what agents in some global context hold which commitments. To make
an abduction is, typically, to give up certain old commitments and to take on certain
new ones. In a community-based context, this means splitting up or emptying cer-
tain communities of commitment and forming new communities or forging alliances
with those already there. From the current formal point of view, this amounts to
redistributing the communities throughout the space of commitments, that is, updat-
ing the functor COM. Thus, the ﬁrst and most important parameter for abductive
inference is the redistribution of communities of commitment in the face of some
given surprise.
8The ancient Greek concept of κινησισ would hold resources here for understanding and expressing
the direct connection between movement and change, even to the point of identifying them.

68
R. Gangle et al.
The subset of agents in a community who encounter an obstruction to their com-
mon commitment are led to revise that commitment in light of the obstruction. The
typical shape of such revision is that of an initial relaxation of their commitment
followed by a subsequent resharpening or refocusing of commitment onto an alter-
nate goal or project. To return to the “target” metaphor used above, a reasonable
response to some commitment obstruction consists of increasing the relevant target
zone (so that a near miss may now count as a hit) and then tightening the target circle
to exclude the obstruction (which now falls outside the target zone). In the more
abstract categorical Heyting representation, this movement appears as an “ascent”
from the associated object in the category in the direction of ⊤, that is, “following
the arrows” of the category until the relevant obstruction is no longer present in the
associated ﬁber, followed by a “descent” that goes “against the arrows” to some more
specialized commitment that resolves or ameliorates the obstruction in whatever way
is contextually appropriate.
P
H
E
N
⊤
⊥
The full technical details of the formalization of this “movement” go beyond the
scope of this presentation, but a simple example should illustrate the main idea. In
the given case of competing atomic hypotheses, the subset of the community com-
mitted to the plum-pudding atomic model who have encountered the obstructive data
in Rutherford’s work cannot remain committed to that hypothesis and must “move”
elsewhere (that is, change their commitments). The most reasonable approach is to

Abductive Spaces: Modeling Concept Framework …
69
move “up” the lattice until the obstructive data is, precisely, no longer obstructive.
In this case, the data also obstructs the more general hypothesis that matter is homo-
geneous ({η} ⊆OB(H)), so the path to the left from P would have to go all the way
up to ⊤, a disappointing result. The path to the right, however, leads to commitment
E, the hypothesis that electrons exist and {η} ⊈OB(E). Let us assume that σ1 and
σ2 do no more than this. Thus, they merely relax their commitment to the plum-
pudding model (P) so that they are now committed to no more than the hypothesis
E (that electrons exist). Scientist σ3, however, performs the more interesting fur-
ther “descent” from E to N. Commitment to the hypothesis N not only escapes the
obstruction η; it also, if it is true, would explain η. Thus, σ3 appears to have performed
an abduction in a signiﬁcantly stronger sense than the mere “commitment revision”
of σ1 and σ2.
The movements of σ1, σ2 and σ3 through the space of commitments are repre-
sented by updating the functor COM to a new functor COM′. In the updated functor
COM′ that “replaces” COM in light of the surprising encounter with obstruction
η, {σ1, σ2} ⊆COM′(E) and {σ3} ⊆COM′(N). All other ﬁbers are, to the greatest
extent possible, preserved.
4.2.2
Reconﬁguration of Obstructions with Respect to Commitments
In the proposed categorical framework, sets of obstructions provide a pragmatic
semantics for the commitments in the base category by varying over them in a
controlled way in the ﬁbers of the functor OB. In response to an encounter with
one or more of these obstructions, agents may revise their commitments as outlined
above in a way that tracks the global semantics in a reasonable manner. But it is
also possible to hold the commitments and associated communities ﬁxed and to
revise the semantics instead. Trivially, it is possible simply to “delete” the relevant
obstruction(s) from the ﬁber of the given commitment. Scientists committed to the
plum-pudding model may decide by ﬁat, for example, that Rutherford’s experimental
data does not represent an obstruction to their commitment. In deciding this, they are
in effect redescribing the content of their commitment. Note that such a modiﬁcation
of the semantics of the commitment space (the ﬁbers in the OB presheaf) would
seem to recommend revisions or reﬁnements of the commitment space itself. This
suggests that a more thorough model would need to elaborate and formalize the
complex interplay between the formal entailment structure in the base category and
the semantic content codiﬁed by the sets of obstructions and their inclusion relations.

70
R. Gangle et al.
P
H
E
N
⊤
⊥
Inthediagramabove,theobstructionη hasbeendeletedfromthesetOB(P).Thus,
a new functor OB′ has been induced such that OB′(P) = OB(P) −{η}. Generally,
such a deletion would entail corresponding changes to ﬁbers upstream if they too
contain the obstruction η. In order to maintain the integrity of the presheaf, local
semantic changes involve more general regional effects. In the given example, we
may assume that Rutherford’s experimental results also obstruct commitment to the
hypothesis H that matter is homogeneous (η ∈OB(H)). Consequently, the update
OB′(H) = OB(H) −{η} is “forced” by the deletion of η from OB(P). Once again,
the particularly abductive character of the change remains largely implicit in this
simple example. In order for the abductive inference not only to accommodate but
(potentially) to explain the surprising event, it would seem that the reason for denying
or deleting the relevant obstruction must in some way be incorporated into the new
commitment. This key aspect remains to be brought explicitly into the dynamics of
the model.
4.2.3
Reﬁnement of the Commitment Space
Finally, abductive inference may involve modifying the Heyting algebra category
C that represents the underlying abstract space of commitments. In particular, the
conceptual distinctions marked out by the objects and relations constituting the space
of commitments may be reﬁned so that more nuanced adjustments can be registered.
Formally, this means passing from the category C to a new category C′ such that
there is a surjective Heyting algebra homomorphism (a functor) h : C′ −→C. Since

Abductive Spaces: Modeling Concept Framework …
71
the OB and COM functors are deﬁned with respect to C, any change in C forces
corresponding updates in OB and COM, even if the functors are intended to be
preserved as much as possible. Roughly speaking, the sets in the ﬁbers over the
newly introduced objects of the category must distribute the sets in the ﬁbers from
the original functor OB (COM) immediately above (below) them.9
P
H
E
N
⊤
⊥
N+
N+()
Here,themovementofabductiveinferenceisunderstoodnotasapassagefromone
pre-given commitment-state to another, but as the enrichment or differentiation of the
current epistemic commitment-state. In this case, Rutherford’s nuclear hypothesis
represented by the node N in the Heyting category is differentiated into two sub-
hypotheses N+ (the atomic nucleus consists only of protons) and N+() (the atomic
nucleus consists of both protons and neutrons). Clearly, commitment to either N+
or N+() entails commitment to N, and neither N+ or N+() entails the other. Note
that the set of objects

⊥, N+, N+(), N

constitutes a sub-Heyting algebra with the
arrows inherited from the larger category in which they are embedded. In general,
the reﬁnement of a single commitment c in a space of commitments C will consist of
a expansion of the object c into a sub-Heyting algebra in which c is the local ⊤or ⊥
(together with all the concomitant relations necessitated by the categorical structure
itself: transitivity as composition, etc.). This formal reﬁnement at the categorical
level nicely captures the intuitive idea of elaborating the “inner logic” (the space of
internal distinctions and entailments) of a given commitment.
9We omit the technical details for reasons of space.

72
R. Gangle et al.
5
Conclusion
It should be clear that the dynamics outlined above do not provide anything like
a complete formal theory of abductive inference. In particular, the core notion of
conjectured explanation remains insufﬁciently articulated. What has been laid out
does offer, however, a collection of general “shapes” within the structural dynamics
that may be thought of metaphorically as characteristic gestures expressing dif-
ferent aspects of abduction. But the delicate ﬁne-tuning necessary to chart out all
the possible nuances and interconnections of these gestures awaits further research.
Nevertheless, within this still relatively coarse framework, those aspects of abduc-
tive inference that have shown themselves to be most resistant to formalization may
at the very least be characterized—precisely as problems—in new and potentially
productive ways. For instance, the explanatory aspect of a conjectured hypothesis
may be conceived (roughly) as its incorporation of a commitment (properly qualiﬁed
as conjectural) to some claim h such that if h is true then some relevant aspect of
the instigating obstruction would be understood as “a matter of course”. In this way,
it seems that the speciﬁc explanatory character of abductive inference will consist
in drawing appropriate conditional antecedents for the relevant subset of obstructive
instigation into the space of commitments itself. In combination with the other param-
eters of adjustment available within this framework, it seems that various new ways
to posit general and speciﬁc types of abduction as well as to generate diverse classes
of concrete models of such types become possible for future research programs.
Abductive inference is a highly complex natural process, a reasoning activity of
which only sophisticated cognitive agents are capable. Because of the essential inte-
gration of abductive inference within the practically-oriented and affectively-tinged
experiences of subjective agents in dynamic material contexts, formal theories of
abduction need to be responsive to multiple dimensions of subjectivity, objectiv-
ity and controlled variability. The framework outlined here coordinates three such
dimensions: logical spaces of subjective commitments, potential objective obstruc-
tions to those commitments, and communities realized and organized with respect
to their common commitments. It should be clear that the actual process of abduc-
tive inference cannot be reduced to any one of these dimensions. A robust theory of
abduction would need to synthesize the three modes of redistribution, reconﬁguration
and reﬁnement sketched above into a uniﬁed account that would at once preserve
their relative independence and also guarantee their coherent composition. Such a
thorough account cannot be provided here. But it may be hoped that the utility of
category theory and the particular tool of presheaf functors over “spaces” (Heyting
categories) for constructing theoretical frameworks that track both the independence
and the interdependence of distinct dimensions of a problem in a controlled manner
has been sufﬁciently demonstrated.

Abductive Spaces: Modeling Concept Framework …
73
References
1. Bell, J.L.: Toposes and Local Set Theories: An Introduction. Clarendon/Oxford University
Press, Oxford (1988)
2. Boutilier, C., Becher, V.: Abduction as Belief Revision. Artif. Intell. 77, 43–94 (1995)
3. Brandom, R.: Articulating Reasons: An Introduction to Inferentialism. Harvard University
Press, Cambridge, MA (2000)
4. Brandom, R.: From Empiricism to Expressivism: Brandom Reads Sellars. Harvard University
Press, Cambridge, MA (2015)
5. Caterina, G., Gangle, R.: Iconicity and Abduction. Springer, Berlin (2016)
6. Esakia, L.: Heyting Algebra: Duality Theory. Springer, Basel (2019)
7. Fann, K.T.: Peirce’s Theory of Abduction. Martinus Nijhoff, The Hague (1970)
8. Fong, B., Spivak, D.I.: An Invitation to Applied Category Theory: Seven Sketches in Compo-
sitionality. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK (2019)
9. Gangle, R.: Diagrammatic Immanence. Edinburgh University Press, Edinburgh (2015)
10. Goldblatt, R.: Topoi: The Categorical Analysis of Logic. Elsevier, Amsterdam (1984)
11. Harman, G.: The Inference to the Best Explanation. Philos. Rev. 74, 88–95 (1965)
12. Lakhtakia, A.: Models and Modelers of Hydrogen. World Scientiﬁc, Singapore (1996)
13. Peirce,C.S.:Hartshorne,C.,Weiss,P.,Burks,A.(eds.)CollectedPapers,vols.1–8.TheBelknap
Press of Harvard University Press, Cambridge (1931–1958)
14. Peirce, C.S.: Peirce Edition Project. The Essential Peirce, vols. 1–2. Indiana University Press,
Bloomington (1998)
15. Sellars, W.: Philosophy and the scientiﬁc image of man. In: Science, Perception and Reality.
Ridgeview Publishing Co., Atascadero, CA (1962)
16. Spivak, D.I.: Category Theory for the Sciences. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA (2014)
17. Vickers, S.: Topology via Logic. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK (1989)

Developing and Applying Peirce’s
Abduction

Abduction as “Leading Away”
Aristotle, Peirce, and the Importance
of Eco-Cognitive Openness and Situatedness
Lorenzo Magnani
Abstract In this article I will take advantage of the logical and cognitive studies I
have illustrated in my recent book The Abductive Structure of Scientiﬁc Creativity.
An Essay on the Ecology of Cognition (2017), in which the process of building new
hypotheses is clariﬁed thanks to my eco-cognitive model (EC-Model) of abduction.
Also resorting to a new interpretation of Aristotle’s seminal work on abduction, I
will emphasize the crucial role played in abductive cognition by the so-called “opti-
mization of eco-cognitive openness and situatedness”. Indeed, in the chapter B25
of Prior Analytics concerning ¢pagwg» (“leading away”), we can see some of the
current well-known distinctive characters of abductive cognition already expressed,
which are in tune with the EC-Model: Aristotle is still pointing to the fundamen-
tal inferential role in reasoning of those externalities that substantiate the process of
“leading away” (¢pagwg»). Hence, we can gain a new positive perspective about the
“constitutive” eco-cognitive character of abduction, just thanks to Aristotle himself.
Situatedness is related to eco-cognitive aspects: to favor the solution of the abductive
problem input and output of the formula
1, . . . , i, ?I ⊩X
L ϒ1, . . . , .ϒ j
have to be thought as optimally positioned: indeed I also contend than a disregarded
issue concerning abduction is related to the current lack of knowledge about what
I call “discoverability” and “diagnosticability”. In the formula above ⊩X
L indicates
that inputs and outputs do not stand each other in an expected relation and that the
modiﬁcation of the inputs ?I can provide the abductive solution. In general, in this
characterizationthedirectionisnotfromevidence/premisestoabductiveresultbutthe
forward fashion is adopted, where the inferential parameter ⊩sets some appropriate
logical relationship between an input which consists in both the abductive guess to be
found and a background theory (or just some premisses), and an output—for example
an evidence, a novel phenomenon to be abductively “explained” through facts, rules,
L. Magnani (B)
Department of Humanities, Philosophy Section and Computational Philosophy Laboratory,
University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy
e-mail: lmagnani@unipv.it
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2021
J. Shook et al. (eds.), Abduction in Cognition and Action, Studies in Applied
Philosophy, Epistemology and Rational Ethics 59,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-61773-8_4
77

78
L. Magnani
or even new theories. Further, in the case of scientiﬁc settings, this optimality is
made possible by a maximization of changeability of both input and output: not only
inputs have to be enriched with the possible solution but, to do that, other inputs have
usually to be changed and/or modiﬁed. This changeability ﬁrst of all refers to a wide
epistemological openness.
1
Eco-Cognitive Model of Abduction (EC-Model),
Aristotle’s
as “Leading Away”, and Its
Eco-Cognitive Openness
At the center of my perspective on cognition is the emphasis on the “practical agent”,
of the individual agent operating “on the ground”, that is, in the circumstances of real
life. In all its contexts, from the most abstractly logical and mathematical to the most
roughly empirical, I always emphasize the cognitive nature of abduction. Reasoning
is something performed by cognitive systems. At a certain level of abstraction and
as a ﬁrst approximation, a cognitive system is a triple (A, T, R), in which A is an
agent, T is a cognitive target of the agent, and R relates to the cognitive resources on
which the agent can count in the course of trying to meet the target-information, time
and computational capacity, to name the three most important. My agents are also
embodied distributed cognitive systems: cognition is embodied and the interactions
between brains, bodies, and external environment are its central aspects. Cognition
is occurring taking advantage of a constant exchange of information in a complex
distributed system that crosses the boundary between humans, artifacts, and the
surrounding environment, where also instinctual and unconscious abilities play an
important role. This interplay is especially manifest and clear in various aspects of
abductive cognition, that is in reasoning to hypotheses.
My perspective adopts the wide Peircean philosophical framework, which
approaches “inference” semiotically (and not simply “logically”): Peirce distinctly
says that all inference is a form of sign activity, where the word sign includes “feel-
ing, image, conception, and other representation” ([39], 5.283). It is clear that this
semiotic view is considerably compatible with my perspective on cognitive systems
as embodied and distributed systems. It is in this perspective that we can fully appre-
ciate the role of abductive cognition, which not only refers to propositional aspects
but it is also performed in a framework of distributed cognition, in which also models,
artifacts, internal and external representations, manipulations play an important role.
The backbone of this approach can be found in the manifesto of my eco-cognitive
model (EC-model) of abduction in [24].1 It might seem awkward to speak of “abduc-
tion of a hypothesis in literature,” but one of the fascinating aspects of abduction is
that not only it can warrant for scientiﬁc discovery, but for other kinds of creativity
as well. We must not necessarily see abduction as a problem solving device that sets
off in response to a cognitive irritation/doubt: conversely, it could be supposed that
1Further details concerning the EC-model of abduction can be found in [27, 28].

Abduction as “Leading Away”
79
esthetic abductions (referring to creativity in art, literature, music, games, etc.) arise
in response to some kind of esthetic irritation that the author (sometimes a genius)
perceives in herself or in the public. Furthermore, not only esthetic abductions are
free from empirical constraints2 in order to become the “best” choice: many forms
of abductive hypotheses in traditionally-perceived-as-rational domains (such as the
setting of initial conditions, or axioms, in physics or mathematics) are relatively
free from the need of an empirical assessment. The same could be said of moral
judgements: they are eco-cognitive abductions, inferred upon a range of internal and
external cues and, as soon as the judgment hypothesis has been abduced, it immedi-
ately “can” become prescriptive and “true,” informing the agent’s behavior as such.
Assessing that there is a common ground in all of these works of what could be
broadly deﬁned as “creativity” does not imply that all of these forms of selective or
creative abduction3 with their related cognitive strategies are the same, contrarily it
should spark the need for ﬁrm and sensible categorization: otherwise it would be like
saying that to construct a doll, a machine-gun and a nuclear reactor are all the same
thing because we use our hands in order to do so!
Aristotle presents a seminal perspective on abduction, which is in tune with my
EC-Model: indeed Aristotle’s abduction (¢pagwg»)4 exhibits a clear eco-cognitive
openness. In the chapter B25 of Prior Analytics concerning ¢pagwg» (“leading
away”), a chapter also studied by Peirce, we can see some of the current well-known
distinctive characters of abductive cognition already expressed, which are in tune
with the EC-Model. By providing an illustration of the role of the method of analysis
and of the middle terms in Plato’s dialectic argumentation, considered as related to
the diorismic/poristic process in ancient geometry—also, later on, emphasized by
Proclus—I maintain that it is just this intellectual heritage which informs Aristotle’
chapter B25 on ¢pagwg». Even if, in general, Aristotle seems to sterilize, thanks
to the invention of syllogistic theory, every “dialectic” background of reasoning,
nevertheless in chapter B25 of Prior Analytics he is still pointing to the fundamental
inferential role in reasoning of those externalities that substantiate the process of
2These kinds of abduction can be called “knowledge enhancing”: Peirce implicity provides various
justiﬁcations of the knowledge enhancing role of abduction, that is when abduction is not considered
an inference to the best explanation in the classical sense of the expression, that is an inference
necessarily characterized by an empirical evaluation phase, or inductive phase. In chapter three
of [29] I have provided the example of conventions: abducing conventions favors and increases
knowledge even if these hypotheses remain evidentially inert—at least in the sense that it is not
possible to empirically falsify them. Consequently abduced conventions are evidentially inert but
knowledge enhancing at the rational level of science.
3For example, selective abduction is active in diagnostic reasoning, where it is merely seen as an
activity of “selecting” from an encyclopedia of pre-stored hypotheses; creative abduction instead
refers to the building of new hypotheses. I have proposed the dichotomic distinction between
selective and creative abduction in [22]. A recent and clear analysis of this dichotomy and of other
classiﬁcations emphasizing different aspects of abduction I have described is given in [37].
4In this article for every English word or expression that refers to Plato and Aristotle’s texts from
Meno, Phaedo, and Prior Analytics I have indicated the original Greek in parentheses. Since the
translations are not uniformly satisfactory, it is best to include the original Greek.

80
L. Magnani
“leading away” (¢pagwg»). Hence, we can gain a new positive perspective about the
“constitutive” eco-cognitive character of abduction, just thanks to Aristotle himself.
First of all, we have to take note that it seems Peirce was not satisﬁed with
the possible Apellicon’s correction of Aristotle’s text about abduction: “Indeed, I
suppose that the three [abduction, induction, deduction] were given by Aristotle in
the Prior Analytics, although the unfortunate illegibility of a single word in his MS,
and its replacement by a wrong word by his ﬁrst editor, the ‘stupid’ [Apellicon],5
has completely altered the sense of the chapter on Abduction. At any rate, even if
my conjecture is wrong, and the text must stand as it is, still Aristotle, in that chapter
on Abduction, was even in that case evidently groping for that mode of inference
which I call by the otherwise quite useless name of Abduction—a word which is
only employed in logic to translate the ¢pagwg» of that chapter” ([39], 5.144–145,
Harvard Lectures on Pragmatism, 1903).
At this point I invite the reader to carefully follow Aristotle’s chapter from the
Prior Analytics, studied and cited by Peirce, I will soon quote and analyze in detail
in the following Sect. 1.1. Aristotle’s discussion turns arguments that transmit the
uncertainty of the minor premiss to the conclusion, rather than the certainty of the
major premiss. If we regard uncertainty as an epistemic property, then it is reasonably
soundalsotosaythatthistransmissioncanbeeffectedbytruth-preservingarguments:
by the way, it has to be said that this is not at all shared by the overall Peirce’s view
on abduction, which is not considered as truth preserving.
I want ﬁrst of all to alert the reader that in the case of the Aristotelian chapter,
abduction does not have to be discussed keeping in mind the schema of the fallacy
of afﬁrming the consequent. What is at stake is abduction considered either (1) the
classiﬁcation of a certain “unclear” dynamic argument in a context-free sequence
of three propositions; or (2) the introduction in a similar “unclear” dynamic three-
propositions argument (in this case no longer context-free) of few new middle terms.
Hence, ¢pagwg»— that the translator of the Prior Analytics I am adopting usefully
renders with “leading away” (abduction)—is, exactly (in the Aristotelian words we
will soon entirely report below)
1. the feature of an argument in which “it is clear (d˜hlon) that the ﬁrst term belongs
to the middle and unclear (¥dhlon) that the middle belongs to the third, though
nevertheless equally convincing (pistÒn) as the conclusion, or more so” ([1],
B25, 69a, 20–22, p. 100);
2. the introduction of suitable middle terms able to make the argument capable
of guiding reasoning to substantiate an already available conclusion in a more
plausible way: Aristotle says in this way we “are closer to scientiﬁc understand-
ing”: “if the middles between the last term and the middle are few (Ñl…ga)
(for in all these ways it happens that we are closer to scientiﬁc understand-
ing (p£ntwj g£r ™ggÚteron e˜„nai sumba…nei t˜hj ™pist»mhj)]” ([1], B25, 69a,
22–24, p. 100).
5Apellicon was the ancient editor of Aristotle’s works. Amazingly, Peirce considers him, in other
passages from his writings, “stupid” but also “blundering” and “scamp” ([20], p. 248).

Abduction as “Leading Away”
81
It is clear that the ﬁrst aspect indicates a certain status of the uncertainty of the
minor premiss and of the conclusion and of the related argument (in abductive terms,
we can say that the conclusion represents a very provisional hypothesis that has to
be rendered plausible); the second aspect, from the perspective of the eco-cognitive
model of abduction, directly refers to the need, so to speak, of “additional/external”
interventions in reasoning, exactly to a get a better and more acceptable conclu-
sion/hypothesis. It has to be said that Aristotle does not consider the case of the
creative reaching of a new conclusion/hypothesis (that is of a creative abductive rea-
soning): however, I have illustrated in [27] that this last case appears evident if we
consider the method of analysis in ancient geometry, as a mathematical argument
which mirrors the propositional argument given by Aristotle, provided we conceive it
in the following way: we do not know the conclusion/hypothesis, but we aim at ﬁnding
one thanks to the tentative introduction of further “few” suitable middle terms.
I cannot emphasize enough, as I have anticipated above, that in this Aristotelian
chapter B25—I will soon report—we face the inﬂuence of the method of analysis
and of the middle terms in Plato’s dialectic argumentation, and the fundamental role
of diorismic/poristic processes in ancient geometry (see below in this article), which
constitute the main aspects of the use of hypothetical argument in ancient philoso-
phy [21]. I think that disregarding this heritage renders difﬁcult a full appreciation of
Aristotle’s chapter B25. Indeed underestimating these geometric and dialectic roots,
and considering Peircean conception of abduction as only referred to the fallacy
of afﬁrming the consequent, in a kind of logicocentric reduction of Peircean richer
analysis of abduction, also characterized by philosophical, psychological, cogni-
tive, and semiotic considerations, is extremely reductive. This reduction leads recent
examinations of Aristotle’s passage to divergent—and at the same time traditional
[20]—conclusions [5, 12]. These skeptical conclusions contend that in chapter B25
we are only and basically dealing with Aristotelian dialectic, not with abduction,
and Peirce made a mistake (he himself shows some hesitation regarding his reading
of Aristotle) forcing the interpretation of chapter B25 by considering it at the roots
of the modern concept of abduction. I think these conclusions misrepresent what
Aristotle is doing in this chapter of Prior Analytics. On the contrary I think that it
is exactly the exploitation of the dialectic background that makes available the new
perspective on abduction as a kind, Woods says, of “third-way reasoning”: in the fol-
lowing paragraphs and in Sect. 1.4, in which I will further explain the relationships
between dialectical and syllogistic logic, I will motivate my point of view.
Indeed, the current revival of studies on abduction can further beneﬁt from recent
explicit Woods’ claim about the need of a naturalized logic of the so-called third-
way reasoning, I have just quoted above,6 which refers to those kinds of inference
that owe their “rightness to the meeting of standards other than deductive validity
and inductive strength”, certainly overworked and overvalued by logicians, and that
instead show the capacity to reach good and reliable results. Third-way reasoning
refers to those cases of human reasoning such as abduction, but also to many other
kinds of the so-called fallacies, disregarded or simply considered irremediable errors
6On this issue cf. also the recent [26, 31].

82
L. Magnani
by logic since its ancient and modern beginnings. The study of third-way reasoning
aims at going beyond the logical obsession for consequence-having, opening to the
analysis of the structure of the so-called consequence-drawing (eventually truth-
preserving or truth-generating), typical of various actual human performances ([51],
pp. 3, 24, 293, and 518). Woods’ recovering of the cognitive and inferential positive
value of fallacies basically concerns: ad hominem, ad populum, ad verecundiam, ad
ignorantiam, afﬁrming the consequent (abduction), denying the antecedent, begging
the question (and circularity), many questions, hasty generalization, equivocation,
gambler’s fallacy, base rate, and post hoc, ergo propter hoc (including false cause).
We know that dialectic is a process for discovering the truth about some subject
thanks to questions conceived to elicit what answerers already know about it implic-
itly or by exposing contradictions and confusions in the answerer’s position: what is
important to note here is that, as Woods contends: “Whatever else it is, a dialectical
logic is a logic of consequence-drawing”, that is not a logic of “consequence-having”
([49], p. 31). Woods further emphasizes that “The logic of syllogisms, he [Aristo-
tle] insisted, was a logic of consequence-having. Dialectic, he said, was (among
other things) a theory of consequence-drawing.7 But the target properties of syllo-
gistic logic would be wholly deﬁnable without reference to properties needed for the
description of attack-and-defend encounters between human individuals” ([51], p.
31).8 In sum, no surprise to see Aristotle to illustrate the ﬁrst uncertain features of the
logic of abduction, contrasted with the main character of valid syllogisms,9 instead
immunized with respect to external interferences, thanks to a reference to Plato and
geometry.
Aristotle himself expressly contends that the necessity of valid syllogism is related
to the circumstance that “no further term from outside (”exwϑen) is needed”, in sum
not only Aristotle aims at banishing redundant premisses from syllogisms, but con-
sequently indicates that syllogism is the fruit of a kind of eco-cognitive immunization
[valid syllogism occurs in the emptiness, so to speak, of a kind of “logical space”,
Woods says ([51], p. 24)]. Woods contends that an Aristotle’s great metalogical
achievement lies in the proof (given in Posterior Analytics) that all the truths of a
mature deductive science lie in the demonstrative closure of its ﬁrst principles, and
7Recently Woods has changed a bit his position: there are also the consequence-spotting arguments,
for example the refutation-arguments of Sophistical Refutations, the refuted party cannot add to
his beliefs the conclusion of the refutation since it contradicts the thesis he’s been defending.
Consequence-having occurs in logical space, consequence-spotting occurs in psychological space,
and consequence-drawing occurs in the inferential subspace of psychological space ([54], p. 14).
Woods also contends that the syllogistic is the logic of consequence-having only for syllogisms-as-
such; for syllogisms-in-use, consequence-having remains a background condition, but the speciﬁc
targets of the arguments are not themselves satisfaction of the consequence-having relation.
8It is interesting to address the reader to a recent research in the ﬁeld of logic, which approaches
abduction without disregarding its pragmatic/dialectical dimension, thanks to the adoption of a
dialogicallogic.Thiscurrentlogicalillustrationofthedialecticinvolvedinabductionisabletomodel
argumentative interactions leading to conjectures. In this case the authors can conclude: “Thus, the
consequence-having is dialectiﬁed and the having-drawing distinction is somewhat broken” [3].
9Aristotle insists that all syllogisms are valid (by deﬁnition) [52], there is no such thing as an invalid
syllogism. We know the syllogistic tradition began to relax this requirement quite early on.

Abduction as “Leading Away”
83
do so in a way that produces the knowledge of their truth. Here, too, there is no
hint of dialectical taint. Aristotle says “A deduction (sullogismÕj) is a discourse
(lÒgoj) in which, certain things having been supposed, something different from the
things supposed results of necessity because these things are so. By ‘because these
things are so’, I mean ‘resulting through them,’ and by ‘resulting through them’ I
mean ‘needing no further term from outside (”exwϑen) in order for the necessity to
come about’” ([1] A1 24, 20–25, p. 2).
1.1
Aristotle Chapter B25 of the Prior Analytics
The following is the celebrated chapter B25 of the Prior Analytics concerning abduc-
tion. The translator usefully avoids the use of the common English word reduction
(for ¢pagwg»): some confusion in the literature, also remarked by Otte ([36], p. 131),
derives from the fact reduction is often rigidly referred to the hypothetical deductive
reasoning called reductio ad absurdum, unrelated to abduction, at least if intended in
Peircean sense. Indeed, the translator chooses, as I have anticipated, the bewitching
expression “leading away”.
XXV. It is leading away (¢pagwg») when it is clear (d»lon) that the ﬁrst term belongs to
the middle and unclear (¥d¹lon) that the middle belongs to the third, though nevertheless
equally convincing (pistÒn) as the conclusion, or more so; or, next, if the middles between
the last term and the middle are few (Ñl…ga) [for in all these ways it happens that we are closer
to scientiﬁc understanding (p£ntwj g£r ™ggÚteron e˜„nai sumba…nei t˜hj ™pist»mhj)]. For
example, let A be teachable, B stand for science [otherwise translated as “knowledge”],
and C justice [otherwise translated as “virtue”]. That science is teachable, then, is obvi-
ous, but it is unclear whether virtue is a science.10 If, therefore, BC is equally convincing
(pistÒn) as AC, or more so, it is a leading away (¢pagwg») (for it is closer to scientiﬁc
understanding (™ggÚteron g£r to˜u ™p…stasϑai) because of taking something in addi-
tion (tÕ proseilhf™nai), as we previously did not have scientiﬁc understanding (™pist»mh)
of AC). Or next, it is leading away (¢pagwg») if the middle terms between B and C are few
(Ñl…ga) [for in this way also it is closer to scientiﬁc understanding (e„dšnai)]. For instance, if
D should be “to be squared,” E stands for rectilinear ﬁgure, F stands for circle. If there should
only be one middle term of E and F, to wit, for a rectilinear ﬁgure together with lunes to
become equal to a circle, then it would be close to knowing (™ggÚj £n e‡h
to˜u e„dšnai).
But when BC is not more convincing (pistÒteron) than AC and the middles are not few
(Ñl…ga) either, then I do not call it leading away (¢pagwg»). And neither when BC is unmid-
dled: for this sort of case is scientiﬁc understanding (™pist»mh) ([1] B25, 69a, 20–36, pp.
100–101).
This passage is very complicated and difﬁcult, also because, as ([19], p. 25) says
“Aristotle transforms (as usually) the argument in a syllogistic form”. I have indicated
words and expressions in ancient Greek because they stress, better than in English,
some of the received distinctive characters of abductive cognition:
10We have to anticipate (see below Sect. 1.3.2) that, having given the geometrical description of
the argument “from hypothesis” Plato/Socrates, in the Meno, had already clearly considered the
statement “Is virtue teachable?” a genuine hypothesis: “In the same way with regard to our question
about virtue, since we do not know either what it is or what kind of thing it may be, we had best
make use of a hypothesis in considering whether it can be taught or not” ([44], 87b).

84
L. Magnani
1. ¥dhlon [unclear] refers to the lack of clarity we are dealing with in this kind
of reasoning; furthermore, it is manifest that we face a situation of ignorance—
something is not known—to be solved. This type of reasoning
[…] might be said, semi-demonstrative, semi-dialectical, since it has a minor premiss
which is known, and a minor premiss which is uncertain. The unknown character of the
minor premiss is the essential feature of this kind of syllogism, according to Aristotle
(see An. pr., 69a35–36) and this uncertainty is transferred to the conclusion. Now, the
minor premiss is getting “more known” (69a28) and the conclusion more probable, if we
introduce a middle term which links the subject “virtue” to the predicate “knowledge”
([19], pp. 25–26);
2. pistÒn [convincing, credible] indicates that degrees of uncertainty pervade a great
part of the argumentation;
3. theexpression“thenitwouldbeclosetoknowing(™ggÚj £n e‡h to˜u e„dšnai)”,
which indicates the end of the conclusion of the syllogism,11 clearly relates to the
fact we can only reach credible/plausible results and not ™pist»mh itself; Peirce
will say, similarly, that abduction reaches plausible results and/or that is “akin to
the truth”12;
4. the adjective Ñl…ga [few] dominates the passage: for example, Aristotle says, by
referring to the hypotheses/terms that have to be added—thanks to the process of
leading away—to the syllogism: “Or next, it is leading away (¢pagwg») if the
middle terms between B and C are few (Ñl…ga) (for in this way also it is closer to
scientiﬁc understanding (e„dšnai))”. The term Ñl…ga certainly resonates with the
insistence on “minimality” that dominates the ﬁrst received models of abduction
of the last decades of XX century.
I favor the following interpretation ([41], p. 173): abduction denotes “the method
of argument whereby in order to explain an obscure or ungrounded proposition one
can lead the argument away from the subject to one more readily acceptable”.
In the passage above Aristotle gives the example of the three terms “science”
[knowledge], “is teachable”, and “justice” [virtue], to exhibit that justice [virtue] is
11Let me reiterate that Aristotle insists that all syllogisms are valid; there is no such thing as an
invalid syllogism. The syllogistic tradition began to relax this requirement: here I will use the term
syllogism in this modern not strictly Aristotelian sense.
12I agree with Pietarinen recent limpid analysis that attributes to Peirce the seminal reﬁnement of the
ancient concept of abduction in terms of the precise moods and modalities involved in conjecture-
making [42]: “The mood of abductive conclusions is not only interrogative or imperative but rather
a complex mixture of them and closer to what linguistics call co-hortative or jussive moods; those
that capture both the important idea of ‘pursuit-worthiness’ of abduced conclusions as well as the
‘rational hopes’ of our guesses to turn out in the way our minds or machines predict. Investigands
are invitations to proceed investigating conjectures further. But those investigations have to start off
at the level of pre-beliefs. It is in the nature of the logic of abduction that some reasons are found
why its conclusions are worthy of further investment. Abductive conclusions cannot be neutral
indicative or epistemic statements; they carry normative and pragmatic force. […] we see Peirce
taking abductive conclusions drawn in an interrogative mood, considered as a formalization of
the Socratic questioning method”. I think these considerations and this conclusion about Socratic
method further support my referral to the important role of Plato’s dialectics in the background of
Aristotle’s considerations about abduction as “leading away”, I am presenting in this article.

Abduction as “Leading Away”
85
teachable: Aristotle is able to conclude that justice [virtue], is teachable, on the basis
of an abductive reasoning, that is ¢pagwg», endowed with a certain plausibility. We
have to reiterate that, having given the geometrical description of the argument “from
hypothesis” Plato/Socrates clearly considers the statement “Is virtue teachable?” a
genuine hypothesis: “In the same way with regard to our question about virtue, since
we do not know either what it is or what kind of thing it may be, we had best make use
of a hypothesis in considering whether it can be taught or not” ([44], 87b) (see below
Sect. 1.3.2). A second example of leading away is also presented, which illustrates
that in order to make a rectilinear ﬁgure equal to a circle only one additional middle
term is required.
I do not think appropriate to consider, following Kraus ([20], p. 247), the adum-
brated syllogism (ﬁrst Aristotelian example in the passage above)
AB Whatever is knowledge, can be taught
BC Virtue (e.g., justice) is knowledge
AC Therefore virtue can be taught.
just an example of a valid deduction, so insinuating Peirce’s interpretation failure.
I think Peirce is crystal clear about the issue, presenting this case—even if with
doubts and remarks—as a typical way of considering abduction, as I will better
explain below in Sect. 1.3.1.
Indeed, it seems vacuous to elaborate on the syntactic structure of the involved
syllogism, as Kraus does: the problem of abduction in chapter B25 is embedded
in the activity of the inferential mechanism of “leading away” performed thanks to
the introduction of new terms, as I explained above. He also says that the second
Aristotelian example
Whatever is rectilinear, can be squared
A circle can be transformed into a rectilinear ﬁgure by the intermediate of lunes
Therefore, a circle can be squared
still a simple deduction, was questionably supposed by Peirce to be fruit of the correc-
tion of Aristotle’s original text due to the “stupid” Apellicon, considered responsible
of blurring Aristotle’s reference to abduction. Indeed, Kraus suggests that, following
Peirce, the original text would have to be the following:
Whatever is equal to a constructible rectilinear ﬁgure, is equal to a sum of lunes
The circle is equal to a sum of lunes
Therefore, the circle is equal to a constructible rectilinear ﬁgure.
which indeed ﬁts the Peircean abductive schema.
It is true that Peirce, following what I called his “sentential” perspective on abduc-
tion ([24], chapter two) is certainly inclined, in his considerations of these two exam-
ples, to think that some Apellicon’s bad corrections of the Aristotle’s text would have
concealed the form—instead correct—indicated by Kraus and reported above. This
ﬁgure of the syllogism, which notoriously illustrates the fallacy of afﬁrming the
consequent, is certainly privileged by Peirce in his sentential view of abduction, but
we have to stress that he also adds some comments which testify his doubts: “If

86
L. Magnani
Fig. 1 Hippocrates’ result:
if the external arc of the lune
is a semicircle, and the
internal one is a quarter of
circle, then the two grey
areas are equal and the lune
is squarable
we do not suppose this corruption to have taken place, we are reduced to accepting
the text as it stands; and if we accept the text as it stands we must accept the usual
interpretation of it. This interpretation is that abduction is nothing but an ordinary
syllogism of the ﬁrst ﬁgure, when we are not sure of the minor premiss, but still
are more inclined to admit it than we should be to admit the conclusion if the latter
were not a necessary consequence of the former” ([39], 7.251). Moreover, as already
reported in Sect. 1, Peirce is also sure that Aristotle is “evidently groping for that
mode of inference which I call […] Abduction”: “At any rate, even if my conjecture
is wrong, and the text must stand as it is, still Aristotle, in that chapter on Abduction,
was even in that case evidently groping for that mode of inference which I call by
the otherwise quite useless name of Abduction—a word which is only employed in
logic to translate the ¢pagwg» of that chapter” ([39], 5.144–145, Harvard Lectures
on Pragmatism, 1903). In sum, Aristotle is actually establishing the ﬁrst building
blocks of the concept of abduction, by referring to the use of hypothetical argument
in Plato and pre-Euclidean geometry.
Let us come back to the second—geometrical—example, which opened a wide-
ranging and controversial debate in the literature on Peirce’s abduction. Actually
Hippocrates of Chios proved that the lune bounded by the arcs labeled E and F
in Fig. 1. has the same area as triangle ABO. This afforded some hope of solving
the circle-squaring problem, since the lune is bounded only by arcs of circles. As
Odifreddi explains ([35], p. 55), to prove that a circle is squared it would be sufﬁcient
to prove that the lune whose external arc is a semicircle and the internal arc is one sixth
of a circle is squared. Unfortunately, as proved by Nikolai Chebutarjov in 1934 and
Arkadiy Dorodnov in 1947, this type of lune is not squared ([35], p. 62). Therefore,
the intermediate of lunes as a minor premiss is very weak, and so it was at the times
of Hippocrates of Chios results, and far from being clear and convincing (in fact, now
we know that it is false, but it was not false at the Aristotle’s times, when it was instead
plausible). Indeed, we can easily guess that at the times of Aristotle a great hope of
solving the circle-squaring problem using the lunes was widespread, and this fact
renders the example acceptable as an illustration of a kind of hypothetical reasoning
(abductive!), not necessarily involved in presenting geometrical established results,
but just possible results that could be reached thanks to the plausibility of the minor
premise (an added middle term)13 concerning lunes.
13Further considerations about the role of additional middle terms in these two Aristotelian examples
are illustrated below, Sects. 1.3.1 and 1.3.2.

Abduction as “Leading Away”
87
We need a deeper and better interpretation of Aristotle’s passage. To this aim
we need analyze some aspects of Plato’s dialectic, ancient geometrical cognition,
and the role of middle terms: by illustrating these aspects, in [27] I tried to con-
vince the reader that we can gain a new positive perspective about the constitutive
eco-cognitive character of abduction, just thanks to Aristotle himself. In the present
section it was sufﬁcient to stress the eco-cognitive openness indicated by Aristo-
tle with his emphasis on the need in abduction of cognitive externalities—leading
away—able to permit reasoners to go beyond that eco-cognitive immunization he
himself—instead—considered crucial for founding syllogism (see above the last
paragraph of Sect. 1).
1.2
Geometry and Logic: The Role of Constructions and
Middle Terms in Abduction (“Leading Away”)
Many researchers (for example [9, 19]) contend that Aristotle’s passage above
reworks two examples already given by Plato in the Meno dialogue [44]. The
interpretative conundrum is related to the role played by the middle term: ﬁrst of
all Aristotle points out that abduction is such “when it is clear (d˜hlon) that the
ﬁrst term belongs to the middle and unclear (¥dhlon) that the middle belongs to
the third, though nevertheless equally convincing (pistÒn) as the conclusion, or
more so”. This situation is not satisfactory because the conclusion/hypothesis is
too precarious. Indeed, Aristotle says that to have an abduction an act of introduc-
ing “something in addition” is necessary, and the addition can also be character-
ized by more middle terms: “That science is teachable, then, is obvious, but it is
unclear whether virtue is a science. If, therefore, BC is equally convincing (pistÒn)
as AC, or more so, it is a leading away (¢pagwg») (for it is closer to scientiﬁc
understanding (™ggÚteron g£r to˜u ™p…stasϑai) because of taking something in
addition (tÕ proseilhf™nai), as we previously did not have scientiﬁc understanding
(™pist»m») of AC). Or next, it is leading away ¢pagwg» if the middle terms between
B and C are few (Ñl…ga) [for in this way also it is closer to scientiﬁc understanding
(e„dšnai)].”
A more careful analysis of the passage requires a reference to some central Plato’s
ideas about dialectic argumentation. Already in the Meno dialogue Socrates “dialec-
tically” reﬂects upon the various relationships between virtue, knowledge, and teach-
ability and also furnishes the example of a geometrical “analysis” (or “method of
hypothesis”), so-called in the literature pertaining ancient mathematics.14
14Cf. for example [18].

88
L. Magnani
1.3
and Geometry
The method of analysis in geometry, already employed by Hippocrates of Chios,
can involve, to creatively solve the problem at hand, (1) a diorism, which resorts
to the ﬁnding of the deﬁnite conditions under which one construction might be
inscribed within another, and (2) a porism, which refers to direct or intentional
discovery through suitable higher constructions related to the ﬁnding of indeﬁnite
cases, eventually capable of innumerable solutions, so looking for a higher unifying
solution. What is important to note is that in the method of analysis new strategic
constructions have to be found: translated in syllogistics terms, this means it is
necessary “taking something in addition (tÕ proseilhf™nai)”, as Aristotle says in
the passage above, that is a new “middle” (or new “middles”).15
The activity of ﬁnding new geometrical constructions (or new middle terms, Aris-
totle would say) is clearly a heuristic process16—based on a dynamics of subsequent
steps—aiming at discovering new geometrical truths, a process which is a case of
¢pagwg», that is of abduction, also in the modern sense of the word.17 In a syllo-
gistic perspective, which regards arguments in general, not necessarily geometrical,
the method of analysis still resorts to the activity performed for ﬁnding the suitable
middle term(s) able to substantiate the reasoning at play.
It is absolutely important to note that in Plato the logico-dialectical anticipation of
the Aristotelian syllogistic relationship between virtue, knowledge, and teachability
is directly derived from the geometrical example, as Socrates expressly says in the
Meno dialogue (see below, the following subsections). From Hippocrates of Chios to
Proclus, ¢pagwg» is the fundamental pre-Euclidean method for solving problems,
as a method of discovery, and at the same time also, later on, for proving theorems
[19], no surprise that it is implicitly central in Plato and still explicitly present in
Aristotle’s Prior Analytics. In this perspective, we will soon see, the English trans-
lations “reduction” and “leading away” both stress the fact that the process involves
15Porism is usually translated as lemma or corollary. I am referring here to another meaning that
goes deeper into the philosophy of ancient Greek mathematics. In this case porisms are active in
solving problems in which it is necessary to adopt new suitable constructions. The most famous
collection of porisms of ancient times was the book The Porisms of Euclid. This work is lost: the trace
survived thanks to the Collection of Pappus. Playfair noted that, thanks to porisms, the analysis of all
possible particular cases of a proposition would establish that: (1) under some conditions a problem
becomes impossible; (2) under some other conditions, indeterminate or related to an inﬁnite number
of solutions the problem can be solved. Classical works on porisms are [45, 48]. The concept is
controversial and still subjected to studies and interpretations provided by researchers in ancient
philosophy: a rich reference to the literature available is given in ([19], pp. 39–40).
16I have provided an analysis of heuristics in the light of abductive cognition in [25]. Heuristics,
in so far they can be algorithmically rendered, are still rules-based, even if these rules are weaker
from the normative point of view, when compared with the logical rules, and typically closer to
what actual human reasoners do.
17In ([24], chapters two and three), I have illustrated how abductive cognition is also characteris-
tically related to various examples of diagrammatic reasoning (based on porisms, we can say), for
example in the case of the discovery of the ﬁrst non-Euclidean geometries.

Abduction as “Leading Away”
89
a transition from a problem or theorem to another, which, if known or constructed,
will make the original problem or theorem evident and solved (or potentially solved).
WehavetoaddthatProclushimselfwillcontendthat“Leadingaway(¢pagwg»)is
a transition from a problem or theorem to another which, if known or constructed, will
make the original problem or theorem evident. For example, to solve the problem of
doubling the cube, geometers shifted their inquiry to another on which this depends,
namely, the ﬁnding of two mean proportionals; and henceforth they devoted their
efforts to discovering how to ﬁnd two means in continuous proportion between
two given straight lines. It is reported that the ﬁrst to effect reduction of difﬁcult
(perplexing) geometrical propositions was Hippocrates of Chios who also squared
the lune and made many other discoveries in geometry, being a man of genius when
it came to constructions, if there ever was one” [Proclus, in Eucl. 213 Translation
adapted from [46]; quoted in ([19], p. 23)].
1.3.1
, Dialectics, and Logic
Socrates and Meno, by constructing the arguments on whether virtue is teachable
are engaged in clarifying the following syllogism (obviously valid, but where both
the second premiss and the conclusion are far from being reliable or “plausible”)
AB Whatever is knowledge, can be taught
BC Virtue (e.g., justice) is knowledge
AC Therefore virtue can be taught.
Faller [10, 11] explains that Socrates, exactly thanks to what Aristotle calls a
“leading away” (¢pagwg») argument—that is the introduction of new middles—,
had established that since virtue is “good” and “there is nothing good that is not
embraced by knowledge, our suspicion that virtue is a kind of knowledge would be
well founded” ([44], 87d), consequently, Meno can say: “We must now conclude, I
think, that it is; and plainly, Socrates, on our hypothesis that virtue is knowledge, it
must be taught” (89c). In the Aristotelian terms exploited in chapter B25:
AB Whatever is knowledge, can be taught
BC Virtue (e.g., justice) is knowledge.
MC Virtue is good18
BM Good is knowledge
AC Therefore virtue can be taught
The ﬁrst premiss is evident, the second uncertain, and the conclusion is even
more uncertain. We can arrive—using the Aristotelian words—“closer to scientiﬁc
understanding (™ggÙteron g£r to˜u ™p…stasϑai)”, with the introduction of a new
18Karasmanisusefullynotesthattheterm“good”isnotgivenintheanalogousAristotelianexampleI
have illustrated in the previous subsection. Aristotle only says that an intermediate term is introduced
([19], p. 37).

90
L. Magnani
term “good” and the propositions “virtue is good” and “good is knowledge” (that is
taking something in addition (tÕ proseilhf™nai), which can possibly support the
second premiss of the original syllogism).
Plato starts from AC, which reﬂects a situation of ignorance, a hypothesis to be
rendered plausible or, so to speak, arguable, or even possibly true, instead of its
contrary; BC would guarantee the result but it has to be supported. MC, the “leading
away” at stake, is the further hypothesis chosen to perform this task: MC results
obvious and true.19
Then Plato establishes that “good is knowledge” (BM) and concludes that
“virtue is knowledge”. Through this process (dialectical) AC is rendered—again,
using
the
Aristotelian
words
—“closer
to
scientiﬁc
understanding
(™ggÚteron g£r to˜u ™pistasϑai)”:indeedheconcludesthatvirtuecanbetaught.20
As Bedu-Addo observes, Plato clariﬁes in the Phaedo that the additional terms
function as further hypotheses that render—in a kind of clear abductive atmosphere,
we can say—the main precarious hypothesis “more adequate”:
Cherniss21 has pointed out, in calling the proposition “virtue is good” a hypothesis, Socrates
is exemplifying the “upward path” of the hypothetical method as described in the Phaedo:
“And when you should have to give account of the hypothesis itself, you would do so in
the same manner hypothesizing another hypothesis which seemed best of those above, until
you came to something adequate (ti ƒcanÒn)” (Phaedo, 101d–101e).22 Thus the proposition
“virtue is good” functions as the “something adequate” in the argument “from a hypothesis”;
and the entire proof which gives the “account” of the hypothesis “virtue is knowledge’‘ as
recommended at Phaedo 101d is to be seen as an instance of “reasoning out the cause”,
a„t…aj logismÒj, which we are told has to be done if a true opinion is to be converted into
knowledge, and which is said to be recollection ([44], 98a), quoted in ([4], p. 10).
Hence, the ﬁnal reached conclusion that virtue can be taught is characterized as
a “true opinion” (Ñrϑ» dÒxa). Socrates indeed says (we are at the ﬁnal part of the
Meno dialogue) “For these [true opinions], so long as they stay with us, are a ﬁne
possession, and effect all that is good; but they do not care to stay for long, and run
away out of the human soul, and thus are of no great value until one makes them fast
with causal reasoning (a„t…aj logismÒj)” ([44], 98a). Actually the syllogisms that
are illustrated in these Socratic examples are affected by uncertainty: they indeed
lead to a soft cognitive commitment to the conclusion/hypothesis because this is a
“true opinion” (Ñrϑ» dÒxa). Plato/Socrates underlines the potential withdrawability
of true opinions and so their provisionality.
19This proposition corresponds to that arche (¢rc») which was so called, in the case of the geo-
metrical analysis, by Hippocrates of Chios [cf. ([23], chapter four)].
20In sum, to render more acceptable and justiﬁable that virtue is teachable it has been necessary to
analyze its nature: “what is virtue”; it has been necessary the method of hypothesis to examine the
features of an obscure subject.
21Cherniss ([7], p. 140).
22The following is another translation that adopts the term principle instead of hypothesis (for
ÙpÒϑesij), but that expresses the same argument: “And when you had to give an explanation of the
principle, you would give it in the same way by assuming some other principle which seemed to you
the best of the higher ones, and so on until you reached one which was adequate ” ([43],101d–101e).

Abduction as “Leading Away”
91
As I have anticipated above in Sect. 1 I think Peirce is crystal clear about the issue,
presenting this case, adopted by Aristotle, as a typical way of considering abduc-
tion. He says: “He [Aristotle] immediately proceeds to give the needed examples.
The ﬁrst is this: ‘Now that comprehension [that is, knowledge] is capable of being
taught is plain; but that virtue is comprehension is not known. If, however, this is as
antecedently likely or more so, than that virtue should be capable of being taught
(which, it seems needless to say, everybody knows to be the fact), then there is ground
for the abduction; since we are brought by the hypothesis ‘tÕ proseil¹f™nai’23
nearer to a comprehension of virtue being capable of being taught, than we were
before’. This seems very clear. […] He now gives another example to illustrate the
case in which the hypothesis brings us nearer to comprehension because, to use his
phrase, ‘the middles are few’, that is, it seems near to ﬁrst principles” ([39], 7.250).
Peirce concludes “This interpretation is that abduction is nothing but an ordinary
syllogism of the ﬁrst ﬁgure, when we are not sure of the minor premiss, but still are
more inclined to admit it than we should be to admit the conclusion if the latter were
not a necessary consequence of the former” ([39], 7.251).24
Let us come back to the Meno dialogue. Meno accepts the ﬁnal reached conclusion
(AC,seeaboveinthissubsection)thatvirtuecanbetaughtbutSocratesisnotsatisﬁed:
to solve the problem we need—still in Aristotelian words—another “leading away”.
Indeed Socrates initiates a second argument consisting of a further hypothesis, that
“if virtue is teachable, then there would be teachers of it”. Unfortunately, because
of the empirical fact that there are no teachers of virtue, virtue is not teachable, a
conclusion which conﬂicts with the previous one about teachability.
First of all we have to note and remember that (1) in the example about virtue
Plato adopts exactly the same method used in geometrical “analysis”. We also
have to stress that (2) we reached two conﬂicting conclusions (already available,
one statement and its negation) and further steps would have to be performed
to execute the cutdown process (cf. [29], Chapter one, Sect. 1.2), that is the
activity of “pruning” hypotheses, still to arrive “closer to scientiﬁc understanding
(p£ntwj g£r ™ggÚteron e˜„nai sÚmba…nei t˜hj ™pist»mhj)”, that is to a unique con-
clusion (the best result, which echoes abduction as the best explanation). Exactly in
23We have already seen that this expression means “taking something in addition”; see above in
Sect. 1 the English translation of chapter B25 that contains this expression.
24This ﬁrst example given by Aristotle and derived from Plato is also unfavorably commented
by Peirce, and I think the negative verdict does not concern its formal congruity with the idea of
abduction expressed in chapter B25, but instead the philosophical content and quality: “But when
we come to the examples, the ordinary interpretation reduces the latter, at least, to nonsense. The
ﬁrst becomes, Comprehension can be taught, Virtue is comprehension; .·. Virtue can be taught.
In the ﬁrst place, this is a petitio principii, or very near to one since there is no way of proving
that virtue is comprehension, except by its being taught. In the next place, few in Aristotle’s time
had used this absurd argument; it had scarcely been seriously doubted, what all experience shows,
that virtue can be taught. A very few ethical writers of modern times have denied it; but it had
hardly been denied then, except as a temporary shift in debate. A philosopher who, like Socrates,
maintained that it was better to do wrong, knowing it, could not doubt that righteousness could be
taught” ([39], 7.251).

92
L. Magnani
the spirit of Peircean original perspective on abduction, we have to select (and so to
prefer) one of the two conﬂicting conclusions.
Again, let me stress that Plato’s argumentation about virtue is the dialectic ana-
logueofadiorismic/poristicgeometricalprocess,whichinturnsubstantiatestheAris-
totelian“takingsomethinginaddition”(tÕ proseil¹f™nai),wherevariousstrategies
can be further activated: various kinds of arguments (for example the reaching of evi-
dent higher hypotheses from which the initial one can be deduced), considerations
of simplicity, looking for consequences (for example in terms of empirical ascer-
tainments and testing), which are able not only to create new cognitive perspectives
(ﬁll-up aspect) but also to select (cutdown aspect) the multiple or conﬂicting ﬂow of
results.
1.3.2
Geometry and Logic Intertwined:
and Its
Eco-Cognitive Openness
Geometrical analysis initially transforms a given problem into one that is more
abstract and general: even if there are conﬂicting views in the available literature on
the subject,25 we can say that diorisms and porisms (often consisting in the depicting
of locus26 problems) favor a form of further geometrical cognition devoted—thanks
to the study of auxiliary objects—to ﬁnding the conditions of possibility of an actual
process of subsequent diagrammatic constructions, in turn ﬁnalized to solve the
problem. Diorisms aim at determining the overall properties of the solutions, and
so represent a wide range of mathematical activities, which “lead away" from the
problem at hand to other unexplored porismic territories (diagrams and sentential
proofs for example, but, for the sake of generality of various cognitive processes,
we can also add other model-based or manipulatory activities totally eco-cognitively
open). In the diorismic/poristic stage, the geometrician exploits the adopted auxiliary
objects to show that a single solution is always possible, or if not, the limitations of
the process or how many solutions there may be and how they are arranged [47].
The process performs a reduction of the problem— caused by the hypothetical
question to be solved—to another one (again, it is the Aristotelian syllogistic “leading
away”), which we expect will enable us to solve the original problem (I have already
said that in the Aristotelian passage above the word ¢pagwg» is often translated
with “reduction”, and that we need interpret reduction as the transition to another
cognitive sub-process and not as the reduction ad absurdum).
In the case of Plato’s second problem—the geometrical one—we are to determine
whether a certain rectilinear ﬁgure could be constructed along the diameter of a circle
examining it by means of “a certain helpful hypothesis” (that is by means of an
additional term, in Aristotelian words), expressed in the following passage (see the
emphasis I have added), where a state of ignorance is immediately declared”. [I have
25Cf. above, footnote 15 at p. 88.
26It is interesting to note that the term topoi (in Latin loci) migrates to Aristotle’s rhetoric and later
rhetoricians’ studies, probably parasitic of its origin in geometrical analysis [11].

Abduction as “Leading Away”
93
already stressed in the previous subsection that it is important to note that in Plato
it is just the “clariﬁcation” of the dialectic relationship between virtue, knowledge,
and teachability, which is directly derived from the geometrical example, as Socrates
expressly says]:
So it seems we are to consider what sort of thing it is of which we do not yet know what
it is! Well, the least you can do is to relax just a little of your authority, and allow the
question – whether virtue comes by teaching or some other way – to be examined by means
of hypothesis. I mean by hypothesis what the geometricians often do in dealing with a
question put to them; for example, (86e) whether a certain area is capable of being inscribed
as a triangular space in a given circle: they reply – “I cannot yet tell whether it has that
capability; but I think, if I may put it so, that I have a certain helpful hypothesis for the
problem, and it is as follows: If this area is such that when you apply it to the given line
[as a rectangle of equal area] of the circle you ﬁnd it falls short by a space similar to that
which you have just applied, then I take it you have one consequence, and if it is impossible
for it to fall so, then some other. Accordingly I wish to put a hypothesis, before I state our
conclusion as regards inscribing this ﬁgure in the circle by saying whether it is impossible
or not” ([44], 86e, 87a).
Let me reiterate that Socrates explicitly analogizes his reasoning about virtue to
the one used in the geometrical example, and we can reasonably guess that the source
of the analogy is exactly the just illustrated geometrical example:27
In the same way with regard to our question about virtue, since we do not know either what
it is or what kind of thing it may be, we had best make use of a hypothesis in considering
whether it can be taught or not, as thus: what kind of thing must virtue be in the class of
mental properties, so as to be teachable or not? In the ﬁrst place, if it is something dissimilar
or similar to knowledge, is it taught or not – or, as we were saying just now, remembered?
(cit., 87b).
To determine whether a certain rectilinear ﬁgure could be constructed along the
diameter of a circle Socrates establishes the hypothesis which I have emphasized
in the ﬁrst passage above from the Meno dialogue: the hypothesis needs be worked
thanks to a diagrammatic process, a “leading away”, which opens up the reasoning
to an eco-cognitive dimension, which in our case corresponds to the ¢pagwg»: an
abduction, endowed with its degrees of uncertainty. The echo of this reference to
the importance of diagrams in analyzing reasoning is still vivid in Peirce: “I said,
Abduction, or the suggestion of an explanatory theory, is inference through an Icon”
([38], p. 276).
A brief note on recent cognitive rich research on diagrammatic geometrical rea-
soning has to be introduced. Fresh studies have shown that false premisses [also
due to the presence in models/diagrams of both substantive and auxiliary assump-
tions, indeed spurious problematic sub-diagrams and new “individuals” can pop-up
27A strict relationship between geometry and dialectics stills echoes in Proclus: “[…] mathematics
reaches some of its results with analysis, others by synthesis, expounds some matters by division,
others by deﬁnition, and some of its discoveries binds fast by demonstration, adapting these methods
to its subjects and employing each of them for gaining insight into mediating ideas. Thus its analyses
are under the control of dialectic, and its deﬁnitions, divisions, and demonstrations are of the same
family and unfold in conformity with the way of mathematical understanding. It is reasonable, then,
to say that dialectic is the capstone of the mathematical sciences” ([46], 43, p. 35).

94
L. Magnani
at any step of geometric constructions ([8], p. 105)] are not exploited in the cognitive
abductive process, because, in the various heuristics, only the co-exact properties
are exploited. As I have described in Sect. 4.4 of ([29], chapter four) the notion of
co-exact properties, introduced by [32], is worth to be further studied in ﬁelds that go
beyond the realm of deductive processes of classical geometry, in which it has been
nicely underscored, so usefully touching various discovery cognitive processes.28
[34] illustrates that in Euclid’s deductive framework diagrams contribute to proofs
only through their co-exact properties: I suggest that this is also typical of dioris-
mic/porismic processes and of their creative counterparts, exactly endowed with an
objection-refuting role.
In the Aristotelian (and Platonic) perspective (see Chap. B25 of the Prior Ana-
lytics) I have delineated in this section we can deﬁnitely conclude that the general
concept of abduction must be seen as constitutively and widely eco-cognitive-based.
Indeed, by contrast, we have to remember that Aristotle says, in the passage I have
already quoted and that I am reporting again, that a valid syllogism—by necessity—
is instead not at all open to something “external”: “A deduction (sÚllogismÕz) is
a discourse (lÒgoz) in which, certain things having been supposed, something dif-
ferent from the things supposed results of necessity because these things are so. By
‘because these things are so’. I mean ‘resulting through them,’ and by ‘resulting
through them’ I mean ‘needing no further term from outside (”exwϑen) in order for
the necessity to come about’ ” ([1], A1 24, 20–25, p. 2) (emphasis added).
Even if in this article I cannot illustrate in detail the diagrammatic construc-
tions, which make possible to afford the geometrical problem illustrated by Plato-
Socrates,29 it is clear that, in syllogistic terms, the geometrical diagrammatic process,
as well as the analogue argumentation about virtue, are ways of ﬁnding a “middle”
ground that solves the problems at hand. Aristotle concludes, in Posterior Analytics
“Thus it results that in all our searches we seek either if there is a middle term or
what the middle term is. For the middle term is the explanation, and in all cases it is
the explanation which is being sought” ([2], B, 90a, 5, p. 48).
At this point there is clear evidence that both Socrates’ examples are recalled, with
slight differences, in Aristotle’s celebrated passage about abduction from chapter B25
of Prior Analytics.
Let us come back to the geometrically puzzling example present in the Aristotelian
passage, already reported above, involving the effort to square the circle through the
lunes, a problem typical, together with the one related to the reduction of the famous
Delian problem, of the geometrical research deriving from Hippocrates of Chios:
DE Whatever is rectilinear, can be squared
28Manders’ deﬁnition describes the co-exact properties “as those conditions unaffected by some
range of every continuous variation of the diagram” and the exact ones as “those which, for at least
some continuous variation of the diagram, obtain only in isolated cases” [32]. “Diagrams of a single
triangle, for instance, vary with respect to their exact properties. That is, the lengths of the sides, the
size of the angles, the area enclosed, vary. Yet with respect to their co-exact properties the diagrams
are all the same. Each consists of three bounded linear regions, which together deﬁne an area” ([34],
p. 264).
29An interesting reconstruction is given in [10].

Abduction as “Leading Away”
95
EF A circle can be transformed into a rectilinear ﬁgure by the intermediate of
lunes30
DF Therefore, a circle can be squared
D = square, E = rectilinear ﬁgure, F = circle
The ﬁrst premiss is known and true, the second is uncertain, the conclusion even
more uncertain: a “leading away”, towards the lunes, has to start. In the above syl-
logism we introduce a new term (N = lune) and two new premisses “EN = the lunes
become rectilinear” and “NF = the circle is a sum of lunes”: thanks to and together
with the related diagrammatic constructions, the schema becomes
DE Whatever is rectilinear, can be squared
EF A circle can be transformed into a rectilinear ﬁgure by the intermediate of lunes
EN The lunes become rectilinear
NF The circle is a sum of lunes
DF Therefore, a circle can be squared.
The new additional premiss, fruit of a “leading away”, aims at supporting the
second uncertain premiss EF to approximate to knowledge and so to solve the prob-
lem. “Our problem, which is squaring the circle, is reduced to that of squaring the
lunes, John Philoponus sees in this way the Aristotelian argument by apagoge. […]
I think it is now plain that Aristotle’s apagoge (apart from its syllogistic form) ﬁts
very well with Proclus’ apagoge” ([19], p. 27). Moreover, Aristotle clearly notes,
we have to deal with one or few new intermediate terms: the importance of min-
imality of abductive cognition is preﬁgured. The concept of abduction is ﬁnally
established: it is leading away (¢pagwg»), Aristotle concludes, if the middle terms
between B and C are few (Ñl…ga) [for in this way we are also closer to scientiﬁc
understanding e„dšnai]. The efﬁcacy of the abductive procedure is thus dependent
on a minimum of middle terms, because too many moves will generate excessive
distance for the argument to be convincing. In case of multiple kinds of middle addi-
tional terms which lead to different conclusions we still have to select/discriminate
both the appropriate/productive additional middles and the best related ﬁnal result
(cutdown problem).
Also the above mathematical second example furnished by Aristotle is negatively
considered by Peirce, but also in this case I think the bad judgement does not regard
its coherence with the idea of abduction expressed in chapter B25, but instead the
mathematical content and quality, considered unsatisfactory:
The other example is still worse. It becomes, Whatever is equal to a rectilinear ﬁgure can
be squared, Every circle is equal to a rectilinear ﬁgure; .·. Every circle can be squared. We
here naturally understand by “equal to a rectilinear ﬁgure”, equal to a rectilinear ﬁgure,
constructible or inconstructible. But in that case, the minor premiss, instead of being not
known, is the most evident thing in the world; while the major premiss which ought to be
30See again the considerations about the classic problem of squaring the circle with the help of the
lunes given at p. 86.

96
L. Magnani
manifest, is far from being so; for if a ﬁgure cannot be constructed it cannot be squared.
Supposing however that by a rectilinear ﬁgure is meant one that can be constructed, which
must have been the meaning, since Aristotle says that it is almost known through lunes, who
ever used such a ridiculous argument? And how can Aristotle say, as he does, that lunes in
any way help the matter, or are at all relevant? Whatever bearing lunes were supposed to
have upon the quadrature of the circle disappears entirely from this representation. Nothing
can be more utterly unlike Aristotle’s usual examples, which bring up in vivid aptness actual
reasonings well known to his scholars ([39], 7.252).
Perplexities are shown about the major premiss, considered questionable, perhaps
based on the fact that if a ﬁgure cannot be somewhat constructed, it cannot be squared
even if it is rectilinear. Perplexities are shown about the minor premiss that may
be Peirce considers entirely evident because new methods can permit to square
the circle beyond the use of compass and straightedge. Not only, Peirce adds the
following sentence: “Mathematics was not Aristotle’s strong point, and possibly he
did not clearly understand that it was only two or three special lunes that Hippocrates
had squared”. In reality, these Peircean comments, which in my opinion manifest,
I repeat, a bad judgement that concerns the mathematical content and quality of
the example, but not its coherence with the idea of abduction expressed in chapter
B25, do not consider that, as I have already said in Sect. 1.1 above, at the times of
Aristotle a great hope of solving the circle-squaring problem using the lunes was
surely widespread. Hence, the example is reasonably acceptable as an illustration
of a kind of hypothetical abductive cognition, obviously not involved in showing
geometrical established results, but just a “possible” result that could be reached
thanks to the increased plausibility of the minor premise, thanks to the added middle
term concerning lunes.
1.4
Dialectics, Rules of Interrogation, Syllogisms: Dialectical
Logic Versus Syllogistic Logic?
We know that in the light of classical logic abduction is the fallacy of the afﬁrming
the consequent. As I have already illustrated in Sect. 1, in the case of the Aristotelian
chapter B25, abduction does not have to be discussed keeping in mind this falla-
cious schema. What is at stake in chapter B25 of Prior Analytics, in which Peirce
envisages the ﬁrst appearance of abduction, is the double face of abduction that can
be considered either (1) the classiﬁcation of a certain “unclear” dynamic argument
in a context-free sequence of three propositions; or (2) the introduction in a similar
“unclear” dynamic three-propositions argument (in this case no longer context-free)
of few new middle terms. Indeed, chapter B25 is built taking advantage of the exam-
ples provided by Plato. These examples are usually seen in a “dialectic” perspective,
where both propositional and geometrical aspects are illustrated. It is important to
note that Aristotle seems to sterilize the dialectic background pointing to the general
and abstract role of those “propositional” externalities which are represented by the
additional middle terms that substantiate the process of “leading away”.

Abduction as “Leading Away”
97
To try to clarify the above difﬁculties we can report a dispute about the status of the
Aristotelian view of logic and fallacies, which might also acquire some further light
thanks to the study illustrated in the present article. The dispute is due to Hintikka
and Woods. Hintikka [16] contends that in the Topics and On Sophistical Refutations
the aim was practical: “Aristotle did not only want to study knowledge-seeking
interrogative games for abstract theoretical purposes. He wanted to show how to win
in such games” ([17], p. 242),31 and “Aristotle is still in the two Analytics thinking
of logical inferences as steps in a questioning process” (cit., p. 243). I think that this
perspective on logical inferences in terms of interrogative games favors a reading of
Aristotle under the dialectic lens of Plato and overlooks the syllogistic spirit which
pervades the study of arguments: in sum, Hintikka thinks that Aristotle treats the
whole inquiry as an interrogative process and is looking for a theory of interrogative
dialectical reasoning intended as a theory of ampliative reasoning, where what we
now call deductive routines are just part and parcel of the dialectical/interrogative
process. Following Hintikka, fallacies (for instance begging the question and many
questions) are just considered by Aristotle violations of rules of interrogation.
It is interesting to note, by the way, that Hintikka’s early (indeed foundational)
attachment to a game-theoretic approach to logic involved the idea that dialectical
interrogation rules are essential to the deﬁnition of logical particles (“all”, “some”)
and logical relations (entailment, proof). Some scholars attribute this view to Aris-
totle [cf. [33] and ([52], chapter three)]. The big difference between Hintikka and
Woods’ approach seems to resort to the fact that Woods sees Aristotle as present-
ing two logics—one for syllogisms-as-such, in which nothing dialectical occurs,
and another for syllogisms-in-use, in which dialectical considerations are sometimes
vitally involved. Hintikka, on the other hand, thinks that dialectical factors are of
central concern throughout.
Indeed, Woods [50] favors a reading of Aristotle, which attributes proper value to
his invention of syllogism, contending that he clearly distinguished syllogism from
dialectics: “Arguments in the narrow sense [not dialectical] stand starkly apart. They
are not social events. They are not events of any kind. They are ﬁnite sequences of
linguistic objects which Aristotle calls propositions. When they meet certain con-
ditions, they are syllogisms”, so “there is no great harm in distinguishing between
Aristotle’s dialectical logic and his syllogistic logic. But we should not lose sight of
the point that these are disjoint conceptions of logic”: the logic of syllogism is the
theoretical core of a successful dialectic in the broad sense, but we need to establish
the distinction. In sum Woods objects that Aristotle develops both a theory of two-
person argument (that is a theory about rules of interrogation in Hintikka’s sense,
where an interrogative dialectical argument is a series of alternating speech acts
between opponents, questioner and respondent), and a theory of syllogism, intended
as a context free sequence of three categorical propositions. Woods concludes “Cer-
tainly Aristotle would allow that these [begging the question and many questions]
31This Hintikka’s article “What was Aristotle doing in his early logic, anyway? A reply to Woods
and Hansen”, belongs to the published intellectual ﬁght between Hintikka and Woods and it is an
answer to Woods and Hansen’s “Hintikka on Aristotle’s Fallacies” [55].

98
L. Magnani
are interrogative rule-violations, but it is not this that makes them fallacies” ([51],
pp. 497–498). I think that this perspective helps us to read Aristotle’s chapter B25
on ¢pagwg» as a chapter which certainly reverberates some aspects of dialectics
but in the sense of syllogistic logic, where abduction is just characterized by the
breaking of high degrees of certainty. In sum, Aristotle takes pains to strip away all
strict dialectical considerations.32
Leaving aside
the interesting querelle about the status of fallacies in Aristotle,
we can nevertheless say that the study of Aristotelian ¢pagwg» illustrated above
provides support to Woods’ conviction about a theory of syllogism “as a context
free sequence of three categorial propositions”: indeed it clearly results that in valid
syllogisms there is no room for broad eco-cognitive acts of “leading away”, such
as the ones that are instead illustrated in chapter B25 of the Prior Analytics. At
this point there is clear evidence that both Socrates’ examples are recalled, with
slight differences, in Aristotle’s celebrated passage about abduction from the Prior
Analytics, but they are embedded in a very different theoretical framework, in which
the classiﬁcation of certain “unclear” dynamic arguments in both context-free and
non context-free sequences of three propositions dominates.
2
Abduction and the Optimization of Eco-Cognitive
Situatedness: Discoverability and Diagnosticability
Explained
When I say that abduction can be knowledge-enhancing33 I am referring to various
types of new produced knowledge of various novelty level, in absence of an empirical
evaluation phase, or inductive phase, as Peirce called it. Some cases of new knowl-
edge produced in science (for example, conventions and intermediate models used
in research settings), are cases of knowledge enhancing abduction. However, also
knowledge produced in an artiﬁcial game thanks to a smart application of strategies
or to the invention of new strategies and/or heuristics has to be seen as the fruit of
knowledge enhancing abduction.
32Woods further observes that the great achievement of Prior Analytics is metalogical. It provides
an almost perfect (and easily repairable) proof of the semi-decidability of validity for arguments
framed under syllogistic constraints. The proof rules for this are both syllogistic and “common”,
and there is nothing remotely dialectical about the procedure in the Hintikkean sense.
33This means that abduction is not necessarily ignorance-preserving (reached hypotheses would
always be “presumptive” and to be accepted they always need empirical conﬁrmation), as contended
by Gabbay and Woods (see [51]). Abduction can creatively build new knowledge by itself (that as
an inference not necessarily characterized by an empirical evaluation phase, or inductive phase), as
various examples coming from the area of history of science and other ﬁelds of human cognition
clearly show. I better supported my claim about the knowledge enhancing character of abduction in
the recent [27, 28]. On this issue see also above footnote 2. Woods has recently enriched, modiﬁed,
and moderated his views of ignorance-preservation, see [53].

Abduction as “Leading Away”
99
I contend that to reach selective or creative good abductive results efﬁcient strate-
gies have to be exploited, but it is also necessary to count on an environment char-
acterized by what I have called optimization of eco-cognitive situatedness, in which
that eco-cognitive openness already envisaged by Aristotle thanks to the empha-
sis on “leading away”34 is fundamental [28]. To favor good creative and selective
abduction reasoning strategies must not be “locked” in an external restricted eco-
cognitive environment such as in a scenario characterized by ﬁxed deﬁnitory rules
and ﬁnite material aspects (an artiﬁcial game, Go or Chess, for example), which
would function as cognitive mediators able to constrain agents’ reasoning.35 In brief,
the optimization of eco-cognitive situatedness concerns the substantial problem of
discoverability and diagnosticability, almost totally disregarded in the literature on
abduction (and just sketched by Peirce himself).36
Research on abduction has frequently emphasized the fruitful role of cognitive
openness. Hendricks [15] consider trans-paradigmatic abduction a form of discovery
in which a guessed hypothesis transcends the prompt empirical agreement between
two paradigms. The paradigms are presumed to belong to the same ﬁeld (for example
physics) where one of the ﬁelds is well established and the other is emerging (for
example classical and quantum physics):
A case in point would be the formulation of the hypothesis of electron spin. Bohr considered
the spin conjecture as a welcome supplement to the current magnetic core theory. Pauli
remained rather skeptical pertaining to the spin hypothesis due to the fact that it actually
required the theory of quantum mechanics for its proper justiﬁcation, which was not part
of the background knowledge at the time of the conjecture. In such cases two paradigms
are competing and the abduction is then dependent upon whether the conjecture is made
within the paradigm or outside it. Hence we distinguish between paradigmatic and trans-
paradigmatic abduction (cit., p. 287).
Furthermore, people draw on different domains of knowledge to arrive to an
abductive conclusion thanks to what [14] call “transepistemic abduction” (TeA),
which illustrates how two agents, in order to successfully explain a phenomenon,
reason across two very distant cognitive ﬁelds (for example computational and psy-
chosocial domains) despite each agent being ignorant of the other domain knowl-
edge. The authors themselves acknowledge that TeA represents a case that is partially
concerned with my eco-cognitive perspective: “TeA may not necessarily accommo-
date wider understandings of abduction like the eco-cognitive model proposed by
Magnani. For example, TeA may not necessarily encompass perceptions, aesthetic
decisions or moral judgements in the way that a eco-cognitive view of abduction
might”.
Another interesting procedure that can refer to higher abductive processes in need
of cognitive openness is the chunk-and-permeate method [6], in which consideration
is given to conditions under which mutually incompatible well-grounded theories
can interact to bring forth solutions to problems which neither theory can solve
34Cf. the previous section of this article.
35More details concerning the role of locked and unlocked strategies are illustrated in the recent
[30].
36I plan to devote part of my future research to study these aspects of abductive cognition.

100
L. Magnani
on its own. This method introduces a paraconsistent reasoning strategy, in which
information is broken up into chunks, and a limited amount of information is allowed
to ﬂow between chunks, and it is applied to model the reasoning employed in the
original inﬁnitesimal calculus.
It is now useful to provide a short introduction to the concept of eco-cognitive
openness from a logical point of view. The new perspective inaugurated by the so-
called naturalization of logic37 contends that the normative authority claimed by
formal models of ideal reasoners to regulate human practice on the ground is, to
date, unfounded. It is necessary to propose a “naturalization” of the logic of human
inference. Woods holds a naturalized logic to an adequacy condition of “empirical
sensitivity” [51]. A naturalized logic is open to study many ways of reasoning that
are typical of actual human knowers, such as for example fallacies, which, even if not
truth preserving inferences, nonetheless can provide truths and productive results.
Of course one of the best examples is the logic of abduction, where the naturalization
of the well-known fallacy “afﬁrming the consequent” is at play. Gabbay ([13], p. 81)
clearly maintain that Peirce’s abduction, depicted as both (a) a surrender to an idea,
and (b) a method for testing its consequences, perfectly resembles central aspects of
practical reasoning but also of creative scientiﬁc reasoning.
It is useful to refer to my recent research on abduction [28], which stresses the
importance in good abductive cognition of the already quoted optimization of situ-
atedness: abductive cognition is for example very important in scientiﬁc reasoning
because it refers to that activity of creative hypothesis generation which characterizes
one of the more valued aspects of rational knowledge. The study above teaches us
that situatedness is related to the so-called eco-cognitive aspects, referred to various
contexts in which knowledge is “traveling”: to favor the solution of an inferential
problem—especially in science but also in the case of other abductive problems, such
as diagnosis—the richness of the ﬂux of information has to be maximized.
It is interesting to further illustrate this problem of optimization of eco-cognitive
situatednesstakingadvantageofsimplelogicalconsiderations.Let = {1, . . . , m}
be a theory, P = {1, . . . , n} a set of true sentences corresponding—for example—
to phenomena to be explained and ⊩a consequence relation, usually—but not
necessarily—the classical one. In this perspective an abductive problem concerns the
ﬁnding of a suitable improvement of A1, . . . , Ak such that 1, . . . , m, A1, . . . , Ak
⊩L 1, . . . , n is L-valid. It is obvious that an improvement of the inputs can be
reached both by additions of new inputs but also by the modiﬁcation of inputs already
available in the given inferential problem. I contend that to get good abductions, such
as for example the creative ones that are typical of scientiﬁc innovation, the input
and output of the formula
1, . . . , i, ?I ⊩X
L ϒ1, . . . , .ϒ j
(1)
(in which ⊩X
L indicates that inputs and outputs do not stand each other in an expected
relation and that the modiﬁcation of the inputs ?I can provide the solution) have to be
37I have illustrated this new project in [26]. See also above the last part of Sect. 1.

Abduction as “Leading Away”
101
thought as optimally positioned. Not only, this optimality—for example in scientiﬁc
hypothetical reasoning—is made possible by a maximization of changeability of both
input and output; again, not only inputs have to be enriched with the possible solution
but, to do that, other inputs have usually to be changed and/or modiﬁed.38
Indeed, in our eco-cognitive perspective, an “inferential problem” can be enriched
by the appearance of new outputs to be accounted for and the inferential process has
to restart. This is exactly the case of abduction and the cycle of reasoning reﬂects
the well-known nonmonotonic character of abductive reasoning. Abductive conse-
quence is ruptured by new and newly disclosed information, and so defeasible. In
this perspective abductive inference is not only the result of the modiﬁcation of the
inputs, but, in general, actually involves the intertwined modiﬁcation of both input
and outputs. Consequently, abductive inferential processes are highly information-
sensitive, that is the ﬂux of information which interferes with them is continuous and
systematically human(or machine)-promoted and enhanced when needed. This is not
true of traditional inferential settings, for example proofs in classical logic, in which
the modiﬁcations of the inputs are minimized, proofs are usually taken with “given”
inputs, and the burden of proofs is dominant and charged on rules of inferences, and
on the smart choice of them together with the choice of their appropriate sequen-
tiality. This changeability ﬁrst of all refers to a wide psychological/epistemological
openness in which knowledge transfer has to be maximized.
In sum, considering an abductive “inferential problem” as symbolized in the above
formula, a suitably anthropomorphized logic of abduction has to take into account
a continuous ﬂux of information from the eco-cognitive environment and so the
constant modiﬁcation of both inputs and outputs on the basis of both
1. the new information available,
2. the new information inferentially generated, for example new inferentially gen-
erated inputs aiming at solving the inferential problem.
To conclude, optimization of situatedness is the main general property of logical
abductive inference, which—from a general perspective—defeats the other proper-
ties such as minimality, consistency, relevance, plausibility, etc. These are special
subcases of optimization, which characterize the kind of situatedness required, at
least at the level of the appropriate abductive inference to generate the new inputs of
the above formula.
In science the optimization of eco-cognitive openness and situatedness surely
also concerns the maximization of the information that has to made available, which
epistemologically characterizes the tradition of modern science. This fact favors a
new attention to the current fragile status human abductive cognition in scientiﬁc
enterprise. Is the current situation of scientiﬁc research facing with problems that
jeopardize the optimization of situatedness needed by good abductive cognition? In
chapter eight of my book [29] I have provided a ﬁrst illustration of some negative
aspects that have to be stressed when dealing with the current challenges to the
creative productiveness of human abductive cognition in science. Indeed, I have
38More details are illustrated in ([28], section three).

102
L. Magnani
introduced the hot problem of the contemporary emergence of disparate kinds of
“epistemic irresponsibility”, related to the commodiﬁcation and commercialization
of science, the marketing of technoscientiﬁc products, the impoverishment of the so-
called “epistemological niches”, which show that human fruitful abductive cognition
in science is increasingly assaulted and jeopardized, and at the same time human
creativity possibly endangered.
3
Conclusion
I this article I have centered the attention on two themes which are appropriate to
stress, in an interdisciplinary perspective and taking advantage of my EC-model of
abduction, the philosophical, logical, cognitive, and pragmatic aspects of building
hypotheses thanks to abductive cognition. First of all I illustrated a new interpretation
of Aristotle’s seminal work on abduction and stressed his emphasis on the need of
a related situation of eco-cognitive openness, beyond that kind of eco-cognitive
immunization against external cognitive interferences Aristotle himself considered
necessary in valid syllogisms. Moreover, by enriching the concepts I have introduced
in the ﬁrst section, I illustrated the concept of optimization of the eco-cognitive
situatedness, describing it as one of the main characters of the abductive inferences
to new hypotheses, also stressing the speciﬁc case of science. In the background I also
recommended that thanks to the two subjects I have illustrated we can gain a new
positive perspective about the “constitutive” eco-cognitive character of abduction
and its intellectual usefulness in providing a ﬁrst insight into the fundamental role of
“discoverability” and “diagnosticability” in abductive successful cognitive results.
Acknowledgements Parts of this article are excerpted from chapters ﬁve and six of the book
The Abductive Structure of Scientiﬁc Creativity. An Essay on the Ecology of Cognition, Springer,
Cham, 2017. For the instructive criticisms and precedent discussions and correspondence that
helped me to develop my analysis of abductive cognition I am indebted and grateful to John Woods,
Atocha Aliseda, Woosuk Park, Luís Moniz Pereira, Paul Thagard, Ping Li, Athanassios Raftopoulos,
Michael Hoffmann, Ahti-Veikko Pietarinen, Gerhard Schurz, Walter Carnielli, Akinori Abe, Yukio
Ohsawa, Cameron Shelley, Shahid Rahman, Cristina Barés Gómez, Matthieu Fontaine, Gerhard
Minnameier, Pat Langley, Oliver Ray, John Josephson, Ferdinand D. Rivera and to my collaborators
Selene Arﬁni and Riccardo Dossena.
References
1. Aristotle: Prior Analytics. Translated by R. Smith. Hackett Publishing Company, Indianapo-
lis/Cambridge (1989)
2. Aristotle. Posterior Analytics, 2nd edn, translated by J. Barnes. Clarendon Press,Oxford (1993)
3. Barés-Gómez, C., Fontaine, M.: Between sentential and model-based abductions. A dialogical
approach. Logic J. IGPL 27(6), 777–811 (2020). Special Issue on “Formal Representations in

Abduction as “Leading Away”
103
Model-Based Reasoning and Abduction”, Nepomuceno, A., Magnani, L., Salguero, F., Barés-
Gómez, C., Fontaine, M. (eds.) Online ﬁrst: https://doi.org/10.1093/jigpal/jzz033
4. Bedu-Addo, J.T.: The role of the hypothetical method in the “Phaedo”. Phronesis 24(2), 111–
132 (1979)
5. Bellucci, F.: Abduction in Aristotle. In: Gabbay, D., Magnani, L., Park, W., Pietarinen, A. (eds.)
Natural Arguments. A Tribute to John Woods, pp. 551–564. College Publications, London
(2019)
6. Brown, B., Priest, G.: Chunk and permeate, a paraconsistent inference strategy. Part I: the
inﬁnitesimal calculus. J. Philos. Logic 33(4), 379–388 (2004)
7. Cherniss, H.: Some war-time publications concerning Plato. I. Am. J. Philology 68(2), 113–146
(1947)
8. Crippa, F.: To prove the evident. On the inferential role of Euclidean diagrams. Theor. Sci.
31(2), 101–112 (2009)
9. Faller, M.: Plato’s Philosophical Use of Mathematical Analysis. Doctoral dissertation, Univer-
sity of Georgia, Athens, GA, USA (2000)
10. Faller, M.: Plato’s geometrical logic. Proc. Soc. Ancient Greek Philos. Online (2003a)
11. Faller,M.: The Origin of Peirce’s Abduction in Plato’s Analytic Method. Manuscript, Online
(2003b)
12. Flórez, J.A.: Peirce’s theory of the origin of abduction in Aristotle. Trans. Charles S. Peirce
Soc. 50(2), 265–280 (2014)
13. Gabbay, D.M., Woods, J.: The Reach of Abduction. North-Holland, Amsterdam (2005)
14. Gibson, A., Bruza, P.: Transepistemic abduction: reasoning across epistemic domains. Logic J.
IGPL. Special Issue on “Formal Representations in Model-Based Reasoning and Abduction”,
Nepomuceno, A., Magnani, L., Salguero, F., Barés-Gómez, Fontaine, M. (eds.). Online ﬁrst:
https://doi.org/10.1093/jigpal/jzz035
15. Hendricks, F.V., Faye, J.: Abducting explanation. In: Magnani, L., Nersessian, N.J., Tha-
gard, P. (eds.) Model-Based Reasoning in Scientiﬁc Discovery, pp. 271–294. Kluwer Aca-
demic/Plenum Publishers, New York (1999)
16. Hintikka, J.: The fallacy of fallacies. Argumentation 1, 211–238 (1987)
17. Hintikka, J.: What was Aristotle doing in his early logic, anyway? A reply to Woods and
Hansen. Synthese 113, 241–249 (1997)
18. Hintikka, J., Remes, U.: The Method of Analysis. Its Geometrical Origin and Its General
Signiﬁcance. Reidel, Dordrecht (1974)
19. Karasmanis, V.:
: Hyppocrates of Chios and Plato’s hypothetical method of the
Meno. In: Longo, A., Forno, D.D. (eds.) Arguments from Hypotheses in Ancient Philosophy,
pp. 21–42. Bibliopolis, Naples (2011)
20. Kraus,M.:Charles S. Peirce theory of abduction and the Aristotelian enthymeme from signs. In:
van Eemeren, F.H., Blair, J.A., Willard, C., Henkemans, A.F.S. (eds.) Anyone Who Has a View.
Theoretical Contributions to the Study of Argumentation, pp. 237–254. Kluwer Academic
Publishers, Dordrecht/Boston/London (2003)
21. Longo, A., Forno, D.D. (eds.): Arguments from Hypotheses in Ancient Philosophy. Bibliopolis,
Naples (2011)
22. Magnani,L.:Abduction,Reason,andScience.ProcessesofDiscoveryandExplanation.Kluwer
Academic/Plenum Publishers, New York (2001a)
23. Magnani, L.: Philosophy and Geometry. Theoretical and Historical Issues. Kluwer Academic
Publisher, Dordrecht (2001b)
24. Magnani, L.: Abductive Cognition. The Epistemological and Eco-Cognitive Dimensions of
Hypothetical Reasoning. Springer, Heidelberg/Berlin (2009)
25. Magnani, L.: Are heuristics knowledge-enhancing? Abduction, models, and ﬁctions in science.
In: Ippoliti, E. (ed.) Heuristic Reasoning, pp. 29–56. Springer, Heidelberg/Berlin (2014)
26. Magnani, L.: Naturalizing logic. Errors of reasoning vindicated: logic reapproaches cognitive
science. J. Appl. Logic 13, 13–36 (2015a)
27. Magnani, L: The eco-cognitive model of abduction.
now: Naturalizing the logic
of abduction. J. Appl. Logic 13, 285–315 (2015b)

104
L. Magnani
28. Magnani, L.: The eco-cognitive model of abduction. Irrelevance and implausibility exculpated.
J. Appl. Logic 15, 94–129 (2016)
29. Magnani, L.: The Abductive Structure of Scientiﬁc Creativity. An Essay on the Ecology of
Cognition. Springer, Cham, Switzerland (2017)
30. Magnani, L.: AlphaGo, locked strategies, and eco-cognitive openness. Philosophies 4(1), 8
(2019a)
31. Magnani, L.: Errors of reasoning exculpated: Naturalizing the logic of abduction. In: Gabbay,
D., Magnani, L., Park, W., Pietarinen, A. (eds.) Natural Arguments. A Tribute to John Woods,
pp. 269–308. College Publications, London (2019b)
32. Manders, K.: The Euclidean diagram. In: Mancosu, P. (ed.) Philosophy of Mathematical Prac-
tice, pp. 112–183. Clarendon Press, Oxford/New York (2008)
33. Marion, M.: Why play logical games? In: Majer, O., Marion, M., Pietarinen, A., Tulenheimo,
T. (eds.) Games: Unifying Logic, Language, and Philosophy, pp. 3–26. Springer, Heidel-
berg/Berlin (2009)
34. Mumma, J.: Proofs, pictures, and Euclid. Synthese 175, 255–287 (2010)
35. Odifreddi, P.: Divertimento geometrico. Bollati Boringhieri, Turin (2003)
36. Otte, M.: Proof-analysis and continuity. Found. Sci. 11, 121–155 (2006)
37. Park, W.: On classifying abduction. J. Appl. Logic 13, 215–238 (2015)
38. Peirce, C.S.: Pragmatism as a Principle and Method of Right Thinking. In: Turrisi, P.A. (ed.),
The 1903 Harvard Lectures on Pragmatism. [Peirce,C.S.: Lectures on Pragmatism,Cambridge,
MA, 26Mar–17May 1903, reprinted in (Peirce, 1992–1998, II, pp. 133–241)]. State University
of New York Press, Albany, NY (1997)
39. Peirce, C.S.: Collected Papers of Charles Sanders Peirce, vols. 1–6, Hartshorne, C., Weiss, P.
(eds.) vols. 7–8; Burks, A.W. (ed.) (1931–1958). Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA
(1866–1913)
40. Peirce, C.S.: The Essential Peirce. Selected Philosophical Writings. Vol. 1 (1867–1893). In:
Houser, N., Kloesel, C. (eds.), Vol. 2 (1893–1913) The Peirce Edition Project. Indiana Univer-
sity Press, Bloomington (1992–1998)
41. Phillips, J.: Aristotle’s abduction: the institution of frontiers. Oxf. Literary Rev. 14(1–2):171–
196 (1992). Special Issue on “Frontiers”, G. Bennington, G., Stocker, B. (1992)
42. Pietarinen, A.: Abduction and diagrams. Logic J. IGPL. Special Issue on “Formal Represen-
tations in Model-Based Reasoning and Abduction”, Nepomuceno, A., Magnani, L., Salguero,
F. Barés-Gómez, C. Fontaine, M. (eds.) (2020). Online ﬁrst: https://doi.org/10.1093/jigpal/
jzz034
43. Plato: Plato in Twelve Volumes. vol. I, Apology. Crito. Phaedo. Phaedrus, with an English
translation by Harold North Fowler; Introduction by W.R.M. Lamb. Cambridge, MA; London:
Harvard University Press; William Heinemann Ltd (1966)
44. Plato: Plato in Twelve Volumes. vol. III, Laches, Protagoras, Meno, Euthydemus, with an
English translation by W. R. M. Lamb. Cambridge, MA; London: Harvard University Press;
William Heinemann Ltd (1967)
45. Playfair, J.: Works of John Playfair. A. Constable & Co., Edinburgh (1882)
46. Proclus Diadochus: In PrimumEuclidis ElementorumlibrumCommentarii. ex recognitione G.
Friedlein, translated and edited by G. R.Morrow A Commentary on the First Book of Euclid’s
Elements, Princenton University Press, Princeton, 1970. Leipzig: B. G. Teubner (1873)
47. Saito, K., Sidoli, N.: The function of diorism in ancient Greek analysis. Historia Mathematica
37, 579–614 (2010)
48. Simson, R.: A Treatise Concerning Porisms. Simmons and Kirby, Canterbury (1777)
49. Woods, J.: Against ﬁctionalism. In: Magnani, L. (ed.) Model-Based Reasoning in Science and
Technology. Theoretical and Cognitive Issues, pp. 9–42. Springer, Heidelberg/Berlin (2013a)
50. Woods, J.: Ancestor worship in the logic of games: How foundational were Aristotle’s contri-
butions? In: Marion, M., Pietarinen, A. (eds.) The Baltic Year Book of Cognition, Logic and
Communication, pp. 1–38 Volume 8, Games, Game Theory and Game Semantics, Online. New
Prairie Press, Riga (2013b)

Abduction as “Leading Away”
105
51. Woods, J.: Errors of Reasoning. Naturalizing the Logic of Inference. College Publications,
London (2013c)
52. Woods, J.: Aristotle’s Earlier Logic. Second revised edition. Originally published by Hermes
Science Publications, Oxford, 2001. College Publications, London (2014)
53. Woods, J.: Reorienting the Logic of Abduction. In: Magnani, L., Bertolotti, T. (eds.) Springer
Handbook of Model-Based Science, pp. 137–150. Springer, Cham (2017)
54. Woods, J.: Truth in Fiction: Rethinking Its Logic. Springer, Cham (2018)
55. Woods, J., Hansen, H.V.: Hintikka on Aristotle’s Fallacies. Synthese 113(2), 217–239 (1997)

Methodeutic of Abduction
Francesco Bellucci and Ahti-Veikko Pietarinen
Abstract Peirce’s claims that methodeutic “concerns abduction alone” and that
“pragmatism contributes to the security of reasoning but hardly to its uberty” are
explained. They match as soon as a third claim is taken into account, namely that
“pragmatism is the logic of abduction,” not of deduction or induction. Since meth-
odeuticconcernsabductionandnotdeductionorinduction,itfollowsthatpragmatism
is a maxim of methodeutic. Then, since pragmatism contributes to the security of
reasoning but not to its uberty, it follows that methodeutic contributes to the secu-
rity of the only reasoning it is concerned with, namely abduction. We then explain
two related issues of methodeutic of abduction. First, in addition to the maxim
of pragmatism, which suggests how to choose among experimental hypotheses
contributing to the security of reasoning, there is the maxim of simplicity, which
suggests hypotheses that are preferable for investment and which contributes to
uberty of reasoning. Second, a third maxim of abduction is economy, which suggests
adopting hypotheses that contribute to the advantageousness of reasoning even when
pragmatism and simplicity cease to apply. These three maxims—experientiality for
security, simplicity for uberty, and economy for advantageousness—are the bedrocks
of Peirce’s methodeutic of abduction.
F. Bellucci (B)
University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy
e-mail: bellucci.francesco@gmail.com
A.-V. Pietarinen
Tallinn University of Technology, Tallinn, Estonia
e-mail: ahti.pietarinen@gmail.com
Research University Higher School of Economics, Moscow, Russia
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2021
J. Shook et al. (eds.), Abduction in Cognition and Action, Studies in Applied
Philosophy, Epistemology and Rational Ethics 59,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-61773-8_5
107

108
F. Bellucci and A.-V. Pietarinen
1
Introduction
In 1902 Peirce applied to the Carnegie Institution to bring his Minute Logic, of which
he had just written the ﬁrst four chapters, to completion.1 The so-called “Carnegie
Application”2 contained a list and the abstracts of thirty-six “memoirs,” namely chap-
ters into which his projected logic book would be divided. The last seven, Memoirs
27 to 33, were devoted to “Methodeutic.” The application was infamously rejected,3
and despite encompassing over 2.500 manuscript and typescript sheets, the Minute
Logic itself was destined to remain severely incomplete.
Methodeutic is the name given by Peirce to the third department of his logic, after
the medieval trivium of artes sermocinales: grammatica, dialectica, and rhetorica.
The ﬁrst department he called “speculative grammar,” and was intended as an analysis
and classiﬁcation of signs. The second department, “logical critic” or simply “critic,”
was intended as an analysis of the different kinds of arguments (deductive, inductive,
abductive). The third department, initially named “speculative rhetoric” and then
“methodeutic,”wasdescribedinMemoir27ofthe“CarnegieApplication”asfollows:
The ﬁrst business of this memoir is to show the precise nature of methodeutic; how it differs
from critic; how, although it considers, not what is admissible, but what is advantageous,
it is nevertheless a purely theoretical study, and not an art; how it is, from the most strictly
theoretical point of view, an absolutely essential and distinct department of logical inquiry;
and how, upon the other hand, it is readily made useful to a researcher into any science, even
mathematics itself. It strongly resembles the purely mathematical part of political economy,
which is also a theoretical study of advantages. Of the different classes of arguments, abduc-
tions are the only ones in which, after they have been admitted to be just, it still remains to
inquire whether they are advantageous. (R L 75, pp. 378–379)
The idea that of the three kinds of arguments abduction is the only one in need of
a methodeutic is expressed even more clearly in some drafts of the same passage:
Methodeutic has a special interest in abduction, or the inference which starts a scientiﬁc
hypothesis. For it is not sufﬁcient that a hypothesis should be a justiﬁable one. Any hypothesis
1The preserved chapters and their sections are as follows. Chapter 1 (R 425, 176 ms pages): Intended
Characters of this Treatise. § 1. Logic’s Promises. § 2. Of Minute Accuracy. § 3. Different Methods
in Logic. § 4. Synopsis of Contents of this Book; Chapter 2: Prelogical Notions. § 1. Classiﬁcation of
the Sciences (R 426–427, 291 ms pages), § 2. Why Study Logic? (R 428, 128 ms pages); Chapter 3.
§ 1. The Essence of Mathematics (R 431, 200 ms pages), § 2. Division of Pure Mathematics (R
430, 108 ms pages)/Specimens of Mathematical Reasoning (R 430, 68 ms pages); Chapter 4: Ethics
(R 432–434, 234 ms pages). According to the plan and its revisions (“List of Proposed Memoirs
on Minute Logic,” R 1578), at least 33 chapters were to be accomplished in total, together with
a lucrative pay-check from Peirce’s friend Francis Lathrop, who had promised to pay $150 for
each chapter. According to this plan, the memoirs on methodeutics were by title “27: Methodeutic.
Discussion of the Method which it should possess”; “28: Economics of Research”; “29: Clearness of
Ideas. Discussion of Pragmatism”; “30: Methodeutic of logical division and natural classiﬁcation”;
“31: On the Conduct of Inquiries and the Economics of Research”; “32: Criticism of Methods
actually in use”; and “33: Objective Logic and Metaphysics.”
2Final version and drafts in RL 75; see [1] for an introduction to the reconstruction of this set of
documents, which amounts to over 500 manuscript pages in the Harvard Peirce Papers (see also
NEM IV, pp. 13–73).
3See [2], pp. 278–289.

Methodeutic of Abduction
109
which explains the facts is justiﬁed critically. But among justiﬁable hypotheses we have to
select that one which is suitable for being tested by experiment. There is no such need of a
subsequent choice after drawing deductive and inductive conclusions. (RL 75, pp. 279–280)
I here consider precisely what methodeutic is. I show that it is here permissible to resort
to certain methods not admissible in stechiologic [i.e., speculative grammar] or in critic.
Primarily, methodeutic is nothing but heuretic and concerns abduction alone. (RL 75, p. 329)
On Peirce’s justiﬁcation of abduction, see [3]. In this paper, we focus on the
methodeutic of abduction. We elucidate Peirce’s puzzling claim that methodeutic
“concerns abduction alone.” As it will become apparent in the sequel, this claim is
closely connected with another claim of Peirce’s that needs an explanation, namely
the claim, repeatedly made in 1913, that “Pragmatism contributes to the security of
reasoning but hardly to its uberty” (R 838, p. 10). The two claims can be bridged, we
shall argue, as soon as another claim, this time one exhaustively explicated by Peirce,
is taken into account: the claim that “pragmatism is the logic of abduction.” Putting
these three claims together we have that since pragmatism is the logic of abduction
and not of deduction or induction, and since methodeutic concerns abduction and not
deduction or induction, it will follow that pragmatism is a maxim of methodeutic.
Then, since pragmatism contributes to the security of reasoning but not to its uberty,
it will follow that methodeutic contributes to the security of the only reasoning it is
concerned with, namely abduction.
In the next sections, we also explain two related issues of the methodeutic of
abduction. First, in addition to the maxim of pragmatism, which suggests how to
choose among experimental hypotheses, there is the maxim of simplicity, which
suggests hypotheses that are preferable for further investment and which contribute
to the uberty of reasoning. Second, there is a third maxim of abduction, namely
the maxim of economy, which suggests adopting hypotheses that contribute to the
advantageousness of reasoning even when pragmatism and simplicity would cease
to apply. These three maxims (experientiality for security, simplicity for uberty, and
economy for advantageousness) are the three bedrocks of Peirce’s methodeutic of
abduction.
2
The Search for Methodeutic
It is quite late in his life that Peirce truly embarks on the study of the third compart-
ment of logic. At some point he even seems to have taken “speculative rhetoric” (i.e.,
methodeutic) to comprise a study of “applications of logic to mathematics” (R 339,
LN [145r], September 29, 1898).4 What this should mean is far from clear. We know
what it meant for Peirce to apply mathematics to logic: it meant using mathemat-
ical techniques and methods, for example the algebraical method, in order to solve
4All mathematical reasoning, he states a few years later, “relates to some schema of the nature of
a diagram, that is, a sign having parts related similarly to the objects denoted, and having letters
or other indices to distinguish those parts” (R 87, c.1905). Soon after, he needs to revisit these and
other earlier statements of his, rethink, and widen the scope of methodeutic.

110
F. Bellucci and A.-V. Pietarinen
problems in logic. His work in deductive logic is an investigation into mathematical
logic, and, properly speaking, is part of mathematics, not of logic. We also know that
at some point Peirce thought he could give a logical account of the axioms for the
natural numbers, like in the work of Richard Dedekind and Giuseppe Peano.5 But this
is hardly a matter of methodeutic, and does not explain in what sense methodeutic
should be (or contain) a study of application of logic to mathematics.
In October 1906 Peirce reports to William James how during 1906 he had “attained
a clearer understanding of my method of classifying relations, signs, and arguments,”
so much so that he took his National Academy of Science presentation approaching
within only a few weeks, to be “comparatively plain sailing” (CSP to WJ, 31 October
1906; RL 224). The “method of classifying relations” Peirce mentions here may
be identiﬁed with the phaneroscopical method, which Peirce had introduced in his
classiﬁcation of the sciences in 1902 and which he thought would constitute the basis
for logic.6 The “method of classifying signs” is, of course, speculative grammar, and
the period 1903–1906 is in fact the most intense in Peirce’s later production as
far as the classiﬁcation of signs is concerned.7 Finally, “the method of classifying
arguments” is logical critic, the sort of investigation he initiated in 1865 with the
Aristotelian syllogism, and which still in 1914 would form the principal subject of
Peirce’s last known manuscript on logic.8
What he perceived still in late 1906 to be done was to complete the theory of
inquiry and scientiﬁc thought, which he had famously written much about since the
1860s, with a concluding chapter on the principles of methodeutic. His studies in
methodeutic, however, even more than his grammatical and critical investigations,
remained largely unpublished, fragmentary and scattered across the manuscripts. On
December 25, 1909, Peirce summarises his efforts and achievements to James as
follows: “I have done a lot of work in Methodeutic that is valuable and very little of
it is printed. This will be the most widely useful part of my Big Book. A few scraps in
my ‘Amazing Mazes’ have brought me several admiring letters from mathematicians
of some power” (RL 224). Perhaps it was when back in Arisbe, Milford, in July 1907,
that Peirce really began writing the “Amazing Mazes” series for The Monist [8, 9] of
which at least 750 draft sheets and copy-texts were completed as currently preserved
in the Houghton Peirce Papers.
The “Amazing Mazes” seek to explain the role of non-mechanical, or as Peirce’s
choice of the word goes, “theoric inferences” involved in mathematical reasoning
5See [4]. In R 70(s) (9 August 1906) Peirce deﬁnes properties of positive integers in the language
of Beta graphs by (i) the two-place successor function (namely that each positive integer N has a
successor S(N)), (ii) that successor to be unique, and that zero is not a successor of any positive
integer, and (iii) the principle of ﬁnite induction. He then derives further axioms such as that being
a successor of two positive integers implies the identity of those integers, and the property that 0 is
the only integer (natural number) not a successor of any integer, among other properties.
6On Peirce’s classiﬁcation of the sciences in 1902–1903 see the beautiful [5]; cf. also [6].
7See [7], Chaps. 7 and 8.
8Namely R 752 (15 March 1914). In it, he talks about “orders” of reasoning, which signals their
double nature of being both “stages” and “kinds” (compare these with the terms “grades” in R 843,
1908, and “types” in R 905, 1908).

Methodeutic of Abduction
111
and proofs. (The phrase is misspelled in NEM III(1), p. 622 as “theoretic inference”;
in the papers published in The Monist the choice of term is “theoric step.”) Peirce
wants to assure the reader that what is meant by “theoric” is a real mode of inference
and not some singular and isolated creative step, element or moment encountered in
the course of proofs. Peirce observes that as the members of the cyclic system grow in
number,sodoesthesizeoftheclassofrelationsoverthosemembers.Butthegrowthis
enormous, factorial growth, which suggests that problems concerning cyclic systems
are in the class of NP-complete problems and have the complexity equal to that of the
Travelling Salesman Problem. Logical reasoning is quasi-mechanical, as mathemat-
ical proofs involve theoric inferences and as problems like those involving ﬁnding
Hamiltonian cycles are fundamentally intractable.9
These are all pertinent observations, but they do not yet give a chapter on the
scientiﬁc principles of the theory of methodeutic. Some months earlier, in March
1907, while having lodged at Prescott Hall since December 1906, Peirce was working
on another long article and letter to The Nation and Atlantic Monthly on pragmatism
(R 318)—and in his own words, “at a killing rate” (CSP to WJ, March 1907; RL
224). At that time, he was also preparing for the Harvard Philosophy Club lectures
on “Logical Methodeutic,” to be delivered in early April. Indeed these episodes
almost took his life (see [2] and the appendix below for some testimonies). For
what we can tell from his lecture notes, Peirce’s sustained plight that spring made
the delivery of these two or three talks a particularly onerous undertaking. They
were to remain his last lectures, and they were presented at the Emerson Hall before
the Harvard Philosophy Club on April 8 and 12, 1907, as reported by The Harvard
Crimson: “Philosophical Club. Logical Methodeutic. I. Retroduction, or the Framing
of Hypotheses. Mr. C. S. Peirce. Emerson B, 8 pm” (The Harvard Crimson, April 6,
1907); “Philosophical Club. Logical Methodeutic. II. Induction, or the Experimental
Method. Mr. C. S. Peirce. Emerson B, 8 pm” (The Harvard Crimson, April 12,
1907). [10] mentions that Peirce delivered three lectures the second of which was
on deduction, but there is no record of that lecture having been announced in The
Harvard Crimson. Its draft appears to be R 754, “Second Talk to the Philosophy
Club. Deduction.” The draft of the lecture on induction designates it as the “Third
lecture on methodeutic” (R 773), which Peirce struggled to deliver, if at all, having
“been really very ill for 24 h previously and had had no sleep” (ibid.).
There is no surviving document for the ﬁrst lecture on retroduction (abduction),
but the two other fragments on deduction and induction do refer to it (Appendix).10
9Reasonably assuming that P ̸= NP.
10R 753 appears to be an earlier, c.1906, segment of a draft lecture on retroduction, with manuscript
pages 3–8 preserved. Its paragraphs that concern retroduction read as follows: “Now without taking
the audience more thoroughly into this matter, I, who have gone through the whole matter far more
systematically, can point out some characteristic features of these three modes of reasoning which
will show their entire unlikeness to one another and what each depends upon. ¶ First, Retroductive
reasoning is the only one of the three which produces any new idea. It originates a theory. Now if
the multitude of possible theories to account for any collection of facts be not strictly inﬁnite, it
may be very moderately estimated as a million. Of these only one can be the true one. Therefore,
considering that the testing of one theory is a matter that may cost a million dollars, several lives,

112
F. Bellucci and A.-V. Pietarinen
Perhaps Peirce was forced to compress his material on the logical methodeutic of
the three types of reasoning into two lectures. Nothing is known about the reception
of those talks or their attendance, save for a question from Edward V. Huntington,
professor of mathematics at Harvard, which concerned the nature of mathematical
discovery the answer of which Peirce reﬂects upon in his post-lecture log (Appendix).
3
Uberty and Security
In the last years of his life, Peirce returned to the problem of logical critic, namely to
the problem of determining the degree of strength and the kind of assurance of each of
the three great classes or orders of reasoning. This problem is addressed in a number
of manuscripts (R 680–684, 1913), some of which discuss two distinct “poles” of
the analysis of reasoning, which now Peirce calls its “security” and “uberty.” Peirce
goes as far as to suggest deﬁning “logic” as a “technical term” “for the science of
the security and uberty of reasonings” (R 683).
Here is an explanation of these two terms that we ﬁnd amidst a long letter of 1913
to Frederik Adam Woods:
I think logicians should have two principle aims: First, to bring out the amount and kind
of security (approach to certainty) of each kind of reasoning, and second, to bring out the
possible and esperable uberty, or value in productiveness, of each kind.
I have always, since early in the sixties, recognized three different types of reasoning, viz.:
First, Deduction which depends on our conﬁdence in our ability to analyze the meanings of
the signs in or by which we think; second, Induction, which depends upon our conﬁdence
that a run of one kind of experience will not be changed or cease without some indication
before it ceases; and third, Retroduction, or Hypothetic Inference, which depends on our
hope, sooner or later, to guess at the conditions under which a given kind of phenomena will
present itself.
and a full generation, it is easy to see that history is not long enough to account for our having
reached any tolerably approximate theories, without we suppose that the human mind has a natural
talent for guessing at the truth of nature – meaning by nature, not only what is artiﬁcial, but all
that is not downright ﬁctitious[sufﬁx or word(s) torn out] a product of the theory. Of course, I do
not mean [word(s) possibly torn out] that a guess is probably right, but merely that it [word(s)
possibly torn out] be true, to be evident. Being evident, it is not doubted. Not being doubted, it
cannot really be criticized. For a doubt is a real state of dissatisfaction; and the common practice of
making believe to doubt, and then offering considerations to appease that make-believe doubt, is a
foolish waste of time, since the man who does not doubt can realize the state of mind of the man
who does, only to a very limited extent, and he thus quite fails in all difﬁcult cases to appease any
real doubt that may exist, or appeases it quite otherwise than by his attempted reasonings. Another
man’s doubt will usually set up a doubt in my mind and that I can handle intelligently; but when
his doubt excites no doubt in my mind, it is either that I know by my own experience where his
mind has probably stumbled (and if I do he can be set right in a moment) or it is that he has thought
that I have never had, and probably understands the matter better than I. But what appears to be
evident is past all possible genuine criticism, until it ceases to appear evident. ¶ It will be observed
that this justiﬁcation of retroduction supposes that the hypothesis or conjecture which is justiﬁed
has been the result of some normal way of forming such a conjecture, though the justiﬁcation does
not depend upon what that process is” (R 753, pp. 3–5).

Methodeutic of Abduction
113
Each of these three types occurs in different forms requiring special studies.
From the ﬁrst type to the third the security decreases greatly, while the uberty as greatly
increases. […]
I don’t think the adoption of a hypothesis on probation can properly be called induction;
and yet it is reasoning and though its security is low, its uberty is high. (CSP to FAW, 6–11
November, 1913, RL 477; CP 8.384)
Deductionisthemostsecureofthethreekindsofreasoning,foritiscertain(though
not merely necessary) as a kind of reasoning can be. Yet, it is the least uberous, that
is, the least productive of new knowledge, because deduction concludes to nothing
that was not already virtually included in the premises. Abduction, by contrast, is the
least secure, because its conclusion only contains a hypothesis that has to be tested;
but it is the most uberous, because it is the only kind of reasoning that can initiate
a new idea.11 As Peirce had written to the Italian philosopher Mario Calderoni a
few years earlier, at a time when the terminology of “uberty” and “security” had not
yet been introduced, through abduction “we gain new ideas; but there is no force in
the reasoning” (CP 8.209): it “furnishes all our ideas concerning real things, beyond
what are given in perception, but is mere conjecture, without probative force” (ibid.).
Abduction is uberous because it furnishes every information about real things that is
not gained in observation, but is unsecure because it has not the probative force of
deduction. Naturally, in scientiﬁc investigation uberty has to be favored over security.
So he wrote to Josiah Royce in 1913: “I am going to insist upon the superiority of
Uberty over Security in the sense in which gold is more useful than iron, though the
latter is more useful in some respects. And also that the art of making explanatory
hypotheses is the supreme branch of logic” (CSP to Royce, 30 June 1913).12
High security and high uberty cannot both be had at the same time: “the more
gravid in life and richer in light the conclusion of a reasoning may be, if it is true, the
less secure can that reasoning be” (R 684, p. 2, 26 August 1913). There is a trade-off
between minimizing one’s errors and blunders of reasoning and increasing the value
11Of the three types of reasoning, abduction is “persuasive, seductive” (R 754, 1907). We are
“compelled to begin with [it] if we are ever to discover a law or the rationale of any phenomenon”
(R 843, p. 41, “Neglected Argument,” (copy-text?) draft, crossed out, c.1907). Peirce talks about
“irresistible persuasiveness” that abductive conclusions have in scientiﬁc discovery: “You will ﬁnd
that our rational instinct often prompts us to reasoning such that no conceivable mass of similar
data would render its conclusion either certain or, in the strict sense above deﬁned, probable, and it
appears to be evident on examination that it is impossible absolutely to prove that these arguments
have any value whatever. Nevertheless, it seems that many of them have an almost, if not quite,
irresistible persuasiveness, that many of them have caused great discoveries and apparent great
advances in science; and ﬁnally the most decisive circumstance of all in their favour is that unless
these arguments have do tend [sic] to carry us toward new truth in the whole, we must abandon
all hope of penetrating further into the secrets of the universe than we have done already” (R 652,
pp. 12–13, July 12, 1910). Peirce draws an analogy from the game of Whist, in which players
may be led to situations which “full warrant a player for acting on the hopeful hypothesis” (ibid.,
p. 14). This is abduction, namely “reasoning from consequent to antecedence”; reasoning “which
from a consequent and a consequence infers an antecedent” (ibid., p. 15). It is “infers” that Peirce
accentuates: abduction is inverse inference and has a certain logical form.
12Letter preserved in the Harvard University Archives.

114
F. Bellucci and A.-V. Pietarinen
of novel information.13 Although abduction is an uberous mode of reasoning, it is
“greatly wanting in security,” Peirce explains in one of the 1913 papers on “Uberty
and Security” (R 684, p. 3). In the same manuscript he adds that the term “‘uberty’
covers two quite distinct virtues” (ibid.), but what follows in the text unfortunately
trails off and does not proceed explaining what the “two quite distinct virtues” were
that Peirce had in mind.
Inanotherdraftofthesamepaper(R682,reproducedinEP2),Peircealsospeciﬁes
that “uberty” is not the same as “fruitfulness”:
I can hardly be supposed to have selected the unusual word “uberty” instead of “fruitfulness”
merely because it is spelled with half as many letters. Observations may be as fruitful as you
will, but they cannot be said to be gravid with young truth in the sense in which reasoning
may be, not because of the nature of the subject it considers, but because of the manner in
which it is supported by the ratiocinative instinct. (R 682, EP 2, p. 472)
Science is the combination of observation and reasoning. It is constituted by the
“processes of collecting and grouping results of Observation and of Reasoning […]
so that Science itself, when this word is used in the sense of that sort of information
that it is the function of men of science to supply to practical men, will consist in what
those men have concluded from their reasonings about observations” (R 682, EP 2,
p. 471). Now, observation itself is probably the most fruitful part of the scientiﬁc
enterprise, in the sense that much of the information of which a scientiﬁc theory is
made comes in observation. But abduction—one of the modes of reasoning through
which a scientiﬁc theory is generated on the basis of observation—is not simply
fruitful: it is “uberous.” Uberty, then, seems to be the kind of informativeness that
is peculiar to abductive reasoning, as opposed to the informativeness that is peculiar
to empirical observation, which Peirce here calls “fruitfulness.” As is suggested in
the passages from the 1905 letter to Calderoni quoted above, abduction is uberous
in the sense that it adds information to the information provided by observation: it
is not simply fruitful, i.e. informative in the manner of empirical observation; it is
uberous, i.e. informative in the manner of reasoning.14
13It is only later in the process that “we correct the errors of our Retroductions [abductions] by
processes of Adduction [induction]” (R 764).
14Here we may offer also another, and related, explanation of why uberty is not mere “fruitfulness.”
Peirce explains that non-uberous hypotheses can be taken to be as fruitful as we like and yet be
conclusively overturned as soon as compelling evidence emerges that indicates refutation. True and
false hypotheses may be both fruitful but only the former can be truly uberous. In contemporary
terms, Peirce may be seen to emphasise the importance of non-epistemic values in science, which
are not in fact distinct from epistemic values [11]. The uberty of retroductive conclusions suggests
that non-epistemic values can be logically analysed, as he notices in the letter to F. A. Woods quoted
above: “I think logicians should have two principle aims: First, to bring out the amount and kind of
security (approach to certainty) of each kind of reasoning, and second, to bring out the possible and
esperable uberty, or value in productiveness, of each kind” (RL 477). It needs to be conceivable that
those values can be logically analysed, at least in principle. One way may be to apply dynamic modal
logics of conjecture-making, which is a theory of abductive reasoning at the level of pre-beliefs,
[12]. There is thus a connection between uberty and human hope that things will turn out the way
anticipated: it springs from uberty that the searching questions of science upon which our rational
hopes are built are amenable to ﬁnal decisions. These two explanations are related, since uberty of

Methodeutic of Abduction
115
It is in the context of these—scanty, to be honest—remarks on the security-uberty
divide that Peirce makes the following claim about pragmatism. He writes to Royce
in the same late letter quoted above:
As for my Pragmatism, then, it is all very well as far as it goes, it chieﬂy goes to improve
the security of inference without touching, what is for more important, its Uberty. It does
not for instance seem to have anything to say as to our exaltation of beauty, duty, or truth.
(CSP to Royce, 30 June 1913).
The same is afﬁrmed in another manuscript from 1913: “Pragmatism contributes
to the security of reasoning but hardly to its uberty” (R 838, p. 10). In order to
understand these claims, it is necessary, as anticipated in the introduction, to go back
to Peirce’s 1903 Harvard Lectures, where pragmatism is explicitly characterized as
the “logic of abduction.”
4
Pragmatism as the Logic of Abduction
In the last of his seven Harvard Lectures of 1903, delivered on 14 May, Peirce
famously declared:
If you carefully consider the question of pragmatism you will see that it is nothing else than
the question of the logic of abduction. That is, pragmatism proposes a certain maxim which,
if sound, must render needless any further rule as to the admissibility of hypotheses to rank
as hypotheses, that is to say, as explanations of phenomena held as hopeful suggestions; and
furthermore, this is all that the maxim of pragmatism really pretends to do, at least so far as
it is conﬁned to logic, and is not understood as a proposition in psychology. (EP 2, p. 234)
The maxim of pragmatism, in its original enunciation, states that the conception
of an object is the conception of the effects of that object that might conceivably have
practical, i.e. experienceable, consequences (W3, p. 266, 1878). Peirce expresses this
in “What Pragmatism Is” of 1905 as follows: “[I]f one can deﬁne accurately all the
conceivable experimental phenomena which the afﬁrmation or denial of a concept
could imply, one will have therein a complete deﬁnition of the concept, and there is
absolutely nothing more in it” (CP 5.412). But the maxim, as Peirce now in 1903 sees
it, is in fact a rule or test for the admissibility of hypotheses to rank as hypotheses.
As the whole content of a concept consists in its experienceable consequences, so
does the whole content of a hypothesis.
Abduction is the ﬁrst step of inquiry, by means of which a hypothesis is suggested
which, if true, would explain some surprising phenomena. The second step of inquiry
is to trace necessary, or deductive, consequences from the hypothesis. These conse-
quences are experimental predictions from the hypothesis, selected independently of
whether or not they are known to be true. The third stage of inquiry, then, consists
in the testing of the hypothesis through a testing of those predictions, and this is
reasoning has a link with truth: all good reasoning rests on logic. The defence of the latter is not to
be taken up here.

116
F. Bellucci and A.-V. Pietarinen
induction. It consists in considering the predictions from the hypothesis, remarking
what conditions should be satisﬁed in order for those predictions to be fulﬁlled,
causing those conditions to be satisﬁed by experiment, and noting the result of the
experiment. If the predictions are fulﬁlled, the hypothesis is inductively conferred a
certain value of conﬁdence or credence.
Pragmatism gives a criterion for the admissibility of the hypotheses that are to be
subjected to inductive testing. On this, Peirce writes to Calderoni: “Pragmaticism is
simply the doctrine that the inductive method is the only essential [sic] to the ascer-
tainment of the intellectual purport of any symbol” (CP 8.209). Since the maxim of
pragmatism states that only an experimental hypothesis can rank as a hypothesis, and
since a hypothesis is experimental in as much as its deductive consequences can be
veriﬁed by inductive experimentation, then the maxim of pragmatism in fact amounts
to stating that the content of a hypothesis coincides with its inductively experimental
content, namely with what can be inductively tested of it in experimentation.
If, as Peirce claims, all that the maxim of pragmatism pretends to do is to exclude
non-experimental hypotheses suggested by abduction, then it has no real inﬂuence
on the two other kinds of reasoning, deduction and induction, that is not already
contained in its inﬂuence on abduction. Peirce explains:
[T]he maxim of pragmatism, if true, fully covers the entire logic of abduction. It remains
to inquire whether this maxim may not have some further logical effect. If so, it must in
some way affect inductive or deductive inference. But that pragmatism cannot interfere with
induction is evident; because induction simply teaches us what we have to expect as a result of
experimentation, and it is plain that any such expectation may conceivably concern practical
conduct. In a certain sense it must affect deduction. Anything which gives a rule to abduction
and so puts a limit upon admissible hypotheses will cut down the premisses of deduction,
and thereby will render a reductio ad absurdum and other equivalent forms of deduction
possible which would not otherwise have been possible. But here three remarks may be
made. First, to affect the premisses of deduction is not to affect the logic of deduction. […]
Secondly, no effect of pragmatism which is consequent upon its effect on abduction can go
to show that pragmatism is anything more than a doctrine concerning the logic of abduction.
Thirdly, if pragmatism is the doctrine that every conception is a conception of conceivable
practical effects, it makes conception reach far beyond the practical. It allows any ﬂight of
imagination, provided this imagination ultimately alights upon a possible practical effect,
and thus many hypotheses may seem at ﬁrst glance to be excluded by the pragmatical maxim
that are not really so excluded. (EP 2, p. 235)
The maxim of pragmatism excludes non-experimental hypotheses from the course
of scientiﬁc inquiry. A hypothesis is experimental if its deductive consequences
can be experimentally tested by induction. Thus, the inﬂuence that the maxim has
on induction is already contained in its being a test for what hypotheses count as
experimental hypotheses. In other words, the maxim already ﬁlters the hypotheses
that will be “passed” to inductive testing, and thus it has already exhausted its task
before those hypotheses are tested.
A parallel consideration holds for deduction, on which Peirce offers three points.
The hypothesis suggested by abduction forms the premise of the subsequent deduc-
tive step. If the hypothesis is true (premise), then such-and-such consequences will
be observable (conclusion). Thus, in the ﬁrst place, the maxim of pragmatism inﬂu-
ences deduction in the sense that it inﬂuences the premises of deduction but does

Methodeutic of Abduction
117
not inﬂuence its “logic,” that is, its inferential rationale. The second is more general,
and in some sense holds for both deduction and induction: the whole inﬂuence of
the maxim of pragmatism on the entire course of scientiﬁc inquiry is exhausted in its
inﬂuence on abduction, so that no effect of the maxim which depends on its effect
on abduction can show that the maxim is effective beyond abduction. The third point
serves to block a possible objection: since deduction, on Peircean principles, consists
in the imaginative study of the necessary consequences of wholly hypothetical states
of things, how can the maxim of pragmatism inﬂuence deduction, even if only indi-
rectly by means of its inﬂuence on abduction? Peirce’s reply to this objection is that
the maxim does not exclude imagination as such, but only imagination that does not
“ultimately alight upon a possible practical effect” (see also [13]). If a hypothesis
has in some sense a consequence that can be an object of experience, even in some
recondite and indirect manner, then such hypothesis does pass the test of the maxim
of pragmatism.
Pragmatism is thus exclusively the logic of abduction, and has effects on deduction
and induction only through its effects on abduction. Now, given that this is Peirce’s
position in the Harvard Lectures of 1903, how do we connect it with his later claim
that pragmatism “contributes to the security of reasoning but hardly to its uberty” (R
838, p. 10)? In the ﬁrst place, as a method for excluding non-experimental hypotheses
from the course of scientiﬁc inquiry, the maxim of pragmatism can hardly be said to
contribute to the “uberty” of scientiﬁc reasoning as a whole. For uberty, we have seen,
is the measure of the informativeness of reasoning; it is a value in the productivity
(or fecundity) of an inferential mechanism. A non-experimental hypothesis can be
as informative as any hypothesis can be, but this does not render it more likely to be
true, or one that in Peirce’s words would be “gravid with young truth.”15
It is commonplace to take the meaningful measure of informativeness to be elimi-
nation of uncertainty. But is it not then the maximally informative modes of reasoning
that leaves no uncertainty about its conclusion, namely deductive reasoning? Here
we need to distinguish two different senses of informativeness: informativeness in
uberty and informativeness in security. Reasoning becomes increasingly secure as
uncertainty about its conclusions is eliminated. As noted, uberty decreases as security
increases, so the measure of informativeness in the sense of uberty does not have to
15In one of his last essays, “Essay toward Improving Our Reasoning in Security and in Uberty,”
Peirce takes abductive conjectures to be distinguishable from normal formulations of interrogative
moods in the sense that the former are “actually gravid with living and proliﬁc truth” (R 683, p. 8).
Not truth per se but “living truth”: truth that might arise to our view in the case our inquiries were
pushed to their utmost limits. Conjectures that are proliﬁc in truth are also of “value in increasing
knowledge” (ibid.). Peirce does not base his revisions of the logical schema of abduction directly
on the shortcomings of his earlier, 1903 Harvard schema. For one, he is not led to acclaim that
conjectures increase our knowledge. His later revisions concern how Modus Tollens, an inverse
reasoning from effects to causes, can result in conclusions in the special “investigand” mood (RL
463; [14, 15]). The increase in knowledge follows from the imperative part of the investigand,
because epistemic import cannot solely derive from the interrogative mood of questions in science.
Questions do not cash out the added value in terms of knowledge. Methodological advances that
Peirce refers to draw not from abduction as such but from the scientiﬁc values that imperative moods
have towards resolution of pertinent research questions.

118
F. Bellucci and A.-V. Pietarinen
do with uncertainty and its elimination. The right method to measure informativity
of uberty is rather the simplicity of the reasoning from premises to hypotheses. This
simplicity is not itself a simple matter and it could be made more precise by speaking
of iconicity instead. Then the higher the iconicity of reasoning is (as in abduction, in
which it is the highest), the lower the security tends, and vice versa.16 The conclusion
from the maxim of pragmatism nevertheless is that it cannot contribute to the uberty
of scientiﬁc reasoning.
On the other hand, the maxim does contribute to its security. For security, we
have seen, is the measure of the certainty of reasoning. Fully secure reasoning is
also maximally certain. Now abduction in itself is the least secure of the three kinds
of reasoning. Yet the somewhat unsecure hypotheses suggested by abduction are
rendered more secure, namely are subjected to testing, by deduction and induction.
Deduction and induction eliminate uncertainty. It is the procedure of the inductive
testingofthehypothesisbymeansofattestingitsdeductiveconsequencesthatconfers
security upon the initial hypothesis.17 Therefore, since the maxim of pragmatism
prescribes what hypotheses should count as hypotheses and what are to be excluded
from the course of scientiﬁc inquiry, that maxim may be said to contribute to the
security of reasoning. In other words, an uberous hypothesis is secured by means of its
real veriﬁability, and therefore the maxim of pragmatism, in prescribing veriﬁability,
contributes to the security of that hypothesis.
5
Economy
In a fragment preserved in a supplementary folder consisting of an assortment of
loose pages we read: “The recommendations of an explanatory hypothesis are, 1st,
veriﬁability; 2nd, simplicity; 3rd, economy” (R S-64, p. 60, c. 1903; cf. R 316a(s),
1903 in [16]. Veriﬁability is a recommendation that an explanatory hypothesis should
accrue its security. Simplicity (as e.g. iconicity of reasoning) is a recommendation
that the hypothesis be uberous. Economy is a third kind of recommendation and has
to do with a hypothesis’ virtue of being advantageous in a number of ways which
experimentation and simplicity cannot ascertain and is hence to be adopted as a
method to select among alternative explanations of surprising phenomena.
Being advantageous is studied in methodeutic. Methodeutic “shows how to
conduct an inquiry. This is what a greater part of my life has been devoted to,
though I base it upon Critic” (R 764). Peirce deﬁned methodeutic to be “the study
16Many measures of simplicity abound, from model selection tasks by least-effort path principles
and minimal description lengths to levels of symmetry and degrees of conservativity in guessing at
new equations. What is common are the considerations of structural relationships in the inferential
framework when moving from premises to conclusions.
17Thisassumescarryingouttheentiretri-partite,repetitivecyclesofreasoning:abduction,deduction
and the experimental testing of the outcomes of the previous two stages of reasoning by induction.
Indeed the action of induction is to conclude “from the results of [abduction and deduction] to what
extent it will be safe to rely upon the hypothesis” (R 478, p. 102).

Methodeutic of Abduction
119
of the proper way of arranging and conducting an inquiry” (R 606, p. 17), depicting
it as being “not so exact in its conclusions as is critical logic” (RL 75, 1902) and
as involving “certain psychological principles” (R 633, 1909). But it is a theoretical
study and not an art all the same. Methodeutic is based upon critic, and considers
not what is admissible (logical validity) but what is advantageous (logical economy).
Brieﬂy put, it is a “theoretical study of advantages” (RL 75, 1902).
Abduction (retroduction) is of special interest to methodeutic, because it is the
only mode of inference that can initiate a scientiﬁc hypothesis:
Retroductive reasoning is the only one of the three which produces any new idea. It originates
a theory. Now if the multitude of possible theories to account for any collection of facts be
not strictly inﬁnite, it may be very moderately estimated as a million. Of these only one can
be the true one. Therefore, considering that the testing of one theory is a matter that may
cost a million dollars, several lives, and a full generation, it is easy to see that history is not
long enough to account for our having reached any tolerably approximate theories, without
we suppose that the human mind has a natural talent for guessing at the truth of nature […]
Of course, I do not mean that a guess is probably right, but merely that it [word(s) torn out
from the corner of the page] be true, to be evident. (R 753, c.1906; see above, footnote 10)
Being justiﬁable is not a sufﬁcient property for hypotheses to be good for the
purposes of science. Justiﬁed hypotheses may be immensely costly, hazardous, or
utterly impracticable to be tested in anyone’s lifetime. Something more is needed.
In the Carnegie Application, Peirce wrote that, “[a]ny hypothesis which explains
the facts is justiﬁed critically. But among justiﬁable hypotheses we have to select
that one which is suitable for being tested by experiment” (RL 75, 1902). When
one performs abductions of a scientiﬁc nature (which in one place Peirce terms
“Scientiﬁc Retroductions”), they will “be subject to considerations of economy” (R
637). Considerations of economy are studied in methodeutic, not in logical critic.
Peirce’s struggle to formulate a theory of methodeutic can be appreciated from
the point of view of his remarks on the theory of economy of research, as it is the
latter that appears as a more fully elaborated account than his late attempt at a theory
of methodeutic. As those questions of what makes some inferences good and some
bad are normative and value-laden, it is indeed helpful to address them from the point
of view of the economy of research.18
A leading motivation that carried Peirce to the restatement of the logical schema
of abduction in late 1903 was the realisation of the importance of economic factors
that inﬂuence our reasoning in discovery and innovation. Those factors need to be
integrated into the logic of abduction, and their reasons submitted to logical analysis.
Peirce puts the case as strongly as the following passage could possibly reveal:
18Peirce’s pertinent observation was that “now economy, in general, depends upon three kinds of
factors; cost; the value of the thing proposed, in itself; and its effect upon other projects. Under
the head of cost, if a hypothesis can be put to the test of experiment with very little expense of
any kind, that should be regarded as a recommendation for giving it precedence in the inductive
procedure” (CP 7.220, 1901). On Peirce’s economy of research, see e.g. [17–20]. [21] has introduced
related concepts of eco-cognitive openness, optimization of situatedness and eco-cognitive model
of abduction and can be used in explaining further the phenomenological aspects of creativity in
scientiﬁc reasoning.

120
F. Bellucci and A.-V. Pietarinen
The principles upon which abduction ought to be conducted ought to be determined exclu-
sively by considerations of what purpose it subserves and how it may best subserve that
purpose. Since, therefore, in scientiﬁc investigation abduction can subserve no other purpose
than economy, it follows that the rules of scientiﬁc abduction ought to be based exclusively
upon the economy of research. (CP 7.220n)
Rules of abduction are based only upon what the economy of research is capable
of prescribing. Now among critically equivalent hypotheses (that is, hypotheses that
explain the same surprising facts), one should be able to select for testing those that
are capable of experimental veriﬁcation. This, as we have seen, is the core of Peirce’s
maxim of pragmatism,
However, there may be inconveniently many “pragmatistically” equivalent
hypotheses, that is, hypotheses that are capable of experimental veriﬁcation. Thus
among such pragmatistically equivalent hypotheses one should select for testing
those that in the sense of the economy of research are the “cheapest” ones. Peirce’s
argument for the economic character of methodeutic is roughly as follows: the logical
validity of abduction presupposes that nature be in principle explainable. This means
that to discover is simply to expedite an event that would sooner or later come to pass.
Therefore, the real service of a logic of abduction is of the nature of an economy.
Economy itself depends on three factors: cost (of money, time, energy, thought), the
value of the hypothesis itself, and the effects that it renders upon other projects and
hypotheses (RL 75, 1902; R 690, CP 7.164–231, 1901).
Of permanent importance in economic issues is the question of the allocation
of resources. A closer analysis of abductive reasoning reveals the presence of it in
what may be termed the Maxim of Novelty, namely that “the new money should
mainly go to opening up new ﬁelds.” This is, Peirce explains, because “new ﬁelds
will probably be more proﬁtable, and, at any rate, will be proﬁtable longer” (CP
7.160). Chances of discovery are highest in frontier and interdisciplinary research,
as it is in those areas that the constraints that may otherwise be imposed upon ﬁnding
the right antecedents of subjunctive conditionals in the second premise of abduction
are deliberately and decidedly turned down. Curiosity-driven, exploratory ideas must
reign free in order to maximise chances of someone hitting upon new hypotheses
that may be gravely needed. Finding novel methods and tools of analysis are equally
proﬁtable, and are according to the economy of research commended to remain part
and parcel of blue sky research, because those methods are both cheap to pursue
and at the same time broadly applicable across sciences, without limitations (cf. CP
7.161). In contrast, funding several competing research groups working on roughly
similar problems, driven by motives such as “who gets there ﬁrst,” is not conducive to
the real advancement of inquiry and just contributes to the increase of false discovery
rates [22]. Nor is the research driven by some singular sets of values or grievances
of special interest groups or identities.
Peirce distinguished three components in his argument for the economy of
research. First, hypotheses possess the quality of caution: according to it hypotheses
are to be broken down into their smallest logical components. Big questions are
to be divided into series of small questions; why- and how-questions into series of

Methodeutic of Abduction
121
yes-no-questions.19 According to the quality of breadth, the value of a hypothesis
is evaluated by its applicability in other related subjects across a multiplicity of
contexts and circumstances. Explanations of the same phenomena should be evalu-
atedaccordingtotheir consequences. Finally, thequalityof incomplexity (theabsence
of complexity, simplicity, or artlessness) states that, because hardly any hypothesis
is optimal anyway, they ought at least to “give a good leave” (EP 2, p. 110). Refuting
a null-hypothesis is not only a refutation but a setting of an example of good conduct
to be followed, as investigators should attempt as large a “break” as possible from
a hypothesis that is destined to fail, for contingent reasons that “we must always
consider what will happen when the hypothesis proposed breaks down” (CP 7.220).
In addition, the science that studies logical methods of science is itself cheap
to employ, and by virtue of the principles of the economy of research should be
applied to a variety of difﬁcult problems that otherwise would be too costly or slow
to pursue. The power of signs is evaluated as they appeal to the mind. It is the
question of methodeutic how to render signs effective. The task is to map out the
many ways in which interpretants are linked to symbols, indices and icons. The task
is also to ﬁnd out how the illocutionary force of retroductive conclusions, conceived
as assertions [23], are transmitted to the minds of their interpreters, and with what
consequences. Special illocutionary forces are associated with conclusions drawn
when one reasons from the consequent and consequences to new antecedents. The
meaningofone’sresearchquestionsisthustobeanalysedintandemwiththemeaning
of one’s hypotheses.
All these are questions that the theory of the economy of research is calculated
to address. Economic considerations are thus pertinent to the development of the
method of ﬁnding right kinds of questions to be asked in science. Finding good
questions to ask is possibly the hardest thing in actual scientiﬁc practice. Exploring
why this is so is a perpetually important topic, and some advice may be forthcoming
from looking at the matter from the logical point of view; after all, according to
Peirce, “it is a question whether [economics] is not a branch of logic” (RL 75).
6
Conclusion
Once critic has justiﬁed abduction, it is up to methodeutic to teach how to reason
abductively in an effective way. Abductions are for Peirce “the only ones in which
after they have been admitted to be just, it still remains to inquire whether they are
advantageous” (RL 75, 1902).
In addition to the maxim of pragmatism, which suggests choosing among exper-
imental hypotheses and which contributes to the security of reasoning, and to the
maxim of simplicity, which suggests that those hypotheses are preferable for further
19The Nobel Prize in economics went in 2019 to poverty research that did not ask the unanswerable
“Howtoget ridofpoverty?” but,forinstance,“Couldthe rate ofaccesstocleanwaterbe expedited?”,
etc.

122
F. Bellucci and A.-V. Pietarinen
investment which are “simple” (in the Peircean–Galilean sense, see [14]) and which
contributes to uberty of reasoning, we have a third maxim of abduction: the maxim
of economy, which suggests a method for adopting hypotheses in the senses qualiﬁed
above (cost, novelty and impact) and which contributes to the advantageousness of
reasoning when pragmatism and simplicity would cease to apply. These three maxims
(experientiality, simplicity and economy) are the bedrocks of Peirce’s methodeutic
of abduction.
Acknowledgments Supported by the Estonian Research Council personal research grant PUT
1305, Abduction in the Age of Fundamental Uncertainty (A.-V. Pietarinen, 2016-2018), and the
HSE University Basic Research Program funded by the Russian Academic Excellence Project
‘5-100’ (A.-V. Pietarinen, 2018-2020).
Appendix
R 754 [p. 1]
Second Talk to the Philosophical Club
Deduction. Deﬁne it. Several years’ reconsideration leads to this new deﬁnition.
Not necessary but compulsive reasoning.
Retroduction persuasive, seductive.
Induction appeals to you as a reasonable being.
Deductionpointstothepremisesandtotheirrelationandthenshakesitsﬁstinyour
face and tells you: “By the eternal powers, you have got to admit the conclusion.”
Effort required distinguishes deduction. That [it is] not necessary [is] shown by
deﬁnition of the necessary and argument about gold. [See the last paragraph of this
R 754 for the argument about gold.]
Compulsive means that you are logically forced to admit the conclusion.
Now, resume the division of reasoning. You begin with perception which brings
surprise. To make that reasonable you resort to Retroduction. That ﬁnally ﬁnished
This resembles perception in bringing the new. And after this no new idea enters
into reasoning. Now comes Deduction by which this new forces you to join with it a
transformation,—no new matter but only a new form. And Deduction is deﬁned as
including all that. Finally Induction, or the Experimental Method tests its truth.
Observe Regular Gradation from the incoming of the new, ﬁrst in Perception,
then in Retroduction; then, formally only in Deduction, while the reasonableness,
quite absent in perception begins to appear in Retroduction, [and] still more forcibly
in Deduction and in its highest development in Induction.

Methodeutic of Abduction
123
[p. 2, discontinuous] […] the depths of consciousness. Question of number
of premises. Effort required. Theôric element never or hardly ever absent from
deduction.
I must confess I have nothing but such mere Generalities to offer, when what is
wanted is a Method for the discovery of Methods. Utter weakness of all the Books.
One obvious and old remark is that a good way to prove that a thing is possible is to
show how it can be brought about. Yet that that is not indispensable is shown by a
celebrated proposition in the elements of higher arithmetic.
The Mathematicians [are] the only skilled and correct reasoners because all
reasoning depends on deduction and I will not consent to my admired friend Bôchler’s
limitation of mathematics to any particular class of Deductions. Mathematics is the
practice of deduction.
It seems to me rather remarkable that though it will not be disputed that I have
shown high powers in regard to the theory of deduction, I have but a very moderate
mathematical talent. Perhaps what I mostly [blame] imperfection is my
Proof of abnumeral multitudes.
Next the proof which I was the ﬁrst to give [was] that Linear Associative Algebra is
the same things as the Theory of Matrices.
Obvious enough, perhaps, yet disputed by Sylvester. Then my proof that only
three algebras have determinate division [quaternions, octonions, nonions].
Then various triﬂes [are] relative to computations in which my lack of generalizing
power is most prominent. (Duplication of the cube. Entire circulating decimals.) [p. 3]
The more I consider the matter, the more I am convinced that corollarial reasonings
are the highest.
Among these is my proof about multitude.
Also De Morgan’s Syllogisms of Transposed Quantity.
Also the Fermatian Inference commonly but most absurdly called Mathematical
Induction.
But those stupendous proofs of Gauss appear to be Theôric. That is why he
can prove a proposition in so many different ways. There can be but one sound
Corollarial proof of any thing from given premises, though the order of procedure
may be somewhat varied. [p. 4]
Second talk. On Deduction.
It was Monday. I was overcome by this Boston April: how ill it always made me
and nearly drove me frantic. Was so ill at last lecture and so gave to sundry points
colors I had never intended.
I began by speaking of myself,—a very hazardous and rash thing to do;—one
runs away with oneself so easily and ﬁnds oneself brought up in the court of self to
answer the charge of driving beyond the limit of speed.
I mentioned my unusual turn for the subtleties of logic, but entirely forgot to
mention, what I had fully intended to emphasize, the quite adventitious character
of such gifts. A talent for logic, or any other, is no more a thing to take credit to
oneself for than is the inheritance of a fortune. The parable of the talents embodies

124
F. Bellucci and A.-V. Pietarinen
deep truths. The talents are represented as capable of growth if properly put to use.
This is very true, indeed. But the parable leaves us to think that the talents are more
entirely extraneous than they really are, that they are as passive as so many pieces of
gold, and that the issue of the matter depends entirely upon the personal character of
the man, regardless of the talents. It is true that there is an attempt, in the parable to
[p.6] correct this error by representing that it is only the man who has one isolated
talent who fails to put it to use, being fearful lest he should lose his all. Well, I
am a Christian, as we all are, did we but recognize it. But the gospel of Christ is a
gospel at once of liberty and of duty to think out things for ourselves, and we have
no warrant whatever for regarding the parables as anything else than appeals to our
reason. Now this talent that we receive, even such a limited endowment as mine, is
more than a ﬁxed sum. It is capable of development so as to dominate and elevate the
whole character; and therefore I prefer that other parable or metaphor of the Nancy
hypnotists of multiple personality;—an ancient and Christian [illeg.] it is too, of a
spirit that grows within a man and supplants the “old man.” [Added in margin:] It is
a singular result of well-known circumstances, that a man is not permitted to express
his belief in a personal God in any impassioned way, no matter how overwhelming
that belief may be.
Dr. Huntington at the end of the other evening’s talk asked how I would regard the
great hypotheses of pure mathematics; and whether it was that I was fatigued or what,
I replied quite stupidly. I certainly regard from considering what for want of a better
word I may call the facts of mathematics. When a coefﬁcient of an equation gradually
changes so that two adjoining roots after coalescing [p. 5] disappear, our explanatory
hypothesis to account for the phenomena if you will permit me to so to call it, is that
the roots, in consequence of the collision have struck off into another dimension. It
is a hypothesis, because it is a way of rendering the phenomena comprehensible. But
it is only a formal hypothesis, not a material hypothesis[.] Deﬁnition or Division are
also retroductive. Deal with them separately.
Deduction. I have hitherto deﬁned this as necessary reasoning; and no doubt
much, perhaps most, possibly all deduction is necessary. But on reviewing the
subject for this talk, it seems to me more correct to deﬁne Deduction as compul-
sive reasoning. Retroduction seduces you. Induction appeals to you as a reasonable
being. But Deduction ﬁrst points to the premises and their relation, and then shakes
its ﬁst in your face and tells you “Now by God, you’ve got to admit the conclusion.” I
beg your pardon, with all my heart, I meant to say, “Now by the eternal world forces
spiritual and personal [illeg.]” Necessary reasoning is reasoning from the truth of
whose premises it not only follows that the conclusion is true, but that it would be
so under all circumstances.
Gold. Somebodysubmits aproposal for anewcoinage, withaspecimentheMaster
of the mind says, This is pure gold and therefore it is too soft for the purpose. That
is not necessary reasoning for it is quite conceivable that gold should be hardened
as pure copper and pure iron can be. But in existing circumstances, no such way of
hardening gold being known, it is now quite compulsive. [End of R 754]

Methodeutic of Abduction
125
Third Lecture on Methodeutic [R 774]
Induction
Apology. Had been really very ill for 24 h previously and had had no sleep. I am still
far from well, but hope to do better than last night.
That proof which I failed to give is as follows. No matter what objects the Ns
may be, so long as they have independent identities, I ask whether there can be any
relation in which every conceivable collection of Ns stands to some N to which no
other describable collection of Ns stands in the same relation.
Take any relation you please, and call it R. Then I divide the Ns into 4 classes:
First class consists of Ns to each of which no collection of Ns is R.
Second class consists of Ns to each of which 2 or more collections of Ns are R.
Third and fourth classes consist of Ns to which of which a single collection of Ns
is R.
The third class consists of those of these Ns each of which is contained in their
collection of Ns that is R to it. The fourth class of those each of which is uncontained
in the collection of Ns that R to it.
Now I will describe a collection of [p. 2] Ns which is not R to any N, unless there
be another collection of Ns that is R to it. It shall contain all the Ns of class 4 none
of class 3 and [2]. This is the collection I choose as a test. Is this the sole R of any
N. Not of any N of the ﬁrst class, since no such has any R at all. N of any N of the
second class since all such have two Rs so that [illeg.] is sole R to any of these. Nor
is the collection I have described R to any N of the third class, since no N of the
third class is contained in it, while every N of the third class is contained in the sole
collection that is R to it. Nor is this collection R to any N of the fourth class, since
every such N of [sic.] is contained in it, while no N of the fourth class is contained
in the sole collection that is R to it. So here is a collection described as deﬁnitely as
you please which is not the sole R of any N.
I spoke of Deduction as the compulsive kind of reasonings. Almost all the
theoric inferences are positively creative. That is, they create, not existent things,
but entia rationis which are quite as real. This blackboard is black. Theoric deduc-
tion concludes that the board possesses the quality of blackness and that blackness
is a simple object, called [p. 3] an ens rationis because that theoric thought creates
it.
Object and Interpretant of a Sign.
The interpretant of Deductive Reasoning is Energetic, or as I call its generalization
Existential. The Object of it, however, is purely Hypothetic. If that situation which
Deduction reasons about happens to exist, that has no bearing at all on its reasoning.
It is not so with Retroduction which starts from the actually perceived. Still less is
it true of Induction which as we shall see, relates entirely to the actual course of
Experience as its Object.
Induction, as I use the word, and I confess I cannot defend my case of the word,—
is simply the acceptance of a hypothesis in so far as it has supported tests. Every test
of a hypothesis consists in making it the basis for a conditional prediction, and if the

126
F. Bellucci and A.-V. Pietarinen
prediction turns out to be veriﬁed, we reasonably accept the hypothesis provisionally.
That is the highest certainty attainable by positive science.
The justiﬁcation of it is that if it be false[,] perseverance in the method will correct
its own result. Induction has three grades. The ﬁrst is the simple assumption that the
future will be like the past. Hence we deny fairies, ghosts, telepathy, etc.
The second is reasoning from a random sample. [p. 4]
The third is where a random sample is impossible because no counting or measure-
ment is possible, but where we know that such a method must bring indeﬁnite
approximation to truth in the long run.
Organic chemistry. Aristotle. Plato and his Xth letter. Basil Valentine. [End of R
774]
References
1. Ransdell, J.: The Signiﬁcance of Peirce’s Application to the Carnegie Institution, (1998). www.
iupui.edu/~arisbe/menu/library/bycsp/L75/intro/l75intro.htm
2. Brent, J.: Peirce: A Life. 2nd edn. Bloomington & Indianapolis: Indiana University Press (1998)
3. Bellucci, F., Pietarinen, A.-V.: Peirce’s justiﬁcation of abduction. Stud. History Philos Sci. A.
84, 12–19 (2020)
4. Shields, Paul, Charles, S.: Peirce on the Logic of Number, Docent Press, Boston (2012)
5. Kent, B.: Charles S. Peirce. Logic and the Classiﬁcation of the Sciences. McGill-Queen’s
University Press, Kingston (1987)
6. Pietarinen, A.-V.: Interdisciplinarity and Peirce’s classiﬁcation of the sciences: a centennial
reassessment. Perspect. Sci. 14(2), 127–152 (2006)
7. Bellucci, F.: Peirce’s Speculative Grammar: Logic as Semiotics. Routledge, New York (2017)
8. Peirce, C.S.: Some amazing mazes. Monist 28(2), 227–241 (1908a). (Reprinted in CP 4.585–
593)
9. Peirce, C.S.: Some amazing mazes (conclusion). Explanation of curiosity the ﬁrst. Monist
28(3), 416–464 (1908b). (Reprinted in CP 4.594–642)
10. Fisch, Max H.: Peirce’s place in American life. Historica Math. 9, 265–287 (1982)
11. Chifﬁ, D., Pietarinen, A.-V.: Fundamental uncertainty and values. Philosophia 45(3), 1027–
1037 (2017)
12. Ma, M., Pietarinen, A.-V.: Let us investigate! dynamic conjecture-making as the formal logic
of abduction. J. Philos. Logic 47(6), 913–945 (2018)
13. Bellucci, F., Pietarinen, A.-V.: The iconic moment: towards a Peircean theory of scientiﬁc
imagination and abductive reasoning. In: Pombo, O., Nepomuceno, A., Redmond, J. (eds.)
Epistemology, Knowledge, and the Impact of Interaction, pp. 463–481. Springer, Dordrecht
(2016)
14. Pietarinen, A.-V., Bellucci, F.: New light on Peirce’s conceptions of retroduction, deduction,
and scientiﬁc reasoning. Int. Stud. Philos. Sci 28(2), 353–373 (2014)
15. Pietarinen, A.-V.: Abduction and diagrams. Logic Journal of the IGPL. (2019 in press)
16. Peirce,C.S.:Logicofthefuture:writingsonexistentialgraphs.Vol.1.HistoryandApplications.
Ed. Pietarinen, A.-V. Berlin & Boston, De Gruyter
17. Haack, S.: Expediting inquiry: Peirce’s social economy of research. Trans. Charles S. Peirce
Soc. 54(2), 208–230 (2018)
18. Paavola, S.: Abduction as a logic and methodology of discovery: the importance of strategies.
Found. Sci 9, 267–283 (2004)
19. Rescher, N.: Peirce and the economy of research. Philos. Sci. 43(1), 71–98 (1976)

Methodeutic of Abduction
127
20. Wible, J.R.: The economic mind of Charles Sanders Peirce. Contemp. Pragmatism 5(2), 39–67
(2008)
21. Magnani, L.: Abductive Cognition: The Epistemological and Eco-Cognitive Dimensions of
Hypothetical Reasoning. Springer, Dordrecht (2009)
22. Ionnadis, J.: Why most published research ﬁndings are false. PLoS Med 2(8), e124 (2005)
23. Chifﬁ, D., Pietarinen, A.-V.: Abductive Inference within a Pragmatic Framework. Synthese
197, 2507–2523 (2020)
24. Chifﬁ, D., Proover, M., Pietarinen, A.-V.: Anticipation, abduction and the economy of research:
a normative stance. Futures J Policy Plann Futures Stud 115, 102471 (2020)
25. Peirce, C.S.: The collected papers of Charles S. Peirce. 8 vols. Eds. Hartshorne, C., Weiss, P.
Burks, A.W. (eds.) Harvard University Press, Cambridge (1931–1966)
26. Peirce, C.S.: Manuscripts in the Houghton Library of Harvard University. Catalogued in
Robin, R. (ed) Annotated Catalogue of the Papers of Charles S. Peirce, Amherst, Univer-
sity of Massachusetts Press (1967); and Robin. R. (ed) The Peirce Papers: A supplementary
catalogue. Trans. C. S. Peirce Soc 7, 37–57 (1971)
27. Peirce, C.S.: The new elements of mathematics by Charles S. Peirce. 4 vols. Ed. Eisele. Mouton,
The Hague (1976)
28. Peirce, C.S.: Writings of Charles S. Peirce: a chronological edition. 7 vols. Ed. Peirce Edition
Project. Indiana University Press, Bloomington (1982–)
29. Peirce, C.S.: The essential Peirce. Vol. 2. Ed. Peirce Edition Project. Bloomington &
Indianapolis: Indiana University Press (1998)

Peirce, Russell and Abductive Regression
John Woods
Abstract Below are reﬂections on Peirce’s conception of abductive methods and
Russell’s conception of regressive methods. Along the way, it will be necessary to
examine the marked differences between Russell and Frege on the ins and outs of
logicism, from which latter the regressivist ideas ﬁrst emerged. Russell was aware of
Peirce’s contributions to the algebraization of logic and Peirce was aware of Russell’s
writings on logicism. However, in framing his thoughts about regressive methods,
Russell showed no familiarity with Peirce’s treatment of abductive methods. In 1907,
Russell read to the Cambridge Mathematics Club an essay entitled “The regressive
method of discovering the premises of mathematics.” Since that paper didn’t see
the published light of day until three years after Russell’s death in 1970, Peirce
couldn’t have taken notice of it in developing his ideas about abduction. Even so,
it has been suggested that there exists a noteworthy similarity between Russell’s
regressivism and Peirce’s abductivism. The principal purpose of this essay is to
show the resemblance to have been misjudged, in which case, my title would have
to be corrected.
1
Peirce
1.1
Peirce’s Abduction
Peirce was an algebraic logician, a principal developer of the logic of relations and
the founding father of quantiﬁcation theory. Credit for the latter usually goes to Frege,
but Quine and Putnam are oppositely inclined.1 So am I. It may be well to take early
1See Peirce [25–27]. Putnam [32, p. 297] and Quine [34, p. 259]. See oppositely (and earlier)
Goldfarb [12]. We needn’t settle the matter here.
J. Woods (B)
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z1, Canada
e-mail: john.woods@ubc.ca
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2021
J. Shook et al. (eds.), Abduction in Cognition and Action, Studies in Applied
Philosophy, Epistemology and Rational Ethics 59,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-61773-8_6
129

130
J. Woods
notice of Peirce’s disinclination to see his account of how we think when we draw
abductive inferences as part of logic “in the strict sense.”
My proposition is that logic, in the strict sense of the term, has nothing to do with how you
think ….2
Indeed,
it is plain that the question of whether any deductive argument, be it necessary or probable, is
sound is simply a question of the mathematical relations between one hypothesis and another.
(ibid., 144, emphasis mine.)
Although logic is solely concerned with the presence or absence of mathematical relations
between propositions, it nevertheless remains the case that propositions must be expressed
somehow; and for this reason formal logic, in order to disentangle itself completely from
linguistic, or psychical, considerations invents an artiﬁcial language of its own, of perfectly
regular formation, and declines to consider any other form of statement then in that artiﬁcial
language. (ibid., 144–145)
In matters of how we do think, and should, Peirce has a good deal to say. He was
in no doubt that the ins and outs of abductive reasoning are expressible and enactable
in ordinary human speech. Peirce framed his views on abduction as a contribution to
the philosophy of experimental science. We could say, then, that it is an essay on the
epistemics of science. Important as it is for human cognitive prosperity, abduction
for Peirce is not a matter for logic in the strict sense.
Let’s turn now to Peirce’s famous schema.
1. The surprising fact F is observed.
2. But if H were true, F would be a matter of course.
3. Hence there is reason to suspect that H is true.3
Although Peirce doesn’t specify what in line (1) he means by “surprising”, “a
matter of course” in line (2), or “there is reason” and “suspect” in line (3), the
general idea becomes clearer when we add further details of his account. For example,
abduction is a form of guessing, underwritten innately by instinct. (RLT, p. 128, CP5.
171, CP 7.220) Abduction provides no grounds for believing the abduced proposition
to be true. (RLT, p. 178) Instead the correct thing to do with abduced hypotheses
is send them off to experimental trial. (CP 5.599, CP 6.469–6.473, CP 7.202–219)
The connection between an abduced hypothesis and the observed fact is subjunctive.
(CP 5.189) The conclusion licensed by abduction is not proposition H, but rather the
proposition that H’s truth is a matter for reasonable suspicion.
2Peirce [28, p. 143], Hereafter RLT.
3Peirce (CP 5.189), in [29] Citations are structured as follows: “CP 5.189” denotes Volume V of
Collected Papers, p. 189. Line numbers are for referential convenience, and I have changed the
original schematic letters to more intuitive ones and removed the italics.

Peirce, Russell and Abductive Regression
131
1.2
The Gabbay-Woods Approach
A Peircian conception of abduction is one that preserves, reﬁnes or expands upon the
features presently at hand. The best-known to me of such adaptations is set out in what
has come to be called the Gabbay-Woods Schema. On the Gabbay-Woods approach
abduction has two separate but interlocking parts.4 The feature that links them is a
fact-created ignorance-problem. Often enough, one’s ignorance is not problematic.
Not knowing why Robbie prefers raspberries to strawberries or Maddy the other
way round, is not something of any great moment to me. But there are occasions on
which not knowing something is irritating, and not at all something we’d be prepared
simply to give up on. So, until further notice, a better name is ignorance-irritation
problem.
Here is the basic structure of an ignorance-irritation problem. With our present
store of knowledge and the further knowledge that lies within our timely reach, we
don’t know how to account for this fact. Relative to these limitations, the question
is intractable. To arrive at an answer there are two requirements to be fulﬁlled. One
is the selection of a hypothesis H from up to arbitrarily large classes of possibilities.
What is wanted is a hypothesis H which, when added to our present knowledge-base
K, would be such that if the resultant K(H) held true, the questioner’s ignorance would
dissipate. Let’s call this the selection-step. The problem of hypothesis-selection is
made more complicated when, as frequently happens, more than one hypothesis
preserves the truth of the subjunctive conditional at line (2). Sometimes, indeed,
these rivals are pairwise inconsistent. As we have it so far, the hypothesis-selection
stage is the least well-developed part of the Peircian approach, and is not, as we
are about to see, much improved upon in the Gabbay-Woods adaptation of Peirce’s
schema. In addition to the rival hypotheses problem, there are also strictly logical
problems when F is the terminus of a search for premisses. Suppose that some true
F were the conclusion of a valid argument.5 What, we might as, are its premisses?
Does F itself count as a premiss? Does the conjunction of F and its negation qualify?
Does the largest self-consistent set of truth-evaluable English sentences severally and
jointly consistent with F count? These questions answer themselves and yield up a
moral. There is more to being a premiss for F than being a statement or statement-set
that logically implies it.
Before leaving this example, we should note that “matter of course” clause need
make no appearance here, as would be evident if F were the proposition that 1 +
1 = 2, and the question it posed were whether it is ﬁnitely provable. The same for
the “surprise” clause. Ignorance-irritation problems can be triggered by completely
4For a recent more detailed exposition, see Woods [45]. See also Gabbay and Woods [11], Magnani
[22] and Park [23]. All these works adopt naturalistic assumptions for the logic of inference. A still
unsettled disagreement is about whether all abductions are inferences to the best explanation. The
authors cited in this note think that it is not that intrinsically. But here, too, we needn’t settle the
question for what matters here.
5For expositionary ease, I use “F” ambiguously. In Peirce’s Schema it names some given fact or
state of affairs. When it occurs as the conclusion of a piece of reasoning, it names a proposition that
states that fact. I leave it to context to disambiguate.

132
J. Woods
unsurprising facts. Equally, one’s ignorance needn’t be irritating. It sufﬁces for it to
be motivating.
The next step(s) are in fact two. One is to determine what is to be concluded from
the successful completion of the selection-step. In what I’ll call the inference-step,
Peirce authorizes the conclusion that “[t]here is reason to suspect that H is true.” Next,
in what I’ll call the action-step, Peirce provides that if the costs are not too high and
the beneﬁts sufﬁciently desirable, it is reasonable or even advisable to release H for
provisional premissory use in the domain of enquiry in which the ignorance problem
arose in the ﬁrst place. Thus
Suspicion: The operational meaning of our suspicion of a hypothesis’ truth is our cost-beneﬁt
willingness to submit the hypothesis to an epistemic stress test.
This sets up the fourth and ﬁnal abductive stage, the test-step. Should the now-
released H play a role in advancing our cognitive prosperity in the domain of enquiry
at hand, it would achieve—usually by degrees—some positive approximation to a
settled fact. The test is passed by the fruitfulness of H’s employment.6 If the test is
not met, H loses its premissory license and drops from sight.
Here now is a slightly more formalized version of the Gabbay-Woods Schema.
Let F be a fact that prompts a question in someone, Bill say, to which he lacks the
answer he desires to have. Let F? be that question. K is Bill’s current knowledge-
base and K* is the immediate successor of K, made so by within Bill’s timely reach.
(For example, he could ﬁnd out be going online.) Let H be a hypothesis and K(H)
the update of Bill’s knowledge-base upon addition of hypothesis H to K. Let í be
the subjunctive conditional connective and R the ignorance-lifting response-relation.
C(H) denotes the conjecture of H as a truth-suspect, and HC denotes the decision to
take action on H. Then the general structure of the G-W extension of Peirce’s schema
is:
6Fruitful conjecture is nicely discussed by philosophically trained historians of science. See, for
example, Tappenden [42] and Ferreirós and Gray [7].

Peirce, Russell and Abductive Regression
133
It is easy to see that the distinctive epistemic feature of abduction is captured
by the schema. It is a given that H is not in Bill’s knowledge-set K. Nor is it in its
immediate successor H*. Since H is not in K, then the revision of K by H is not a
knowledge-successor K* of K. Even so, if H were true, then it would be the case that
K(H) would answer ?F. Note, however, that even though this is a successful abduc-
tion, this itself is not an answer to ?F. Rather it gives license to try to ﬁnd out whether
H in fact is true. For if it were true, ?F would have an ignorance-erasing answer. It is
commonly accepted that the distinguishing mark of deduction is truth-preservation
and, of induction, is likelihood-enhancement. If the Gabbay-Woods model is faithful
to Peirce, then the distinctive feature of Peircian abduction is ignorance-preservation,
but in a way that identiﬁes candidates for its possible removal upon further inves-
tigation. Let us be clear. Neither of the schema’s conclusions answers the question
posed by E. They are helpful and instructive in other ways.
Line (10) leaves the conditions on hypothesis-selection unschematized. But it
isn’t true that its authors stand mute on the matter. In Woods [46], much is made of
the fact that among the many cognitive tasks at which we humans are adept, is the
selecting plausible or “ballpark” hypothesis in ?F-contexts. In plainer words, we are
really quite good at good guessing. There are other things we are rather good at. We
have just-in-time memories that generally serve us well, and we’re really quite good
at keeping irrelevant information at bay by denying it premissory license. We are
good at spotting local inconsistencies arising from incoming information – this, after
all, is the conditio qua non of pro-contra argument, the life’s-blood of the reductio.
On the other hand, we’re no good at all in keeping deep memory and background
informationconsistent.7 Butthesefrailtiestendtohavelittleimpactonthepremissory
use of small consistent subsets of those larger wholes. A ﬁnal example is the skill we
display in managing the distinction between a proposition’s or a theory’s deductive
and demonstrative closures. It is a theorem of number theory that zero is a natural
number. It follows from this theorem that zero is a natural number or Nice is nice in
November. “Zero is a natural number or Nice is nice in November” is in the deductive
closure of Peano-Dedekind arithmetic, but it is not a theorem of arithmetic, it is not
an arithmetic truth. The reason why is that it is not in the theory’s demonstrative
closure. Nobody who has ever drawn breath has identiﬁed “Zero is a natural number
or Nice is nice in November’ as a truth of arithmetic. That is because we’re so good at
managing the requisite closure differences. For the most part, we have no conscious
grasp of how we manage to be good at these things. This fact alone disposes me to
think that these mechanisms that ﬁlter out irrelevances and regulate vital distinctions
are for the most part automatic. This is a conjecture of a type entirely welcome by
the causal-response epistemologies of naturalized logic.8 The reason that they aren’t
listed in line (10) of the schema is that it is not yet known with any speciﬁcity what
7More on this can be found in Chap. 9, “Putting inconsistency in its place”, of Woods [46].
8A causal-response epistemology sees the beliefs that qualify as knowledge as causal responses to
information-processing under speciﬁed conditions. (Woods [44], Sect. 3.5). In contrast, a causal-
contact epistemology, requires a believer’s causal contact with the object of belief [13].

134
J. Woods
they are and how they work. So until something better comes along, perhaps we
could rewrite (10) to say:
(10′) H is the product of well-ﬁltered possibilities.9
2
Russell
2.1
Mathematics When Russell Was Starting
Conjecture, of course, is the dynamic engine of all living science. Without new ideas,
the sciences would atrophy. No nineteenth century mathematician would have dreamt
of mounting an arrest-on-sight anti-conjecture campaign. The general question raised
by conjectures is what is to be done with them when they ﬁrst arise? No one would
have doubted that the right thing to do with a scientiﬁc conjecture is put it to the
test, put it, so to speak, on trial. In the empirical sciences, a winning conjecture will
have to negotiate its way through the conﬁrmational checkout counter. In the abstract
sciences, there is no question of empirical validation. The general and universally
received answer is that even an abstract conjecture wins the day if it is backed by
a valid proof. Normally, however, there is a time-lag between the emergence of
a conjecture and a proof that validates or invalidates it. For example, Poincaré’s
Conjecture arose in 1904 and wasn’t proved until 2006. Riemann’s Hypothesis was
announced in 1859 and still lacks a settled consensus. Hodge’s Conjecture was
announced in 1950 and also awaits a solution.10 It is natural to ask of conjectures
in limbo—102 years in Poincaré’s case, 106 years and counting in Riemann’s, and
69 and counting in Hodge’s—what are the rules of their employment? It is here that
opinion starts to divide. Many mathematicians hold that limboed conjectures should
be allowed to circulate and seek proﬁtable careers in conditional proofs, for example;
especially when they have consequences which themselves turn out to be indepen-
dently provable. Opinions divide more sharply over the question of whether mathe-
matically interesting ideas should ever be granted provisional premissory license to
appear in categorical proofs.
At the heart of this matter are considerations of risk-tolerance. The landscape
of Peirce’s abductive surveyance was a nineteenth century commonplace in mathe-
matics and science, and is so to this day. During the time of Peirce’s mathematical
ﬂourishment and of Russell coming to some degree of mathematical maturity, math-
ematics was in a state of creative crisis. On the one hand, new ideas came “fast
and furious and curious”. Among the more interesting newcomers were Riemann’s
n-tuply extended magnitudes, the irrational, imaginary and complex numbers, ellip-
tical functions, progressive harmonic conjugates and Desargesian planes. On the
9For more enriched versions see Chifﬁand Pietarinen [3, 4].
10Poincaré’s Conjecture says that every simply connected closed 3-manifold is homeographic to
the 3-sphere. Riemann’s Hypothesis is that all non-trivial zeros of the Riemann zeta function have a
real part equal to 0.5. Hodge’s Conjecture is that certain de Rham cohomology classes are algebraic.

Peirce, Russell and Abductive Regression
135
other hand, in the midst of all this newness, serious worries arose about the epis-
temic integrity of the thinkings-up of mathematical structures that had had no prior
presence in mathematical practice. The worries were both alethic and epistemic. One
wants one’s theorems to be true, and to be known to be so without countervailing risk
of defeat.11 But it is a steadfast fact about the human cognitive economy that beings
like us make errors, lots and lots of them. Sometimes our proofs are predicated on
inconsistent axioms. Sometimes the axioms are ﬁne but the proof rules are leaky.
And sometimes key concepts are sloppily deﬁned. We shall shortly see that these
three vulnerabilities lie at the motivational core of Frege’s foundational mathematics
and also for a while of Russell’s. They are important enough to have a name. Let’s
call them the Terrible Three–false axioms, leaky proofs and slovenly deﬁnitions. I’ll
come back to this unappealing trio in the section to follow.
In the context of the new, the unintuitive and the unproved, these are obvious
worries. It is only natural that there would be measures designed to mitigate the
risk of mathematical error. In this company, two broad “schools” of risk-tolerance
would dominate. On the “conservative” or Weierstrassian side, the toleration of risk
was low. On the “liberal” or Riemannian side it was higher. A related wrinkle in
this controversy is the importance accorded to the deﬁnition of terms prior to their
release into the ﬂow of mathematical practice. Weierstrassians favoured precise and
explicit deﬁnition as a condition of an idea’s employment. Riemannians thought that
proﬁtable future usage would in time amount to its implicit deﬁnition.
It hardly needs saying that the Weierstrassian-Riemann divide is itself neither
mathematically well-deﬁned nor in all respects mutually exclusive. It is enough to
say that the conservatives carried a low toleration for the risk of error, and liberals
were more disposed to invest more heavily in the post facto error-correction side.
Seen the latter way, mathematics is an experimental science, and a fallibilist one to
boot.
2.2
Pre-paradox Logicism
Russell is said to be the co-founder, with Frege, of logicism. This in fact is untrue.
Russell was too young to have been its founder.12 Russell (1872–1970) was twenty-
fours younger than Frege (1848–1925) and, in the year that Russell was Seventh
Wrangler in Cambridge’s mathematics tripos, Frege had brought forth volume I of
his chef d’oeuvre the Grundgesetze.13 When, nine years earlier, Frege published
11Since most epistemologies require that truth be a condition on knowledge, henceforth I’ll frame
the worry as epistemic.
12Notwithstanding some occasional slippage. For example, he endorsed the idea that the functions
of which the True and the False were their respective values could be left to arbitrary stipulation.
13Frege [9].

136
J. Woods
the Grundlagen in 1884, Russell was a precocious boy of twelve.14 Russell’s prin-
cipal mathematical inﬂuence at Cambridge was Whitehead, and it was Moore who
mattered most philosophically. When it came to mathematics, young Russell tried
to conform to Whitehead’s insistence on mathematical precision and rigour. When
it came to the philosophy of mathematics he set his cap for the certainties afforded
by the philosophical analysis of complex concepts. Russell learned from Moore that
some concepts are simple and philosophically undeﬁnable. Though unanalyzable,
they were perfectly in order as they stood, and graspable with intuitive certainty.
The principal source of Russell’s early logicism wasn’t Frege. It was Peano,
whom Russell had met at the 1900 International Congress of Philosophy in Paris. In
Principles, Russell reports that he had formed his logicist convictions and worked out
most of the key deﬁnitions before he became aware of Frege’s logicism. (xviii) While
Peano was the inspiration, Russell would soon see that Frege was a considerable
improvement on him. So we must stay awhile with Frege.
It only stands to reason that during the heyday of the Weierstrassian-Riemanian
turbulence, there would be spasms of anxiety about the epistemic bona ﬁdes of
mathematics’ upper reaches.15 The new mathematics differed markedly from the
old. It was a considerably more abstract discipline and its new-fangled concepts
were unfamiliar to the point of counterintuitiveness. It made perfect sense to wonder
about the intelligibility of transcendental numbers, and it is not at all surprising that
ways of relief and reassurance would be sought. A case in point—indeed a signature
feature of nineteenth century mathematics—was the arithmeticization of analysis,
which aimed to deﬁne all concepts of analysis in number theory. Speaking to the
International Congress of Mathematicians in Paris in 1900, Poincaré summed up the
then-present state of analysis:
Arithmeticism: “Today in analysis there remain only natural numbers or ﬁnite or inﬁnite
systems of natural numbers …. Mathematics, as one says, has been arithmetized.”16
The arithmeticization of the upper reaches of mathematics was epistemologically
motivated. It was thought that arithmetic was the paragon of mathematical truth and
the gold standard of utter certainty. It was further supposed that these undoubted
virtues would be conferred upon higher mathematics by the ties that bound it to
arithmetic.
Then something happened to break the spell. Here is Dedekind writing in 1872,
where he reports that when some years earlier he started teaching the differential
calculus he
felt more keenly than ever before the lack of a really scientiﬁc foundation for arithmetic.17
There are two points to take from this. One is that arithmetic was, over time, an
intensifying source of worry for Dedekind, and not remotely a merely nagging one.
14Frege [8].
15Gray [15].
16Poincaré [30].
17Dedekind [5]. Reference here to the Foreword of the ﬁrst edition.

Peirce, Russell and Abductive Regression
137
The other is that it was a long-held worry, considerably pre-dating the opening bars
of Frege’s Grundlagen of 1884:
… is it not a scandal that our science should be so unclear about the ﬁrst and foremost among
its objects [i.e., the number one], and one which is apparently so simple? Small hope, then,
that we shall be able to say what a number is. If a concept fundamental to a mighty science
gives rise to difﬁculties, then it is surely an imperative task to investigate it more closely
until those difﬁculties are overcome. (p. xiv)
We take these expostulations as evidence of the blowback on the tried and true
of the epistemic anxieties that had so riled the Weierstrassian tiers of the higher
mathematics. I lack the space to go on at length about this most curious reversal of
conﬁdence. It will be enough to say for present purposes that what Dedekind, Frege
and others felt the want of can be summed up this way:
The Terrible Three test: A mathematical theory is epistemically secure only to the extent that
its theorems are provable from irrefutable axioms, air-tight deﬁnitions of its basic concepts,
and leak-proof rules of demonstration. That is, it must wrestle the Terrible Three to the
ground.
In 1888, Dedekind axiomatized number theory. So did Peano a year later, but not
less ably.18 But in short order it was clear that Frege had not found in them the solace
he sought. We are left to conclude that the reason why is that Frege thought that
Dedekind hadn’t managed to pass the Terrible Three test.
In a move that would bear his name evermore, Frege added a codicil to the Terrible
Three test, according to which it would be a passable test only if the axioms, deﬁ-
nitions and proof rules that validated arithmetic arose in logic. Thus was born the
doctrine which Frege never called “logicism”. The name was assigned it by Abraham
Fraenkel in 1928, three years after Frege’s death. We should also note that Fraenkel
meant “logicism” as a characterization of the position of Whitehead and Russell.19 As
we shall shortly see, logicism in the Whitehead-Russell sense is about the last thing
that Frege’s doctrine could have been. Frege’s proferred rescue-theory for arithmetic
was a second-order functional calculus of his own making, upon which he bestowed
the name of logic. Russell’s would be his and Whitehead’s Principia,20 also carrying
the name of logic, which differed from Grundgesetze in a number of ways, not least
in its intended scope. It was designed to accommodate all of mathematics, including
a chunk of geometry, not just number theory.
Russell had enough familiarity with Frege’s work to have alerted him in 1902
of the paradox occasioned by Basic Law V. Until its discovery, Russell had been a
steadfast supporter of the idea that logic was the only epistemically safe harbour for
mathematics. Pre-paradox Russell, like Frege, was a thoroughgoing epistemic logi-
cist, a quester for mathematical certainty. Post-paradox Russell would be a different
kettle of ﬁsh.
18Dedekind [6] and Peano [24].
19Grattan-Guinness [14].
20Whitehead and Russell [43].

138
J. Woods
It is generally accepted that the paradox of the set that is and is not its own
member marked the death of Frege’s logicism. In fact there was another and more
basic point of vulnerability. Analyticity was Frege’s anti-Terrible Three elixir. His
was not the Kantian notion according to which an analytic truth was one in which
all information carried by a statement’s predicate is already present in its subject.
Kant’s conception presented Frege with two difﬁculties. One was that Frege had
abandoned the subject-predicate characterization of statements distinction for the
newer one between arguments and functions. The other was that Frege did not want
the epistemically secure theorems of the Grundgesetze to be uninformative in the
way that “All bachelors are unmarried men” is. In the Grundlagen (p. 4), Frege says
that to ascertain whether a proposition is analytic or synthetic, it is necessary that
we examine its proof and determine whether it ﬂows incorrigibly from primitive
truths, that is, from principles that are neither needful nor susceptible of independent
proof. If, in turn, primitive truths are wholly general laws which validate the proofs’
deﬁnitions, then the statement in question is analytic.21 Frege accepts that analytic
truths close the world. Their truth is invariant under all possible permutations of fact.
Frege thought that if the problem of the Terrible Three were to be solved, axioms
would have to be analytic, deﬁnitions analytically tight and proof-rules analytically
truth-preserving. But it is easy to see that, on his own telling, Frege cannot pass this
test.
Frege’s Bind: A proposition is analytic only if it lies in the demonstrative closure of its
governing axioms or primitive truths. Since primitive truths are indemonstrable, they are
excluded from membership in any demonstrative closure. So no primitive truth is analytic,
and the Fregean bailout cannot meet the terms laid out for it.
The question that now presses is how Frege could have missed the bind that he
was in. The answer, in large part, was because of another bind that he didn’t yet know
he was in. Frege had an old-fashioned conception of axioms, virtually the same as
Aristotle’s notion of ﬁrst principles. An axiom was a statement that carried the Good
Housekeeping Seal of Epistemic Approval. Its epistemic assurance was intrinsic. It
was unneedful and insusceptible of proof and fully sealed-off from refutation and
falsiﬁcation. Today, however, “Frege’s view is a dinosaur”, such is the measure of
its old-fashionedness.22 Frege was caught in a kind of time-warp. On the one hand,
he aspired to be a strict Terrible Three-free logicist, which denied him release from
Russell’s paradox. Thanks to the paradox, it lies with the very idea that the concept of
set is empty. Frege’s old-fashioned view of axiomhood made matters worse.23 Even
if he were to agree that the paradox made Basic Law V somehow “inoperable”—i.e.
unusable as a premiss - he couldn’t in all consistency allow that Russell had shown
it to be false. How could it have done? Basic laws are beyond refutation. This is a
further bind that Frege was in.
21In about these same words, Frege characterizes the à priori, thus collapsing the Kantian distinction
between the alethic property of analyticity and the epistemic property of apriority.
22Blanchette [2, p. 31].
23For a fuller discussion of this difﬁculty, readers could consult Woods [47].

Peirce, Russell and Abductive Regression
139
Frege’sDoubleBind:Settheorycannotbesavedinanyofthewaysundercontemplationatthe
time, and Frege’s own set theory is beyond repair. Conclusion: Set theory is mathematically
impossible, and the epistemic certainty of arithmetic cannot be secured by logicism. Indeed
it cannot be secured at all.
Russell also saw the paradox as a quite general disaster. The year after his letter
to Frege, Russell concedes that “I have failed to perceive any concept fulﬁlling the
conditions requisite for the notion of class”.24 This throws as much of a monkey-
wrench into Russell’s project as it did to Frege’s. Before the blow fell, Russell’s own
method
will therefore be one of analysis, and our problem may be called philosophical - in the sense,
that is to say, that we seek to pass from the complex to the simple, from the demonstrable to
its indemonstrable premises. (p. 2; emphasis mine)25
It is important to note, therefore, that the method of analysis was itself a regressive
procedure, in which one reasoned backwards from the received statements of settled
mathematical practice to its unanalyzable primitive truths, in whose demonstrative
closure the rest of its truths would reside. From time to time, Russell would call the
regressive method the “method of analysis.”
Russell knew the jig was up for analytical logicism before he published his 1902
paper, which had given a favourable impression of it. It took him awhile to come
to his senses, and in Principles, he charts a markedly new course for logicism. He
grants that there is no concept of set, hence nothing for the logicist to analyse. But
Russell allows for mathematical, as opposed to philosophical deﬁnitions, in a sense
that “is widely different from that current among philosophers.” (p. 15) He goes on
to explain that
it is necessary to realize that deﬁnition, in mathematics, does not mean, as in philosophy,
an analysis of the idea to be deﬁned into constituent ideas. This notion, in any case, is only
applicable to concepts, whereas in mathematics it is possible to deﬁne terms which aren’t
concepts. (p. 27)
Moreover,
of the three kinds of deﬁnition admitted by Peano – the nominal deﬁnition, the deﬁnition by
postulates, and the deﬁnition by abstraction – I recognize only the nominal. (p. 112)26
Russell sometimes called his new approach the method of synthesis, the method
of making up new ideas from bits and pieces of old ones. Henceforth his would be
synthetic logicism.
24Russell [38].
25In “On the axioms of geometry” of 1899, Russell lists seven simple and indeﬁnable concepts:
addition, number, order, equality, less, greater and manifold. See Grifﬁn and Lewis [17].
26Russell took a somewhat rigourist approach even to mathematical stipulation. He dismisses deﬁ-
nition by abstraction, which “… suffers from a wholly fatal formal effect: it does not show that only
one object satisﬁes the deﬁnition.” (p. 114).

140
J. Woods
In 1901–02 Russell accepted that sets were needed for modern mathematics. But
he agreed with Frege that, thanks to the paradox, the very concept of set was philo-
sophically empty. So he stipulated sets into nominal existence by way of mathemat-
ical deﬁnition. In so doing, a further difﬁculty arose.27 Should the made-up axioms
of set-theory turn out not to be true, the theory’s valid proofs would become merely
conditional. They would establish that if the premisses are true, then the conclusion
is also true. Left unresolved, Russell’s brand of synthetic logicism would have condi-
tional standing only. This is the so-called if-then-ism problem. It is contested as to
whether Russell saw this as a one.28
Like the Grundgesetze, Principia Mathematica is a work of daunting complexity
and technical virtuosity. It is just as it stands, a work of great architectural sublimity.
Nothing is easy in Principia, and hardly anything is free. It is not until proposition *
110.643 on page 83 of the second volume that we are treated to the proof that 1 + 1
= 2. It would be lovely to linger awhile longer, but it is past time that we return to the
disclosures of 1907. Let’s close this section with the summary observation that now
that there is no concept of set, there is nothing available to Russell for philosophical
analysis. This puts Russell in a bind. In the Preface to Principles, Russell says that in
the absence of conceptual analysis, philosophy of mathematics is impossible.29 And
with that impossibility comes another. It is impossible to provide epistemic surety
for the theorems of mathematics.
Russell’s Bind: Since classes are essential for logicism and yet are beyond the reach of
conceptual analysis, logicism lies beyond the power of philosophy to deliver.
What is more,
Russell’s Double Bind: Even if classes were philosophically analyzable, its primitive truths
would be open to the trouble that plagued Frege’s indemonstrables.
Hoist on the same pétard, Frege and Russell parted ways. Frege gave up on logi-
cism as an irretrievably lost cause. Russell changed the subject but not the name. From
that point onwards his logicism would be the stipulated product of mathematical
deﬁnition. It would be the logicism effected by synthesis.
2.3
Russell’s Post-paradox Logicism
On March 9, 1907, Russell read to the Cambridge Mathematical Club an essay
entitled “The regressive method of discovering the premises of mathematics,” a
paper that wasn’t published until after his death sixty-three years later. We owe
its exposure to Douglas Lackey in [41] and more recently and, in a more directly
focused way, to Andrew Irvine.30 In the year that Russell read the regression paper
27See, for example, Putnam [31], Grifﬁn [16] and Krall [21].
28For reservations, see Grifﬁn [16].
29Principles, xviii.
30Irvine [20].

Peirce, Russell and Abductive Regression
141
he published a paper entitled “The study of mathematics” which spoke approvingly
of analytic logicism.31 Russell appears to have written this paper in 1902, the same
year of his letter to Frege announcing the contradiction that ﬂowed from Basic Law
V of the Grundgesetze.32 In fact, Russell had come upon the contradiction in the
spring of 1901.33 This was the year in which Russell also published “Recent work
on the principles of mathematics”.34 Russell’s next post-paradox publication was
The Principles of Mathematics of 1903. The interval from Spring 1901 to December
1902, when Russell completed Principles reﬂect a volte face in Russell’s philosophy
of mathematics, a radical departure from his own former philosophical self.
Here in brief summary form is the state that logicism was in in 1907 and counting.
Axiomatization was a recognized regressive enterprise. Frege’s own Grundgesetze
had been regressively structured. Pre-paradox Russell reserved pride of place for
axiomatizations effected by conceptual analysis, which would expose the axioms as
primitive truths whose certainty is intuitively assured. After the paradox, Russell gave
up on conceptual analysis for logicism, but he did not give up on logicism. He retained
regressive measures for axiomatizing mathematics, whose primitive principles would
now be advanced by mathematical stipulation. Since mathematical deﬁnitions aren’t
certainty-producing, the best we can hope for is to ﬁnd reason for believing one’s
axioms to be true. For this to work, grounds would have to be found for believing to
be true axioms which hardly appear so—notably the axioms of inﬁnity, choice and
reducibility. If successful, axioms needn’t be intuitive or carry the look of truth or
even plausibility to qualify for reasoned believability. To this end, Russell frames a
question along the following lines; “What are the unproved propositions p1, …, pn in
whose demonstrative closure the known or accepted truths of mathematics are wholly
included.” The follow-up question asks for the methods by which these propositions
are to be found.
In contexts of regressivist enactment, Russell draws an odd-seeming distinction
between empirical propositions and logical propositions. An empirical proposition
is an obvious truth of mathematics such as the proposition that 1 + 1 = 2. A logical
proposition is one that implies an empirical proposition of this kind. Generalizing,
in the ﬁrst instance Russell is looking for the least class of logical propositions in
whose demonstrative closure all obvious mathematical truths are contained. From
this, Russell conjectures that if C+ is got by addition of further logical propositions
to C and that all of mathematics, both the obvious and the nonobvious, can be
shown to lie in its demonstrative closure, that would be reason to believe that the
propositions of C+ are true. Whatever its details, the regressive method is a premiss-
search, not a search for newly revealed consequences. It is not, as we shall see, a
hypothesis-selection search.
31Russell [36, 29–44]. Reprinted in the ﬁrst edition of Russell (1910).
32Bertrand Russell, Letter to Frege, in van Heijenoort [39, 40]. Frege’s letter in reply follows at
pages 127–128.
33Russell appears to have been unaware of Zermelo’s derivation of it the year before. See Hallett
[19].
34Russell [35]. Reprinted with revisions and a new title in Russell (1918).

142
J. Woods
This brings us to what’s distinctive about Russell’s 1907 paper. It is not made so by
itsendorsementofregressivemethods.Itwasmadesobythewayinwhichitanswered
the follow-up question. The way to determine whether a proposition qualiﬁes as a pi is
by trial and error, i.e., by examining how much of received mathematics resides in its
demonstrative closure. In so thinking, Russell places himself in the descendant-class
of his godfather, J. S. Mill, whose A System of Logic (1843) sees logic as a science
on par with the sciences of nature, whose basic laws are arrived at inductively. In a
general sort of way, this shows Russell in a now more Riemannian frame of mind from
that of his earlier leanings towards conceptual analysis. More to the point, though
he took no notice of it, is that Russell has aligned himself to the inductive measures
advocatedbylogic’sveryfounder,wherebythepractitionerofascience–mathematics
and logic included—are seized of the binding authority of its ﬁrst principles.35 As
pointed out in Irvine [20], Russell has framed his case for the reasonable believability
of the axioms of Principia on the model of how the believable laws of the physical
sciences are arrived at. I ﬁnd Irvine’s case to be a convincing one, and the case he
attributes to Russell to have genuine merit. But the matter before us is not whether
Russell’s reasoning in 1907 was sound, but rather whether it was abductive.
3
Abduction and Regression
3.1
Curtain
The idea that regressivism is abductive is said to have been suggested by Scott Kleiner
in conversation with Irvine.36 Irvine reports the suggestion without further comment,
beyond saying that “the regressive method is similar to Peirce’s abduction” (idem.)
Perhaps that is so. The question is whether it was similar enough to matter for either
enterprise. My answer to that question is in the negative. There are too many of the
Peircian boxes that Russell’s project doesn’t tick. Let’s begin with
Russell’s Question: What would it take to make it the case that the epistemically
uncertain propositions stipulated in Principia are propositions we have reason to
believe to be true?37
35This view is developed in Aristotle’s Posterior Analytics and Metaphysics [1]. Details can be
found in Woods [47].
36Irvine [20] reports that suggestion in ft. 26, p. 322. Kleiner is a philosopher of science at the
University of Georgia.
37Of course, volume one of Principia has yet to appear. Shouldn’t we instead take Russell to be
thinking of the logic of the Principles? I think not. On May 13, 1903, a few days after its publication,
Russell had lost conﬁdence in Principles, writing that “it seems to me a foolish book, and I am
ashamed to think that I have spent the best part of six years upon it. Now that it is done, I can allow
myself to believe that it was not worth doing—an odd luxury!” See Grifﬁn [18]. Even allowing for
Russell’s habit of self-effacement, it is better to locate his logical thinking in 1907 in Russell [37]
in van Heijenoort [10], pages 152–182, which would appear a year later and would be absorbed
into Principia, whose ﬁrst appearance was two years after that.

Peirce, Russell and Abductive Regression
143
Of course, that is not a question answerable by a Peircian abduction. No question
that triggers a Peircian abduction is answered by its successful enactment. The best
that it could deliver is that, while there is no reason to believe the propositions of
Principia to be true, there is reason to suspect they are true. However, reasoned
suspicion of the truth is not what “The regressive method” is after. It undersells the
Russellian line.
Let’sturnnowtotheselectionstep.WhatshouldwetakeHtobe?Supposeweputit
that H is the hypothesis that mathematics is derivable from Principia. Slot this H into
the antecedent of the subjunctive conditional at line 10 of the Gabbay-Woods schema.
This would give “If adding to what we already know, the proposition that mathematics
is derivable from Principia” resulted in a true statement, then Russell’s question
would be answered.” Clearly, however, it does not answer Russell’s question. The
selection-step is misplayed. What is more, even had that step not been misplayed,
the inference-step would be misplayed by any sentence, other than “Hence there
is reason to suspect that mathematics is derivable from Principia”. But, again, that
would undershoot Russell’s target. Indeed, it would be the last thing from which
Russell would derive cause to submit to Peircian stress-test. Let’s be clear about
this. Russell does indeed want to submit Principia to a stress-test. But his decision
misnegotiates the Peircian action-step. Peircian action-steps are always occasioned
by suspicions of something’s truth in the absence of any reason to believe to be so.
That was never Russell’s position with respect to Principia. So, as I now propose,
all this casts serious doubt on the abductive regression thesis. It misnegotiates too
many steps in the abductive inference schema for serious belief.
References
1. Aristotle:TheCompleteWorksofAristotle:TheRevisedEnglishTranslation,vol.2.In:Barnes,
J. (ed.) Princeton University Press, Princeton (1984)
2. Blanchette P.A.: Axioms in Frege. In: Rossberg, M., Ebert, P. (eds.) Essays on Frege’s Basic
Laws of Arithmetic. Oxford University Press, Oxford
3. Chifﬁ, D., Pietarinen, A.-V.: Abductive inference with a pragmatic framework. Synthese.
1007/s11239-018-1824-6
4. Chifﬁ, D., Pietarinen, A.-V.: The extended Gabbay-Woods Schema and scientiﬁc practice. In:
Gabbay, D.M., Magnani, L., Park, W., Pietarinen, A.-V. (eds.) Natural Arguments, A Volume
in the Tributes Series. College Publications, London (2019)
5. Dedekind, R.: Essays on the Theory of Numbers, Dover, New York. Reference here to the
foreword of the ﬁrst edition. First published in 1872 (1963a)
6. Dedekind, R. The Nature and Meaning of Numbers. Reissued in two volumes by Dover. First
published in 1888 (1963b)
7. Ferreirós, J., Gray, J. (eds.): The Architecture of Modern Mathematics: Essays in History and
Philosophy. Oxford University Press, New York (2006)
8. Frege, G.: Die Grundlagen der Arithmetik. Wilhelm Koebner, Breslau (1884). Translated into
English as Foundations of Arithmetic, J. L. Austin, Blackwell, Oxford (1950)
9. Frege, G.: Grundgesteze der Arithmetik. Herman Pohle, Jena (1893/1903). In: Ebert, P.A.,
Rossberg, M., Wright, C. (eds.) Translated into English as Basic Laws of Arithmetic. Oxford
University Press, Oxford (2013)

144
J. Woods
10. Frege, G., Letter to Russell. In: van Heijenoort, J. (ed.) From Frege to Gödel: A Source Book
in Mathematical Logic, 1879–1931, pp. 127–128 (1967)
11. Gabbay, D.M., Woods, J.: The Reach of Abduction: Insight and Trial. North-Holland,
Amsterdam (2005)
12. Goldfarb, W.: Logtic in the twenties: the nature of the quantiﬁer. J. Symbol. Logic 44, 351–368
(1979)
13. Goldman, A.: A causal theory of knowing. J. Philos. 64, 357–372 (1967)
14. Grattan-Guinness, I.: The Search for Mathematical Roots, 1870–1940. Princeton University
Press, Princeton (2000)
15. Gray, J.J.: Anxiety and abstraction in nineteenth-century mathematics. Sci. Context 17, 23–47
(2004)
16. Grifﬁn, N.: New work on Russell’s early philosophy. Russell 2, 69–83 (1982)
17. Grifﬁn,N.,Lewis,A.C.(eds.)TheCollectedPapersofBertrandRussellVolumeIIPhilosophical
Papers, 1876–1899, pp. 390–415. George Allen & Unwin, London (1982)
18. Grifﬁn, N. (ed.) The selected letters of Bertrand Russell, vol. 1. In: The Private Years, 1884–
1914, Letter 120. Houghton Mifﬂin, Boston (1992)
19. Hallett, M.: Cantorian Set Theory and Limitations of Size. Clarendon Press, Oxford (1984)
20. Irvine, A.D.: Epistemic logicism and Russell’s regressive method. Philos. Stud. 55, 303–327
(1989)
21. Krall, A.: The aim of Russell’s logicism. Synthese 191, 1493–1510 (2014)
22. Magnani, L.: The Abductive Structure of Scientiﬁc Creativity: An Essay on the Ecology of
Cognition, Cham. Springer, Switzerland (2017)
23. Park, W.: Abduction in Context: The Conjectural Dynamics of Scientiﬁc Reasoning, Cham.
Springer, Switzerland (2017)
24. Peano, G.: The principles of arithmetic, presented by a new method. In: van Heijenoort, pp. 85–
97. First published in 1889 (1967)
25. Peirce, C.S.: Description of a notation for the logic of relatives, resulting from an ampliﬁcation
of the conceptions of Boole’s calculus of logic. Memoirs Am. Acad. 9, 317–378 (1870)
26. Peirce, C.S.: The logic of relatives. In: Peirce, C. S. (ed.) Studies in Logic, pp. 1870-203. Little,
Brown & Co., Boston (1883a)
27. Peirce, C.S.: Second intentional logic. In: Peirce, pp. 56–58 (1883b)
28. Peirce, C.S.: Reasoning and the Logic of Things: The Cambridge Conference Lectures of 1898.
In: Kettner, K. L. (ed.) With an Introduction by Kettner and Hilary Putnam. Harvard University
Press, Cambridge, MA (1992)
29. Peirce, C.S.: Collected Papers. In: Hartshorne, C., Weiss, P. (vol. I–VI) Burks, A.W. (vols. VII
and VIII) (eds.) Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA (1931–1958)
30. Poincaré, H.: Du rôle de l’intuition de la logique in mathematiques. Compte Rendue der
Deuxième Congrés International des Mathématiciens, Paris (1902)
31. Putnam, H.: The thesis that mathematics is logic. In: Shoenman, R. (ed.) Bertrand Russell:
Philosopher of the Century, pp. 273–303. Allen & Unwin, London (1967)
32. Putnam, H.: Peirce as a logician. Hist. Math. 9, 290–301 (1982)
33. Quine, W.V.: Peirce’s Logic. In: Quine [34]
34. Quine, W.V.: Selected Logic Papers, pp. 258–265. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA
(1995)
35. Russell, B.: Recent work on the principles of mathematics. Int. Month. 4, 83–101 (1901).
Reprinted with revisions and a new title in Russell (1918)
36. Russell, B.: The study of mathematics. New Q. I, 29–44 (1907). Reprinted in the ﬁrst edition
of Russell (1910) Bertrand Russell Philosophical Essays. Longmans, Green & Co., London
(1910)
37. Russell, B.: Mysticism and Logic. Longmans Green, London (1918)
38. Russell, B.: The Principles of Mathematics. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (1903);
second edition. Allen & Unwin, London (1937)
39. Russell, B.: Letter to Frege. In: van Heijenoort (ed.), pp. 124–125 (1967a)

Peirce, Russell and Abductive Regression
145
40. Russell, B.: Mathematic logic as based on the theory of types. In: van Heijenoort (ed.), pp. 152–
182 (1967b)
41. Russell, B.: The regressive method of discovering the premises of mathematics. In: Lackey,
D., Russell (eds.) Essays in Analysis. George Allen & Unwin, London (1973)
42. Tappenden, J.: Metatheory and mathematical practice in Frege. Philos. Topics 25, 213–264
(1997)
43. Whitehead, A.N., Russell, B.: Principia Mathematica, vol. 3. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge (1910–1913). Second edition, 1925 and 1927
44. Woods, J. Errors of Reasoning: Naturalizing the Logic of Inference, vol. 45. Studies in Logic.
College Publications, London (2013); reprinted with corrections 2014
45. Woods, J.: Reorienting the logic of abduction. In: Magnani, L., Bertolotti, T. (eds.) Springer
Handbook of Model-Based Science, pp. 137–150. Springer, Berlin (2017)
46. Woods, J.: Truth in Fiction: Rethinking its Logic, vol. 391. Synthese Library: Springer, Cham,
Switzerland (2018)
47. Woods, J.: What did Frege take Russell to have proved? Synthese. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11
229-019-02324-4 (2019)

Abduction, Mathematics, and Logic
in Creative Discovery

The Place of Logic in Creative Reason
Atocha Aliseda
Abstract In this text, I put forward the thesis that creativity and logic do not exclude
each other. I depart from the characterization of a creative product as that which is
novel and useful. I presuppose there is some kind of method for generating that new
product, and in this respect, I rely on Peirce’s formulation of abduction. A central
point to be discussed concerns whether Peirces’ abduction may be considered as a
logic of synthetic reasoning; to what extent its products are genuinely novel. In my
defense of above’s thesis, I shall restrict to new scientiﬁc hypotheses generated from
previous concepts. I consider that this modest analysis will nevertheless shed some
light on the scope of this thesis.
1
Introduction: Creative Reason
Creative Reason has a place in the process of invention when we conceive of an
idea for the ﬁrst time or discover a new scientiﬁc theory. It is, however, necessary to
establish a position with regard to the following question: What do we understand
by creativity? The lack of even minimal agreement on the meaning of creativity as a
concept is notorious. For the purpose of this work I shall adopt, although tentatively,
a characterization proposed in the ﬁeld of cognitive psychology (see Sternberg and
Lubart 1999: 3) which deﬁnes a creative product as one that is both novel (original,
Research for this article was supported by the project Logics of Discovery, Heuristics and Creativity
in the Sciences granted by the National Autonomous Univeristy of Mexico. A previous version of
this text was publisehd in Aliseda [3].
A. Aliseda (B)
Instituto de Investigaciones Filosóﬁcas, National Autonomous University of Mexico, México
CDMX 04510, Mexico
e-mail: atocha@ﬁlosoﬁcas.unam.mx
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2021
J. Shook et al. (eds.), Abduction in Cognition and Action, Studies in Applied
Philosophy, Epistemology and Rational Ethics 59,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-61773-8_7
149

150
A. Aliseda
unexpected) and useful (appropriate, adaptable). On the other hand, when I refer to
Creative Reason, I am simply assuming that there is a certain method involved.1
ThequestionswhichinterestmeinthistextregardingtheoriginofCreativeReason
and its justiﬁcation are related to inquiries into synthetic reasoning, which go back to
Immanuel Kant and were reformulated by Charles S. Peirce, as the following passage
testiﬁes:
According to Kant, the central question of philosophy is ‘How are synthetical judgments
a priori possible?’ But antecedently to this comes the question how synthetical judgments
in general, and still more generally, how synthetical reasoning is possible at all. When the
answer to the general problem has been obtained, the particular one will be comparatively
simple. This is the lock upon the door of philosophy. (CP [25]:5.348, cited in Hookway [17]:
18)
Peirce’s analysis of ampliative reasoning or, as he preferred to call it, synthetic
reasoning has two fundamental aims: on the one hand, to justify its possibility; on
the other, to develop a method for putting it into practice. Pierce found the answer to
the ﬁrst in his metaphysics; the second is a matter addressed by some contemporary
formal research in logic, above all that referring to abductive logic.2
The following question captures very well the place of Logic in Creative Reason:
Is there a logic of scientiﬁc discovery? While this question has its origin in Ancient
Greece and traverses much of the history of philosophy, it is worth stressing its place
in the context of contemporary philosophy of science and in its later adoption by
cognitive psychology. In the second part of this article, I shall go into this question
in depth, drawing on the work of Peirce, who conferred a logical formulation upon
abduction, and which I shall review in detail in relation to the question of whether
this is effectively a logic of synthetic reasoning and in what sense its products are
novel.
In this text I shall argue, in particular, for the thesis that logic and creativity are
not mutually exclusive. It is worth clarifying that I shall be analyzing this thesis in a
somewhat restrictive way. As regards creativity, I shall be concerned only with the
generation of new scientiﬁc hypotheses and, as far as Logic is concerned, I shall
limit myself to the formal interpretation that has been given to Peirce’s formulation.
I believe that this modest analysis will enable us to appreciate both the scope and the
limitations of this thesis.
1There are, of course, other reasons identiﬁed in Philosophy and related disciplines: Kant’s Pure
Reason, the Historical Reason of Ortega y Gasset and, of course, the Poetical Reason of María
Zambrano.
2See Hookway [17] for an analysis of the metaphysical aspect of ampliative reasoning in Peirce.
For an argument in favor of the utility of ampliative logics for modeling creative processes involved
in the genesis of new ideas and the generation of scientiﬁc theories, see Aliseda [4]; for a panorama
of recent developments in abductive logic, see Aliseda [2].

The Place of Logic in Creative Reason
151
2
Logics of Scientiﬁc Discovery
2.1
Contexts of Research in the Philosophy of Science
The question regarding the types of logic involved in scientiﬁc discovery is relevant
in the framework of the methodological distinction proposed by Hans Reichenbach
between the context of discovery and the context of justiﬁcation [30]. While the
former has to do with the origin and genesis of scientiﬁc theories, the latter entails the
epistemic and methodological questions proper to the philosophy of science, those
that support the truth and reliability of scientiﬁc theories. As regards the relation
between logic and creativity, Reichenbach makes his position very clear when he
states that “the act of discovery escapes logical analysis”. (Reichenbach [30]: 231).
This distinction of contexts is one of the pillars on which “the received view” has
been built up in the philosophy of science; this concerns itself with the context of
justiﬁcation and has to do exclusively with the so-called “ﬁnished research report”
of a theory. This certainly leaves a wide space for the context of discovery in the
research process.
Nonetheless, many authors have regarded this distinction as both insufﬁcient and
unsatisfactory and have put forward proposals of their own. Some identify an inter-
mediate stage between the conception and the justiﬁcation of a new theory. Claude
Savary, for example, characterizes this stage as one of “working with ideas” (Savary
[32]); Larry Laudan speaks of a “context of pursuit”, a sort of “nether region”
between the initial and ﬁnal contexts (Laudan [22]: 174); he also introduces another
dimension into the study of the context of discovery which consists in distinguishing
between a narrow point of view and another broader one. For Savary, the problems
of discovery are restricted to the initial conception of an idea, such as the famous
“Eureka moment”; while for Laudan, they are implicated in the whole process setting
off from the conception of a new idea until the positing of an idea subject to ﬁnal
justiﬁcation.
Another way of proceeding is to extend the frontiers of the context of justiﬁcation
in order to deal also with the matter of evaluation, in particular when the truth of
the theory is not the only thing that interests us. One consequence of this vision is
the proposal of Theo Kuipers, who re-named the context of justiﬁcation context of
evaluation [19]. Yet another proposal is that of Alan Musgrave, who prefers the term
context of appreciation (Musgrave [23]:20). In turn, the latter renames the context
of discovery context of invention, in order to avoid the apparent contradiction that
arises when we talk of the discovery of a hypothesis, since “discovery” is a word that
suggests a successful process, presupposing the truth of what is discovered.
On the other hand, when the emphasis is on scientiﬁc practice, the proposal of
Javier Echeverría [11] must not be passed over. He makes a clear distinction between
four contexts: “education”, “research”, “application” and “evaluation”. This point
of view is attractive because it does not oblige us to situate creativity or discovery
in a single context; both can ﬁnd a place in any of the contexts. Consequently, not
only can the original distinction between those of discovery and justiﬁcation be

152
A. Aliseda
further subdivided, but it also becomes clear that their frontiers are not so clearly
deﬁned. A question that emerges naturally is whether the context of discovery—or
any other context one wishes to consider—is susceptible to philosophical reﬂection
and whether it lends itself to logical analysis. The latter point is precisely what we
are concerned with here.
Questions regarding scientiﬁc discovery have come to the fore in contempo-
rary philosophy of science, although “most often with the intention of excluding
the matter from epistemological analysis” (Pérez Ransanz [28]:347), and Karl
Popper pronounced an—apparently categorical—disqualiﬁcation. The common idea
regarding the position of this author is that problems of discovery cannot be studied
within the frontiers of methodology, for he explicitly denies the possibility of a
logical reconstruction of the processes of discovery, and considers that its study is
a matter that pertains to psychology. This position is clearly stated in the following
often quoted passage:
… I shall distinguish sharply between the process of conceiving a new idea, and the methods
and results of examining it logically. As to the task of the logic of knowledge—in contradis-
tinction to the psychology of knowledge—I shall proceed on the assumption that it consists
solely in investigating the methods employed in those systematic tests to which every new
idea must be subjected if it is to be seriously entertained.
Some might object that it would be more to the purpose to regard it as the business of
epistemology to produce what has been called a ‘rational reconstruction’ of the steps that have
led the scientist to a discovery—to the ﬁnding of some new truth. […]. But this reconstruction
would not describe these processes as they actually happened: it can give only a logical
skeleton of the procedure of testing. Still, this is perhaps all that is meant by those who speak
of a ‘rational reconstruction’ of the ways in which we gain knowledge.
It so happens that my arguments in this book are quite independent of this problem. However,
my view of the matter, for what it is worth, is that there is no such thing as a logical method
of having new ideas, or a logical reconstruction of this process. (Popper [27]: 8–9)
A response to Popper’s position has been offered by one of his most prominent—
and at the same time critical—students, Imre Lakatos, who states, ﬁrstly “There is no
infallibilist logic of scientiﬁc discovery leading infallibly to results” and, secondly,
that “Popper, who has laid the basis of this logic of discovery, was not interested in
the meta-question of what is the nature of this investigation, so he did not realize that
it is neither psychology nor logic, but an independent ﬁeld, the logic of discovery,
heuristics. (Lakatos [20]: 167, my emphasis)
In Lakatos’ vision, heuristics is that method of scientiﬁc discovery half-way
between logic and psychology. However, as I have argued elsewhere [5], Popper’s
logic of scientiﬁc inquiry points in the direction of some fundamental mechanisms
that fall under the heading of the study of discovery (understood in a broad sense)
and also has points of coincidence with the dominant current of the so-called “friends
of discovery”, headed by Herbert Simon and which I shall consider in the following
section.3
3See Pérez Ransanz [28] for a more detailed analysis of Popper’s position on his “two notions of
discovery”.

The Place of Logic in Creative Reason
153
2.2
Heuristics in Cognitive Psychology
The subject of scientiﬁc discovery has found a privileged position beyond the philos-
ophy of science in cognitive science. I shall mention brieﬂy the positions of two of
its pioneers, Herbert Simon and Paul Thagard.
In his essay “Does Scientiﬁc Discovery Have a Logic?” Simon sets out to refute
Popper’s general argument, re-construed for his purposes as follows: “If ‘there is no
such thing as a logical method of having new ideas’, then there is no such thing as a
logical method of having small new ideas” (Simon [34]:327).
The ambitious project of a logic of scientiﬁc discovery, one that reveals in all its
complexity the process I am trying to capture, becomes, in Simon’s hands, a much
less ostentatious process. Before detailing his proposal, he tells us (in reference to the
examples he cites): “Their modesty as instances of discovery will be compensated
by their transparency in revealing underlying process.” (Ibid.)
This approach, as brilliant as it is humble, enables Simon both to establish the
types of problems that are to be analyzed and to specify the methods to be used. For
Simon and his followers, scientiﬁc discovery is a problem-solving activity.4 Although
there is no effective method by means of which to achieve scientiﬁc discovery as
a problem-solving activity, it can be characterized by way of strategies. The key
concept in all this is heuristics. Heuristic methods of discovery are characterized by
selective searches with fallible results. That is to say, although they do not guarantee
success in arriving at a solution, the search in the problem space is not blind, but
selective according to a predeﬁned strategy.5
Popper’s and Simon’s postulations have both convergences and differences. Both
subscribe to the vision of science as a problem-solving activity, though differ on just
what they consider to be the Logic of scientiﬁc discovery. While for Popper ideas are
generated by the method of Conjectures and Refutations, which can be interpreted
4If this slogan afﬁrms something that seems obvious nowadays when referring to scientiﬁc practice,
it is in fact an idea that the methodology of science imported from cognitive psychology [1]. When
Simon characterizes scientiﬁc discovery as a “problem-solving activity”, this translates into compu-
tationalprogramswithtoolsoftheirownformodelingscientiﬁcdiscovery.Suchprogramsexemplify
the possibility of automatic simulation of scientiﬁc discoveries, oriented towards modeling funda-
mental mechanisms that point towards conditions for creative inferences sufﬁcient for leading to the
generation of new knowledge. In the context of this conception, a distinction is provided between
two types of problems—well-structured versus illstructured ones—, and the aim of ﬁnding a logic
of discovery concentrates on well-structured problems. The latter type is one for which a clearly
deﬁned criterion of testing exists and for which there is, at least, a problem space in which the initial
state and the ﬁnal state can be represented, and where all the remaining intermediate states can be
reached with the appropriate transitions between them. An ill-structured problem lacks at least one
of the above conditions.
5The authors also distinguish between weak and strong methods of discovery. The former comprise
the type of problem solving used in novel ﬁelds; they are characterized by their generality, since
they do not demand deep knowledge of the particular ﬁeld. In contrast, the strong methods are used
for cases in which our knowledge of the ﬁeld is extensive, and are especially designed for a speciﬁc
structure. The weak methods include heuristic methods of generation and testing, and analysis of
ends and means, in order to build up explanations and solutions for given problems. For details of
the approach of Simon and his followers, see Langley et al. [21].

154
A. Aliseda
as a method of ‘blind search’, Simon and his team develop a theory for upholding
the position that ideas are generated by means of a method of ‘selective search’. The
latter approach enables the way in which new ideas can be generated to be captured
as such, and concerns heuristics.6
In the same spirit of the “friends of discovery”, Paul Thagard [37] proposes a
new ﬁeld of study, namely the computational philosophy of science, an approach
that brings together psychology and the history and philosophy of science, all with
a view to scientiﬁc discovery and with a particular emphasis on cognitive patterns
and key notions in the philosophy of science relevant to this matter: explanation,
conﬁrmation, falsiﬁcation, evaluation, induction, abduction and revision of theories.
The vision of scientiﬁc discovery as an instance of Simon’s problem-solving
activity as well as the conception of a computational philosophy of science conceive
the inquiry into the processes of scientiﬁc discovery as part of the methodology of
science. The interaction between the different disciplines that make up this study
promotes the importation of computational tools into the philosophy of science, with
the aim of modeling the dynamics of scientiﬁc knowledge, including its generation
and development.
3
Abduction: The Logic of Synthetic Reasoning
My interest here is to explore in greater depth the question of the logics of discovery
from the point of view of Logic itself; in this text I shall limit myself to tracing
the origins of such logics and analyzing some aspects of them. The ﬁrst philoso-
pher to propose a logical formulation for abductive reasoning was Charles Sanders
Peirce (1839–1914); his inﬂuence on those who represented the “received view” was,
however, minimal or non-existent. On the other hand, his importance was recognized
by certain philosophers who reacted against the prevailing current, precisely because
of their concern to investigate matters of relevance to the context of discovery (a
prominent case being that of Hanson [15]). Nevertheless, Peirce’s notion of abduction
is difﬁcult to analyze, since his conception of it evolved throughout his philosophical
trajectory, and several different versions appear as his thinking evolved.7 At the same
time, his conception is interlaced with epistemological and semiotic aspects of his
philosophy that are equally complex.
For the purpose of this paper, I shall focus on the logical formulation of abduction
that emerges from the third and last stage of his thinking, and shall analyze it in the
light of the thesis that concerns this text, namely that logic and creativity are not
mutually exclusive.
6For a deeper analysis comparing these approaches, see Aliseda [5].
7For a detailed study, which clearly distinguishes three stages in the evolution of the notion of
abduction in Peirce, see Fann [12]. Another key reference is Anderson [7], for an analysis of
abduction and creativity.

The Place of Logic in Creative Reason
155
For Peirce, abductive reasoning is fundamental in every human act of inquiry.
Abduction plays a role in perception: “The abductive suggestion comes to us
as a ﬂash” (CP [25]:181). It also plays a fundamental role in the generation of
hypotheses and new ideas in scientiﬁc activity: “Abduction is the process of forming
an explanatory hypothesis. It is the only logical operation which introduces any new
ideas”.
As proposed by Anderson [6], abduction seems to be both “an act of intuition
and one of inference”, which suggests a double aspect: both intuitive and rational.
The presence of these two aspects, apparently antagonistic, has invariably caused
confusion in scholars of Peirce. In general, only one of these is considered for the
analysis of abduction ([18, 33, 39]). Some other critics have interpreted this duality
as Peirce’s dilemma and concluded that the philosopher lacked a coherent vision of
the nature of abduction [13]. There also exists another approach—in addition to the
above mentioned one of Anderson—that seeks to give a sense to these two aspects,
the intuitive and the rational [8, 24], and this is precisely the line I follow in this text
in support of my own thesis: logic and creativity are not mutually exclusive. The
abductive formulation is as follows (CP 25:189):
The surprising fact, C, is observed.
But if A were true, C would be a matter of course.
Hence, there is reason to suspect that A is true.
This formulation has been the starting point for many studies in both philosophy
and computing. In general its formal interpretation is as follows:
C 
A 
 C 
A 
Implicit is the extra-logical speciﬁcation that the status of the conclusion is tenta-
tive; otherwise one would incur in the fallacy of afﬁrming the consequent. Likewise
it is assumed that the second premise is part of the background theory in question.
Aside from its explanatory capacity, Peirce considers a further two criteria for
a successful hypothesis, namely, testability and economy. An abductive hypothesis
can be regarded as explanatory if it accounts for the facts in accordance with the
formulation; its status remains, however, tentative until it is put to the test, thus
achieving empirical corroboration and yielding place to the third criterion: that of
economy. The latter answers to the practical problem of managing an endless series
of hypotheses that satisfy the former criteria.8
I shall now analyze some critiques of the Peircean formulation, above all as regards
its creative role in respect of the generation of hypotheses. As regards the formal
8Some approaches attempt to capture Peirce’s economy criterion as a subsequent process for
choosing “the best explanation”, since there may be many formulae that ﬁt this logical formulation
and that are all subject to empirical testing, without being ideal hypotheses. For the interpretation of
abduction as inference to the best explanation, see Harman [16] and Douven [10]. For a discussion
on whether Peirce’s notion of abduction is one of inference to the best explanation, see Campos [9].

156
A. Aliseda
interpretation of the abductive formulation, we have the following in Frankfurt’s
words:
Clearly, if the new idea, or hypothesis, must appear in one of the premises of the abduction,
it cannot be the case that it originates as the conclusion of such an inference; it must have
been invented before the conclusion was drawn [13]: 594.
This statement points to the temporal sequence of the invention of elements that
make up the formulation, which in turn directs us to the very meaning of novelty. Let
us now consider the former. Anderson argues in favor of the simultaneous generation
of the two occurrences where “A” appears: “In this sense, the ‘A’ in A-C(sic) is logi-
cally prior to the ‘A’ in the conclusion. However, it is also clear that the two ‘A’s’ are
one and the same. Therefore, in temporal terms, they may be simultaneously arrived
at; it does not follow that A ‘must have been invented before the conclusion was
drawn’” [7]:35; and concludes, “… on Peirce’s view it is possible for the hypoth-
esis and its abductive application to occur together. Therefore, abductions may be
insightful and original and still have logical form.” [6]:157. The new, the creative,
does not exclude logic; it is part of it.
I shall now examine the idea of novelty, as concerns this formulation. What counts
as something completely new? According to Frankfurt, the conclusion does not offer
anything genuinely new, since it is already present in the premises. But if the creative
act consists in identifying something already known A →C (a natural law, for
example) and on this basis to suggest A (as the cause of C, for example), then we are,
ontheonehand,upholdingAnderson’sargumentofsimultaneoustemporalityand,on
the other, afﬁrming that the creativity lies precisely in establishing new connections
between the elements that present themselves to us, in this case as a surprising fact
represented by C and by an associated law (A →C) so as, in consequence, to propose
A.
In order to appreciate the functioning of the abductive formulation, let us brieﬂy
look at some elements of the reconstruction of a scientiﬁc discovery of the eighteenth
century attributed to Antoine Lavoisier.9 This scientist is known for his contributions
that were of key importance for the conformation of modern chemistry; here I shall
address his research into the nature of combustion. As a product of his observations
that certain metals gain in weight as a consequence of combustion, he conjectured
that this process entails in some way combination with air, thus refuting the theory
of phlogiston. His observations that certain metals effervesced (produced bubbles)
during the process of combustion led him to conjecture that such metals “contained
air”. The latter hypothesis can be represented in the abductive schema as follows:
C  
 
Effervesces (m) 
A 
 C   
Contains (x, air) 
 Effervesces (x) 
A  
 
Contains (m, air) 
9A detailed reconstruction of Lavoisier’s discovery as a case of an “abductive rule”, can be found
in Thagard [38].

The Place of Logic in Creative Reason
157
While the observations of the increase in weight of metals as a consequence
of combustion can be generalized to all metals through an (enumerative) inductive
inference, the conjecture that effervescent metals contain air is initially the product
of an abductive inference. This schema represents the connection made by Lavoisier
between an observation (a certain metal effervesces) and the empirical regularity
alluded to (the metals that contain air effervesce), in order to establish precisely a
hypothesis (the metal observed contains air), that in turn is generalized in order to
conclude that the metals in combustion contain air.
Having analyzed the idea of novelty illustrated in this schema, I shall go on to
analyze the scope of the (formalization of the) original formulation of Peirce. In
the ﬁrst place, it could well be argued that it fails to capture in itself either the
fact of C being novel, or any of the other criteria proposed by Peirce. Furthermore,
note that the interpretation of the second premise has no reason to be the classical
material implication; it could be a logical implication of another kind, or even a
(computational) process whose input would be A and its output C.
Indeed, today there as many logical as there are computational systems that imple-
ment the abductive formulation in somewhat sophisticated ways. For example, in
adaptive logics, when an abductive conclusion is generated, it is added as a line
of the proof with a tentative status. If in later lines new information is added that
refutes this hypothesis, a strategy enters into operation that marks the line in which it
appears (and perhaps other lines that depend on that) and blocks it until it chances to
be “resuscitated” as a product of later inferences. Other abductive approaches exist
whose aim is to construct algorithms in order to generate abductive hypotheses.10
As regards the question whether these formal systems produce genuinely new
elements, we must acknowledge that the abductive formulation, even in its most
sophisticatedforms,revealsanintrinsiccharacteristicofCreativeReasoninitsformal
version: new ideas are always a product of combinations of already existing ideas.
This vision is manifested clearly as a “syntactic restriction of language”, in the sense
that in abductions, new elements can only be generated in the framework of the
language in question.11 At ﬁrst sight this reﬂects a limitation; at least it underlines
the fact that in formal models of creativity there is no place for the generation of
new concepts, a phenomenon usually associated with Revolutionary Science. In so
far as they are creative hypotheses, abductions modeled in formal frameworks refer
to facts or relations between them; but when a hypothesis is based on a new theory
that involves the creation of a new concept, such models have neither the language
nor the mechanisms to generate totally new products. Even so, the generation of
new facts and of relations between empirical facts that explain a phenomenon are
authentic creative products, inasmuch as they arise from new connections and combi-
nations between existing ideas. No few scientiﬁc discoveries have been the product
10For an introduction and panorama of the logic of abduction in which three different logical
approaches are reviewed (as logical inference, as computational process and as epistemic change),
see Aliseda [2]. For a connectionist model of abduction, implemented in Bayesian networks, see
Peng and Reggia [26].
11In adaptive logics, the type of abduction that has received most attention is indeed the simplest
one: abduction of a fact [14].

158
A. Aliseda
of new connections. Discoveries of this sort represent the type of advance in science
described by Kuhn as Normal Science.
On the other hand, with respect to the intuitive aspect of creativity, for Peirce
scholars it is both well-known and controversial that in his view abduction is rooted
in an animal instinct, which in turn involves the competence to conjecture hypotheses
as a distinctive characteristic of the human capacity for truth approximation:
In regard to instinctive considerations, I have already pointed out that it is a primary hypoth-
esis underlying all abduction that the human mind is akin to the truth in the sense that in
a ﬁnite number of guesses it will light upon the correct hypothesis. (CP [25]:7.220, my
emphasis).
Thus the cognitive faculty that confers abduction on us is manifested as a rational
instinct, as characterized by Ayim [8], or more precisely as the guessing instinct,
the term used by Peirce himself. This hypothesis is similar to Chomsky’s regarding
the acquisition of language, according to which human ability for spoken language
can be imputed to an innate competence. Nonetheless, Peirce’s hypothesis has been
sharply criticized, above all when it is used as a justiﬁcation of the possibility of
synthetic reasoning.12
Creativity combines as many intuitive as logical aspects. According to Peirce, the
intuitive part is necessary for setting in train that innate capacity for guessing; but
intuition is not the only aspect that counts for explaining success in the generation
of abductive hypotheses. It is also necessary, although not by itself sufﬁcient, that
abductive hypotheses conform to a certain logical structure such as that provided by
Peirce’s formulation.
To conclude, I have argued in favor of the thesis that logic and creativity are not
mutually exclusive, and have shown, through the abductive formulation of Peirce,
that Logic has a privileged place in Creative Reason. I close with a citation from
Simon, which captures very well the conception of creativity that I have chosen to
defend in this text:
New representations, like new problems, do not spring from the brow of Zeus, but emerge by
gradual—and very slow—stages […]. Most scientiﬁc activity goes on within the framework
of established paradigms. Even in revolutionary science, which creates those paradigms, the
problems and representations are rooted in the past; they are not created out of whole cloth.
([35]:301-302)
References
1. Aliseda, A., Gillies, D.: Logical, historical and computational approaches. In: Kuipers, T. (ed.)
General Philosophy of Science: Focal Issues (Handbook of the Philosophy of Science), vol. 1,
pp. 431–513. Elsevier, Amsterdam (2007)
12There are those who question it (Rescher [31]) and those who uphold it [6], but all agree in that
the guessing instinct hypothesis presents serious problems.

The Place of Logic in Creative Reason
159
2. Aliseda, A.: The logic of abduction: an introduction. In: Magnani, L., Bertolotti, T. (eds.)
Handbook of Model-Based Science (Section The Logic of Hypothetical Reasoning, Abduction
and Models). Springer, Heidelberg (2017a)
3. Aliseda, A.: El Lugar de la Lógica en la Razón Creativa. In: Pérez Ransanz, A.R., Ponce
Miotti, A.L. (eds.) Creatividad e innovación en ciencia y tecnología (Colección del Seminario
de Investigación sobre Sociedad del Conocimiento y Diversidad Cultural, 10), pp. 171–184.
UNAM, México (2017b)
4. Aliseda, A.: Lógica como Herramienta de la Razón. Razonamiento Ampliativo en la
Creatividad, la Cognición y la Inferencia. Cuadernos de lógica, epistemología y lenguaje,
vol. 6. College Publications, Milton Keynes, U.K. (2014)
5. Aliseda, A.: Abductive Reasoning: Logical Investigations into Discovery and Explanation.
Synthese Library, vol. 330. Springer, Dordrecht. (2006)
6. Anderson, D.: The evolution of Peirce’s concept of abduction. Trans. Charles S. Peirce Soc.
22(2), 145–164 (1986)
7. Anderson, D.: Creativity and the Philosophy of C.S. Peirce. Springer, Dordrecht (originally
published by Martinus Nijhoff Publishers) (1987)
8. Ayim, M.: Retroduction: The rational instinct. Trans. Charles S. Peirce Soc. 10(1), 34–43
(1974)
9. Campos, D.: On the distinction between Peirce’s abduction and Lipton’s inference to the best
explanation. Synthese 180, 419–442 (2011)
10. Douven, I. (2011). Abduction. In The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Available via
http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2011/entries/abduction/. Accessed 5 Sept 2018
11. Echeverría, J.: Filosofía de la Ciencia. Akal, Madrid (1995)
12. Fann, K.T.: Peirce’s Theory of Abduction. Martinus Nijhoff, The Hague (1970)
13. Frankfurt, H.: Peirce’s notion of abduction. J. Philos. 55(14), 593–597 (1958)
14. Gauderis, T.: Modelling hypothetical reasoning by formal logics. In: Magnani, L., Bertolotti,
T. (eds.) Handbook of Model-Based Science, (Section “The Logic of Hypothetical Reasoning,
Abduction and Models). Springer, Heidelberg (2017)
15. Hanson, N.R.: Observation and Explanation: A Guide to Philosophy of Science. Allen and
Unwin, London (1971)
16. Harman, G.H.: The inference to the best explanation. Philos. Rev. 4(1), 88–95 (1965)
17. Hookway, C.: Peirce. Routledge, London (1992)
18. Kapitan, T.: In What Way is Abductive Inference Creative? Transactions of the Charles S.
Peirce Society. 26(4), 499–512 (1990)
19. Kuipers, T.: From Instrumentalism to Constructive Realism: On Some Relations Between
Conﬁrmation, Empirical Progress, and Truth Approximation. Synthese Library 287. Kluwer
Academic Publishers, Dordrecht (2000)
20. Lakatos, I.: Proofs and Refutations. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (1976)
21. Langley, P., Simon, H., Bradshaw, G., Zytkow, J.: Scientiﬁc Discovery. Computational
Explorations of the Creative Processes. MIT Press/Bradford Books, Cambridge (1987)
22. Laudan, L.: Why was the logic of discovery abandoned? In: Nickles, T. (ed.) Scientiﬁc
Discovery, Logic and Rationality. Boston Studies in the Philosophy and History of Science,
vol. 56, pp. 173–183. Kluwer Academic Publishers Reidel, Dordrecht (1980)
23. Musgrave, A.: Deductive heuristics. In: Gavroglu, K. et al. (eds.) Imre Lakatos and Theories
of Scientiﬁc Change, pp. 15–32. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht (1989)
24. Paavola, S.: Peircean abduction: instinct or inference?. Semiotica 153–154, 363–374 (2005).
Mouton de Gruyter, Berlin
25. Peirce, C.S.: Collected Papers (CP), vols. 1–8, Hartshorne, C., Weiss, P., Burks, A.W. (eds.).
Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA (1931–1958) (References to this work are written
as (CP passage), following the international convention and observing Springer’s format. The
work compiles and orders Charles Peirce’s writings in eight volumes.)
26. Peng, Y., Reggia, J.A.: Abductive Inference Models for Diagnostic Problem-Solving. Springer,
New York (1990)

160
A. Aliseda
27. Popper, K.R.: The Logic of Scientiﬁc Discovery. Hutchinson, London/New York (ﬁrst
published in German 1935) (1959)
28. Pérez Ransanz, A.R.: Qué queda de la distinción entre contexto de descubrimiento y contexto
de justiﬁcación? Theoria, Int. J. Theor. History Found. Sci. 22(60), 347–350 (2007)
29. Reichenbach, H.: Experience and Prediction. University of Chicago Press, Chicago (1938)
30. Reichenbach, H.: The Rise of Scientiﬁc Philosophy. University of California Press, Berkeley
(1951)
31. Rescher, N.: Peirce’s Philosophy of Science. Critical Studies in His Theory of Induction and
Scientiﬁc Method. University of Notre Dame Press, Notre Dame/London (1978)
32. Savary, C.: Discovery and its logic: Popper and the ‘Friends of discovery’. Philos. Soc. Sci.
25(3), 318–344 (1995)
33. Sharp, R.: Induction, abduction, and the evolution of science. Trans. Charles S. Peirce Soc.
6(1), 17–33 (1970)
34. Simon, H.A.: Does scientiﬁc discovery have a logic? 326–337 (1977) (originally published in
Philosophy of Science 40, 471–480 (1973))
35. Simon, H.A.: Models of Discovery and Other Topics in the Methods of Science. Boston Studies
in the Philosophy and History of Science vol. 54. Reidel, Dordrecht/Boston (1977)
36. Sternberg, R.J., Lubart, T.I.: The Concept of Creativity: Prospects and Paradigms. In: Sternberg,
R.J. (ed.) Handbook of Creativity. Cambridge University Press (3rd reprint) (2003)
37. Thagard, P.R.: Computational Philosophy of Science. MIT Press, Cambridge (Bradford Books)
(1988)
38. Thagard, P.R.: Conceptual Revolutions. Princeton University Press, Princeton (1992)
39. Thagard, P.R.: The unity of Peirce’s theory of hypothesis. Trans. Charles S. Peirce Soc. 13(2),
112–123 (1977)

On Abducing the Axioms of Mathematics
Woosuk Park
Abstract How do we discover and justify axioms of mathematics? In view of the
long history of the axiomatic method, it is rather embarrassing that we are still
lacking a standard answer to this simple question. Since the axiom of choice is
arguably one of the most frequently discussed famous axioms throughout the history
of mathematics, Thomas Forster’s recent identiﬁcation of the axiom as an inference
to the best explanation (IBE) provides us with a nice point of departure. I will argue
that, by separating sharply between abduction and IBE, we can give a convincing
account of both the discovery and the justiﬁcation of the axioms of mathematics.
1
Introduction: Forster on the Axiom of Choice and IBE
How do we discover and justify axioms of mathematics? In view of the long history
of axiomatic method, it is rather embarrassing that we are still lacking a standard
answer to this simple question.
Thomas Forster’s recent paper “The Axiom of Choice and Inference to the Best
Explanation” provides us with a nice point of departure:
An argument often given for adopting the Axiom of Choice as an axiom is that it has a lot
of obviously true consequences. This looks like a legitimate application of the practice of
Inference to the Best Explanation. (Forster [6], 191)
Forster presents the argument as follows:
There are various obviously true assertions, such as that the union of countably many count-
able sets is countable, or that a perfect binary tree has an inﬁnite path, or that a ﬁnitely
branching inﬁnite tree must have an inﬁnite branch, which — it transpires — cannot be
proved without exploiting the axiom of choice. Given that they are obviously true, any
sensible system of axioms for set theory will have to prove them, so we’d better include the
axiom of choice in our set of axioms. (Forster [6], 191)
W. Park (B)
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Daejeon, South Korea
e-mail: woosukpark@kaist.ac.kr
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2021
J. Shook et al. (eds.), Abduction in Cognition and Action, Studies in Applied
Philosophy, Epistemology and Rational Ethics 59,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-61773-8_8
161

162
W. Park
And, he identiﬁes the argument as a kind of abduction or inference to the best
explanation (IBE):
Although this argument sounds a bit like a fallacy of afﬁrming the consequent, it’s actually
nothing of the kind. Arguments like this are so common and so natural and so legitimate that
it is hardly surprising that this method has been identiﬁed by philosophers as a sensible way
of proceeding and that there is a nomenclature for it and a literature to boot. It is probable
that this is (at least part of) what Peirce had in mind when he coined the word abduction;
nowadays it is captured by the expression inference to the best explanation “IBE”; see Lipton
[27] for an excellent treatment. (Forster [6],192)
The axiom of choice is arguably one of the most frequently discussed famous
axioms throughout the history of mathematics. The heated controversies around the
discovery and justiﬁcation of this axiom indeed supplies rich sources of insights
for philosophers and historians of mathematics. Furthermore, by treating the crucial
terms “abduction” and “inference to the best explanation (IBE)” as synonymous,
Forster presents me a perfect target I intend to aim at in this paper. I will argue that,
by separating sharply between abduction and IBE, we can give a convincing account
of both the discovery and the justiﬁcation of the axioms of mathematics.
Let me brieﬂy outline what I intend to do in this paper. In Sect. 2, I shall discuss
Russell’s regressive method in mathematics, which has been extensively examined
recently as a challenge to the received reading of Russell as one of the epistemic
logicists. Whether it is just a historical accident or not, it is interesting to note that
mathematicians and philosophers around David Hilbert were also extremely inter-
ested in the regressive method in mathematics. I will check wherein lie the similarities
and the differences between their views and that of Russell’s in Sect. 3. In Sect. 4, I
will turn to problem of the discovery and the justiﬁcation of the axiom of choice as
a concrete example for comparing Russell’s and the Zermelo’s regressive method.
In Sect. 5, I will discuss Gabbay and Woods’ brilliant idea of distinguishing regres-
sive abduction as abductive premise search and mathematical proof as enthymeme
resolution. By emphasizing the distinction between abduction and IBE, however, I
will speculate on the possibility of assimilating them by introducing the notion of
abductive enthymeme in Sect. 6.
2
Russell’s Regressive Method
According to the typical account, the emergence of foundations of mathematics
was motivated by the crisis of mathematics due to Russell’s paradox. This common
epistemological concern can be easily understood in the case of Frege’s logicism.
For, as Irvine writes,
Frege’s original idea had been that if the principles of logic are granted self-evidence, and
that if the laws of arithmetic can be shown to be derivable from them, arithmetic will have
become epistemologically justiﬁed. (Irvine [20], 305)

On Abducing the Axioms of Mathematics
163
One might think that Russell’s logicism can be explained in basically the same
fashion. Indeed, such a view baptized by Irvine as “epistemic logicism” has been the
standard interpretation of Russell’s logicism:
According to this view, since we are epistemically justiﬁed in accepting the self-evident
truths of logic, the successful identiﬁcation of mathematics with logic would give us the
same justiﬁcation for accepting the truths of mathematics. (Ibid., p. 307)1
Irvine points out, however, epistemic logicism is not only inconsistent with “Rus-
sell’s explicitly stated views on the subject” but also “susceptible to a number of
well-known, related objections”. (Ibid.)
The difference between Frege’s epistemic logicism and Russell’s own logicism
may be hinted at by Russell’s autobiographical remarks related to Russell’s paradox
(Russell [55], p. 58; Irvine [20], 314; Patton [43], p. 109). Irvine ﬁnds Russell’s view
“representative and telling”, for it indicates that the discovery of Russell’s paradox
forced him “to develop the idea that much of logic would have to be justiﬁed by
some method other than self-evidence”. (Irvine [20], 314; Patton [43], p. 109)
What are the alleged well-known objections to epistemic logicism? Irvine aptly
summarizes the basic idea of these objections as follows:
It is unlikely that mathematics should gain its sole epistemic justiﬁcation via logic since
parts of mathematics are themselves more certain than (and are often known independently
of) the requisite body of logical belief. (Ibid.)
Irvine counts objections based on this idea as “common sense objections”, and
presents the following as an example:
For example, consider an elementary arithmetical proposition such as “2 + 2 = 4”. What
is it that provides the requisite justiﬁcation for our acceptance of such a proposition? If it
is suggested that our knowledge that such a proposition obtains results from a formal proof
from ﬁrst principles, immediate objections arise. Not everyone who knows such elementary
propositions to be true, if pressed, could come up with a satisfactory sequence of sentences
which would constitute the required proof. In fact, most people who know many elementary
arithmetical truths could not even truthfully claim ever to have seen such a proof, let alone
to being able to reproduce one as a warrant for their belief. [Ibid., 308]
According to Irvine, this kind of objections to logicism was actually raised by
Poincaré [49, pp. 3f.] and Wittgenstein [61, §65eff.]. He also draws our attention to
Steiner’s detailed discussion of similar points (Steiner [59], p. 19; Irvine [20], 309).
It is interesting to note that Russell is well aware of these objections. Further,
Irvine’s claim that “Russell himself accepted many of them as sound” is fully
supported by Russell’s own words:
There is an apparent absurdity in proceeding, as one does in the logical theory of arithmetic,
through many rather recondite propositions of symbolic logic, to the “proof” of such truisms
as 2 + 2 = 4: for it is plain that the conclusion is more certain than the premises, and the
supposed proof therefore seems futile. But of course what we are really proving is not the
1Irvine cites Steiner [59], Parsons [42], and Lakatos [25] as examples of such an interpretation.
Also, he points out that this interpretation is indeed correct for other logicists such as Frege [7,
p. 2f] and Hempel [13].

164
W. Park
truth of 2 + 2 = 4, but the fact that from our premises this truth can be deduced. (Russell
[54; Irvine [20], 309)
As a consequence, many scholars have discussed recently “Russell’s method of
analysis and his regressive method for justifying the axioms of logic” as distinctively
departing from Frege’s logicism.2 (Patton [43], p. 108). And, in all this discussion,
Russell’s talk “The Regressive Method of Discovering the Principles of Mathemat-
ics” to the Cambridge Mathematical Club on March 9, 1907 turns out to be the central
text (Russell [54]).
Russell’s aim in this talk is clearly announced by himself:
My object in this paper is to explain in what sense a comparatively obscure and difﬁcult
proposition may be said to be a premise for a comparatively obvious proposition, to consider
how premises in this sense may be discovered, and to emphasise the close analogy between
the methods of pure mathematics and the methods of the sciences of observation. (Russell
[54], 272; Irvine [20], 309, 323; Patton [43], p. 113)
Russell’s distinction between two different types of premise, i.e., empirical
premise and logical premise is introduced just for the ﬁrst task, i.e., to explain in
what sense a comparatively obscure and difﬁcult proposition may be said to be a
premise for a comparatively obvious proposition. Further, there is no doubt that
Russell, only by fully employing this distinction, was not only able to present his
original ideas related to the second task, i.e., how premises in this sense may be
discovered, but also to pursue the third task, i.e., to emphasize the close analogy
between the methods of pure mathematics and the methods of empirical sciences.
Let us see how Russell distinguishes between empirical and logical premises. He
writes:
Thus we see that the word ‘premise’ has two quite different senses: there is what we may call
the ‘empirical premise’, which is the proposition or propositions from which we actually
are led to believe the proposition in question; and there is what we will call the ‘logical
premise’, which is some logically simpler proposition or propositions from which, by a
valid deduction, the proposition in question can be obtained. Thus the empirical premises
for 2 + 2 = 4 will be ‘2 sheep + 2 sheep = 4 sheep, and other like facts; whereas the logical
premises will be certain principles of symbolic logic. (Russell [54], pp. 272–273)
The main purpose of Irvine’s strenuous effort to clarify carefully what Russell
intends by “empirical premise” and “logical premise” seems to be this. He wants
to claim that “[m]ost often in mathematics the empirical and logical premises coin-
cide”. He believes, “[i]t is in exactly these cases that a mathematical proof is of direct
epistemological value”. [Ibid.] In other words, Irvine is here trying make sense of
Russell’s question as to “in what sense a comparatively obscure and difﬁcult propo-
sition may be said to be a premise for a comparatively obvious proposition?” by
identifying “the mid-range concepts (concepts which are neither extremely funda-
mental nor extremely complex) that are commonly comprehended most readily”.
[Ibid.]
2Patton cites Irvine [21], Godwyn and Irvine [10], Hager [12], and Gandon [9] as examples.

On Abducing the Axioms of Mathematics
165
Patton seems to be particularly helpful in understanding what is at stake here. For,
as she claims, Russell’s position is “that in the case of at least some mathematical
axioms, our commitment to them as axioms need not require us to believe that they
are true” (Patton [43], p. 108). But it may not be certain that Russell indeed took this
position. Patton tries to appease some such worries by the following elaboration:
This may seem un-logicist: should not the axioms be derivable from logical truths? But there
is another way to think of the logicist method. It is possible to be a logicist, to consider that
arithmetic is derivable from the Peano axioms, and nonetheless to argue that some math-
ematical axioms need not be universal, univocal a priori truths, but can have a regressive
justiﬁcation derived from the method of analysis. To a Russellian logicist, the results of math-
ematics can constitute evidence of a deeper set of logical relationships, and the clariﬁcation
of these logical relationships can extend our knowledge, in mathematics and in logic. (Patton
[43], pp. 108–109; Emphasis is mine.)
What exactly is the relation between the regressive method and the method of
analysis? Patton, in this regard, seems to have in mind on Michael Beaney’s careful
discussion of the different modes of “analysis”, as she quotes him as follows:
we may distinguish three core modes of analysis… the regressive mode, concerned to identify
the “starting-points” (principles, premisses, causes, etc.) by means of which something can
be “explained” or “generated”, the resolutive mode, concerned to identify the elements of
something and the way they interrelate, and the interpretive mode, concerned to “translate”
something into a particular framework (154). (Beaney [1], 154; Patton [43], p. 120)
Then, she claims that “Russell was committed to something one could call imma-
nent logicism” by putting Irvine’s and Beaney’s results in broader context. What she
means by “immanent logicism” is “a commitment to the view that analysis of logical
structures within mathematics can lead to an expansion of knowledge”. (Patton [43],
p. 110)
What is important in Beaney’s discussion of the different modes of analysis for
Patton is that “[f]or Russell, distinguishing axioms from theorems is not just a matter
of tracing back lines of dependence via the regressive method”. (Patton [43], p. 121).
Patton rightly counts the resolutive mode as “what is usually identiﬁed with logical
analysis”. We are rather familiar with this resolutive sense of “analysis”, which
seems to be working in our understanding of analysis in analytic philosophy. The
point Patton wants to highlight is that, as Beaney observes, “both the regressive and
resolutive modes presuppose the third:
Any analysis presupposes a particular framework of interpretation, and work is done in
interpreting what we are seeking to analyse – the analysandum – as part of the process of
disclosing what is more fundamental. (Beaney [1], 155–156; Patton [43], ibid.)
Patton concurs with Beaney, for “only under a certain interpretation is one proposi-
tion more fundamental than another”. Indeed, Patton emphatically claims that “Rus-
sell’s regressive method for discovering the axioms of mathematics should be read
in the larger context of the method of analysis” and of what she called “immanent
logicism”. As she claims, Russellian method of analysis is not just “the regressive
discovery of the axioms on which certain inferences or results depend” but includes
the analysis of “the logical structures of dependence of a theory, or of the fundamental
logical conditions for mathematical results” (Ibid.).

166
W. Park
3
Regressive Method in the Hilbertian Tradition
Patton’s strategy to ﬁnd the sources for Russell’s regressive method by starting from
his interlocutors, including Frege, Bradley, Keynes, and Poincaré turns out to be
very successful. For, as she indicates, all these inﬂuential scholars not only discuss
Jevons’ Principles of Science [23] seriously, but also adopt many ideas from it. So, her
historical conjecture that “the application of the “regressive method” to the axioms
of mathematics and of empirical science was broadly established by the end of the
nineteenth century” may indeed be true (Patton [43], pp. 110–113; See also Laudan
[26]). By simply expanding the list, we may ﬁnd further conﬁrmations. For example,
Peirce could have been mentioned by Patton (See Peirce [47, 48; See also articles in
Moore [33]). It is more important, however, to note the striking fact that she seems
to ignore Hilbert and his associates in her discussion of the history of the regressive
method.
The overwhelming importance of Hilbert in the history of the axiomatic method
cannot be too much emphasized. For, it is Hilbert who radically changed our concep-
tion of the axiomatic method itself. Further, we do have enough historical evidence
that Hilbert and his associates at Göttingen were extremely interested in the regressive
method in mathematics.
As Peckhaus points out, Hilbert was keenly aware of the necessity to distinguish
sharply between “the presentation of systems of statements in axiomatic form” and
“the axiomatic method”, as is clear from his deﬁnition of the axiomatic method:
I understand under the axiomatic exploration of a mathematical truth [or theorem] an inves-
tigation which does not aim at ﬁnding new or more general theorems being connected to
this truth, but to determine the position of this theorem within the system of known truths
in such a way that it can be clearly said which conditions are necessary and sufﬁcient for
giving a foundation of this truth. (Hilbert [14], 50; Peckhaus [46], 10)
After having characterized Hilbert’s axiomatic method as “an architectural proce-
dure” ordering conditions and propositions in mathemtics, Peckhaus claims that
Hilbert later sharpened this idea of ordering in terms of “progressive and regressive
tasks of mathematics:
The progressive task consists in developing systems of relations and investigating their
logical consequences. The regressive task consists in determining the conditions of a theory
on the base of a clear distinction between suppositions and logical consequences. (Peckhaus
[46], 10)
Hilbert’s emphasis on the universality of the axiomatic method is salient in that it
is not restricted to natural sciences but extended to other ﬁelds of knowledge such as
economics or even to philosophy (Hilbert [16], p. 18; Peckhaus [46], 10–11). Indeed,
Hilbert’s pride of his unprecedented contribution to the axiomatic method can be
highlighted by Hilbert’s another catch phrase, i.e., “the deepening the foundations”.
In Hilbert’s “Axiomatisches Denken” [15], where he emphasizes the central role of
mathematics among the sciences, we read the following suggestive claims:

On Abducing the Axioms of Mathematics
167
The procedure of the axiomatic method, as it is expressed here, amounts to a deepening of
the foundations of the individual domains of knowledge—a deepening that is necessary for
every ediﬁce that one wishes to expand and to build higher while preserving its stability.
(Hilbert [15], p. 1109)
This sentence seems to claim that deepening the foundations of the individual
science necessarily demands its expansion to its neighbouring ﬁelds of knowledge
(Park [38, 39], p. 435).
Now we may note that many of Hilbert’s associates seem to share Hilbert’s views.
To name a few evident examples, we may mention Zermelo, Bernays, and Nelson.
Zermelo is the one who axiomatized set theory for the ﬁrst time in 1908. Bernays
is the collaborator of Hilbert, the true author of the monumental Grundlagen der
Mathematik, I and II (Hilbert and Bernays [17]) co-authored with Hilbert. Nelson
may not be widely known, though he has a unique place in the history of ethics. For
this reason, Peckhaus’ brief comments on Nelson could be useful:
For Hilbert, the axiomatic method is a representation of mathematical thought, but again,
its application is not restricted to mathematics. It can even be applied to sets of statements
that cannot be based on axioms. Hilbert himself mentions as an example, the work of the
Göttingen philosopher Leonard Nelson. Like Kant, Nelson strictly rejected attempts to apply
the mathematical method, i.e., the axiomatic-deductive method, to philosophical questions.
In his Kritik der praktischen Vernunft of 1917, however, he proposed to erect ethics by means
of the axiomatic method. (Peckhaus [46], 11–12; See also Nelson [37])
From Reid’s popular biography of Hilbert, we are rather well informed of Hilbert’s
effort to secure Nelson a stable academic position (Reid [52], pp. 144–145). Probably,
however, what is important for my purpose is that Nelson was a leader of a group
inspired by J. F. Fries. In fact, Zermelo and Bernays were also the members of this
group (Reid [52], p. 151). As a consequence, we can gather the following information
about Nelson from a biography of Zermelo:
In cooperation with Gerhard Hessenberg, Nelson worked on a programme of “Critical Math-
ematics” (“Kritische Mathematik”) as a philosophical alternative to Frege’s logicism and
Poincaré’s anti-logicism. Already in 1904, when Nelson was still a student, both had become
co-founders of the new series of Abhandlungen der Friesschen Schule which was to promote
Kant’s critical philosophy in the continuation of the philosopher Jakob Friedrich Fries (1778–
1843) (Ebbinghaus and Peckhaus [5], p. 72; Cf., e.g., Nelson [36]). For details see Peckhaus
[44], p. 123f.
Now we can see that Nelson advocates critical mathematics in the sense of Fries,
who admired Kant so much. According to Pulte’s recent assessment, Fries tries to
develop Kantian philosophy further by revision and extension. It is simply beyond
the scope of this paper to discuss in what ways Fries tried to go beyond Kant. For
my present purpose, what is important is that he made pivotal inﬂuence to the New
Friesian School, and thereby to the Hilbetians. [For further details, see Peckhaus [44,
45] and Pulte [50], p. 46] Further, as Peckhaus points out, Hilbert’s regressive method
itself might have its origin in Kantian notion of “regressive method” (Peckhaus [46]
11–12; See Kant [24], A 42, § 5, note).

168
W. Park
4
How Can the Axiom of Choice Be Smuggled?3
4.1
Russell
Patton starts her discussion of Russell’s involvement with the axiom of choice by a
seemingly neutral description:
In the early 1900s, Russell became increasingly aware of the role of certain axioms, including
the axioms of reducibility, choice, and inﬁnity, and the multiplicative axiom, in deriving the
results of mathematics. (Patton [43], p. 116)
From her point of view, the axiom of choice is just one of the axioms of mathe-
matics, insofar as the issue is the discovery and justiﬁcation of the axioms of mathe-
matics. Further, she is emphasizing the role of these axioms “in deriving the results of
mathematics” rather than establishing their truth. In other words, she already char-
acterizes Russell’s position in terms of his regressive method, thereby distancing
it from epistemic logicism. Probably, for this reason, she is able to read Moore’s
general remarks on the role of the Axiom of Choice in Russell’s work as supporting
her perceptive reading of the title of Russell’s talk, “The Regressive Method of
Discovering the Principles of Mathematics”. Moore simply writes:
The role played by the Axiom of Choice in Russell’s work is long and complicated. Like
many mathematicians around 1900, he used the Axiom of Choice implicitly without realizing
that he had done so, since no one had yet formulated it explicitly (lv). (Moore [34], p. Lv.)
But Patton counts him as putting in his own way her insight that, unlike epistemic
logicists, Russell’s regressive method is “to identify the principles of mathematics
that were always at work in, and implicit in, mathematical practice” rather than “to
discover the principles of mathematics: the single, fundamental, true laws of logic
from which mathematics is derived” (Patton [43], p. 117; Patton’s emphasis).
In order to explain how Russell was led to his own and Whitehead’s Multiplicative
axiom, which is logically equivalent to the Axiom of Choice, Patton again relies
on Moore’s exposition.4 She quotes Moore’s description of Russell’s route to the
Multiplicative Axiom as follows:
Russell reached the Multiplicative Axiom by a route quite different from Zermelo’s path to
the Axiom of Choice. While Zermelo had been preoccupied with the Well-Ordering Problem,
Russell’s Multiplicative Axiom arose from considering the inﬁnite product of disjoint sets,
i.e., their multiplicative class, in order to deﬁne the product of inﬁnitely many cardinals.
(Moore [35], 123; Patton [43], pp. 117–118)
Based on Moore’s nice report, Patton also emphasizes the following fact:
3I heavily rely on Moore [35] as the basic data for my discussion, as Maddy and Patton do (Maddy
[29, 30]; Patton [43]). See also Bell [2] and Jech [22].
4Even in quoting from Russell’s letter to Jourdain (Letter of March 15, [53]; reprinted in Grattan-
Guiness [11], 107), she is again following Moore’s lead (Patton [43], p. 117; Moore [35], p. 122).

On Abducing the Axioms of Mathematics
169
As Moore notes, at ﬁrst, Russell and Whitehead saw the Multiplicative Axiom as a theorem.
At some point, Russell came to realize that a number of results depended on the proposition
and came to regard it as an axiom. (Patton [43], p. 118)
But, exactly in what respects Russell’s route to his and Whitehead’s Multiplicative
Axiom is different from Zermelo’s route to the axiom of Choice?
4.2
Zermelo
Zermelo’s route to the Axiom of Choice was via the Well-Ordering Problem: Can
every set be well-ordered? Here again let us follow Moore’s guide:
While the Axiom’s roots lie in the inﬁnite processes so prominent in nineteenth-century
analysis, this assumption was not explicitly stated until a new discipline emerged from anal-
ysis: Cantorian set theory. The decisive question, here termed the Well-Ordering Problem,
was this: Can every set be well-ordered? Strictly speaking, this Well-Ordering Problem did
not originate as a problem at all, but as an assumption. In 1883, Georg Cantor proposed as
a valid “law of thought” that every set can be well-ordered. (Moore [35], p. 4)5
As Moore continues to explain,
Yet this law of thought, hereafter termed the Well-Ordering Principle, was not accepted by
his contemporaries, and a decade later Cantor himself was seeking a proof. It was in order
to obtain such a proof that in 1904 Ernst Zermelo ﬁrst formulated the Axiom of Choice.
(Moore [35], p. 2)
Now, let us probe the question as to what exactly is different in Russell’s case and
Cantor’sandZermelo’scaseindependentlyofhowothermathematiciansandphiloso-
phers found the matter. Interestingly enough, there seem to be some obvious differ-
ences between them. Russell thought that the Multiplicative Axiom is a theorem.
Only after having failed to prove it, he began to count it as an axiom. On the other
hand, Cantor and Zermelo never thought the Well-Ordering Principle as a theorem.
Cantor thought it to be an assumption. But later he tried to prove it. In other words, he
became to count it as a theorem. And, Zermelo formulated the Axiom of Choice to
prove it. That means, Zermelo also treated the Well-Ordering Principle as a theorem
to be proven.
Moore’s report is continued as follows:
In this manner, the Axiom passed from unconscious to conscious use and, for many math-
ematicians at the time, to conscious avoidance. Indeed, Zermelo’s solution to the Well-
Ordering Problem generated a heated debate, which raged among mathematicians all over
Europe, as to whether his Axiom and proof were correct. This controversy soon led him to
publish, on the one hand, a spirited defense of his proof and, on the other, his axiomatiza-
tion for set theory. Within this axiomatization, he believed, both his Axiom and proof were
securely embedded. His critics did not agree. (Moore [35], p. 2)
5Please refer to my more extensive discussion of Zermelo in Chap. 5 of Park [40].

170
W. Park
Moore’s description of what happened in mathematical community in response to
Zermelo’s proof of the Well-Ordering Principle and his axiomatization of set theory
is too short to be informative. Yes, there was a heated controversy, and his critics
never agreed with Zermelo’s belief that both the Axiom of Choice and the proof of
the Well-Ordering Principle were securely embedded within his axiomatization of
set theory. But exactly why should there be such a controversy? For what reason
didn’t the critics agree with Zermelo’s view?
Moore himself must have struggled to understand what happened. And, he seems
to have arrived at the following conclusions.
M1: The use of inﬁnitely many arbitrary choices had been growing independently during
the last third of the nineteenth century.
M2: But there was no awareness that a new mathematical principle was required.
M3: It was only after Zermelo’s proof of the Well-ordering Principle within his axiomatic set
theory that mathematicians became sensitive to the theorems that need the Axiom of Choice
to be proven. (Moore [35], p. 2)
At ﬁrst blush, it is apparently a serious lacuna that Cantor is not mentioned at all
in any of M1–M3. However, Moore claims that “Cantor did more than this” (Moore
[35], p. 30–31; See also Zermelo in Cantor [4], p. 451). Moore seems to be claiming
here:
M4: Cantor unconsciously employed the Assumption (i.e., the Axiom of Choice) in certain
basic results (rather than in set theory and point-set topology).
M5: Only through its own offsprings, the Assumption came to be used by mathematicians.
(Moore [35], pp. 30–31, p. 38)
5
Woods on Regressive Abduction and Enthymeme
Resolution
In order to understand better the difference between Zermelo and Russell in handling
the Axiom of Choice, I suggest to employ Dov Gabbay and John Woods’ comparison
of the elements of abduction in the regressive premise search and in the enthymeme
resolution. Even though the abductive element in Russell’s regressive method has
been detected by some philosophers (Irvine [20], 322, n. 26; Patton [43], p. 113), only
Gabbay and Woods use the expression “regressive abduction” (Gabbay and Woods
[8], p. 125f.). Gabby and Woods are also interested in “the problem of determining
in what sense ‘a comparatively obscure and difﬁcult proposition may be said to be
a premise for a comparatively obvious proposition’ (Russell [54], p. 272), and the
problem of “explaining how such obscure and difﬁcult propositions are discovered
and justiﬁed” (Gabbay and Woods [8], p. 125).
Gabbay and Woods schematize regressive abduction as follows:
Let T be the task of justifying a non-obvious (“recondite” is Russell’s word for it) principle
of logic. Call this proposition H. Suppose that there is an obvious truth of mathemtics, V,
such that for some set of propositions K, K(H) constitutes a proof of V. Since nothing else

On Abducing the Axioms of Mathematics
171
(so far as one can see) counts in favour of the truth of H, H is forwarded conjecturally soley
on the basis of the role it plays in the proof of Q. (Gabbay and Woods [8], p. 297)
Against this background, Gabbay and Woods contrast Wiles’ situation in proving
Fermat’s Last Theorem. It is a brilliant idea to characterize what Wiles had to do as
solving Fermat’s enthymeme:
Then Wiles’ T´ was to construct a proof of V´. His agenda was both similar to and different
from that undertaken by regressive abducers. What the regressive abducer also wants is a
proof of V. But that is not all that he wants, or even the most important part of it. What he
wants is a proof of V that contains H as a prior line. The regressive abducer’s main task is to
justify H, not prove V. Proving V is a subagenda whose whole motivation is the support it
lends not to V but to H. Wiles, on the other hand, was wholly absorbed with V´. To that end,
there are thousands of prior lines, towards none of which did Wiles’ show the kind of interest
that deﬁnes regressive abduction. Wiles took great pains to construct his derivation of V´
from mathematically sound premisses (and subproofs), but nowhere in that vast undertaking
is there the slightest indication that Wiles’ wanted his proof of Fermat’s theorem to constitute
a justiﬁcation of any of the premisses he actually deployed. Regressive abducers target Hs.
Enthymeme resolvers target V´. (Gabbay and Woods [8], pp. 297–298)
LetusdistinguishbetweenRussellt (Russellduringtheperiodinwhichhebelieved
the Multiplicative Axiom to be a theorem) and Russella (Russell during the period
in which he believed it to be an assumption). Russellt was an enthymeme resolver
targetingV′.Ontheotherhand,itmaynotbeeasytodescribewhatRussella wasdoing.
Why? Because it is clear how Russell would discover and justify the Multiplicative
Axiom. Likewise, we may distinguish between Cantora (Cantor during the time in
which he believed the Well-Ordering principle to be an assumption) and Cantort
(Cantor during the period in which he believed it to be something to be proven). Can
we say without hesitation that Cantora was a regressive abducer? Can we present
unreservedly Cantort as an enthymeme resolver? I think that both are rather difﬁcult
problems. Cantora thought that the Well-ordering Principle must be self-evidently
true. So, it is difﬁcult to count him as a regressive abducer. Since he was interested
in establishing theorems of set theory, he must be an enthymeme resolver insofar as
those theorems are concerned, but not for the Well-Ordering Principle or the Axiom
of Choice.
Probably, Zermelo may be the toughest case to handle with Gabbay and Woods’
frmework. Zermelot (Zermelo in the period in which he tried to prove the Well-
Ordering Principle) may be an enthymeme resolver. However, he must have become
a regressive abducer when he began to build an axiomatic system for set theory. Was
there any one moment or a period of time at which he was both a regressive abducer
and an enthymeme resolver at the same time in connection with one of his axioms
of his set theory? How about regarding the Axiom of Choice?

172
W. Park
6
Concluding Remarks
As was hinted at in the previous section, Gabbay and Woods’ distinction between an
enthymeme resolver and a regressive abducer seems to have an enormous potential
to enhance our understanding of the problem of the discovery and the justiﬁcation
of axioms of mathematics. In liew of a conclusion, I would like to speculate a bit
more about the ways of expanding their distinction. What would happen if we intro-
duce the idea of enlarging the notion of enthymeme to cover not only the deductive
enthymemes but also non-deductive enthymemes? Gabbay and Woods’ observation
that enthymeme resolution does not have the character of regressive abduction may
be correct. But if we expand the scope of enthmeme to cover non-deductive as well
as deductive enthymemes, then some cases of enthymeme resolution may or may
not have the character of regressive abduction.
Wiles was an enthymeme resolver rather than a regressive abducer in trying
to prove Fermat’s Last Theorem. Thanks to Kenneth A. Ribet’s proof inspired by
Gerhard Frey, it turns out that proving Taniyama-Shimura Conjecture would prove
Fermat’s Last Theorem at the same time. [See Wiles [60], 443; Singh [57], p. 202;
Singh and Ribet [58], 71–72]. As Gabbay and Woods claim, Wiles was exclusively
interested in proving the truth of Taniyama-Simura Conjecture, and thereby that of
Fermat’s Last Theorem without bothering to ﬁnd any fundamental propositions from
which Taniyama-Simura Conjecture can be deduced. But couldn’t we be able to view
Frey (or Ribet) as both an enthymeme resolver and regressive abducer?
At the beginning of this paper, we saw Forster counting abduction and IBE as
synomyms. However, Gerhard Minnameier attempts to contrast abduction with IBE
in terms of their functions: “Thus, while abduction marks the process of gener-
ating theories—or, more generally, concepts—IBE concerns their evaluation” [32]–
76]. Minnameier’s opinion is widely shared, e.g., by Magnanai [31], Campos [3],
and Mackonis [28]. [Park [39], pp. 29–31] Also, I pointed out that IBE cannot be
abduction in GW-Model. [ibid., 31–34].6
Armed with both Gabbay and Woods’ distinction between an enthymeme resolver
and a regressive abducer and the widely held distinction between abduction and IBE,
now we may compare what exactly Frey, Ribet and Wiles were doing in connection
with the Fermat’s Last Theorem. At a symposium in Oberwolfach in the autumn of
1984, Gerhard Frey made a remarkable claim that “if mathematicians could prove
the Taniyama-Shimura conjecture then they would automatically prove Fermat’s Last
Theorem”. [Singh [57], pp. 194–195]
The signiﬁcance of Frey’s truly creative insight to connect Taniyama-Shimura
conjecture with Fermat’s Last Theorem cannot be too much emphasized:
6I also discussed this problem in Park [41]. I am delighted by Raftopoulos’s reminder that Hintikka
[18, 19] already argued for the distinction between abduction and IBE (Raftopoulos [51], 262–263).
In fact, Woods also discuss the problems related to abduction and IBE in his writings. For example,
he discusses them in connection with the problem of abductive premiss-searches (Woods [62], p. 2,
[63], p. 136). Woods’ most recent attempt to prove the impossibility of identifying abduction with
IBE is discussed in Park [41].

On Abducing the Axioms of Mathematics
173
For the ﬁrst time in a hundred years the world’s hardest mathematical problem looked
vulnerable.AccordingtoFrey,provingthe Taniyama-Shimura conjecture wasthe onlyhurdle
to proving Fermat’s Last Theorem. [Ibid., p. 197]
As is well known by now, there was “an elementary blunder” in Frey’s logic:
“he [Frey] had not quite demonstrated that his elliptic equation was sufﬁciently
weird”. [Ibid.] It was Ken Ribet who “proved that the Taniyama-Shimura conjec-
ture implies Fermat’s Last Theorem” in 1986. [ibid., p. 201] Only on hearing the
news about Ribet’s proof, Wiles plunged into his serious adventure to prove the
Taniyama-Shimura conjecture, thereby to prove Fermat’s Last Theorem ultimately.
[Ibid., p. 205]
For my present purpose, i.e., to compare Frey, Ribet, and Wiles as enthymeme
resolvers and/or regressive abducers, ample information is already at hand. As
Gabbay and Woods seem to believe, Wiles might be characterized as merely an
enthymeme resolver. For he was at least primarily interested in proving the Taniyama-
Shimura conjecture. Frey and Ribet were, unlike Wiles, not only enthymeme
resolvers but also regressive abducers, insofar as they bothered to demonstrate the
relation between the Taniyama-Shimura conjecture and Fermat’s Last Theorem.
From my point of view, Frey is much more interesting than Ribet both as an
enthymeme resolver and a regressive abducer. While Ribet was a successful
enthymeme resolver in the usual sense of enthymeme, Frey can be called an
enthymeme resolver only with some qualiﬁcations. As was pointed out above, he
did not quite prove that the Taniyama-Shimura conjecture implies Fermat’s Last
Theorem. At best, he proved merely the plausibility of that implication. So, he was
an unsuccessful enthymeme resolver: he neither turned the invalid deductive argu-
ment into a valid one, nor did he show the impossibility of doing so. As a regressive
abducer, Frey and Ribet were not on a par. It was only Frey who detected the possi-
bility of the Taniyama-Shimura conjecture’s implying Fermat’s Last Theorem. All
too probably both Frey and Ribet might have tried any number of inferences to the
best explanation in their attempts to prove that the Taniyama-Shimura conjecture
implies Fermat’s Last Theorem. So, Ribet was a regressive abducer only in the sense
of doing an IBE or simply following the step of Frey’s abduction.
References
1. Beaney, M.: Russell and Frege. In: Grifﬁn, N. (ed.) The Cambridge Companion to Russell.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press (2003)
2. Bell, J.L.: The Axiom of Choice. College Publications, London (2009)
3. Campos, D.G.: On the distinction between Peirce’s abduction and Lipton’s inference to the
best explanation. Synthese 180, 419–442 (2011)
4. Cantor, G.: Gesammelte Abhandlungen mathematischen und philosophischen Inhalts. In: E.
Zermelo (ed.) Springer, Berlin (1932), reprinted Olms, Hildesheim (1962)
5. Ebbinghaus, H.-D., Peckhaus, V.: Ernst Zermelo: An Approach to His Life and Work. Springer,
Berlin/Heidelberg (2007)
6. Forster, T.: The axiom of choice and inference to the best explanation. Logique et Analyse 194,
194–197 (2006)

174
W. Park
7. Frege, G.: The Foundations of Arithmetic, 2nd ed. trans. Austin. Blackwell, UK (1884/1974)
8. Gabbay, F., Woods, J.: The Reach of Abduction: Insight and Trial. Elsevier, Amsterdam (2005)
9. Gandon, S.: Russell’s Unknown Logicism. Palgrave McMillan, London (2012)
10. Godwyn, M., Irvine, A.: Bertrand Russell’s Logicism, pp. 171–201 in Grifﬁn (2003)
11. Grattan-Guinness, I.: Bertrand Russell on his paradox and the multiplicative axiom. An
unpublished letter to Philip Jourdain. J. Philos. Logic 1(2), 103–110 (1972)
12. Hager, P.: Russell’s method of analysis, pp. 310–331 in Grifﬁn (2003)
13. Hempel, C.: On the nature of mathematical truth. Am. Math. Monthly 52, 543–556 (1945)
14. Hilbert, D.: ¨Uber den Satz von der Gleichheit der Basiswinkel im gleichschenkligen Dreieck.
Proc. London Math. Soc. 35, 50–68 (1902/03)
15. Hilbert, D.: Axiomatic thought. In: ed. by Ewald, W. (ed.) From Kant to Hilbert: A Source
Book in the Foundations of Mathematics, vol. 2, Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1996, pp 1105–1115
(1918)
16. Hilbert, D.: Natur und mathematisches Erkennen. In: Rowe, D.E. (ed.) Birkhäuser Verlag,
Basel/Boston/Berlin (1992)
17. Hilbert, D., Bernays, P.: Grundlagen der Mathematik I, II. Springer, Berlin/Heidelberg (1934,
1939)
18. Hintikka, J.: What was Aristotle doing in his early logic, anyway?: A reply to Woods and
Hansen. Synthese 113, 241–249 (1997)
19. Hintikka, J.: “What is abduction? the fundamental problem of contemporary epistemology”,
Trans. Charles S. Peirce Soc. 34(3), 503–533 (1998)
20. Irvine, A.: Epistemic logicism & Russell’s regressive method. Philos. Stud. 55(3), 303–327
(1989)
21. Irvine, A.: Bertrand Russell’s logic. In: Gabbay, Woods (eds.) Handbook of the History of
Logic, vol. 5, pp. 1–28. Elsevier, Amsterdam (2009)
22. Jech, T.J.: The axiom of choice. Dover Publications INC, Mineola, N. Y. (1973)
23. Jevons, W.S.: Principles of Science. Richard Clay & Sons, London (1874)
24. Kant, I.: Prolegomena zu einer jeden künftigen Metaphysik dit als Wissenschaft und auftreten
können. Johann Friedrich Hartknoch, Riga (1783)
25. Lakatos, I.: Inﬁnite regress and foundations of mathematics. In: Worrall and Currie (eds.) Math-
ematics, Science and Epistemology, vol. 2, pp. 3–23. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
(1962/1980)
26. Laudan, L.: Theories of scientiﬁc method from Plato to mach. Hist. Sci. 7, 1–63 (1968)
27. Lipton, P.: Inference to the Best Explanation, 2nd edn. Routledge, London (2004)
28. Mackonis, A.: Inference to the best explanation, coherence and other explanatory virtues.
Synthese 190(6), 975–995 (2013)
29. Maddy, P.: Realism in Mathematics. Oxford University Press, Oxford (1990)
30. Maddy, P.: Naturalism in Mathematics. Oxford University Press, Oxford (1997)
31. Magnani, L.: Abductive Cognition: The Epistemological and Eco-Cognitive Dimensions of
Hypothetical Ewasoning. Springer, Berlin (2009)
32. Minnameier, G.: Peirce-suit of truth—why inference to the best explanation and abduction
ought not to be confused. Erkenntnis 60, 75–105 (2004)
33. Moore, M.E.: New Essays on Peirce’s Methematical Philosophy. Open Court, Chicago and La
Salle, Illinois (2010)
34. Moore, G.H.: “Introduction” to Russell, Bertrand. In: Moore, G.H. (ed.) The Collected Papers
of Bertrand Russell, Volume 5: Toward Principia Mathematica, pp. 1905–1908. Routledge,
London (2015)
35. Moore, G.: Zermelo’s Axiom of Choice: Its Origins, Development, and Inﬂuence. Springer,
New York (1982, 2012)
36. Nelson, L.: Kritische Philosophie und mathemtische axiomatik. Unterrichtsblätter für Math-
emtik und Naturwissenschften 34, 108–142 (1928)
37. Nelson, L.: Kritik der praktischen Vernunft. Göttingen: Verlag “Öffentliches Leben” (1917)
38. Park, W.: Friedman on implicit deﬁnition. in search of the Hilbertian heritage in philosophy of
science. Erkenntnis 76(3), 427–442 (2012)

On Abducing the Axioms of Mathematics
175
39. Park, W.: Abduction in Contect: The Conjectural Dynamics of Scientiﬁc Reasoning. Springer,
Berlin (2016)
40. Park, W.: Philosophy’s Loss of Logic to Mathematics. Springer, Berlin (2018)
41. Park, W.: Hintikka/Woods and Hansen Controversy on Aristotelian Fallacies. In: Gabbay, D.,
Magnani, L., Pietarinen, A., Park, W. (eds.) Natural Arguments: A Tribute to John Woods.
College Publications, London, forthcoming (2019)
42. Parsons, C.: “Mathematics, Foundations of. In: Edwards, P. (ed.) The Encyclopedia of
Philosophy, vol. 5, pp. 188–213 Macmillan and The Free Press, New York and London (1967)
43. Patton, L.: Russell’s method of analysis and the axioms of mathematics. In: Lapointe, S.,
Pincock, C. (eds.) Innovations in the History of Analytical Philosophy. Palgrave macmillan,
London (2017)
44. Peckhaus, V.: Hilbertprogramm und Kritische Philosophie. Das Göttinger Modell interdiszi-
plinärer Zusammenarbeit zwischen Mathematik und Philosophie. Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht,
Göttingen (1990)
45. Peckhaus, V.: Fries in Hilbert’s Gottingen: Die Neue Fries’sche Schule. In: Hogrebe
Wolfram and Herrmann Kay (eds.) Jakob Friedrich Fries—Philosoph, Naturwissenschaftler
und Mathematiker, pp. 353–386. Lang, Frankfurt a.M (1999
46. Peckhaus, V.: Regressive analysis. In: Logical Analysis and History of Philosophy,
5 (2002). Available at http://www.uni-paderborn.de/ﬁleadmin/kw/Institute/Philosophie/Per
sonal/Peckhaus/Texte_zum_Download/regressive_analysis.pdf)
47. Peirce, C.S.: Collected Papers, 8 vols. In: Hartshorne, C., Weiss, P. (vols. I–VI), Burks, A.W.
(vols. VII–VIII) (eds.) Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA (1931–1958)
48. Peirce, C.S.: The New Elements of Mathematics, vol. 4. In Eisele, C. (ed.). Mouton de Gruyter,
Berlin/New York; Atlantic Highlands, Humanities Press, NJ (1976)
49. Poincare, H.: Science nd Hypothesis (1905). Dover, New York (1952)
50. Pulte, H.: J. F. Fries’ philosophy of science, the New Friesian School and the Berlin Group:
on divergent scientiﬁc philosophies, difﬁcult relations and missed opportunities. In: Milkov,
N., Peckhaus, V. (eds.) The Berlin Group and the Philosophy of Logical Empiricism. Springer,
Dordrecht (2013)
51. Raftopoulos, A.: Abduction, inference to the best explanation, and scientiﬁc practice: the case
of Newton’s optics. In: Magnani, L., Casadio, C. (eds.) Model-Based Reasoning in Science
and Technology, pp. 259–277. Springer (2016)
52. Reid, C.: Hilbert. Springer, Berlin/New York (1970, 1996)
53. Russell, B.: M. Poincaré’s Science et Hypothèse. Mind 15(57), 141–143 (1906)
54. Russell, B.: The regressive method of discovering the premises of mathematics. In: Lackey, D.
(ed.) Essays in Analysis, pp. 272–283. George Allen & Unwin Ltd, London (1907/1973)
55. Russell, B.: My Philosophical Development. Uniwin Books, London (1959/1975)
56. Russell,B.:TheCollectedPapersofBertrandRussell,Volume3.In:Moore,G.(ed.).Routledge,
New York (1993)
57. Singh, S.: Fermat’s Enigma. Anchor Books, New York (1997)
58. Singh, S., Ribet, K.A.: Fermat’s last stand. Sci. Am. 277(5), 68–73 (1997)
59. Steiner, M.: Mathematical Knowledge. Cornell University Press, Ithaca and London (1975)
60. Wiles, A.: Modular elliptic curves and Fermat’s Last Theorem. Annals of Mathematics 142,
443–551 (1995)
61. Wittgenstein, L.: Bemerkungen über die Grundlagen der Mathematik, trans. By G. E. M.
Anscombe as Remarks on the Foundations of Mathematics, Anscombe, G.E.M., Rhees, R.,
Von Wright, G.H. (eds.). Blackwell, Oxford (1956)
62. Woods, J.: Aristotle’s Earlier Logic. Hermes Science Publishing Ltd, Oxford (2001)
63. Woods, J.: Aristotle’s Earlier Logic, 2nd edn. College Publictions, London (2014)

Abduction, Complex Inferences,
and Emergent Heuristics of Scientiﬁc
Inquiry
John R. Shook
Abstract The roles of abductive inference in dynamic heuristics allows scientiﬁc
methodologies to test novel explanations for the world’s ways. Deliberate reasoning
often follows abductive patterns, as well as patterns dominated by deduction and
induction, but complex mixtures of these three modes of inference are crucial
for scientiﬁc explanation. All possible mixed inferences are formulated and cate-
gorized using a novel typology and nomenclature. Twenty ﬁve possible combi-
nations among abduction, induction, and deduction are assembled and analyzed
in order of complexity. There are ﬁve primary categories for sorting these infer-
ential procedures: fallacies, non-scientiﬁc procedures, quasi-scientiﬁc procedures,
scientiﬁc procedures, and scientiﬁc heuristics.
Experimental sciences use abductions in the course of their methodologies. The
involvement of abductive inferences in many kinds of dynamic heuristics allows
scientiﬁc methodologies to consider and test novel explanations for curious matters,
and to gradually increase information about the world’s ways.
Science didn’t invent abductive inference; it was borrowed. Deliberate reasoning
in general—accepting conclusions due to their discerned relationships with relied-
upon beliefs—frequently follows abductive patterns as well as deductive and induc-
tive patterns. Deeper cognitive processes such as perception, concept formation,
and shifting habits of thought likely modes of abduction.1 To the extent that the
experimental sciences contribute increases in knowledge, they have applied some
J. R. Shook (B)
University at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY 14260, USA
e-mail: jrshook@buffalo.edu
1Ordinary abduction is evidently habitual in practice for humans, and habits can be brought under
reﬂective review for deliberation, especially if they are acquired in learning (Magnani [1]). No
“instinct or inference” dichotomy about abduction is forced upon us, as if learning must be rigid
and automatic. It is a debatable question whether something akin to abduction is instinctive for
non-human animals (Park [2]).
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2021
J. Shook et al. (eds.), Abduction in Cognition and Action, Studies in Applied
Philosophy, Epistemology and Rational Ethics 59,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-61773-8_9
177

178
J. R. Shook
abduction as well as induction and deduction. The power of scientiﬁc explanation
does not reside within any of these inferential modes alone. Understanding roles for
abduction in satisfactory explanation should look to complex mixtures of these three
modes.
A preliminary exploration of those modes, organized by increasing complexity
and categorized with a typology, maps out some prominent features of this infer-
ential landscape. Five primary categories emerge for the twenty-ﬁve combinatorial
possibilities among deduction, induction, and abduction. These inferential proce-
dures can be sorted into fallacies, non-scientiﬁc procedures, quasi-scientiﬁc proce-
dures, scientiﬁc procedures, and scientiﬁc heuristics. Among these procedures are
core methodologies inherent to metaphysical and theological worldviews, and their
accurate classiﬁcation helps to reveal their close relationships with proto-scientiﬁc
thinking.
1
Why Abduction?
Deductive reasoning alone may be sufﬁcient to intelligibly relate all knowledge
already possessed. Alan Musgrave defends deductivism by pointing out how any
generalization appearing to arise from non-deductive reasoning can be re-cast after-
wards as a deductive inference with just the right premises added. After showing
how to do this with a typical form of generalization, he adds,
“The same applies to all the other patterns of inductive or ampliative reasoning. All can be
reconstructed as deductive arguments with suppressed factual or epistemic premises.”2
Reconstructed deductive arguments are useful in their own way, after new infor-
mation has been established. Of course, knowledge arises (for humans, at least) from
learning, and we must ﬁgure out which factual or epistemic premises are just the
right ones. Being told that some extra fact about the world will convert non-deductive
support for a conclusion into its deductive support isn’t helpful for learning. Learners
want to acquire precisely which fact, when supposed, will turn out to be the right
support.3
Inquiry crucially relies on abduction, so that proposed matters can become believ-
able supposed facts. Abduction, by itself, is a blatant fallacy—yet there appears to
be no way to avoid it. Neither deduction (necessary inference) nor induction (prob-
able inference) can increase the real amount of information beyond what is already
accepted, but abduction (possible inference) can.
If these are the three primary modes of inference, with abduction playing a needed
but insufﬁcient role, then abduction may be transcending mere fallacy through its
application in concert with deduction and/or induction. Charles Peirce, abduction’s
2Musgrave [3, p. 127].
3Stanford [4] makes a similar point regarding the supposed self-sufﬁciency of Bayesian conﬁrma-
tion.

Abduction, Complex Inferences, and Emergent Heuristics …
179
‘discoverer’, typically situated abduction alongside deduction and abduction in the
proper functioning of scientiﬁc inquiry. His 1903 Harvard Lectures on Pragmatism
is an example:
Abduction merely suggests that something may be. Its only justiﬁcation is that from its
suggestion deduction can draw a prediction which can be tested by induction, and that, if we
are ever to learn anything or to understand phenomena at all, it must be by abduction that
this is to be brought about.4
Peirce placed immense conﬁdence in abduction’s explanatory powers, so long as it
played a helpful role in cooperation with the other modes of inference.5
Here, we explore how patterns of procedural abduction—combinations of these
threeinferentialmodesexecutedovertimetowardssomeconclusion—cansimultane-
ously reduce the fallacious character of abductions, increase the credibility deserved
by their conclusions, and yield increasing information about the world. This prelim-
inary work is concerned with methodologies within empirical inquiry, not about the
overall strengths and weaknesses to “inference to the best explanation” or debates
over scientiﬁc realism.6 It delineates, identiﬁes, and evaluates many combinations of
deduction, induction, and abduction, from simpler forms to quite complex patterns.
Some intricate combinations rise to the level of utility for experimental scientiﬁc
inquiry. Along the way, non-scientiﬁc and pseudo-scientiﬁc procedures are exposed
as well, which suggests why they can be relevant to the perennial demarcation
problem.
Procedural abduction plays a signiﬁcant role within some phases of proto-
scientiﬁc and fully scientiﬁc methods. Its patterns may be most recognizable in
the ordinary inquiries people undertake daily to sort and select simple explanations
behind encountered events. Understanding the merits and risks inherent to proce-
dural abduction would not be out of place in an effort to improve critical thinking.
Science is by no means ‘common sense’ enlarged, although continuities are present.
It must be ﬁrmly noted from the outset that these patterns cannot be the “essence”
of scientiﬁc methodology, if there could be such a thing. Nor are these patterns
even capable of characterizing the more important inferential methods applied in the
sciences. Some of the most complex abductive patterns do begin to resemble what
have been called ‘heuristics’ to scientiﬁc inquiry, as later sections note. Science surely
gets vastly more complicated than even the most convoluted inferential patterns cate-
gorized here. Nevertheless, in these procedural abductions, some of science’s proto-
methodical ‘building blocks’ can be discerned, and distinguished from inferential
patterns on paths tending to diverge away or run parallel to science.
4Peirce [5, para. 171–172].
5A handful of recent philosophers of science have appreciated Peirce and abduction’s signiﬁcant
role. Consult for example McMullin [6], Niiniluoto [7], Psillos [8]. A recent examination of Peirce’s
mature logic of scientiﬁc methodology is by Pietarinen and Bellucci [9].
6Campos [10] distinguishes Peirce’s abduction apart from inference to the best explanation. For
broader explorations of abduction’s role in procedures of explanatory reasoning, consult Flach and
Kakas [11], Lipton [12], Paavola [13], Aliseda [14], Pizzi [15], Schurz [16], Gauderis and De Putte
[17], Gauderis [18], Aliseda and Beirlaen [19], Velázquez-Quesada [20].

180
J. R. Shook
2
Abduction Basics
Begin with abduction in its simplest form:
Q
If A then Q
So, A [“Simple abduction” – the ‘afﬁrming the consequent’ fallacy]
Because we are only considering deliberate inferences, and such cognitions are
extended in time, this three-part inference is to be understood as displaying temporal
phases that matter to the acceptability of any conclusion. Here, ‘Q’ is learned ﬁrst, and
‘If A then Q’ is considered after Q is already in mind, with the conclusion following
in both temporality and plausibility (if any may pertain). After acquaintance with all
three parts, they may be kept in mind as a single whole for further consideration, just
as all the notes of a simple tune may be sustained together in the imagination without
having to sing it over and over. Just as the original order of a tune’s notes still matter
all the same (the same notes in another ordering would form a different tune), the
original order of a certain abductive procedure matters to its plausibility. Rearrange
theorder,andadifferentabductiveprocedureisformed.Thistemporalitytoabductive
inquiry shall remain a presumption for the rest of the procedures discussed in this
article.
This abduction fallacy concludes with some candidate ‘A’ for credibility, though
that candidate must be deemed logically unacceptable here. The phrase “Therefore,
A” ﬁts well with deduction, and by convention, to induction. Instead of using ‘there-
fore’ with abduction, we shall use ‘so’ to indicate only an intended linkage between
premises and tentative conclusion. Hence, “So, A” can only mean something like,
“So, it appears that A is plausible,” or “So, perhaps A is believable.” In the realm
of abduction, “So, A” is entirely compatible with “You shouldn’t regard A to be
credible, since …” Where abduction is involved, inferences retain their conjectural
and fallible status to some degree or another.
There are two intuitive reasons why this simple ‘afﬁrming the consequent’ is a
fallacy. First, almost no credibility can be given to an explanation when innumerable
equally explanatory options (B, C, D, etc.) are available, since they haven’t been ruled
out by Q or any other considerations. Call this the “Explanatory Plenitude Problem”.
For example, if I blame a roaming raccoon for that sound heard outside my window
late at night, I have arbitrarily picked one of many possible causes for that sound.
Second, almost no credibility can be given to an explanation when simply positing
some imagined A to be responsible for Q supplies no conception of the relationship
between A and Q to make responsibility plausible. (And asserting “A is responsible!”
is not a conception of the alleged relationship.) Think about it: why would a raccoon
be causing such a noise? Call this the “Explanatory Responsibility Problem”.
Greatest conﬁdence in A would be earned if we could arrive at: Only if A then
Q, and Q, so A. Asserting “Only If A then Q” is an assertion both that no other B,
C, etc. can explain Q, and the absence of other explanations is due to the way that

Abduction, Complex Inferences, and Emergent Heuristics …
181
the conceived ground of the relationship between A and Q that makes A responsible
for Q is so concrete and compelling that A of necessity is responsible for Q. Then
A would truly be the best explanation. Of course, that result is gained by effectively
replacing abduction with deduction. The distance between simple abduction and
straightforward deduction is vast indeed. How can that gap be narrowed?
With simple abduction, so far, some B (or C or D etc.) could be imagined easily
to imply Q just like A. We are very far from “Only if A then Q.”
What if we prevented any other optional explanations from becoming conceiv-
able?
Q
Only If A then Q [because no other B, C, D, etc. seem thinkable, or if thinkable, they don’t
feel relevant]
So, A [“Deducible abduction”]
This is the conceptual conversion of “If A then Q” to “Only if A then Q” by
psychological means. If B, C, D (etc.) can be made to seem unthinkable and impos-
sible, then A appears to be the forced preference. But this tactic is only about biasing
the mind, not learning about reality. Adjusting or interfering with people’s minds
to cause mental poverty or ignorance in a group cannot be a reasonable way to
rule out the existence of alternative possible explanations. Deduction is a dangerous
method to apply to substantial matters without caution. Conceivability may be a
sign of real possibility, but inconceivability should never be taken to be a sure sign
of impossibility about material matters. Limiting your knowledge to only what you
ﬁnd currently conceivable will prevent further learning. Nevertheless, a principle
that “Foreign explanations are inconceivable among us!”—let this be labeled as the
“Social Inconceivability of Options” principle—often operates among social groups.
More brains thinking just like us can’t really increase deserved credibility. Back
to observations then, so we need more Qs.
Q1
If A then Qs
Q2, Q3, … [induction]
So, A [“Inducible abduction”]
A seems to reliably predict lots of Qs, and more Qs keep coming. If one is primed
for spotting more Qs as they occur, A can seem so predictive. But what about some
rival explanation B? If B, then Q, and Q1, Q2, …, So B! And what about C or D
as well, explaining those Qs that have been already observed? When all that has
been observed is a reliable pattern of Qs, no A or B (etc.) seems to really put to any
explanatory test. Just taking a series of Qs to be good evidence for A leaves one prone
to a simply conﬁrmation bias. However, where equally successful ‘explanations’ can
proliferate just by imagination, the credibility for any single explanation falls towards
zero.
So far, we have combined simple abduction with deduction and induction,
without making much progress towards discovering a procedure deserving credi-
bility. However, we do see where deduction and induction can be combined with

182
J. R. Shook
abduction. Those two combinations can dominate abduction so that the procedure
really isn’t abductive anymore, but instead primarily deductive or inductive in nature.
The three basic forms are:
ABDUCTION, because it is accounting for a surprising fact which is doing most of the
credibility work.
Q!
If A then Q
So, A
INDUCTION upon abduction, because it is the iteration which is doing most of the credibility
work.
If A then Q, and Q
If A then R, and R
If A then T, and T
So, A
DEDUCTION upon abduction, because it is the deﬁnition of A which is doing most of the
credibility work.
Q!
If A’s deﬁnition is suitably changed, then Q
So, A
Returning to our analysis of Inducible abduction, what about rival explanation B?
If B, then Q, and Q1, Q2, …, So B! And what about C or D as well, explaining those
Qs that have been already observed? We need to look at more than Qs. Two primary
options open up at this stage.
EITHER
Qs, and If A then Qs
Rs, and If A then Rs
Ss, and If A then Ss
Ts, and If A then Ts
…
So, A [abductive induction – “Interative Abduction” – a sequence of similar abductions of
things]
OR
Both Qs and Rs have feature F1
If A then Qs and Rs would have F1 [after deﬁning A to ‘effect’ that analogous F1 displayed
by both Qs and Rs]
Both Qs and Rs have feature F2
If A then Qs and Rs would have F2 [A’s deﬁnition also ‘effects’ that analogous F2 in both
Qs and Rs]
…
So, A [abductive deduction – “Coduction” – an abduction of similar features in things]

Abduction, Complex Inferences, and Emergent Heuristics …
183
Let’s discuss Coduction ﬁrst. Although it applies abduction, it really is a kind of
deduction. Deducing similar phenomena, these analogous features in both Qs and
Rs, from A’s deﬁnition is actually doing the plausibility work. This A can ‘effect’—
can ‘be responsible for’—a curious series of analogous features (they only need be
similar/analogous, not identical features) in two otherwise different things. There can
be great intuitive plausibility attached to an A which can account for why separate
things would display analogous features. We suspect some hidden thing responsible
for the similar features to otherwise separate matters. We rely heavily on this basic
Coduction in our human world, for example. When we visit a neighboring house and
compare that house with our own, we might notice how that house has the same-
sized kitchen to the left of the dining room, which also open up to the right onto the
same-sized living room just as ours does, and the stairs proceed from that room up
to two bedrooms just like our own house has, and so on, we soon will be thinking
that both houses probably were designed by the same architect.
The detection of similar features across different things is a core intellectual
capacity, and ‘coduction’ points at the inherent plausibility awarded to an explana-
tion able to be responsible for that detected correlation. However, two main problems
arise to severely limit the reasonableness of Coduction. First, the Explanatory Plen-
itude Problem will persist, since rival explanations B, C, D (etc.) will also try to
be responsible for the same Fs of Qs, Rs (etc.). That opens the door for the second
main problem: as rival A, B, C (etc.) set off to account for more and more analo-
gous features among Qs, Rs, Ss, and even more things, our cognitive capacity to
‘detect’ similarities across disparate things will get powerfully exercised. We are too
good at this capacity, though. Cognitive biases again make their inﬂuence felt, espe-
cially in our tendency to attend closely to coincidences and perceive strong patterns
where only weak ones really exist. We can ﬁnd analogous features in about any two
different things with enough imaginative creativity. Our efforts will go into detecting
analogous (we imagine) features of things, and not into the proposed connecting
relationships between explanation A and feature Fs. This Explanatory Relation-
ship Problem, as we can label it, will only grow. However, Coduction does show
powerful explanatory power, even if controlling that power is evidently crucial. We
will re-engage with Coduction after some detailed explorations into Abduction.
Next, concerning Iterative Abduction, while it applies abduction it really is a
kind of induction. Intuitive plausibility can attach to an A which can account for
why separate things display their detected frequency patterns after those patterns
are discovered. A simple example illustrates the degree of plausibility that Iterative
Abduction deserves. When I am upset to ﬁnd that the garbage can behind the house
has been overturned and garbage is littered about, I imagine a raccoon getting a
midnight snack. The next day, not only has the garbage can been overturned and
pillaged again, my neighbor’s garbage can has also pillaged. After several similar
incidents, I can’t help but think that a raccoon has found a congenial picnic location.
There is a degenerate form of Iterative Abduction, where A is used to repeatedly
‘explain’ a series of features to Qs:
Qs have F1, and If A then Qs have F1

184
J. R. Shook
Qs have F2, and If A then Qs have F2
Qs have F3, and If A then Qs have F3
…
So, A [limited abductive induction – “Singular Interative Abduction”]
This narrower form can helpfully focus attention on a plausible explanation, but its
explanatory power is severely limited. To continue my earlier example, I might notice
how only certain kinds of food wastes left in my garbage appear to be consumed each
night—just waste from foods containing nuts, peanut butter, or seeds. Every time
that my garbage is invaded, I notice how either nuts, seeds, or peanut butter products
appear targeted, so my suspicions turn towards a squirrel instead of a raccoon.
For both Iterative Abduction and Singular Iterative Abduction, some alternative
explanation B could keep pace with similarly explaining the features of many Qs,
or the series of Qs, Rs, Ss, etc., just as well as A. There is an additional risk that as
more explanations C, D (etc.) also try to keep up, they become explanatorily empty.
However, Singular Iterative Abduction in the long run, if perpetually successful, may
arouse the suggestion that A and Qs may not be separate matters. If every signiﬁcant
feature of all Qs is ‘reliably’ effectuated by A, and A does not possess any of its own
capacities not busily effectuating Qs, then the conceptual distinction between A and
Qs fades. Perhaps Qs simply are manifestations of A from various ‘perspectives’.
For example, I still recall my astonishment as a child upon being told that traveling
through fog is just like traveling through a cloud. Later, I learned why: there is hardly
a difference between fog and cloud except altitude; one could fairly say that fog is
just a cloud down upon the ground.
The “Principle of Identity of Effects” serves as a label for the proposal that where
an explanatory thing always effects the same phenomena and never effects anything
else, then those phenomena are just manifestations of that explaining thing. This
principle can be very useful, but it must be applied cautiously, as discussions of
more complex procedures shall illustrate.
Why wait to see what kind of A can keep predicting each and every thing that
comes along? Perhaps we can deﬁne A more carefully up front. What if A can effect
… everything!
[everything – all observed ‘Zs’ where a Z could be anything]
There is no Z such that If A then not-Z [by deﬁning A just right and then deducing this
second premise]
So, A [extreme deducible abduction – “Panoptical abduction” – abduction by everything
observed]
While uncommon, this extremely imaginative sort of ‘explanation’ isn’t alien to
human thinking. When people long ago mostly lived in isolated villages, rooted to
their local agricultural life, childish questions asking why the sky displays its bright
lights, or why the landscape has its peculiar features, or why the people do the daily
tasks they do, might (depending on local tradition) all be answered with ancient lore
about a single high god who turns out to always be responsible for arranging all

Abduction, Complex Inferences, and Emergent Heuristics …
185
matters. Seeing “the hand of god” in all things remains an explanatory tactic avail-
able to theology to this day. Yet this tactic remains vulnerable to local ignorance; its
plausibility relates to the “Social Inconceivability of Options” principle often oper-
ating among social groups. That vulnerability is exposed when one village discovers
how the neighboring village credits everything to a different deity. That’s the risk
to crediting a lone A for all that explanatory work—what about some imaginatively
deﬁned B that can explain everything too? Deduction is needed again. What we need
is an additional principle to add to the deduction process.
There is no Z such that If A then not-Z [deduced from A’s deﬁnition]
There is no Z such that If B then not-Z [deduced from B’s deﬁnition]
[everything]
If X is responsible for a set of things and Y is responsible for precisely that same set of
things, then X = Y [Principle of Identity of Responsibles]
So, A [“Reductive panoptical abduction”]
The Principle of Identity of Responsibles has some intuitive power because one
commonsensically doesn’t expect some Z to really be entirely caused by both A and
B, so only one is probably involved. For example, two neighboring villages, or two
entire religions, may suspect that fewer than two deities are fully responsible for
all creation (so they instead argue over the correct name for that singular supreme
deity). However, that helpful intuition cannot logically identify which one, A or B,
is actually responsible, or whether some unknown C might really be responsible.
This Principle of Identity of Responsibles can’t be generally valid. It only seems
to be valid so long as there is nothing that could ever be unexplainable by A or B.
Under those extraordinary conditions, we can’t conceive of a difference that makes a
difference. As Peirce judged, no logical difference remains between two hypotheses
permanently having the same empirical consequences.7 We can decide that the A/B
distinction is just semantic, and we reduce them to each other so that only one
explanation is really involved. In this atypical context alone, the Principle may be
admitted.
But what about the way that it could still be the case that even “If A then [every-
thing]”, each particular Z never depends on A? Deﬁning A “just right” to be logically
compatible with all Z does not permit the inference that Z every actually depends on
A. In fact, the vaguer A gets by deﬁnition to stay compatible with everything in the
world, the less we are able to conceive of the grounds for a dependency relationship
of any Z to A. A is assigned fewer and fewer traits and the remaining traits get more
and more abstract. There is less and less in common between A and any particular
thing, to the point where A shares almost nothing or nothing in common with things
and cannot be understandably relatable to all things. (Theologians are familiar with
the way that metaphysical conceptions of God can easily get vaguer the more that
God is unlike creation.) The “Explanatory Relationship Problem” arises in the long
run, in a new form. The claim that “A is responsible for each and every thing” can
7See Psillos [8, 135].

186
J. R. Shook
become explanatorily vacuous and the conception of A becomes empty. Label this
as the “Explanatory Emptiness Problem.”
In order to avoid that explanatory dead end, we must return to a stage before
deduction was allowed to tempt us to deﬁne A with excessive ‘explanatory’ power.
We therefore return to this stage:
Qs, and If A then Qs
Rs, and If A then Rs
Ss, and If A then Ss
Ts, and If A then Ts
…
So, A [abductive induction – “Interative Abduction” – a sequence of similar abductions of
things]
Yet it is still the case that some alternative B might keep up with explaining Qs,
Rs, Ss, etc. That possibility of competition should not get ruled out. So we must
restrain our conception of A in advance.
3
Abduction Controls
Let’s try to control the deﬁnition of A so that it only has a delimited amount of traits
and powers.
Qs, Rs, Ss, and Ts!
If A then Qs
If A then Rs
If A then Ss
If A then Ts [and given A’s deﬁnition, by deduction we see that there are no more things for
A to explain]
So, A [deduced abductive induction]
All the same, we won’t wait long for some B, C, and D to show up to explain
Qs, Rs, Ss, and Ts too. It’s too easy to conceive of some new B (etc.) such that E
‘explains’ a given list of Qs, Rs, Ss, and Ts already observed. (A cat or a dog, rather
than a raccoon, may be getting into each house’s garbage cans on my street.) If many
conceivable causes for the same observed phenomena can be considered, what can
be called the “Explanatory Plenitude Problem” arises to diminish conﬁdence in any
of the possible A, B, C, D, etc.
Delimiting the conception of A up front was too hasty. We must limit the explana-
tory responsibilities of A without delimiting them too much up front. Our answer is
this: we shall permit A (and B, etc.) to be deﬁned generously up front, permitting it
to potentially be responsible for matters not yet observed.
Qs!
If A then Qs

Abduction, Complex Inferences, and Emergent Heuristics …
187
Rs!
If A then Rs [given A’s deﬁnition, by deduction we see how Rs would be expected from A]
So, A [“limited interative abduction”]
Of course, some alternative explanation B could also turn out to expect Rs too. What
could throw the advantage to A again?
A’s advantage would be due to greater explanatory reach. How many novel
phenomena might A be able to ‘predict’ after their discovery—how much can A
‘retrodict’ in the long run?
Qs!
If A then Qs
Rs!
If A then Rs [given A’s deﬁnition, by deduction we see how Rs would be expected from A]
Ss!
If A then Ss [given A’s deﬁnition, by deduction we see how Ss would be expected from A]
…
So, A [deducibly abductive induction – “Retrodicted Abduction”]
This procedure can continue for a long time, depending on the initial deﬁnition of
A and how many kinds of phenomena can be elicited from it. (If only a dog would
knock over lots of garbage cans, and eat all of the food waste, and dig a hole nearby
to bury a steak bone, etc., then suspicions turn towards blaming a dog.) There is a
similar inductive version to Retrodicted abduction, “Retrodicted Induction”:
Qs!
Suppose that If A then Qs [after designing A’s deﬁnition quite vaguely, to expect Qs along
with plenty of other unspeciﬁed matters]
Rs!
Suppose that If A then Rs [now expecting Rs from A’s vague deﬁnition too]
Ss!
Suppose that If A then Ss [now expecting Ss from A’s vague deﬁnition too]
…
So, A [abducibly deductive induction – “Retrodicted Induction”]
Retrodicted Induction superﬁcially looks like an abductive procedure. It surely is
far more suspicious, because A’s deﬁnition is designed in advance to ‘explain’ not just
some initial Qs but also plenty of other vaguely indicated matters, so that any chosen
Rs, Ss, and Ts (etc.) can get ‘explained’ when they show up later. (If my partner gets
fearfully convinced that a bear is roaming the neighborhood, without knowing much
about bears, that suspicion gets stronger every day that a mess is discovered, because
“That’s apparently just what a bear would do!”) Retrodicted Abduction seems less
suspicious by comparison, because at least A has the modestly greater merit of not
being pre-designed to vaguely ﬁt with some selected set of phenomena observed
later on.

188
J. R. Shook
For an explanation A supported by either procedure, some rival explanations B,
C, and D will try to keep pace, but a failure rate will build up among them. It is
possible that some E will outpace all other explanations tried so far, by retrodicting
more explained phenomena than the rest without exhausting its explanatory powers.
If two explanations, E and F, have explained all surprising Qs, Rs, …, Zs without
signs of explanatory exhaustion, perhaps E and F are really about the same thing?
Apply the Principle of Identity of Responsibles here: If X is responsible for a set
of things and Y is responsible for precisely that same set of things, then X = Y.
However, that Principle is not valid in this context, where it is not known whether
their sets of explained phenomena will remain the same, so therefore E and F cannot
be known to be identical to each other.
Furthermore, conceptions of E and F become vaguer as they repeatedly come up
with post hoc ways to ‘explain’ what gets observed. By the Principle of Explanatory
Emptiness, explanations E and F (etc.) risk becoming vacuous as they race each other
to maximize phenomena explained. It seems to be a dead end to expect maximal
retrodictions from explanations.
More pressure must be put on the explanations A, B, C etc. by the things Q, R, S
(etc.) that they are supposed to be responsible for. Two primary options emerge and
diverge at this stage.
The “Predicted Independent Phenomena” scenario, in which the deﬁnition of A gets induced
to expect an iteration of Qs, Rs, etc.:
If A then Qs [given A’s deﬁnition, by deduction we see how Qs would be expected from A]
A pattern of Qs gets discovered!
If A then Rs [given A’s deﬁnition, by deduction we see how Rs would be expected from A]
A pattern of Rs gets discovered!
…
So, A [deduced inductive abduction – “Predicted Abduction”]
OR
The “Predicted Analogous Phenomena” scenario, in which the deﬁnition of A is used to
deduce features, and a iterated series of Fs are predicted for Qs and Rs:
If A then Qs and Rs have F1 [from A’s deﬁnition, by deduction feature F1 is expected in
both Qs and Rs]
Qs and Rs have F1!
If A then Qs and Rs have F2 [from A’s deﬁnition, by deduction feature F2 is expected in
both Qs and Rs]
Qs and Rs have F2!
…
So, A [induced deductive abduction – “Predicted Coduction”]
Predicted Abduction is the ﬁrst procedure in this development which genuinely
deserves some credibility. It combines two important features. First, the deﬁnition
of A remains stable throughout the iterations of abductions (this will become highly
signiﬁcant), so iterations are deduced from the same deﬁnition to A. Second, the

Abduction, Complex Inferences, and Emergent Heuristics …
189
deﬁnition of A is applied to make “novel” predictions about what would be discov-
ered, and those discoveries are made. This is abductive risk, which should not get
lost. (Knowing more about dogs than bears, I can predict further signs of canine
scavenging around the neighborhood, and watch for conﬁrmations.) So long as the
iterated pattern of successful predictions can continue, A can enjoy some deserved
credibility. How much credibility? Well, we mustn’t get too attached to A, because
its run of explanatory luck may not be long, especially because the deﬁnition of A
is inﬂexibly rigid. How much can A really keep predicting?
We consider Predicted Coduction next. Like its simpler version already consid-
ered, this procedure must eventually suffer from the Explanatory Relationship
Problem. Recalling my neighbor’s house, sharing striking features to its ﬂoor plan
with my own house, we might notice further similarities as we get more convinced
that one architect designed both houses, while overlooking major dissimilarities and
ignoring the possibility that two different architects coincidentally designed similar
plans. All the same, an explanation A using Predicted Conduction will resist its
dismissal, on the grounds that it has impressive explanatory power, by accounting for
surprising similar features to different matters. That impressive ability to focus atten-
tion only on similarities, in the long run, is exactly what should erode its credibility
upon reﬂection.
As A is applied for ﬁnding expanding analogous features to separate phenomena,
great pressure will compel the conception of A to change and develop, so that it can
‘effect’ additional features to new things while still accounting for already explained
features.
4
Abduction Inﬂation
If Predicted Conduction is applied in a more ﬂexible manner, then it will actually
look like this in practice:
The “Predictably Analogous Phenomena” procedure:
If A then Qs have features F1 [given A’s deﬁnition, by deducing how Qs having F1 are
expected]
Qs have F1!
If A then Rs also have analogous features F2 [after adjusting A’s deﬁnition, then deducing
how Rs having F2 are expected, while still deducing Qs with F1 too]
Rs have F2!
…
So, A [inducibly deductive abduction – “Predictable Coduction”]
ThisﬂexibleprocedureofPredictableCoductiondeservesitsname,becauseaftera
while this mode of explaining gets somewhat predictable. Primed by an initial suppo-
sition of A, our cognitive capacities search out novel features of curious matters, and
then we ponder adjusting our conception of A just right to ‘predict’ some analogous
feature to those matters getting explored. For example, suppose my friend makes

190
J. R. Shook
his ﬁrst visit to a foreign country and barely understands its language. Overhearing
native speakers warn against the ‘zumzum’ (names have been changed to protect the
innocent species), my friend infers that this zumzum is a nasty thing to watch out for.
That night, noises against the window disturb her rest, she notices a red bite mark
on her ankle the next day, and on the third day she catches a glimpse of something
small crawling on her sandwich. She now thinks that a single insect is behind these
manifestions: this ‘zumzum’ is a ﬂying bug, that seems to also be a bug that ﬂies
onto people to bite them, as well as a hungry biting bug that lands on food. Conﬁdent
that she has identiﬁed what this zumzum is, after blaming it for a series of incidents
“bugging” her, she would be surprised to learn from local inhabitants that ‘zumzum’
doesn’t actually refer to any of those things.
The abduction aspect to Predictable Coduction inﬂates the conception of A to
keep up with whatever evidence is brought before it. We simultaneously ‘guess’ at
what A should be conceived as while we try to detect just those suitable analogous
features which will ‘ﬁt’ well enough with a revised conception of A. After those
features are ‘found’, then we ‘conﬁrm’ that revised conception to A, and even higher
credibility gets assigned to A. There is no lack of cleverness to this procedure,
since it may be difﬁcult to simultaneously imagine a modiﬁed A that can ‘effect’
just the right analogous features to some new matter still getting explored. This
sort of procedure can be productive at the ‘cutting edge’ of new knowledge, where
features of poorly understood things are not clear at all. That’s why the ‘detection’
of ‘predicted’ features can happen more easily, and ‘conﬁrmations’ to A are more
frequently available than with any well-established subject matter. This also explains
why, despite the difﬁculties to ‘predicting’ novel features to things, rival explanations
B, C (etc.) can manage to compete and survive alongside A.
AssuspiciousasthisﬂexibilitytoA(andB,C,etc.)mustbe,PredictableCoduction
marks a needed transition in the development of explanatory inference, precisely
because A’s conception is changing to respond to more and more evidence. Not only
is the conception of explanation A central to the evaluation of these inferences, a
feature of any material inference, any potential growth for a material inference’s
explanatory power lies in the deliberate inquiry-led modiﬁcation to explanations.
Down that road lies the full explanatory power of material inferences harnessed to
inquiry-driven evidence gathering.8
Although Predictable Coduction displays some explanatory potential, a degen-
erate form of Predictable Coduction refuses to make speciﬁc predictions about what
phenomena would be observed. Instead, this procedure ﬁrst notices unusual features
to newly discovered things, and then adjusts its explanation A so that those features
‘ﬁt’ a pattern of analogy with previously explained features to other phenomena.
The “Deducibly Analogous Phenomena” procedure:
Qs have F1!
If A then Qs have features F1 [given A’s deﬁnition, by deducing how Qs having F1 are
expected]
Rs have F2!
8Consult Brigandt [21].

Abduction, Complex Inferences, and Emergent Heuristics …
191
If A then Rs also have analogous features F2 [after adjusting A’s deﬁnition, then deducing
how Rs having F2 are expected, while still deducing Qs with F1 too]
Ss have F3!
If A then Ss also have analogous features F3 [after adjusting A’s deﬁnition again, then
deducing how Ss having F3 are expected, while still deducing Rs with F2 and Qs with F1
too]
…
So, A [deducibly abductive induction – “Iterative Coduction”]
Iterative Coduction can attract even more credulous believers than Predictable
Coduction, because this procedure can be repeated and applied to almost anything
novel and somewhat mysterious, making it appear that A is endlessly ‘explaining’
many new curious matters and yielding explanatory connections among them. As
A conceptually inﬂates, its believability seems to grow. This attractive credulity is
the reason why fascination with the “uncanny” linked with oft-repeated superstition
is prevalent across human societies. For example, faulting malevolent spirits for all
sorts of human miseries is not a common custom of only pre-modern times. (Societies
accustomed to such ‘explanations’ typically host ‘experts’ predicting and negotiating
with these hidden powers.) Iterative Coduction is a procedure utilized by mythic
thinking, because it is both scalable and hierarchical. It can be broadened endlessly
across ranges of phenomena, and higher-level explanations can superstructurally be
“Coduced” to unify important features displayed by lower level explanations.
Claude Lévi-Strauss located the divide between scientiﬁc and nonscientiﬁc
mentality here. Both care for evidence and explanation, but mythic mentality spins its
intense practical obsession with everything in the environment into all-encompassing
explanatory webs.9 It is unnecessary to appeal to Lévi-Strauss’s controversial theses;
a reliance of mythic cosmology on Iterative Coduction is evident. When a single and
supremely explanatory web uniting all explanatory webs is creatively developed,
the realm of mythic cosmogony emerges, perhaps including agent deities or at least
supreme powers. Where a grand mythic web of explanation is sustained by struc-
tured inculcation across generations, it acquires features commonly associated with
religion.
The second and third intellectual strategies both lead to the same desired result, a
guarantee that A will be the ‘best’ and ﬁnal explanation, amounting to a procedure
which we label as Deduced Coduction.
Qs have F1, and If A then Qs have F1
Rs have F2, and If modiﬁed-A then Rs have F2
Ss have F3, and If modiﬁed-A then Ss have F3
…
Principle of Explanatory Fertility/Principle of Identity of Responsibles
So, A [inducibly abductive deduction - Deduced Coduction, by pan-fertility or by pan-
responsibility]
9Lévi-Strauss [22].

192
J. R. Shook
In addition, recalling the procedure of Panoptical Abduction, a third strategy to
‘guarantee’ that A is the best and ﬁnal explanation can be rationalized. This third
way is called “Reductive Pancosmism” because everything that can ever be in the
cosmos is reduced to an effect of a single ultimate explanation.
There is no Z such that If A then not-Z [deducible from A’s ﬂexible deﬁnition]
[everything]
Principle of Explanatory Fertility/Principle of Identity of Responsibles
So, A [abducible inductive deduction, Reduced Pancosmism, by pan-fertility or by pan-
responsibility]
Metaphysical systems, some idealistic and others materialistic, can resort to
Deduced Coduction and Reduced Pancosmism, as the history of philosophy displays.
Core differences among kinds of theologies are also traceable back to these
procedures.
Materialisms tend to prefer Deduced Coduction while idealisms typically rely
on Reduced Pancosmism. Four primary types of ‘mono-theology’ also distinguish
themselves here. The development from magical and superstitious imagination
towards mythic ideas about hidden agents and guiding powers reaches its culmina-
tion in cosmogonic religions and rationalizing theologies. Hinduism’s Upanishads
and Advaita Vedanta relied on Reduced Pancosmism by pan-fertility, as the tran-
scendent reality endlessly generates (perceptibly or imperceptibly) all dualities and
natural entities. Christianity’s monotheism relied on Reduced Pancosmism by pan-
responsibility, as the lone Creator effected (directly or indirectly) each natural thing.
Greek polytheism produced a theology that can be called “panpolytheism” which
declared that other nations’ pantheons apply their local names to the one true set
of gods genuinely responsible for all events, hence relying on Deduced Coduc-
tion by pan-responsibility. Roman Stoicism relied on Deduced Coduction by pan-
fertility, by attributing to uniquely supreme powers (‘deities’) the responsibilities for
harmonizing all of nature’s generative cycles and supportive habitats.
5
Abduction Development
Let us return back to two procedures already enumerated, positioned before mythic
thinking branched away: the Predicted Independent Phenomena scenario and the
Predictably Coductive Abduction procedure. To recall:
The “Predicted Independent Phenomena” scenario:
If A then Qs [given A’s deﬁnition, by deduction we see how Qs would be expected from A]
A pattern of Qs gets discovered!
If A then Rs [given A’s deﬁnition, by deduction we see how Rs would be expected from A]
A pattern of Rs gets discovered!
…
So, A [deduced inductive abduction – “Predicted Abduction”]

Abduction, Complex Inferences, and Emergent Heuristics …
193
AND
The “Predictably Analogous Phenomena” procedure:
If A then Qs have features F1 [given A’s deﬁnition, by deducing how Qs having F1 are
expected]
Qs have F1!
If A then Rs also have analogous features F2 [after adjusting A’s deﬁnition, then deducing
how Rs having F2 are expected, while still deducing Qs with F1 too]
Rs have F2!
…
So, A [induced deductive abduction – “Predictable Coduction”]
Predictable Coduction enjoys an enormous advantage over Predicted Abduction:
its deﬁnition of A is permitted to developmentally change. Turning to an example
from physiology, the heart was long ago connected to the ﬂow of red blood. If the
heart by deﬁnition rhythmically puts red blood out through the arteries for consump-
tion by the body, then further events would be observed; the ancient Greek physician
Galen noted pulsing red blood from cut arteries of the limbs, and hearts pumping
blood from its chambers during vivisection. Galen’s delimited deﬁnition for the
heart allowed centuries of physicians to ponder how the heart makes red blood, why
heart valves restrict blood ﬂow direction, where blue blood comes from, why some
arteries are conveying blue blood, and many more mysteries. Harvey’s seventeenth
century discoveries about the heart and circulatory systems were predicated on ﬂex-
ibly deﬁning the heart differently. The heart does not make blood and blood isn’t
consumed but only transformed, as the blood is pumped out through arteries, back
towards the heart through veins, and cooled by the air in the lungs during a side trip
(he was unprepared for reconceiving the lungs).10
Admirers of Predicted Abduction might point to its deﬁnitional rigidity to endorse
its higher credibility, since A doesn’t receive post hoc modiﬁcations suspiciously
capable of predicting new phenomena. It is the case that Predictable Coduction’s
ﬂexibility exposes this procedure to the high risk of degenerating into post hoc
pseudo-explanations, explanatory vacuousness, and superstitious thinking. However,
puritanical admiration for Predicted Abduction would be misguided. After all, the
deﬁnition of A just to explain the initial Qs had to be forged from available prior
notions, and A’s conception is almost always some modiﬁed older idea. Furthermore,
revolutionary theories in the history of science always undergo modiﬁcation and
development as they are extended to wider and disparate phenomena. It is very
difﬁcult to identify some useful hypothesis which never changed at all from its
initial conception to its fullest utility. Nor does theoretical rigidity serve as a reliable
predictor of scientiﬁc success—many of best conﬁrmed scientiﬁc theories underwent
dramatic development in the course of their thorough testing. Indeed, theoretical
rigidity seems to always part of the regrettable story to discredited explanations.
10See Shackelford [23], chap. 2.

194
J. R. Shook
Let us honestly admit that explanatory rigidity is no safe path towards credibility.
Permitting explanatory ﬂexibility, we next generate the procedure of Predictable
Abduction:
The “Predictable Independent Phenomena” procedure:
If A then Qs [given A’s deﬁnition, by deduction we see how Qs would be expected from A]
A pattern of Qs gets discovered!
If A then Rs [after adjusting A’s deﬁnition, then deducing how Rs would be expected from
A, while still deducing Qs too]
A pattern of Rs gets discovered!
…
So, A [deducibly inductive abduction – “Predictable Abduction”]
At this stage, with two tentatively viable procedures, we can see how far we
have come all the way from simple abduction to inducibly deductive abduction and
deducibly inductive abduction.
Both procedures ﬂexibly alter an explanation in the course of anticipating and
predicting novel patterns to things or novel features to things. As we discussed,
Predictable Coduction is a dangerous procedure to explore. Unless strict controls are
placed upon modifying A in the process, A soon enjoys vast explanatory fertility at
the cost of becoming explanatorily vacuous and/or A only ‘explains’ things as they
get discovered, generating mythos. All the same, discerning an explanation behind
the prediction of analogous features to otherwise separate things feels familiar to
us and possesses an undeniably powerful cognitive appeal. Things really are more
deeply connected that they may appear, as a natural matter. The tougher question
is how to develop this Coductive procedure in order to weed out poor explanations
from better ones. Let’s set this issue aside, for now.
Predictable Abduction also look familiar and compelling, for obvious reasons.
Let’s try to develop this Abductive procedure in order to weed out poor explanations
from better ones. We should ﬁrst admit that good explanations try to explain already
curious matters. We should also admit that if we will be permitting conceptions of
explanations to get set down and also modiﬁed, those explanatory features should
have the capacity (somehow) to effectuate Qs, Rs, and so on, so that there is some
conceivability to A (A at least has its set of capacities C1, C2, etc.), and also some
conceivability to the basis for the effective relationship between the explanation and
the phenomena getting explained.
This next procedure controls the set of capacities so that they are immediately put
to use to explain how Qs, Rs etc. get effectuated.
This AIA procedure: A and its capacities Cs are abductively related, and then that relation
is induced to effect Qs, Rs, etc.
Qs!
(If A then C1), then Qs would be effected from C1
(If A then C2 too), then Rs would be effected from C2
Rs!

Abduction, Complex Inferences, and Emergent Heuristics …
195
(If A then C3 too), then Ss would be effected from C3
Ss!
…
So, A(Cs) [abductively inductive abduction - AIA]
The problem with AIA is that crediting A with multiple capacities, accumulating
to account for more and more phenomena, leave the conception of A with a set of
otherwise unrelated and ad hoc capacities. Looking to the history of science, the
example of germ theory illustrates AIA’s potential and limits. The hypothesis that
tiny living forms or ‘germs’ are involved with sepsis and pestilence traces back to the
seventeenth century. Over subsequent centuries, germs were occasionally raised by
speculative physicians and botanists to account for very different phenomena from
infections, boils, and fevers to plagues among humans and livestock, and even to
afﬂictions to plants and crops. The concept of ‘germ’ was left far too vague, and
related to varying phenomena in an ad hoc manner, leaving little solid informa-
tion for researchers to work with. By the late nineteenth century, biologists were
distinguishing bacteria, molds, fungi, worms and other parasites, and many more
kinds of microorganisms, permitting scientists to link speciﬁc pathogens with certain
maladies. AIA by itself credits A with various capacities ‘generated’ from A, but not
because we really understand A, but only because they would conveniently produce
the phenomena. There’s no reason given why A would have these Cs, or how they
relate to each other. Instead of the Explanatory Vacuousness problem, there is a
mysterious Capacity Overload problem. Furthermore, any rival explanation B, C
(etc.) can keep pace by including those capacities too, so no explanation can really
gain any advantage over sufﬁciently imaginative rivals even in the long run.
To avoid the appearance of arbitrariness where Cs are gradually elicited from the
conception of A, it is possible to ﬁrst list all the Cs that the explanation should have,
and then check to see if those capacities do effectuate further Rs, Ss, etc.
This IAA procedure: A and its capacities Cs are inducibly related, and then that relation is
abductively effectuating Qs, Rs, etc.
C1, C2, C3 … imply A which has these Cs, and Qs would be effected from C1
Qs would be effected from C1
Qs!
Rs would be effected from C2
Rs!
Ss would be effected from C3
Ss!
…
So, A(Cs) [induced abductive abduction - IAA]
The problem with IAA is that the initial list of capacities for A would have to be
amazingly predictive of not just the initial Qs, but also the Rs, Ss (etc.) in advance. It
would require the most extraordinary guessing at just the right needed capacities to
accomplish this procedure successfully for very long. If that amazing guessing feels

196
J. R. Shook
somehow believable to someone, that person would ﬁnd A extremely credible. But
moreskepticismisrecommended.Thisprocedurecanworkwellonsomeoneignorant
aboutQs,Rs,Ss,etc.,sothatthefraudulentclaimismadethatthisexplanationAarose
long ago before all these Zs were discovered but A still managed to ‘predict’ them.
For example, the attraction to “Ancient Wisdom” that amazingly anticipates today’s
matters and recently discovered phenomena falls into this category of intellectual
fraud. Of course, that explanation A was actually invented recently after all those Zs
had been discovered, and so this procedure effectively collapses into IAD, Deduced
Coduction, which is a ‘theological’ procedure.
A similarly suspicious procedure, IIA, simply assigns a set of Cs to an A which
are capably of effecting any number of Zs of some general character.
This IIA procedure: A and its capacities Cs are inducibly related, and then that relation is
inductively/effectuating Qs, Rs, etc.
C1, C2, C3 … imply A which has these Cs, so that various Zs would be effected from one
or another of the Cs
Qs!
Rs!
Ss!
…
So, A(Cs) [induced inductive abduction – Elicited Abduction]
The way that Elicited Abduction won’t say in advance much about what speciﬁc
sorts of phenomena these Zs will be must arouse suspicion and skepticism. When
speciﬁc Rs, Ss (etc.) get detected and elicited into service, it would be too easy to
say that those are the among the Zs ‘predicted’ by A having those Cs. For example,
a pseudo-scientiﬁc theory such as astrology relies on this Elicited Abduction proce-
dure, in which the capacities of heavenly bodies are supposed laid down by the
theory, and they in turn are responsible for vague sorts of elicited Zs noteworthy
here on earth. When interesting things do happen on earth, such as Rs and Ss (you
are born with a certain temperament, or speciﬁc things happen to you today) then
the astrologer announces that those Rs and Ss were indeed among the Zs “foretold”
in the heavens. This procedure is most plausible to people who are already quite
susceptible to conﬁrmation biases.11
Instead of specifying A’s Cs in advance, we could return to a method that adjusts
the Cs possessed by A gradually, as the procedure goes along from prediction to
prediction.
The ADA procedure: A and its capacities Cs are abductively related, and then that relation
is deductively applied to imply analogous features to Qs, Rs, etc.
Qs have F1!
Supposing (If A then C1), then Qs would have feature F1
Supposing (If A then C2 too), then Rs would have feature F2
Rs have F2!
11On pseudo-science in general, the reader may begin by consulting Pigliucci and Boudry [24].

Abduction, Complex Inferences, and Emergent Heuristics …
197
Supposing (If A then C3 too), then Ss would have feature F3
Ss have F3!
…
So, A(Cn) [abductively deductive abduction – ADA – Abductive Coduction]
Abductive Coduction manifests a tendency, also seen in IIA, towards a strong
resistance to any disconﬁrmation. Suppose that after supposing that A has C4 and
expecting some Ts with feature F4, those Ts aren’t showing up as predicted. Has A
suffered from a disconﬁrmation, so that doubt instead of credulity is earned here? No,
the proponent of A will explain, all that has happened is that the fallible abduction
that A has C4 was hasty and mistaken. A hasn’t been disconﬁrmed at all—only C4.
In fact, this bad prediction has yielded credible information about A, that it lacks
C4. But A’s existence remains a secure matter, we will be assured. Over time, by this
selective procedure, A will acquires capacities (let’s say) C1, C2, C3, C6, C12, C15,
C19, C23, and C37. Look at how many capacities of A have been “conﬁrmed”!
Although Abductive Coduction is minimally proto-scientiﬁc, since it is at least
imaginatively experimental, reliance on this procedure would be unwise. The danger
is that devout conviction that A is real can be sustained in foolishly credulous people
for a long time by applying this hit-or-miss method. Conspiracy theorists rely on
selective Abduction Coduction; they imagine that important events are really the
outcomes of plots by a secretive organization, let’s say. Which events? That’s the
puzzle-solving fun to being a conspiracy theorist—only the truly signiﬁcant events
would occupy such a powerful and secret organization, so one must weed through
each year’s worth of notable events to discern just the ones that could and would
be accomplished by this secret organization (using their money? their threats? their
political machinations? their overseas support? and so on) in a timely and effective
manner.
The logical fact remains that A would not be seriously tested by Abductive Coduc-
tion, although whoever is assigning Cs to A and garnering some conﬁrmations would
be a very good guesser. Good guessing could also be displayed by proponents of a
rival explanation B, C (etc.), as well. There could be something real about A and
its conﬁrmed capacities, but this is a poor procedure for credibly ﬁguring out what
is really the best explanation. There are fewer fruitless debates than those between
adherents of rival conspiracy theories.
Abductive Coduction is hence susceptible to degeneration into hasty judgment,
cognitive bias, fallacious inference, and even outright trickery. It is the method
preferred by a fraud who might fool spectators into thinking that he or she possesses
extraordinary powers. With enough imagined ‘capacities’ for making forecasts, diag-
nosing illnesses, reading others’ thoughts, doing impossible feats, and so on, the
busily risk-taking fraud can luckily (or skillfully, with some magic tricks) accom-
plish some unexpected results once in a while before surprised onlookers. When
the credulous people in the crowd have “seen with their own eyes” just a handful
of ‘successful’ conﬁrmations to this fraud’s amazing capacities, they don’t attend as
much to the disconﬁrmations. This risk of degeneration into the “Fraudulent Powers”
problem leaves Abductive Coduction in generally poor repute.

198
J. R. Shook
6
Abduction Evolution
We proceed to a more complex stage, for working out procedures that exercise stricter
controls on the capacities assigned to the conception of A. The next procedure in the
sequence is DAA.
The DAA procedure: A’s capacities are deduced from A’s deﬁnition, but then they are
abductively related to Qs, Rs, Ss (etc.)
Qs!
Suppose (only if A has C1), then Qs
Suppose (only if A has C1-2), then Qs & Rs
Rs!
Suppose (only if A has C1-3), then Qs, Rs & Ss
Ss!
…
So, A(Cn) [deducibly abductive abduction – “Strict Abduction”]
Unlike the simpler suspicious procedures AIA, IAA, IIA, and ADA, which run
into their troubles by not strictly controlling the capacities assigned to A’s deﬁnition,
DAA exercises very strict control over modestly modifying the conception of A.
Only the capacities required to account for the phenomena are attributed to A, and
whatever the deﬁnition of A may be, that deﬁnition is only permitted to be compatible
with those Cs applied in the procedure. No other conceptions of A, beyond those
Cs proposed to account for Qs, Rs, Ss (etc.) are regarded as relevant. DAA has
similarities with the simpler procedure of Predictable Abduction. However, instead
of allowing the deﬁnition of A to be as broad as desired and adjusting it whenever
it is convenient to predict some Rs, Ss (etc.), as Predictable Abduction allows, DAA
does not permit the deﬁnition of A to range beyond whatever is minimally necessary
for it to have its explanatory capacities. That is why we may label DAA as Strict
Abduction.
Strict Abduction has ﬁve additional merits. First, whenever it being used, any
particular time the conception of A has only one clear deﬁnition and set of capacities.
Second, due to this bounded clarity, a community of inquirers can apply A together
and everyone can agree upon what the explanation is and what it so far entails.
Third, although a community will disagree over what new capacities A should have
for increasing its predictive range, both the current deﬁnition of A and the presently
assigned capacities place compatibility constraints on the sort of new capacities
that can be assigned to A. Fourth, if a new prediction goes badly, only the relevant
implicated capacity of A must be doubted, and not the rest of the capacities of A,
preserving what explanatory power A had already earned. Fifth, the expansion of
A’s capacities and its explanatory range can halt whenever the community ﬁnds no
work for A to do presently, but A can be put to work again in the future.
Comets can illustrate Strict Abduction. During the late 1500s, astronomer Tycho
Brahe’s observations suggested that comets are celestial (not atmospheric) bodies

Abduction, Complex Inferences, and Emergent Heuristics …
199
due to their observed trajectories; if celestial, they would be distant from the earth,
and Brahe’s parallax measurements indeed indicated their immense distance and
vast size. By 1604 Johannes Kepler added that the sun’s rays cause a comet’s head
to expel a stream of nebular material shining by the sun’s light; his idea ﬁt well
with the usually overlooked way that a comet’s tail always points away from the
sun. This celestial, naturalistic, and causal explanation for comets hasn’t essentially
changed, but only supplemented. If comets journey between the planets, their paths
must also be affected by the sun. By the late 1600s, Isaac Newton determined that
a comet approaches the sun, swings around behind it, and departs away from the
sun, and he explained why a parabolic path due to gravity would be typical for
many comets. Also, Newton suggested that the sun would heat a close comet to
incredible temperatures, so the head of a comet must be dense while the tail would
be vaporous. Later investigations conﬁrmed these hypotheses, completing the basic
theory of comets.12
ThetransitionfromPredictableAbductiontoStrictAbductionmarkstheboundary
into scientiﬁc reasoning. Predictable Abduction, Predictable Coduction, and even
Abductive Coduction are proto-scientiﬁc. They also can be put to use for pseudo-
scientiﬁc and theological ends, as the proto-scientiﬁc is simultaneously logical,
mythological, theological, and scientiﬁc. All four procedures are cohabitants of a
broad realm of “speculative” thinking, or what the ancient Greeks called “inquiry
into nature” (not excepting the cosmic gods), which is an arrival place of many
simpler methods and a departure point for complex procedures going in different
directions. Several civilizations arrived at this generative nexus of the proto-scientiﬁc
and proto-theological.13
Only Strict Abduction ventures on into fully scientiﬁc methodology. That journey
leaves behind preferences for vaguely conceived yet richly imagined explanations
that elicit credulity by appealing to familiar notions, cognitive biases, and selected
evidence than genuine predictive power. A scientiﬁc hypothesis restricts the capac-
ities (properties, powers, etc.) of a hypothesized thing to some fairly delimited set,
and those capacities are stable and habitual. The logic of testing hypotheses requires
such features; speciﬁc predictions must be made and conﬁrmed, so postulated entities
must behave in patterned ways under speciﬁed conditions. That is why science has an
innate preference for proposing constant impersonal capacities to explain observed
regularities and mundane matters, leaving mythic and religious thinking to imagine
less than predictable (ﬁckle and willful) agents to account for singular extraordinary
events.
A close variant to Strict Abduction is DDA—Deducible Coduction—in which
A and its capacities Cs are deducibly related, and then that relation is deductively
applied to imply analogous features to Qs and Rs.
DDA:
Qs and Rs have F1!
12Heidarzadeh [25], chap. 4.
13On that Greek nexus, consult Buxton [26], Morgan [27], Wians [28], Mikalson [29].

200
J. R. Shook
Only if A then C1, then Qs and Rs would have feature F1
Only if A then C2, then Qs and Rs would have feature F2
Qs and Rs have F2!
Only if A then C3, then Qs and Rs would have feature F3
Qs and Rs have F3!
…
So, A(Cn) [deducibly deductive abduction – DDA – Deducible Coduction]
Deducible Coduction is also a basic, but soundly scientiﬁc procedure. It utility
is limited to the investigation of two different kinds of things which share in many
common features. Recalling how fog banks are practically low clouds, their common
manner of refracting and obscuring light (F1) is due to their composition of tiny water
droplets (A). With enough water particles suspended in the air (C1), both clouds and
fog banks would obscure light in their characteristic way. Water particles condense
from water vapor (C2) when just a few degrees separate the air temperature and the
dew point, so both clouds and fog would form when those conditions prevail (F2),
regardless of altitude (although wind matters). Further properties of condensed water
vapor account for additional common features to both clouds and fog.
In the long run, Deducible Coduction can permit a long iteration of successful
predictions that Qs and Rs share in every signiﬁcant feature. If there seems to be
no signiﬁcant feature that Qs and Rs do not share and A’s capacities have predicted
all of them, a further inference seems plausible: the genuine connection between
Qs, Rs, and A must be far tighter than originally postulated. Perhaps Qs and Rs are
simply two ways for A to effectively manifest itself (so that A and Qs aren’t really
two separate matters, nor are A and Rs—e.g. fog is cloud is amassed water droplets).
Alternatively, going even further, there really was no A in the ﬁrst place because Qs
and Rs really are the same thing understood from two different ‘perspectives’.
The ﬁrst suggestion amounts to a “Principle of Identity of Effectables” while the
second suggestion amounts to a “Principle of Identity of Correlatables”. The Identity
of Effectables means that Qs and Rs are dual manifestations (or ‘properties’, etc.)
of one single underlying A. The Identity of Correlatables means that there never
really was any A, since it is now deemed explanatory eliminable, so that Qs and Rs
were really the same thing all along. (Further inquiry could next determine if R has
ontological priority so that Q is ‘actually’ just R, or the reverse). These two Principles
would function in two different procedures as follows:
Application of the Principle of Identity of Effectables
Qs and Rs have F1!
Only if A then C1, then Qs and Rs would have feature F1
Only if A then C2, then Qs and Rs would have feature F2
Qs and Rs have F2!
…
For all signiﬁcant Fs of Qs and Fs of Rs, each Fn of Qs = some Fn of Rs [by inductive
searching and discovery – “Identity of Features”]

Abduction, Complex Inferences, and Emergent Heuristics …
201
Principle of Identity of Effectables – Where all of A’s capacities effectuate Qs & Rs Identity
of Features, then A = Qs and A = Rs
So, A(Cn) = Qs & Rs [Maximal Coduction]
OR
Application of the Principle of Identity of Correlatables
Qs and Rs have F1!
Only if A then C1, then Qs and Rs would have feature F1
Only if A then C2, then Qs and Rs would have feature F2
Qs and Rs have F2!
…
For all signiﬁcant Fs of Qs and Fs of Rs, each Fn of Qs = some Fn of Rs [by inductive
searching and discovery – “Identity of Features”]
Principle of Identity of Correlatables – Where all of A’s capacities effectuate Qs & Rs Identity
of Features, then Qs = Rs
So, Qs = Rs [Maximal Reduction]
Only each scientiﬁc ﬁeld of inquiry can be responsible for judging the circum-
stances and background knowledge that permit the application of either Maximal
Coduction or Maximal Reduction. These are fallible applications under the best of
circumstances, since the possibility of rival explanations doing an even better job of
explaining Qs and Rs, or a different job of relating Qs and Rs to other phenomena,
cannot be ruled out in advance. Regarding banks of fog as just low-lying clouds
because their composition and conditions for formation are so similar is an illus-
tration of Maximal Coduction. An illustration of Maximal Reduction is the fate of
Lavoisier’s ‘caloric ﬂuid’, an elemental gaseous substance within all bodies which
ﬂows from hotter to cooler regions. Chemists solved many experimental problems
using caloric theory, while pondering how caloric ﬂuid would also be the basis for the
kinetic motion of molecules responsible for temperature. By the mid-1800s, Rudolf
Clausius and James Clerk Maxwell demonstrated that the transfer of heat is just the
redistribution of molecular kinetic energy obeying the principle of conservation of
energy, so ‘caloric ﬂuid’ was discarded.
There is one more procedure to this stage, AAA, which combines the merits of
Strict Abduction with those of Deducible Coduction.
The AAA procedure: A’s capacities Cs are abductively proposed from A’s prior explanatory
successes, and then they are abductively related to Qs, Rs, Ss (etc.). Let W(1-n) and Y(1-n)
stand for any related series of Qs, Rs, Ss, Ts…Ns. Also, we deﬁne W(1-n) and Y(1-n) as an
“analogous series” where common features found among all members of W(1-n) are also
found, in analogous form, among all of Y(1-n).
If (Only if A’s Cs have predicted a series of unexpected W(1-n)) then (an analogous series
of unexpected Y(1-n))
Y(1-n)!
So, A [abductively abductive abduction – “Productive Abduction”]

202
J. R. Shook
For Productive Abduction, the C’s of A are a “model” applied to the impres-
sive effectuation of one “structure”—a series of W(1−n)—and that model addition-
ally permits the successful prediction of another analogous structure of Y(1−n). To
illustrate Productive Abduction, consider the development of cell theory in biology.
Seeking the fundamental basis of life, the idea of a cell having its own cell wall
and internal organic processes led botanists towards conﬁrmations from studying
microorganisms and plants. By the 1830s, this model was successfully applied
to animal tissues, where cells displayed a similar construction and physiological
functionings, and the cell was conﬁrmed as the basic organic unit for all life forms.
Explanations conﬁrmed by Productive Abduction deserve credibility. This proce-
dure exploring the explanatory productivity of models is respectably scientiﬁc, while
remaining naturally fallible.
7
Abduction Heuristics
Iterations of Productive Abduction (IAAA) can increase credibility, especially if
no other rival explanation is also having that same degree of success. Furthermore,
Deduced Productive Abduction (DAAA) can expand the explanatory power of A to
additional structures if deﬁnite expansions to A’s capacities are envisioned.
Iterated Productive Abduction:
If (Only if A’s capacities Cs have predicted a series of unexpected W(1-n)) then (an analogous
series of unexpected Y(1-n))
Y(1-n)!
If (Only if A’s capacities Cs have predicted W(1-n) & Y(1-n)) then (another analogous series
of unexpected Z(1-n))
Z(1-n)!
…
So, A(Cs) [IAAA – “Iterated Productive Abduction”]
OR
Deduced Productive Abduction:
If (Only if A’s capacities C(n) have predicted a series of unexpected W(1-n)) then (an
analogous series of unexpected Y(1-n))
Y(1-n)!
If (Only if A’s capacities C(n + 1) have predicted W(1-n) & Y(1-n)) then (another analogous
series of unexpected Z(1-n))
Z(1-n)!
…
So, A(Cn +) [DAAA – “Deduced Productive Abduction”]
Both Iterated Productive Abduction and Deduced Productive Abduction can be
powerfully credible for scientiﬁc explanation. An illustration for the ﬁrst procedure

Abduction, Complex Inferences, and Emergent Heuristics …
203
comes from Maxwell’s theory of electromagnetic radiation, which explained the
properties of light as manifestations of the same radiating energy found at shorter
and longer frequencies (conﬁrmed with radio waves), and explained the properties
of both electric and magnetic forces as well, so that a single theory of oscillating
electric/magnetic energy obeying a few equations eventually explained a wide range
of phenomena. To illustrate the second procedure, consider the concept of the gene,
which underwent drastic development during the 20th century. Proposed as the basic
unit of heredity passed on the offspring via reproduction, a gene’s capacity for trans-
mission and combination with other genes to produce traits in all organisms could
additionally explain how a cell’s internal processes are regulated if genes also have
the ability to control metabolic reactions, suggesting chemical properties for genes.
Seeking out those properties in chromosomes, James Watson and Francis Crick ascer-
tained that genes would be stretches of the DNA discovered by X-ray crystallography.
Later research has made the concept of ‘gene’ more complex, as their suscepti-
bility to mutation, reliance on regulatory regions, encoding for multiple proteins,
working alongside epigenetic inﬂuences, making horizontal transfers (and so on),
have explained in succession many puzzling features to cellular activity.
These two procedures are powerful, yet they do go deeper into risky territory. The
same problem that emerged with Coduction can arise here for Iterated Productive
Abduction: the Explanatory Relationship Problem. We can ﬁnd analogous features
in two distinct matters with enough imaginative creativity. Our efforts might go
more into detecting analogous (we imagine) features of structure, and not into the
proposed connecting relationships between A, its many capacities, and structures W,
Y, Z (etc.). As for Deduced Productive Abduction, matters may be worse because A’s
capacities are growing during the procedure, so the Explanatory Emptiness Problem
can emerge again. If we ignore the issue of maintaining coherent conceptions of
the relationships among A and its capacities, this explanatory model may become
explanatorily vacuous, and the conception of A eventually seems paradoxical, irre-
deemably vague, or oddly empty. (The old paradigm of the gene as the unique carrier
of information and the powerful initiator of biochemistry is practically extinct, while
interest insystems biologyandpostgenomics grows.14) Thereis notricktopreventing
these difﬁculties in advance. Communities of inquirers must experimentally explore
the consequences to expanding an explanation’s capacities for the sake of growing its
explanatory power, because there is no higher logical method for dictating theoretical
modiﬁcation.
Because there is no higher inferential procedure for dictating modiﬁcations to
explanations, besides letting them suffer the fate of their own predictive productivity,
one way or the other, we are now entirely within the realm of hypothesis experimen-
tation. Each scientiﬁc ﬁeld must rely on the accumulated wisdom of skilled practi-
tioners and useful heuristics for smartly adjusting procedures as inquiries proceed.
Thisisespeciallythecasewhenanetworkofinterconnectedhypothesesformatheory
which must undergo further explanatory expansion and testing by risky predictions.
14Consult Richardson and Stevens [30].

204
J. R. Shook
The familiar problems of deciding which hypotheses within a theory must suffer cred-
ibility diminishment or even disconﬁrmation when things go badly are a matter of
scientiﬁc heuristics, a higher meta-level problem beyond the scope of strict inferential
reasoning.
In the realm of theories—networks of hypothetical explanations about a common
matter—the next procedure of Abductive Productive Abduction may be applied, but
it is more of an optional heuristic than a required procedure.
AAAA:
Structures W, Y, and Z under experimental conditions EC1!
If (Model A(Cs) can produce W, Y, Z under EC1) then W, Y, and Z
If (Model A(Cs) can produce analogous W, Y, Z under EC2) then analogous W, Y, Z
Analogous W, Y, Z!
…
So, model A(Cs) [AAAA: Abductive Productive Abduction]
With this sketch to AAAA, our stages of procedures must arbitrarily halt to
conclude this article. Additional heuristics for modiﬁcations to networked models are
combinatorially possible. Their patterns can be constructed from the earlier inferen-
tial procedures outlines above, by returning to the start of this discussion and letting
eachinstanceof‘A’forAbductionstandforProceduralAbduction.Thus,totransform
IDA, insert Productive Abduction for that instance of ‘A’ in ‘IDA’ to form “inducibly
deductive abductively abductive abduction” or just Inducibly Deductive Productive
Abduction. A typical scientiﬁc ﬁeld may ﬁnd a few of these additional heuristics to
be practically useful, as it struggles with updating theoretical paradigms and coordi-
nating ontologies with neighboring ﬁelds. However useful these advanced heuristics
may be, they all still suffer from their characteristic problems and degenerate forms,
as warned in previous sections.
8
Conclusion
To summarize, there are ﬁve primary categories for sorting the inferential procedures
covered by this investigation into the combinatorial possibilities among deduction,
induction, and abduction: fallacies, non-scientiﬁc procedures, quasi-scientiﬁc proce-
dures, scientiﬁc procedures, and scientiﬁc heuristics. Among the non-scientiﬁc and
quasi-scientiﬁc procedures are found the basic types of mythic thinking and pseudo-
scientiﬁc thinking, although a discussion about sorting them adequately requires
separate treatment.
Fallacies:
A, simple abduction
DA, deducible abduction
IA, inducible abduction

Abduction, Complex Inferences, and Emergent Heuristics …
205
Non-scientiﬁc procedures:
AI, abductive induction - Iterative Abduction
AD, abductive deduction - Coduction
DAI, deducibly abductive induction - Retrodicted abduction
ADI, abducibly deductive induction - Retrodicted induction
DIA, deduced inductive abduction - Predicted Abduction
IDA, inducibly deductive abduction - Predictable Coduction
DIA, deducibly inductive abduction - Predictable Abduction
DAI, deducibly abductive induction - Iterative Coduction - religion
IAD, inducibly abductive deduction - Deduced Coduction - theology
AID, abducibly inductive deduction - Reduced Pancosmism - theology
Quasi-scientiﬁc procedures:
IDA, inducibly deductive abduction - Predictable Coduction
DIA, deducibly inductive abduction - Predictable Abduction
AIA, abductively inductive abduction - Capacity Overload problem
IAA, induced abductive abduction - degenerates to Deduced Coduction
IIA, induced inductive abduction - Elicited Abduction, Conﬁrmation Biases problem
ADA, abductively deductive abduction - Coductive Abduction, Fraudulent Powers problem
Scientiﬁc procedures and heuristics:
DAA, deducibly abductive abduction - Strict Abduction
DDA, deducibly deductive abduction - Deducible Coduction
AAA, abductively abductive abduction - Productive Abduction
IAAA, Iterated Productive Abduction
DAAA, Deduced Productive Abduction
AAAA, Abductive Productive Abduction
(etc.)
References
1. Magnani, L.: Abductive Cognition: The Epistemological and Eco-Cognitive Dimensions of
Hypothetical Reasoning. Springer, Dordrecht (2010)
2. Park, W.: Abduction and estimation in animals. Found. Sci. 17, 321–337 (2012)
3. Musgrave,A.:Deductivismsurpassed:or,foxinginitsmargins?J.Gen.Philos.Sci.43,125–132
(2012)
4. Stanford, P.K.: Damn the consequences: Projective evidence and the heterogeneity of scientiﬁc
conﬁrmation. Philos. Sci. 78, 887–899 (2011)
5. Peirce, C.S.: The Collected Papers of Charles Sanders Peirce, vol. 5. In: Hartshorne, C., Weiss,
P. (eds.) Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA (1934)

206
J. R. Shook
6. McMullin, E.: The Inference that Makes Science. Marquette University Press, Milwaukee, WI
(1992)
7. Niiniluoto, I.: Truth-seeking by abduction. In: Stadler, F. (ed.) Induction and Deduction in the
Sciences, pp. 57–82. Kluwer, Dordrecht (2004)
8. Psillos, S.: An explorer upon untrodden ground: Pierce on abduction. In: Woods, J., Gabbay, D.,
Hartmam S. (eds.) Handbook of the History of Logic, vol. 10, Inductive Logic, pp. 117–151.
Elsevier, Amsterdam (2009)
9. Pietarinen, A., Bellucci, F.: New light on Peirce’s conceptions of retroduction, deduction, and
scientiﬁc reasoning. Int. Stud. in the Phil. of Sci. 28, 353–373 (2014)
10. Campos, D.: On the distinction between Peirce’s abduction and Lipton’s inference to the best
explanation. Synthese 180, 419–442 (2011)
11. Flach, P., Kakas, A. (eds.): Abduction and Induction: Essays on Their Relation and Integration.
Kluwer, Dordrecht (2000)
12. Lipton, P.: Inference to the Best Explanation, 2nd edn. Routledge, London (2004)
13. Paavola, S.: Abduction as a logic of discovery: The importance of strategies. Found. Sci. 9,
267–283 (2005)
14. Aliseda, A.: Abductive Reasoning: Logical Investigations into Discovery and Explanation.
Springer, Dordrecht (2006)
15. Pizzi, C.: Abductive inference and iterated conditionals. In: Magnani, L., Ping, L. (eds.) Model-
Based Reasoning in Science, Technology and Medicine, pp. 365–381. Springer, Dordrecht
(2007)
16. Schurz, G.: Patterns of abduction. Synthese 164, 201–234 (2008)
17. Gauderis, T., Van De Putte, F.: Abduction of generalizations. Theoria 75, 345–363 (2012)
18. Gauderis, T.: Modelling abduction in science by means of a modal adaptive logic. Found. Sci.
18, 611–624 (2013)
19. Aliseda, A., Beirlaen, M.: A conditional logic for abduction. Synthese 191, 3733–3758 (2014)
20. Velázquez-Quesada, F.R.: Reasoning processes as epistemic dynamics. Axiomathes 25, 41–60
(2015)
21. Brigandt, I.: Scientiﬁc reasoning is material inference: Combining conﬁrmation, discovery,
and explanation. Int. Stud. Philos. Sci. 24, 31–43 (2010)
22. Lévi-Strauss, C.: Myth and Meaning: Cracking the Code of Culture. Schocken Books, New
York (1995)
23. Shackelford, J.: William Harvey and the mechanics of the heart. Oxford University Press,
Oxford, UK (2003)
24. Pigliucci, M., Boudry, M.: Philosophy of Pseudoscience: Reconsidering the Demarcation
Problem. University of Chicago Press, Chicago (2013)
25. Heidarzadeh, T.: A History of Physical Theories of Comets, From Aristotle to Whipple.
Springer, Berlin (2008)
26. Buxton, R. (ed.): From Myth to Reason? Studies in the Development of Greek Thought. Oxford
University Press, Oxford, UK (1999)
27. Morgan, K.: Myth and Philosophy from the Presocratics to Plato. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, UK (2000)
28. Wians, W. (ed.): Logos and Muthos: Philosophical Essays in Greek Literature. State University
of New York Press, Albany, NY (2009)
29. Mikalson, J.: Greek Popular Religion in Greek Philosophy. Oxford University Press, Oxford,
UK (2010)
30. Richardson, S., Stevens, H. (eds.): Perspectives on Biology after the Genome. Duke University
Press, Durham, NC (2015)

Abduction, the Logic of Scientiﬁc
Creativity, and Scientiﬁc Realism
John R. Shook
Abstract A fundamental question for philosophy of science asks, How is knowledge
oftheworldcreated?Apragmatistapproachisconstructedtoshowhowdiscoveryand
justiﬁcation are tightly related during the creation of scientiﬁc knowledge. Procedural
abduction, at the scientiﬁc level of Strict Abduction and higher, integrates the learn-
able (postulations undergoing conceptual development) and the logical (hypotheses
undergoing rational scrutiny) quite thoroughly. Discovery and justiﬁcation are func-
tionallyfusedtogether withintheorganizedprocess of procedural abductionbyscien-
tiﬁc communities. Four questions posed at the start are answered by this pragmatist
philosophy of science as follows. (1) Is scientiﬁc creativity methodologically related
to scientiﬁc justiﬁcation? Answer: scientiﬁc creativity is integral to abductive proce-
dures yielding scientiﬁc justiﬁcation. (2) Can a distinction between genuine science
and pseudo-science be clearly deﬁned? Answer: genuine science is distinguished by
the application of procedural abduction at the level of Strict Abduction or higher.
(3) Does scientiﬁc knowledge achieve the legitimacy of scientiﬁc realism? Answer:
procedural abduction legitimates the credibility of highly-conﬁrmed hypotheses and
hence justiﬁes scientiﬁc realism. (4) How are scientiﬁc communities responsible for
establishing scientiﬁc knowledge? Answer: scientiﬁc communities using procedural
abduction realize (in both cognitive and constructive senses) scientiﬁc knowledge.
How is knowledge of the world created? Four longstanding issues involved with
addressing this general question are usually treated separately by philosophy of
science. From a pragmatist approach, there are resolutions to certain issues which
additionally yield solutions to the others, and thus all four can be resolved together.
These key issues can be expressed as four problematic questions, listed in the order
that they are discussed in this chapter.
1. Is scientiﬁc creativity methodologically related to scientiﬁc justiﬁcation?
2. Can a distinction between genuine science and pseudo-science be clearly deﬁned?
J. R. Shook (B)
University at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY 14260, USA
e-mail: jrshook@buffalo.edu
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2021
J. Shook et al. (eds.), Abduction in Cognition and Action, Studies in Applied
Philosophy, Epistemology and Rational Ethics 59,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-61773-8_10
207

208
J. R. Shook
3. Does scientiﬁc knowledge achieve the legitimacy of scientiﬁc realism?
4. How are scientiﬁc communities responsible for establishing scientiﬁc knowledge?
An inadequate answer to one of these problems contributes to making the other
problems intractable. Only an examination into the abductive logic of scientiﬁc
inquiry can show how to resolve all four. The key to these interconnected issues lies
with scientiﬁc creativity. During the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, dominant
theories of scientiﬁc methodology ignored creativity or placed creativity’s contribu-
tion beyond the inferential thinking undergirding scientiﬁc credibility. Fixated only
on deductive and inductive logic, abductive logic and its creativity has been only
thinly considered in epistemology [1] and philosophy of science [2].
Abductive inference has been linked with conjectural creativity in scientiﬁc
inquiry from its inception with Charles S. Peirce’s logical investigations to its elab-
oration in recent investigations.1 The pragmatic logic of abductive discovery—with
discovery bearing the twinned sense of discovering hypotheses having plausibility
and discovering that hypothesized entities have reality—requires creativity at every
stage from postulation to conﬁrmation. That pervasive role for creativity shows the
pragmatist way towards resolving the four issues listed above. Scientiﬁc creativity
is integral to scientiﬁc justiﬁcation; genuine science is distinguished by procedural
abduction; procedural abduction legitimates scientiﬁc realism; and scientiﬁc commu-
nities using procedural abduction realize (in both cognitive and constructive senses)
scientiﬁc knowledge.
1
Types of Scientiﬁc Creativity
At the least, scientiﬁc creativity is not mere novelty. Like artistic or technical
creativity, where innovation develops from earlier forms and designs, the creativity
to scientiﬁc learning has a largely constructive character. The history of science does
not amount to just a loose sequence of novel ideas lacking in cohesion. A pleni-
tude of hypotheses do arise over time, with paradigms twisting and shifting, but a
scientiﬁc ﬁeld continually enlarges through discoveries building on discoveries. The
culmination of scientiﬁc creativity cannot stop short of appreciation and adoption
into the growing body of scientiﬁc knowledge. Original learning can be surprisingly
revelatory but new knowledge must be thoroughly reasonable. Creating knowledge
is difﬁcult, and rightly so.
Different types of creativity play important roles in science. On the surface, it is
obvious that the knowledge sought by scientiﬁc investigators, established as original
discoveries, has to be created. Anything empirically known has to be ﬁrst learned by
curious inquirers responsible for learning something new. That learning is created by
learners, to supplement and amend knowledge, and then to be subsequently taught as
1An entryway into the literature could start by consulting Magnani [18], Paavola [19], Barrena and
Nubiola [20], Park [21].

Abduction, the Logic of Scientiﬁc Creativity, and Scientiﬁc …
209
part of that established knowledge. Those instructed learners do not feel so creative;
receptivity and ﬂexibility characterize their adoption of knowledge that is new to
them. Receptive learning is not a deﬁning component of science itself; creative
learning is essential to science. How is scientiﬁc knowledge created? A deeper mode
of creativity is involved.
Scientiﬁc inquiry at minimum enlarges and improves the factual evidence to be
considered during an investigation. A body of reliable evidence, no matter how
compendious and categorized, needs to be expanded. Investigators can go out to
explore and gather fresh material for their study, and they can also return to accumu-
lated evidence for re-inspection and re-interpretation by applying better methods of
scrutiny. Both routes exemplify that enlargement of evidence. What seemed evident
in the past may later appear less meaningful later, or what seemed uninteresting
acquires more signiﬁcance as overlooked features come into view. Even if already-
collected materials are untouched and unchanged, their status as evidence relevant
to further inquiry surely changes. New facts are able to arise from old evidence as
well as from fresh evidence.
Material evidence, no matter how substantial and abundant, cannot inferentially
bear upon justifying any validity to hypotheses—only credible facts could do so.
Evidence is “uncovered” as though it pre-exists; interesting facts are surely created.
(Pre-existing facts, due to their inadequacy and insufﬁciency, only provoke those
new investigations.) Discovery and creativity are contraries, if their primary mean-
ings are set in direct contrast. What is genuinely discovered cannot also be authen-
tically created—the created thing cannot already exist prior to its creation, while
a thing getting discovered must already exist prior to its discovery. And yet, we
observe creativity and discovery blending together and intertwining with justiﬁcation
during empirical phases of scientiﬁc investigations. Scientiﬁc knowledge is created
through the process of creating relevant evidence, a process which requires creative
engagements with the observable world.
Surprising evidential facts are indispensable, often impelling new thinking and
compelling revaluations of older theorizing. Methodical efforts undertaken during
the conduct of inquiry create new facts within scientiﬁc ﬁelds. This view upon
creating facts looks contrary to empirical science, which prides itself upon objective
methods hostile to human-manufactured “evidence.” That much-prized objectivity
still involves the creation of new learning, the learning of new facts from enlarging
accessible evidence. Furthermore, objectivity implies a reduction of subjectivity,
where individual biases ﬂourish. Genuine discovery cannot be merely a fantasy in the
mind or a ﬁxation on familiar ground. As an enterprise of discovery, scientiﬁc inquiry
instead constructs novel conditions where new empirical facts for learning about
modeled causes can be openly generated and recorded.2 This experimental creativity,
when accomplished properly, is far from subjective. Reproducibility, repeatability,
and robustness across a group of competent investigators are key signs of factual
reliability.
2Prominent philosophers of science who stress the epistemic link between realistic modelling and
controlled experimental conditions include Hacking [22], Geire [23], Cartwright [24].

210
J. R. Shook
Creating scientiﬁc knowledge relies on creating relevant evidence, which depends
on creating experimental conditions that in turn create objective facts—important
facts implicated in the creation of credible hypotheses able to creatively accommo-
date them. During each phase of this discernment of new knowledge through an
appreciation of fresh facts and an appraisal of novel hypotheses, a reach of imag-
inative creativity beyond what is already familiar must be attained. At every level,
what has been realistically conceivable, so far, is no longer adequate. Yet, at the same
time, whatever is becoming conceivable is also responsible for being reasonable. It is
impossible for conception and ratiocination to function in scientiﬁc inquiry without
continual coordination. That coordination, within procedural abduction, is actually
due to their fundamental fusion.
2
Discovery and Justiﬁcation
How is knowledge of the world created? That creation presumes an integration of
what is learnable with what is logical. If learning and logic have nothing in common,
not only does their cooperation remain puzzling, but the place for creativity could be
divided apart, as if imaginative creativity must stay separated from logical creativity.
That manner of subdividing creativity sounds dubious indeed—what gets assigned to
“logical creativity” so long as logic is no place for fancy? More commonly, creative
discoverygetsassignedexclusivelytotheprocessesoflearning.Intuition,inspiration,
imagination—by whatever name, such bursts of creativity seem very different from
strict rationality.
As the previous section’s tour through primary phases of empirical inquiry has
suggested, however, imaginative discovery and inferential justiﬁcation should be
organically uniﬁed during the creation of scientiﬁc knowledge. If learning and logic
are integrated in that common goal of knowledge creation, creativity could not be
isolated from reasoning. Each would ﬁnd its scientiﬁc purpose in the other. Creativity
would be reasonable, and reasoning would be creative, where a body of scientists
are growing a body of knowledge over time.
However timeless the forms of inference may seem, processes of human judgment
must be temporal, especially during consideration, consultation, and collaboration.
Thinking is temporal through durations; all thoughts have histories. Theories earning
their credibility have origins and courses, and even their demises have durable effects
in fertilization or fossilization. A scientiﬁc body, as a replenishing organization of co-
functioning scientists investigating theories over decades and centuries, displays both
imaginative creativity and methodic rationality intertwined in intricate harmonies.
A sharp dichotomy between learning and logic establishes a dualism dismem-
bering that organic unity within science. It divides discovery from justiﬁcation,
with spontaneous creativity on one side and strict reasoning on the other side.
Creativity would at most have only an external association with logicality, leaving
their fruitful relationship as a deep mystery. Why should inferential justiﬁcation
accept intuitive notions as initial inputs for premises, and how would reasoning

Abduction, the Logic of Scientiﬁc Creativity, and Scientiﬁc …
211
choose sensible inputs from a plenitude of fancies? Deduction proceeds towards
conclusions after initial propositions are granted; it is no business of deduction what
ideas get premised. Induction at least demands an array of observed facts before
proceeding towards generalizations. Scientiﬁc creativity remains a problem where
the relationship between learning and logic is a mystery.
Nevertheless, philosophy of science continually distinguishes the context of
discovery from the context of justiﬁcation and then struggles to re-connect them.3
The post-Kantian separation of empirical contingencies apart from apriori necessi-
ties enforced rationalism’s dichotomy, and nineteenth century empiricism was no
less strict. William Whewell’s The Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences asserted that
the ﬁrst step beyond the evidence can only be “some happy thought, of which we
cannot trace the origin; some fortunate cast of intellect, rising above all rules. No
maxims can be given which inevitably lead to discovery. No precepts will elevate a
man of ordinary endowments to the level of a man of genius: nor will an inquirer
of truly inventive mind need to come to the teacher of inductive philosophy to learn
how to exercise the faculties which nature has given him.”4 For Whewell, and so
many empiricists claiming expertise over the psychology of knowledge, the insight
of a naturally imaginative mind is just an inspirational phase; only logically rigorous
inferences can discern true discovery.
Neo-Kantianism and logical empiricism conveyed this view into the early twen-
tieth century, exempliﬁed by Karl Popper. In The Logic of Scientiﬁc Discovery
he stated that “every discovery contains an ‘irrational element’, or ‘a creative
intuition’.”5 He expanded on this crucial distinction in this way:
The initial state, the act of conceiving or inventing a theory, seems to me neither to call
for logical analysis not to be susceptible of it. The question how it happens that a new idea
occurs to a man – whether it is a musical theme, a dramatic conﬂict, or a scientiﬁc theory
– may be of great interest to empirical psychology; but it is irrelevant to the logical analysis
of scientiﬁc knowledge. This latter is concerned not with questions of fact (Kant’s quid
facti?), but only with questions of justiﬁcation or validity (Kant’s quid juris?). Its questions
are of the following kind. Can a statement be justiﬁed? And if so, how? Is it testable? Is
it logically dependent on certain other statements? Or does it perhaps contradict them? …
Accordingly I shall distinguish sharply between the process of conceiving a new idea, and
the methods and results of examining it logically. As to the task of the logic of knowledge
– in contradistinction to the psychology of knowledge – I shall proceed on the assumption
that it consists solely in investigating the methods employed in those systematic tests to
which every new idea must be subjected if it is to be seriously entertained.6
The demise of logical empiricism did not doom Popper’s distinction. The larger
lesson was ampliﬁed: attaining an initial conception is unlike and unrelated to
reaching a ﬁnal conclusion. In general, philosophy must insist that what happens
to be believable cannot be identiﬁed with what should be credible. Believability and
credibility rest on two separate grounds. Imagining ideas to inspire learning is one
3See Nickels [25], Snyder [26], Schickore and Steinle [27].
4Whewell [28, vol. 2, p. 186].
5Popper [29, p. 32].
6Popper [29, pp. 7–8].

212
J. R. Shook
process, while justifying learning to count as knowledge is another process. Reducing
knowing down to learning violates that distinction and puts psychology in charge of
logic (and hence of knowledge and truth too). As Popper well understood, philosophy
of science was but one ﬁeld affected by the broader problem of “psychologism” for
philosophical logic [3] and theories of knowledge [4]. Learning is supposed to occur
entirely within natural psychology while logic is liberated from psychologism by
normative rationalism.
Narratives about the history of science typically appeal to this creation-
justiﬁcationdistinction.Onescientistgetscreditforﬁrstthinkingofanewhypothesis,
while another scientist is credited with later conﬁrming that hypothesis. Historians
of science now understand how scientiﬁc advances could not have been so simplistic.
The genesis of a hypothesis has receded in signiﬁcance as theoretical models became
more complex, and those abstract models resemble observable things less and less.
That oversized role for an individual scientist has also diminished. Behind a complex
hypothesis there stands a number of scientists who developed it over time, and teams
of scientists are needed for gathering conﬁrmations of that hypothesis. Furthermore,
those two processes typically blend and share more in common. The period of devel-
opment overlaps, and gets involved with, the period of conﬁrmation. Some scientists
help to redevelop hypotheses while they participate in designing rounds of experi-
mental trials. A growing body of scientists consult together about the eventual rejec-
tion or acceptance of a hypothesis, contributing to the body of knowledge either
way.
Allowing how many scientists are typically involved with phases of inquiry,
philosophy of science is at least convinced that there is a distinctive logic of justiﬁ-
cation. In itself, logical justiﬁcation is not so problematic. Science sets its standards
of reasonable inference, to test and justify acceptable hypotheses. On the other hand,
the idea of a “logic of discovery” in isolation is harder to conceptualize. Could there
be any such thing as a “logic of discovery”?
3
The Learnable and the Logical
The disputed question whether there is a logic of scientiﬁc discovery, and wondering
how it could relate to the logic of scientiﬁc justiﬁcation, is rooted in the perennial
tension between psychology and logic [5]. Modern logic renounced any entangle-
ment with psychology; an understanding of logic requires avoiding the prime fallacy
of psychologism. Logic is concerned for the ways that knowledge should be recog-
nized among beliefs. Divorcing the context of discovery from the logic of justiﬁca-
tion echoes the age-old divide separating learning (temporally psychological) from
reasoning (timelessly logical). Actual beliefs and how they happen to form is not
supposed to be in logic’s department. Knowing, in short, is more than believing.
Believed ideas are learned by individuals through the passage of time; known truths
are justiﬁed by inferences through unchanging norms. How a new idea could inspire
original learning must be, it has been claimed, a very different process from the way

Abduction, the Logic of Scientiﬁc Creativity, and Scientiﬁc …
213
that an attempt at learning should be justiﬁed as knowledge. Intuition, inspiration,
imagination—by whatever name, that genesis of creativity by an actual mind seems
irreducible to methodical steps for a generic reasoner.
Let logic protest that it truly does guide learning. It is the case that logic must deal
indirectly with beliefs, since anything known must at least be believed. For logic,
what should be believed is what is learnable, and what is learned should approach
knowledge. (What is not knowable, such as the false or mysterious, cannot be learned
now, and perhaps never learned.) What is knowable has already been learned, of
course—unless something was learned, how could it now be known by anyone?
A. What is knowable must already be learned.
B. What is learned must already be knowable.
If logic has guidance about how knowledge should be learned, how would its
guidance be used? It seems as if the known is already the learned, and the learned
is already the known—and therefore logic is useless except for its survey of system-
atized instruction. The object of knowledge is what is already known by some number
of minds. This is the basis for deduction: the right conclusion is dependent on reasons,
reasons premised and already understood to be acceptable, which reliably guide one’s
thoughts to the conclusion. The premises must be both familiar and acceptable to
one’s mind.
C. What is learnable is already conceivable.
Where acceptable premises are to be obtained is not deduction’s responsibility.
Only premises already accepted as true can yield a knowable conclusion. (Merely
hypothetical relations among propositions do not yield known conclusions about
something’s existence.) The objective of learning is already fully conceived from
the start, since a deduction’s conclusion is given with the premises. The object of
knowledge—indicated by the ‘subject’ term in the conclusion—is set in the premises,
and one’s conception of it cannot change while learning from a deduction.
Tenet A can be disputed, for “knowable” has two senses: the knowable is what
might become known; or the knowable is already established as known. (When is
a river navigable? Only after someone has successfully navigated the length of its
waters? Or, is a river navigable before anyone tries? The grammar of ‘-able’ allows
both senses.) Potential knowability is distinct from conﬁrmed knowability.
A2. What is potentially knowable may become learned.
B2. What is learned must already be conﬁrmably knowable.
As for logic, it now has a function for learning. What is potentially knowable
can become learned through logic’s guidance, but that guidance must be cognizant
of knowledge’s object to some degree. Guidance is no guidance without a concep-
tualized objective, even if only in vague outline. Furthermore, that guidance must
relate this object with information accessible to the learner. Permitting the knowable
object to be entirely unlike and unrelated to accessible information is nothing like
guidance.

214
J. R. Shook
C2. What is potentially knowable is presently conceivable.
If the knowable object is conceived in terms of features evident in accessible
information, that conceivability responds to the body of accessible information. If the
relevant information changes over time during a period of learning, then the concep-
tion of the knowable object can also change. Indeed, intelligent learning modiﬁes
conceptions of the knowable object as more and more relevant evidence is gathered.
Only unintelligent thought refuses to re-conceive what it is trying to understand.
4
Deduction, Induction, Abduction
If deduction is taken for the paradigmatic mode of inference for knowledge, there
can be no logic of discovery. In a sound deduction, the subject of the conclusion—the
object to be known—is already accepted as existing when the premises are accepted.
Where and why premises are accepted as believable is not deduction’s concern.
Furthermore, that object of knowledge cannot be changed from the premises to
the conclusion; a different ‘subject’ in the subject-predicate conclusion invalidates
a deduction. The pre-given and static status of deduction’s object of knowledge
explains why deduction yields little learning and no discovery.
Deduction is about learning what is already known, not about the original
discovery of something by initial learners. Deduction leads to conclusions of propo-
sitional learning about the terms in the premises. This is not empirical learning.
Deduction does not conclude anything about the existential discovery of anything.
Anything’s existence must be presumed in premises. Although a reasoner learns
propositions that are new to that learner, only propositions are “discovered.” The
terms of the conclusion are not new to the reasoner, since the premises must ﬁrst be
understood. Novelty to a term’s meaning is unwanted, since a term’s meaning should
not change between premises and the conclusion. Terms must not change meanings
if more premises are added. Through deduction, a term is not discovered, nor is a
term’s meaning discovered or altered, and nothing that a term may refer to can be
discovered. At most, deduction’s propositional learning draw attention to relations
among understood terms.
Deduction about empirical matters has further restrictions. A learner accepting a
conclusion as known accepts the premises as accurate, and accepting an empirical
premise involves taking its terms to be about existing matters. Learning an empirical
conclusion by deduction is not about discovering a premised term or discovering
that a premised thing exists. Nothing in the world is discovered during deductive
reasoning.
Induction is, by reputation and results, supposed to be the mode of inference that
specializes in original discovery. Learning, if it involves some logicality, requires
inferences about (a) objects not already known to exist and (b) not rigidly pre-
conceived. Modes of induction partially satisfy these two criteria for logical learning.
Inductive generalizations can anticipate future matters not yet encountered, and they

Abduction, the Logic of Scientiﬁc Creativity, and Scientiﬁc …
215
can suggest modiﬁed conceptions of things already encountered when conjoined
with fresh evidence. For example, the early idea of a microorganism gradually
gained speciﬁcity as sub-types (such as bacteria, protozoa, and viruses) came into
microscopic view, and those classiﬁcations themselves developed as more and more
organisms were discovered. Induction is restricted by its inability to warrant concep-
tions of entities impossible to observe by any instrumental means, and limited by
its impotence to suggest conceptions of matters quite unlike what has already been
observed. Scientiﬁc theorizing about non-observable entities, with properties unlike
phenomenal qualities, cannot have an entirely inductive basis.
Abductive reasoning is a better model for learning about objects not already
known to exist and not familiarly pre-conceived. Abduction introduces and justiﬁes
the credibility of fresh hypotheses about unknown things with novel properties, so
scientiﬁc methodologies require productively abductive theorizing [6] and not just
inferences to “the best explanation” [7]. Peirce accordingly claimed that only the
original postulations of abduction allows for scientiﬁc explanation, with this basic
schema:
The surprising fact, C, is observed
But if A were true, C would be a matter of course
Hence, there is reason to suspect that A is true. ([4], 5.189)
This schema only serves as a comparison with basic forms of deduction and
induction. In schematic form, abduction lacks credibility in actual empirical usage,
as Peirce himself warned [8]. Abduction in iterative and procedural forms (sketched
in following sections) does deliver serious credibility to hypotheses. That credibility
can never attain certainty or even conﬁdent probability. Valid deduction discerns
necessary relations between a conclusion and given premises, while strong induc-
tion detects probable conclusions from accumulated premises. Abductive credibility
attaches to a surmised conjecture that expects a postulated cause to be responsible
for observable effects. Peirce accordingly refers to “deductive necessity,” “inductive
probability,” and “abductive expectability” ([4], 5.194).
The creativity inherent to abductive postulation, as Peirce repeatedly explained,
allows for a genuine logic of discovery [9]. In this logic for learning, that static
“Discovery-Justiﬁcation” dichotomy separating learning from logic is replaced by
a functional “Postulation-Conﬁrmation” distinction within a uniﬁed process of
reasoned discovery.
5
Abduction and Postulation
In 1878, Peirce published the sixth part of his “Illustrations of the Logic of Science”
titled “Deduction, Induction, and Hypothesis.” By “hypothesis” Peirce was refer-
ring to what he also called “retroduction” and later labeled as abduction [10]. On
deduction, Peirce points out that it “adds nothing to the premises, but only out of the

216
J. R. Shook
various facts represented in the premises selects one and brings the attention down
to it” ([4], 2.643). Comparing induction with hypothesis (abduction), he writes,
By induction, we conclude that facts, similar to the observed facts, are true in cases not
examined. By hypothesis, we conclude the existence of a fact quite different from anything
observed, from which, according to known laws, something observed would necessarily
result. The former, is reasoning from particulars to the general law; the latter, from effect to
cause. ([4], 2.536)
Induction can ascertain patterns and regularities among things sharing similari-
ties. Discovering a not-yet-observed explanation responsible for those matters asks
creative thinking to go beyond induction.
As Peirce reﬁned and enlarged his approach to abduction, he continually empha-
sized science’s essential dependence on abduction’s creativity, transcending any
observational reach.
All the ideas of science come to it by way of abduction. Abduction consists in studying facts
and devising a theory to explain them. ([4], 5.145)
Abduction is the process of forming explanatory hypotheses. It is the only logical operation
which introduces any new idea. ([4], 5.172)
The relationship of abduction’s creativity with conﬁrmation is left unclear by
these brief statements.
The simplest formulation of abduction is, as Peirce well knew, just a formal fallacy
of afﬁrming the consequent. That concise schema only mentions the postulated entity
once in the two premises: “But if A were true, C would be a matter of course.” Where
does that conception of A come from? It does not arrive from somewhere beyond
abduction since it is a component of abductive reasoning. Yet its singular mention in
the premises makes it look like it descends from clouds of imagination.
Peirce does say that “the abductive suggestion comes to us like a ﬂash. It is an act
of insight” ([4] 5.181). However, Peirce treats this “insight” more like an informed
guess [11] that arises in various guises during inferential reasoning [12]. He wrote,
“It must be remembered that abduction, although it is very little hampered by logical
rules, nevertheless is a logical inference asserting its conclusion only problematically
or conjecturally, it is true, but nevertheless having a perfectly deﬁnite logical form”
([4] 5:188). There is no contradiction between these two statements about abduction,
unless one (wrongly) presumes that an initial insight is never modiﬁed throughout the
process of abductive reasoning towards its eventual conclusion. That presumption is
essential to valid deduction (avoiding the fallacy of four terms), but Peirce did not
reduce abduction to a sort of deductive argument.
Abduction in the hands of scientiﬁc inquiry is never just simple abduction in
pure form. Induction and abduction (hypothesis) cooperate in concert, according to
Peirce.
The great difference between induction and hypothesis is, that the former infers the existence
ofphenomenasuchaswehaveobservedincaseswhicharesimilar,whilehypothesissupposes
something of a different kind from what we have directly observed, and frequently something
which it would be impossible for us to observe directly. Accordingly, when we stretch an
induction quite beyond the limits of our observation, the inference partakes of the nature of

Abduction, the Logic of Scientiﬁc Creativity, and Scientiﬁc …
217
hypothesis. It would be absurd to say that we have no inductive warrant for a generalization
extending a little beyond the limits of experience, and there is no line to be drawn beyond
which we cannot push our inference; only it becomes weaker the further it is pushed. Yet, if
an induction be pushed very far, we cannot give it much credence unless we ﬁnd that such
an extension explains some fact which we can and do observe. Here, then, we have a kind
of mixture of induction and hypothesis supporting one another; and of this kind are most of
the theories of physics. ([4] 2.640.)
Furthermore, the explanatory power of abduction also includes deduction:
Abduction is the process of forming an explanatory hypothesis. It is the only logical operation
which introduces any new idea; for induction does nothing but determine a value and deduc-
tion merely evolves the necessary consequences of a pure hypothesis. Deduction proves that
something must be, Induction shows that something actually is operative, Abduction merely
suggests that something may be. Its only justiﬁcation is that from its suggestion deduction
can draw a prediction which can be tested by induction and that, if we are ever to learn
anything or to understand phenomena at all, it must be by abduction that this is to be brought
about. ([4] 5:171)
Reaching a conclusion earning abductive credibility is the result of prolonged
inquiry incorporating phases of creative postulation together with induction and
deduction.
Acloserexaminationofabductiveproceduresforscience,ﬁrstelaboratedinShook
[13] and sketched in the next section, reveals how they require a dynamic relationship
between the accumulation of new empirical evidence and the alterations needed to
the conception of the object of knowledge proposed in a hypothesis. That dynamic
relationship between evidence and hypothesis accounts for the scientiﬁc realism that
arises from abduction. Successful conﬁrmations from abductive procedures yield
conclusions credibly afﬁrming the real existence of their hypothesized objects of
knowledge.
6
Abduction and Conﬁrmation
Deduction, induction, and abduction can be simplistically formulated in their pure
timeless forms. Imitating Peirce’s examples, consider the fruit of a particular tree.
Deduction – Atemporal
Fruits from that tree are red.
These fruits are from that tree.
Therefore, these fruits are (surely) red.
Induction - Atemporal
These fruits are from that tree.
These fruits are red.
Therefore, fruits from that tree are (probably) red.
Abduction - Atemporal

218
J. R. Shook
That tree’s fruit is red.
If these fruits are from that tree, then they are red.
Therefore, these red fruits are (possibly) from that tree.
Their atemporal forms allow for schematic comparison, to show how none of
them are reducible to another form.
Treating abduction only as a straightforward sort of premise-to-conclusion
reasoning with but two premises is misleading. During the procedures of complex
types of abduction, the object of the conclusion is re-conceived during the consider-
ation and re-consideration of additional sought-for premises. The point of abductive
reasoning is to improve conceptions of that postulated object in its capacity to be
causally responsible for observed effects, while the plausibility of its efﬁcacious
reality grows in relation to an enlarging evidence base. The eventually discovered
object is not already fully conceived from the start.
Peirce expected that the three kinds of inference—deduction, induction, and
abduction, should cooperate in empirical discovery. His 1903 Harvard Lectures on
Pragmatism says:
Abduction merely suggests that something may be. Its only justiﬁcation is that from its
suggestion deduction can draw a prediction which can be tested by induction, and that, if we
are ever to learn anything or to understand phenomena at all, it must be by abduction that
this is to be brought about. ([4] 5.17)
Peirce occasionally referred to “mixed” reasonings and inferences ([4] 2.774,
2.787, 7.218). He emphasized how deduction, induction, and abduction are distinct
components in science, unable to perform another’s inferential work.
Nothing has so much contributed to present chaotic or erroneous ideas of the logic of science
as failure to distinguish the essentially different characters of different elements of scientiﬁc
reasoning; and one of the worst of these confusions, as well as one of the commonest, consists
in regarding abduction and induction taken together (often mixed also with deduction) as a
simple argument. Abduction and induction have, to be sure, this common feature, that both
lead to the acceptance of a hypothesis because observed facts are such as would necessarily
or probably result as consequences of that hypothesis. But for all that, they are the opposite
poles of reason, the one the most ineffective, the other the most effective of arguments.
The method of either is the very reverse of the other’s. Abduction makes its start from the
facts, without, at the outset, having any particular theory in view, though it is motived by the
feeling that a theory is needed to explain the surprising facts. Induction makes its start from
a hypothesis which seems to recommend itself, without at the outset having any particular
facts in view, though it feels the need of facts to support the theory. Abduction seeks a theory.
Induction seeks for facts. In abduction the consideration of the facts suggests the hypothesis.
In induction the study of the hypothesis suggests the experiments which bring to light the
very facts to which the hypothesis had pointed. ([4] 7.218)
Deduction, induction, and abduction have very different inferential characters and
results. That is why each needs the others for productive and predictive inquiries.
For example, Peirce recounts how abduction and induction can cooperate during
investigations into explanations for empirical patterns:
Presumption, or, more precisely, abduction … furnishes the reasoner with the problematic
theory which induction veriﬁes. Upon ﬁnding himself confronted with a phenomenon unlike

Abduction, the Logic of Scientiﬁc Creativity, and Scientiﬁc …
219
what he would have expected under the circumstances, he looks over its features and notices
some remarkable character or relation among them, which he at once recognizes as being
characteristic of some conception with which his mind is already stored, so that a theory
is suggested which would explain (that is, render necessary) that which is surprising in the
phenomena. ([4] 2.776)
In a 1902 manuscript, after declaring that “arguments are either deductions, induc-
tions, abductions, or mixed arguments,” Peirce describes a thoughtful process that
mixes abduction with induction.
Suppose, then, that, being seated in a street car, I remark a man opposite to me whose
appearance and behavior unite characters which I am surprised to ﬁnd together in the same
person. I ask myself, How can this be? Suppose I ﬁnd this problematic reply: Perhaps he
is an ex-priest. He is the very image of such a person; he presents an icon of an ex-priest.
Here is an iconic argument, or abduction of it. Secondly, it now occurs to me that if he is an
ex-priest, he should be tonsured; and in order to test this, I say something to him calculated
to make him take off his hat. He does so, and I ﬁnd that he is indeed tonsured. Here at last
is an indication that my theory is correct. I can now say that he is presumably an ex-priest,
although it would be inaccurate to say that there is any deﬁnite probability that he is so,
since I do not know how often I might ﬁnd a man tonsured who was not an ex-priest, though
evidently far oftener than he would be one. The supposition is, however, now supported by
an inductive induction, a weak form of symptomatic or indexical argument. It stands on a
widely different basis from that on which it stood before my little experiment. Before, it
rested on the ﬂimsy support of similarity, or agreement in “ﬂavor.” Now, facts have been
constrained to yield conﬁrmation to it by bearing out a prediction based upon it. Belief in
the theory rests now on factual reaction to the theory. [14]
Peirce’s story illustrates an inquiry that generates new evidence from an abductive
guess which in turn supports the plausibility of that hypothesis. Conﬁrming evidence
is not independent from the postulated hypothesis; that evidence may never have been
soughtandfoundwithoutsuchahypothesisinmind.Thenotionofahypothesisgener-
ating its own evidence must look suspicious from the standpoint of static deductive
logic or sequenced inductive logic. Abductive reasoning is circular, in the sense that
the growing quality of the evidence is the responsibility of the hypothesis’s greater
explanatory power. Atemporal reasoning schemas cannot reproduce or license such
a mutually supportive relationship between postulation and conﬁrmation stages.
Learning takes time; learning through reasoning is assuredly temporal. Imag-
ining, thinking, and predicting are mental processes having durations. Peirce typi-
cally depicts induction and abduction as thoughtful procedures extended over time.
Basic forms of inductive and abductive procedures can accordingly be schematized.
Induction - Temporal
These 3 small fruits are from that tree.
Those fruits are also red.
These 4 small red fruits are from that tree too.
Those fruits are also sweet.
These 5 small red sweet fruits are from that tree too.

220
J. R. Shook
Those fruits are also soft.
Therefore, fruits of that tree are small, red, sweet, and soft.
During the process of temporal induction, one’s conception of the conclusion’s
object, that tree’s fruits, is modiﬁed. Alterations to the object of the conclusion also
occur for temporal abduction.
Abduction - Temporal
These are small and red fruits.
That tree’s fruit is small and red.
If these fruits are from that tree, then they are small and red.
These small red fruits are also sweet.
That tree’s fruits are also sweet.
Therefore, these fruits are from that tree.
And, as Peirce proposes, abduction and induction in their temporal forms can be
combined.
Abduction – Inductively Temporal
These are red fruits.
That tree has red fruit.
If those fruits came from that tree, then they would be red.
These same red fruits are also small.
That tree has small red fruit.
If those fruits came from that tree, then they would be small and red.
These same small red fruits are also sweet.
That tree has small red sweet fruit.
If those fruits came from that tree, then they would be small, red, and sweet.
Therefore, these small red sweet fruits came from that tree.
Inductively temporal abduction ensures that one’s conception of that tree’s fruits
is gradually modiﬁed, and the actual origin of those fruits (that tree) is now expected
by the reasoner. Furthermore, with each additional observation, conﬁdence in the
accuracy of this conclusion reasonably increases. Deduction is not left out of this
iterative process. At each stage, the statement of the hypothesis is a deduction in
miniature, e.g.: “If those fruits came from that tree, then they would be small and
red.” Gathering more empirical evidence modiﬁes the conception of the conclusion’s
object, and it develops the hypothesis. Let us call this “procedural abduction.” The
dynamic relationship between the growing evidence and the developing hypothesis
is the basis for the realism that arises from procedural abduction: it is more and
more credible that the hypothesized entity exists. This is discovery, from a reasoning
procedure, where no bright line is separating the logic apart from the learning.
In summary so far, the inferential modes of deduction, induction, and abduction
can be compared in stages from postulation to conﬁrmation.

Abduction, the Logic of Scientiﬁc Creativity, and Scientiﬁc …
221
Deduction does not seek more premises, deduction cannot change the meaning of terms
during reasoning, and deduction cannot discover the existence of anything.
Induction could seek more premises, and repetitive induction can change the meaning of
terms during reasoning, but induction does not discover things with novel properties.
Abduction should seek out more premises, abduction must change the meaning of terms
during reasoning, and abduction can discover unfamiliar things with novel properties.
Furthermore, iterative abduction can raise the level of reasonable conﬁdence in the real
existence of those things.
Although Peirce labelled a proposal of a hypothesis as an “abduction” it would be
a mistake to isolate scientiﬁc creativity in general within abduction alone, apart from
deduction and induction. Peirce never made that mistake. Only the combination and
integration of the three forms of inference gets productively utilized within empirical
inquiry.
7
Procedural Abduction
Peirce offered a few examples of cooperation among forms of inference, but he did
not explore mixed inferences further. Many combinations of deduction, induction,
and abduction can be formulated, and some of them inform sound scientiﬁc method-
ologies. Twenty-ﬁve combinations are delineated in Shook [13], ranging from the
fallacious and pseudo-scientiﬁc to the proto-scientiﬁc and fully scientiﬁc. Four types
of reasoning, from simpler to more complex forms, serve to illustrate here how
the last type of scientiﬁc abduction, “strict abduction,” is able to warrant credible
conclusions about postulated entities. Qs, Rs, and Ss are placeholders for any sort of
observed phenomena, while A (and its capacities C1, C2, etc. that make a difference
to observable evidence) is a placeholder for any postulated entity (e.g. an object,
model, energy, force, ﬁeld, and so on).
Retrodicted Induction
Qs!
Suppose that If A then Qs [now expecting Qs from A’s vague deﬁnition]
Rs!
Suppose that If A then Rs [now expecting Rs from A’s vague deﬁnition too]
Ss!
Suppose that If A then Ss [now expecting Ss from A’s vague deﬁnition too]
…
So, A
Retrodicted Induction superﬁcially looks like an abductive procedure. It is far
more suspicious, because A’s deﬁnition is designed in advance to ‘explain’ not
just some initial Qs but also plenty of other vaguely indicated matters, so that any
chosen Rs, Ss, and Ts (etc.) can get ‘explained’ when they show up later. Retrodicted
Induction cannot attain the level of scientiﬁc theorizing.

222
J. R. Shook
Predicted Abduction
If A then Qs [from a vague idea of A, by deduction Qs would be expected from A]
A pattern of Qs gets discovered!
If A then Rs [from a vague idea of A, by deduction Rs would be expected from A]
A pattern of Rs gets discovered!
…
So, A
Predicted abduction also falls short of the level required for fully scientiﬁc theo-
rizing. It allows a thinker to remain stubbornly attached to an initial conception of
the entity to be discovered.
Predictable Coduction
If A then Qs have features F1 [given A’s deﬁnition, by deducing how Qs having F1 are
expected]
Qs have F1!
If A then Rs also have analogous features F2 [after adjusting A’s deﬁnition, then deducing
how Rs having F2 are expected, while still deducing Qs with F1 too]
Rs have F2!
…
So, A
Predictable Coduction is more plausible, because A is well-deﬁned rather than
vague, and A’s deﬁnition is permitted to developed in only incremental ways in
response to evidence. Predictable Coduction lacks explanatory plausibility, however,
since it actually only “explains” things as they get discovered.
Strict Abduction
Qs!
Suppose (only if A has C1), then Qs
Suppose (only if A has C1-2), then Qs & Rs
Rs!
Suppose (only if A has C1-3), then Qs, Rs & Ss
Ss!
…
So, A(Cn)
At this level of scientiﬁc theorizing, where postulation and conﬁrmation are thor-
oughly intertwined, it is no longer an easy matter to see where logic and learning
are divided apart. The conceptual creativity applied to developing the object of the
conclusion is not a separate thought process apart from the inferential rationality that
eventually warrants acceptance of that entity’s existence.

Abduction, the Logic of Scientiﬁc Creativity, and Scientiﬁc …
223
8
Abductive Scientiﬁc Realism
The question of philosophical realism is a metaphysical issue, unlike scientiﬁc
realism. Even if one grants a measure of scientiﬁc realism, afﬁrming that postu-
lated entities with ample scientiﬁc conﬁrmation are credibly real (more or less as
theories conceive them), philosophy can still ask its skeptical question, “Is it rational
to think that science’s afﬁrmed entities actually exist?” Science’s most conﬁrmed
entities may not be actually knowable, if philosophy knows knowledge better than
any amount of science. Metaphysical anti-realism can be compatible with modest
scientiﬁc realism, if only to warn science that its excusable conﬁdence in theoret-
ical entities cannot determine their actual reality or compel a rational mind to take
them as truly real. This philosophical anti-realism sets the bar for knowledge higher
than any methodological standards followed during scientiﬁc inquiry. Philosophical
naturalism, by contrast, takes the position that science’s highly conﬁrmed entities
should enjoy at least as much credibility (and often more) as anything else familiarly
known from experience [15].
This chapter’s topic is scientiﬁc realism, not metaphysical realism/anti-realism, or
philosophical naturalism. The motivating question is, “Is it reasonable for scientiﬁc
realism to be afﬁrmed in the course of empirical inquiries applying sound scien-
tiﬁc methodologies?” When the application of procedural abduction in scientiﬁc
methodologies is considered, then scientiﬁc realism is warranted because scientiﬁc
hypotheses about postulated entities become credibly reasonable.7 Standing outside
of science, and pondering how to inductively or abductively justify scientiﬁc realism,
is already philosophically futile and scientiﬁcally irrelevant [16]. The best explana-
tion for science’s success is science’s own work: if science itself does not sufﬁciently
justify the credibility of its conﬁrmed hypotheses in the ﬁrst place, nothing can.
Fortunately, science has no need of any non-scientiﬁc or metaphysical assistance.
Naturalism’s worldview, for example, is plausible only if scientiﬁc realism is already
reasonable; nothing about the scientiﬁc realism due to procedural abduction needs
any axiom or premise of naturalism.
The credible plausibility to abductive scientiﬁc realism lies in the special features
of Strict Abduction and higher-order abductive procedures in Shook [13]. Crucial
features have to do with the creative postulation and re-conceptions of the entity to
be discovered. Loose ideas of entities allow for vague predictions about amorphous
evidence, evidence that any number of similarly imprecise postulations could equally
well “explain”. The poor reputation of abduction is not due to abductive reasoning
itself, but rather to vague and unrevised ideas of postulated causes. Strict abduction
deals with a postulated entity A by exercising tight control over modestly modifying
the conception of A during the reasoning process. That control is emphasized in the
ﬁrst two special features of Strict Abduction.
First, at each stage, the conception of A has only one clear deﬁnition and set of capacities.
Only the capacities required to account for the phenomena are attributed to A, and whatever
7Recent studies linking scientiﬁc realism with abductive inquiry include Magnani and Betolotti
[30], Niiniluoto [31].

224
J. R. Shook
the deﬁnition of A may be, that deﬁnition is only permitted to be compatible with those Cs
applied in the procedure.
Second, no other conceptions of A, beyond those Cs proposed to account for Qs, Rs, Ss
(and so on) are regarded as relevant. Strict Abduction does not permit the deﬁnition of A
to range beyond whatever is minimally necessary for it to have its explanatory capacities.
That strict control allows successful predictions to more impressively support the postulated
hypothesis.
Any responsibility for the vagueness or precision of conception of postulated
entities must rest with the human conceivers, not the entities. The fault lies with
scientists for failing to better deﬁne and reﬁne their hypotheses, thereby permitting
undeserved “conﬁrmations” and allowing unscientiﬁc theories to proliferate. It is a
mistake to depict scientiﬁc inquiry as a thought process undertaken by a solitary
thinker. Peirce expected a scientiﬁc community to conduct and control the scientiﬁc
enterprises of empirical inquiry and collectively evaluate their results. Scientiﬁc
communities yield knowable discoveries, not any lone mind.
9
Scientiﬁc Communities
Procedural abduction works best for a community of scientiﬁc inquirers who consult
together about how realistic a hypothesis can become, while they enlarge the collec-
tion of evidence and simultaneously develop their conceptions of postulated entities.
These additional features of procedural abduction, exclusively the responsibility of
scientiﬁc communities, have essential roles:
Third, due to the bounded clarity supplied by the second feature, a community of inquirers
can apply A together and everyone can agree upon what the explanation is and what it so far
entails.
Fourth, although a community will have disagreements over what new capacities A should
have for increasing its predictive range, both the current deﬁnition of A and the presently
assigned capacities place compatibility constraints on the sort of new capacities that can be
assigned to A.
Fifth, if a new prediction goes badly, the community of inquirers only needs to doubt the
new implicated capacity of A, not the rest of the capacities of A, preserving the explanatory
power A had already earned.
Sixth, the expansion of A’s capacities and its explanatory range can halt and pause whenever
the community ﬁnds no work for A to do presently, but A can be put to work again in the
future when opportunities come for relevant observations.
More complex kinds of procedural abduction than Strict Abduction all share in
these six features. Those features prevent a hypothesis from being able to explain
far too much, and from trying to explain new phenomena only after they are observ-
able. All the same, a hypothesis explaining too much too easily can seem convinc-
ingly realistic to the smartest minds, including scientists. Histories of scientiﬁc ﬁelds
are replete with tales about good scientists who stubbornly cling to their inade-
quate hypotheses. Humility is perhaps the prime virtue of scientiﬁc character. (Peirce

Abduction, the Logic of Scientiﬁc Creativity, and Scientiﬁc …
225
pointed to scientiﬁc analogues of faith, hope, and charity as well; see Shook [17]).
Peirce wrote,
The scientiﬁc world is like a colony of insects in that the individual strives to produce that
which he himself cannot hope to enjoy. One generation collects premises in order that a
distant generation may discover what they mean. ([4]. 7.87)
Since scientiﬁc knowledge of the real world is created, something in this world
accomplishes that knowledge—the community of scientiﬁc inquirers, who have a
shared history of discovery and a shared future of hypothesis testing, bound together
by a commitment in their common purpose of creating knowledge. Peirce explicitly
connected the ideal of the scientiﬁcally real with the idea of the scientiﬁc community.
The real, then, is that which, sooner or later, information and reasoning would ﬁnally result
in, and which is therefore independent of the vagaries of me and you. Thus, the very origin
of the conception of reality shows that this conception essentially involves the notion of a
COMMUNITY, without deﬁnite limits, and capable of a deﬁnite increase of knowledge. ([4]
5.311)
That growth of discovered knowledge is due to abductive procedures applied
by scientiﬁc inquirers. Procedural abduction, by maximizing the value of eviden-
tial information and inferential reasoning, yields discovery in its genuine sense of
scientiﬁc realism.
Procedural abduction overcomes that long-standing dichotomy between psycho-
logical learning and rational logic. Where learning and logic, and discovery and
justiﬁcation, are uniﬁed for the inclusive goal of knowledge creation, creativity
could not be isolated from reasoning. Each ﬁnds its scientiﬁc purpose in the other.
Creativity is reasonable, and reasoning is creative, where an organization of scientists
are growing organized knowledge. Three modes of creativity have come up in this
scientiﬁc context: novelty, development, and organization.
Novelty – new things one after another after another. However, mere novelties may not be
relevant to each other, so development is needed.
Development – enlarging capacities to effectively manage sequenced novelties. However,
independent developments are not automatically coordinated with each other, so organization
is needed.
Organization – improving integration of the whole through harmonious co-development.
However, only committed organizations with a shared history and future can guarantee this
co-development, so scientiﬁc community is needed.
This chapter asked a fundamental question for philosophy of science: How is
knowledge of the world created? It was proposed that what is learnable and what is
logical is integrated and uniﬁed by the processes of creating knowledge. This would
require that discovery and justiﬁcation are organically uniﬁed during the creation
of knowledge. Procedural abduction, at the scientiﬁc level of Strict Abduction and
higher, integrates the learnable (postulations undergoing conceptual development)
and the logical (hypotheses undergoing rational scrutiny) quite thoroughly. This is
where discovery and justiﬁcation are functionally fused together within the organized
process of procedural abduction by scientiﬁc communities.

226
J. R. Shook
The four questions posed at the beginning are answered by this pragmatist philos-
ophy of science as follows. (1) Is scientiﬁc creativity methodologically related to
scientiﬁc justiﬁcation? Answer: scientiﬁc creativity is integral to abductive proce-
dures yielding scientiﬁc justiﬁcation. (2) Can a distinction between genuine science
and pseudo-science be clearly deﬁned? Answer: genuine science is distinguished by
the application of procedural abduction at the level of Strict Abduction or higher.
(3) Does scientiﬁc knowledge achieve the legitimacy of scientiﬁc realism? Answer:
procedural abduction legitimates the credibility of highly-conﬁrmed hypotheses and
hence justiﬁes scientiﬁc realism. (4) How are scientiﬁc communities responsible for
establishing scientiﬁc knowledge? Answer: scientiﬁc communities using procedural
abduction realize (in both cognitive and constructive senses) scientiﬁc knowledge.
References
1. Hintikka, J.: What is abduction? The fundamental problem of contemporary epistemology.
Trans. Charles S. Peirce Soc. 34, 503–533 (1998)
2. Aliseda, A.: The logic of abduction: An introduction. In: Magnani, L., Bertolotti, T. (eds.)
Handbook of Model-based Science, pp. 219–230. Springer, Cham, Switzerland (2017)
3. Brockhaus, R.: Realism and psychologism in 19th century logic. Philos. Phenomenological
Res. 51, 493–524 (1991)
4. Peirce, C. S.: The collected papers of Charles Sanders Peirce, vol. 8. In: Hartshorne, C., Weiss,
P, Burks, A.W. (eds.) Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA (1931–1935, 1958). (Citations
are to volume and paragraph numbers)
5. Peckhaus, V.: Psychologism and the distinction between discovery and justiﬁcation. In:
Schickore, J., Steinle, F. (eds.) Revisiting Discovery and Justiﬁcation, pp. 99–116. Springer,
Berlin (2006)
6. Pietarinen, A., Belluci, F.: New light on Peirce’s conceptions of retroduction, deduction, and
scientiﬁc reasoning. Int. Stud. Philos. Sci. 28, 353–373 (2014)
7. Yu, S., Zenker, F.: Peirce knew why abduction isn’t IBE: a scheme and critical questions for
abductive argument. Argumentation 32, 569–587 (2018)
8. Plutynski, A.: Four problems of abduction: a brief history. HOPOS: J. Int. Soc. Hist. Philos.
Sci. 1, 227–248 (2011)
9. Anderson, D.R.: Creativity and the Philosophy of C. S. Peirce. Martinus Nijhoff, Dordrecht
(1987)
10. Anderson, D.R.: The evolution of Peirce’s concept of abduction. Trans. Charles S. Peirce Soc.
22, 145–164 (1986)
11. Tschaepe, M.: Guessing and abduction. Trans. Charles S. Peirce Soc. 50, 115–138 (2014)
12. Tschaepe, M.: Gradations of guessing: preliminary sketches and suggestions. Contemp.
Pragmatism 10, 135–154 (2013)
13. Shook, J.R.: Abduction, complex inferences, and emergent heuristics of scientiﬁc inquiry.
Axiomathes 26, 157–186 (2016). Reprinted in this volume
14. Peirce, C. S.: The Carnegie application for logic research, Draft E” MS L75.163-173, held by
The Peirce Edition Project at Indiana University Indianapolis (1902). Accessed online at http://
arisbe.sitehost.iu.edu/menu/library/bycsp/L75/ver1/l75v1-06.htm
15. Shook, J.R.: Varieties of twentieth century American naturalism. Pluralist 6, 1–17 (2011)
16. Worrall, J.: The no miracles intuition and the no miracles argument. In: Dieks, D. (ed.)
Explanation, Prediction, and Conﬁrmation, pp. 11–21. Springer, Dordrecht (2011)
17. Shook, J.R.: Reasoning is communal in method and spirit. In: Thellefsen, T., Sorensen, B. (eds.)
Charles Sanders Peirce in His Own Words, pp. 70–83. Mouton De Gruyter, Berlin (2014)

Abduction, the Logic of Scientiﬁc Creativity, and Scientiﬁc …
227
18. Magnani, L.: The Abductive Structure of Scientiﬁc Creativity. Springer, New York (2017)
19. Paavola, S.: On the Origin of Ideas: An Abductivist Approach to Discovery, 2nd edn. LAP
Lambert Academic Publishing, Saarbrücken, Germany (2012)
20. Barrena S., Nubiola J.: Abduction, the logic of creativity. In: Bloomsbury Companion to
Contemporary Peircean Semiotics, pp. 185–203. Bloomsbury, London (2019)
21. Park, W.: Abduction in Context: The Conjectural Dynamics of Scientiﬁc Reasoning. Springer,
Cham, Switzerland (2017)
22. Hacking, I.: Representing and Intervening: Introductory Topics in the Philosophy of Natural
Science. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK (1983)
23. Giere, R.N.: Science Without Laws. University of Chicago Press, Chicago (1999)
24. Cartwright, N.: Nature’s Capacities and Their Measurement. Oxford University Press, Oxford,
UK (1989)
25. Nickles, T.: The strange story of scientiﬁc method. In: Meheus, J., Nickles, T. (eds.) Models
of Discovery and Creativity, pp. 167–207. Springer, Dordrecht, Germany (2009)
26. Snyder, L.J.: Hypotheses in 19th century British philosophy of science: Herschel, Whewell,
Mill. In: Heidelberger, M., Schiemann, G. (eds.) The Signiﬁcance of the Hypothetical in Natural
Science, pp. 59–76. Walter de Gruyter, Berlin (2009)
27. Schickore, J., Steinle, F.: Revisiting Discovery and Justiﬁcation: Historical and Philosophical
Perspectives on the Context Distinction. Springer, Berlin (2006)
28. Whewell, W.: The Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences. J.W. Parker, London (1840)
29. Popper, K.: The Logic of Scientiﬁc Discovery. Routledge, London (1959)
30. Magnani, L., Bertolotti, T. (eds.): Springer Handbook of Model-based Science. Springer, Cham,
Switzerland (2017)
31. Niiniluoto, I.: Truth-Seeking by Abduction. Springer, Cham, Switzerland (2018)

Human Reasoning and Theories
of Cognition

Abduction and the Logic of Inquiry:
Modern Epistemic Vectors
Jay Schulkin
Abstract CS Peirce introduced the concept of abduction into our epistemic lexicon.
It is a view of problem solving that emphasizes ecological contexts, preparatory or
predictive predilection knotted to learning and inquiry. Abduction is essentially tied
more broadly to pragmatism. One view of the brain reﬂects the fact that predic-
tive predilections knotted to abduction or hypothesis testing dominates the land-
scape of diverse forms of problem solving. Abduction is biologically constrained
and contextual, not a monolithic term and runs the range of neural capability.
Keywords Abduction · Inquiry · Disruption · Inference · Cephalic · Conservation
1
Introduction
Problem solving is at the root of foraging for epistemic coherence; its roots in its
diverse forms is biological. We come ready to investigate, to search for coherence
and meaning. Embedded in the process of satisfying our basic wants and needs are a
number of problem-solving skills—something I like to call “cephalic capabilities.”
I use the word cephalic in neuroscience [1–3], an older word not much used in the
neurosciences, because of its link to the brain in the context of the body. The living
brain is not detached from action and divorced from the contours of adaptation;
rather, a brain is part of a body in space and time that is the rare limiting factor for
behavior and experience.
Moreover, we do not come into the world as a blank slate. Abduction is in a context
of prior adaptive resolutions, prior probabilities in predictive machinery inherent in
the design of the nervous system, diverse forms of cognitive capabilities permeate
neuronal expression and structure at the very onset of life [4]. These capabilities
include the ability to think about numbers, food, space, time, detecting others and
their beliefs, etc. We also start out with a certain cephalic plasticity.
J. Schulkin (B)
Department of Neuroscience, Georgetown University, Washington, USA
e-mail: jjs54@georgetown.edu
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2021
J. Shook et al. (eds.), Abduction in Cognition and Action, Studies in Applied
Philosophy, Epistemology and Rational Ethics 59,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-61773-8_11
231

232
J. Schulkin
Cephalic systems traverse the whole of sensory and information-gathering
systems with which we sample the world and update our orientations. There is no
separation of a mind from a body, but diverse forms of information sampling of the
environment, both internal for what is to be sustained in viable ways, and sampling
external events for what is occurring [2]. Indeed, core abductive moments “getting
the gist” of something fast [5–7] makes sense from a neuroscience perspective by the
massive neural connectivity between neocortical or amygdala innervation of sites in
the brainstem or the peripheral visceral nervous systems that regulate the alimentary
systems, namely the gut those hunches, generating an idea, those abductive moments,
are rich in gut//visceral/cortical neural connectivity.
Bodily sensibility and the issue of cephalic functioning (and its evolution by
adding on diverse forms of information processing, of sampling and appraising
diverse terrains) is its adaptive value and applications [8, 9] and continued expression
that underlies our epistemic engines of discovery [10, 11]. In other words, problem
solving is a continuous function across the natural and cultural landscape as we
look into our evolutionary past, neural systems, and present circumstances [12], it is
mostly local and rooted in context and need.
In this chapter, I start with giving a sense of what abduction is about, and then
some of the resources that ﬁgure in active inference, abduction and problem solving.
Abduction and Inquiry: CS Peirce suggested that there are no precognitive events
but rather degrees of cognitive action underlying perception, attention, and action
that runs through our experience. Indeed, we know that human organization is based
largely on anticipatory cognitive system tied to ecological contexts of relevance and
neural design.
For Peirce, pragmatism is knotted inextricably to abduction. By abduction, Peirce
meant the genesis of ideas or, in other words, hypothesis formation and testing.
Abductive events are at the heart of inquiry. For Peirce, abduction is “preparatory;”
and induction is a “concluding step” grounded in natural outcomes and deduction.
By, introducing the idea of abduction, Peirce offered an alternative to rationalism
and deduction, as well as endless empiricism and induction.
Anticipation, a response to the awareness of time, is a fundamental feature of our
cognitive capabilities; it is tied to everything about us. The endogenous clocks are
reminders in preparation for events, in anticipation of action. They are the origins
of forethought [13], abductive inferences begin to emerge with the anticipation of
events and their breakdown and within a context of cephalic/ecological and social
resources.
Our evolutionary orientation toward familiar objects remains somewhat constant
but our understanding always reﬂects our speciﬁc culture as well. We come partic-
ularly prepared to focus on animate objects, like body parts, including that of the
brain [14].
We come prepared to forage for the coherence of our neural processes as much
as we come prepared to look for food. Our evolutionary success is contingent upon
both. Knowledge acquisition is constrained by context and expectations; the law
of “sufﬁcient reason,” for instance, is contextualized by investigators, the tools for
inquiry that are available, and the theories that dominate the inquiry.

Abduction and the Logic of Inquiry: Modern Epistemic Vectors
233
A core capacity for investigations is rooted in this basic need to ﬁnd coherence,
to sample for stable, viable, predictable events, from which to build action-oriented
anticipated functions and foraging for coherence in inductive machinery. Multiple
diverse exploratory processes are embedded in this cognitive/neural capability.
Indeed, Peirce was insightful. Peirce understood that “thinking is a species of the
brain and cerebration is a species of the nervous action” (Peirce 1880/1992, Vol. 1
p. 107). Peirce always noted that there are no precognitive events but rather degrees
of cognitive action underlying perception, attention, and action [6]. Indeed, we know
that human organization is based largely on anticipatory cognitive systems, most of
which encompass the vast cognitive unconscious [15]. When Peirce correctly noted,
“It was impossible to know intuitively that a given cognition is not determined by
a previous one” [16, p. 30], he was close to recognizing that cognitive resources
ﬁgure in the organization of action, as do the larger habits and cultural expression,
something some 30 years later John Dewey would note in his critique on the “reﬂex
arc” [8, 17, 18].
Peirce regarded pragmatism as the method to determine larger consequences. This
represented a move away from nominalism towards the realism of Scotus and Reid
about kinds of objects and our knowledge of them. For Peirce, pragmatism is knotted
inextricably to abduction [7]. By abduction, Peirce meant the genesis of ideas or, in
other words, hypothesis formation and testing. Abductive events are at the heart of
inquiry (Table 1).
Abduction is “preparatory;” and induction is a “concluding step” grounded in
natural outcomes [7, 19, 20]. Hypothesis formation as it related to the science of
discovery [21, 22, 23]. There was no detached starting point for the eradication of
all doubt as there was in Descartes (see also see [24]). Peirce underlie epistemic
activities and the cumulative results of inquiry. He added the additional element of
something akin to an instinct hitting on the right idea: abduction. Here evolutionary
success is an important element and the larger cultural expression that cultivates
successful problem solving and discovery.
Hypothesisformationisessentialfordrawinginferencesinthecontextofdeducing
consequences and inducing noted relationships. The causes and the consequences
are embedded in larger based frameworks [22, 25]. Abduction offered entrenchment
in the knowing process tied to prediction and coherence. And predictive coherence
are some of the features that the living brain depends on: reliabilism [11, 26–28].
Table 1 Logical steps in active inference, following Peirce [103] Source [16]
Inference and Hypothesis 
Deductive or Analytic
Synthetic
Induction
Hypothesis/Abduction in context & ecology

234
J. Schulkin
Fallibilism, a term frequently used by Peirce, was paramount to this approach.
This is not surprising, because he also understood something about the new tools
that were emerging in the statistical sciences, such as the properties of chance and
probability that involved looking for frequencies, determining statistical support, and
ﬂushing out the controls and the control groups from experimental design [5, 7, 29].
Importantly, for [7], pragmatism is knotted to “abduction”; abductive events are
at the heart of inquiry, abduction is about hypothesis creation. Abduction, in other
worlds, is about hypothesis formation and testing; the grounding is in objects and
action, reference and a natural sense of objects. The richer the hypothesis, in some
contexts the larger the implication: the deeper the hypothesis, the better the under-
standing, inferences towards better explanations, but abduction is mostly about good
enough ﬁt for the context of epistemic satisfaction [30].
A logic of discovery is not one set of epistemic events (c.f. [22, 31, 32]). A logic of
discovery as [33] would suggest is a “manual of conclusions”, but an assessment of
inferences made, the problematic in a particular context, the ﬁt of the hypothesis and
the explanatory depth or not; but set in a context of effective strategies, research trends
of success, and reliable justiﬁcation of inference rules (see also [34]), constrained
and situated in ecological contexts [35, 36]. Abduction in context; options, suitability
and viability; testing and foraging are continuous with these events.
What is an instinctive adaptation; they are ideas that ﬁt easily into a niche, where
there is probably selection pressure, that allows for a good enough ﬁt. One orientation
of the living brain is statistical inference, the ﬂip side of which is probabilistic errors
and to minimize error [37] and energy expenditure by the brain [38].
The theory of inquiry, of hypothesis testing, is rooted in this cognitive perspective;
ﬁxation of belief is rooted in the organization of action [13, 39]. The orientation
is not simply reactive, but anticipatory—but also responsive to discrepancy with
expectations. Indeed [40], a scholar of Peirce has noted that Kant and Alexander
Bain were particular inﬂuential with regard to the origins of pragmatism. Alexander
Bain, less well known, had written an inﬂuential book in the early nineteenth century
on the will, linking beliefs to a tendency and strength of action. And abduction is
an inference that emerges within this context, generating a new idea, slightly altered
one, etc. All of which is tied to foraging for epistemic coherence.
Of course, action is often habitual routine. Memory, attention, and other cogni-
tive resources are minimized during diverse routines; cognitive capabilities are then
recruited elsewhere in the ongoing action. It is the breakdown that helps generate
further action and cognitive resources to learn, attend, and construe new resolu-
tions and new forms of adaptations, and part of the clarity to determine the diverse
consequences of the new set of hypotheses determinant in human action, long term
[7, 16, 29].

Abduction and the Logic of Inquiry: Modern Epistemic Vectors
235
2
Keeping Track, Abduction and the Predictive Brain
Ecological Considerations: Cognitive adaptations towards objects that makes their
ready use and understanding available, a veritable set of cephalic heuristics [5, 41, 42]
wearriveatsomeideasratherquickly.Wearriveatthembecausethereisabackground
context of adaptation; the ecological ﬂuidity to the living brain oxygenated the ease
of hypothesis formation or abductive inference [3].
Anchoring our decision making to useful heuristics with a cephalic orientation
about number andfrequencies is veryuseful. Thewayproblems areframedinﬂuences
the judgment, the decision making. Keeping track is demythologizing the decision
making by making it transparent and readily understandable; no easy chore, but
knowing something about relationships between events, the origins of statistics being
linked to keeping track of events [43]. One way we do this is by representing statistical
relationships and the quantiﬁcation of data in terms of probabilities and natural
frequencies. Keeping track of events is expanded by the scaffolding to diverse forms
of information [44, 45].
Abduction in context, constrained by context and ecology. Our sensory capacity is
keen to detect objects that afford sustenance or harm [5, 46]. Fast forms for detecting
information can change the structure; diverse forms of heuristics, fast ways to solve
problems both speciﬁc and general, evolved in the evolution of our brain.
All inquiry constrained by frameworks utilizing diverse forms of statistical infer-
ences and underlying the logics of discovery are very Peircian indeed, and quite
modern. And his epistemology was emboldened less by the issue of correspondence
than coherence and the fruits of labor in inquiry.
We come prepared to associate a number of events linked by causal building blocks
in cephalic structures by worldly events. Ecological rationality—viz., readily avail-
able heuristics well-grounded in successful decision making [42]—places decision
making and the use of statistical features within cephalic predilections about numbers
and representations of frequencies in real contexts. Gerd Gigerenzer [5] following
Herbert Simon looked for ways in which we can adapt and satisfy ourselves with the
best we can discern given the context, circumstances and expectations in behavioral
explanations. There are better and worse forms of decision making.
As Peirce noted, we come with a predilection to hit on the right hypothesis,
and to react quickly to solve problems, both speciﬁc and general: diverse heuristics
developed in the evolution of our brain. In other words, we come prepared to asso-
ciate a number of events linked by causal building blocks [13, 15, 47]. Ecological
sensibility and rationality, abduction in context describe readily available heuris-
tics well-grounded in successful decision making [23, 48]. Abduction is grounded
in ecological ﬂuidity and social evolution [49], availability of resources and neural
capability [50].
Inquiry and learning is in a context when expectations are not met, when habit
formationandactivityaredisrupted[6,7,51].Predictioniscoupledwithexpectancies
and their breakdown [52, 53]. When expectations are thwarted, a broad array of
learning occurs through new problem solving and search principles. Information

236
J. Schulkin
acquisition and control is a strong desire. Aversion to ambiguity, for example, is a
real property of our decision-making. Ambiguity can breed indecision, the status
quo in action in human decision-making processes [54]. Foraging for coherence
and sampling environmental stimuli of signiﬁcance is tied to the fact that, within
traditional learning, associations are embedded within probability of occurrences.
Learning, abduction, in part, takes place when expectations and coherent forms of
behavioral adaptation are compromised or called into question [55].
When expectations are thwarted, a broad array of learning occurs through new
problem solving and search principles. Peirce’s view of inquiry and learning was
prescient, for the variants of this view would capture learning theory through what
became known as the [55] equation:
V = αβ(λ−V )
The Rescorla-Wagner model depicts the associative strengths of stimuli and how
discrepancies from expectations are resolved. An association, and thereby learning,
occurs by the strength of the predictions that are being developed. The model then is
not simply a mathematical approach to neural science, but also an incorporation of a
cognitive point of view. In the equation, V represents the current associative strength
of the stimulus, while λ shows the maximum associative strength of the primary
motivating event.
Abductive inference and the detection of salience in the context of hypothesis
formationandhabitgenerationwhenexpectationsarethwarted,whentheanticipatory
behaviors have lost credence, and when the expected outcomes are undermined.
From there comes a further foraging for coherence and propagating actions that are
consistent with newly formed hypotheses and expectations, abduction is set in this
context; the search that underlies appetitive search to remedy a problematic context
that generates epistemic motion [3, 51].
Much of real inquiry, however, involves struggling with the not-known, the barely-
known, or the yet-to-be-known [51]. Indeed, from our routine problem-solving for
survival emerged our ability to discern and act on that which is knowable only with
degrees of conﬁdence. That judgmental practice is the heart of statistical inference.
We now know that diverse regions of the brain are linked to statistical inference,
and they include both neocortical and subcortical regions such as the basal ganglia
[56]. Perhaps it is not surprising that cortical regions are linked to statistical infer-
ences, but the subcortical sites may be surprising, as these sites are also understood in
the context of motor regions. The basal ganglia is the head ganglia of motor control,
but then movement and action are inherently related in the organization of action
and in the anticipatory regulation of sensory and motor expression and expectations
[57, 58].
Resolving uncertainty clearly is a major motivator of behavior. Perhaps this is
what makes us more eager to hear the end of a song that deﬁes our expectations
rather than fulﬁlling them, but the brain is wired to minimize neural exhaustion [38],
to minimize neural excess use.

Abduction and the Logic of Inquiry: Modern Epistemic Vectors
237
Foraging for coherence is active sampling tied to prediction of action and expec-
tations of events. Typically, it runs continuously. Of course, our world is mostly
coping, managing and surviving, with bouts of relief and neural regeneration [38,
59]. Breakdowns result in abductive inference or active inference and learning [50].
Interestingly, information deprivation is construed as a cognitive deprivation. A
consequent hunger to ﬁll this gap occurs [60]. Within the bounds of reason, some
forms of inquiry and cognitive coherence may reﬂect this search for cognitive equi-
librium. The emphasis is on embodied knowing; visceral input is something vital
to curiosity, learning, and inquiry. Interestingly, in the common phrase, “to pique
one’s curiosity,” the word pique means “to arouse or provoke,” but the word can
also mean “to cause to feel vexation or resentment.” The gap of information, both
relative and absolute, leads to a possible understanding of curiosity and the joys that
one might ﬁnd in the search for and attainment of information. The relationship of
the information gap to curiosity has been articulated through the use of information
theory’s entropy coefﬁcient:
n

pi
log2pii = 1
In this equation, n represents the total possible choices or outcomes of infor-
mation, whereas pi is the assessed probability that a particular choice will occur.
As knowledge concerning each choice increases, the probabilities of each become
more varied and exact. The equation is useful, but not necessarily exact, in quan-
tifying multidimensional information in a one-dimensional manner. In terms of the
information gap and curiosity levels, several entropy measures are necessary: the
individual’s current situation, the informational goal of the individual, and a situa-
tional level of ignorance are all factors. The absolute magnitude would therefore be
the informational goal minus the current situation. The relative magnitude would be
the absolute magnitude divided by the difference of the informational goal and level
of total ignorance. Abduction emerges in ﬁlling in the gaps, the active inferences that
underlie the curiosity, the discomfort, the noted discrepancy, and ameliorates neural
energy consumption.
Abduction and Surprise: Neuroscientiﬁc inquiry, in the same way, is geared to
minimizingsurprisesthroughinvestigation.Theneuralorientationistogainprecision
in perceptual contact with minimizing neural energy expenditure [38]. Conservation
of energy one principle adaptation [61]. Importantly, the view is tied to classical
pragmatism, in the form of [6, 7, 16, 62] and particularly [17, 51].
Effortandtheengagementofthemotorsystemisinherentlytaggingandpredicting
events with contact with real or imagined object, whether conscious or not, and
perhaps mostly not [15]. This may, perhaps, occur in particular during default modes
of simulation [63] or simply be a running neural capability in suitable contexts.
Prediction of events is the running theme in a living brain tied to expectations
and regulation [64]. Diverse regions of the cortex [65] and subcortical regions

238
J. Schulkin
[58] underlie the action sequences, and the abductive inferences that underlie the
organization of action.
The “pragmatic turn in cognitive science” [66] recognizes the continuous organi-
zation of cognitive/motor regulation of action. Diverse forms of dualism are diluted
[17], such as thought and action, perception and thought, in the organization of action.
As [17] noted “there is simply a continuously ordered sequence of events”. And that
is essential in the continuous integration of afferent and efferent timing of events and
in the predictive capability that runs through the motor systems and the generation
of action sequences.
One dominant theme in foraging for coherence is the detection of error and
the use of various methods to correct effort prediction. Expectations and feed-
back are a dominant and recurrent theme across cephalic systems and capabili-
ties. These computational systems, embedded in well—worn and tested practices,
cultural contexts at the heart of ﬁnding meaning across diverse systems, particularly
motor/action/appraisals—a key feature of cephalic adaptive systems [5] and adaptive
abductive inferences.
2.1
Bayes’ Theorem and Bayesian Brain: Abductive
Inference
This orientation to self-correct and keep track of prior probabilities is a key feature
of the brain [54]. Bayes’ theorem is one way in which to understand expectations
in terms of prior probabilities that are embedded in our predictions about recurrent
events, and learning from them. These events lie within a wide array of problem-
solving capabilities, without one set of consistent overlying rules (see also [15, 30]).
In other words, no one unifying super problem-solving device exists; rather, we have
a wide assortment of adaptive tools that underlie problems involving the evolution
of adaptive systems and abductive inference.
Abductive inferences is within self-corrective neural systems. Bayes’ theorem is
a fundamental theorem of probability that states that, for any two events A and B,
the probability of A given B can be computed from the probability of B given A, as
well as the overall probabilities (known as the “prior probabilities”) of A and B.
p(A|B) = p(B|A)p(A)
p(B)
Moreover, we may be prepared to understand natural frequencies more easily
than other ways of representing events as we track objects and events with diverse
heuristic devices and revise our orientations to events if we need to.
A Bayesian cephalic self-corrective, a realistic metaphor, functions to coordinate
expectations with new forms of evidence in a context of predictive capabilities [67].
This is perhaps one part of cephalic capabilities—a ‘grab bag’ of diverse functions

Abduction and the Logic of Inquiry: Modern Epistemic Vectors
239
[15] that underlie human foraging for coherence and sampling behaviors and adaptive
good enough and contextual adaptive inferences.
2.2
Cataloging; Conditions for Abductive Inference
But one thing that may be inherent in cephalic function and adaptative systems
are probabilistic expectations of diverse forms of sensory information and ways in
which to track, link and structure events in meaningful categorical relationships that
underlie causal inferences [68].
It is not surprising that we come prepared to catalogue and group objects, espe-
cially into things alive or not-alive. The epistemic attempts of Linnaeus (and others,
such as Buffon) represent just one human scheme for classifying plants and animals;
human beings have always explored their world through categories of understanding.
Indeed, categories of understanding—classiﬁcatory systems embedded in
projectable predicates [26] and with expectations—are part of our essential tagging
capabilities. We do this easily; it is fundamental to inductive events and for tracking
and tagging objects of relevance in categories that match objects to predictable statis-
tical relationships, perhaps using Bayesian type tracking and sampling mechanisms,
namely building on prior probabilities through evidence and continuous updating as
needed [68].
This is a valuable tool in a world of adaptation and heuristic problem-solving [5,
30]. The natural continuum of events is from theoretical constructs to solutions that
attempt to satisfy very real problems. The “naturalization of intelligence,” a phrase
Dewey used, is to be always oriented to the problem. It begins in organizing events
into categories of coherence with an eye towards things and objects that matter to us
or which we wish to avoid [27].
Natural knowledge is an ancient predilection for taming reality by categories, a
skill we come prepared with and which is linked to diverse forms of cephalic capa-
bility. Coming prepared to recognize, for instance, edible objects from inedible ones,
anchors the way forward in a suitable environment in which additional learning can
take place. And, of course, having capability to draw adaptive abductive inferences.
Human beings have a common currency of survival and folk biological categories.
These are shared categories of understanding in common adaptation while we forage
for both survival and understanding. Indeed, the two mix in an endless stream as
we sample and anticipate events to come while we sustain our viability. Inferential
systems are grounded in our sense of nature: the evolutionary equipment that got us
here some 10,000 years ago [69].
Indeed, exposure to diverse forms of visual experience ﬁgures in both visual
recognition and the semantic meaning of animate objects, e.g., plant recognition [4].
Developing postnatal brains are formed by exposure to events. The sculpting of
diverse brain regions is a continuous function during development, leading to both
pre- and postnatal achievement of basic form and function.

240
J. Schulkin
The search is for the “stable amidst the precarious” [51] in a never-ending battle
for viability. Classiﬁcation is rooted in that core search. Theoretical taxonomies are
alwaysoperative.Withouttheory,thereisnolens,noseeing,forcoherence[22].Infer-
ences are embedded in an orientation of action and in viability of outcomes, expec-
tations in past habits codiﬁed by neural systems within environmental constraints on
hypothesis formation.
Our commitment to the taxonomy of objects is built on the success of that
taxonomy as it renders events predictable and coherent. It is not make-believe. The
whole point about both pragmatism and adaptation is that things matter, there are
consequences, and the consequences are not abstract. That is the allure of prag-
matism—a pragmatism grounded in discovery and understanding. Such taxonomic
cultural evolution underlies the evolution of knowledge. We look for core features
of objects that provide us with some coherence in expectations.
Abductive inference is set in a context or prior order, whether as part of neural core
function or as selected objects and groupings. Core concepts include that of agency,
causation, time space, number, and our sense of objects. Discerning recurrence and
reliability in the network of semantic meaning is a “good enough” way of making
sense of our world.
However, a set of cognitive capabilities to recognize the usefulness of natural
objects varies with culture. Atran and Medin, for instance, in comparing the ability
of the Itza people versus local non-natives in picking out natural objects, reveal
something like devolution of function [70]. Folk biological knowledge is in a context,
even in its most primitive modern form. What this sort of ﬁnding might be saying is
that we are prepared to note useful objects. They ﬁgure in reliable information in the
organization of action and decision making within a culture. Indeed, categories are
endlessly fallible. Peirce’s fallibilism, on the other hand, sets expectations on limits.
The platypus aptly illustrates some of the limits of our sampling systems. The
main deﬁnition of a mammal is an animal that bears live young (i.e., does not lay
eggs). Of course, a platypus is just that—an egg laying mammal—a marvel of nature
and a delight to behold, but also something both within and outside our classiﬁcatory
system. The point here is about seeing, context, classiﬁcation, and the expansion of
knowledge, both operative when foraging for coherence and updating by sampling
continuously. Abductive connects the dots, despite the discrepancy.
Aids for Abductive Inference: A wide array of both speciﬁc and more general
problem-solving capabilities is vital in foraging for coherence; certainly, numer-
ical capability is essential for tracking events. Spatial capability ﬁgures in noting
where things are and when they might appear, and what events are associated by
predictability or non-predictability.
A tool box in epistemic discoveries, abductive inferences is tied to core knowl-
edge about space, time, probability, agency, language, statistical capability, and a
variety of social and technological skills. We imagine the preconditions for foraging
for coherence and then place them in a sense of inquiry with constraints on hypoth-
esis formation and inferences towards good explanation [7, 16], or a good enough
explanation, given the context (see also [30]).

Abduction and the Logic of Inquiry: Modern Epistemic Vectors
241
Reason and problem-solving aim toward a “good ﬁt,” constrained by ecolog-
ical context and evolutionary history (e.g. [5, 30]). Then we have something Peirce
might have expressed, if we go further in integrating a biological perspective with
hypothesis formation and abduction. We come prepared with diverse heuristics in
problem-solving. Heuristics—i.e., fast ways to solve problems both speciﬁc and
general—evolved along with our brain.
Abductive inference is in context, constrained by context and ecology. Our sensory
capacity is keen to detect objects that afford sustenance or harm [71]. Fast forms
for detecting information can change the structure. Indeed, we come prepared to
associate a number of events linked by causal building blocks in cephalic structures
by worldly events [15, 47]. Ecological rationality—readily available heuristics well-
grounded in successful decision making, as the classical pragmatists understood—
placesdecisionmakingandtheuseofstatisticalfeatureswithincephalicpredilections
about numbers and representations of frequencies in real contexts [5].
3
Conclusion: Abduction and Inquiry
All inquiries constrained by frameworks utilizing diverse forms of statistical infer-
ences and underlying the logics of discovery are very Peircean indeed and extend
into modern times [25, 43, 72]). The understanding mind requires thinking about
our evolution, our problem-solving capabilities, our ability to predict events, and
our sense of probable events in space and time as tied to habits of intelligence and
problem solving. Indeed, keeping track of objects is a basic predilection built into
cephalic sensibility and reaching into everything we do.
The intellectual move is away from excessive essentialism and rationalism, while
being anchored to objects within a sense of cognitive adaptation. The philosophic
sensibility is oriented to action. And the brain is oriented to maximize good enough
abductive inference to resolve problematic contexts and the breakdown of expecta-
tions. Epistemic and existential coherence are anchored to heuristics that underlie
abductive inference; hitting on the right hypothesis in contexts of meaning and local
adaptation.
Epigenetic regulation of diverse regions of the brain underlie inquiry or learning
vital for life [73]. In other words, regions of the brain are modiﬁed by experience.
While other animals have some plasticity or neurogenesis, in humans it is vast: look
at the diverse languages we can learn, the many forms of epistemic and other human
activities we can express, the different inventions that we can generate, that expand
our sense for seeing, hearing, and knowing, that underlie abduction.
Foraging for coherence is grounded in action, in never losing sight that we are
object/body oriented. Despite the perplexities of inquiry, this is a primary anchoring
point (Quine 1951). We traverse an epistemic space of endlessly boot-strapping to get
a grasp on predictive capability. The issue is coherence and reliability for projectable
predicatesofmeaning[26].Theepistemicforagingmetaphorthatunderliesabductive
inferencesiswithinaframeworkinwhichthemorereliableismoreheavilyembedded

242
J. Schulkin
in our frames of understanding. A movement from hands to language is a continuous
function of our communicative sensibility; gestural expression predominates as we
explore, cooperate, and communicate with others [74].
Context is everything. The brain includes both the central and peripheral systems
and is deeply embedded in social milieu. Take memory, for example: memory is
not exactly in the brain, but extends into the environment. Indeed, a number of
investigators have detailed ways in which memory and other cognitive abilities are
endlessly tied to the environment in which we are foraging for coherence [75].
Action and perception are linked as we explore the world [17, 37]; our sense
of ourselves, imagined or not, is knotted to action [75]. There are many ways to
talk about the mind not being strictly in the head, but rather as extended across the
terrain. In this terrain, we are foraging for coherence with cephalic systems prepared
to understand objects easily. For example, we recognize faces and places, distinguish
animate from inanimate objects, observe movement, and infer causal relationships
early in development and a feature across a lifetime of problem-solving, etc. Social
contact is essential for us, and is tied to the actions of others, their direction, and
their movement.
Abduction is set in the context of others; what others have acquired. The social
roots permeate the abductive space of decision making. The brain is not isolated, and
neither are we as a species. We are embedded in the culture, in the local niche, in
the diverse practices in which we participate. Understanding cephalic systems leads
us to acknowledge this profound fact. We are inherently in a universe of coherence;
chaos and utter breakdown are actually incredibly rare.
Coherence, however, is not the same as truth-seeking and self-corrective inquiry;
we must never confuse these concepts. Sampling and foraging for coherence are in a
context of inquiry, of checking and modifying habitual forms of behavior. This is not
de novo. The practices in which we participate are well-orchestrated and pervade the
organization of action [75]. We come into the world prepared to recognize objects
as meaningful or not, animate or not, reliable or not, etc.; then we are embedded in
diverse practices that pervade our coherent forms of action [76–102].
Human neural organization and the stability of habit formation and continued
viability is based largely on anticipatory cognitive system tied to ecological contexts
of relevance and neural design. For Peirce, pragmatism is knotted inextricably to
abduction. By abduction, Peirce meant the genesis of ideas or, in other words, hypoth-
esis formation and testing. Abductive events are at the heart of inquiry. For Peirce,
abduction is “preparatory;” and induction is a “concluding step” grounded in natural
outcomes and deduction. By introducing the idea of abduction, Peirce offered an
alternative to rationalism and deduction, as well as endless empiricism and induction.
In conclusion, predictive predilections knotted to abduction or hypothesis testing
dominates the landscape of diverse forms of problem solving. Abduction is biologi-
cally constrained and contextual, not a monolithic term and runs the range of neural
capability. We come oriented to exclude some forms of irrelevant forms of informa-
tion in problem solving that aids problem solving and predictive coherence. Abduc-
tion from the mundane and the adaptive to the exploratory is reﬂective of active

Abduction and the Logic of Inquiry: Modern Epistemic Vectors
243
problem solving. Indeed, abduction rest on the fact that brain is an active organ in
which plasticity of function or neurogenesis is as basic as neural or synaptic pruning.
References
1. Schulkin, J.: Social Sensibility and Neural Function. MIT Press, Cambridge (2000)
2. Schulkin, J.: Bodily Sensibility Intelligent Action. Oxford University Press, Oxford (2004)
3. Schulkin, J.: Foraging for Coherence in Neuroscience. Palgrave Macmillan, London (2015)
4. Carey, S.: On the origins of concepts. Oxford University Press, Oxford, United Kingdom
(2009)
5. Gigerenzer, G.: Adaptive thinking. Oxford University, Oxford, United Kingdom (2000)
6. Peirce, C.S.: The ﬁxation of belief. Popular Science Monthly 12, 1–15 (1877)
7. Peirce, C.S.: Deduction, induction and hypothesis. Popular Sci. Mon. 13, 470–482 (1878)
8. Lakoff, G., Johnson, M.: Philosophy in the Flesh. Basic Books, New York (1999)
9. Schulkin, J.: Cognitive Adaptation: A Pragmatist Perspective. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge (2009)
10. Dennett, D.: The Intentional Stance. MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts (1987)
11. Kitcher, P.: Preludes to Pragmatism. Oxford University Press, Oxford (2012)
12. Dewey, J.: The Inﬂuence of Darwin on Philosophy. Indiana University Press, Bloomington
(1910, 1965)
13. Gallistel, C.R.: The Organization of Learning. MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts (1990)
14. Keil, F.: Concepts, Kinds and Cognitive Development. MIT Press, Cambridge (1979,1992)
15. Rozin, P.: The evolution of intelligence and access to the cognitive unconscious. In: Sprague,
J., Epstein, A.N. (eds.) Progress in Psychobiology and Physiological Psychology, vol. 6,
pp. 245–280. Academic Press, New York, NY (1976)
16. Peirce, C.S.: Questions concerning certain faculties claimed for man. In: Houser, N., Kloesel,
C. (eds.) The Essential Peirce, vol. I, pp. 11–27. Indiana University Press, Bloomington,
Indiana (1868, 1992)
17. Dewey, J.: The reﬂex arc concept in psychology. Psychol. Rev. 3, 357–370 (1896)
18. Parrott, G.W., Schulkin, J.: Neuropsychology and the cognitive nature of emotions. Cogn.
Emot. 7, 43–59 (1993)
19. Houser,N.,Roberts,D.D.,Evra,Van:StudiesinthelogicofCharlesSandersPeirce.University
of Indiana Press, Indianapolis, Indiana (1997)
20. Houser, N., Eller, J.R., Lewis, A.C., De Tienne, A., Clark, C.L., Bront Davis, D.: The essential
Peirce, vol. 2. Indiana University Press, Bloomington, Indiana (1998)
21. Anderson, D.R.: Science of Discovery. Purdue University Press, West Lafayette, Indiana
(1995)
22. Hanson, N.R.: Patterns of Discovery. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United
Kingdom (1958, 1972)
23. Heelan, P.A., Schulkin, J.: Hermeneutical philosophy and pragmatism: a philosophy of
science. Synthese 115, 269–302 (1998)
24. Wittgenstein, L.: Philosophical Investigations. Macmillan Publishing, New York, NY (1953,
1968)
25. Hanson, N.R.: Observation and explanation. Harper Press, New York, NY (1971)
26. Goodman, N.: Fact, Fiction and Forecast. Bobbs-Merrill, New York (1955, 1973)
27. Altran, S.: Cognitive Foundations of Natural Philosophy. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge (1990)
28. Hohwy, J.: The Predictive Mind. Oxford University Press, Oxford (2013)
29. Peirce, C.S.: The architecture of theories. Monist 1, 61–76 (1892)
30. Simon, H.A.: Models of Bounded Rationality. MIT Press, Cambridge (1982)
31. Hintikka, J.: What is abduction? Trans. CS Peirce Soc. 34, 503–533 (1998)

244
J. Schulkin
32. Rescher, N.: Essays in the History of Philosophy. Aldersot, Averbury (1995)
33. Hanson, N.R.: Notes toward a logic of discovery. In: Bernstein, R.J. (ed.) Perspectives on
Peirce. Yale University Press, New Haven (1965)
34. Paavola, S.: Abduction cognition: the epistemological and eco-cognitive dimensions of
hypothetical reasoning. Trans. CS Peirce 47, 252–256 (2011)
35. Magnani, L.: The abductive structure of scientiﬁc creativity: an essay on the ecology of
cognition. Springer, Berlin (2017)
36. Shook, J.R.: Abduction, complex inferences, and emergent heuristics of scientiﬁc inquiry.
Axiomathes 26, 157–186 (2016)
37. Friston, K.: The free-energy principle. Cell 30, 781–899 (2009)
38. Peters, A., McEwen, B.S., Friston, K.: Uncertainty and stress. Prog. Neurobiolgy 156, 164–
188l (2017)
39. Gallistel, C.R.: The organization of action: A New Synthesis. Lawrence Erlbaum, Hillsdale,
New Jersey (1980)
40. Fisch, M.H.: Peirce, Semiotic and Pragmatism. Indiana University Press, Bloomington, IN
(1986)
41. Brighton, H., Gigerenzer, G.: Homo heuristicus and the bias-variance dilemma. In: Schulkin,
J. (ed.) Action, Perception and the Brain. Palgrave Macmillan, London (2012)
42. Goldstein, D.G., Gigerenzer, G.: Models of ecological rationality: the recognition heuristic.
Psychol. Rev. 109, 75–90 (2002)
43. Hacking, I.: The Taming of Chance. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United
Kingdom (1999)
44. Clark, A.: Being There. MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts (1997)
45. Donald, M.: A Mind So Rare: The Evolution of Human Consciousness. Norton, New York,
NY (2001)
46. Kahneman, D., Slovic, P., Tversky, A.: Judgment under uncertainty: heuristics and biases.
Cambridge University Press, New York, NY (1982)
47. Rozin, P.: Evolution and development of brains and cultures. In: Gazzaniga, M.S., Altman, J.S.
(eds.) Brain and mind: Evolutionary perspectives, pp. 111–123. Human Frontiers Sciences
Program, Strasbourg, France (1998)
48. Schulkin, J.: Naturalism and Pragmatism. Palgrave Macmillan, London (2012)
49. Kirk, A., Stokerson, P.: Naturalizing Peirce’s semiotics: ecological psychology’s solution to
the problem of creative abduction (2010)
50. Friston, K., et al.: Active Inference and Learning. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 68, 862–869
(2016)
51. Dewey, J.: Experience and Nature. Open Court, La Salle, Illinois (1925, 1989)
52. Miller, N.E.: Liberalization of basic S-R concepts: extensions to conﬂict behavior, motivation
and social learning. In: Koch, S. (ed.) Psychology: A Study of a Science, vol. 2, pp. 198–292.
McGraw-Hill, New York, NY (1959)
53. Rescorla, R.A.: Pavlovian conditioning. Am. Psychol. 43, 151–160 (1988)
54. Baron, J.: Thinking and Deciding. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom
(1988, 2008)
55. Rescorla, R.A, Wagner, A. A theory of pavlovian conditioning. In: Classical Conditioning.
NY: Apleton-Century Crofts (1972)
56. Glimcher, P.W.: Decisions, Uncertainty and the Brain. MIT Press, Cambridge (2003)
57. Jeannerod, M.: Motor Cognition. Oxford University Press, Oxford (2006)
58. Schulkin, J.: Effort: A Behavioral Neuroscience Perspective on the Will. Erlbaum Press,
Mahjaw, NJ (2007)
59. Schulkin, J.: Uncovering An Information Molecule: Corticotrophin Releasing Factor. Oxford
University Press, Oxford (2017)
60. Loewenstein, G.: The psychology of curiosity. Psychol. Bull. 116, 75–98 (1994)
61. Helmholtz, H.: On the conservation of force. In: Science and Culture: Popular and Philo-
sophical Essay: Herman von Helmholtz. University of Chicago Press, Chicago (1862–1863,
1995)

Abduction and the Logic of Inquiry: Modern Epistemic Vectors
245
62. James, W.: The Principles of Psychology, vols. 1–2. Henry Holt, New York, NY (1890, 1952)
63. Schubotz, R.I.: Prediction of external events with our motor systems. Trends Cogn. Sci. 11,
211–218 (2007)
64. Bubic, A., Cramon, D.Y., Schubotz, R.I.: Prediction, cognition and the brain. Front. Hum.
Neurosc. 4, 22–44 (2010)
65. Cisek, P.: Cortical mechanisms of action selection: the affordance competition hypothesis.
Philosop. Trans. Royal Soc. B12, 2032–2044 (2007)
66. Engel, A.K., Kriston, K.J., Kragic, D.: The Pragmatic Turn. MIT Press, Cambridge (2015)
67. Glymour, C: Thinking Through Things. MIT Press, Cambridge (1992, 2004)
68. Tennenbaum, J.B., et al.: How to grow a mind: statistics, structure and abstraction. Science
331, 1279–1285 (2011)
69. Mellars, P.: Why did modern human populations disperse from Africia ca. 60,000 years ago.
Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 103, 9381–9386 (2006)
70. Altran, S., Medin, D.: The Native Mind and the Social Construction of Nature. MIT Press,
Cambridge (2008)
71. Gibson, J.J.: The Senses Considered as Perceptual Systems. Houghton-Mifﬂin, New York
(1966)
72. Hacking, I.: Logic of statistical inference. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United
Kingdom (1964)
73. Waddell, J., Shors, T.J.: Neurogenesis, learning and associative strength. Eur. J. Neurosci. 27,
3020–3028 (2008)
74. Corballis, M.C.: From Hand to Mouth. Princeton University Press, Princeton (2002)
75. Noë, A.: Action in perception. MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts (2004)
76. Clark, A.: Surﬁng Uncertainty. Oxford University Press, Oxford (2016)
77. Descartes, R.: Discourse on Method. Hackett Publishing Co., Indianapolis, Indiana (1637,
1993)
78. Dewey, J.: Logic: The Theory of Inquiry. Holt, Rinehart and Winston, New York (1938)
79. Hacking, I.: The emergence of probability. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United
Kingdom (1975)
80. Hoffman, M.: Problems with Peirce’s concept of abduction. Found. Sci. 3, 271–305 (1999)
81. Houser, N., Kloesel, C.: The Essential Peirce (Vol. I). Indiana University Press, Bloomington,
Indiana (1992, 1998)
82. Kahneman, D.: Thinking Fast and Slow. Farrar, Strauss and Giroux, New York (2011)
83. Keynes, J.M.: A Treatise on Probability. Harper and Row, New York, NY (1921, 1957)
84. McEwen, B.S., et al.: Sixty years of neuroendocrinology. J. Endocrinol. 6, 226–267 (2015)
85. Nickles, T.: Scientiﬁc Discovery, Logic and Rationality. Reidel, Dordrecht (1980)
86. Paavola, S.: Abduction as a logic and methodology of discovery. Found. Sci. 9, 267–273
(2004)
87. Peirce, C.S.: Studies in logic by members of the Johns Hopkins University. Little, Brown and
Co, Boston, Massachusetts (1883)
88. Peirce, C.S.: On a method for search for categories. In: Houser, N., Kloesel, C. (eds.) The
Essential Peirce, vol. I. Indiana University Press, Bloomington, Indiana (1866)
103. Peirce, C.S.: Deduction, induction and hypothesis. Popular Scientiﬁc Monthly 13, 470–482
(1878)
89. Peirce, C.S.: Reasoning and the Logic of Things. Harvard University Press, Cambridge,
Massachusetts (1899, 1992)
90. Peirce, C.S., Jastrow, J.: On small differences of sensation. Memoirs Nat. Acad. Sci. 3, 75–83
(1885)
91. Pezzulo G.: Anticipation and the predictive brain
92. Quine, W.V.O.: From a Logical Point of View. Harper and Row, New York (1953, 1961)
93. Quine, W.V.O.: Ontological Relativity and Other Essays. Columbia University Press, NY
(1969)
94. Reid, T. Essays on the Intellectual Powers of Man. MIT Press, Cambridge (1785,1969)

246
J. Schulkin
95. Shanahan, T.: The ﬁrst moments of scientiﬁc inquiry: CS Peirce on the logic of abduction.
Trans. CS Peirce Soc. 22 (1986)
96. Swanson. L.W.: Brain Architecture. Oxford University Press, Oxford (2003, 2013)
97. Thagard, P.: Coherence in Thought and Action. MIT Press, Cambridge (2000)
98. Thagard, P. Abductive inference: from philosophical analysis to neural mechanisms. In:
Inductive Reasoning. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (2007)
99. Turing, A.: The Essential Turing. Clarendon Press, Oxford, United Kingdom (2004)
100. Van Frassen, B.S.: The Empirical Stance. Yale University Press, New Haven (2002)
101. Van Essen, D.C., et al.: Information processing in the primate visual system. Science 25,
419–422 (1992)
102. Weiss, P.: Charles S. Peirce: Philosopher. In: Bernstein, R.J. (ed.) Perspectives on Peirce: Crit-
ical essays on Charles Sanders Peirce, pp. 139–148. New Haven, Connecticut: Yale University
Press (1965)

Abductive Inference, Self-Knowledge,
and the Myth of Introspection
Eric Phillip Charles and Nicholas S. Thompson
Abstract Much of the history of psychology can be understood as a debate over
what we do when we attribute psychological states to ourselves and to others. In
the classic Cartesian view, those activities are quite distinct: We engage an infallible
ability—introspection—when examining our own psychological states, but merely
speculate when trying to identify the psychological states of others. The American
Philosopher, Charles Sanders Peirce dedicated several early papers to a critique of
the Cartesian approach. He concluded that attempts at self-knowledge require the
same inferential processes that we use when attributing mental states to others, and
therefore incur the same logical risks. By pursing these ideas further, we intend to
show that self-knowledge results from a special kind of abduction; the inference
of behavior states from particular observed behaviors. Such inferences allow us to
anticipate yet-unseen patterns of behavior in yet-to-be-manifested circumstances.
1
An Alternative to Cartesian Introspection
Questions about the nature of self-knowledge date back to the earliest days of
philosophy. If we look to the ancient world, we ﬁnd the instructions to “Know
Thyself” (αυτ`oν ‡σθι) written over the entrance to the Temple of Apollo at Delphi,
where the great Oracle resided. We may presume, because many classical philoso-
phers elaborated upon those instructions, that Greeks considered self-knowledge a
difﬁcult, but attainable, goal. The idea of self-knowledge as a signiﬁcant achieve-
ment contrasts sharply with Cartesian dualism, which convinced generations of
philosophers that self-knowledge was the foundation of all knowledge. By the
latter way of thinking, knowledge about self is not only in-practice easier to obtain
E. P. Charles (B)
American University, Washington, USA
e-mail: echarles@american.edu; Charles.Psychology@gmail.com
N. S. Thompson
Clark University, Worcester, USA
e-mail: Thompnickson2@gmail.com; nthompson@clarku.edu
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2021
J. Shook et al. (eds.), Abduction in Cognition and Action, Studies in Applied
Philosophy, Epistemology and Rational Ethics 59,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-61773-8_12
247

248
E. P. Charles and N. S. Thompson
than knowledge about others, it is easier to obtain in principle, as the two types
of knowledge are fundamentally different. Although this Cartesian conviction has
become more and more controversial, much psychological research and theory still
proceed on the assumption that self-knowledge is relatively easily obtained, whereas
knowledge-about-the-minds-of-others is harder to obtain.
In psychology, the continuing inﬂuence of Descartes is readily seen in the vast
“theory of mind” literature, in which empirical researchers theorize about what we
do when “attributing” mental states to others [9, 14, 21]. In one way or another, those
researchers assert an introspective step, whereby we look into ourselves, and then a
projective step, whereby we mentally-project that self-knowledge onto another being.
Proponents of that approach assume—without question—that the introspective step
entails a relatively direct experience of one’s own mind, contrasted with guesses
about the minds of other people; they then attempt to research how we get better at
such guesses over time. These approaches, building out of the Cartesian tradition,
take it as foundational that the minds of others are inherently not the types of things
that we can experience [2, 3, 13].
The status of dualistic thinking in psychology is often hidden behind authors’
adamantly denying being “dualists,” while still advancing inherently dualistic ideas.
Most of our research-psychologist colleagues would be embarrassed to assert that
mind and matter are different substances, yet some are happy to refer to “inner”
causes located in some “deep” place within “the mind.” As a professional matter,
the research psychologists we are acquainted with recognize that mind-world and
mind-body dualisms are broadly problematic. If pressed they will fall back on an
amorphous brain-state materialism, claiming that anything about their theory that
seems dualistic is shorthand for some sort of unspeciﬁed neuronal process. The
commonness of this weak defense—embracing the language and concepts of mind-
world dualism while pleading for an incompatible materialism—is due, in part, to
the lack of clear alternatives to the dualistic language and concepts [6, 7]. We have
shown elsewhere that such claims entail circular reasoning [21].
One alternative to such dualism is the pragmatism of Charles Sanders Peirce.
We have elsewhere argued that Peirce’s work (implicitly) underlies several threads
in twentieth century psychology, including branches of behaviorism and ecological
psychology [4, 5, 7, 24], and others have made similar connections [e.g., 8, 11, 20].
In that context, we have been working to develop principles regarding psychology
that are grounded in Peirce’s early work. These ideas will be further developed here,
via an exploration of the problem of introspection and abductive inference.
2
Early Peirce: Cognition as Inference
Four of Peirce’s early ideas will be the most crucial in the analysis that follows: (1)
The rejection of a capacity of “intuitive” introspection; (2) the process of inference
by abduction; (3) clarifying meaning using the pragmatic maxim; and (4) Peirce’s

Abductive Inference, Self-Knowledge, and the Myth …
249
deﬁnition of “belief.” Once those ideas are in hand, we will use them to clarify our
thinking about self-knowledge.
2.1
Incapacities of Man
Several of Peirce’s early philosophical works focused on rejecting the existence
of certain mental “capacities” that past philosophers (particularly in the Cartesian
tradition), believed were possessed by all people (e.g., [15–17]) In those works Peirce
repeatedly argued, contra Descartes, that people do not have a special intuition of
introspection. In this context, “intuition” indicated a cognition that did not result
from inference ([15], including footnote 1). Peirce pointed out that there was no
evidence for such an intuition, and argued instead that self-knowledge is attained via
an inferential process of the same kind as our inferences about the minds of others.
Thus, the supposed results of introspective intuition could not be understood “except
as a hypothesis necessary to explain what takes place in what we commonly call the
external world.” [16].
2.2
Abduction
Shortly after his work on the incapacities of man, Peirce introduced the concept
of abduction, as a more formal term for what he previously called “hypothesis.”
Roughly, abduction occurs when we observe the properties of something, and then
infer that it is a member of a class of things that share those properties.1 Inference of
class membership entails the expectations of other properties, and those expectations
can be tested via future interaction. Abduction is distinguished from deduction and
from induction: Deduction occurs when, knowing an object is a member of a class,
and knowing that members of that class are characterized by a general property, we
infer a property of the individual object, knowing that said property is characteristic
of a general class of objects and that the individual is a member of a that class.
Induction occurs when, knowing a property of an object, and knowing the object is
a member of a particular class, we infer that property is characteristic of the general
class (See Fig. 1).
The abductions Peirce most admired were those generated by the great eigh-
teenth century chemists. Those inferences were intellectually daring leaps to multi-
faceted expectations regarding the results of yet-to-be-performed experiments, which
were then tested in the many laboratories of a dynamic research community, and ulti-
matelyconﬁrmed.WhilePeirceofferedmanydeﬁnitionsforabductionovertheyears,
sometimes emphasizing its speculative nature, other times its logical precision, he
always emphasized its crucial role in scientiﬁc discovery.
1See [1], and several chapters in this volume.

250
E. P. Charles and N. S. Thompson
Fig. 1 The inference
triangle. Given any two
corners of the triangle as
premises and the third corner
as a conclusion, one can
determine the type of
inference that is occurring.
From [18, 23]
Some abductions are better than others, in the sense that pursing them honestly
would lead us more rapidly towards that belief that will survive long-term scientiﬁc
scrutiny. Other abductions lead us only slowly towards stable belief or lead us alto-
gether astray. We suspect that much of the confusion over what, exactly, Peirce meant
by abduction is due to his frequent failure to distinguish between whether he was
talking about abduction-in-general or high-quality-skillful-abduction in particular.

Abductive Inference, Self-Knowledge, and the Myth …
251
2.3
Belief
As a part of his assault on Descartes, Peirce discusses the nature of belief and doubt.
Descartes tries to convince his readers that he can know what he doubts and what
he believes, by virtue of a non-inferential introspective intuition. He further tries
to convince his readers that those beliefs and doubts are on the other side of the
unpassable chasm that separates his mind from the material world, with additional
unpassable chasms between that world and the minds of others. We have already
seen that Peirce rejected the existence of intuitive introspection. After rejecting the
existenceofintuitiveintrospection,PeirceanticipatesthePragmaticMaximbyasking
us to consider what the consequences are of having a “belief” or a “doubt”, Peirce
concludes to have a “belief” is to have something upon which we are willing to act,
whereas a “doubt” is uncertainty regarding how to act [17].
Being willing to act upon something can have very broad or very narrow implica-
tions, depending on the belief in question. And yet, regarding many beliefs we may
use a key action as shorthand. A hungry man who believes his desired food is in the
cupboard, will go to the cupboard and open it, continuing his behavior smoothly if
the food is revealed, and acting surprised if it is not. The belief that the desired food
is in the refrigerator would be similar, but with a course of action oriented towards
the refrigerator instead of the cupboard. A man who has doubts about which of the
two locations contains the food, in contrast, will be hesitant in taking either actions.
At the extreme he will resemble Hadrian’s Ass: If the hungry man has absolute doubt
about the location of the food, he will not be able to take any action at all, as there
is nothing upon which he is willing to act.2
2.4
The Pragmatic Maxim
A year after his discussion about the effects of belief and doubt, Peirce formally
introduced the Pragmatic Maxim as a way to determine the meaning of any concept
[19], “Consider what effects, that might conceivably have practicial bearings, we
conceive the object of our conception to have. Then, our conception of these effects
is the whole of our conception of the object.” Peirce’s use of the word Pragmatic and
“practical” has led some to conclude that Pragmatism was a seat-of-the pants, short-
sighted, anti-theoretical philosophy which identiﬁed truth with short-term efﬁcacy
or even social power.3 On the contrary, Peirce’s philosophy sought to develop an
enduring, coherent and ethical understanding of the world, i.e., that understanding
2American Philosophy scholars might well point out that we are slightly muddling how Peirce
might be expected to present these ideas with how James might be expected to present them. As we
are psychologists, building towards insights about the ﬁeld of psychology, we will own any such
criticisms for the time being.
3Peirce deplored any casuistic understanding of Pragmatism so much that he eventually felt the
need to distinguish his approach by adding an extra syllable and calling it Pragmaticism. In the
same spirit, N.S.T believes we could bring clarity by editing The Maxim to add a syllable to the

252
E. P. Charles and N. S. Thompson
most likely to survive the vicissitudes of future discovery. Peirce is squarely focused
on rigorous thinking and precise action: “There is no distinction of meaning so ﬁne,
as to consist in anything but a possible difference of practice.” Further, “…if one can
deﬁne accurately all the conceivable experimental phenomena which the afﬁrmation
or denial of a concept could imply, one will have therein a complete deﬁnition of the
concept, and there is absolutely nothing more in it” (excerpted from [10]).
Peirce offers a crucial corollary to his maxim: Whenever it seems as if two ideas
are at play, and those two ideas are found to entail all the same conceivable effects,
then only one idea is at play. In that context, let us imagine that one chemist asserted
that a particular compound “contained iron” while another asserted disagreement
by claiming the compound was a “ferrous composite.” If we set out to determine
whether or not the two chemists really disagree, we would ask them about how they
expect a material within their speciﬁed category to respond under various conditions:
What would we ﬁnd if we exposed it to a magnet? What if we immersed in pure
oxygen gas? What if we put it in a spectrometer? Etc., etc., etc. If the two chemists
agree regarding all the expected consequences-of-investigation, then regardless of
how vehemently they claim to disagree, we (as third parties) will conclude that they
their conceptions are the same and their disagreement illusory.
When trying to determine if there are two concepts at play or just one, we will not
give any weight to ways in which the chemists might treat the substances differently
that do not involve interaction with the substance itself. For example: We will not ask
what letters they would write on a vial containing the substance, because whether one
chemist would write “iron” on the vial and the other chemist “ferrous” is irrelevant.
While the chemists might think of the written letter as relating to who is right and
who is wrong, it is not an effect in the sense the pragmatic maxim; we are only
interested in what would be found when we interact with (act upon) the compound
itself.
2.5
Summary
At the end of his three papers on the “Incapacities”, Peirce leads us to the conclusion
that self-knowledge results from inferences of the same kind as those that produce
knowledge about others. However, he does not tell us what type of inference or
inferences those might be, and at the time he had not even introduced the term
“abduction.” He then provides us with the pragmatic maxim as a method for deter-
mining the meaning of our concepts, and provides an example of what is found when
that maxim is applied to the concept of “belief.” We are now prepared to circle back
word “practicial.” That would stress the fact that Peirce was using “pragmatic” in the sense of
a practice, especially adherence to longstanding scientiﬁc practices of laboratory science, inter-
laboratory debate and cooperation, and theoretical analysis. The Pragmaticist Maxim would then
read, “Consider what effects, that might conceivably have practicial bearings, we conceive the object
of our conception to have. Then, our conception of these effects is the whole of our conception of
the object.”

Abductive Inference, Self-Knowledge, and the Myth …
253
to ask how we can understand self-knowledge within a system that has dispensed
with dualistic inclinations.
3
Mental Terms in Light of Pragmatism
Treating “Know Thyself” as a directive implies that knowing-about-yourself is not
the result of an innate and infallible ability, but rather is a skill to be developed over
time. Such a skill would not have been conceived if we could not tell, to some extent,
that some people know themselves better than others, and that some people improve
the accuracy of their self-knowledge over time. How can it be that some people are
better at knowing about themselves than others are? How can it be that some people
get better at knowing about themselves over time? While it is hard to say exactly
how those differences are possible, we can nonetheless work out some conditions that
must be true for such differences to be possible. If knowing yourself is a skill one can
improve, then there must be facts-of-the-matter against which self-claims push, facts
which sometimes push back. Were it impossible to be wrong when inferring about
yourself, or were it impossible to detect when you had been wrong, then improvement
at the task would also be impossible. Invoking the pragmatic maxim: If “I am mad”
had all the same (experimentally-investigable) effects as “I am not mad”, then “mad”
and “not-mad” would have the same meaning.
Phrased the other way around: For it to be possible to ﬁnd “I am mad” true and “I
am not mad” false, or vice versa, the two conceptions must have different practical
consequences; it must be possible to arrange conditions to reveal effects that are
entailed in one of the concepts, but not entailed in the other.
The central questions regarding self-knowledge are therefore: By what process of
inference do we arrive at self-knowledge? And, what are the effects about which we
are inferring?
Answering those questions presents many challenges, because our standard termi-
nology is laden with dualism. Normally we would label the process of gaining self-
knowledge as “introspection.” But the term “introspection” implies that there is an
“interior” that I am “seeing into.” Of course, we do not mean literally looking into
ourselves, as when examining a ﬂesh wound. We are also not referring to indirect
perceptions of our insides, as one might get from an x-ray or a brain-scanning device;
“know thyself” discussions date back thousands of years, and are not attempts to infer
about structures of brain tissue, patterns of oxygen consumption, or the like. We need
a new starting place.

254
E. P. Charles and N. S. Thompson
3.1
Revisiting “Belief”
Because Peirce’s early ideas about “belief” were well developed, we can ﬁnd a
foundation by starting with self-knowledge questions such as “What do I believe?” or
“Do I actually believe X?” Given Peirce’s deﬁnition of “belief,” asking such questions
is an attempt to infer the nature of our habits: Upon what would I unhesitantly act?
Were the right type of situation to arise, would I, in fact, unhesitantly act as if X was
true? Am I that type of person?
This method is analogous to how a chemist, trying to infer about the type of
substance in a bottle, is inferring about the effects that would be witnessed if certain
procedures were to be performed on the chemical. “What does it look like?” It is
a silvery metallic. “Would it change shape if I swirl the bottle?” It does. “Would it
be attracted to a magnet?” It isn’t. From that you might infer it is mercury, because
mercury is a type of chemical for which those results would be expected. And, due to
the pragmatic maxim, we know that making such an inference (concluding that the
substance “is mercury”) is nothing beyond inferring about the outcomes of numerous
other operations yet to be performed on the substance. The chemist does not “look
into” the chemical any more than the introspecting person “looks into” herself, and
yet both draw meaningful conclusions about the type of thing they are dealing with.
Depending on the belief in question, our introspection may be asking about a
narrow range of behavior-circumstance pairings (habits), or a nigh inﬁnite number.
A narrow example, so narrow as to seem trivial, could occur if we are being overly-
introspective when seeking out food: “Do I believe the food is in the fridge?”, we
ask ourselves. “I think that I do, but I recognize that I will not know for certain until
I see if the fridge is where I end up when looking for food!” The triviality makes that
example seem odd. Imagining the results of such introspection being overturned in
the course of events would be hard, but not impossible. However, even sticking to
similar narrowly-speciﬁable cases, we can easily ﬁnd more interesting examples. For
example, we might introspect regarding political candidates, asking questions such
as, “Which candidate in the election do I believe is the best, and how much doubt
do I harbor?” In that example, the actual act of voting serves as a clear “moment of
truth.” Likely most people, especially as an election approaches, are quite ﬁrm and
accurate in their answers to such questions, but people are not perfect predictors.
Sometimes a voter’s support for a particular candidate is not clear until they are in
the voting booth and suddenly, unexpectedly, hesitate. A similar moment of truth
occurs when a person wonders if he or she is “ready to leave home and go off to
college.” Some young people correctly infer that it will be hard for them; they struggle
to leave. Others correctly infer that they are ready; they stride out conﬁdently out,
their readiness visible to all. Others ﬁrmly believe they are ready, but then hesitate,
learning the truth about themselves in that moment. Others expect great difﬁculty,
but learn the truth about themselves when departure suddenly seems easy.
For more complex beliefs, many habits may be in play. “Do I believe that it is
important to help the poor when I am able?” No crucial moment veriﬁes such a belief.
You may have chance encounters with poor people in countless situations, and seek

Abductive Inference, Self-Knowledge, and the Myth …
255
them out proactively in countless others. In each encounter several behaviors may
qualify as “helping.” Also, the degree to which you are “able” might vary depending
on circumstances outside the encounter in question. Do I donate to charities that help
the poor? Do I assist individual poor people, either spontaneously, such as giving
money to a random panhandler, or systematically, such as giving to particular poor
people with whom I have social relationships? Do I encourage others to assist the
poor? And, crucially, what desirable activities do I pass up in order to help the poor?
The latter is crucial, as “it is important to” indicates a prioritization of helping the
poor over engaging in other, less-important activities. Assuming I am engaged in an
honest attempt at self-knowledge, I can consider past instances in which I acted out
the behavior-vs-circumstance pattern that is “helping the poor”, as well as instances
in which I did not act out that pattern. Weighing such evidence, I can infer what
behaviors I am likely to exhibit in future relevant circumstances.
3.2
More Complex “Mental States”
The same basic reasoning that applies to inferences about belief must also apply
to inferences about more complex mental phenomenon. Let us take a person, for
example, participating in a leadership training program. The program offers training
in a range of leadership skills, which our participant can choose from. One of the
options is “Communication”, which prompts the self-directed question “Am I a good
communicator?” We have written extensively about what “communication” means to
ﬁeld researcher in animal behavior [4, 22], and offer a deﬁnition of communication
that answers the question: What would I need to see (and under what conditions
would I need to see it) to conﬁrm that I am a good communicator? It is, in other
words, what a clear-thinking person (in Peirce’s sense) would mean when using the
term.
“Communication” is when one organism has a behavioral system (a system that
matches its behavior to its circumstances), and a second organism has a system
that interacts with the ﬁrst organism’s system to facilitate the ﬁrst system’s func-
tion. For example: One organism, perhaps a type of monkey, might have an “anti-
predator” behavioral system that responds to seeing a snake by trying to getting off
the ground, and responds to seeing a hawk by trying to be close to a tree trunk. A
second monkey might have a “signaling” behavioral system that responds to seeing
a snake by producing a certain call and responds to seeing a hawk by producing a
different call. If the ﬁrst monkey responds to the “snake call” as it would respond
to seeing a snake, and responds to the “hawk call” as if it had seen a hawk, then
we are dealing with a communicatory system. Crucially, everything about those
two systems, and everything about their interaction can be observed under natu-
rally occuring or experimentally arrangable circumstances. Or, phrased to match our
earlier discussion of the Pragmatic Maxim: That analysis provides all the conceiv-
able experimental phenomena which “the monkeys communicate” could imply, and
there is absolutely nothing more in it.

256
E. P. Charles and N. S. Thompson
Generalizing back to humans: To be an effective communicator is to be the type
of person who reliably makes those around them better match their behavior to their
circumstances better, by virtue of interacting with those other peoples’ behavioral
systems. Someone trying to determining whether or not to focus on improving “com-
munication” skills, must infer whether or not she is the type of person who is already
adept at assisting others in that way, or if she needs to improve her ability to help
others in that way.
Certainly, in trying to determine what type of person she is, our prospective leader
faces practical limits in determining the truth of the matter; she cannot now, nor in any
future, observe herself under all possible circumstances entailed in such a complex
concept. However, no deeper limitations prevent her from gaining such knowledge.
There is no other thing, no ethereal “internal soul” about which she is attempting to
infer.
Note that, while we will never experience every possible circumstances in which
our communicatory ability could be tested, given enough time we will have oppor-
tunity to observe ourselves across a large swath of varied circumstances, and deter-
mine whether our hypothesis proves out. Just as with other meaningful claims about
the world, it is possible—when making mental claims—to investigate honestly and
determine when you are wrong.
This “introspective” inference is, in form, identical to what we would do for a
colleague who was looking for advice about whether or not to take the “communica-
tion” class. When trying to infer “What type of person is he?” we would need to think
about the extent to which we have seen that person exhibit parts of the larger pattern
that is “communication.” We ask ourselves, “Have we seen him successfully vary
behavior this way and that, depending on the circumstances, so as to help others
better match their world? Have we seen him fail to do so?” And from the resulting
evidence, we infer will happen in future interactions. Concluding that he is a good
communicator is not a deﬁnitive judgement about past interactions, or about some
nebulous brain state, or about a quality of his intangible soul, but rather a prediction
regarding what will happen in future interactions.
4
Self-Knowledge and Types of Inference
What type of inference is entailed in the above examples? In the simple examples,
we can contort the situation to make it seem like any of the three types of syllogistic
inference resulted in the relevant conclusion. For example, we might imagine using
deduction, induction, or abduction to answer the question of whether or not I will go
to the fridge to look for cake. If I know that hungry people always look in the fridge
(premise 1, class property), and that I am hungry (premise 2, class membership),
then I can infer via deduction that I will look in the fridge (inference of individual
property). If I know that today is Tuesday (premise 1, class membership), and that
last Tuesdays I looked in the fridge (premise 2, individual property), I can infer via
induction that Tuesdays are days when I will look in the fridge (inference of class

Abductive Inference, Self-Knowledge, and the Myth …
257
property). If I know my stomach is growling (premise 1, individual property), and
that fridge checkers tend to have growling stomachs (premise 2, class property), then
I could infer via abduction that I am a fridge-checker (inference of class membership)
(See Fig. 2). While the conclusion of each of those inferences clearly differs if ones
looks closely, at a rougher level they all seem to suggest I will check the fridge.
The more complex the mental state we are concluding about, the harder to imagine
all types of inference being leading me to the same conclusion about myself. That is
because, as the mental phenomenon in question gets more complex, we can no longer
act like we are merely concluding about whether we will engage in a single crucial
Fig. 2 The inference
triangle, using example from
text (modiﬁed from
Thompson [23]). Note that
while all three inferences
may initially seem to involve
the same conclusion, upon
closer inspection the
conclusion is quite different
depending on the mode of
inference. In the ﬁrst case I
am concluding something
about myself as an
individual, in the second case
I am concluding something
about a property of a group,
and in the third case I am
concluding that I am a
member of a type

258
E. P. Charles and N. S. Thompson
action; the more complex the mental phenomenon in question, the more clearly we
are trying to infer about a broad pattern of action across numerous circumstances.
Do I have a good memory? That is a question about the matching of numerous
behaviors to past circumstances. Am I brave? Again, while some moments might be
crucial in making the judgement, the question is about far more than a single act.
The directive to “know thyself” is not directing you to know the exact way you will
act in one particular situation, it is directing you to know what type of person you
are. To draw conclusions about what type of person you are, based upon your having
traits characteristic of members of that type, is, by deﬁnition, abduction.
Even acknowledging that in vivo inference is typically of a complex variety,
as inferential processes are rarely encountered in pure isolation (see Shook, this
volume), it is clear that the key act of gaining insight about our nature results from
an abductive process.
4.1
False Self-Belief
Just as we generally understand the risks of error entailed in inferring about the minds
of others (trying to classify what type of people they are based on having observed
some amount of their behavior), we should generally acknowledge all the same
risks when we infer about ourselves. Both are abduction. The person wondering if he
believes in helping poor people might not have accurate ideas about his past behavior
in regards to helping poor people; he might not be honest with himself about what the
pattern “helping poor people” looks like; and even without those challenges he might
come to an inaccurate conclusion about future behavior, because abductive inference
is fallible. Similarly, when trying to infer about others you would encounter the same
limitations: How accurate is your knowledge of the other person’s past behavior?
How accurate is your understanding of the thing you are concluding about? How
accurate an inference can you draw from whatever base of ideas you start with?
Abduction-concerning-the-self carries all the same risks as abduction about the
mental states of others, because those risks are inherent in any abduction. Stated
simply: We can be mistaken regarding each premise, and we can be mistaken about
the strength of the inference drawn from the premises. The same fundamental problem
is faced by our archetypal abductor, the bench chemist, in his efforts to infer the
nature of a substance: She may not have correctly read her instruments, or may have
otherwise gained inaccurate ideas about how the substance responded to past tests
(premise 1, individual property). She may be inaccurate regarding the “properties” of
different known substances (premise 2, type property). And even if she was accurate
regarding experimental results and was accurate regarding the properties of known
chemicals, she may still draw an incorrect conclusion (regarding type membership).
And what would the consequences be of an incorrect abduction, i.e., of concluding
incorrectly regarding the identity of a chemical? Abduction to an incorrect conclusion
entails failing to correctly anticipate the result of future experiments involving the
chemical. Abduction is a probabilistic form of inference, and the fundamental risks
faced by people engaged in abductive inference remain the same across subject matter
domains.

Abductive Inference, Self-Knowledge, and the Myth …
259
5
Can Others Know Us Better Than We Know Ourselves?
If self-knowledge is achieved through everyday powers of inference, why have
arguments-for-a-special-power-of-introspection have been so convincing in the past.
Presumably, one important reason past generations have believed in special powers
of introspection is that many people feel like they know themselves quite well. That
feeling must be accounted for.
First, we must acknowledge the extensive evidence in the experimental-
psychology literature that people are not particularly good at predicting how they
will act in novel situations (extensively summarized in [12]). Those data suggest that
people feel good about introspection because of hindsight and conﬁrmation bias, or
related phenomena. When people evaluate their own introspective abilities, they may
inaccurately remember past anticipatory inferences, with a bias towards thinking they
correctly anticipated their behavior even when they did not (hindsight bias). Also,
they might correctly remember past anticipatory inferences, but do so selectively,
attending primarily to instances in which they anticipated correctly, and neglecting
instancesinwhichtheiranticipationswereincorrect(conﬁrmationbias).Thosebiases
can easily combine with other biases, such as the Dunning-Kruger effect, whereby
people with marginal competence at a task dramatically overestimate their compe-
tence. Thus, it is possible people believe they have excellent self-knowledge simply
because they overestimate their own ability.
However, even after acknowledging that people are not, on average, as good at
self-knowingastheyseemtothink,theymightbeevenworseatknowingaboutothers.
That is, some people might feel like they are very good at anticipating what they will
do in various situations, because they are so much worse at anticipating what others
will do, and they are thinking in relative terms. Are there reasons why abductions
about ourselves might be more reliable, on average, than abductions about others? At
least two reasons seem obvious: First, we might have more data upon which to base
self-related inferences and, second, we might have access to more useful information
upon which to base our self-related inferences.
5.1
Access to More Observations
Regarding the ﬁrst possibility, people have a wealth of experience being around
themselves. Presumably we have each been around ourselves more often than we
have been around any other individual. To the extent that can accurately draw upon
that past experience, we may be able to reach more reliable conclusions than we
could reach about others.
If this explanation was true, then the seeming advantage of introspection would
be an extreme example of the principle that we are generally better at anticipating
the behavior of those we have known a long time, and worse at anticipating the
behavior of those we have known only a short time. This explanation also matches

260
E. P. Charles and N. S. Thompson
our intuition that people with memory problems, either temporary or permanent,
should show deﬁcits in self-knowledge.
5.2
Access to More Useful Observations
Regarding the second possibility, we note that we often do not present ourselves
honestly to those around us. If there are behaviors, or inclinations towards behaviors,
that we hide from those around us (e.g., situations in which we lie to others about our
past behavior, or situations in which we make special effort to not be observed), then
other people, making an inference based on the best information they have available,
could be at a disadvantage. This possibility isn’t about the amount of data available
for our inferences, but about access to particularly useful data.
The problem with this second line of inquiry is that even if we are typically
able to accurately recount our past behavior, nothing guarantees such efforts are
always accurate. If Freud was right about one thing, it was that people sometimes
lie to themselves, deploying various strategies designed to avoid coming to terms
with exactly the types of self-knowledge insights we are discussing. Whether or not
Freud was right in his description of how so-called “defense mechanisms” operate,
he was correct that we frequently do not know why we respond in certain ways in
certain situations. If Freud was right about a second thing, it was that a properly
trained professional may gain insights into the motivations of others, and thereby
learn exactly the types of things that “intuitive introspection” is supposed to reveal.
The professional psychoanalyst tries to gather a lot of data about the subject’s past
behavior and circumstances, and deploys strategies designed to reveal examples the
client would normally not reveal to others. These can including examples the client
would not normally choose to face on his or her own. The practice is based on the
assumption that, provided sufﬁcient time, and the right conditions, a stranger may
become more proﬁcient at anticipating your behavior than you are.
5.3
Summary
Once we have rejected the notion of an infallible introspective intuition, we are left
with the conclusion that even if people are quite good at introspection, those insights
are still best understood as the result of an inferential process. We cannot take refuge
in the idea that introspection works well because it provides privileged access to
uniquely insightful information. Nothing guarantees that the crucial information is
always available to introspection, and nothing guarantees that others cannot have
that information, given the proper circumstances. Abduction about the self has the
same basic limitations as abduction about others.

Abductive Inference, Self-Knowledge, and the Myth …
261
6
Conclusion
We have argued that inference of the “know thyself” variety—so-called “introspec-
tive” inference, about who you are as a person—takes the form of abduction. Such
inferences do not differ in kind from the abductive inferences by which we draw
conclusions about the minds of others. In both cases, we are ultimately inferring
what type of person someone is—we are inferring membership in a general class—
which leads to expectations of what that person would do under a variety of different
conditions. Whether inferring about ourselves or about others, were we to follow
up the inference in the manner of honest investigators, concerned with whether or
not our ideas were true, we would proceed to create various situations and observe
reactions. In both cases we can be mistaken in well understood ways.
The pragmatic maxim dictates that the meaning of a concept is nothing more
than all conceivable practical effects the concept entails. If we are correct that the
process of testing claims regarding mental terms entail tests of behavior under various
circumstances, then that is the entire meaning of the concepts. Understanding self-
knowledge and other-knowledge as abductive inference helps us see the ubiquity of
abduction in everyday life. As highly social animals, we are navigating a constant
maze of probable inferences regarding ourselves and those around us, with some
of those inferences being veriﬁed, others being rejected, and still others remaining
untested because the crucial circumstances never arise.
Also, by understanding that both self-knowledge and other-knowledge results
from abductive inference we can better understand how to use mental terms within a
science of psychology. We cannot give into the crude operationalism of some behav-
iorists on the one side, nor to the pervasive crypto-dualism of cognitive psycholo-
gists on the other side [7, 11]. We must understand our mental terms as references
to complex clusters of potential experimental results, while not allowing into our
thinking anything that is inherently non-investigable. Only then can we create a solid
foundation for the ﬁeld.
References
1. Campos, D.G.: On the distinction between Peirce’s abduction and Lipton’s Inference to the
best explanation. Synthese 180, 419–442 (2011)
2. Charles, E.P.: ToM 101: a guide to mainstream theory of mind research [Review of the book
Theory of mind: How children understand others’ thoughts and feelings, by M. J. Doherty].
PsycCRITIQUES 54(15) (2009)
3. Charles, E.P.: Myths and missteps in “theory of mind” dogma [Review of the book Against
theory of mind, by I. Leudar & A. Costall, Eds.]. PsycCRITIQUES 55(25) (2010). https://doi.
org/10.1037/a0020186
4. Charles, E.P.: Seeing minds in behavior: descriptive mentalism. Rev. Gen. Psychol. 15(3),
267–276 (2011)
5. Charles, E.P., Bybee, M.D., Thompson, N.S.: A behaviorist account of emotions and feelings:
making sense of James D. Laird’s Feelings: The perception of self. Behav. Philos. 39, 1–16
(2011)

262
E. P. Charles and N. S. Thompson
6. Charles, E., Dege, M.: The beyond must also be useful: the burden of alternative approaches.
Integr. Psychol. Behav. Sci. 42(2), 194–199 (2008)
7. Charles, E.P., Golonka, S., Wilson, A.D.: The most important thing neuropragmatism can
do: providing an alternative to ‘cognitive’ neuroscience. In: Shook, J.R., Solymosi, T. (eds.)
Pragmatist Neurophilosophy: American Philosophy and the Brain, pp. 127–149 (2014)
8. de Waal, C. (ed.): American New Realism 1910–1920. Thoemmes Press, Bristol, United
Kingdom (2005)
9. Doherty, M.J.: Theory of Mind: How Children Understand Others’ Thoughts and Feelings.
Psychology Press, New York (2009)
10. Houser, N.: Peirce’s Post-Jamesian Pragmatism. Eur. J. Pragmatism Am. Philos. [Online], III-1
(2011). URL: http://journals.openedition.org/ejpap/866
11. Heft, H.: Ecological Psychology in Context: James Gibson, Roger Barker, and the Legacy of
William James’ Radical Empiricism. Erlbaum Inc, Mahwah, NJ (2001)
12. Laird, J.D.: Feelings: The Perception of Self. Oxford University Press, New York (2007)
13. Leudar, I., Costal, A.: Against Theory of Mind. Palgrave Macmillan, New York (2009)
14. Miller, S.A.: Theory of Mind: Beyond the Preschool Years. Psychology Press, New York (2012)
15. Peirce, C.S.: Questions concerning certain faculties claimed for man. J. Speculative Philos. 2,
103–114 (1868)
16. Peirce, C.S.: Some consequences of four incapacities. J. Speculative Philos. 2, 140–157 (1868)
17. Peirce, C.S.: Grounds of validity of the laws of logic: further consequences of four incapacities.
J. Speculative Philos. 2, 193–208 (1869)
18. Peirce, C.S.: The ﬁxation of belief. Popular Sci. Monthly 12, 1–15 (1877)
19. Peirce, C.S.: How to make our ideas clear. Popular Sci. Monthly 12, 286–302 (1878)
20. Smith, L.D.: Behaviorism and Logical Positivism: A Reassessment of the Alliance. Stanford
University Press, Stanford, CA (1986)
21. Thompson, N.S.: The many perils of ejective anthropomorphism. Behav. Philos. 22, 59–70
(1994)
22. Thompson, N.S.: Communication and natural design. In: Thompson, N.S. (series ed.), Owings,
D., Beecher, M. (vol. eds.) Perspectives in Ethology, vol. 12: Communication. Plenum, New
York (1997)
23. Thompson, N.S.: Signs and designs. Behav. Philos. 46, 25–46 (2018)
24. Thompson, N.S., Charles, E.P.: Interview with an old new realist. In: Charles, E.P. (ed.) A
New Look at New Realism: The Psychology and Philosophy of E. B. Holt, pp. xxxi–lviii.
Transaction Publishers, Piscataway, NJ (2011)

The Role of Collections of Objects
in Abduction
Patricia Turrisi
Abstract The abductive stage of logical investigation beneﬁts from direct contact
with objects of thought, especially material objects in aggregates. The ubiquity of
collecting activity and collections of non-utilitarian material objects in ancient as well
as contemporary settings, with increasingly deliberate attention to material objects
as implements of thought, demonstrates these beneﬁts. This essay focuses on the
logica utens of collecting and the role of collections in detection and discovery.
Keywords Logical investigation · Inquiry · Logica utens · Logica docens · Charles
Peirce · Signs · Representations · Art of memory · Recollection · Memory · Mary
Carruthers · Paleozoic era · Non-utilitarian objects · Objective idealism ·
Museums · Collections · Collecting · Niles Eldredge · Hoarding behavior ·
Process philosophy · Research · Discovery · Scott Herring · Cicero · Theory of the
universe · Unifying theory of nature · Charles Darwin · Alfred Lord Wallace
Abductions may certainly be formulated in the inner space of the mind, in an empty
room in the absence of objects of perception and thought, as when one has a “bright
idea” inspired by a dream or spontaneous intuition. Such a process substitutes mental
representations for objects and relies on meta-data and its selective representation
of the features of objects, focusing more typically on already well-formed concep-
tions, while neglecting unmediated experiences. Objects of thought themselves are
generally richer in content than our selective perceptions and memories make them
out to be. Rather than presuming a sterile environment for thought that only includes
precise representations in the form of propositions that may serve as the premises and
conclusions of abductive arguments, let us imagine a lavish environment in which a
plenitude of possible objects of thought resides. At times, the economy of research
has presided too much over the generation of abductions. Economy in research elim-
inates not only lines of inquiry but also access to inquiry. Let us instead imagine
that economic restrictions on time and resources will take care of themselves or that
P. Turrisi (B)
University of North Carolina, Wilmington, USA
e-mail: turrisip@uncw.edu
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2021
J. Shook et al. (eds.), Abduction in Cognition and Action, Studies in Applied
Philosophy, Epistemology and Rational Ethics 59,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-61773-8_13
263

264
P. Turrisi
there will be breakthroughs in methods of research that permit broader and deeper
inquiries than are possible now. In doing so, we may turn to the issue of how an
abundance of samples and specimens foster the generation of abductions.
In his 1898 Cambridge Conference Lectures, Charles Peirce asserted that the ﬁrst
rule of reason is, “Do not block the way of inquiry” [1, p. 178]. In her article, “Peirce’s
First Rule of Reason and the Process of Learning,” Amy McLaughlin supplements
the interpretation of Peirce’s rule made by Susan Haack which focuses on “the (ideal)
product of (completed) inquiry, truth” [2, p. 233]. McLaughlin expands Haack’s inter-
pretation by ﬁrst noting Douglas Browning’s understanding of Peirce as a “philoso-
pher of process,” the key feature of process philosophy being that “the universe is
essentially to be understood as creative, organic, and temporal.” McLaughlin stresses
that Peirce “describes learning as a ‘gain of experience’,” motivated by dissatisfac-
tion with one’s own experience, understood as “a hunger, or thirst” more accurately
than as a mere absence of opinion [3, pp. 233–234]. In surveying the kinds of motiva-
tions and ideals attributed to collectors, I took this point of view to heart. Collections
and collecting are neither random nor aberrant human behavior. Rather, as we say
about aspects of certain systems, they are a feature, not a bug, of inquiries seeking
sustenance for hunger or thirst “to ﬁnd out, from the consideration of what [one]
already know[s], something else which [one does] not know” [4, p. 2].
The Peirce papers at Houghton Library consist of more than 100,000 pages in
various partial stages of cataloguing and preservation. Peirce studied chemistry,
worked as an assistant in the Harvard Observatory for four years and for the United
States Coast and Geodetic Survey for thirty years. He amassed collections of obser-
vations and measurements as a researcher in his work in both these institutions. His
scientiﬁc and philosophical papers display a vast accumulation of facts and observa-
tions from which he drew hypotheses as well as new methodologies for investigating
scientiﬁc and philosophical questions. His self-described method of work began, in
each case of a given question coming up for discussion, with “writing a collation
upon it,” including arguments for and against one and then the other side of the matter
[5, p. 386]. His method then called for him to “draw up a list of the general methods
in which a solution of the problem might be sought.” In other words, he collected
every thought and perspective on the problem at hand and kept it before his eyes.
He further processed these lists, referring to each conception of the problem as “a
seedling tree, which must have water, nutriment, sunlight, shade, and air and frequent
breaking of the ground about it, in order that it may grow into something worthy of
respect,” also calling each iteration a “digestion” [5, p. 387]. It seems clear that
Peirce took pains to allow plentiful reﬂection. While the resources for undergoing
any given investigation might be limited, he saw no reason to censure his ambitions
or expectations for nurturing ideas.

The Role of Collections of Objects in Abduction
265
1
Logica Utens: Logical Doctrine Without the Systems
and Traditions
Aside from studies of Peirce, logic in this century exists primarily in the realm of
meta-data, in text and discourse (propositions) as a phenomenon exclusive of reality,
especially materiality. Logic appears to be a separate ﬁeld from ontology (especially
materiality as a subcategory of ontology) though there may be overlapping concerns.
However, these concerns characterize logic as formal and, for the most part, as a
set of purely intellectual operations that omit any reference to content. For example,
Thomas Hofweber claims, in an essay intended to be generic and universal, that,
Overall, we can thus distinguish four notions of logic:
• (L1) the study of artiﬁcial formal languages
• (L2) the study of formally valid inferences and logical consequence
• (L3) the study of logical truths [more or less acceptable rules of logical operations]
• (L4) the study of the general features, or form, of judgements [6]
Such deﬁnitions of the realm of logic conﬁne it to a content-free set of formal rules
and operations. An understanding of Peirce’s logic of abduction, which is admittedly
only nominally formal but rich in suggestions regarding content, is best constructed
not through the four ideas of logic listed above, but rather from Peirce’s own writings
and the relevant literature in Peirce studies. This essay distinguishes, as Peirce does,
between logica docens and logica utens. Logica docens is the systematic scientiﬁc
study of logic; logica utens is the rational process that is antecedent to any systematic
study of the forms of logic. The acts of reasoning I will cite in this essay, apart from
Peirce’s, are generally examples of logica utens. Logica utens does not lack a logical
doctrine or logical tenets. Logica utens is merely reasoning without a theory of itself.
Though its users do not deliberately employ formal logical systems, they do make
deliberate and self-controlled inferences whose forms “[they] approve as calculated
to lead to the truth” [7].
Anyone can engage in abduction without knowing the theory of it. Anyone can
adopt a conclusion provisional to its eventual proof. An abduction “is the process
of forming an explanatory hypothesis.” Peirce identiﬁes an abduction as “the only
logical operation which introduces any new idea” [1]. Abductive inference has this
form:
The surprising fact, C, is observed;
But if A were true, C would be a matter of course, Hence, there is reason to suspect A is
true. [8]
Logica utens is likely to focus on the surprising fact of C initially. Why or how
is C possible? How did C get there? Why does C appear to have the form that it
does? One makes guesses that explain C. My motive for discussing collections is
that collections are reasonable to study as the source of A, as the examples illustrate.

266
P. Turrisi
2
Objects Speak to Us: Peirce’s “One Intelligible Theory
of the Universe”
The “one intelligible theory of the universe,” Peirce claims, is objective idealism,
which holds that “matter is effete mind, inveterate habits becoming physical laws.”
Rejecting both the autonomy of matter from mind and the autonomy of mind from
matter, he underlined their relationship as one that evolves from irregularity to
regularity. He claims that
The old dualistic notion of mind and matter, so prominent in Cartesianism, as two radically
different kinds of substance, will hardly ﬁnd defenders today. Rejecting this, we are driven to
some form of hylopathy, otherwise called monism. Then the question arises whether physical
laws on the one hand and the psychical law on the other are to be taken
(A) as independent, a doctrine often called monism, but which I would name neutralism;
or,
(B)
the psychical law as derived and special, the physical law alone as primordial, which
is materialism; or,
(C)
the physical law as derived and special, the psychical law alone as primordial, which
is idealism.
The materialistic doctrine seems to me quite as repugnant to scientiﬁc logic as to common
sense; since it requires us to suppose that a certain kind of mechanism will feel, which would
be a hypothesis absolutely irreducible to reason, – an ultimate, inexplicable regularity; while
the only possible justiﬁcation of any theory is that it should make things clear and reasonable.
Neutralism is sufﬁciently condemned by the logical maxim known as Ockham’s razor, i.e.,
that not more independent elements are to be supposed than necessary. By placing the inward
and outward aspects of substance on a par, it seems to render both primordial.
The one intelligible theory of the universe is that of objective idealism, that matter is effete
mind, inveterate habits becoming physical laws. [9]
On the way to acquiring inveterate habits, is it not then possible that matter
expresses itself in signs that are in-exact, that is, neither measurable nor express-
ible in mathematical signs as one might expect in the “exact sciences”? For example,
since the ostensibly regular phenomenon of the speed of an object is often computed
using the formula: speed = distance/time, any number of objects in motion can
be partially characterized with reference to one of the regularized habits of matter.
However, countless other effects that are materially expressed do so more or less
irregularly, that is, in patterns that are more or less habitual and, therefore, only more
or less measurable. Positivist philosophers have taught us that entities that are not
measurable may as well not exist for the discipline of philosophy, but logica utens
practitioners live in a world ﬁlled with such objects. Their effects appear in perceptual
judgments that are difﬁcult to analyze precisely through symbolic systems. Nonethe-
less, they guide our understanding of the world and especially our situational aware-
ness of our own personal worlds. Sometimes, they can be characterized in general

The Role of Collections of Objects in Abduction
267
terms, through the language of nonverbal communication as studied in proxemics,
kinesics and other ﬁelds such as anthropology and even the neurosciences. I am
proposing that not only does nonverbal communication take place between sentient
beings such as ourselves, but also between sentient entities such as human beings
and material objects, especially those that have only partially developed “inveterate
habits.” After all, the ability to calculate the speed of an object only reveals a partial
truth about it. There is much more to learn. Thus, in the spirit of Peirce’s ﬁrst rule of
reason, let us consider a variety of objects of thought that are accessible to us through
our interactions with collections—quantiﬁable as well as unquantiﬁable, material as
well as nonmaterial.
3
Objects Speak to Us: Hominin Foundations of the Urge
to Collect
Non-verbal capacities to express responses to the environment that appear in early
(and contemporary) humans predate the evolution of human symbolic communica-
tion systems.
Neurobiological studies locate the source of nonverbal responses in the limbic
system, a part of the brain thought to be the oldest in evolutionary time. Researched by
“anthropologists, archaeologists, biologists, linguists, psychiatrists, psychologists,
semioticians, and others who have studied human communication from a scientiﬁc
point of view,” The Nonverbal Dictionary of Gestures, Signs & Body Language Cues
is a rich assembly of terms that elaborate the conditions under which human beings
discern signs that are durable, material, aromatic, auditory, tactile, vestibular, visual
and edible [10]. The arrangements, combinations, contrasts, rhythms, and sequences
of signs have their own systems. The perception and use of space, and the system of
spatial signs, speak to us, albeit without words and in terms difﬁcult to measure. The
Nonverbal Dictionary distinguishes between efferent and afferent signs, acknowl-
edginginmanyentriesbothsignsthathumanssendnonverballyandsignsthataresent
tohumansnonverbally,byotherhumanbeingsandobjectsalike.Afferentandefferent
signs are part of a closed nervous system loop that consists of nerves that accompany
sensations, decisions and reactions. The nervous system registers afferent signs as
“incoming” sensations while efferent signs are characterized as “outgoing” decisions
and reactions, mostly expressed in muscle movement and glandular activity, distinct
nerve ﬁbers registering affect and effect in this system. As observers of responses
to material objects that give pleasure, for example, the affect is a “subjective feel-
ing” of pleasure (as in the notion, “mmm, this smells good”), while the effect may
be a change in hormonal levels, or other facial or bodily expression or action, with
reference to the source of pleasure. Charles Peirce would have been excited to study
the relationships that nonverbal specialists now understand have evolved between
objects and perceivers; for example, in the case of “new car smell”:

268
P. Turrisi
Aroma cue. A scented consumer product designed to mimic the leather, rubber, plastic, and
vinyl aromas of a show-room-new motor vehicle interior.
Usage. We ﬁnd the synthetic odor of new car smell pleasant because it contains chemical
analogs of natural plant resins, animal esters, and sexual steroids.
Evolution. New car smell, which may be sprayed from aerosol cans, was developed by
International Flavors and Fragrances of New York, which supplies odor cues for Downey
Fabric Softener and Colgate’s Irish Spring soap. [11]
The “new car smell” experience is based on an entirely manufactured, chemically
precise substance that becomes a sign when as-signed to a new car and is understood
by a perceiver to stand for a set of affairs, the distinctive aroma of cars in a showroom
or on a test drive. Pleasure is somewhat measurable in brain activity, but to under-
stand the experience of pleasure it provides (relating to emotion and mood, which are
afferent sensations) requires recognition of a set of relations between the consumer,
the chemistry of “new car smell,” the limbic system of the consumer, the adaptive
value of proximity to plant resins, animal esters and sexual steroids in human exis-
tence, and the material object that prompts an almost instantaneous suggestion of the
meaning of these relations, the “new car” itself. The perceptual judgments that arise
from experiencing “new car smell” are not merely isolated events of odor detection,
but also a guess as to the meaning of a complex network of relationships.
The urge to interact with material objects is itself a nonverbal behavior as are
the acts of collecting and maintaining collections. The Nonverbal Dictionary has
adopted the term object fancy to indicate:
1. The desire to pick up, handle, and hold a material object, especially a consumer product of
elegant design. 2. The urge to touch, own, arrange, collect, display, or talk about a manufac-
tured human artifact. 3. The motivation for compulsive shopping. Usage: Products “speak”
to us nonverbally as tangible, material gestures. Their design features (e.g., the shine, shape,
and smoothness of a platinum bracelet) send compelling messages to capture our attention.
That we respond to their appeal shows in the sheer number of artifacts we possess. Our
personality may be caricatured by the object(s) we desire, e.g., jewelry, boats, shoes, and so
on. We may hold treasured artifacts with two hands, in a gentle, caressing embrace between
the tactile pads of our thumbs and foreﬁngers. Forever beckoning from TV monitors, mail
order catalogues, and shelves, products gesture until we answer their call. [12]
“Object fancy” does not describe a utilitarian desire to fulﬁl one’s basic needs
for food, shelter or defense, though it may well be an adaptive desire that promotes
well-being from other perspectives. Standard timelines of human development cite
tool use and cooking as the ﬁrst major breakthroughs in human cultural evolution.
Early humans in East Africa as early as 2.6 million years ago used hammer stones
to produce sharp ﬂakes with which to process new foods. However, a number of
non-utilitarian lithic objects have come to light in various parts of the world from
previously excavated collections held in museums [13]. These objects were collected
as part of past archaeological explorations but have only recently been curated as
signiﬁcant objects in themselves. Against denials of the symbolic value and, indeed,
the emergence of a symbolic understanding of objects previous to homo sapiens,
or more than 75,000 years old, Moncel et al. claim, in their research report, “Non-
Utilitarian Lithic Objects from the European Paleolithic,” that:

The Role of Collections of Objects in Abduction
269
The odd and non-utilitarian lithic objects occurring in the Paleolithic [~ 2.6 million –
12,000 years ago] sites indicate that they retained the attention of hominins, and were treated
with special care for some time, at least from the time that they were carried from the natural
source to the living site. Because these objects are related to a range of activities apart from
subsistence, they are signiﬁcant for our understanding of the day-to- day life of the Paleolithic
people.
What the motivation was for collecting extraordinary items is impossible to assess in early
hominins, and even in modern humans. Picking up an extraordinary stone and bringing it back
“home” may represent a casual action, or alternatively, this action may be related to various
individual or collective concerns like play, aesthetic feeling, symbolic communication or
magical-religious practice, among others. [13, p. 25]
These non-utilitarian, “extraordinary” objects include fossils, quartz crystals and
other minerals, stones with cupules, objects with anthropomorphic shapes, pebbles,
amber, black stones, steatite, smooth pebbles, shells and shell fragments. Collection
activity in early hominins is difﬁcult to characterize as unequivocally indicative of
speciﬁc cognitive capacities, yet the authors conclude that:
The frequency of these objects increases with time [from the Lower to the Upper Paleolithic
Ages] and, although their presence dramatically increases after the appearance of Homo
sapiens, they are still apparent in early hominins and Neanderthal sites….
With the early hominins this is indicated simply by the collection of odd, unusual, extraordi-
nary objects, picked up at the same time as the necessary goods for survival. Such behavior
has not been observed so far among other primates, even though they use wood or stone tools
and play with pieces of these common raw materials (Goodall 1989; Joulian 2005; Morgan
and Abwe, 2006; Mercador et al. 2007). [13, p. 34]
Early collection activity “was mainly centered around objects distinguishable by
their color, transparency, shape, surface texture, etc.” while, after the appearance of
Homo sapiens, “the collection of unusual objects, like fossils, fragments of rocks
with odd shades or morphology, [and] small colored pebbles continued.” Homo
sapiens also began to transform unusual raw materials “in a more systematic manner”
for symbolic or aesthetic purposes. Their apparently great interest in exceptional
materials “led to increasingly distant searches, involving movement of objects and/or
people,” with the selection of objects based on color as before, but also increasingly
“on the possible effects of transparency or luster, as well as on the degree of softness”
[13, p. 34].
4
Systems of Collection: The Sheet of Assertion
In this section and the next, I compare one of Peirce’s techniques for organizing
objects of thought with a pre-modern system of re-collection, i.e., the art of memory,
both of which acknowledge the purpose of collections as means of generating new
thought.
An abduction terminates in an assertion that is a supposition about the relation-
ships between perceptions, or collections of perceptions, or of regularities as regards

270
P. Turrisi
other regularities, or the relationship between something in evidence and its cause or
explanation. The Sheet of Assertion is a device Peirce imagined in order to construct
a mode of expressing sets of assertions for further examination:
1903 | A Syllabus of Certain Topics of Logic | Peirce, 1903, p. 15; CP 4.397
It is agreed that a certain sheet, or blackboard, shall, under the name of The Sheet of Assertion,
be considered as representing the universe of discourse, and as asserting whatever is taken
for granted between the graphist and the interpreter to be true of that universe. The sheet of
assertion is, therefore, a graph.
1903 [c.] | Logical Tracts. No. 2. On Existential Graphs, Euler’s Diagrams, and Logical
Algebra | CP 4.430
What we have to do […] is to form a perfectly consistent method of expressing any asser-
tion diagrammatically. The diagram must then evidently be something that we can see and
contemplate. Now what we see appears spread out as upon a sheet. Consequently our diagram
must be drawn upon a sheet. We must appropriate a sheet to the purpose, and the diagram
drawn or written on the sheet is to express an assertion. We can, then, approximately call
this sheet our sheet of assertion.
1903 [c.] | Logical Tracts. No. 2. On Existential Graphs, Euler’s Diagrams, and Logical
Algebra | CP 4.432
A certain sheet, called the sheet of assertion, is appropriated to the drawing upon it of
such graphs that whatever may be at any time drawn upon it, called the entire graph, shall be
regarded as expressing an assertion by an imaginary person, called the graphist, concerning a
universe,perfectlydeﬁniteandentirelydeterminate,butthearbitrarycreationofanimaginary
mind, called the grapheus. [14]
Let us imagine the shelves in the storeroom of a museum as a proto-sheet of
assertion, with its specimens systematically withdrawn from their natural state by
collectors and curators.
These objects propel us toward much more than propositions about individual
specimens, though such assertions may be added to the sheet in the form of labels,
indexes, catalogues and oral reports. The organization of the collection of objects
permits references by each individual in the set to others with which it is catego-
rized, and each subset of collections to other subsets of collections. Furthermore,
the system by which collectors have organized each collection and sub- collection
may be conjectured as another feature of the collections. Collections additionally
tell us something about their collectors, which may be interesting from historical
and cultural perspectives. The minds that categorize objects are worth understanding
because they add to the community of scholarship that attempts to render the world
intelligible. Now imagine other kinds of collections such as the approximately 2.5
billion square feet of self-storage rentable space in the USA, the approximately
55,000 museums in the world, 75,000 antique stores on the internet, 25 million
sellers on eBay, or 291 million monthly active Pinterest users. Add to these your
own library, your bookmarks on your browser, or your collection of anything you
please. You might be the subject of object fancy, as primitive as picking up pretty
rocks as you walk from one place to another, or you might collect things that may
be useful in making sense of some question or problem. In the case of the sheet of
assertion, Peirce re-collects that which the graphist and the interpreter agree is the

The Role of Collections of Objects in Abduction
271
widest Universe of Reality. Moreover, “the diagram must then evidently be some-
thing that we can see and contemplate.” Items on the sheet can be added or erased, put
into different conﬁgurations, and added to again and again as an inquiry progresses.
For this reason, it is useful to introduce the method and purpose of the pre-modern
art of memory, which was intended to create a structure “in trained memory that
built character, judgment, citizenship, and piety” [15, p. 11]. Just as Peirce’s tech-
nique proposes a collection-preserving artifact that serves as a prompt for thoughtful
inquiry, the art of memory gives a method for collecting the means for a thoughtful
human disposition.
5
Systems of Collection: The Art of Memory and Memory
as Re-collection
The art of memory as practiced in pre-modern times through the Middle Ages bears
little resemblance in method or purpose to memory schemes that are everywhere
present in the modern world. “Brain games,” for example, claim to aid memory
by providing stimulation that prevents brain atrophy. “Mental athletes” practice
mnemonics to improve memory while everyone else relies on external devices
because they no longer have to store “information,” that is, facts or bits and pieces
of data. The meanings and uses of memorized “information” are supposed to be
unnecessary or irrelevant to the practice of memory. A typical description claims
that,
Mnemonics was a once common art of using particular techniques to improve the strength
of your memories. These techniques were popular back when people really needed to rely
on their mind’s ability to keep track of information. [16]
However, the purpose of the classical art of memory was neither as utilitarian nor
as trivial as its contemporary practice imagines. In the Greek tradition of mnemonics,
perceptions, regardless of how they were presented to the mind, were “encoded as
phantasmata, ‘representations’ or a ‘kind of eikôn’” [15, p. 20]. The goal of recol-
lection was to invent and compose in the present, not to reproduce a record of past
events or to “keep track of information.” The further goal of such inventions and
compositions was to enrich and enhance the human condition through enrichment
by communities of educated scholars (“textual communities”) whose universe of
discourse was a shared grasp of key texts. Books, language and other human arti-
facts themselves were cues to “existent truths,” not fundamentalist tracts with no
further need of interpretation or application [15, p. 11]. Furthermore, writing was
not considered a supplement (or replacement) of memory.
Rather, as Cicero wrote:
Memory … is in a manner the twin sister of written speech [litteratura] and is completely
similar to it [persimilis], [though] in a dissimilar medium. For just as script consists of marks
indicating letters and of the material on which those marks are imprinted, so the structure

272
P. Turrisi
of memory, like a wax tablet, employs places [loci] and in these gathers together [collocat]
images like letters. [15, p. 18]
To be clear, writing, whether on an actual or imagined surface, was understood
to be distinct from “writing down.” Mary Carruthers states, in The Book of Memory,
that “the ability to write is not always the same thing as the ability to compose
and comprehend in a fully textual way, for indeed one who writes (a scribe) may
simply be a skilled practitioner, employed in a capacity to that of a professional
typist today” [15, pp. 17–18]. The purpose of memoria was to stimulate and facili-
tate thinking about moral character and civic responsibility in pre-modern times as
now, an activity that required creative interpretation and not merely a mechanical
adherence to formulae:
Memoria, as these writers understood and practiced it, was a part of litteratura: indeed it
was what literature, in a fundamental sense, was for. Memory is one of the ﬁve divisions of
ancient and medieval rhetoric; it was regarded, moreover, by more than one writer on the
subject as the “noblest” of all these, the basis for the rest. Memoria was also an integral part
of the virtue of prudence, that which makes moral judgment possible.
Training the memory was much more than a matter of providing oneself with the means
to compose and converse intelligently when books were not readily to hand, for it was in
trained memory that one built character, judgment, citizenship, and piety. [15, p. 11]
Carruthers clariﬁes the “distinction between memory understood as the ability
to reproduce something exactly (“rote”) and memory as recollection or reminis-
cence” [15, p. 22]. Regardless of whether the scheme of retrieval was natural or
artiﬁcial, “both sorts of schemes are heuristic, inventive and investigatory in the clas-
sical sense” (of a learning and making practice) [15, p. 24]. She emphasizes that the
representations or images stored in memory each have a “cognitive function,” that
is, its user understands each to represent a certain thing. Peirce deﬁnes a sign in a
comparable manner. Moreover, his method of work may be understood as a kind
of re-collection in Carruthers’ terms. Citing a predominant model of memory work
involving inscription on a block of wax, as discussed in Plato’s Theaetetus and in
Aristotle’s Metaphysics, Carruthers notes that the root word Plato uses for “seal,”
(sême) or sign, is “a mark by which something is known.” Carruthers explains that
these copies, whether stored in the mind or stored on a wax tablet, are “sort-of”
images, not precisely replicas of the somethings that are known, but evocative rather,
a “quasi-picture” representation that calls something to mind, perhaps the initial
perception, but more useful for invention, composing and learning, a trove of asso-
ciations contextualized by the process of memorial collection in the ﬁrst instance
[15, p. 27]. The pre- modern memory artist’s skill was most evident in the weaving
together (textus) of phantasma into original discoveries such as Thomas Aquinas did
in his compilations (collections) of Patristic texts made for Pope Urban or the sudden
breakthrough in his argument against the Manichees in Summa theologica.
These remarks suggest that in any medium that memorializes thought, there are
collections of almost-representations that more or less cohere with one another.
There is much food for thought here as we consider books, libraries, and other
collections of manuscripts and addenda curated (in material and mental forms) by

The Role of Collections of Objects in Abduction
273
textual communities. However, it may be a challenge to understand how one ever
determines what to collect, which somethings to focus upon when “we may wish to
remember something we see or hear or conceive in our own minds.”1 Two examples
should illustrate both that such choices are useful means of generating abductions
and that a choice to collect an item is itself abductive, the abduction in general being
that it will be useful in generating abductions.
6
Scientiﬁc and Artistic Collections. Niles Eldredge:
Paleontologist and Cornet Collector
Niles Eldredge has been Curator in the Division of Paleontology at the American
Museum of Natural History since 1969. In 1972, he and Stephen Jay Gould formu-
lated the theory of Punctuated Equilibrium in distinction from Charles Darwin’s
gradualist theory of evolution. Eldredge also studies the relationships between global
extinctions in the geological past and the current crises in biodiversity [17]. His initial
work with Gould took ﬂight from his specialization in mid-Paleozoic phacopid trilo-
bites. Trilobites are an extinct class of Paleozoic marine arthropods consisting of over
25,000 described species [18]. The American Museum of Natural History owns spec-
imens of trilobites from the Cambrian through Permian Periods (roughly 542–251
million years ago), from regions as diverse as North America, Africa, Europe, Asia,
Australia, Russia, South America and China (roughly everywhere). More recently,
Eldredge has been comparing patterns and processes in biological evolution with
a similar process in material cultural evolution using his collection of over ﬁve
hundred antique cornets. He told reporter Margaret Wertheim, “I’m doing now with
cornets exactly what I used to do with trilobites: measuring, analyzing and cata-
loging the myriad gradations of their forms” [19]. He further commented that, as his
collection grew, he “began to realize that ‘the basic cornet designs are essentially
packages of information, of cultural material information, similar to species in the
biological realm.” He wondered if patterns similar to those found in the fossil record
could be seen in the evolution of cultural material artifacts. His work on cornets
identiﬁed a set of characteristics that he has perceived as capturing “the essential
anatomical features of the cornet” in order to further explore “the way new ideas and
designs spread through an instrument population.” Ilya Temkin, Eldredge’s student
and an expert on the psaltery, an instrument played in Latvia, Lithuania, Estonia,
Finland and Russia, is applying methods of classiﬁcation used to study pearl oysters
to search for patterns in psaltery evolution. Both scientists have derived intriguing
hypotheses concerning differences between biological evolution and the evolution
1In Theaetetus, when Socrates introduces the imaginary block of wax in our minds, he states, “Let
us call it the gift of the Muses’ mother, Memory, and say that whenever we wish to remember
something we see or hear or conceive in our own minds, we hold this wax under the perception
of ideas and imprint them on it as we might stamp the impression of a seal ring. Whatever is so
imprinted we remember and know so long as the image remains; whatever is rubbed out or has not
succeeded in leaving an impression we have forgotten and do not know” [2, p. 24].

274
P. Turrisi
of the manufacture of musical instruments. One example is lateral transmission,
which is common among bacteria and plants but otherwise rare among other organ-
isms. Lateral transmission of characteristics of musical instruments occurs when one
manufacturer creates an innovative feature, others copy it, and it spreads throughout
a region. Eldredge and Temkin identify patterns in manufacture and pair them with
economic and social patterns in the period of manufacture to discover more about
these patterns in order to promote further guesses about how these patterns emerged.
7
Scientiﬁc and Artistic Collections: Museums
In his book, Museums: A History, John E. Simmons traces the history of collec-
tions from hoards and artifacts in tombs to modern museums in order to “discern
worldviews and, in some instances, the motivations of collectors” [20, p. xiii].
Simmons cites Alma S. Wittlin’s argument that “an account of premuseum collec-
tions based on chronology or geography was not as useful as categorizing collections
by function because ‘collections both reﬂect and affect human ways of life’” [20,
p. 11]. Wittlin proposed six categories, one of which was “collections intended to
stimulate curiosity and inquiry.” It would be impractical to survey every collec-
tion in every museum in the world, but it may sufﬁce to review several examples
of museum collections intended to stimulate such curiosity and inquiry. The ﬁrst
is the Alexandrian Temple of the Muses, which “formed the conceptual basis of
museum development beginning in the Renaissance” in its use of objects as sources
of knowledge [20, p. 31]. Reliable historical evidence of the contents and layout of
the Alexandrian Temple of the Muses does not exist, but imaginative and conjectural
accounts describe it as based on shrines to the Muses that promoted learning and
civic harmony. Simmons claims it is “best described as a combination of a school of
scholars, a research institution and a library” [20, p. 34]. Alexander sent specimens
from Persia and India to his tutor, Aristotle, including many described by Aristotle in
Historia Animalium and from which Aristotle developed a taxonomic system of some
450 animals he arranged in terms of their relative perfection on the scala naturae
[20, p. 35]. Historians have determined that the Alexandrian Temple of the Muses
contained, among other accommodations for scholars, an observatory, a zoo, and a
botanical and meditation garden. The library contained a number of scrolls. Ptolemy
II “was reputed to have required travelers arriving in Alexandria to surrender any
manuscripts in their possession so that they could be copied for the library” [20,
p. 37]. The manuscripts collected in the library were edited and corrected to produce
the most authentic versions of the Greek literature of classical antiquity, including
stories, songs, poems and plays that represented a rich array of understandings of
human life, relationships between humans and gods, and stories of war, travel and
exploration [20, p. 37].
With exploration and the technology that allowed better preservation of specimens
and artifacts, museums in the modern period became places where collections were

The Role of Collections of Objects in Abduction
275
established for research. Major modern museums display only a small portion of the
objects they own for study.
For example, as of 2015, the Victoria and Albert Museum displayed 233,742
objects and works of art but had 2,044,441 books, drawings, prints, photographs
and archives available for study [21]. As of 2013, the Field Museum in Chicago
contained 25 million artifacts but displays less than one per cent at any given time.
According to the Field’s Associate Curator of Birds, “the rest are one of the best
research collections in the world for all types of biological and cultural diversity”
[22]. Many donations to museums have their origin in private collections originally
amassed for research purposes. Charles Darwin kept a heated greenhouse where he
grew plants for his experiments. Preserved bird specimens collected by Darwin on his
voyage on the HMS Beagle were ﬁrst given to the Zoological Society of London and
later distributed to the British Museum and other institutions. Two hundred of his bird
specimens now reside in the UK’s Natural History Museum and seven other collec-
tions. Half of his original collections are unaccounted for, but it is certain that, over
his lifetime, he compared myriad specimens that led him to formulate theories about
the origins of differences between varieties of organisms and their relationships to
geographical and environmental conditions [23]. Darwin’s co-presenter of the theory
of natural selection, Alfred Russel Wallace, likewise collected natural history spec-
imens, especially plants, insects, beetles and birds, many of which are now held in
several dozen institutions internationally. The signiﬁcance of evolutionary interpre-
tations of specimen collections in originating, supporting and amplifying what has
become the unifying theory of the life sciences cannot be overstated. Moreover, as
Steven Lubar claims, in Inside the Lost Museum, it is inadvisable merely to replace
the objects and specimens in museum collections with digital copies because new
inquiries can arise from old objects. Arguing for the preservation of large collections,
he identiﬁes Harvard University’s Museum of Comparative Zoology’s collection of
mice, mouse collections at the Smithsonian Institution, the Museum of Vertebrate
Zoology in Berkeley and others whose specimens are over a century old. Asking
“but what use are they today?” he notes the response by Hopi Hoekstra, Curator
of Mammals at the Museum of Comparative Zoology: “the mice they collected are
invaluable, documenting ‘more than a century of dynamic relationships between
deer mice and their environment’,” allowing scientists to study population genetics,
and “to answer questions about climate change and how mice respond to changing
environments” [3, p. 274]. More signiﬁcantly, such collections allow scientists to ask
questions about the relationship between the past, present and future.
8
Collecting as Disorder/Disorder as “Useful
Destabilization”
Should anyone believe that collectors are all of a piece and mentally ill rather than in
the main quite serious about the uses of collections for sparking inquiries about the

276
P. Turrisi
nature of things, it is important to clear the air: close to a century of ideology about
“hoarding” and “hoarders” is rooted in indefensible claims.
The DSM-5 (Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders) in 2013
formally recognized hoarding behavior as “Hoarding Disorder,” which it character-
izedas “persistent difﬁcultydiscardingor partingwithpossessions, regardless of their
actual value, as a result of a strong perceived need to save the items and to distress
associatedwithdiscardingthem”[24,p.235].Thisauthoritativemanualdistinguishes
what it terms a hoarding disorder from normal collecting when hoarding results in
clutter in active living areas “such that their intended use is substantially compro-
mised.” An extreme form of hoarding disorder “consists of excessive collecting,
buying or stealing of items that are not needed or for which there is no available
space” [24, p. 235]. The pathology of the supposed disorder assumes it has a neuro-
biological origin despite a complete lack of evidence. In “Collyer Curiosa: A Brief
History of Hoarding” Scott Herring refutes the interpretation of one supposed case
of a hoarding disorder, Collyer Brothers Syndrome, as a representation of an “anal-
erotic” trait or as biochemical imbalance. He instead “treats hoarding as a chapter in
the unﬁnished cultural history of disorder and ‘gross disorganization’” [25, pp. 161–
2]. He offers a plausible alternative hypothesis to regarding the condition variously
labelled as collector’s mania, pathological collecting and, especially, chronic disor-
ganization, as a mental disorder [25, pp. 159–160]. Rather, he demonstrates how
a pernicious interpretation of Harlem and of migrant neighborhoods gave rise to a
global interpretation of the dubious category of excessive collecting as a dangerous
mental aberration.2
Compare the “hoarding disorder” diagnosis of a collector whose possessions “are
not needed” with a museologist’s justiﬁcation of the method of using objects as
evidence:
The object as keeper of the truths of the past, as the most truthful historian, appeals to the
museum curator. The curator can reveal those truths and make the objects speak. [3, p. 280]
Lubar describes perceiving old objects in new contexts, the abduction of the
signiﬁcance of objects as they occur alongside others:
Most curators combine methods [of analysis, classiﬁcation and description] with a visceral
understanding of artifacts. Nicholas Thomas of the Cambridge Museum of Archaeology
and Anthropology describes the museum method as more about “discovery” than critical
enquiry: “it often involves ﬁnding things that were not lost, identifying things that were
known to others, or disclosing what was hidden or repressed.
The encounter with arrays of objects is usefully destabilizing.” [3, p. 280]
2See also Martin F. Manlansan IV, “The ‘Stuff’ of Archives: Mess, Migration, and Queer Lives”
in Radical History Review Issue 120 (Fall 2014), 94–107 for an ethnographic account of undocu-
mented Asian and Latino queer immigrants living in Jackson Heights, Queens. Manlansan derives
an account of transitory lives that are organized disorganizations of “the tragic, the repulsive, the
uncomfortable, the banal, and the seemingly trashy, off-kilter and bodily practices that may hint
at political potentials, gesture to alternative narrative, and enable an openness to multiple futures.”
([26], p. 106).

The Role of Collections of Objects in Abduction
277
In Peirce’s terms, such destabilizing encounters unblock the way of inquiry. Lubar
explains that storerooms are places where curators practice “museum sense” in its
purest form, which they also call “object-feel” or “a good eye.” In storerooms, cura-
tors may experience “object-love” (akin to “object fancy”): “a curators’ passion for
his or her collection, and for every object in it.” Lubar notes, “Curators love their
collections, and storerooms are ‘shaped by the emotion attached to the objects they
house’” [3, p. 101]. While it would be a mistake to conﬂate museum storerooms with
dwellings full of seemingly useless leavings, the value of hundreds of artifacts in
storage areas may be inestimable for research.
References
1. Peirce, C.S.: Abduction. Harvard lectures on pragmatism: lecture VI. MS [R] 314. In: Bergman,
M., Paavola S. (eds.) The Commens Dictionary: Peirce’s Terms in His Own Words. New Edition
(1903). http://www.commens.org/dictionary/term/abduction. Accessed 23 May 2019
2. McLaughlin, A.: Peirce’s First Rule of Reason and the Process of Learning. In: Thellefsen, T.,
Sorensen, B. (eds.) Peirce in His Own Words: 100 Years of Semiotics, Communication and
Cognition, pp. 229–234. De Gruyter Mouton, Boston (2014)
3. Lubar, S.: Inside the Lost Museum: Curating Past and Present. Harvard University, Cambridge
(2017)
4. Peirce, C.S.: The Fixation of Belief. Popular Sci. Monthly 12, 1–15 (1877)
5. Turrisi, P.: Peirce’s Method of work. In: Thellefsen, T., Sorensen, B. (eds.) Peirce in His Own
Words: 100 Years of Semiotics, Communication and Cognition, pp. 385–391. De Gruyter
Mouton, Boston (2014)
6. Hofweber, T.: Logic and Ontology. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. https://plato.stanford.
edu/archives/sum2018/entries/logic-ontology/. Accessed 18 Aug 2018
7. Peirce, C.S.: Reason’s Rules. MS [R] 596. In: Bergman, M., Paavola S. (eds.) The Commens
Dictionary: Peirce’s Terms in His Own Words. New Edition (1902–03 [c.]). http://www.com
mens.org/dictionary/term/logica-utens. Accessed 23 May 2019
8. Peirce, C.S. Abduction. Harvard lectures on pragmatism: lecture VI. MS [R] 315. In: Bergman,
M., Paavola S. (eds.) The Commens Dictionary: Peirce’s Terms in His Own Words. New Edition
(1903). Accessed 23 May 2019
9. Peirce, C.S.: Objective idealism. In Bergman, M., Paavola S. (eds.) The Commens Dictionary:
Peirce’s Terms in His Own Words. New Edition. http://www.commens.org/dictionary/term/obj
ective-idealism. Accessed 23 May 2019
10. Givens, D.: The Nonverbal Dictionary of Gestures, Signs & Body Language Cues. http://cen
ter-for-nonverbal-studies.org/htdocs/6101.html. Accessed 31 Aug 2019
11. Givens, D.: New Car Smell. The Nonverbal Dictionary of Gestures, Signs & Body Language
Cues. http://center-for-nonverbal-studies.org/htdocs/newcar.htm. Accessed 31 Aug 2019
12. Givens,D.:ObjectFancy.TheNonverbalDictionaryofGestures,Signs&BodyLanguageCues.
http://www.nonverbal-dictionary.org/2013/01/object-fancy.html. Accessed 31 Aug 2019
13. Moncel, M.-H., Chiotti, L., Gaillard, C., Onoratini, G., Pleurdeau, D.: Non-utilitarian lithic
objects from the European Paleolithic. Archaeol Ethnology Anthropol Eurasia 40(1), 24–40
(2012)
14. Peirce, C.S.: Sheet of Assertion. In: Bergman, M., Paavola S. (eds.) The Commens Dictionary:
Peirce’s Terms in His Own Words. New Edition. http://www.commens.org/dictionary/term/
sheet-of-assertion. Accessed 16 May 2019
15. Carruthers, M.: The Book of Memory: A Study of Memory in Medieval Culture, 2nd edn.
Cambridge University, Cambridge UK (2008)

278
P. Turrisi
16. Handel, S.: Mnemonics: The Forgotten Art of Memory. https://www.theemotionmachine.com/
mnemonics-the-forgotten-art-of-memory/. Accessed 31 Aug 2019
17. Eldredge, N.: American Museum of Natural History, New York. https://www.amnh.org/res
earch/staff-directory/niles-eldredge. Accessed 31 Aug 2019
18. Gallery of Trilobites. American Museum of Natural History, New York. https://www.amnh.
org/research/paleontology/collections/fossil-invertebrate-collection/trilobite-website/gallery-
of-trilobites. Accessed 31 Aug 2019
19. Wertheim, M.: Scientist at Work—Niles Eldredge; Bursts of Cornets and Evolution Bring
Harmony to Night and Day March 9, 2004, Section F, Page 3 New York Times
20. Simmons, J.E.: Museums: A History. Rowman & Littleﬁeld, Lanham, Maryland (2016)
21. Size of the V&A Collections. Victoria and Albert Museum. http://www.vam.ac.uk/content/art
icles/s/size-of-the-v-and-a-collections/. Accessed 31 Aug 2019
22. Klocksin, K.: How Much of the Field Museum’s Collection Is Actually On Display? WBEZ91.5
Chicago (2013). https://www.wbez.org/shows/curious-city/how-much-of-the-ﬁeld-museums-
collection-is-actually-on-display/485cb7d3-b46c-434b-ae84-8f6ae8ad808f. Accessed 31 Aug
2019
23. Voyage of HMS Beagle (1831–1836) Natural History Museum. https://www.nhm.ac.uk/our-
science/collections/zoology-collections/bird-skin-collections/bird-skin-collection-hms-bea
gle.html. Accessed 31 Aug 2019
24. American Psychiatric Association: Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th
edn. American Psychiatric Association, Arlington, VA (2013)
25. Herring, S.: Collyer Curiosa: a brief history of hoarding. Criticism 53(2), 159–188 (2011)
26. Manlansan IV, M.F.: The ‘Stuff’ of archives: mess, migration, and queer Lives. Radical Hist.
Rev. 120, 94–107 (2014)

Our Themes on Abduction in Human
Reasoning: A Synopsis
Emmanuelle-Anna Dietz Saldanha, Steffen Hölldobler,
and Luís Moniz Pereira
Abstract Psychological experiments have shown that humans do not reason accord-
ing to classical logic. Therefore, we might argue that logic-based approaches in gen-
eral are not suitable for modeling human reasoning. Yet, we take a different view
and are convinced that logic can help us as an underlying formalization of a cogni-
tive theory, but claim rather that classical logic is not adequate for this purpose. In
this chapter we investigate abduction and its link to human reasoning. In particular
we discuss three different variations we have explored and show how they can be
adequately modeled within a novel computational and integrated, cognitive theory,
the Weak Completion Semantics.
1
Introduction
Originally, one of the objectives of using logic in artiﬁcial intelligence and knowledge
representation and reasoning was the formalization of human and commonsense
reasoning. During the past decades the original objective shifted out of focus. The
problem description was not speciﬁed adequately, possibly because there was little
or no communication with cognitive scientists. Non-classical logic approaches exist,
The authors are mentioned in alphabetical order.
E.-A. Dietz Saldanha (B) · S. Hölldobler
Faculty of Computer Science, TU Dresden, 01062 Dresden, Germany
e-mail: sh43@posteo.de
S. Hölldobler
e-mail: sh@iccl.tu-dresden.de
S. Hölldobler
North-Caucasus Federal University, Stavropol, Russian Federation
L. M. Pereira
NOVA Laboratory for Computer Science and Informatics, Departamento de Informática,
Faculdade de Ciências e Tecnologia, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, 2829-516 Caparica, Portugal
e-mail: lmp@fct.unl.pt
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2021
J. Shook et al. (eds.), Abduction in Cognition and Action, Studies in Applied
Philosophy, Epistemology and Rational Ethics 59,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-61773-8_14
279

280
E.-A. Dietz Saldanha et al.
however most of them are purely theoretical and not applied to actual human case
studies. Instead, artiﬁcial examples have been constructed, which only show that a
theory works within some very speciﬁc context. But what is the value of a cognitive
theory that has never been evaluated against the conclusions that humans actually
draw?
Taking this observation as a starting point, several human reasoning episodes,
ranging from the suppression and the selection task [8, 9], to spatial, syllogistic [5]
and counterfactual reasoning [6, 7] have been successfully modeled under a new,
computational and integrated, cognitive theory, the Weak Completion Semantics. In
a nutshell, under the Weak Completion Semantics the following steps are taken for a
given human reasoning scenario:
1. Reasoning towards a (logic) program representation.
2. Weakly completing the program.
3. Computing its least model under Łukasiewicz logic.
4. Reasoning with respect to the least model.
5. If necessary, applying abduction.
The Weak Completion Semantics is based on ideas ﬁrst presented in [22, 23]. Unfor-
tunately, these ﬁrst ideas contained a technical bug, which was corrected in [13] by
switching from three-valued Kleene logic [16] to three-valued Łukasiewicz logic
[18]. As shown in [13], each weakly completed program admits a least model which
can be computed as the least ﬁxed point of an appropriate semantic operator. Unsur-
prisingly, it turned out that some human reasoning tasks require abduction and, hence,
the Weak Completion Semantics has been extended with abduction.
In this chapter, we will avoid introducing formal deﬁnitions, and assume the
reader to be familiar with logic and logic programming. The interested reader is
referred to [12, 17]. The goal of this chapter is rather to give the intuitions behind
the different facets that abduction can take within human reasoning. By means of
four episodes of human reasoning, the suppression task, counterfactual reasoning,
contextual reasoning and reasoning with obligation and factual conditionals, we
will show that abductive reasoning is required. Interestingly, a different variation of
abduction applies for each of the four cases in order to be adequately modeled under
the Weak Completion Semantics.
2
The Suppression Task
The suppression task is a famous psychological experiment originally carried out
by Byrne [2] showing that humans suppress previously drawn conclusion if new
information becomes available.
Suppose that participants are told that
if she has an essay to ﬁnish then she will study late in the library

Our Themes on Abduction in Human Reasoning: A Synopsis
281
and that
she will study late in the library.
Then, the subjects are asked whether they are willing to conclude that she has an essay
to write. As Byrne reports, 71% of the subjects are willing to draw this conclusion.
Following [22, 23], the conditional is translated into the program
{library ←essay ∧¬ab1, ab1 ←⊥},
whose weak completion is1
{library ↔essay ∧¬ab1, ab1 ↔⊥},
where essay denotes that she has an essay to ﬁnish and library that she will study late
in the library. ab1 is an abnormality predicate that can deal with possible exceptions
to the rule, and is introduced as needed in the program representation, depending on
the conditional.
The weakly completed program admits a least model under (three-valued)
Łukasiewicz logic,2 where library and essay are mapped to unknown and ab1 is
mapped to false. Adding the fact library ←⊤to the program changes the least
model in that library is now mapped to true, but essay is still unknown. Hence,
we should not add it but rather consider library as an observation that needs to be
supported by an explanation. In the given context, the minimal explanation being
{essay ←⊤}. If added to the program, we obtain the weakly completed program
{library ↔essay ∧¬ab1, essay ↔⊤, ab1 ↔⊥},
whose least model maps library and essay to true and ab1 to false. Reasoning with
respect to this model allows to abductively conclude essay, which most subjects did.
Hypothesis 1 Humans reason abductively.
In another group of the same experiment participants were told:
If she has an essay to ﬁnish, then she will study late in the library.
If she has a textbook to read, then she will study late in the library.
All other information being equal to the previous experiment, the number of subjects
willing to conclude that she has an essay to write drops to 13% [2]. The previously
drawn conclusion is suppressed as soon as the second conditional is given. Modelling
this reasoning episode similarly to before, we obtain the weakly completed program
1One should observe that under completion as deﬁned in [4], essay ↔⊥would be an element of
this set. The Weak Completion Semantics however does not map undeﬁned relations to false but
rather considers them unknown.
2In the sequel, all models are computed with respect to three-valued Łukasiewicz logic where not
explicitly mentioned otherwise.

282
E.-A. Dietz Saldanha et al.
{library ↔(essay ∧¬ab1) ∨(textbook ∧¬ab2), ab1 ↔⊥, ab2 ↔⊥},
where textbook denotes that she has a textbook to read. Considering library again as
an observation to be justiﬁed, there are two minimal explanations, viz. {essay ←⊤}
and {textbook ←⊤}. Reasoning credulously, i.e. when one explanation sufﬁces to
conclude essay, then one would conclude that she has an essay to write. However,
humans do not do this. Their conclusions appear to be modelled adequately when
skeptical abduction is applied.
Hypothesis 2 Humans prefer skeptical over credulous abduction.
As shown in [8, 14], all twelve cases of the suppression task can be adequately
modelled under the Weak Completion Semantics. For six of these cases, skeptical
abduction is required.
3
Counterfactual Reasoning
Consider the following scenario [1]: President Kennedy was killed. There was a
lengthy investigation about whether Oswald or somebody else shot the president. In
the end, it was determined that Oswald did it. Which of the following conditionals
do humans accept easily?
If Kennedy is dead and Oswald did not shoot Kennedy then someone else did.
If Oswald had not shot Kennedy then someone else would have.
According to [1], humans accept the former, but reject the latter conditional.
In this case, the background knowledge is encoded in the program
{ kennedy ←oswald ∧¬abo,
abo ←⊥,
kennedy ←someone_else ∧¬abs,
abs ←⊥,
oswald ←⊤},
where kennedy denotes that Kennedy was killed, oswald denotes Oswald shot,
someone_else denotes somebody else shot, and abo as well as abs are introduced
abnormality predicates. As the weak completion of this program we obtain
{ kennedy ↔(oswald ∧¬abo) ∨(someone_else ∧¬abs),
abo ↔⊥,
abs ↔⊥,
oswald ↔⊤
},
whose least model maps oswald and kennedy to true and abo and abs to false.
The antecedent ¬oswald of the second conditional is false in this least model.
Hence, the conditional is a counterfactual. In order to evaluate this counterfactual we
must revise the background knowledge. The Weak Completion Semantics does this
in a straightforward and minimal way by replacing the positive fact oswald ←⊤
with the negative assumption oswald ←⊥in the program. Consequently, the least
model of the weakly completed modiﬁed program maps oswald, abo and abs to false

Our Themes on Abduction in Human Reasoning: A Synopsis
283
and kennedy to unknown. If we evaluate the second conditional with respect to this
least model we ﬁnd that the antecedent ¬oswald of the conditional is true, whereas
its consequence kennedy is unknown. Thus, the conditional itself is evaluated as
unknown.
If we evaluate the ﬁrst conditional with respect to the least model of the weak
completion of the original program, then its antecedent kennedy ∧¬oswald is also
false as the literal ¬oswald is mapped to false. If the original program is revised as
before, then ¬oswald is mapped to true, but now kennedy is unknown with respect to
the least model of the weakly completed modiﬁed program. Hence, the antecedent
kennedy ∧¬oswald is unknown. However, kennedy can be explained by abduction.
The only minimal explanation is {someone_else ←⊤}. Adding this explanation to
the revised program and weakly completing it, we obtain
{ kennedy ↔(oswald ∧¬abo) ∨(someone_else ∧¬abs),
abo ↔⊥,
abs ↔⊥,
oswald ↔⊥
someone_else ↔⊤},
whose least model maps someone_else and kennedy to true and oswald, abo and
abs to false. Under this model the antecedent kennedy ∧¬oswald as well as the
consequent someone_else of the ﬁrst conditional are mapped to true. Consequently,
the conditional itself is evaluated to true.
Hypothesis 3 If needed, humans minimally revise their background knowledge
before applying abduction.
Various counterfactual reasoning scenarios, such as Pearl’s ﬁring squad sce-
nario [19] and Byrne’s forest ﬁre scenario [3] can also be adequately modeled by
applying minimal revision followed by abduction under the Weak Completion Seman-
tics, as detailed in [7].
4
Contextual Reasoning
How can we prefer explanations that explain the normal cases to those explanations
that explain the exceptional cases? How can we express that some explanations have
to be considered only if there is some evidence for considering the exception cases?
We want to avoid having to consider all explanations if there is no evidence at all
for considering exception cases. On the other hand, we don’t want to state that all
exception cases are false.
Let us consider the famous Tweety example from [20] which is as follows:
Birds usually ﬂy. Tweety and Jerry are birds.
According to [20], if nothing else is known about Tweety and Jerry, then we can
deduce that both can ﬂy.
This scenario can be easily modeled in the Weak Completion Semantics. The
background knowledge is encoded in the program

284
E.-A. Dietz Saldanha et al.
{ﬂy(X) ←bird(X) ∧¬ab(X), ab(X) ←⊥, bird(tweety) ←⊤, bird(jerry) ←⊤},
where X a variable, ﬂy(X) denotes that X can ﬂy, bird(X) that X is a bird and ab(X)
is an abnormality predicate. The corresponding ground program is
{ ﬂy(tweety) ←bird(tweety) ∧¬ab(tweety), ab(tweety) ←⊥, bird(tweety) ←⊤,
ﬂy(jerry) ←bird(jerry) ∧¬ab(jerry),
ab(jerry) ←⊥,
bird(jerry) ←⊤
}.
Weakly completing this program we obtain
{ ﬂy(tweety) ↔bird(tweety) ∧¬ab(tweety), ab(tweety) ↔⊥, bird(tweety) ↔⊤,
ﬂy(jerry) ↔bird(jerry) ∧¬ab(jerry),
ab(jerry) ↔⊥,
bird(jerry) ↔⊤
}.
whose least model maps bird(tweety), bird(jerry), ﬂy(tweety) and ﬂy(jerry) to true
and ab(tweety) as well as ab(jerry) to false. Reasoning with respect to this least
model we conclude that Tweety and Jerry can ﬂy.
Suppose we observe
Jerry does not ﬂy.
This observation cannot be explained in the usual abductive framework as speciﬁed
in [15]. In such a framework the set of abducibles is deﬁned to be the set of undeﬁned
relations with respect to the given program, where a relation or ground atom A is
said to be undeﬁned given a program if (the ground instance of) the program does
not contain a rule of the form A ←Body, where Body is a conjunction of literals.
In the program above all relations (ﬂy(jerry), ﬂy(tweety), bird(jerry), bird(tweety),
ab(jerry), ab(tweety)) are deﬁned.
However, under the Weak Completion Semantics, negative assumptions like
ab(jerry) ←⊥can be defeated by positive facts like ab(jerry) ←⊤. The weak com-
pletion of a negative assumption A ←⊥and its defeater A ←⊤is A ↔⊤∨⊥,
which is semantically equivalent to A ↔⊤. We believe that humans may defeat
negative assumptions. To this end we allow defeaters of negative assumption to be
abducibles in an extended abductive framework. Now, the observation Jerry does not
ﬂy can be explained by the minimal explanation {ab(jerry) ←⊤}. In other words,
Jerry does not ﬂy because it is an abnormal bird.
Hypothesis 4 Humans may defeat negative assumptions.
Consider this extended scenario:
Usually birds can ﬂy, but kiwis and penguins cannot.
Tweety and Jerry are birds.
This background information can be encoded by the program
{ ﬂy(X) ←bird(X) ∧¬ab(X),
ab(X) ←kiwi(X),
ab(X) ←penguin(X),
bird(tweety) ←⊤,
bird(jerry) ←⊤
}.

Our Themes on Abduction in Human Reasoning: A Synopsis
285
The corresponding ground program is
{ ﬂy(tweety) ←bird(tweety) ∧¬ab(tweety),
ﬂy(jerry) ←bird(jerry) ∧¬ab(jerry),
ab(tweety) ←kiwi(tweety),
ab(tweety) ←penguin(tweety),
ab(jerry) ←kiwi(jerry),
ab(jerry) ←penguin(jerry),
bird(tweety) ←⊤,
bird(jerry) ←⊤
}.
Weakly completing this program we obtain
{ ﬂy(tweety) ↔bird(tweety) ∧¬ab(tweety),
ﬂy(jerry) ↔bird(jerry) ∧¬ab(jerry),
ab(tweety) ↔kiwi(tweety) ∨penguin(tweety),
ab(jerry) ↔kiwi(jerry) ∨penguin(jerry),
bird(tweety) ↔⊤,
bird(jerry) ↔⊤
}.
whose least model maps bird(jerry) and bird(tweety) to true and all other ground
atoms to unknown.
Suppose we observe
Jerry ﬂies.
This observation can be justiﬁed by the minimal explanation
{kiwi(jerry) ←⊥, penguin(jerry) ←⊥}.
One should observe that both atoms, kiwi(jerry) and penguin(jerry), must be mapped
to false in order to map ab(jerry) to false as well, which is a prerequisite for mapping
ﬂy(jerry) to true. In other words, we need to assume that Jerry is not a kiwi and not
a penguin in order to conclude that Jerry ﬂies.
There are several problems with this approach. Firstly, to the best of our knowl-
edge there are currently 41 known classes of birds which do not ﬂy. Secondly, only
specialists in biology might know these 41 classes. Thirdly, there may be classes of
ﬂightless birds which we are unaware of. Hence, it is unlikely that humans consider
all known exceptions before concluding Jerry ﬂies.
In order to overcome these problems, the Weak Completion Semantics was
extended with a new truth-functional operator ctxt (called context) in [10], whose
meaning is speciﬁed in Table 1. The meaning of ctxt can be understood as a mapping
Table 1 The truth table for ctxt L, where L denotes a literal
L
ctxt L
⊤
⊤
⊥
⊥
U
⊥

286
E.-A. Dietz Saldanha et al.
from three-valuedness to two-valuedness, which allows to locally capture negation
as failure [4] under Weak Completion Semantics. Using the ctxt operator we may
now specify the program for the last Tweety example as
{ ﬂy(X) ←bird(X) ∧¬ab(X),
ab(X) ←ctxt kiwi(X),
ab(X) ←ctxt penguin(X),
bird(tweety) ←⊤,
bird(jerry) ←⊤
}.
The corresponding ground program is
{ ﬂy(tweety) ←bird(tweety) ∧¬ab(tweety),
ﬂy(jerry) ←bird(jerry) ∧¬ab(jerry),
ab(tweety) ←ctxt kiwi(tweety),
ab(tweety) ←ctxt penguin(tweety),
ab(jerry) ←ctxt kiwi(jerry),
ab(jerry) ←ctxt penguin(jerry),
bird(tweety) ←⊤,
bird(jerry) ←⊤
}.
Weakly completing the ground program we obtain
{ ﬂy(tweety) ↔bird(tweety) ∧¬ab(tweety),
ﬂy(jerry) ↔bird(jerry) ∧¬ab(jerry),
ab(tweety) ↔ctxt kiwi(tweety) ∨ctxt penguin(tweety),
ab(jerry) ↔ctxt kiwi(jerry), ∨ctxt penguin(jerry),
bird(tweety) ↔⊤,
bird(jerry) ←⊤
}.
whose
least
model
maps
kiwi(jerry),
kiwi(tweety),
penguin(jerry)
and
penguin(tweety) to unknown, ab(jerry) and ab(tweety) to false (thanks to the ctxt
operator), and bird(jerry) and bird(tweety) as well as ﬂy(jerry) and ﬂy(tweety) to
true. Reasoning with respect to this least model allows to conclude that Jerry ﬂies
by default without even considering the exceptional cases of birds which do not ﬂy.
If we learn, for example, that
Jerry is a penguin,
then the situation changes again. Our background knowledge is extended to
{ ﬂy(X) ←bird(X) ∧¬ab(X),
ab(X) ←ctxt kiwi(X),
ab(X) ←ctxt penguin(X),
bird(tweety) ←⊤,
bird(jerry) ←⊤
penguin(jerry) ←⊤
}.
The least model of the weak completion of this program maps kiwi(jerry),
kiwi(tweety) and penguin(tweety) to unknown and penguin(jerry), bird(jerry) and
bird(tweety) to true. Consequently, ab(jerry) is mapped to true, whereas ab(tweety)
is still mapped to false. Hence, ﬂy(tweety) is mapped to true, whereas ﬂy(jerry) is
mapped to false. Thus, we can conclude that Tweety ﬂies, but Jerry does not ﬂy.

Our Themes on Abduction in Human Reasoning: A Synopsis
287
Let us consider the following characterizations about kiwis and penguins:
If a bird has feathers like hair then it is likely to be a kiwi.
If a bird is black and white then it is likely to be a penguin.
Consequently, let us extend the above program with the following clauses:
{ kiwi(X) ←featherslikeHair(X) ∧¬abk(X),
abk(X) ←⊥,
penguin(X) ←blackAndWhite(X) ∧¬abp(X),
abp(X) ←⊥}.
Let us assume that we observe
Tweety has feathers like hair and cannot ﬂy.
The most plausible explanation in the context of knowing that Tweety has feathers
like hair, is, that Tweety is a kiwi, and not, that Tweety is a penguin.
Hypothesis 5 Humans prefer certain explanations depending on the context.
In order to provide a preference among explanations, [10] provides an extension
for abduction under the WCS, which reﬁnes the notion of strong dependency among
literals in a program. Strong dependency among literals is given when the depen-
dency path is not via a literal within the ctxt operator. Accordingly, only abducibles
that strongly depend on the observation, are those that are allowed to serve as expla-
nations. For the above observation Tweety has feathers like hair, can be explained
by itself, which maps kiwi(tweety) to true and at the same time serves as explanation
for Tweety cannot ﬂy.
5
Obligation Versus Factual Conditionals
This example is taken from [21] with minor modiﬁcations. Consider the background
knowledge:
If it rains then the roofs are wet and she takes her umbrella.
In fact, these are two conditionals with the same antecedent which can be represented
by the program
{wet_roofs ←rain ∧¬abw, abw ←⊥, umbrella ←rain ∧¬abu, abu ←⊥},
where wet_roofs denotes that the roofs are wet, rain denotes that it rains, umbrella
denotes that she takes her umbrella and abw and abu are abnormality predicates.
Weakly completing this program we obtain
{wet_roofs ↔rain ∧¬abw, abw ↔⊥, umbrella ↔rain ∧¬abu, abu ↔⊥},
whose least model maps abw and abu to false and all other atoms to unknown.

288
E.-A. Dietz Saldanha et al.
Given this background knowledge we would like to evaluate the four conditionals
If the roofs are not wet then it did not rain.
If she did not take her umbrella then it did not rain.
If the roofs are wet then it did rain.
If she took her umbrella then it did rain.
To this end we apply minimal revision followed by abduction as presented in Sect. 3.
All conditionals are mapped to true. Because the antecedents of the conditionals are
unknowngiventheleast model of theweakcompletionof thebackgroundknowledge,
abduction is applied yielding the minimal explanation {rain ←⊥} in case of the ﬁrst
and second conditional and {rain ←⊤} in the third and fourth conditional. Hence,
the consequences of the four conditionals will be true.
This is a bit surprising. Consider the ﬁrst two conditionals, where the negative
consequence of the background knowledge is abductively afﬁrmed, i.e. the conse-
quence is denied. It is not clear that given the information that the roofs are not wet,
humans would conclude it did not rain in the same way as they would conclude it did
not rain in case the given information was she did not take her umbrella. A similar
difference holds regarding the third and fourth conditionals, where the consequent
of the background knowledge is conﬁrmed. Given the information that she took her
umbrella, it is again not clear that humans would conclude it did rain in the same
way as they would conclude it did rain given the information that the roofs are wet.
5.1
Obligation and Factual Conditionals
Itappearsthatthetwoconditionalsstatedasbackgroundknowledgeshouldbeseman-
tically interpreted in two different ways. Such a semantic interpretation will be devel-
oped in the remainder of this section. Consider the conditionals
if it rains then the roofs are wet
and
if it rains then she takes her umbrella.
The consequence of the ﬁrst conditional is obligatory. We cannot easily imagine a
case, where the antecedent is true and the consequence is not. On the other hand,
we can easily imagine a situation, where the antecedent of the second conditional is
true and the consequence is not. The consequence of the second conditional is not
causally obligatory. We will call the ﬁrst conditional an obligation conditional and
the second one a factual conditional.
As explained in [3], a conditional whose consequence is denied is more likely to
be evaluated to true if it is an obligation conditional. This happens because for this
type of conditional there is a forbidden or unlikely possibility where antecedent and
not consequent happen together and, in this case, where the consequent is known to
be false, it cannot be the case that the antecedent is true as, otherwise, the forbidden

Our Themes on Abduction in Human Reasoning: A Synopsis
289
possibility is violated. Thus, not antecedent is concluded. Because in the case of
a factual conditional this forbidden possibility does not exist, a conditional whose
consequence is denied should be evaluated as unknown.
Hypothesis 6 Humans may classify conditionals as obligation or factual condition-
als.
This is an informal and pragmatic classiﬁcation. It depends on the background
knowledge and experience of a subject as well as on the context in which a conditional
is stated.
One should observe that the conditional
Birds usually ﬂy
considered in Sect. 4 is often classiﬁed as a factual conditional. For most humans,
its consequence is not obligatory. They can imagine cases, where its antecedent X is
a bird is true and its consequent X can ﬂy is not.
5.2
Necessary and Non-necessary Antecedents
The antecedent of the ﬁrst conditional in the background knowledge is necessary.
The consequent cannot be true unless the antecedent is true. The antecedent of the
second conditional in the background knowledge does not appear to be necessary.
There are many different reasons for taking an umbrella like, for example, that the
sun is shining. The antecedent of the second conditional is non-necessary.
Hypothesis 7 Humans may classify antecedents as necessary or non-necessary.
The classiﬁcation is informal and pragmatic. It depends on the background knowl-
edge and experience of a subject as well as on the context in which the condition is
stated.
5.3
Reasoning with Obligation and Factual Conditionals
Obligation and factual conditionals are represented by programs as before. Thus, the
program representing the background knowledge remains unchanged. However, the
semantics of conditionals is taken into account by modifying the set of abducibles
for a given program. As usual, undeﬁned relations may be abduced. In addition we
allow to abduce expressions of the form A ←⊤if A is the head of a conditional with
non-necessary antecedent. The consequent A may be true even if the antecedent is

290
E.-A. Dietz Saldanha et al.
not true. And we allow to abduce defeaters of abnormalities if the abnormality occurs
in the body of a factual conditional. (One should observe that this is consistent with
the use of defeaters in the examples discussed in Sect. 4.) In our example we obtain
the set
{rain ←⊤, rain ←⊥, abu ←⊤, umbrella ←⊤}
of abducibles.
Given this modiﬁed set of abducibles we may now evaluate the four conditionals
using the principle minimal revision followed by abduction. Evaluating the condi-
tional
if the roofs are not wet then it did not rain
yields the same result as before because the explanation {rain ←⊥} is the only min-
imal explanation for the observation that the roofs are not wet. Hence, the conditional
is true.
Evaluating the conditional
if she did not take her umbrella then it did not rain
we now ﬁnd two minimal explanations for the observation that she did not take her
umbrella, viz. {rain ←⊥} and {abu ←⊤}. If we add the ﬁrst explanation to the
background knowledge, then rain is mapped to false. However, if we add the second
explanation to the background knowledge, then rain remains unknown. Reasoning
skeptically the conditional is evaluated as unknown.
Evaluating the conditional
if the roofs are wet then it did rain
yields the same result as before because the explanation {rain ←⊤} is the only
minimal explanation for the observation that the roofs are wet. Hence, the conditional
is true.
Evaluating the conditional
if she did take her umbrella then it did rain
we now ﬁnd two minimal explanations for the observation that she did take her
umbrella, viz. {rain ←⊤} and {umbrella ←⊤}. If we add the ﬁrst explanation to the
background knowledge, then rain is mapped to true. However, if we add the second
explanation to the background knowledge, then rain remains unknown. Reasoning
skeptically the conditional is evaluated as unknown.
According to this classiﬁcation, [21] can solve the abstract as well as the social
case of the selection task: In the abstract case the conditional is interpreted as a
factual conditional with necessary antecedent and in the social case the conditional
is interpreted as an obligation conditional with non-necessary antecedent.

Our Themes on Abduction in Human Reasoning: A Synopsis
291
6
Conclusions
We have shown that different human reasoning episodes can be adequately modeled
with abductive reasoning. Interestingly, different forms of abduction seem to appear
in the different cases. As exempliﬁed by the suppression task, reasoning within con-
ditionals requires skeptical abduction. On the other hand, when modeling reasoning
withinconditionalsandcounterfactuals,aformofminimalrevisionpriortoabduction
seems to occur. Finally, the last two cases show that the plausibility of explanations
can be determined by the context and by the types of conditions and conditionals.
This leads us to two related observations: (1) From a complexity point of view,
computing skeptical conclusions is quite expensive [11, 14], and in case the set of
abducibles become larger, skeptical reasoning appears to be infeasible. (2) From
a cognitive perspective, it does not seem adequate that humans consider all expla-
nations as equally plausible, but rather, that they only consider a relevant subset
bounded by the context, other observations and the type of conditional.
In order to investigate how these explanations have to be bounded, we will need
to know more about how humans reason. In general, we need ﬁndings from other
psychological experiments that can tell us whether the underlying assumptions of the
Weak Completion Semantics are adequate. In particular, whether humans do always
prefer skeptical over credulous abduction and how exactly do they apply revision
when reasoning about counterfactuals.
From our perspective the following questions are desirably worth evaluating.
• Do humans reason with multi-valued logics and, if they do, which multi-valued
logic are they using? Can an answer ’I don’t know’ be qualiﬁed as a truth value
assignment or is it a meta-remark?
• What do we have to tell humans such that they fully understand the background
information?
• Do humans apply abduction and/or revision if the condition of a conditional is
unknown and, if they apply both, do they prefer one over the other? Do they prefer
skeptical over credulous abduction? Do they prefer minimal revisions?
• How important is the order in which multiple conditions of a conditional are
considered?
• Do humans consider abduction and/or revision steps that turn an indicative con-
ditional into a subjunctive one?
We surmise that humans do reason with a third truth value; we have shown that
the Suppression and the Selection Tasks can be adequately modeled under Weak
Completion Semantics and, moreover, in these tasks skeptical abduction had to be
applied [8]. However, we also believe that they only consider certain explanations
as plausible. These are determined by the context, the additional observations and
the type of conditional in consideration. Finally, we venture that minimal revision
followed by abduction are applied if the conditions of a conditional are unknown.
Acknowledgements Luís Moniz Pereira acknowledges support from FCT/MEC NOVA LINCS
PEst UID/CEC/04516/2019.

292
E.-A. Dietz Saldanha et al.
References
1. Adams, E.W.: Subjunctive and indicative conditionals. Found. Lang. 6(1), 89–94 (1970)
2. Byrne, R.M.J.: Suppressing valid inferences with conditionals. Cognition 31, 61–83 (1989)
3. Byrne, R.M.J.: The Rational Imagination: How People Create Alternatives to Reality. MIT
Press, Cambridge, MA, USA (2007)
4. Clark, K.L.: Negation as failure. In: Gallaire, H., Minker, J. (eds.) Logic and Data Bases, vol.
1, pp. 293–322. Plenum Press, New York, NY (1978)
5. Costa, A., Dietz Saldanha, E.-A., Hölldobler, S., Ragni, M.: A computational logic approach to
human syllogistic reasoning. In: Gunzelmann, G., Howes, A., Tenbrink, T., Davelaar, E.J. (eds.)
Proceedings of the 39th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (CogSci 2017),
pp. 883–888. Cognitive Science Society, Austin, TX (2017)
6. Dietz, E.-A., Hölldobler, S., Höps, R.: A computational logic approach to human spatial reason-
ing. In: IEEE Symposium Series on Computational Intelligence (SSCI 2015), pp. 1627–1634.
IEEE (2015)
7. Dietz, E.-A., Hölldobler, S., Pereira, L.M.: On conditionals. In: Gottlob, G., Sutcliffe, G.,
Voronkov, A. (eds.) Global Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (GCAI). Epic Series in Com-
puting. EasyChair (2015)
8. Dietz, E.-A., Hölldobler, S., Ragni, M.: A computational logic approach to the suppression task.
In: Miyake, N., Peebles, D., Cooper, R.P. (eds.) Proceedings of the 34th Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society, pp. 1500–1505. Cognitive Science Society (2012)
9. Dietz, E.-A., Hölldobler, S., Ragni, M.: A computational logic approach to the abstract and
the social case of the selection task. In: Proceedings of the 11th International Symposium on
Logical Formalizations of Commonsense Reasoning (COMMONSENSE) (2013)
10. Dietz Saldanha, E.-A., Hölldobler, S., Pereira, L.M.: Contextual reasoning: usually birds can
abductively ﬂy. In: Proceedings of 14th International Conference on Logic Programming and
Nonmonotonic Reasoning (LPNMR), pp. 64–77. Springer (2017)
11. Dietz Saldanha, E.-A., Hölldobler, S., Philipp, T.: Contextual abduction and its complexity
issues. In: Proceedings of the 4th International Workshop on Defeasible and Ampliative Rea-
soning (DARe) co-located with the 14th International Conference on Logic Programming and
Nonmonotonic Reasoning (LPNMR). CEUR Workshop Proceedings, vol. 1872, pp. 58–70.
CEUR-WS.org (2017)
12. Hölldobler, S.: Logik und Logikprogrammierung 1: Grundlagen. Kolleg Synchron, Synchron
(2009)
13. Hölldobler, S., Kencana Ramli, C.D.P.: Logics and networks for human reasoning. In: Alippi,
C., Polycarpou, M.M., Panayiotou, C.G., Ellinas, G. (eds.) International Conference on Arti-
ﬁcial Neural Networks (ICANN), Part II. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 5769, pp.
85—94. Springer, Heidelberg (2009)
14. Hölldobler, S., Philipp, T., Wernhard, C.: An abductive model for human reasoning. Logical
Formalizations of Commonsense Reasoning (Commonsense 2011). AAAI Spring Symposium
Series Technical Reports, pp. 135–138. Cambridge, MA (2011)
15. Kakas, A., Kowalski, R., Toni, F.: Abductive logic programming. J. Logic Comput. 2(6), 719–
770 (1992)
16. Kleene, S.C.: Introduction to Metamathematics. North-Holland, Amsterdam (1952)
17. Lloyd, J.W.: Foundations of Logic Programming. Springer, New York, NY, USA (1984)
18. Łukasiewicz, J.: O logice trójwarto´sciowej. Ruch Filozoﬁczny 5, 169–171 (1920). English
translation: On three-valued logic. In: Łukasiewicz, J., Borkowski, L. (eds.) Selected Works,
pp. 87–88. North Holland, Amsterdam (1990)
19. Pearl, Judea: Causality: Models, Reasoning, and Inference. Cambridge University Press, New
York, USA (2000)
20. Reiter, Raymond: A logic for default reasoning. Artif. Intell. 13(1–2), 81–132 (1980)

Our Themes on Abduction in Human Reasoning: A Synopsis
293
21. Dietz Saldanha, E.-A., Hölldobler, S., Rocha, I.L.: Obligation versus factual conditionals under
the weak completion semantics. In: Hölldobler, S., Malikov, A., Wernhard, C. (eds.) YSIP2—
Proceedings of the Second Young Scientist’s International Workshop on Trends in Information
Processing, Dombai, Russian Federation, 16–20 May 2017. CEUR Workshop Proceedings,
vol. 1837, pp. 55–64. CEUR-WS.org (2017)
22. Stenning, K., van Lambalgen, M.: Semantic interpretation as computation in nonmonotonic
logic: the real meaning of the suppression task. Cogn Sci 6(29), 916–960 (2005)
23. Stenning, K., van Lambalgen, M.: Human Reasoning and Cognitive Science. A Bradford Book
(2008)

