Chapter 5 
The Epistemological and Ideological Stakes 
of Literary Darwinism 
Alexandre Gefen 
A. Gefen (✉) 
CNRS, Paris, France 
Université Sorbonne-Nouvelle-ENS, Paris, France 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2023 
A. du Crest et al. (eds.), Evolutionary Thinking Across Disciplines, Synthese Library 
478, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-33358-3_5
Abstract Proposing to produce “new humanities,” the literary Darwinists afﬁrm the 
failure of the humanities in the face of modern scientiﬁc demands. Literary Darwin-
ism promises to naturalize literary aesthetic practices, both poetry and narrative. It 
justiﬁes the human need to produce ﬁction and proposes to interpret its contents. By 
confronting cultural studies head-on, as well as previous paradigms, from psycho-
analysis to historicism, evolutionary theorists have opposed postures defending the 
insularity of art and the differential character of artistic practices. Such a position has 
been exposed to virulent criticisms (reductionism, conservatism, utilitarianism, 
essentialism, scientism, etc.) to which I would like to return, as they seem to me to 
hinder a serene examination of the disciplinary proposals put forward, in all their 
richness and epistemological ambitions. 
The cognitive sciences constitute a scientiﬁc domain rather than a single science. 
Originally organized according to a triad constituted by experimental psychology, 
neuroscience and information theory, they now deploy a variety of levels of analysis 
and ﬁelds of expertise, whether they are interested in the molecular, cellular, 
neuronal, behavioral, social or even anthropological supports of human cognition. 
Placed in a very particular position within the sociology of science, since they are 
characterized both by their internal heterogeneity and by the ubiquity of their 
questions, the cognitive sciences have been accused of various evils (positivism, 
dualism, formalism), and, in reaction, have recently developed in the direction of the 
analysis of complex phenomena and in original orientations that make them much 
more than a description of cerebral functioning: embodied cognition, affective 
sciences, social cognition or shared cognition. Starting from the idea that all the 
human facts, including the facts of imagination, are included in a process of 
evolution, the evolutionist conception of the aesthetic mechanisms consists in 
putting aside the metaphysical, sociological, economic, formal, psychological
77

interpretations (in the non-evolutionist sense of the term), to wonder in what the 
aesthetic representations illustrate, exemplify or model the play of biological forces 
“hard-wired” (Max, 2005): the survival, the reproduction and the expansion of the 
species, the competition and the cooperation between the men, the families and the 
communities, the kinship, the social afﬁliation, the efforts to acquire resources and 
inﬂuence, the domination, the aggression, ﬁnally the need of imagination (Carroll, 
2011b: 30). To think with evolutionary psychology is also to ask how the production 
of aesthetic objects—man, says Jonathan Gottschall, a great ﬁgure of this emerging 
discipline, is “a storytelling animal” (Gottschall, 2012a)—participates in the nature 
of man as a species and in his evolution, whether it is a question of explaining the 
aesthetic aptitudes as a parasitic biological competence, as an elaborated aptitude of 
adaptation to an environment, or still, as Jean-Marie Schaeffer does, as an analogue 
of the mechanisms of optimization of the choice of the partner in the sexual 
reproduction (Schaeffer, 2009).
78
A. Gefen
The evolutionary paradigm offers a theory that is both very simple and powerful 
in its principles, much less technical and much more powerfully heuristic than 
literary neuroscience; it is, moreover, and I will come back to this, very heavy 
with implications, as optimistic as they are troubling, as to the place of culture and 
artistic practice in our societies, and as to that of the humanities in the map of 
knowledge and the academy: conceived as an indispensable natural adaptive capac-
ity, literature becomes inseparable from man’s humanity, it acquires a function and 
therefore an indisputable legitimacy. If, after a nineteenth century marked by history, 
a twentieth century marked by the triumph of linguistic knowledge, it is to a 
cognitivist twenty-ﬁrst century that we will be confronted, and it is in my opinion 
ﬁrst of all with evolutionary psychology that literary criticism and theory will have to 
dialogue. 
5.1 
Epistemological Situation of Evolutionary Psychology 
Before returning to these theses, I would like to make a few general remarks of an 
epistemological nature, without which it seems difﬁcult to understand the place of 
these theories and which have to do with the epistemological status of the cognitive 
sciences and of evolutionary psychology in general. Cognitive evolutionism is in 
fact part of both philosophical naturalism and scientiﬁc positivism: the ultimate 
substratum of mental facts is physical, natural, and the ultimate determinisms are 
genetic. The theoretical anchorage of understanding of our knowledge, its founda-
tion, must be that of human cognition, as a natural phenomenon explicable in ﬁne by 
the sciences, without recourse to external metaphysical or linguistic models: we are 
in the framework of what Quine calls a “naturalized epistemology”, to which it 
would be permitted to employ “the resources of natural science” (Quine, 1969b: 90). 
In this total Spinozism, which refers to a form of critical materialism (which, in a 
sense, is the equivalent for our generation of post-war Marxism) (Guerin et al., 2010: 
146), there is only a strictly biological substratum to mental facts, and cerebral

evolutions are determined by mechanisms proper to the augmented evolution of 
Mendelian theory: random individual variation, environmental pressure, genetic 
selection and transmission of optimal adaptive characteristics. Here, consciousness, 
religion as well as literature are products of neuronal evolution governed by the need 
to master a complex and dynamic human environment—unlike instinctual behaviors 
or a simple adaptation to a ﬁxed and repeated environment, attributed to Homo 
sapiens: the characteristic of man as a species is cognitive ﬂuidity and neuronal 
plasticity (Mithen, 1996). 
5
The Epistemological and Ideological Stakes of Literary Darwinism
79
The consequences of such a movement of “naturalization of the human being” 
(Lageira, 2012: 50) are considerable and it is important to specify them. First of all, 
we should note that this naturalization of aesthetics is not comparable to a return of 
“psychologism” in the traditional sense, or to the theory of an evolution of literature 
in the sense of Brunetière (who, as we remember, applied the Darwinian model to the 
logic of literary genres [Brunetière, 1890; Compagnon, n.d.]). As with Quine, whose 
naturalization of epistemology constitutes a major framework of analysis, we are in 
the framework of a psychology considered “in a non-psychological way” (Laugier, 
2010: 24), that is to say an anti-intentionalist, anti-mentalistic psychology, where 
there is no need to “interpret” private expressions in a supposed abstract “mental 
language” that would have its logic, but simply to classify empirical facts according 
to a deductive scientiﬁc logic. If we take again an opposition posed by Wilhelm 
Dilthey between natural sciences (Naturwissenschaften), producing explanations, 
even predictions, with the help of experimental demonstrations or mathematizable 
reasonings, and human sciences (Geisteswissenschaften), producers of comprehen-
sion, the evolutionary psychology of the literature has vocation to be reintegrated in 
sciences in general and to produce not interpretations, but explanations of aesthetic 
facts. It is a question, when one speaks about the psychology of the art, to found it on 
the empirical observation, even on the experimentation, and to guard against any 
endogenous speech. Some hard theorists like Harold Fromm (Fromm, 2010) are in 
fact close to what is called “eliminative materialism,” represented in particular by 
Daniel Dennett1 —who refers the mental facts to a physiological substratum beyond 
the reach of common sense, including the qualia (subjective effects of our sensations 
and experiences), and Richard Dawkins2 —the inventor of the meme theory, that is to 
say of a conception of the artistic facts and of the culture in general as “foldable 
units, supports of formal elements or stylized contents” (Morizot, 2012: 185), 
subjected to the laws of the natural selection. Without going so far, the “sociobio-
logical” thought to take back a concept very used by the “literary Darwinists”3 tends 
to refute the interpretation (at least the internalizing interpretation), the speculation
1 Dennett is professor of philosophy at Tufts University, where he co-directs the Center for 
Cognitive Studies. On his theory of mental properties, see Dennett, 1991; on his adaptationist 
views, Dennett, 1995; on his atheism, Dennett, 2006. 
2 Dawkins is a biologist and ethologist and Professor Emeritus at New College, Oxford. See 
Dawkins, 1976, 1982, 2006. 
3 Expression coined by the American biologist Edward O. Wilson. See Max, 2005.

on the particular and individual value of the works or on the personality of the 
author, in the name of the logic of the very long duration (the starting point of the 
cognitivist literary history, it is not Homer, but the “‘Human Revolution,’ some-
where between 100,000 and 30,000 years ago” [Carroll, 2011b: 26]) or of the 
quantitative logic. For Jonathan Gottschall, “one thing literature offers is data. 
Fast, inexhaustible, cross-cultural and cheap” (quoted in Max, 2005). One can 
think here of the concept of big data in the digital world: the amount of empirically 
available data is so large that its quantitative examination would supplant any theory. 
It is a question, Gottschall continues, of producing “literary hypotheses that make 
testable predictions about empirical reality” (Gottschall, 2008a: 64). It is then a 
question of proposing an empirical description, if not experimental, of the art, 
ambition which reverberates to other disciplines and notably, if one believes Gerald 
Prince, to the post-classical narratology (Prince, 2008). This shift leads to forms of 
description of the literary fact which often tend to refuse any speculation on the 
particular cases, private, in the name of general and massive facts or, when it is 
interested in singular facts, to avoid any aesthetic speculation in favor of a simple 
description of interactions supposedly governed by the necessities of the species and 
making sense in series. Hence what Carroll considers an epistemological modesty: 
literary texts cannot be “deciphered” in another code, because evolutionary theory 
assumes that texts are cultural tools that operate on ordinary behaviors with ordinary 
language, that they incorporate a “folk understanding of human nature” (Carroll, 
2011b: 110, see 29; Guerin et al., 2010: 146). If “most texts are understood 
reasonably well at the level of common language and common knowledge,” they 
must therefore be interpreted through common language (Carroll, 2011b: 29). 
Darwinians, unlike poststructuralists, therefore forbid the use of “prefabricated 
sign systems” in which they would translate the content of texts (29). In the same 
way that we try to avoid what we could call among the Wittgensteinians the illusion 
of interiority, we are going to avoid what Quine called “the museum myth” of 
interpretation (Quine, 1969a: 27 ff.) and the idea that meaning is part of a discourse 
that goes beyond the data we have to speak about language, by reinscribing on the 
contrary in natural behavioral determinisms the textual representations, which have 
neither mental substance, nor mechanics of their own (Laugier, 1992: 93).
80
A. Gefen
Another consequence of this epistemological position is that there would be no 
more formal logic or speciﬁc historicity to symbolic productions than ontological or 
even functional autonomy of literature, which loses all speciﬁcity. There is no more 
reason to circumscribe an “empire within an empire,” and, to say it with another 
vocabulary, the cognitive evolutionism integrates itself to a general paradigm that 
Jean-Marie Schaeffer qualiﬁes of “end of human exception.” It consists in refusing 
any anthropocentric, teleological or essentialist conception of man (Schaeffer, 2007: 
185–200), in order to examine the so-called “humanity”  “in the light of the con-
straints that govern it as a biological hope” (201). Let us note in passing that for 
Schaeffer, as for all the theorists of evolutionism, there is no opposition between 
cultural order and natural order, since culture is a “natural” attribute of the human 
species; it is on the contrary a question of admitting the existence and of showing the 
sense of the interactions between biological dispositions and cultural dispositions—

what is called the genetic-cultural coevolution (341–343)—or between resources 
and collective constraints, on the one hand, and particular individual aptitudes, on 
the other hand (249). It should be noted here that this anti-essentialism is to be 
distinguished from historicism in the traditional sense of the term as well as from the 
philosophies of existence: if man has no essence, it is in so far as he is an animal, a 
biological and genetically modellable being, constituting lineages in constant evo-
lution, and not in so far as he transcends by his freedom his biological identity 
(198–199). It is thus a question of not seeking the ultimate reasons of the symbolic 
textual productions in the cultural standards and their determinations, but in a 
“human nature” of genetic order which includes the culture. One sees here the 
power of disruption of these theories: it is by the natural adaptation that we must 
account for the ontology of the representations, it is by it that the link between 
literature and reality is made. Joseph Carroll, leaning on the ethologist Konrad 
Lorenz, thus afﬁrms that “the human senses and the human mind have access to 
reality because they have evolved in adaptive relation to a physical and social 
environment about which the organism urgently needs to acquire information” 
(Carroll, 2011b: 20). 
5
The Epistemological and Ideological Stakes of Literary Darwinism
81
5.2 
The Debate on the Adaptive Function of Literature 
The ﬁrst and perhaps most interesting debate concerns the functions of literature 
conceived as a response to a need for adaptation. Several theories have been 
proposed in response to the paradox posed by the emergence of art among properly 
human activities: how is it that the human species has spent so much time on useless 
and altruistic activities such as ﬁction, instead of hunting and reproducing? 
According to Gottschall (2004: 12), the will to propose a non-metaphysical expla-
nation to the necessity of art has attracted many eminent evolutionists, who see in the 
production and consumption of art either an adaptive result of natural selection 
(Wilson, 1998; Tooby & Cosmides, 2001), or an adaptive result of sexual selection 
(Miller, 2000) or a non-adaptive by-product (Pinker, 1997a, b; Buss, 1999: 
407–410) of this same sexual selection. This debate between three possible expla-
nations of the human artistic fact can be found in most of the typologies proposed by 
evolutionists, in Carroll (2011b:  20–29, 49–53) as well as in Brian Boyd (2005), 
who opposes a conception of art as adaptive attention, another of art as a by-product 
of evolution and a last one making art a mechanism directly derived from the 
processes of sexual selection (sexually selected).

82
A. Gefen
5.2.1 
Theory of Enjoyment, in Other Words of Art 
as a Parasitic Activity 
Let’s start with the theory of art as a by-product, sometimes called the theory of art as 
an spandrel.4 For Steven Pinker (1997a, b, 2007; see Mellmann, 2011: 315–316), art 
“presses” our pleasure buttons, designed for other purposes. It would be analogous 
to our need to consume pornography whereas our needs are only reproductive, 
except that the pressed buttons are not those of the sexual activity. Hence the 
image of cheesecake, a pastry elaborated to titillate the sensitive points of our mental 
faculties: we like cheesecake because we have developed not a taste for it as such, 
but circuits that trigger in us a ﬂow of pleasure when we experience the sweetness of 
a ripe fruit, the creamy sensation in the mouth of fats and oils, the freshness of water. 
“Cheesecake packs a sensual wallop unlike anything in the natural world because it 
is a brew of megadoses of agreeable stimuli which we concocted for the express 
purpose of pressing our pleasure buttons. Pornography is another pleasure technol-
ogy. At least to some extent, art may be a third” (Pinker, 1997a, b: 524–525; see the 
review by Carroll, 1998). One sees here the departure made between the necessary 
capacities, as the sociality and the language, and the optional capacities as the 
imagination. Art would be thus, like masturbation, the decoupling of a hardware 
faculty of the man in a different software, to borrow frequent metaphors among the 
cognitivists. This position, which can make one smile, has been frequently criticized, 
by Brian Boyd in particular (2005: 155 ff.), who alleges on the one hand that it 
totally neglects the public and thus the engagement in art in the form of a social 
pressure and, on the other hand, that it forgets to what extent art can be an effort). As 
debatable as it is, this archaeology of the art is implicitly summoned every time we 
make of a genre or an artistic practice the transposition, the autonomization or the 
extension of instinctual or natural pre-coded functions. One will ﬁnd it, for example, 
in the concept of “exaptation” proposed by Morizot as a possible analogy to 
understand the way in which the art is born, that is to say the use of an organ for 
another use that the biologically determined one, theory that he calls indirect and for 
which “the result,” in other words the artistic fact, “is not selected for itself, but as a 
correlate of a more fundamental reason” (Morizot, 2012: 185). 
4 “Gould and Lewontin have proposed a famous analogy between Gothic architecture and evolu-
tionary logic, both of which involve reorientation phenomena; just as the small bones of the inner 
ear of vertebrates have their origin in the jaw of reptilians although they fulﬁll a completely different 
function, the triangular and curvilinear spaces (pendentives or spandrels) between an ogive and a 
pillar or a dome cannot be avoided as soon as one adopts the gothic style, but the mosaicists of San 
Marco were able to transform these inconvenient areas into sumptuous decorative supports that 
were not originally intended,” explains Morizot, 2012: 185.

5
The Epistemological and Ideological Stakes of Literary Darwinism
83
5.2.2 
The Theory of Expensive Signals 
The conception of art as a mechanism directly derived from the processes of sexual 
selection is based on a concept introduced by Darwin in The Descent of the Species 
(1871), “to justify the existence of paradoxical forms of evolution which at ﬁrst sight 
seem like handicaps (the tail of the peacock, the antlers of the deer, etc.). The idea is 
that these disproportionate appendages do not function for direct adaptation (like 
camouﬂage), but as a manifestation of potential reproductive superiority” (Morizot, 
2012: 185). This idea, enriched by the contributions of Mendelian genetics, can be 
found in what is called the “theory of costly signals,” imported by Jean-Marie 
Schaeffer in a 1997 article and then in a 2009 book: “The central hypothesis of the 
theory of costly signals is that the cost or beneﬁt (for the signaler) of this type of 
disabling signal depends on the actual qualities of the sender. The greater these 
qualities are, the less costly the signal is for him; the smaller they are, the greater the 
cost.” (Schaeffer, 2009: 35) In other words, to quote Schaeffer again, “a costly signal 
is a signal that cannot be simulated. If one is able to produce it, it is because one 
actually possesses the qualities that it signals, because it is precisely these qualities 
that make its production possible” (35). The analogy between costly signals and 
artistic processes is thus largely due to the fact that “the main stake in the commu-
nication of the costly signal is the very existence of this signal beyond anything to 
which it may otherwise refer” (Schaeffer, 2012: 30), we are here close to what 
Wittgenstein suggested when he afﬁrmed that the work of art “does not want to 
transmit something else, but only itself” (Schaeffer, 2009: 47): whether it is a 
question of sexual selection or of works of art, costly signals have a metasignaletic 
function. Thus, the sex parade of the cradle bird “functions neither as a simple 
artifactual construction nor as a simple interaction by hetero-referential signals, but 
within a self-referential dynamic: the cradle is referred to itself as a decorated 
structure that materializes the ﬁtness of the male, the dance and the calls are self-
presentations that both signal and enact its value. This logic is that of the work of art” 
(47–48). Better, Schaeffer suggests that the contexts of emergence are similar: 
“What we call art, they are the facts of costly signaling, or rather their crystallization 
in the form of a certain number of typical productions related transculturally (dances, 
ornaments, sculptures, verbal productions, pictorial representations, etc.) which 
answer these situations of problematic communication. And what we call aesthetic 
relation is nothing else than a reception itself costly of these signals” (Schaeffer, 
2012: 31). The art would be a possible answer to our need of reﬂexivity in complex 
or “problematic” existential or social situations, by distant derivation of functionally 
different adaptive mechanisms. It is undoubtedly that the recourse of Schaeffer to the 
animal model is worth less as an operational explanatory framework than as a 
reminder of the uniﬁed epistemological order in which it falls to us to think the 
aesthetic fact.

84
A. Gefen
5.2.3 
Theories of Adaptive Gain 
The theories that make of art an adaptive disposition with direct beneﬁts for the 
human 
species 
proceed 
from 
a 
functionalist 
thought 
of 
the 
aesthetic 
defunctionalization: they share the idea that the detour of the immediate action 
(of enjoyment, of sexual reproduction) favors capacities of complex organization 
of the behaviors and the interrelations. We could, in my opinion, divide them 
between two big currents, which have in common to have largely reﬂected on the 
adaptive role of the ﬁction. To continue the analysis of Boyd who, in his thought of 
art as “adaptive” attention (Boyd, 2005: 151 ff.), underlines, on the one hand, a 
dimension of adaptation and social regulation, and on the other hand, a more general 
capacity of mental organization (167) offered by the ﬁctional immersion in possible 
worlds, we could differentiate the theories centered on the social role and the theories 
centered on the cognitive role of ﬁction. 
5.2.4 
Literature as a Behavioral Adaptation Capacity 
It is a question of making ﬁction, in a more or less directly behaviorist perspective, a 
tool of adaptation and regulation of social behaviors. The capacities of social 
adaptation induced by art are not then directly linked to the selection of the partner, 
but to the good functioning of the society: the education to others and more largely 
the simulation of “a variety of social relationship, behaviors, and consequences” 
(Sugiyama, 2005: 188) allowed by art allow a better knowledge of the human 
environment by the exercise of the anticipation and the changes of mental roles. 
The art and in particular the representative art, allows the species to produce and to 
transmit a general knowledge on itself, knowledge whose determining speciﬁcities 
are to be concrete, affective, incarnated, and thus to supplement more abstract orders 
of knowledge. This “knowledge-how”, to use Ryle’s formula (Gefen, 2010), has not 
only the strength to produce regulating models of reference and to put on the table 
normative conﬂicts that are common in evolved societies (ﬁdelity to the model of 
desire vs. ﬁdelity to the idea of family, obedience to the state vs. preservation of the 
family unit, etc.), but also to explore new ways of thinking and acting.), but also to 
explore particular cases, even atypical, amoral or traumatic situations on which it 
informs the group (it is the exemplarity of the inexemplarity [Gefen, 2007]). 
One cannot live without a theory of how another’s mind works, these philoso-
phers argue, a profound knowledge that literary ﬁction would stimulate. Not only 
does literature play a role in the way literature allows us to reﬁgure and appropriate 
our experience, as narrativist philosophies such as that of Paul Ricoeur have shown, 
but it would also participate in this fundamental aptitude that is our capacity to 
envisage the psychological structure of others by acquiring, at least in a summary 
way, a “cartography of the human mind” (mind mapping) and by being able to 
anticipate the reactions of other individuals (mind reading, understanding others).

This form of initiation to the otherness is undoubtedly close to what the literary 
tradition had named according to the formula of Dorrit Cohn “interior transparency” 
(Cohn, 1978), that is to say the postulation of the literature to discover and to explain 
the psychic life by the mediation of ﬁctional interiorities. Literature would equip us 
with cognitive tools of behavioral modelling that allow this form of divination by 
which we ordinarily interact with the minds of others. This perspective explains, 
among other things, why literature gives itself as a recurrent theme the psychological 
portrait or the biographical narrative: such is the framework of many modern plots 
on which evolutionary thought intends to cast an overhanging glance by likening 
them to a form of psychological speculation (Guerin et al., 2010: 149–150; Nettle, 
2005). Alan Palmer connects this work of mind mapping with the games of 
enunciative position in the literature which would put in scene the conscience at 
work in the novel (“in essence, narrative is the description of ﬁctional mental 
functioning” [Palmer, 2004: 12; see 177]), to the proﬁt of a cognition, an action 
and even a form of distributed identity (15): for him as for Mark Turner (1997), the 
human brain considered as an active and plastic system modiﬁed by experience and 
language conceived as an instrument used by separate brains to exert biological 
inﬂuence on others at a distance, to the point of creating a kind of virtual brain of the 
species that exerts a distributed biological inﬂuence. The hypotheses necessarily 
made by the readers, the conjectures, the reﬂections that he has to deploy to analyze 
the situations, the enunciative games of the literature make of the narratives devices 
to understand the springs of action and cognition of the mind. Lisa Zunshine 
continues this reﬂection by adapting it to the analysis of cinema (2008) and, in 
“Style Brings in Mental States”, reﬁnes the “theory of mind” to demonstrate that not 
only the enunciative effects, but the effects of style itself, participate in this work of 
understanding the “sociocognitive complexity” of the world of human societies 
(Zunshine, 2011: 350, 353). Mutatis mutandis, one will ﬁnd an equivalent thought 
in Carroll: art allows the access to a “total cognitive order” (Carroll, 2005: 87) which 
is an added value to the world. He produces an analysis of the “life cycle” (83) with 
the help of literature, allowing the construction of a “cognitive behavioral” frame-
work of reference (92). The notion of collective intelligence seems to me to be 
particularly interesting: it can be found both in Palmer’s work, who thinks largely in 
terms of social cognition (Palmer, 2004), and in Terrence Deacon’s work, who 
afﬁrms that the integration of common histories with the individual histories of 
individuals allows for the construction of a shared world that is essential to the 
species (Deacon, 1997). 
5
The Epistemological and Ideological Stakes of Literary Darwinism
85
5.2.5 
Art as an Added Value 
Another theoretical option consists in underlining less the cognitive gains than the 
existential gains for the species and makes of the ﬁction a mode of resistance to the 
metaphysical difﬁculties (the man is an animal conscious of his own mortality) that 
social (the complexity and the ﬂuidity of the human societies). For Ellen

Dissanayake, Homo Aestheticus (1992), art is a result as fundamental of the evolu-
tion as nutrition, because it gives interest to the ordinary activities of the existence 
and allows to make the difﬁculties of the life more livable. Thanks to art and its 
capacity to instill desire and beauty in the interactions between individuals, the group 
becomes bearable; thanks to it, human activities are not reduced to ﬁnalities such as 
reproduction and the quest for survival, but acquire an aura: art makes human actions 
special, makes them meaningful and memorable. I would tend to think that, in these 
perspectives, just as the work of the form would come from a will to resorb the 
natural asymmetries and roughnesses, the art would be thought as allowing to 
preserve the social harmony. It would not change anything to the human condition, 
but would intervene as therapeutic: it would reinforce the beings, would ensure the 
interior cohesion of the groups, would facilitate our relation to the nature. We ﬁnd 
this problematic in Frederick Crews: “Those of us who embrace Darwinian knowl-
edge without cavil are convinced that all existence is unplanned and therefore quite 
pointless, leaving humanity with the task of rendering its life digniﬁed in moral, 
intellectual, and aesthetic ways scrounged and adjusted from our evolved heritage of 
repertoires. When the gods have been shipped to fairyland to rejoin the Easter 
Bunny, we can direct our awe toward beings who actually deserve it—Shakespeare, 
Rembrandt, Beethoven, Einstein—without cheapening their achievements by ascrib-
ing them to mysterious infusions of spirit” (Crews, 2005: xiii). In other words, with 
the naturalization of the human existence, dies the metaphysical interpretation of the 
art, but is born, in a suppletive way, a conception of the art as compensation or 
supplement of sense. 
86
A. Gefen
5.2.6 
Art as a Form of Empathy 
Another argument could be advanced to explain the advantages of the recourse to the 
ﬁction, it is the idea that the art in general, and in particular of the human detour by 
the representative arts and the ﬁction favors the empathy, conceived here as mode of 
social regulation by emotional transfer. In other words, the aptitude for literature 
would take part of a selection and a valorization of altruism as an indispensable 
mechanism of self-defense of the species, or simply as ﬂuidiﬁcation of the social 
relations. I am thinking here of the often-cited work of psychologists Raymond Mar 
and Keith Oatley on the way in which exercise through ﬁction improves our capacity 
to connect with others (Mar & Oatley, 2005, 2008; Mar et al., 2006, 2009), or of 
Mulligan and Habel’s work (2011) on the capacity of ﬁction to favor the develop-
ment of intersubjective communication capacities and to ﬂuidify the social behavior 
of children. It is a question of valuing literature as a moment of constitution of 
affective communities or as an activation of our capacities for empathy through the 
power of ﬁctional enunciation to lead us to change our position emotionally and 
intellectually. An evolutionist like Gottschall combines these two ideas, that of 
resistance and that of transfer: ﬁction is an exercise of our prosocial capacities. It 
“enhances our ability to understand other people; it promotes a deep morality that

cuts across religious and political creeds” (Gottschall, 2012b). Gottschall is not far 
from Butler or the moral theorists of empathetic role change (the theory of role 
imagination comes from Cavell, in particular), but reinscribes himself in an evolu-
tionary logic where the capacity to adapt to difﬁculty emphasized by Ellen 
Dissanayake is essential: literature provides us with both a stimulating and useful 
access to the interiority of others, but also the illusion of a life that can be lived: “[. . .] 
ﬁction’s happy endings seem to warp our sense of reality. They make us believe in 
a lie: that the world is more just than it actually is. But believing that lie has 
important effects for society—and it may even help explain why humans tell stories 
in the ﬁrst place” (Gottschall, 2012b). Hence, for example, a theorist like William 
Flesch explains that ﬁctions in the world are dominated by retributive justice or 
poetic justice, by this need to maintain in the optimism of the species (Flesch, 2008). 
5
The Epistemological and Ideological Stakes of Literary Darwinism
87
As some works of anthropology of the literature (for example Thomas Pavel in 
The Thought of the novel that shows that even the individualizing and hyper-
speculative reﬂexivity of the literature possesses a provides “a substantial hypothesis 
on the nature and the organization of the human world” to value of axiological 
framework [Pavel, 2003: 46–47]), These works deploy a utilitarian thought of the 
aesthetic behaviors at the same time stimulating and risky, making of the literature a 
tool of regulation and social coordination, proposing to make of the literature not 
only the sharing and the debate of moral values, but the creation of a kind of 
collective self-regulating instinct. 
5.2.7 
Pure Cognitive Gain Theories 
Another form of functionalist consists not in articulating art to direct stakes of 
selection or adaptation, but in underlining how, in a more diffuse way, the aptitude 
of art, and in particular of the narrative forms, to increase our cognitive capacities 
and thus to support our domination of our environment and the aptitude of the human 
space to set up and transmit complex social structures. Based on Marie-Laure Ryan’s 
analysis (Ryan, 2010: 482), we can cite various “inﬂationary” hypotheses that make 
narrative literature a fundamental mental exercise: all memories take a narrative form 
(Roger Schank); humanity developed language to respond to a need to tell stories 
(Mark Turner); narrative constructs reality, identity is a narrative construction and 
narrative teaches us to read the minds of others (Jerome Bruner); experience is not 
the subject of narrative, but is made possible by it (David Herman). The general 
agreement is made around the idea of a mental training: according to Morizot, ﬁction 
is a “breaking in of our cognitive capacities” (Morizot, 2012: 185), and to quote 
Joseph Carroll: “art, music and literature are not merely the products of cognitive 
ﬂuidity. They are important means by which we cultivate and regulate the complex 
cognitive machinery on which our more highly developed functions depend” (Car-
roll, 1998: 481). In other words, because we call in genetics the Baldwin effect, that 
is to say the integration in the instincts and therefore in the genes of learned cultural 
behaviors, nature will select the phenotypes of those who do the best learning and

will encode in the genotypes aptitudes of cerebral organization optimized by the 
exercise, passive or active, of the ﬁction. For this perspective, the human being, in 
order to assure his domination as an alpha species, is confronted with the necessity of 
thinking complex and counter-instinctual actions, of managing situations where he 
overcomes the stimuli, of producing long-term contracts, etc. Original behaviors in 
nature such as technological mastery, post-menopausal survival of females, very 
long gestation, identiﬁcation with extended groups could not be thought of without 
forms of organization of values in time allowed by ﬁction. As a high-level mental 
exercise, narrative ﬁction would favor the mastery of our environment by allowing 
us to inscribe ourselves in extended logics and imaginative adaptations. These 
original conducts would impose a kind of “psychological exile” of the man in the 
nature and would regularly enter in conﬂict with the determinisms that are the 
instincts of reproduction and survival. These conﬂicts between the strategies of the 
reptilian brain and those, richer, of the neocortex, would be at least as present in the 
literary representations as the dialectic of the social forces or the relation of the 
individual to the history. 
88
A. Gefen
Many works reference John Tooby and Leda Cosmides’ seminal article, “Does 
Beauty Build Adapted Minds?” (2001). According to Morizot, these authors “devel-
oped the idea that in neurocognitive adaptation, the organizational mode plays a role 
that is at least as fundamental as the functional mode; it is the mode that favors the 
development of talents, allows their maturation, and tends to signal what would be 
advantageous to pay attention to outside of instrumental reasons. In short, it is not 
beauty that is selected, but certain scenarios of response to types of situation acquire 
an aesthetic signiﬁcance” (Morizot, 2012: 185). In a rather similar way, for Karl 
Eibl, the existence of an “induction instinct,” an “evolved cognitive tool for infor-
mation gathering and experiential learning,” would explain that rhetoric or poetry, 
but also the work on formal symmetries (or asymmetries) or the interrogation on the 
narration and its logics, are indispensable exercises to maintain and select the ﬁtness 
of the individual (Eibl, 2004, 2009, quoted in Mellmann, 2011: 311), and one will 
ﬁnd in Changeux (1994, 2008) other analyses going in the same direction and being 
situated at the crossroads of an archeology of the aesthetic function, reﬂections 
stemming from the experimental psychology and the ﬁrst data stemming from the 
neurosciences. 
H. P. Abbott (2000) or Katja Mellmann (2010) had underlined the intellectual 
productivity of narrativity and its centrality. The latter places it at the center of “a 
complex cultural congregation of innate dispositions” (Mellmann, 2011: 313 n. 41), 
combined with other high-level adaptive capacities, such as those of inducing 
reasoning and attributing causality to facts. Mark Turner goes further by making 
narrativity the very origin of language. For him, “parable is the root of the human 
mind—of thinking, knowing, acting, creating, and plausibly even of speaking” 
(Turner, 1997: 168). For the American theorist, storytelling is indeed at the center 
of three fundamental capacities: telling, projecting, and producing a parable. These 
capacities result from our capacity to put into action what Turner considers as spatial 
scenarios. Literature enriches this capacity by allowing for shifts between conceptual 
orders or changes in spatial point of view. It is therefore necessary to analyze the

stories as a combination of mental spaces (blended spaces [96]), explains Turner 
(characters, level of reality, etc.). These spatial micro-schemas are at the very origin 
of our need and our faculties of expression: on the one hand they produce basic 
grammatical constructions (predication) and on the other hand they provide trans-
positions (an action can be transposed into another order of spatial schemas). For this 
micronarrative thought, each sentence is a microhistory. Against Aristotle, but also 
against Chomsky, Turner refutes the idea that there is a logical structure of language 
underlying it or a cerebral module built by evolution and dedicated to this capacity5 : 
narrativity is not a consequence of the brain’s organization, but its source, a 
hypothesis that makes the one engaged by literary narrative ﬁction prevail over 
any other form of cognitive exercise. 
5
The Epistemological and Ideological Stakes of Literary Darwinism
89
5.3 
The Heuristics of Cognitive Psychology in Practice 
What heuristic model, what type of question is offered to us when evolutionary 
theory is interested in particular texts, in the works themselves, when we do close 
reading? Evolutionary psychology does not intend to limit itself to the analysis of 
the “origins” of Homo narrans and fossilized behaviors, it is not limited to an 
archaeology (to what M. S. Sugiyama [2005: 177] calls a “reverse-engineering” 
functioning of modern ﬁction), but it wants to show how literature and in particular 
ﬁction continues to respond to a demand for adaptation by staging concrete adaptive 
problems, which gives a universal relevance to evolutionary analysis. 
It is in thematic terms that such an explanation can be made: for Joseph Carroll, 
literature produces a “cognitive mapping,” an image of human experience colored by 
subjectivity, a mapping that makes experience intelligible (Carroll, 2011a: 10).6 This 
“mapping” analyzes the deep motivations of Homo sapiens sapiens: education of the 
children, efforts of enrichment, competition and cooperation (the fundamental 
mechanisms of perpetuation and defense of the species)—“the most effective and 
truest works of literature are those that reference or exemplify these basic facts,” 
comments D. T. Max (2005). In literature, cognitivists argue to produce thematic 
analyses, character is deﬁned in terms of agency, setting in terms of milieu, and plot 
in terms of action (Carroll, 2011b: 10). Sugiyama’s recent point (2006/2007) gives 
some idea of the directions taken by literary Darwinists: study of the choice of sexual 
partners in the Anglo-Saxon novelistic corpus (Sugiyama, 1996, 1997; Whissell, 
1996); highlighting of the reproductive concerns at work in adultery, through the 
Arthurian narratives (Nesse, 1995)7 ; deﬁnition of epic literature as a staging of
5 We are close to the criticism addressed by Quine to the “copy theory of language:” see Quine, 
1969a: 27. 
6 The notion of cognitive mapping is developed in another text: Carroll, 1995: 3 ff. 
7 The article is devoted to the story of Guinevere and Lancelot in Chrétien de Troyes, Thomas 
Malory, Tennyson and William Morris.

intrasexual competition, males against males and females against females (Fox, 
1995, 2005; Barash & Barash, 2002, 2005; Gottschall, 2001, 2008b); analysis of 
the behaviors of revolt against the adaptive pressure (Carroll, 2011c); study of 
jealousy and cuckolding as answers to the competition of the dominants in Pushkin 
(Cooke, 1999); quantitative approach of the agonistic structure of the Victorian 
novels (Carroll et al., 2011), etc. It is the whole “life cycle” (Carroll, 2005: 83) 
and the behavioral activities of man determined by the “hierarchical motivational 
structure” of its nature (87): an author (i.e. a particular phenotype8 ) stages a 
simulation where ﬁctitious phenotypes are confronted in various environmental 
contexts with adaptation problems. This system is the same in the character as in 
the writer and the reader: as Tim Horvath notes, among literary Darwinists, “any-
thing that can be said about authors can by deﬁnition also be related to characters in 
some way, and vice versa” (Horvath, 2005), at the risk of underestimating the 
distance that can be taken from biological determinisms, as Mellmann suggests, 
“Literary writers are not compelled to fashion verisimilar (‘mimetic’) representa-
tions” (Mellmann, 2011: 311).9
90
A. Gefen
Let’s take a few speciﬁc examples of these analyses, starting with a 
provocative case: in an essay entitled Madame Bovary’s Ovaries (2005), David 
and Nanelle Barash relate the amorous representations of romance literature to a 
series of adaptive problems: the selection of the best partner, adultery and its stakes 
in genetic terms for the species, the education of children and the optimal choices of 
the family. The novelistic logic of Flaubert’s biographical novel is, within this 
explanatory framework, to stage the adaptive optimization strategy of his epony-
mous character, governed by his ovaries to ﬁnd a better partner than Charles. Let’s 
give another example: Gottschall on Homer in The Rape of Troy defends the idea 
that the Iliad tells us about the ﬁghts of humans returned to their animal nature: 
“Homer shows that men in combat stoop to a nearly quadrupedal level and concern 
themselves only with the animal processes of maintaining and destroying life” 
(Gottschall, 2008b: 162); they are “precocious killer apes who have applied their 
grand technologies and cooperative instincts to traverse broad seas and rob other 
men of all they hold precious: their wealth, their women, their lives” (163); they all 
act unconsciously in accordance with “life’s prime directive: be fruitful and multi-
ply” (163). But for Gottschall, Homer also shows how human beings seek to 
overcome this animality, sometimes succeeding (Achilles returning Hector’s 
body), failing elsewhere (164): in this sense, the epic would be not only a 
thematization, but a real literary thought experiment about the evolutionary capac-
ities of man. The moral issues often placed at the heart of the novel do not escape 
such 
a 
biologizing 
deconstruction, 
as 
William 
Flesch’s 
important 
book
8 See Sugiyama, 2006/2007: “A given story takes a set of people, each with a different phenotype 
(i.e., different personality traits, life experiences, ﬁtness attributes and goals), places them in a 
particular set of historical, cultural, and geographical conditions, then plays out one possible version 
of the interaction of these variables over a certain length of time.” 
9 The criticism is brought against Carroll in Richardson, 2000: 561.

y
Comeuppance (2008), devoted to deserved punishment, costly signals, altruistic 
punishment and other biological components of ﬁction, illustrates. Flesch also 
explains the human attraction to ﬁction through an evolutionary version of social 
game theory. The need for ﬁction comes from the fact that man is a social animal. 
Therefore, on the one hand, it is a matter of treating narrative as “a verisimilitudinous 
record of human cooperation” and, on the other hand, of making the work “an object 
of the kinds of interest that human cooperation requires and rewards” (Flesch, 2008: 
182) “Narratives depict signals” (in the sense of evolutionary theory) “and narratives 
signal” (91). For Flesch, our need for narratives is explained by our need to monitor 
and appropriate forms of reciprocity: by reading, the reader acquires an aptitude 
(“ﬁtness”) for understanding and exchanging in the social relationship, a capacity 
and empathy, the latter understood as an indirect reciprocity that makes each 
individual more interesting and attractive while endowing him or her with a better 
capacity for social interaction. Being able to know and care about a novel manifests 
our ability to engage in altruistic activities. This leads to considerations about the 
value of novels: “We care about the narrative report of what some people do to other 
people because we care about whether they treat them altruistically or selﬁshly” 
(155–156). Altruistic here differs from generous: it is altruistic to punish the other for 
their wrongdoing, as it is selﬁsh to neglect the obligation to punish wrongdoers. In 
sum, we are interested in the novel in what is “prosocial”, revenge, for example, as 
altruistic punishment (Achilles, Hamlet, Batman). Whereas the situation of modern 
literature, that of an art for art’s sake, empowered and breaking with the words and 
values of the tribe, might seem irreducible to such a functionality, because it places at 
the center of the literary scene a marginalized individual, a provocative and revolting 
writer, and the testimony of an irreducible singularity, Flesch very skillfully man-
ages to reintegrate the modern writer, conceived as one who assumes the pain and 
difﬁculty of being aware of the world and who shares this ability through an altruistic 
self-sacriﬁce (147)—to the point of quoting Leiris and his conception of literature as 
a 
bullﬁght 
(143). 
Flesch 
explains 
the 
“aesthetics” 
of 
modernity 
as 
the 
complexiﬁcation and extreme weighting of the signal, and as the place where reﬁned 
and prosocial forms of cooperation are enacted. In the same spirit and taking up this 
theory of “deserved punishment,” Blakey Vermeule analyzes Middlemarch, b  
George Eliot, showing that the genius of the novelist was to build her novel not on 
the good feelings and the logics proper to the recognition, but on the moral darkness 
of the man and his desire to punish the others for their misdeeds (Vermeule, 2011). 
To generalize the thought of evolutionists, our interest in novels is explained not by a 
quest for individual morality, but rather by that of collective morality, which is itself 
overdetermined by the logic of the species, not that of particular individuals. 
According to a paradox already analyzed by Kant, our anti-social aptitudes are 
part of our social existence. We see again the similarities of such a theory with the 
axiological vision of Thomas Pavel in The Thought of the Novel, for whom the novel 
plays the role of a toolbox for solving an axiological problem: the novel “poses 
above all, and with an unparalleled acuteness, the axiological question of whether 
the moral ideal is part of the order of the world [. . .]. In the novel, [. . .] the 
axiological question amounts to asking whether, in order to defend the ideal, man
5
The Epistemological and Ideological Stakes of Literary Darwinism
91

must resist the world, immerse himself in it in order to re-establish the moral order, 
or ﬁnally try to remedy his own fragility, if, in other words, the individual can inhabit 
the world in which he is born (Pavel, 2003: 46–47).
92
A. Gefen
Another track of evolutionary analysis of literary works is an analysis of a 
quantitative nature, illustrating the claimed empiricism of literary Darwinists as 
well as their veriﬁcation method. J. Gottschall in Literature, Science, and a New 
Humanities (2008a: 91 ff.)10 thus starts from an evolutionary hypothesis according 
to which the female protagonists of the stories should defend their offspring rather 
than those of others; they should choose men with wealth or high social status and 
who are physically attractive; they should be less active and less physically heroic 
than their male counterparts (because, in most sexual species, males have risk-taking 
and status-seeking behaviors that expose them to the very clear-cut alternative of 
proliﬁc reproduction and possible death); and ﬁnally, readers should prefer active 
and physically heroic male characters. Gottschall confronts this hypothesis with a 
corpus of 658 tales from different cultures to draw several conclusions that he 
believes are convincing: the female heroine role is generally eccentric to the male 
character’s role, they are mostly young and beautiful, they seek to marry and succeed 
in doing so at the end of the story; they ﬁrst seek the hero’s kindness (prosocial) and 
they then devote themselves to the good and wealth of their kin, but less through 
active physical struggle than their male counterparts. He deduces from his statistics 
empirical universals, which he then uses against feminist analyses that defend on the 
contrary the cultural and purely Western dimension of our representations of 
women: the sexual differences examined by crossing their cultural representation 
are coherent and stable (Gottschall, 2008a: 125) and correspond to what can be 
expected from the behaviors of sexualized mammals. If the American critic defends 
himself from being essentialist or anti-feminist, he refutes the culturalist theories of 
gender as empirically inaccurate, while conceding that the statistically observed 
differences do not deny the possibility of cultural action and plasticity of the species 
in the face of biological determinisms. 
5.4 
Academic and Philosophical Issues of These Emerging 
Disciplines 
Such an analysis sufﬁciently illustrates the stakes of Darwinian interpretations of 
literature. In the American context of cultural studies, they break with the traditional 
culturalist explanatory frameworks of criticism and their ideological undertones, 
since they lead to the reintroduction at the center of reﬂection of the idea of a human 
nature, which is certainly evolving and not predetermined. In the French context, the 
break is made in relation to another dominant critical paradigm, that of formalism, 
which afﬁrms the autonomy of linguistic structures. The issue at stake is ﬁrst of all
10 See the review of this book by Easterlin, 2009.

epistemological, for the Darwinians justify their approach by a certain failure of the 
human sciences in the face of the scientiﬁc requirements in which they declare 
themselves to be inscribed: it would be a question of overcoming the aporias of a 
literary analysis based on linguistic, cultural or psychoanalytical models and its 
prohibitive incapacity to become a tool of empirical prediction, despite the structur-
alist games with white boxes (Gefen, 2006) or Marxist literary teleologies.
5
The Epistemological and Ideological Stakes of Literary Darwinism
93
The idea of a methodological bankruptcy of the traditional humanities which 
would refuse experimentation leads Gottschalll to propose to speak about “new 
humanities” beneﬁting from the contribution of the life sciences to propose empirical 
analyses (Gottschall, 2008a), involving in passing virulent reactions like that of the 
English neuroscientist Raymond Tallis speaking of “Neurotrash” about the 
eliminationist postures of Daniel Dennett and Richard Dawkins (Tallis, 2011b; see 
also Parry, 2011). In his book Aping Mankind (2011a), Tallis designates, not without 
caricature, two reductionist drifts of the cognitive sciences: on the one hand, 
neuromania, i.e. the idea that brain activity would be the sufﬁcient condition of 
human consciousness and the only key to our behavior (for example, a famous study 
of detection of the brain regions involved in love thanks to functional magnetic 
resonance imaging [Bartels & Zeki, 2000]); on the other hand, Darwinitis, i.e. the 
idea that the theory of evolution would explain not only the origin of the human 
species (which Tallis admits as a good Darwinian), but also the behavior of man and 
the nature of social institutions. 
Tallis is far from being the only one to brandish the axe of war. To summarize the 
polemics led notably in Style and Poetic’s Today,11 the criticisms opposed to the 
evolutionists are made in the name of an autonomist position defending the insularity 
of the art and the differential character of the artistic practices in the name of the 
freedom (by making of the art the other of the society and the human animality), of 
an epistemological skepticism as for the inferences produced with regard to an 
inaccessible past of the prehistoric man, of reticence in front of the immaturity of 
the discipline or to its reductionist ambitions. Thus, M.-L. Ryan (2010: 481) insists 
for example on the speculative character of the theories of the narration as adapta-
tion: “since we do not have at our disposal a specimen of Neanderthal or 
Cro-Magnon man, we cannot compare the storytelling abilities of mankind during 
various stages of its cultural or biological evolution, and we can only make educated 
guesses about the role of storytelling in the development of the social organization 
typical of humans,” explains the Swiss critic. It would be easy, in this respect, to 
denounce poorly mastered and controversial conceptual transfers, such as, for 
example, the hypothetical role of mirror neurons in altruistic behavior, extended 
from macaques and bonobos to evolved human societies (notably by Frans de Waal). 
This lack of conceptual ﬁnesse would render these naturalizing doctrines incapable 
of expressing particular historical and generic variations12 without reducing them to
11 See especially Eibl & Mellmann, 2008, and Poetics Today, 2009. In a more mainstream version, 
see Gopnik, 2012. 
12 This is, for example, the view of Jackson, 2000: 329, 341; Kelleter, 2007: 164–169. Mellmann, 
2011 argues against this assertion. Schaeffer, 2009:  37–43 adopts a measured position.

n
invariable universals. Now, for literary Darwinists, for example Mellmann and 
Carroll, this reduction is inevitable, because it is consubstantial to any real produc-
tion of knowledge; for them, as for Quine or Dewey, we have nothing to lose by 
embracing a naturalist and behaviorist conception of signifying facts. The question is 
not whether Darwinians reduce texts, but how. They do so, Carroll replies, by 
providing a “comprehensive framework” for comparing authors’ perspectives, the 
organization of meaning in texts, and readers’ responses (Carroll, 2011b:  29–30; 
Mellmann, 2011: 310).
94
A. Gefen
The criticisms are not only epistemological: for literary Darwinists, a politically 
motivated resistance is at work against evolutionary psychology or, if you like, 
against its scientism and determinism. In the United States, the ﬁght was ﬁrst waged 
on the cultural studies front: M. S. Sugiyama (2006/2007) recounts that when she 
asserted in her dissertation that literary characters were representations of evolved 
human psychology, and that literary analysis should therefore be founded on an 
understanding of evolutionary psychology, she was accused of reductionism and 
took more than a year to form a dissertation jury at the University of California, 
Santa Barbara. She herself warns against the danger that evolutionary psychology is 
content to propose a universal interpretative scheme in front of the works, to 
ritualistically unveil unconscious and deeply buried mechanisms, just like Freudism 
against which it was built. “Stories do not simply reﬂect adaptive problems and the 
cognitive mechanisms that have evolved to solve them. Complex adaptations are 
facultative: they are sensitive to environmental variation, capable of generating 
different responses to different environmental inputs. Stories enact the facultative 
nature of our evolved psychology.” (Sugiyama, 2006/2007)13 It is their utilitarian-
ism, which would be that of Social Darwinism that literary Darwinists have also 
been reproached with, an accusation of fatalism against which Gottschall defends 
himself: “evolutionary study of human behavior and psychology is not [. . .] a  
ideology of pessimism, defeatism, or conservative defense of the status quo” 
(Gottschall, 2008a: 34); on the contrary, it obeys the Delphic imperative Know 
thyself, the learning of freedom being done in the knowledge of biological deter-
minism: this is the old battle of the culturalists against the biologists, which goes 
back to the ﬁght of Boas and his students against Darwinism (30 ff.). For the critics 
of evolutionism, the normative naturalization that this doctrine underlies would hide 
an inegalitarian right-wing thought. The accusation was made, for example, by 
Patrick Hogan against Randy Thornhill and Craig Palmer’s A Natural History of 
Rape (2000), which presented the propensity of men to commit rape as an evolu-
tionary adaptation (Hogan, 2003b: 200). Gottschall, taking stock of this debate, 
pointed out that such hypotheses, which are indeed highly questionable, are the 
subject of debate within evolutionary psychology itself, while Peter Singer defended 
the existence of a left-wing Darwinism (Gottschall, 2004: 206; Singer, 2000). 
In the face of these criticisms, which explain the still marginal and almost 
sectarian character of evolutionists in American faculties, intermediate critical
13 The author admits to being close to the positions of Easterlin, 2001.

* * *
positions have been suggested, for example by restricting the ambitions of the 
method. For D. T. Max, “in the end, literary Darwinism may teach us less about 
individual books than about the point of literature.” (Max, 2005) On the contrary, 
modern literature would represent problems not reducible to issues of adaptation, 
and the ﬁlter of the evolutionary grid would be too crude to understand literary 
strategies and denaturalized conduct. For Schaeffer, the animal model is useful, but 
insufﬁcient to describe human speciﬁcities: in the theory of costly signals, the 
mechanisms of art and courtship are similar, but not the goals and functions. It is 
necessary according to him to distinguish between structural homology and func-
tional identity, under penalty of engaging in a reductionist approach (Schaeffer, 
2009:  37–43). Indeed, “the aesthetic relation is not a function: it is deﬁned as an 
attentional dynamics regulated by the index of attractiveness of the attentional 
activity itself” (33).
5
The Epistemological and Ideological Stakes of Literary Darwinism
95
Another interesting fallback position is represented by the critic Katja Mellmann: 
for her, evolutionary psychology should not be applied to artifacts such as stories and 
characters, but to the producer and the reader; it can only concern the living: 
“anthropological model reader” (Mellmann, 2011: 301). Katja Mellmann is in 
sharp contrast to Carroll and Gottschall’s view that problems of adaptation are 
represented and thematized in literature. For her, it is necessary to work on concrete 
living subjects and to produce a stimulus pattern heuristic speciﬁc to reading: “rather 
than searching for (redundant) analogies between the behavior of ﬁctional persons 
and actual human beings, we should pay attention to the potential isomorphisms 
between text structure and innate releasing schemata” (308), because “literary 
artifacts [. . .] can be said to act as a dummy stimulus on our innate dispositions” 
(309), that is to say, on our natural receptors of sensation. Such an analysis, rather 
than leading us to utilitarian speculations, would allow us for example to describe 
how ﬁction is “a particular strategy of ﬁctionalisation as based on our adaptations for 
laughter and humour” (311; refers to Mellmann, 2009: 65–86 and Mellmann, 2007: 
264–352, 450–451). 
A few words to conclude and to express both my fascination and my mistrust. As 
we have seen, this emerging theory, represented by a whole generation of American 
“literary Darwinists” but also a French school, offers a global explanation of the 
literary fact that breaks with our whole French critical tradition: for the Darwinians, 
the literary fact is not marginal in human behaviors, but central to the species; it is 
not anti-social, but regulating; literature has no ontology of its own or endogenous 
logic, but is biologically overdetermined; texts or their interpretation are not a space 
of freedom, but a cognitive device, etc. This vision of literature echoes a new grip of 
literature on social behaviors, as witnessed by so many essays on personal develop-
ment and self-management (how X or Y can help you change your life14 )—which
14 See, for example, De Botton, 1997—a work that admittedly plays the humor card—or Housden, 
2001, an anthology whose author has produced other collections with a similar aim: ten poems to 
say goodbye, to free yourself, to open your heart). Similarly, Méra, 2009 delivers a very serious 
Balzacian management lesson.

explains the extremely popular character of the works of Alan Palmer, Mark Turner 
or Jonathan Gottschall, who do not hesitate to explain to us, to quote the title of one 
of Gottschall’s articles, “why ﬁction is good for us.” Certainly, it seems to me that 
the tools proposed are much more reﬁned than those of neuroscience: While 
stylistics or cognitive narratology are still in their infancy, and medical investigative 
work on the aesthetic brain is still in its infancy and unﬁt for describing the 
complexity and variety of the effects of literature, the evolutionary paradigm pro-
duces powerful and ordinary descriptive categories formulated in a common lan-
guage, as well as a compelling genealogy of the necessity of that strange and yet so 
profoundly human-deﬁning (Aristotle’s) process that is ﬁction. The emerging cog-
nitive literary studies—rhetoric,15 poetics,16 grammar,17 stylistics,18 narratology,19 
semiotics20 —can be built largely from this archaeology of the artistic fact as much as 
from observational results with obvious beneﬁts for literature: just as neurosciences 
allow for an objectiﬁcation of empirical knowledge and functional enlightenment on 
cognition (neurophysiological bases of reading, cognition, etc.), the evolutionary 
paradigm can be used as a basis for the development of a new approach, facilitating 
the reinsertion of literature into common cognitive processes, proposing us in the 
process to test a new vocabulary and new problems of text analysis. Another interest 
exempliﬁed by Gottschall’s works (in particular 2004), but also by those, less 
immediately biologizing, of Patrick Hogan, in particular The Mind and Its Stories 
(Hogan, 2003a; see also Hogan, 2006, 2011), it is to relaunch the criticism to the 
search of human universals by the literature, quest to which we had largely 
renounced. Thus, in Hogan’s affective evolutionism and his theory of the archetypes 
of the imagination, we could identify “emotional prototypes,” based on three 
different relationships to emotions, universals with a transcultural value. In any 
case, the confrontation with the Darwinian paradigm engages a truly interdisciplin-
ary debate, whether or not one adheres to Edward O. Wilson’s sociobiology 
afﬁrming the unity of knowledge (Wilson, 1998), one cannot but be fascinated by 
the hypothesis that “literature and its oral antecedents derive from a uniquely human, 
species typical disposition for producing and consuming imaginative verbal con-
structs. Removing the methodological barrier between humanistic expertise and the
96
A. Gefen
15 The term “cognitive rhetoric” appeared in the mid-1970s in an article by Dan Sperber (Sperber, 
1975). See, among others, Lakoff & Johnson, 1980; Turner & Lakoff, 1989; Turner, 1997. 
16 The term “cognitive poetics” was coined in the early 1990s by Reuven Tsur (Tsur, 1992). See also 
Stockwell, 2002; Gavins & Steen, 2003; Vandaele & Brône, 2009. 
17 See, for example, Langacker, 1987–1991, 1991, 2008. 
18 See, for a ﬁrst look, Semino & Culpeper, 2003; Toolan & Weber, 2005; Burke, 2008. 
19 The movement was launched in the late 1990s by Manfred Jahn in Jahn, 1997. The most recent 
points are due to David Herman (1999, 2002, 2003, 2007, 2009). Among the founding works, see 
Cook, 1994; Fludernik, 1996; Emmott, 1997; Abbott, 2001, Richardson & Steen, 2002; Palmer, 
2004; Richardson & Spolsky, 2006; Zunshine, 2006. 
20 See in particular Rastier, 1991. Rastier draws on the computational functionalism of Fodor, 1987 
and Pylyshyn, 1984; but, for him, this cognitive semantics must be based on what he calls a 
“material hermeneutics” (see Rastier, 2005).

expertise of the social sciences can produce results valuable to both ﬁelds.” (Carroll 
et al., 2012; cited by Carroll, 2011b: 35) Hence the birth of new disciplines such as 
the ecocriticism of Harold Fromm or Glen Love (ecocriticism) (Love, 2003; 
Glotfelty & Fromm, 2009; Fromm, 2010), the Darwinian literary history (different 
from that of the nineteenth century and Brunetière) of Tom Dolack, based not on the 
metaphor of the species and the reiﬁcation of the forms, but on a solid theory of the 
technological innovation by imitation in the species, etc. (Dolack, 2010). Or Robert 
Storey’s theory of genres and theory of representation in Mimesis and the Human 
Animal (1996; see the review by Carroll, 1996).
5
The Epistemological and Ideological Stakes of Literary Darwinism
97
With the interdisciplinary postulate of literary evolutionism, it is here the institu-
tional and academic place of the humanities that is questioned. Whether one 
conceives of literature as an anthropological database, or as a laboratory of exper-
imental psychology or “experimental philosophy,” to use another fashionable con-
cept, it is to a relegation of literary criticism and to a reintroduction of the latter into 
the heart of other knowledge that we could witness. Such are, for example, the 
virtues of Turner’s narrativist theories that I have described and of the cognitivist 
turn in general: “since the publication in 1980 of George Lakoff and Mark Johnson’s 
inﬂuential Metaphors We Live By, literary critics have been encouraged by the idea 
of a cognitive poetics—of, that is, a systematic theory of the mind in which literature 
is not merely peripheral but central to the understanding of human psychology,” 
writes Van Oort (2003: 238). In other words, literature does not only have to 
passively import an exogenous conceptual vocabulary, and criticism does not only 
have to account for its empirical metadiscourses with new scientiﬁc tools, but it can 
serve, differently from any other form of knowledge, to think concrete mental and 
social processes, by reinscribing itself in the very long duration of human history.21 
References 
Abbott, H. P. (2000). The evolutionary origins of the storied mind: Modeling the prehistory of 
narrative consciousness and its discontents. Narrative, 8(3), 247–256. 
Abbott, H. P. (Ed.). (2001). On the origins of ﬁction: Interdisciplinary perspectives, special issue of 
SubStance, 30(1). 
Barash, D. P., & Barash, N. R. (2002). Evolution and literary criticism. The Chronicle of Higher 
Education, 49(8), 7–9. 
Barash, D. P., & Barash, N. R. (2005). Madame Bovary’s ovaries: A Darwinian look at literature. 
Delacorte Press. 
Bartels, A., & Zeki, S. (2000). The neural basis of romantic love. NeuroReport, 11(17), 3829–3834; 
online at: http://www.vislab.ucl.ac.uk/pdf/NeuralBasisOfLove.pdf 
Boyd, B. (2005). Evolutionary theories of art. In J. Gottschall & D. S. Wilson (Eds.), The literary 
animal: Evolution and nature of the narrative (pp. 149–178). Northwestern University Press. 
Brunetière, F. (1890). L’Évolution de la critique depuis la Renaissance jusqu’à nos jours. Hachette. 
21 I am in complete agreement with the conclusions of Ryan, 2010.

98
A. Gefen
Burke, M. (2008). How cognition can augment stylistic analysis. The European Journal of English 
Studies, 9(2), 185–196. 
Buss, D. (1999). Evolutionary psychology: The new science of the mind. Allyn & Bacon. 
Carroll, J. (1995). Evolution and literary theory. University of Missouri Press. 
Carroll, J. (1996). Review of Robert F. Storey. Mimesis and the Human Animal; online at http:// 
cogweb.ucla.edu/Abstracts/Carroll_S98.html 
Carroll, J. (1998). “Steven Pinker’s cheesecake for the mind” (review of Steven Pinker, how the 
mind works, 1997). Philosophy and Literature, 22(2), 478–485; online at: http://cogweb.ucla. 
edu/Abstracts/Carroll_C98.html 
Carroll, J. (2005). Human nature and literary meaning: A theoretical model illustrated with a 
critique of pride and prejudice. In J. Gottschall & D. S. Wilson (Eds.), The literary animal: 
Evolution and nature of the narrative (pp. 76–116). Northwestern University Press. 
Carroll, J. (2011a). Reading human nature: Literary darwinism in theory and practice. SUNY 
Press. 
Carroll, J. (2011b). An evolutionary paradigm for literary study, with two sequels. In J. Carroll 
(Ed.), Reading human nature: Literary darwinism in theory and practice (pp. 3–54). SUNY 
Press. 
Carroll, J. (2011c). The Cuckoo’s history: Human nature in Wuthering Heights. In J. Carroll (Ed.), 
Reading human nature: Literary darwinism in theory and practice (pp. 109–122). SUNY Press. 
Carroll, J., Gottschall, J., Johnson, J. A., & Kruger, D. (2011). Agonistic structure in Victorian 
novels: Doing the math. In J. Carroll (Ed.), Reading human nature: Literary darwinism in 
theory and practice (pp. 151–175). SUNY Press. 
Carroll, J., Gottschall, J., Johnson, J. A., & Kruger, D. (2012). Graphing Jane Austen: The 
evolutionary basis of literary meaning. Palgrave Macmillan. 
Changeux, J.-P. (1994). Raison et plaisir. Odile Jacob. 
Changeux, J.-P. (2008). Du vrai, du beau, du bien. Odile Jacob. 
Cohn, D. (1978). Transparent minds: Narrative modes for presenting consciousness in ﬁction. 
Princeton University Press. 
Compagnon, A. (n.d.). Genre, création, évolution (Course); online at: http://www.fabula.org/ 
compagnon/genre12.php 
Cook, G. (1994). Discourse and literature. Oxford University Press. 
Cooke, B. (1999). Sexual property in Pushkin’s ‘the snowstorm’: A Darwinist perspective. In 
B. 
Cooke 
& 
F. 
Turner 
(Eds.), 
Biopoetics: 
Evolutionary 
explorations 
in 
the 
arts 
(pp. 175–204). ICUS. 
Crews, F. (2005). Foreword from the literary side. In J. Gottschall & D. S. Wilson (Eds.), The 
literary animal: Evolution and nature of the narrative (pp. xiii–xv). Northwestern University 
Press. 
Dawkins, R. (1976). The selﬁsh gene. Oxford University Press. 
Dawkins, R. (1982). The extended phenotype. Oxford University Press. 
Dawkins, R. (2006). The god delusion. Bantam Press. 
De Botton, A. (1997). How Proust can change your life. Pantheon. 
Deacon, T. W. (1997). The symbolic species: The co-evolution of language and the brain. W. W.  
Norton & Company. 
Dennett, D. C. (1991). Consciousness explained. Little, Brown. 
Dennett, D. C. (1995). Darwin’s dangerous idea: Evolution and the meanings of life. Simon & 
Schuster. 
Dennett, D. C. (2006). Breaking the spell: Religion as a natural phenomenon. Allen Lane. 
Dissanayake, E. (1992). Homo Aestheticus: Where art comes from and why. Free Press. 
Dolack, T. (2010). Imitation and literary evolution. Politics and Culture, (1), April 29, 2010, 
online at: http://www.politicsandculture.org/2010/04/29/imitation-and-literary-evolution/. 
Easterlin, N. (2001). Hans Christian Andersen ﬁsh out of water. Philosophy and Literature, 25(2), 
251–277.

5
The Epistemological and Ideological Stakes of Literary Darwinism
99
Easterlin, N. (2009). “Literature, science, and the new humanities” (review). Philosophy and 
Literature, 33(1), 230–233. 
Eibl, K. (2004). Animal Poeta. Bausteine der biologischen Kultur- und Literaturtheorie. Mentis. 
Eibl, K. (2009). The induction instinct: Evolution and poetic application of a cognitive tool. Studies 
in the Literary Imagination, 42(2), 43–60. 
Eibl, K., & Mellmann, K. (2008). Misleading alternatives. Style, 42(2–3), 166–171. 
Emmott, C. (1997). Narrative comprehension: A discourse perspective. Oxford University Press. 
Flesch, W. (2008). Comeuppance: Costly signaling, altruistic punishment, and other biological 
components of ﬁction. Harvard University Press. 
Fludernik, M. (1996). Towards a “natural” narratology. Routledge. 
Fodor, J. A. (1987). Psychosemantics. M.I.T. Press. 
Fox, R. (1995). Sexual conﬂict in the epics. Human Nature, 6(2), 135–144. 
Fox, R. (2005). Male bonding in the epics and romances. In J. Gottschall & D. S. Wilson (Eds.), The 
literary animal: Evolution and nature of the narrative (pp. 126–144). Northwestern University 
Press. 
Fromm, H. (2010). The nature of being human: From environmentalism to consciousness. Johns 
Hopkins University Press. 
Gavins, J., & Steen, G. (Eds.). (2003). Cognitive poetics in practice. London. 
Gefen, A. (2006). Du bon usage des tableaux à double entrée: stratégies taxinomiques et ambitions 
épistémologiques de la théorie littéraire. In M. Escola & S. Rabau (Eds.), La Case blanche: 
théorie littéraire et textes possibles, actes du colloque d’Oléron (14–18 avril 2003). Reims, La 
Lecture littéraire, n. 8.  
Gefen, A. (2007). L’adieu aux exemples. Sérendipité et inexemplarité dans la littérature modern. In 
E. Bouju, A. Gefen, G. Hautcœur, & M. Macé (Eds.), Littérature et exemplarité 
(pp. 249–261). PUR. 
Gefen, A. (2010). L’éthique est-elle un récit? Le récit est-il une éthique? Retour sur la querelle du 
‘narrativisme’. In  Proceedings of the international colloquium “Les moralistes modernes”. 
University of Belgrade (22–23 October 2009). Published online at: http://www.fabula.org/ 
colloques/document1352.php 
Glotfelty, C., & Fromm, H. (Eds.). (2009). The ecocriticism reader: Landmarks in literary ecology 
(2nd ed.). The University of Georgia Press. 
Gopnik, A. (2012). Can science explain why we like stories? The New Yorker; online at: http:// 
www.newyorker.com/online/blogs/books/2012/05/can-science-explain-why-we-tell-stories. 
html 
Gottschall, J. (2001). Homer’s human animal: Ritual combat in the Iliad. Philosophy and Litera-
ture, 25(2), 278–294. 
Gottschall, J. (2004). Review of Joseph Carroll, Literary Darwinism, 2004. Human Ethology 
Bulletin, 19(4), 11–13. 
Gottschall, J. (2008a). Literature, science, and a new humanities. Palgrave Macmillan. 
Gottschall, J. (2008b). The rape of Troy: Evolution, violence, and the world of Homer. Cambridge 
University Press. 
Gottschall, J. (2012a). The storytelling animal: How stories makes us human. Houghton Mifﬂin 
Harcourt. 
Gottschall, J. (2012b, April 29). Why ﬁction is good for you. The Boston Globe; online at: http:// 
articles.boston.com/2012-04-29/ideas/31417849_1_ﬁction-morality-happy-endings 
Guerin, W. L., Labor, E., Morgan, L., Reesman, J. C., & Willingham, J. R. (2010). A handbook of 
critical approaches to literature (6th ed.). Oxford University Press. 
Herman, D. (Ed.). (1999). Narratologies: New perspectives on narrative analysis. Ohio State 
University Press. 
Herman, D. (2002). Story logic: Problems and possibilities of narrative. University of Nebraska 
Press. 
Herman, D. (2003). Stories as a tool for thinking. In D. Herman (Ed.), Narrative theory and the 
cognitive sciences (pp. 163–192). Stanford, CSLI.

100
A. Gefen
Herman, D. (2007). Storytelling and the sciences of the mind: Cognitive narratology, discursive 
psychology, and narratives in face-to-face interaction. Narrative, 15, 306–334. 
Herman, D. (2009). Basic elements of narrative. Wiley-Blackwell. 
Hogan, P. C. (2003a). The mind and its stories: Narrative universals and human emotion. 
Cambridge University Press. 
Hogan, P. C. (2003b). Cognitive science, literature, and the arts: A guide for humanists. Routledge. 
Hogan, P. C. (2006). “A Debate for Making Clear the Worth of Universals: Ninety-Five Theses”. 
Position paper serving as the text for debate at the plenary session on “Aesthetic Universals”. 
Conference of the International Society for the Empirical Study of Literature and Media 
(Internationale Gesellschaft für Empirische Literaturwissenschaft). Fraueninsel, Germany, 
August 2006. 
Hogan, P. C. (2011). Affective narratology: The emotional structure of stories. University of 
Nebraska Press. 
Horvath, T. (2005, January 1). Literary darwinism and literary darwinisms: Let the games begin. . . . 
Cogweb; online at: http://cogweb.ucla.edu/Culture/Horvath-on-Carroll-04.html 
Housden, R. (2001). Ten poems to change your life. Harmony. 
Jackson, T. (2000). Questioning Interdisciplinarity: Cognitive science, evolutionary psychology, 
and literary criticism. Poetics Today, 21(2), 319–347. 
Jahn, M. (1997). Frames, preferences, and the Reading of third-person narratives: Toward a 
cognitive narratology. Poetics Today, 18(4), 441–468. 
Kelleter, F. (2007). A tale of two natures: Worried reﬂections on the study of literature and culture 
in an age of neuroscience and neo-Darwinism. Journal of Literary Theory, 1(1), 153–189, 
online at: http://www.jltonline.de/index.php/articles/article/view/65/258 
Lageira, J. (2012). Artialisation. In R. Pouivet & J. Morizot (Eds.), Dictionnaire de philosophie 
esthétique (2nd ed., pp. 49–50). Armand Colin. 
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors we live by (p. 1980). University of Chicago Press. 
Langacker, R. W. (1987–1991). Foundations of cognitive grammar (Vol. 2 vols). Stanford, 
Stanford University Press. 
Langacker, R. W. (1991). Concept, image, and symbol: The cognitive basis of grammar. Mouton de 
Gruyter. 
Langacker, R. W. (2008). Cognitive grammar: A basic introduction. Oxford University Press. 
Laugier, S. (1992). L’Apprentissage de l’obvie: l’anthropologie logique de Quine. J. Vrin. 
Laugier, S. (2010). Wittgenstein, le mythe de l’inexpressivité. J. Vrin. 
Love, G. (2003). Practical ecocriticism: Literature, biology, and the environment. University of 
Virginia Press. 
Mar, R., & Oatley, K. (2005). Evolutionary pre-adaptation and the idea of character in ﬁction. 
Journal of Cultural and Evolutionary Psychology, 3(2), 179–194. 
Mar, R., & Oatley, K. (2008). The function of ﬁction is the abstraction and simulation of social 
experience. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 3(3), 173–192. 
Mar, R., Oatley, K., Hirsh, J., dela Paz, J., & Peterson, J. B. (2006). Bookworms versus nerds: 
Exposure to ﬁction versus non-ﬁction, divergent associations with social ability, and the 
simulation of ﬁctional social worlds. Journal of Research in Personality, 40, 694–712. 
Mar, R., Oatley, K., & Peterson, J. B. (2009). Exploring the link between Reading ﬁction and 
empathy: Ruling out individual differences and examining outcomes. Communications, 34, 
407–428. 
Max, D. T. (2005, November 6). The literary darwinists. The New York Times Magazine; online at: 
http://www.nytimes.com/2005/11/06/magazine/06darwin.html?pagewanted=all 
Mellmann, K. (2007). Emotionalisierung. Von der Nebenstundenpoesie zum Buch als Freund. 
Mentis. 
Mellmann, 
K. 
(2009). 
Das 
‘Spielgesicht’ 
als 
poetisches 
Verfahren. 
Elemente 
einer 
verhaltensbasierten Fiktionalitätstheorie. In T. Anz & H. Kaulen (Eds.), Literatur als Spiel. 
Evolutionsbiologische, ästhetische und pädagogische Aspekte (pp. 65–86). de Gruyter.

5
The Epistemological and Ideological Stakes of Literary Darwinism
101
Mellmann, K. (2010). Voice and perception. An evolutionary approach to the basic functions of 
narrative. In F. L. Aldama (Ed.), Toward a cognitive theory of narrative acts (pp. 119–140). 
University of Texas Press. 
Mellmann, K. (2011). Evolutionary psychology as a heuristic in literary studies. In N. Saul & S. J. 
James (Eds.), The evolution of literature: Legacies of Darwin in European cultures 
(pp. 299–317). Rodopi. 
Méra, B. (2009). La Méthode Rastignac: “La Comédie humaine”, une culture d’entreprise. 
Tallandier. 
Miller, G. (2000). The eating mind: How sexual choice shaped the evolution of human nature. 
Doubleday Books. 
Mithen, S. J. (1996). The prehistory of the mind: A search for the origins of art, religion, and 
science. Thames and Hudson. 
Morizot, J. (2012). Évolution et esthétique. In R. Pouivet & J. Morizot (Eds.), Dictionnaire de 
philosophie esthétique (2nd ed., pp. 184–186). Armand Colin. 
Mulligan, K., & Habel, P. (2011). An experimental test of the effects of ﬁctional framing on 
attitudes. Social Science Quarterly, 92(1), 79–99. 
Nesse, M. (1995). Guivenere’s choice. Human Nature, 6(2), 145–163. 
Nettle, D. (2005). What happens in Hamlet? Exploring the psychological foundations of Drama. In 
J. Gottschall & D. S. Wilson (Eds.), The literary animal: Evolution and nature of the narrative 
(pp. 56–75). Northwestern University Press. 
Palmer, A. (2004). Fictional minds. University of Nebraska Press. 
Parry, M. (2011, October 9). Raymond Tallis Takes Out ‘Neurotrash’. The Chronicle Review; 
published online: http://chronicle.com/article/Raymond-Tallis-Takes-Out-the/129279/ 
Pavel, T. (2003). La Pensée du roman. Gallimard. 
Pinker, S. (1997a). How the mind works. W. W. Norton. 
Pinker, S. (1997b). Toward a consilient study of literature. Philosophy and Literature, 31(1), 
161–177. 
Pinker, (2007). How the mind works, « Toward a Consilient Study of Literature ». Philosophy and 
Literature, 31, 161–177. 
Poetics Today. (2009). Cognitive themes. Poetics Today, 30 (3). 
Prince, G. (2008). Narratologie Classique et narratologie post-classique; published online: http:// 
www.vox-poetica.org/t/articles/prince.html 
Pylyshyn, Z. (1984). Computation and cognition. MIT Press. 
Quine, W. V. (1969a). Ontological relativity. In W. V. Quine (Ed.), Ontological relativity and other 
essays (pp. 26–68). Columbia University Press. 
Quine, W. V. (1969b). Epistelomogy naturalized. In W. V. In Quine (Ed.), Ontological relativity 
and other essays (pp. 69–90). Columbia University Press. 
Rastier, F. (1991). Sémantique et recherches cognitives (2nd ed.:2001). PUF. 
Rastier, François (2005). Sémiotique du cognitivisme et sémantique cognitive: questions d’histoire 
et d’epistémologie. Texto; online at: http://www.revue-texto.net/inedits/rastier/rastier_ 
semantique-cognitive.html 
Richardson, A. (2000). Rethinking romantic incest: Human universals, literary representation, and 
the biology of mind. New Literary History, 31(3), 553–572. 
Richardson, A., & Spolsky, E. (Eds.). (2006). The work of ﬁction: Cognition, culture, and 
complexity. Ashgate. 
Richardson, A., & Steen, F. F. (Eds.) (2002). Literature and the cognitive revolution. Poetics Today, 
special issue, 23 (1). 
Ryan, M.-L. (2010). Narratology and cognitive science: A problematic relation. Style, 44(4), 
469–495. 
Schaeffer, J.-M. (2007). La Fin de l’exception humaine. Gallimard. 
Schaeffer, J.-M. (2009). Théorie des signaux coûteux: esthétique et art. Tangence éditeur. 
Schaeffer, J.-M. (2012). Pour une esthétique naturaliste: l’animal artiste et esthète? In R. Pouivet & 
J. Morizot (Eds.), Dictionnaire de philosophie esthétique (2nd ed., pp. 28–31). Armand Colin.

102
A. Gefen
Semino, E., & Culpeper, J. (Eds.). (2003). Cognitive stylistics: Language and cognition in text 
analysis. John Benjamins. 
Singer, P. (2000). A Darwinian left: Politics, evolution, and cooperation. Yale University Press. 
Sperber, D. (1975). Rudiments of cognitive rhetoric. Poetics, 23, 389–415. 
Stockwell, P. (2002). Cognitive poetics: An introduction. Routledge. 
Storey, R. F. (1996). Mimesis and the human animal: On the biogenetic foundations of literary 
representation. Northwestern University Press. 
Sugiyama, M. S. (1996). On the origins of narrative: Storyteller bias as a ﬁtness-enhancing strategy. 
Human Nature, 7(7), 403–425. 
Sugiyama, M. S. (1997). Feminine nature: An evolutionary analysis of Hemingway’s women 
characters (PhD). University of California. 
Sugiyama, M. S. (2005). Reverse engineering narrative. In J. Gottschall & D. S. Wilson (Eds.), The 
literary animal: Evolution and nature of the narrative (pp. 177–195). Northwestern University 
Press. 
Sugiyama, M. S. (2006/2007). “The nature of literature”, review of David and Nanelle Barash. 
Madame Bovary’s Ovaries. Entelechy, (8); online at: http://www.entelechyjournal.com/ 
michellescalisesugiyama.html 
Tallis, R. (2011a). Aping mankind: Neuromania, Darwinitis, and the misrepresentation of human-
ity. Acumen. 
Tallis, R. (2011b). Neurotrash. Humans are special. Prospect, published online: http://www. 
prospectmagazine.co.uk/magazine/neurotrash-brain-chemistry-biologism-neurones-darwin/ 
Thornhill, R., & Palmer, C. T. (2000). A natural history of rape: Biological bases of sexual 
coercion. MIT Press. 
Tooby, J., & Cosmides, L. (2001). Does beauty build adapted minds? Toward an evolutionary 
theory of aesthetics, ﬁction and the arts. SubStance, 94/95, 6–27; online at: http://www.psych. 
ucsb.edu/research/cep/papers/beauty01.pdf 
Toolan, M., & Weber, J.-J. (Eds.). (2005). The cognitive turn: Papers in cognitive literary studies. 
European Journal of English Studies, 9(2), 197–208. 
Tsur, R. (1992). Toward a theory of cognitive poetics (Amsterdam, North-Holland, 1992. 2nd ed.). 
Sussex Academic Press. 
Turner, M. (1997). The literary mind: The origins of thought and language. Oxford University 
Press. 
Turner, M., & Lakoff, G. (1989). More than cool reason: A ﬁeld guide to poetic metaphor. 
University of Chicago Press. 
Van Oort, R. (2003). Cognitive science and the problem of representation. Poetics Today, 24(2), 
237–295. 
Vandaele, J., & Brône, G. (Eds.). (2009). Cognitive poetics: Goals, gains and gaps. Mouton de 
Gruyter. 
Vermeule, B. (2011). A comeuppance theory of narrative and emotions. Poetics Today, 32(2), 
235–253. 
Whissell, C. M. (1996). Mate selection in popular women’s ﬁction. Human Nature, 7(4), 427–447. 
Wilson, E. O. (1998). Consilience: The unity of knowledge. Alfred A. Knopf. 
Zunshine, L. (2006). Why we read ﬁction: Theory of mind and the novel. Ohio State University 
Press; online at: https://uky.academia.edu/LisaZunshine 
Zunshine, L. (2008). Theory of mind and ﬁctions of embodied transparency. Narrative, 16(1), 
65–92; online at: https://uky.academia.edu/LisaZunshine 
Zunshine, L. (2011). Style brings in mental states. Style, 45(2), 349–356; online at: https://uky. 
academia.edu/LisaZunshine

