N
Neutron Interferometry
Helmut Rauch
Neutrons are elementary massive particles consisting of one “up” and two “down”
quarks; but in neutron interference experiments they exhibit wave features only. In
this case, the  wave function describing thermal neutrons can be split, reﬂected
and superposed coherently by means of dynamical Bragg diffraction from a perfect
silicon single crystal. The coherent beam parts are widely separated, and they can be
inﬂuenced individually by nuclear, magnetic or gravitational interaction. This tech-
nique has ﬁrst been tested 1974 at a small 250 kW TRIGA reactor in Vienna [1].
The monolithic design of such interferometers guarantees the parallelism of the
reﬂecting lattice planes up to a fraction of their lattice distance, which is a nec-
essary condition for coherent beam splitting. This experimental method has been
adapted from X-ray interferometry developed earlier [2]. The ﬁgure shows various
types of such interferometers as they are used now at several neutron sources around
the world.
A well balanced and insulated interferometer can provide interference fringes
with a contrast higher than 90% (see ﬁgure). The intensity modulation due to rel-
ative phase shifts between the coherent beams can be achieved by any material
or magnetic or gravitational ﬁeld. The related interaction for neutrons with wave-
length λ can be described by an index of refraction n which causes a phase shift
χ = (1 −n) k D = −NbcλD where k = 2π/λ denotes the k-number, N the parti-
cle density, bc the coherent scattering length and D the thickness of the material
I ∝
ψI + ψII
2
∝1 + cos χ
D. Greenberger et al. (eds.), Compendium of Quantum Physics: Concepts, Experiments,
402
History and Philosophy, c⃝Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2009

Neutron Interferometry
403
N
Neutron interferometry always takes place in the regime of self interference since
the phase space density of existing neutron sources is rather small, with the
consequence that during a certain time interval there is only one neutron within
the interferometer while the following one is still in a uranium nucleus of the
reactor fuel.
The main scientiﬁc achievements during the years of applying and developing
this neutron interferometric technique were:
• The veriﬁcation of the 4π-symmetry of spinor wavefunctions ( Berry’s Phase)
• The observation of the Earth gravitational and rotational effect
• The observation of coherent spin superposition
• The observation of the neutron Fizeau effect
• The observation of the magnetic Josephson effect
• The observation of the topological  Aharonov–Casher and the scalar
 Aharonov–Bohm effect
• The observation of single and multiple photon exchange within time-dependent
magnetic ﬁelds
• The experimental separation of the geometric and dynamical phases
A detailed description of these experiments can be found in the book “Neutron In-
terferometry”, [3].
More recently, quantum contextuality could be veriﬁed which implies an entan-
glement of external (beam path) and internal ( spin) degrees of freedom for a single
particle system. In this connection, the  Kochen–Specker Theorem has been tested
indicating that a measurement of commuting  observables depends on the order
in which the measurements have been done [4]. Several recent investigations have
also dealt with non-adiabatic and non-cyclic phases and they show that nowadays
the complete quantum state can be measured. Neutron phase tomography has been
developed as well, providing a kind of non-interaction imaging technique. Broad
interest have found investigations directed towards decoherencing and dephasing
effects ( decoherence) since the separated beams can be exposed to various ﬂuc-
tuating conditions (magnetic noise ﬁelds, etc.). The transition from a pure to a
 mixed state and several state retrieval methods have also been investigated. The
sensitivity against ﬂuctuating and dissipative forces of coherent and non-classical
 Schr¨odinger cat-like states is an important topic in order to understand how a
classical world emerges from the quantum mechanical properties of nature.
Perfect crystal neutron interferometers can be seen as relatively robust
macroscopic quantum devices since the whole system operates under ordinary
atmospheric conditions and environmental effects have to become rather strong to
destroy the typical quantum behaviour. Neutron interferometry can be considered
as a pioneering step preparing the path towards interferometry and quantum optics
with even heavier particles like atoms, molecules, fullerenes, etc. ( Mesoscopic
quantum phenomena). Nowadays neutron interferometry has been established as a
laboratory tool for basic quantum phenomena.

404
No-Cloning Theorem
Literature
1. H. Rauch, W. Treimer, U. Bonse: Test of a single-crystal neutron interferometer. Phys. Lett.
A47 (1974) 369–371
2. U. Bonse, M. Hart: An X-ray interferometer. Appl. Phys. Lett. 6 (1965) 155–156
3. H. Rauch, S.A. Werner: Neutron Interferometry, Clarendon Press, Oxford 2000
4. Y. Hasegawa, R. Loidl, G. Badurek, S. Filipp, J. Klepp, H. Rauch: Evidence for entanglement
and full tomographic analysis of Bell states in a single-neutron system. Phys. Rev. A76 (2007)
052108
No-Cloning Theorem
Stefan Weigert
There is no quantum-mechanicaldevice which outputs a perfect copy of an arbitrary
pure quantum state |ψ⟩while leaving the original intact. Such an apparatus would
be described by a unitary operator ˆU acting as
ˆU|ψ⟩⊗|0⟩= |ψ⟩⊗|ψ⟩,
where |0⟩is a ﬁxed ‘blank’ input state. However, due to the linearity of the
operator ˆU this equation is consistent only if the input states |ψ⟩are pairwise or-
thogonal. A contradiction arises if one requires that the device work correctly for
non-orthogonal states as well. It is also impossible to duplicate (or broadcast) non-
commuting mixed states.
Two proofs of the No-Cloning theorem [1, 2] have been published in 1982, both
triggered by a claim that the use of entangled states ( entanglement) would al-
low one to transmit information with supraluminal speed. However, the proposed
scheme cannot be implemented since it relies on the perfect cloning of quantum
states. Considering the elementary nature of its proof, the No-Cloning theorem and
its generalization to mixed states [3] have been discovered surprisingly late.
The No-Cloning theorem captures a fundamental aspect of the structure of quan-
tum mechanics. Its limiting character plays an important role in the theory of
quantum information. For example, the theorem forbids to copy the information
carried by a state |ψ⟩at the end of a  quantum computation. Thus, although
desirable, no safety copies of the result embodied in the state |ψ⟩can be made,
it cannot be distributed to other parties or multiplied for  quantum state recon-
struction. At the same time, the security of quantum cryptography ( quantum
communication) relies on the No-Cloning theorem: if two parties establish a se-
cret key by exchanging quantum states through a quantum channel, eavesdroppers
are not able to reliably copy the states unknown to them. The theorem is consistent

