Distributed Neural Interfaces: Challenges
and Trends in Scaling Implantable Technology
Katarzyna M. Szostak, Peilong Feng, Federico Mazza,
and Timothy G. Constandinou
Contents
1
Introduction. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
382
1.1
The Distributed Approach. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
383
2
Design Aspects for Chronic Distributed Neural Interfaces. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
385
2.1
Miniaturization. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
385
2.2
Materials. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
388
2.3
Implantation Procedure. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
389
2.4
Microelectrodes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
391
2.5
CMOS Compatibility. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
392
2.6
Packaging. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
393
3
Wireless Capability. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
395
3.1
Wireless Power Transfer. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
396
3.2
Electromagnetic Power Transfer. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
397
3.3
Ultrasonic Power Delivery. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
403
3.4
Other Energy Harvesting. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
406
4
Wireless Data Communication. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
406
4.1
Downlink Data Telemetry. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
406
4.2
Uplink Data Telemetry. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
407
5
Conclusion. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
408
References. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
410
K. M. Szostak · P. Feng · F. Mazza
Imperial College London, London, UK
e-mail: k.szostak@imperial.ac.uk; peilong.feng14@imperial.ac.uk;
federico.mazza@imperial.ac.uk; f.mazza15@imperial.ac.uk
T. G. Constandinou ()
Centre for Bio-Inspired Technology, Institute of Biomedical Engineering, Imperial College
London, London, UK
Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Imperial College London, London, UK
e-mail: t.constandinou@imperial.ac.uk
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2023
N. V. Thakor (ed.), Handbook of Neuroengineering,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-16-5540-1_11
381

382
K. M. Szostak et al.
Abstract
Current implantable neural interfaces, both clinically available solutions and
research tools, rely on a limited number of implanted devices (from one to few
units). This factor, aside from the obvious spatial resolution limitations, does
not conform to the paradigm of the brain as a massively parallel computational
system and creates a bottleneck in the amount of information that could be
exchanged between the brain and an external processing unit. This issue has
fuelled recent research efforts towards the study of distributed neural interfaces,
systems that depend on a network of implanted nodes. Such conﬁguration allows
to spread of the overall complexity across multiple devices, which can now be
more easily scaled down in size and individual power consumption, improving
their conformity with the surrounding tissue, which is a major concern in current
monolithic solutions. However, this architecture brings a new set of challenges
ranging from the optimization of ultra-low-power electronics, through the for-
mulation of a wireless transmission scheme for efﬁcient power delivery and data
transfer to the investigation of novel materials and methods for the fabrication
of micro-scale, long-term reliable implants. This chapter outlines state of the
art and describes design considerations for the future autonomous, wireless
distributed neural implants. Aspects of miniaturization and chronic stability of
devices including materials choice, implantation procedure, packaging strategies
and microelectrode types are described, alongside a discussion on different
modalities to achieve wireless power transfer and data telemetry.
Keywords
Distributed neural interfaces · Brain-Computer Interfaces (BCI) · Implantation
procedure · Microelectrodes · CMOS Compatibility · Packaging · Wireless
power transfer · Wireless data communication
1
Introduction
There is no doubt that the extensive research in the ﬁeld of brain-computer interfaces
(BCIs) has produced astounding results, by broadening our understanding of the
brain as well as by delivering effective treatments to hundreds of thousands of
people worldwide.
However, it is a fact that most research efforts, although providing extremely
valuable experimental results, struggle to translate into established clinical tools
[1]. Where on one side, we have successful stories of neuromodulation devices such
as cochlear implants for restoring hearing in patients with profound deafness and
deep brain stimulation (DBS) devices for relieving pain or mitigate symptoms of
conditions like Parkinson’s disease and epilepsy, on the other hand, the majority
of research efforts still battle to cross the gap from valuable investigation tools to
established medical devices. This circumstance is particularly evident for systems
belonging to the domain of intracortical neural interfaces [2–4].

Distributed Neural Interfaces: Challenges and Trends in Scaling Implantable. . .
383
The cause of this disparity is mostly the result of the challenges faced in two
key areas: scalability and chronic stability of the neural interfaces. For example,
an effective BCI must ensure reliable operation throughout its lifespan while
causing minimal damage to the body (which directly translates into minimizing the
implant’s size), but at the same time, in order to increase the spatial resolution of the
system, a BCI would beneﬁt from a large amount of recording and/or stimulation
sites.
Moreover, these technological challenges, together with their various proposed
solutions, fall under a set of more theoretical requirements, necessary to justify the
use and deprecate the abuse of such invasive systems [5]:
•
Safety: The interface must not cause harm to the user, and adequate precautions
must be taken even in case of device failure.
•
Reliability: The interface must provide stable and controlled performance over
the required lifetime.
•
Efﬁcacy: The amount of information present in the neural signals must be
sufﬁcient to justify the use of a BCI.
•
Minimal invasiveness: The degree of invasiveness must be kept to a minimum,
without exceeding what is absolutely necessary.
Meeting these requirements while ﬁnding effective solutions to the technical
challenges associated with invasive neural interfaces calls for a holistic design
approach that takes into consideration the inter-dependencies of various aspects,
from the electronic circuits for data processing, to the packaging of the implants, to
the surgical tools and procedures necessary for implantation [6].
1.1
The Distributed Approach
One of the main current trends to overcome the translational gap is to design neural
interfaces that depart from the traditional monolithic approach of devices like Utah
arrays and micro-electrode arrays (MEAs) [7]. These former devices rely on the
use of a single – or a few units – central implant, that can host up to hundreds of
individual recording or stimulating sites (Fig. 1).
However, the next generation of neural interfaces will require an increasing
amount of stimulation sites and recording channels to expand spatial resolution
and provide more accurate information about neuronal processes. Maintaining the
current monolithic approach would cause an increase in their size as well as in
the number of interconnections, but this would play against the need for smaller
implants necessary to minimize tissue damage.
To respond to this challenge, a substantial design shift towards distributed
implantable interfaces has been proposed by a number of research institutes.
Although the various propositions might differ in their actual technical implemen-
tation, their architecture shares the following features:

384
K. M. Szostak et al.
Epi- and 
Subdural ECOG
Intracortical 
Electrodes
EEG
Epi- and 
Subdural ECOG
Intracortical 
Electrodes
EEG
Fig. 1 Overview of the different locations and degrees of invasiveness of interfaces for the central
nervous system. (Reproduced with kind permission from [8])
•
Scalability: an increase in the overall number of devices up to hundreds or
thousands, while reducing the number of electrodes per device. Each device
is fully integrated and autonomous in its operation. This shifts the overall
complexity from a device level to a distributed network level.
•
Miniaturization: by reducing the number of electrodes on each device, it is
possible to scale down its overall dimensions to the millimetre – or even
submillimetre – scale. This has proven to be extremely beneﬁcial to reduce
damage to the surrounding tissue and to vascularization.
•
Wireless communication: given the increased number of devices, wired connec-
tions are not sustainably viable anymore. Moreover, wires and connections are
one of the primary causes of failure. A wireless approach to deliver both data and
power is required.
This distributed concept could allow, as opposed to complicated, centralized
implants, to tackle the issue of performing high-complexity neuronal tasks in a
more efﬁcient way as multiple devices could record and analyse neuronal behaviour
at a large scale and in parallel. Owing to the miniaturization and independence of
each implant node, they could be implanted over large areas both in the central and
in the peripheral nervous system, thus bringing unprecedentedly detailed real-time
information about the nature of neuronal processes and their mechanisms [7]. In
light of these considerations, this chapter focuses on the challenges that arise from
such a shift in system architecture and the current strategies to address them in the
design of distributed intracortical neural interfaces.

Distributed Neural Interfaces: Challenges and Trends in Scaling Implantable. . .
385
2
Design Aspects for Chronic Distributed Neural Interfaces
As a consequence of the progress in miniaturization technology and material science
in the late twentieth century, there has been a noticeable development in the
form factors and technologies employed for neural interfacing. Over the course
of time, implants have signiﬁcantly shrunk in dimensions while simultaneously
being equipped with a growing number of recording and stimulating channels
[9, 10]. Despite all these efforts, the promise of a fully implantable brain-machine
interface (BMI) system capable of wireless work over large cortical areas is yet to
be fulﬁlled. Challenges in system integration, implant fabrication and packaging
are recognized as the fundamental aspects requiring further advancements on the
road towards the future of clinical neural interfaces [8, 9]. Particularly in the case
of systems composed of multiple distributed implants, where the relation between
the number of implanted devices and their size is inversely proportional, it is of
utmost importance to reduce the packaging size to a minimum, thus effectively
protecting both the device from deterioration and the host tissue from inﬂammation.
Aside from environmental protection, the implant’s package should provide robust
interconnections between the interfacing electrodes and the electronic modules
responsible for data conditioning and processing. For these reasons, the design of
autonomous miniaturized neural interfaces faces a set of challenges that need to be
tackled to ensure reliable long-term performance: from the implant’s compatibility
with the biological environment to the safety of its complementary metal oxide
semiconductor (CMOS) electronics and wireless communication, without neglect-
ing a fabrication process that could adapt to mass manufacturing.
2.1
Miniaturization
Unquestionably, one of the most signiﬁcant requirements for the packaging of
distributed systems is to ensure the miniaturization of each independent device.
The fabrication of multiple implantable devices is characterized by complicated
architectures and expectations of high yield; therefore, the device’s design for
manufacturability ought to be considered from the very beginning. This requires
consideration of the cumulative impact of devices’ invasiveness as well as of total
estimated production cost and repeatability of their characteristics.
Over the years, implantable neural interfaces have become smaller and with
more capabilities, from simple wire bundles and centimetre-sized silicon arrays
to millimetre-sized wireless modules [8]. One of the main current trends in the
development of such systems is the shift from centralized, single tethered units to
much simpler but highly miniaturized networks of implants (Fig. 2). With an aim
to make systems of ﬂoating neural interfaces viable, the footprint of each individual
implant should be kept to a minimum, preferably much smaller than the currently
achievable few square millimetres, so that several units can be placed next to each
other and cover larger cortical areas. In addition to facilitating systems scalability,
it has been proven that smaller implants cause a reduced inﬂammatory response

386
K. M. Szostak et al.
Fig. 2 Schematic overview of the principal features that distinguish the distributed from the
centralized approach in the design of cortical neural interfaces
in the surrounding tissue, thus being safer when considering the implantation of a
large number of devices [11–14]. Despite the size of an individual ﬂoating device
being considerably smaller as compared to centralized, multi-channel implants like
Utah arrays, owing to the effect of a scale, the total tissue displacement and system
invasiveness may be greater as multiple devices rather than one are being involved.
This is because in distributed approach, the total number of implanted devices is
much larger; thus, the total tissue displacement must be seen cumulatively – as the
sum of the volume of tissue being affected by each individual implanted probe.
That way the systems in which hundreds of devices are to be implanted may turn
out to be overall much more invasive as compared to the systems in which only one
large implant is being employed. It is not yet researched properly whether the lack
of in-tissue anchorage of ultra-small distributed neural interfaces could lead to the
migration of implanted devices from the target placement area elsewhere.
Nowadays, the trend is to miniaturize implants while equipping them with more
and more channels, thus increasing interconnections pitch density and giving a
rise to the problem of connectivity method selection [15, 16]. In fact, alongside
the need for a way to package implants hermetically, the problem of feedthroughs
becomes the major obstacle on a way to achieve a new level of neural interfaces’
miniaturization and technological advancement (Fig. 3) [17, 18].
From the manufacturing perspective, the number of implanted devices inﬂuences
the choice of processes and techniques enabling large-scale, low-cost, parallel
and repeatable fabrication and assembly. Thus, any manual assembly techniques
or lengthy process steps become problematic from the economic and repeata-
bility perspective. In the interest of saving precious space and enhancing the
distributed device’s reliability, the use of adhesive bonding techniques and external

Distributed Neural Interfaces: Challenges and Trends in Scaling Implantable. . .
387
Fig. 3 Interconnections in the packaging of neural interfaces are often an overlooked element which is crucial for the successful miniaturization and high-
level integration of implants. Interconnections are typically realized by the use of ﬂexible cables soldered or thermocompression-bonded to the microelectrode
array platforms and distally ended with various connectors for connecting to external electronics (examples: A [19], B [20] and C [21]). The emergence
of miniaturized, integrated, distributed neural implants requires new approaches for the realization of feedthroughs (examples: D [22], E [23] and F [24]).
(Reproduced with kind permission from [19–24])

388
K. M. Szostak et al.
connectors should be avoided and instead approaches like thermo-compression
bonding on custom interposers with redistribution layers and VIAs can be more
appropriate.
2.2
Materials
The choice of materials used for the implanted devices and in particular in the
outer layers has a strong and direct inﬂuence on the type and the magnitude of
the interaction between the implant and the surrounding tissue. For this reason,
such materials should satisfy the necessary biocompatibility requirements as to
their toxicity, biostability, allergenicity and biofouling [25–27]. As it might not
be possible to fully exclude the use of non-biocompatible materials from the
entirety of an implant (for example, those used in CMOS fabrication), it is strictly
necessary to ensure that the outermost layer of encapsulation is fully protective
and biocompatible. Considering the scale effect of an increased number of devices
implanted in parallel, the importance of material compatibility becomes even more
critical as the minor reactions evoked by each device may sum up and induce large
overall responses.
When implanted for long periods of time in the harsh conditions of a living
organism, even the most robust of materials are going to experience degrading
effects on their integrity [28]. Therefore, for long-term implanted devices, it
is particularly important to ensure the maximum degree of material safety and
resilience, as even as early as a week after the surgery the effects of materials
compatibility can be observed [29]. Possible material complications owed to the
inﬂuence of processes occurring in the biological milieu include:
•
Changes in material’s elasticity
•
Leaching of molecules
•
Corrosion
•
Hydrolysis
Especially the outermost layers of implanted interfaces should be of high
structural integrity to avoid mechanical wear resulting in the release of debris
and causing secondary inﬂammatory response, which is particularly observed for
nanostructured materials [30].
Typical materials employed in the design and fabrication of distributed neural
interfaces largely depend on the packaging scheme of choice and include silicon
oxide, silicon nitride, silicon carbide, hafnium oxide, aluminium oxide and their
combinations on a chip level alongside solders, ceramics and polymers such as
liquid crystal polymer (LCP), polyimides, parylene-C and polydimethylsiloxane
(PDMS) in SOC-based systems [31]. Embedded electronics generate heat, which
aside from having the potential to affect the local biological environment can
possibly inﬂuence the integrity of interfaces made with materials of dissimilar
thermal characteristics [32]. Therefore, thermal conductivity properties should also

Distributed Neural Interfaces: Challenges and Trends in Scaling Implantable. . .
389
be analyzed when selecting the implant’s structural materials and designing their
ﬁnal shapes. It is of additional advantage when the materials employed allow for safe
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) inspections; however, it is obligatory for them
to enable and support the transmission of data and power signals (either ultrasonic,
optic or electromagnetic), as distributed systems rely on wireless communication.
Irrespective of the materials selected, the implant and its package ought to
tolerate obligatory procedures of medical device sterilization, which require a
combination of radiation, chemical or thermal treatment [33].
2.3
Implantation Procedure
As compared to conventional neural interfaces, the implantation procedure of
autonomous distributed devices would be a more complex task for the physicians, as
the number of devices to be accurately implanted is proportionally larger and their
size smaller. To minimize the risk of damage to the devices caused by mishandling
and to increase the safety of the patients, along with the implants, custom surgery
aids will be likely needed to be developed. This is particularly important for
multiple implantations of distributed systems as difﬁculties in handling and the
multitude of devices could lead to unnecessary surgery prolongation. The safety of
placement surgery has been known as one of the critical factors contributing towards
postsurgery complications, to minimize the risk of infections surgeries should be
short and if possible less invasive than open-skull craniotomy procedures [4].
From the perspective of mechanical properties of materials, the package of
the implant should enable easy implantation and neuronal integration without
damaging nearby tissue or the device itself. Rigid implants, while overall easier
to implant, might dimple the surface of the cortex upon insertion and once in
vivo can cause continuous local irritation and inﬂammatory response as a result
of mechanical mismatch [34–36]. On the other hand, implants made of ﬂexible,
conformal materials, despite reducing the body’s inﬂammatory response, hinder the
penetration of the tissue without causing strains and tend to buckle or bead prior to
placement, being not rigid enough to pierce the brain’s pia mater [37].
The majority of implantation methods used for ultra-small or ﬂexible neural
implants relies on the employment of much larger and stiffer insertion aids
temporarily attached to the device’s body, for example, by electrostatic forces
or dissoluble adhesives [37–39]. Alternatively, whole devices can be stiffened
by means of soluble polymer coatings such as PLGA, PEG or silk polymers,
thus easing insertion, however at the price of size increase [40–42]. Placement
surgeries can be done manually or with the aid of robotic systems programmed
for a given insertion speed, leading to an increase in implantation throughput and
accuracy [43]. Nonetheless, shuttle-aided implantation methods work well mainly
for implants with compact designs and non-complicated geometries. Any added
complexity in implant architecture such as irregular cross-section or the existence
of multiple protrusions impedes placement accuracy and ease of tissue penetration,
thus signiﬁcantly complicating surgery (Fig. 4).

390
K. M. Szostak et al.
Fig. 4 Overview of various implantation aids used to ease the insertion of ﬂexible or ultra-small implants into the cortex: (a) removable needle-based shuttle
temporarily attached to an ultra-ﬂexible neural probe by dissoluble PEG-coating [44], (b) ultra-thin ﬂexible neural probe temporarily stiffened by maltose
coating [45], (c) planar silicon chiplets embedded within dissoluble agarose needles [46], (d) implantation shuttle for ultra-ﬂexible NET nanoelectronic probes
based on microholes and carbon ﬁbres [47], (e) ﬂexible microwire electrode insertion aided by electrode guide [48]. (Reproduced with kind permission from
[44–48])

Distributed Neural Interfaces: Challenges and Trends in Scaling Implantable. . .
391
2.4
Microelectrodes
The target housing for future neural interfaces accommodates three main functional
groups of implant’s elements – neural tissue interface, wireless communication
and computational units in a single, miniaturized package. Tissue interfacing units,
commonly referred to as microelectrodes, are in direct physical and electrical
contact with neural tissue and can be of various proﬁles, typically in a form
of single- or multi-stem arrays of long, conductive, high-aspect-ratio structures
protruding from the implant’s body. Thus far, there have been several achievements
in the miniaturization of single microelectrodes in neural interfaces. Sizes as low
as of several microns of wire diameter were reached in carbon ﬁbre-based probes;
however, the total size of implantable device systems remains considerably larger,
in the range of at least a few cubic millimetres [12, 49]. Within the ﬁeld of
autonomous distributed neural implants, three main types of interfacing electrodes
can be distinguished [7, 50]:
•
Planar thin-ﬁlm microelectrodes (in ﬂoating neural implants using traditional
electric contact to establish an interface with neural tissue).
•
Metallic microwire microelectrodes (in ﬂoating neural implants using traditional
electric contact to establish an interface with neural tissue).
•
Miniaturized micro-LED modules (in optogenetics-based neural implants).
The advantage of using diodes as an interface is their reduced invasiveness and
small size within hundreds of microns range. LEDs can be placed either directly
on the implant’s body surface or at the end of various extensions in order to bring
the light closer to the neuronal regions of interest, in which case diodes require
additional assembly to connect to the rest of the device [51]. However, as diodes
can generate a considerate amount of heat, the materials to which they are mounted
ought to accommodate for the heat dissipation [52].
The most straightforward and best from the miniaturization perspective are thin-
ﬁlm conductive microelectrodes, as they do not require additional integration nor
assembly, can be fabricated along the same run as the data processing circuitry
and thanks to being deﬁned by photolithography offer unique design possibilities,
including the possibility of high contact density [53, 54]. However, as they are
inherently planar, thin-ﬁlm recording sites are more likely to be affected by the
distance increasing effects of foreign body reactions.
Finally, microwire microelectrodes are characterized by great material integrity
and stability. To date, microwire electrodes have been an interface responsible
for providing the longest neuronal recording session in vivo [55]. This being
said, microwires are challenging to directly integrate with electronics and difﬁcult
to provide with uniform long-lasting passivation, thus requiring custom design
of processes [23, 56–58]. Microwire-based implants are also difﬁcult to handle
with precision when it comes to implantation precision accuracy because of the
possibility of bundle splaying or lead bending, thus leading to incorrect ﬁnal
placement [59].

392
K. M. Szostak et al.
In the ﬁeld of distributed neural interfaces, microelectrodes tend to be of
lesser density per implant, thus simplifying the architecture and allowing for more
miniaturization. Though seemingly disadvantageous, a lesser number of channels
locally are easily overcome by the larger total number of implants within the area.
2.5
CMOS Compatibility
To date, the majority of cortical neural interfacing systems relied on positioning
power supply and data processing units on the outside of the body and utilizing
ﬂexible cables to provide connections to an implant [8]. That way, tissue interfacing
microelectrodes could be manufactured using a variety of methods regardless
of their CMOS compatibility. With the highly miniaturized distributed neural
interfacing coming into the light, such an approach is no longer feasible. Formation
of autonomous miniaturized implants necessitates integration with some form of
smart modalities within the same package as each device, usually achieved by
introducing integrated circuit electronics. Because of that, cytotoxicity of CMOS
devices embedded within implant becomes an important factor to consider as their
overall number of chips and their effect on the host increases with the number
of implants [60]. Fabrication of CMOS devices involves the utilization of several
hazardous materials and chemicals, the traces of which may remain present in the
ﬁnal device and affect local tissue; thus, the implant’s packaging method needs
to provide an impervious seal. From the perspective of device’s protection, to
ensure implants and embedded electronics performances are up to speciﬁcations
methods of assembly and packaging should avert the use of high temperatures
(to prevent dopant redistribution) and involvement of reactive materials (to prevent
them from causing oxides defects and migration into the circuits junctions). Any
process involving thermal treatment in temperatures higher than 350–400 ◦C can
lead to circuitry degeneration; thus, when implants are to integrate ICs, techniques
of sealing and packaging which are well-established in MEMS and sensor industries
such as anodic bonding, glass frit or thermocompression bonding become largely
incompatible [61]. What is more, any outer coatings or materials in contact with
on-implant circuitry should be free of metal or mobile ions which could otherwise
migrate to the junctions [62]. Important in distributed neural implants is also
electrochemical compatibility of implantation environment with various materials
used in devices, including materials used in integrated electronic circuitry. When a
neural interface is used for stimulation as well as for recording, exceeded stimulation
water window and insufﬁcient packaging can lead to uncontrolled electrochemical
reactions at the interface and pH variations which can cause neuronal degeneration
or corrosion to exposed metallization [63, 64]. As an example, the electrochemical
stability of aluminium, the most popular top level-metallization material in CMOS,
changes with pH, and its behaviour can vary from corroding at low and high pH to
being purely passive in neutral pH [63]. Moreover, aluminium has been found to
have evident toxic effect on the human body with especially clear negative impact
on the nervous system, where it can accumulate over time and has been linked to the

Distributed Neural Interfaces: Challenges and Trends in Scaling Implantable. . .
393
aetiology of Alzheimer’s disease; therefore, the back end of the line metallization
of integrated circuits made of aluminium should be well packaged so that there is
no exposure of the material to the body [65].
2.6
Packaging
To ensure long-term performance stability, it is essential for the implant package
to remain hermetic. Moisture ingress gives rise to corrosion and dissolution of
materials, degradation of on-chip circuitry and mechanical stresses, thus leading
to compromised stability. The choice of encapsulation material may be aided by
analysis of moisture permeability characteristics which is the lowest for dense
inorganic materials such as pure crystals, metals, or ceramics [68]. Any polymer-
based coatings or joining techniques, such as adhesive gluing, would not be capable
to form a permanently impervious barrier unless very thick, which would be
contrary to the size constraints of a single device in a distributed system. Full metal
packages while being popular in implants designed for other regions are impossible
to be used in applications where wireless communication is necessary as they
affect the signal transmission. In general, protection of neural interfacing devices
can be realized using one or a combination of two basic packaging strategies,
direct deposition of protective material or surrounding system elements by an outer
enclosure made of polymers, glasses, epoxies or metals.
The chosen strategy should allow for protection as thin and small as possible
however durable enough to provide a continuous, homogeneous barrier which is
thick enough to accommodate for the effects of superﬁcial degeneration in vivo. The
most common package is the combination of CMOS passivation layers with outer
polymer sheath (Fig. 5b, c, e). When fabricated, CMOS devices are coated with
dielectric layers of silicon oxide and silicon nitride, which on their own already
provide some level of protection against environmental effects. The robustness of
such insulation depends on the thickness and quality of deposited ﬁlms which vary
between production lines. Furthermore, it is not conclusive at what exact rate CMOS
passivation layers are dissolving in vivo as it highly depends on the quality of surface
layers [69, 70]. For that reason, the common approach is to additionally encapsulate
ICs with a layer of polymers; then, the proper adhesion and material’s selection
becomes the key issue (Fig. 6).
Polymers such as parylene-C, PDMS and epoxy are typically the materials of
choice and are deposited at the end of fabrication and assembly run. Owing to
their ability to be cast into designed shapes, polymers allow for the encapsulation
of multiple implant’s components simultaneously, thus opening the possibility to
enclose wire-wound communication coils or external capacitor within the same
package [23, 51, 66, 71]. Given the polymer’s afﬁnity to moisture degradation, such
a solution does not secure microcoil’s integrity in the longer term, especially if
wires used are made of oxidizable materials. Moreover, the encapsulant’s ﬂexibility
can transmit stresses generated by tissue and possibly affect the coil’s geometry.
Polymers such as polyimide can also be used as a structural substrate on which

394
K. M. Szostak et al.
Fig. 5 Overview of architectures and packaging approaches for autonomous distributed neural
interfaces. (a) ALD-based packaging of an implant using multilayers of hafnium and silicon oxides
with thin-ﬁlm planar recording sites [53]. (b) Optical neural interface implant employing polymer
substrate and epoxy protection of micro LED module interface [66]. (c) Multicomponent neural
interfacing implant assembled on polyimide substrate with epoxy coating [67]. (d) Optical neural
interface using acrylic potting as a package and micro LEDs on microwire extension as an interface
[51]. (e) Tungsten microwire-based implant with parylene-C/PDMS polymer package [23]. (f)
Niobium multiple microwire neural interfacing implant eutectic-sealed using cavity package made
of silicon [58]. (Reproduced with kind permission from [23, 51, 53, 58, 66, 67])
various implant’s components, including coils and ICs, are mounted and intercon-
nected with each other [67]. Whereas the implant’s body package in the form of an
outer polymer jacket has been shown to provide an acceptable level of protection
from moisture ingress, given its porous nature, it requires a relatively thick layer
to serve its purpose over time. This characteristic makes using polymers as outer
packages for miniaturized interfaces difﬁcult. Being organic materials, polymers
are more prone to degradation as a result of biological and chemical processes
such as enzymatic mechanisms, hydrolysis or biofouling. Furthermore, under long
exposures to moisture, polymers are prone to delamination and swelling [10].
Recently, approaches of using thin, ALD-deposited high-k ceramic materials
such as hafnium dioxide and multilayers with silicon dioxide as a protective coating
on silicon-based neural implants have emerged [53]. They hold the promise of
thin, stable protective layers; however, they do not solve an issue of protection for
heterogenous implants because ALD’s process effectiveness is highly dependent
on the substrate’s surface. Moreover, using ALD coatings applied on a large scale

Distributed Neural Interfaces: Challenges and Trends in Scaling Implantable. . .
395
Fig. 6 Overview of the main components needed to build autonomous distributed neural interface
along biological elements present within its implantation environment (left). Simpliﬁed list of
requirements which future successful package for miniaturized neural implants must fulﬁl (right)
on multiple devices might be challenging because of the process’ economical
disadvantages, requiring expensive equipment.
Instead of protecting devices by means of additional layer deposition, another
approach is to provide a custom enclosure made of two components, base and
lid made of inorganic materials such as silicon, ceramics or quartz which are
connected together by the means of brazing or soldering [56, 72]. This approach
can be considered fully hermetic, thus allowing for life-long protection of devices
within. The challenges of this approach lie in the selection of joining technique
providing reliable joint, as the seal between the two components becomes the
weakest point of the system. Thus far, eutectic bonding and laser brazing techniques
have been employed for that purpose. Another challenge in the capsule-like
packaging approach is an integration with microelectrodes, which requires forming
interconnects either tunnelled underneath the seal or vertically through the package
using VIAs, thus complicating the fabrication run [58].
3
Wireless Capability
One of the foremost challenges for implantable neural interfaces is how to provide
sufﬁcient energy and establish reliable data links through biological tissues. The
common issue of the neural interface in the past was implantable medical devices

396
K. M. Szostak et al.
with transcutaneous cables to enable power supply and data communication with
external devices. This method, however, is inconsistent with long-term in-tissue
implantation, as the high risk of infection led by transcutaneous cables. Another
compromise is the implantation of rechargeable batteries or supercapacitors at
the expense of limited service life and considerable implanted volume. To solve
these issues, wireless power and data transmission methods have been applied to
implantable medical devices and favoured by most researchers and neuroscientists.
The next generation of reliable, lifelong, distributed neural interfaces has been
proposed during recent decades, based on in-depth theoretical research [73, 74]
and extensive in vivo experiments [22, 75] on wireless power harvesting and data
transmission in medical devices. In this section, we will represent the challenges
and trends in the wireless capabilities of millimetre-scale distributed neural inter-
faces [58].
3.1
Wireless Power Transfer
As shown in Fig. 7, typical wireless power transfer techniques for implantable
medical devices include ultrasonic, electromagnetic and optical power transmis-
sion and recently emerging thermal, biochemical and kinetic energy harvesting.
Load
Solar cells
Light waves
(e)
Load
Solar cells
Light waves
(e)
Source
Load
C
C
L1
L2
(d)
Source
Load
C
C
L1
L2
(d)
Source
Ultrasonic waves
Acoustic piezo transducers
Tx
Load
Rx
(c)
Source
Ultrasonic waves
Acoustic piezo transducers
Tx
Load
Rx
(c)
(a)
Load
Rx coil
Source
Tx coil
EM waves
C1
C2
(a)
Load
Rx coil
Source
Tx coil
EM waves
C1
C2
d
a
o
L
e
cr
u
o
S
d
a
o
L
e
cr
u
o
S
EM waves
(b)
Rx antenna
Tx antenna
d
a
o
L
e
cr
u
o
S
EM waves
(b)
Rx antenna
Tx antenna
Load
Biochemical
(f)
Load
Biochemical
(f)
Load
Solar cells
Light waves
(e)
Source
Load
C
C
L1
L2
(d)
Source
Ultrasonic waves
Acoustic piezo transducers
Tx
Load
Rx
(c)
(a)
Load
Rx coil
Source
Tx coil
EM waves
C1
C2
d
a
o
L
e
cr
u
o
S
EM waves
(b)
Rx antenna
Tx antenna
Load
Biochemical
(f)
Fig. 7 Typical wireless power transfer techniques for implantable medical devices [84]: (a)
electromagnetic inductive coupling, (b) electromagnetic radiation or beamforming, (c) ultrasonic
waves, (d) capacitive coupling, (e) solar energy harvesting, (f) biochemical energy harvesting.
(Reproduced with kind permission from [84])

Distributed Neural Interfaces: Challenges and Trends in Scaling Implantable. . .
397
For neural interfaces, ultrasonic power transmission is being considered for the
peripheral nervous system because ultrasonic waves cannot effectively penetrate
high-density biological tissues, in particular the spine and skull. Electromagnetic
power transmission is widely adopted in peripheral and central nervous system
implants. Because the magnetic permeability variations in biological tissues are
negligible, they result in effective magnetic penetration inside the body. The current
development of wireless transmission systems usually focuses on power transfer
efﬁciency enhancement under stringent safety and health regulations [76, 77] with
respect to body tissue exposure to different energy radiation. Other emerging
biological energy harvesting methods utilize temperature variations, biochemical
(glucose [78] or ATP [79]) energy or kinetic energy, but the power density varies
from 12.6 μW/mm2 to 61.25 μW/mm2 [80–83], which is not sufﬁcient to achieve
the minimum power budget (∼100 μW/mm2) of microelectronic systems. In the
following subsections, we ﬁrst review various wireless power transmission methods
and subsequently compare them to guide the selection of implantable medical
devices.
3.2
Electromagnetic Power Transfer
Electromagnetic power transfer is a prevalent method of wireless power trans-
mission (WPT). It can be divided into three regions: near-ﬁeld, mid-ﬁeld and
far-ﬁeld, according to the wavelength relative to the transmitter-receiver distance.
The boundary of the mid-ﬁeld region is not strictly deﬁned. If the electromagnetic
waves are considered, the near-ﬁeld waves are complicated and unpredictable, while
the far-ﬁeld waves are considered uniform. The near-ﬁeld and far-ﬁeld can be
speciﬁed by the Fraunhofer distance [85], which is deﬁned as
df = 2d2
o/λ
(1)
where df is the boundary between near-ﬁeld and far-ﬁeld, do is the outer diameter
of coils and λ is the EM wavelength in the transmission medium.
The near-ﬁeld and mid-ﬁeld regions are widely applied for wireless power
transmission in implantable medical devices, such as providing continuous power
to cochlear implants or recharging implanted batteries in DBS systems, while
far-ﬁeld power transmission is limited to extremely low power transfer efﬁciency
(PTE) over long distances, due to massive loss in GHz operating range [86]. Most
importantly, the far-ﬁeld power transmission is not suitable for implantable medical
devices because the safety requirements regarding electromagnetic radiation to
the human body limit the incident RF energy level. Researchers [87] suggested
moving the operating electromagnetic frequency from kilohertz to tens of megahertz
for powering implantable medical devices in the near-ﬁeld region. Although
electromagnetic radiation is negligible for biological tissue at such low frequencies,
the relatively long quarter wavelength (5.6 m at 10 MHz in water) prevents the
miniaturization of implantable medical devices, which results in the achieved

398
K. M. Szostak et al.
minimum Rx diameter in the order of centimetres. Recently, the operating frequency
has moved to hundreds of megahertz, which leads to the diameter reduction of
the implanted Rx and PTE improvement [88]. Furthermore, the transmission of
mid-ﬁeld electromagnetic transmission has recently been proposed by [89], and
the operating frequencies increase up to GHz [90, 91]. This approach has the
convenience of further miniaturization of implanted devices, but electromagnetic
radiation with respect to biological tissue requires special attention.
Three key parameters of electromagnetic power transfer are the transmitter-
receiver (Tx–Rx) distance dTx–Rx, the diameter of receiver DRx, and the operating
frequency f. The Tx–Rx distance dTx–Rx is determined by the implantation position.
For the human central nervous system, the brain-scalp distance varies with age
and region of the skull from 7 mm to 20 mm, and a typical value is 12 mm [92].
The Rx diameter DRx must comply with the miniaturization trend of the implanted
devices since their volume is crucial for the patients’ safety. Millimetre-scale or
submillimetre-scale devices reduce surgical risks, such as inﬂammation and foreign
body reactions. Currently, advanced microelectronic fabrication technology can
undoubtedly meet the requirements of implants due to the evolution of Moore’s
law. In addition, recent progress in microfabrication has reduced its mechanical
structure remarkably, such as in microelectrode arrays. However, the Rx devices’
miniaturization is against the power transfer efﬁciency enhancement.
The crucial parameter that must be optimized is the operating frequency f
of the electromagnetic waves. Depending on the operating frequencies, there are
different employed techniques: inductive coupling (near-ﬁeld), EM radiation (mid-
ﬁeld) and beamforming (far-ﬁeld), as shown in Table 1. Inductive coupling usually
operates from kilohertz to hundreds of megahertz. It features high power transfer
efﬁciency within a short distance (millimetres to a few centimetres). In addition, it
is important to guarantee the precise Tx/Rx coil alignment. The transfer distance is
increased from 4 to 10 times the diameter of the coil by implementing magnetic
resonant coupling with tuned coils or lumped element resonators. EM radiation
employs segmented antennas to achieve mid-distance transmission (up to several
centimetres) in the sub-gigahertz to the tens of gigahertz frequency range. The
drawback of this solution is the low power transfer efﬁciency and troubling safety
and health risks. In the gigahertz to terahertz frequency range, the beam-forming
scheme achieves a high energy concentration and low interference with existing
communication systems, but its extremely high EM radiation is hazardous; thus, it
is not suitable for medical or consumer electronics products.
Table 1 Comparison of various electromagnetic power transfer methods
EM region
Technology
Frequency
Range
Beneﬁt
Drawback
Near-ﬁeld
Inductive
coupling
kHz to MHz
Millimetres to
centimetres
High
efﬁciency
Short
distance
Mid-ﬁeld
EM radiation
Sub-GHz to
GHz
Centimetres to
metres
Small
receiver
Low
efﬁciency
Far-ﬁeld
Beam forming
GHz to THz
Up to
kilometres
Long range
Health
hazard

Distributed Neural Interfaces: Challenges and Trends in Scaling Implantable. . .
399
Downlink
Data
Carrier
Power
Amplifier
Primary Side
Distance=12mm
Uplink Sensing
Uplink
Data Recovery
Bandgap
Voltage
Reference
Voltage
Regulator
Vref
Downlink
Demodulator
Uplink
Modulator
TX Data
RX Data
RX Clock
Power Supply
Secondary Side
Power Management
Wireless Communication
Uplink Sensing
Uplink
Data Recovery
Bandgap
Voltage
Reference
Voltage
Regulator
Vref
Downlink
Demodulator
Uplink
Modulator
TX Data
RX Data
RX Clock
Power Supply
Inductive Link
Power Management
Wireless Communication
Fig. 8 Block diagram of conventional two-coil inductive link
Therefore, inductive coupling is the most suitable technology for implantable
medical devices in the electromagnetic power transmission region. The following
subsections will reveal the existing challenges and present the future directions of
inductive coupling. A conventional two-coil inductive link is taken as an example,
where we brieﬂy describe its operating principles and coupled-mode theory in
resonance-based WPT.
3.2.1
Operating Principle of Inductive Link
Figure 8 shows a simpliﬁed two-coil inductive link. It consists of an external
transmitter on the primary side and a single implanted receiver at the secondary
side. The external transmitter is connected to the battery or the power supply
and converts electrical power into electromagnetic ﬁelds. These ﬁelds transmit
through the biological tissue and then are coupled to multiple receivers. The Rx
coil at the secondary side converts the sensed electromagnetic ﬁelds into AC
electrical energy. After power rectiﬁcation and regulation, the stable DC voltage
supplies the implantable microelectronic system. The external circuitry on the
primary side includes a power ampliﬁer for power transmitting and data modula-
tion/demodulation for downlink and uplink. Implanted circuitry on the secondary
side usually contains the active or passive rectiﬁer, low-dropout regulator (LDO),
and data transceiver.
The power transmission efﬁciency of the entire system consists of the power-
added efﬁciency (PAE) of the power ampliﬁer, AC–DC power conversion efﬁciency
(PCE AC-DC) of the rectiﬁer, DC–DC power conversion efﬁciency (PCE DC-DC)
of the regulator and power transfer efﬁciency (PTE) of the inductive link, as shown
in Fig. 9. A class-E power ampliﬁer and on-chip power conditioning (rectiﬁcation
and regulation) are likely to achieve high power conversion efﬁciency. However,
the inductive link is the weakest part of the overall energy transfer ﬂow [93].
Since the Tx and Rx are in a weak coupling condition, a large portion of the
incident electromagnetic energy is absorbed or reﬂected by biological barriers.

400
K. M. Szostak et al.
External
Battery
Power
Amplifier
Inductive
Link
Rectifier
Regulator
Implanted 
Medical
Device
PAE
PTE
PCE AC-DC
PCE DC-DC
Tissue
Environment
PTx
PRx
PAmp
PInd
PRec
PReg
External
Battery
Power
Amplifier
Inductive
Link
Rectifier
Regulator
Implanted 
Medical
Device
PAE
PTE
PCE AC-DC
PCE DC-DC
Tissue
Environment
PTx
PRx
PAmp
PInd
PRec
PReg
Fig. 9 Power transfer efﬁciency of entire inductive coupled power transmission system redrawn
from [93]. (Reproduced with kind permission from [93])
Thus, the PTE of a two-coil link for brain-machine interfaces is usually less than
10%, even though several advanced techniques have been proposed, such as tissue
absorption reduction by optimizing the operating frequency [88], special patterns of
the transmitting EM ﬁeld generation [94] or coil resistance reduction by optimizing
the geometrical dimensions of the inductive link [95].
3.2.2
Technological Challenges
The technical challenges of wireless power transmission for neural interfaces in the
central nervous system are summarized according to the following four aspects.
Challenges 1 – Low Power Transfer Efﬁciency: This property is caused by weak
coupling between the transmitter and receiver over a large distance (a distance
larger than Rx outer diameter dTx–Rx ≫DRx), scattering and reﬂection of
electromagnetic ﬁelds on the surface of the biological tissues, as well as the
absorption of electromagnetic ﬁelds in biological tissues.
Challenges 2 – Non-Uniform Power Coverage: The emerging distributed
implantable devices require a wide range of power coverage. The free-
positioning concept demands robust WPT against angular/positional misalign-
ment and distance variation, especially considering the folded cerebral cortex
and the brain micro-movement in the skull.
Challenges 3 – Interference and Intermodulation: Interference between the
wireless power and data carriers and intermodulation among communication
channels are inevitable. The wireless power transmission requires a narrow-band
antenna with a high Q factor to maximize the power transfer efﬁciency, but
a wide-bandwidth and low-quality factor antenna is desirable for the wireless
data communication system to achieve a high-throughput data rate. If the
same antenna is multiplexed with power wireless transmission and wireless
data communication, the antenna design speciﬁcations must be conformed to a
compromised scheme.
Challenges 4 – Safety Limitations: The safety considerations for implantable
medical devices focus on heat dissipation and EM radiation. The neurons in

Distributed Neural Interfaces: Challenges and Trends in Scaling Implantable. . .
401
the central nervous system are extremely sensitive to heat dissipation, and the
recommended temperature variation is less than 1 ◦C [96]. Inductive power
transfer for implantable medical systems must meet the safety standards of the
IEEE standard C95.1-2005 of SAR requirements (<1.6 W/kg) worldwide [76].
Also, the EM interference safety of implantable medical devices should take
into consideration, such as the compatibility with metal detectors at airports and
MRI in hospitals. Finally, cybersecurity has also attracted public attention, as
implantable devices have network access capabilities [97].
3.2.3
Current Trends
Several years ago, the major effort in wireless power transmission for implantable
medical devices focused mainly on PTE improvement while satisfying the cor-
responding speciﬁc absorption rate (SAR) requirements for biological tissue,
regardless of the power coverage extension for distributed implants [88, 98, 99].
The most prevalent approach of the PTE optimization focuses on the selection of
key geometric dimensions of the receiver and transmitter, such as the number of
turns and trace width/spacing ratio [100, 101]. Different iterative algorithms [88]
and theoretical models [93, 102] have been proposed to perform PTE optimization
based on coil geometry.
Recently, distributed neural interfaces require extensive uniform power coverage
to provide continuous energy to multiple free-positioned implants. A conventional
two-coil inductive coupled link is no longer able to meet the power coverage
requirement. In addition, two-coil links suffer from low power transfer efﬁciency
due to the weak coupling coefﬁciency and centrally focused power coverage because
of non-uniform electromagnetic ﬁelds generated by a single transceiver [88]. A
well designed two-coil link is the encapsulated neural interfacing acquisition chip
(ENIAC) from the University of California San Diego [103], shown in Fig. 10a. The
power and signal paths have been designed as an H-tree to avoid eddy current in the
loop connections, to increase the Q factor of the Rx in-CMOS coil. The voltage
gain in a two-coil link is not sufﬁcient to drive the micro-system at the secondary
side, and thus, the multi-mode buck-boost resonant regulating rectiﬁer (B2R3) has
been proposed to boost the rectiﬁed voltage. After implementing these advanced
techniques, the power transfer efﬁciency achieves 3.4% [103], but the scheme for
powering distributed implants is not clear.
The three-coil inductive link has been demonstrated to have higher PTE than
the two-coil link [74] and to extend the power coverage within a limited area.
This scheme has been widely used in current distributed neural interfaces [23, 91,
104–108] to partly overcome the positional misalignment and to extend the power
coverage. A single circular resonator is added between the transmitter and receivers
to improve the PTE to 9.13% after following a complex iterative optimization
algorithm [106], as shown in Fig. 10b. Another example (Fig. 10c) of a three-
coil architecture is Neurograins from Brown University, which is designed for a
human [108] and rodent neural interface [91]. Different four-quadrant coils are
designed and fabricated according to the experimental objects. The four-quadrant
coil acts as a resonator in the three-coil link to improve PTE. Also, it ensures that

402
K. M. Szostak et al.
Fig. 10 Examples of electromagnetic power transfer systems for distributed implants: (a) encap-
sulated neural interfacing acquisition chip (ENIAC) [101, 103], (b) distributed free-ﬂoating
wireless implantable neural recording (FF-WINeR) system [23, 104], (c) human neurograin net-
work with a four-quadrant resonator [108], (d) eireless ﬂoating microelectrode array (WFMA) for
intracortical visual prosthesis (ICVP) [109, 110], (e) distributed wireless ECoG recording systems
[111], (f) scattered microbead implantable wireless neural stimulator [90], (g) midﬁeld wireless
power transfer for implantable medical devices [89, 94]; (h) stretchable wireless optoelectronic
systems [114], (i) EM lens empowering next generation implantable neural interfaces (ENGINI)
[115, 116]. (Reproduced with kind permission from [23, 89, 90, 101, 104, 108, 109, 111, 114–116])
the magnetic ﬁeld strengths in the two central symmetrical quadrants are consistent,
which suppress differences in energy distribution at the Rx side.
The intracortical visual prosthesis (ICVP) system in Fig. 10d attempts the same
coil for a wireless power supply and data transmission, and it also proposes the
concept of a distributed system [109, 110]. In addition, the Yoon Lab [111] from the
University of Michigan also proposed distributed wireless ECoG recording systems
in Fig. 10e. Each built-in intra-skin module has a rechargeable battery with a
wireless inductive link, and thus, the problem of a concurrent wireless power supply
for multiple modules has been avoided. In addition, there is a conceptual distributed
scheme called scattered microbead [90] from Johns Hopkins University, as shown in
Fig. 10f. Multiple transmitters supply power for submillimetre implantable wireless

Distributed Neural Interfaces: Challenges and Trends in Scaling Implantable. . .
403
neural stimulator in different areas. Nevertheless, the power transfer efﬁciency
deteriorates to 0.008%, and the power delivered to the load is less than 100 μW.
Some solutions to the uneven power coverage issue for distributed implants
are inspired by the rodents’ cage experiments [112], such as meshed overlapped
transmitting coils to improve the distribution of the power density over a wide range.
These also compensate for the robustness of the angular and positional offsets.
Thus, it is worthwhile to note the wireless cage development for rodents over the
past decade. There has been signiﬁcant work on retroﬁtting cages with a wireless
power transfer system to provide uniform power coverage of an entire cage [112,
113]. For example, 3D resonators wounded around the cage can extend the power
coverage effectively. Overlapping planar coils with dedicated phase control [105]
improves the delivered power to free-positioned Rx devices. A simpliﬁed approach
in [107] utilizes an array of planar PCB non-overlapping Tx coils to keep SAR
within the safe limits for sub-millimetre Rx coils. In addition, mid-ﬁeld and far-ﬁeld
based wireless power transfer systems are implemented for optogenetics excitation
through the μ-LED, which presented in Fig. 10g,h. These solutions have a special
patterned transmitter or stretchable receiver to provide a wide range but limited
power density for the implants’ receptor.
We cannot disregard the inﬂuence of the distance variation between the receiver
and the transmitter on the wireless power transmission efﬁciency. A common way to
attenuate this inﬂuence is to add relays among them such as resonators [95] or meta-
materials [117]. Interference between wireless power transmission and wireless
data communication has also attracted widespread attention, with separate data
and power transmission coils [118] or multiplexed coils using different frequency
carriers [113]. The EM lens enhanced strongly coupled inductive links [115, 116]
as shown in Fig. 10i has been proposed to solve this misalignment and distance
variation issues. This scheme has two inherent beneﬁts for near-ﬁeld wireless
power transmission: (1) efﬁcient power transfer; (2) uniform power coverage. EM
lens shortens the distance between the transmitter and receiver by using wired
connections through the skull. Thus, the PTE through inductive links has an
opportunity for considerable improvement. Also, the EM lens evenly distributes the
magnetic ﬁeld density over a more extensive area than that of the Tx coil. Thus, Rx
coils outside the Tx coverage can also obtain sufﬁcient power.
3.3
Ultrasonic Power Delivery
Ultrasound has been widely used in many ﬁelds including medical imaging,
nondestructive testing, underwater communication and wireless power transfer
via biological tissues or through steel walls. However, ultrasonic wireless power
transmission did not attract attention because of the low wireless power transfer
efﬁciency in the short range compared with electromagnetic wireless power trans-
mission. Recently, researchers [22, 119] have attempted to utilize ultrasonic energy
to deliver power wirelessly for implantable medical devices because ultrasound
propagation in biological tissues is safer than that of electromagnetic ﬁelds. In

404
K. M. Szostak et al.
the following subsections, we ﬁrst introduce the operating principles, and then, we
reveal the current trends and technical challenges.
3.3.1
Principle of Operation
The core component of an ultrasonic transmission system is the piezoelectric
transducer, as shown in Fig. 7c. Both the transmitting and receiving devices have
piezoelectric transducers for electrical and vibration conversion. The brief workﬂow
of the entire system is that the transmitting device ﬁrst converts the electric energy
into ultrasonic waves which propagate into the body tissue to the implanted receiver.
Next, the receiving piezoelectric transducer converts the ultrasonic vibration into
an alternating voltage and passes through the power management circuitry, which
provides the power supply for the implantable microelectronic system.
3.3.2
Ultrasonic vs. Electromagnetic Power Transfer
Ultrasonic waves have the following three advantages over electromagnetic waves
in the biological environment:
1. Low Loss in Tissue: The ultrasonic loss in biological tissues is considerably less
than that of electromagnetic waves. Since the transmission of sound waves is
through compression and stretching of biological tissues, it avoids electromag-
netic radiation and displacement currents on the surface of the skin and eddy
currents in body tissues.
2. Short Wavelength: The low propagation speed of the ultrasonic wave (105 times
slower than the electromagnetic waves) makes the wavelength of the ultrasonic
wave shorter at low frequencies, which is advantageous to Rx miniaturization.
3. Undemanding Safety Regulations: Ultrasonic safety regulations with regard to
the human body are relatively loose compared to the stringent regulations for
electromagnetic radiation. The intensity of the ultrasound that biological tissue
can withstand is approximately nine times that of the electromagnetic ﬁelds
[76, 77].
3.3.3
Technical Challenges
Ultrasound can effectively penetrate most soft biological tissues except for bones.
This capability occurs because of an impedance mismatch between hard bone and
other soft tissues. Thus, ultrasound has been widely used in medical imaging and
diagnosis. Figure 11 shows examples of ultrasonic power transfer through biological
tissues. For neural interfaces, ultrasonic power delivery systems usually apply to
the peripheral nervous system [22, 120, 121] since the biological central nervous
system is shielded by bones such as the skull or the spine. In addition, it is difﬁcult
for ultrasonic waves to achieve high transmission efﬁciency and power density over
a short distance. According to recent research [122], the efﬁciency of ultrasonic
transmission is usually less than that of electromagnetic power transmission.
However, ultrasound provides deeper penetration in body tissues and supplies
sufﬁcient energy for the implants over extended distances, while electromagnetic
power transmission has entered the far-ﬁeld region where its efﬁciency decreases

Distributed Neural Interfaces: Challenges and Trends in Scaling Implantable. . .
405
Fig. 11 Examples of ultrasonic power transfer systems for distributed implants: (a) neural dust
[22], (b) ultrasound powered millimetre-sized implant [57, 119, 123, 124], (c) implantable micro-
oxygen generator [125]. (Reproduced with kind permission from [22, 124, 125])
signiﬁcantly. It is necessary to account for the horizontal positional variations and
angular offsets caused by biological movement during wireless transmission, and
ultrasonic transmission is very susceptible to misalignment; there is no practical
solution, yet.
3.3.4
Current Trends
The development trends of ultrasonic energy transmission systems are similar to
those of electromagnetic transmission systems. The focus is on the improvement of
transmission efﬁciency, the minimization of the implanted devices and the uniform
energy coverage for distributed nodes. Similar to electromagnetic power transfer,
three key parameters that affect the power transfer efﬁciency are the effective
sensing area of the receiver ARx, the distance between the transmitter and the
receiver dTx–Rx and the operating frequency f. For millimetre-depth implantable
devices, electromagnetic wave wireless energy transfer is more efﬁcient, while for
centimetre-depth implants, ultrasonic energy transfer is preferred.

406
K. M. Szostak et al.
3.4
Other Energy Harvesting
The optical power transmission method relies on photovoltaic cells to harvest optical
energy from an external energy source (such as LEDs, laser diodes), as shown in
Fig. 7e. It often uses near-infrared or infrared regions, also known as therapeutic
window wavelengths [126], to take advantage of the minimal loss mechanisms
in biological tissues [127]. The efﬁciency of photoelectric energy conversion
depends on the area of the photovoltaic cells, the distance from the light source
[128] and the material, structure and thickness of photovoltaic cells [129]. Optical
energy transmission is proportional to the effective area of the photovoltaic cell
instead of the area squared, as compared to electromagnetic coupling. This feature
makes optical power transfer into implanted electronics a worthwhile investigation.
However, optical energy transmission also has undeniable weaknesses. The light
penetration loss in tissue mainly caused by the light absorption in the epidermis
layer and dermis layer [130]. Also, the reﬂections and refractions are not to be
neglected due to propagation in multi-layered biological tissues and scattering in
anisotropic biological tissues. These effects determine the inherent inefﬁciencies of
optical transmission.
Among emerging energy harvesting methods in Fig. 7f, for example, glucose
[78] or adenosine triphosphate [79] currently cannot provide sufﬁcient power levels
for the required form factor or the acceptable lifetime.
4
Wireless Data Communication
The requirements for neural interface data communications vary from 10 Kbps to
100 Mbps data rate, from several millimetres to centimetres in distance and from
simplex, to half-duplex, to full-duplex modes. Typically, we deﬁne the downlink and
uplink according to the direction of data transmission in the neural interface where
the downlink is deﬁned as the communication from the external transmitter to the
implantable devices; the opposite direction is referred to as the uplink, as shown in
Fig. 12. The downlink is usually utilized to send commands to the implants, while
the uplink transmits raw or compressed recorded data from electrodes to the external
devices. For distributed implanted devices, the throughput demands for the uplink
rapidly increase as the number of distributed implanted devices increases.
4.1
Downlink Data Telemetry
There are two main implementations of the downlink: data carrier modulation [75,
118] and pulse-based modulation [131]. The most common implementation is the
use of a single carrier for amplitude (ASK), phase (PSK), frequency (FSK) and load
shift keying (LSK). The advantage of this approach is the simple system structure
for low power consumption with limited data throughput. The proposed scheme

Distributed Neural Interfaces: Challenges and Trends in Scaling Implantable. . .
407
Fig. 12 Block diagram of a
wireless data telemetry
system to indicate the
direction of data
communication
Air
Tx (Data)
Rx (Data)
Distributed Implants
Biological Tissue
Rx (Data)
Tx (Data)
Rx (Data)
Tx (Data)
Uplink
Downlink
Disi trir bi uted Im
I p
m lantst
Bioi logici al Ti
T si sue
Rx (
x (D
( atat )
a
Tx x 
T (D
( ata)
a)
t
Up
U lil n
i k
Down
w lin
i k
Air
Tx (Data)
Rx (Data)
Distributed Implants
Biological Tissue
Rx (Data)
Tx (Data)
Uplink
Downlink
in [118] has separate power and data carriers in orthogonally positioned coils to
reduce the interference, but this approach increases the volume and complexity of
the wireless system. Pulse-based data telemetry has been proposed by using pulse
harmonic modulation [132] or pulse delay modulation [118] to transmit sharp pulses
at a certain amplitude or timing to represent 0 or 1 data bits. The advantage of this
approach is the minimum interference between the power and data transmission, but
the receiving side requires complex demodulation circuitry.
4.2
Uplink Data Telemetry
In general, uplinks are classiﬁed into passive and active data telemetry. Most
researchers [75, 133, 134] regard passive data telemetry as a practical solution
for neural interfaces because it consumes orders of magnitude of lower power
than conventional radio communications due to the backscattering principle, which
reﬂects the energy from the transmitter. Conventional methods of passive data
telemetry are ASK, FSK, on-off keying, and LSK. The other advantages of
backscattering are the following: (1) the multiplexed antenna between receiving the
power and transmitting data, thereby saving the volume of the implant, and (2) the
elimination of the data carrier by avoiding the power-hungry oscillator and mixer,
thereby simplifying the modulation circuit.
The apparent disadvantage of passive data telemetry is the challenge of main-
taining simultaneous stable power transfer and high-throughput data transmission.
Thus, the throughput of passive data telemetry is generally less than 10 Mbps.
When the uplink requires high data throughput, it applies UWB-based active data
telemetry. This active transmission requires a considerable amount of power to
generate the data carrier and can achieve a data throughput of over 100 Mbps.
The innovative IR-UWB [131, 135] can use a sharp digital pulse to drive a

408
K. M. Szostak et al.
wideband antenna to simplify the modulation module in the implant microelectronic
system with a reduction in the power consumption. Recently, low-power, high-
throughput active data links [136, 137] are proposed based on IR-UWB combined
with pulse position modulation (PPM) and pulse width modulation. Although these
modulations simplify the structure of the electronic circuits at the implanted site,
it complicates the external demodulation circuits and requires a large amount of
energy for demodulation.
Commercial medical implant communication system (MICS) band of 402–
405 MHz has been utilized in data communication for implantable medical devices
and wearable devices. Texas Instruments and Microsemi (previously Zarlink) have
released commercially available MICS components CC1101 and ZL70103. These
data transceivers have been implemented into pacemakers, implantable insulin
pumps, bladder control monitors and other medical devices [138].
The challenging requirements have also been placed on wireless data commu-
nication to conform to the trend of distributed medical implants. The massive data
collected from multiple implants demand to be transmitted to an external receiver.
Current preliminary research, mainly based on mature wireless communications in
modern mobile technologies, can be divided into three categories: time division
multiple access (TDMA), frequency division multiple access (FDMA) and code
division multiple access (CDMA). The CDMA technique has been applied to
the ultrasonic-powered neural dust [139]. It implements amplitude modulation by
employing ultrasonic echoes. Neurograin [108] leverages TDMA technology to
enable simultaneous communication with 64 ASICs by using binary phase-shift
keying (BPSK). In addition, ENGINI [116] uses an on-chip tuning LC tank to
achieve frequency modulation to realize frequency division technology.
5
Conclusion
The science of neural implants has signiﬁcantly progressed since the ﬁrst attempts
in neural interfacing using large, crude devices. Nowadays, thanks to the progress in
technology observed in the last century, the myriad of various miniaturized neural
interfaces of high accuracy is available. Using techniques taken from semiconductor
and microsystem’s industries, these devices are mostly made as centralized units
of multiple recording channels connected to the power supply and data processing
units by ﬂexible cabling. As a result of the limited adaptability of manufacturing
and communication technologies available for applications in neural interfaces
space, centralized-implant architecture approaches have become dominant. Despite
a variety of forms and shapes available, existing implants architectures do not leave
much room for substantial improvements in overall devices performance; hence,
formulation of novel design tactics is needed.
As an answer to this, a distributed approach to neural interfacing hardware has
appeared within the neuroscience community. Instead of single, highly advanced
devices containing hundreds of recording points, the focus could be shifted into
producing hundreds of smaller, simple devices of merely a few recording points

Distributed Neural Interfaces: Challenges and Trends in Scaling Implantable. . .
409
making a scattered BMI network. To make it possible, distributed neural interfaces
ought to be able to exchange power and data via wireless links and have a simpliﬁed
design, thus allowing for relative device miniaturization and multiplication of a
number of implants. In that way, distributed neural interfaces would make safe, low
maintenance interfaces capable of providing detailed neuronal data over large brain
regions, thus bridging the gap in currently available BMI hardware which is now
purposed either for highly detailed interfacing within very small tissues volume or
coarse recordings and stimulation over large cortical areas.
Regardless of being a novel approach, distributed BMIs follow the same con-
straints of implantable devices such as high functionality, reliability and stability.
However, as the overall number of devices to be implanted increases, the aspects
of effective communication and system’s safety become crucial. Each device in the
distributed network needs to be long-term hermetically packaged that requires new
encapsulation methods capable of keeping implants small size and ensuring their
safe use without disturbing wireless data and power transfer. In addition, packaging
method should be easily applied to hundreds of devices at low cost, preferably in a
parallel manner. From the fabrication perspective, it is crucial to ensure each implant
has the same characteristics to possibly avoid any performance variability between
devices.
Similarly challenging is establishing the right method for wireless power and
data transfer. Methods characterized by high efﬁciency are also those least safe from
the power dissipation perspective, thus requiring engineers some design trade-offs.
Likewise, the ratio between available data rates and total power consumption is
inversely proportional, thus complicating the creation of a safe and efﬁcient wireless
link. Before smart, distributed BMIs will be widely available, there is still a great
deal of research to be conducted to ensure an adequate level of implants safety
and a high level of performance. Firstly, detailed studies of chronic neuronal tissue
response should be conducted on both the cellular and extra-cellular level to better
understand the impact of tissue response on electrode performances. There should
be a close collaboration between engineers and neuroscientists to identify the design
aspects which when adjusted would boost devices performance in speciﬁc brain
regions. Only then neural interfaces will be seen as a long-missing element in the
repertoire of neuroscience hardware.
•
Design trade-offs among different schemes
– Opposite requirements for safety and efﬁciency: safety (inductive < ultrasonic
< optical) and efﬁciency (inductive > ultrasonic > optical)
– Trade-off between data rate and power consumption: data rate (active
approaches > passive approached), power consumption of data modulation
(active approaches > passive approached)
•
Future directions of different schemes
– Provide the uniform power coverage for multiple implants and multi-user data
communication with distributed devices
– Design ultra-low power implantable microsystem and keep electromagnetic
or ultrasonic radiation within the safe limits

410
K. M. Szostak et al.
•
Main future challenges for the design of chronic implants
– Need for detailed studies of chronic neuronal tissue response, both cellular
and extra-cellular level, to better understand the impact of tissue response on
the electrode performances.
– Minimize tissue damage caused by implants and surgical methods, necessary
to always consider the surgical procedure when designing devices.
– Use of bioactive materials and geometries to maximize the integration of
implant with tissue.
– Streamline device production like it has been done with ICs. We can’t rely
anymore on full manual assembly and non-paralleled production.
References
1. Greenwald, E., Masters, M.R., Thakor, N.V.: Implantable neurotechnologies: bidirectional
neural interfacesapplications and vlsi circuit implementations. Med. Biol. Eng. Comput.
54(1), 1–17 (2016)
2. Crowson, M.G., Semenov, Y.R., Tucci, D.L., Niparko, J.K.: Quality of life and cost-
effectiveness of cochlear implants: a narrative review. Audiol. Neurotol. 22(4–5), 236–258
(2017)
3. Miocinovic S., Somayajula S., Chitnis S., Vitek J.L.: History, applications, and mechanisms
of deep brain stimulation. JAMA Neurol. 70, 163–171 (2013)
4. Obidin, N., Tasnim, F., Dagdeviren, C.: The future of neuroimplantable devices: A materials
science and regulatory perspective. Adv. Mater. 32(15), 1901482 (2020)
5. Wolpaw, J., Wolpaw, E.W.: Brain-Computer Interfaces: Principles and Practice. OUP, New
York (2012)
6. Kozai, T.D.Y.: The history and horizons of microscale neural interfaces. Micromachines. 9(9),
445 (2018)
7. Laiwalla, F., Nurmikko, A.: Future of neural interfaces. In: Neural Interface: Frontiers and
Applications, pp. 225–241. Springer, Singapore (2019)
8. Szostak, K.M., Grand, L., Constandinou, T.G.: Neural interfaces for intracortical recording:
Requirements, fabrication methods, and characteristics. Front. Neurosci. 11, 665 (2017)
9. Silvoni, S., Ramos-Murguialday, A., Cavinato, M., Volpato, C., Cisotto, G., Turolla, A.,
Piccione, F., Birbaumer, N.: Brain-computer interface in stroke: A review of progress. Clin.
EEG Neurosci. 42(4), 245–252 (2011)
10. Jorﬁ, M., Skousen, J.L., Weder, C., Capadona, J.R.: Progress towards biocompatible intracor-
tical microelectrodes for neural interfacing applications. J. Neural Eng. 12(1), 011001 (2014)
11. Salatino, J.W., Ludwig, K.A., Kozai, T.D.Y., Purcell, E.K.: Glial responses to implanted
electrodes in the brain. Nat. Biomed. Eng. 1(11), 862–877 (2017)
12. Yoshida Kozai, T.D., Langhals, N.B., Patel, P.R., Deng, X., Zhang, H., Smith, K.L.,
Lahann, J., Kotov, N.A., Kipke, D.R.: Ultrasmall implantable composite microelectrodes with
bioactive surfaces for chronic neural interfaces. Nat. Mater. 11(12), 1065–1073 (2012)
13. Skousen, J.L., Merriam, S.M.E., Srivannavit, O., Perlin, G., Wise, K.D., Tresco, P.A.:
Reducing surface area while maintaining implant penetrating proﬁle lowers the brain foreign
body response to chronically implanted planar silicon microelectrode arrays. Prog. Brain Res.
194, 167–180 (2011). Elsevier
14. G¨allentoft, L., Pettersson, L.M.E., Danielsen, N., Schouenborg, J., Prinz, C.N., Linsmeier,
C.E.: Size-dependent long-term tissue response to biostable nanowires in the brain. Biomate-
rials. 42, 172–183 (2015)
15. Gill, E.C., Antalek, J., Kimock, F.M., Nasiatka, P.J., McIntosh, B.P., Tanguay, A.R., Weiland,
J.D.: High-density feedthrough technology for hermetic biomedical micropackaging. MRS
Online Proceedings Library Archive, 1572 (2013)

Distributed Neural Interfaces: Challenges and Trends in Scaling Implantable. . .
411
16. Langenmair, M., Martens, J., Gierthmuehlen, M., Plachta, D.T.T., Stieglitz, T.: Low temper-
ature approach for high density electrical feedthroughs for neural implants using maskless
fabrication techniques. In: 2018 40th Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineer-
ing in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC), Honolulu, pp. 2933–2936 (2018)
17. Clement, C.: The Human Body: A Special Environment, pp. 97–200. Springer International
Publishing, Cham (2019)
18. Koch, J., Schuettler, M., Pasluosta, C., Stieglitz, T.: Electrical connectors for neural implants:
Design, state of the art and future challenges of an underestimated component. J. Neural Eng.
16(6), 061002 (2019)
19. NeuroNexus. Matrix array (small animal). NeuroNexus. https://neuronexus.com/products/
electrode-arrays/3D-probes/small-animal-matrix-arrays
20. Perlin, G.E., Wise, K.D.: An ultra compact integrated front end for wireless neural recording
microsystems. J. Microelectromech. Syst. 19(6), 1409–1421 (2010)
21. Barrese, J.C., Rao, N., Paroo, K., Triebwasser, C., Vargas-Irwin, C., Franquemont, L.,
Donoghue, J.P.: Failure mode analysis of silicon-based intracortical microelectrode arrays
in non-human primates. J. Neural Eng. 10(6), 066014 (2013)
22. Seo, D., Neely, R.M., Shen, K., Singhal, U., Alon, E., Rabaey, J.M., Carmena, J.M., Maharbiz,
M.M.: Wireless recording in the peripheral nervous system with ultrasonic neural dust.
Neuron. 91(3), 529–539 (2016)
23. Yeon, P., Mirbozorgi, S., Ash, B., Eckhardt, H., Ghovanloo, M.: Fabrication and microassem-
bly of a mm-sized ﬂoating probe for a distributed wireless neural interface. Micromachines.
7(9), 154 (2016)
24. Leung, V.W., Lee, J., Li, S., Yu, S., Kilfovle, C., Larson, L., Nurmikko, A., Laiwalla, F.:
A CMOS distributed sensor system for high-density wireless neural implants for brain-
machine interfaces. In: ESSCIRC 2018-IEEE 44th European Solid State Circuits Conference
(ESSCIRC), pp. 230–233. IEEE (2018)
25. Marin, C., Fernandez, E.: Biocompatibility of intracortical microelectrodes: Current status
and future prospects. Front. Neuroeng. 3, 8 (2010)
26. Fattahi, P., Yang, G., Kim, G., Abidian, M.R.: A review of organic and inorganic biomaterials
for neural interfaces. Adv. Mater. 26(12), 1846–1885 (2014)
27. Kotov, N.A., Winter, J.O., Clements, I.P., Jan, E., Timko, B.P., Campidelli, S., Pathak, S.,
Mazzatenta, A., Lieber, C.M., Prato, M., et al.: Nanomaterials for neural interfaces. Adv.
Mater. 21(40), 3970–4004 (2009)
28. Polikov, V.S., Tresco, P.A., Reichert, W.M.: Response of brain tissue to chronically implanted
neural electrodes. J. Neurosci. Methods. 148(1), 1–18 (2005)
29. Robinson, F.R., Johnson, M.T.: Histopathological studies of tissue reactions to various metals
implanted in cat brains. Technical report. Aeronautical Systems Division Wright-Patterson
AFB Ohio Aerospace Medical Division (1961)
30. Neves, H.P.: Materials for implantable systems. In: Implantable Sensor Systems for Medical
Applications, Woodhead Publishing Limited, pp. 3–38. Elsevier, Cambridge (2013)
31. Ahn, S.-H., Jeong, J., Kim, S.J.: Emerging encapsulation technologies for long-term reliabil-
ity of microfabricated implantable devices. Micromachines. 10(8), 508 (2019)
32. Wolf, P.D., Reichert, W.M.: Thermal considerations for the design of an implanted cortical
brain–machine interface (bmi). In: Indwelling Neural Implants: Strategies for Contending
with the In Vivo Environment, pp. 33–38. CRC Press/Taylor & Francis, Boca Raton
(2008)
33. Stieglitz, T.: Manufacturing, assembling and packaging of miniaturized neural implants.
Microsyst. Technol. 16(5), 723–734 (2010)
34. Karumbaiah, L., Saxena, T., Carlson, D., Patil, K., Patkar, R., Gaupp, E.A., Betancur, M.,
Stanley, G.B., Carin, L., Bellamkonda, R.V.: Relationship between intracortical electrode
design and chronic recording function. Biomaterials. 34(33), 8061–8074 (2013)
35. Köhler, P., Wolff, A., Ejserholm, F., Wallman, L., Schouenborg, J., Linsmeier, C.E.: Inﬂuence
of probe ﬂexibility and gelatin embedding on neuronal density and glial responses to brain
implants. PLoS One. 10(3), e0119340 (2015)

412
K. M. Szostak et al.
36. Du, Z.J., Kolarcik, C.L., Kozai, T.D.Y., Luebben, S.D., Sapp, S.A., Zheng, X.S., Nabity,
J.A., Cui, X.T.: Ultrasoft microwire neural electrodes improve chronic tissue integration. Acta
Biomater. 53, 46–58 (2017)
37. Yoshida Kozai, T.D., Kipke, D.R.: Insertion shuttle with carboxyl terminated selfassembled
monolayer coatings for implanting ﬂexible polymer neural probes in the brain. J. Neurosci.
Methods. 184(2), 199–205 (2009)
38. Zhang, H., Patel, P.R., Xie, Z., Swanson, S.D., Wang, X., Kotov, N.A.: Tissue-compliant
neural implants from microfabricated carbon nanotube multilayer composite. ACS Nano.
7(9), 7619–7629 (2013)
39. Weltman, A., Yoo, J., Meng, E.: Flexible, penetrating brain probes enabled by advances in
polymer microfabrication. Micromachines. 7(10), 180 (2016)
40. Felix, S.H., Shah, K.G., Tolosa, V.M., Sheth, H.J., Tooker, A.C., Delima, T.L., Jadhav, S.P.,
Frank, L.M., Pannu, S.S.: Insertion of ﬂexible neural probes using rigid stiffeners attached
with biodissolvable adhesive. J. Vis. Exp. 79, e50609 (2013)
41. Pas, J., Rutz, A.L., Quilichini, P.P., Slezia, A., Ghestem, A., Kaszas, A., Donahue, M.J.,
Curto, V.F., O’Connor, R.P., Bernard, C., et al.: A bilayered pva/plga-bioresorbable shuttle
to improve the implantation of ﬂexible neural probes. J. Neural Eng. 15(6), 065001 (2018)
42. Metallo, C., Trimmer, B.A.: Silk coating as a novel delivery system and reversible adhesive
for stiffening and shaping ﬂexible probes. J. Biol. Methods. 2(1), e13 (2015)
43. Musk, E., et al.: An integrated brain-machine interface platform with thousands of channels.
J. Med. Internet Res. 21(10), e16194 (2019)
44. Zhang, S., Wang, C., Gao, H., Yu, C., Yan, Q., Lu, Y., Tao, Z., Linghu, C., Chen, Z., Xu, K.,
et al.: A removable insertion shuttle for ultraﬂexible neural probe implantation with stable
chronic brain electrophysiological recording. Adv. Mater. Interfaces. 7(6), 1901775 (2020)
45. Xiang, Z., Yen, S.-C., Xue, N., Sun, T., Tsang, W.M., Zhang, S., Liao, L.-D., Thakor, N.V.,
Lee, C.: Ultra-thin ﬂexible polyimide neural probe embedded in a dissolvable maltose-coated
microneedle. J. Micromech. Microeng. 24(6), 065015 (2014)
46. Sigurdsson, S.A., Yu, Z., Lee, J., Nurmikko, A.: A method for large scale implantation of 3d
microdevice ensembles into brain and soft tissue. bioRxiv (2020)
47. Luan, L., Wei, X., Zhao, Z., Siegel, J.J., Potnis, O., Tuppen, C.A., Lin, S., Kazmi, S., Fowler,
R.A., Holloway, S., et al.: Ultraﬂexible nanoelectronic probes form reliable, glial scar–free
neural integration. Sci. Adv. 3(2), e1601966 (2017)
48. Arafat, M.A., Rubin, L.N., Jefferys, J.G.R., Irazoqui, P.P.: A method of ﬂexible micro-wire
electrode insertion in rodent for chronic neural recording and a device for electrode insertion.
IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 27(9), 1724–1731 (2019)
49. Cheung, K.C.: Implantable microscale neural interfaces. Biomed. Microdevices. 9(6), 923–
938 (2007)
50. Cavuto, M.L., Constandinou, T.G.: Investigation of insertion method to achieve chronic
recording stability of a semi-rigid implantable neural probe. In: 2019 9th International
IEEE/EMBS Conference on Neural Engineering (NER), pp. 665–669. IEEE (2019)
51. Montgomery, K.L., Yeh, A.J., Ho, J.S., Tsao, V., Iyer, S.M., Grosenick, L., Ferenczi, E.A.,
Tanabe, Y., Deisseroth, K., Delp, S.L., et al.: Wirelessly powered, fully internal optogenetics
for brain, spinal and peripheral circuits in mice. Nat. Methods. 12(10), 969 (2015)
52. Delbeke, J., Hoffman, L., Mols, K., Braeken, D., Prodanov, D.: And then there was light:
perspectives of optogenetics for deep brain stimulation and neuromodulation. Front. Neurosci.
11, 663 (2017)
53. Jeong, J., Laiwalla, F., Lee, J., Ritasalo, R., Pudas, M., Larson, L., Leung, V., Nurmikko, A.:
Conformal hermetic sealing of wireless microelectronic implantable chiplets by multilayered
atomic layer deposition (ald). Adv. Funct. Mater. 29(5), 1806440 (2019)
54. Neely, R.M., Piech, D.K., Santacruz, S.R., Maharbiz, M.M., Carmena, J.M.: Recent advances
in neural dust: Towards a neural interface platform. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 50, 64–71 (2018)
55. Krüger, J., Caruana, F., Rizzolatti, G., et al.: Seven years of recording from monkey cortex
with a chronically implanted multiple microelectrode. Front. Neuroeng. 3, 6 (2010)

Distributed Neural Interfaces: Challenges and Trends in Scaling Implantable. . .
413
56. Szostak, K.M., Mazza, F., Maslik, M., Leene, L.B., Feng, P., Constandinou, T.G.: Microwire-
cmos integration of mm-scale neural probes for chronic local ﬁeld potential recording. In:
2017 IEEE Biomedical Circuits and Systems Conference (BioCAS), pp. 1–4. IEEE (2017)
57. Charthad, J., Chang, T.C., Liu, Z., Sawaby, A., Weber, M.J., Baker, S., Gore, F., Felt, S.A.,
Arbabian, A.: A mm-sized wireless implantable device for electrical stimulation of peripheral
nerves. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Circuits Syst. 12(2), 257–270 (2018)
58. Ahmadi, N., Cavuto, M.L., Feng, P., Leene, L.B., Maslik, M., Mazza, F., Savolainen, O.,
Szostak, K.M., Bouganis, C.-S., Ekanayake, J., et al.: Towards a distributed, chronically-
implantable neural interface. In: 2019 9th International IEEE/EMBS Conference on Neural
Engineering (NER), pp. 719–724. IEEE (2019)
59. Misra, A., Burke, J.F., Ramayya, A.G., Jacobs, J., Sperling, M.R., Moxon, K.A., Kahana,
M.J., Evans, J.J., Sharan, A.D.: Methods for implantation of micro-wire bundles and
optimization of single/multi-unit recordings from human mesial temporal lobe. J. Neural Eng.
11(2), 026013 (2014)
60. Graham, A.H.D., Robbins, J., Bowen, C.R., Taylor, J.: Commercialisation of CMOS inte-
grated circuit technology in multi-electrode arrays for neuroscience and cell-based biosensors.
Sensors. 11(5), 4943–4971 (2011)
61. Najaﬁ, K.: Packaging of implantable microsystems. In: 2007 IEEE SENSORS, pp. 58–63.
IEEE (2007)
62. Balke, T., Völker, B., Schenk, H., Radu, I., Reiche, M.: Wafer bonding for optical mems,
Proc. ECS, PV2005-02, pp. 184–193 (2005)
63. Robblee, L.S., Rose, T.L.: Electrochemical guidelines for selection of protocols and electrode
materials for neural stimulation. In: Agnew, W.F., McCreery, D.B. (Eds.), Neural Prostheses:
Fundamental Studies, Prentice Hall Biophysics and Bioengineering Series. Prentice Hall,
Englewood Cliffs, pp 25–66 (1990)
64. Graham, A.H.D., Bowen, C.R., Taylor, J., Robbins, J.: Neuronal cell biocompatibility and
adhesion to modiﬁed CMOS electrodes. Biomed. Microdevices. 11(5), 1091 (2009)
65. Shaw, C.A., Tomljenovic, L.: Aluminum in the central nervous system (CNS): Toxicity in
humans and animals, vaccine adjuvants, and autoimmunity. Immunol. Res. 56(2–3), 304–316
(2013)
66. Khan, W., Jia, Y., Madi, F., Weber, A., Ghovanloo, M., Li, W.: A miniaturized, wirelessly-
powered, reﬂector-coupled single channel opto neurostimulator. In: 2018 IEEE Micro Electro
Mechanical Systems (MEMS), pp. 174–177. IEEE (2018)
67. Chang, T.C., L Wang, M., Charthad, J., J Weber, M., Arbabian, A.: 27.7 a 30.5 mm 3 fully
packaged implantable device with duplex ultrasonic data and power links achieving 95kb/s
with¡ 10–4 ber at 8.5 cm depth. In: 2017 IEEE International Solid-State Circuits Conference
(ISSCC), pp. 460–461. IEEE (2017)
68. Morales, J.M.H.: Evaluating biocompatible barrier ﬁlms as encapsulants of medical micro
devices. Ph.D. thesis, Universite Grenoble Alpes (2015)
69. Maloney, J.M., Lipka, S.A., Baldwin, S.P.: In vivo biostability of cvd silicon oxide and silicon
nitride ﬁlms. MRS Online Proceedings Library Archive, 872 (2005)
70. Vanhoestenberghe, A., Donaldson, N.: Corrosion of silicon integrated circuits and lifetime
predictions in implantable electronic devices. J. Neural Eng. 10(3), 031002 (2013)
71. Feng, P., Yeon, P., Cheng, Y., Ghovanloo, M., Constandinou, T.G.: Chip-scale coils for
millimeter-sized bio-implants. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Circuits Syst. 99, 1–12 (2018)
72. Nagarkar, K., Hou, X., Stoffel, N., Davis, E., Ashe, J., Borton, D.: Micro-hermetic packaging
technology for active implantable neural interfaces. In: 2017 IEEE 67th Electronic Compo-
nents and Technology Conference (ECTC), pp. 218–223. IEEE (2017)
73. Kurs, A., Karalis, A., Moffatt, R., Joannopoulos, J.D., Fisher, P., Soljaˇci´c, M.: Wireless power
transfer via strongly coupled magnetic resonances. Science. 317(5834), 83–86 (2007)
74. Kiani, M., Ghovanloo, M.: The circuit theory behind coupled-mode magnetic resonance-
based wireless power transmission. IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I: Regul. Pap. 59(9), 2065–
2074 (2012)

414
K. M. Szostak et al.
75. Lo, Y., Kuan, Y., Culaclii, S., Kim, B., Wang, P., Chang, C., Massachi, J.A., Zhu, M., Chen, K.,
Gad, P., Edgerton, V.R., Liu, W.: A fully integrated wireless SoC for motor function recovery
after spinal cord injury. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Circuits Syst. 11(3), 497–509 (2017)
76. IEEE. IEEE standard for safety levels with respect to human exposure to radio frequency
electromagnetic ﬁelds, 3 kHz to 300 GHz. IEEE Std C95.1–2005 (Revision of IEEE Std
C95.1–1991), pp 1–238 (2006)
77. Food and Drug Administration. Information for manufacturers seeking market clearance
of diagnostic ultrasound systems and transducers. Food and Drug Administration, pp 1–64
(September 2008). Accessed 30 Dec 2019
78. Mano, N.: A 280 μWcm−2 biofuel cell operating at low glucose concentration. Chem.
Commun. 19, 2221–2223 (2008)
79. Roseman, J.M., Lin, J., Ramakrishnan, S., Rosenstein, J.K., Shepard, K.L.: Hybrid integrated
biological-solid-state system powered with adenosine triphosphate. Nature. 6, 10070 (2015)
80. Venkatasubramanian, R., Siivola, E., Colpitts, T., O’Quinn, B.: Thin-ﬁlm thermoelectric
devices with high room-temperature ﬁgures of merit. Nature. 413(6856), 597–602 (2001)
81. Yoon, E.-J., Park, J.-T., Chong-Gun, Y.: Thermal energy harvesting circuit with maximum
power point tracking control for self-powered sensor node applications. Front. Inf. Technol.
Electron. Eng. 19(2), 285–296 (2018)
82. Shi, B., Li, Z., Fan, Y.: Implantable energy-harvesting devices. Adv. Mater. 30(44), 1801511
(2018)
83. Katic, J., Rodriguez, S., Rusu, A.: A high-efﬁciency energy harvesting interface for implanted
biofuel cell and thermal harvesters. IEEE Trans. Power Electron. 33(5), 4125–4134 (2018)
84. Etemadrezaei, M.: Chapter 22 – Wireless power transfer. In: Rashid, M.H. (ed.) Power
Electronics Handbook, 4th edn, pp. 711–722. Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford (2018)
85. Tran, L.-G., Cha, H.-K., Park, W.-T.: RF power harvesting: A review on designing method-
ologies and applications. Micro Nano Syst. Lett. 5(1), 14 (2017)
86. Ouda, M.H., Arsalan, M., Marnat, L., Shamim, A., Salama, K.N.: 5.2-GHz RF power
harvester in 0.18-μm CMOS for implantable intraocular pressure monitoring. IEEE Trans.
Microwave Theory Tech. 61(5), 2177–2184 (2013)
87. Kiani, M., Ghovanloo, M.: A ﬁgure-of-merit for designing high-performance inductive power
transmission links. IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron. 60(11), 5292–5305 (2013)
88. Ahn, D., Ghovanloo, M.: Optimal design of wireless power transmission links for millimeter-
sized biomedical implants. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Circuits Syst. 10(1), 125–137 (2016)
89. Ho, J.S., Yeh, A.J., Neofytou, E., Kim, S., Tanabe, Y., Patlolla, B., Beygui, R.E., Poon, A.S.Y.:
Wireless power transfer to deep-tissue microimplants. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 111(22), 7974–
7979 (2014)
90. Khalifa, A., Liu, Y., Karimi, Y., Wang, Q., Eisape, A., Stanaevi, M., Thakor, N., Bao, Z.,
Etienne-Cummings, R.: The microbead: A 0.009 mm3 implantable wireless neural stimulator.
IEEE Trans. Biomed. Circuits Syst. 13(5), 971–985 (2019)
91. Lee, J., Mok, E., Huang, J., Cui, L., Lee, A., Leung, V., Mercier, P., Shellhammer, S., Larson,
L., Asbeck, P., Rao, R., Song, Y., Nurmikko, A., Laiwalla, F.: An implantable wireless
network of distributed microscale sensors for neural applications. In: 2019 9th International
IEEE/EMBS Conference on Neural Engineering (NER), San Francisco, p 871–874 (March
2019)
92. Beauchamp, M.S., Beurlot, M.R., Fava, E., Nath, A.R., Parikh, N.A., Saad, Z.S., Bortfeld,
H., Oghalai, J.S.: The developmental trajectory of brain-scalp distance from birth through
childhood: Implications for functional neuroimaging. PLOS One. 6(9), 1–9 (2011)
93. Jow, U., Ghovanloo, M.: Design and optimization of printed spiral coils for efﬁcient
transcutaneous inductive power transmission. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Circuits Syst. 1(3), 193–
202 (2007)
94. Ho, J.S., Kim, S., Poon, A.S.Y.: Midﬁeld wireless powering for implantable systems. Proc.
IEEE. 101(6), 1369–1378 (2013)
95. Yeon, P., Mirbozorgi, S.A., Lim, J., Ghovanloo, M.: Feasibility study on active back telemetry
and power transmission through an inductive link for millimeter-sized biomedical implants.
IEEE Trans. Biomed. Circuits Syst. 11(6), 1366–1376 (2017)

Distributed Neural Interfaces: Challenges and Trends in Scaling Implantable. . .
415
96. Wolf, P.D.: Thermal considerations for the design of an implanted cortical brainmachine
interface (bmi). In: Raton, B. (ed.) Indwelling Neural Implants: Strategies for Contending
with the In Vivo Environment, chapter 3, pp. 63–86. CRC Press Taylor & Francis, Boca
Raton (2008)
97. Agarwal, K., Jegadeesan, R., Guo, Y., Thakor, N.V.: Wireless power transfer strategies for
implantable bioelectronics. IEEE Rev. Biomed. Eng. 10, 136–161 (2017)
98. Zargham, M., Gulak, P.G.: Fully integrated on-chip coil in 0.13 μm CMOS for wireless power
transfer through biological media. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Circuits Syst. 9(2), 259–271 (2015)
99. Mark, M., Bjrninen, T., Ukkonen, L., Sydnheimo, L., Rabaey, J.M.: SAR reduction and
link optimization for mm-size remotely powered wireless implants using segmented loop
antennas. In 2011 IEEE Topical Conference on Biomedical Wireless Technologies, Networks,
and Sensing Systems, Phoenix, pp. 7–10 (Jan 2011)
100. Royet, A.S., Michel, J.P., Reig, B., Pornin, J.L., Ranaivoniarivo, M., Robain, B., de Person,
P., Uren, G.: Design of optimized high Q inductors on SOI substrates for RF ICs. In: 2016
IEEE International Conference on Electronics, Circuits and Systems (ICECS), Monte Carlo,
p 324–327 (2016)
101. Park, J., Kim, C., Akinin, A., Ha, S., Cauwenberghs, G., Mercier, P.P.: Wireless powering of
mm-scale fully-on-chip neural interfaces. In: 2017 IEEE Biomedical Circuits and Systems
Conference (BioCAS), Turin, pp. 1–4 (Oct 2017)
102. Jow, U., Ghovanloo, M.: Modeling and optimization of printed spiral coils in air, saline, and
muscle tissue environments. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Circuits Syst. 3(5), 339–347 (2009)
103. Kim, C., Park, J., Ha, S., Akinin, A., Kubendran, R., Mercier, P.P., Cauwenberghs, G.: A 3
mm × 3 mm fully integrated wireless power receiver and neural interface system-on-chip.
IEEE Trans. Biomed. Circuits Syst. 13, 1 (2019)
104. Mirbozorgi, S.A., Yeon, P., Ghovanloo, M.: Robust wireless power transmission to mm-
sized free-ﬂoating distributed implants. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Circuits Syst. 11(3), 692–702
(2017)
105. Lee, B., Ahn, D., Ghovanloo, M.: Three-phase time-multiplexed planar power transmission
to distributed implants. IEEE J. Emerg. Sel. Top. Power Electron. 4(1), 263–272 (2016)
106. Yeon, P., Mirbozorgi, S.A., Ghovanloo, M.: Optimal design of a 3-coil inductive link for
millimeter-sized biomedical implants. In: 2016 IEEE Biomedical Circuits and Systems
Conference (BioCAS), Shanghai, China, pp. 396–399 (2016)
107. Karimi, Y., Khalifa, A., Montlouis, W., Stanaevi, M., Etienne-Cummings, R.: Coil array
design for maximizing wireless power transfer to sub-mm sized implantable devices. In: 2017
IEEE Biomedical Circuits and Systems Conference (BioCAS), pp. 1–4 (Oct 2017)
108. Lee, J., Laiwalla, F., Jeong, J., Kilfoyle, C., Larson, L., Nurmikko, A., Li, S., Yu, S., Leung,
V.W.: Wireless power and data link for ensembles of sub-mm scale implantable sensors near
1GHz. In: 2018 IEEE Biomedical Circuits and Systems Conference (BioCAS), pp. 1–4 (Oct
2018)
109. Troyk, P., Bredeson, S., Cogan, S., Romero-Ortega, M., Suh, S., Hu, Z., Kanneganti, A.,
Granja-Vazquez, R., Seifert, J., Bak, M.: In-vivo tests of a 16-channel implantable wireless
neural stimulator. In: 2015 7th International IEEE/EMBS Conference on Neural Engineering
(NER), pages 474–477, April 2015
110. Troyk, P.R., Bradley, D., Bak, M., Cogan, S., Erickson, R., Hu, Z., Kufta, C., McCreery,
D., Schmidt, E., Sung, S., Towle, V.: Intracortical visual prosthesis research – Approach
and progress. In: 2005 IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology 27th Annual Conference,
Shanghai, China, pp. 7376–7379 (Jan 2005)
111. Chang, S.-I., Park, S.-Y., Yoon, E.: Minimally-invasive neural interface for distributed
wireless electrocorticogram recording systems. Sensors. 18(1):263 (2018)
112. Mirbozorgi, S.A., Bahrami, H., Sawan, M., Gosselin, B.: A smart cage with uniform wireless
power distribution in 3D for enabling long-term experiments with freely moving animals.
IEEE Trans. BioCAS. 10(2), 424–434 (2016)
113. Jia, Y., Mirbozorgi, S.A., Zhang, P., Inan, O.T., Li, W., Ghovanloo, M.: A dual-band wireless
power transmission system for evaluating mm-sized implants. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Circuits
Syst. 13(4), 595–607 (2019)

416
K. M. Szostak et al.
114. Park, S.I., Brenner, D.S., Shin, G., Morgan, C.D., Copits, B.A., Chung, H.U., Pullen, M.Y.,
Noh, K.N., Davidson, S., Oh, S.J., Yoon, J., Jang, K.-I., Samineni, V.K., Norman, M.,
Grajales-Reyes, J.G., Vogt, S.K., Sundaram, S.S., Wilson, K.M., Ha, J.S., Xu, R., Pan, T.,
Kim, T., Huang, Y., Montana, M.C., Golden, J.P., Bruchas, M.R., Gereau, R.W., Rogers,
J.A.: Soft, stretchable, fully implantable miniaturized optoelectronic systems for wireless
optogenetics. Nat. Biotechnol. 33(12), 1280–1286 (2015)
115. Feng, P., Maslik, M., Constandinou, T.G.: Em-lens enhanced power transfer and multinode
data transmission for implantable medical devices. In: 2019 IEEE Biomedical Circuits and
Systems Conference (BioCAS), Nara, Japan, pp. 1–4 (2019)
116. Leene, L.B., Maslik, M., Feng, P., Szostak, K.M., Mazza, F., Constandinou, T.G.:
Autonomous SoC for neural local ﬁeld potential recording in mm-scale wireless implants.
In: 2018 IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems (ISCAS), Florence, Italy,
pp. 1–5 (May 2018)
117. Lipworth, G., Ensworth, J., Seetharam, K., Huang, D., Lee, J.S., Schmalenberg, P., Nomura,
T., Reynolds, M.S., Smith, D.R., Urzhumov, Y.: Magnetic metamaterial superlens for
increased range wireless power transfer. Sci. Rep. 4(1), 3642 (2014)
118. Kiani, M., Ghovanloo, M.: A 13.56-Mbps pulse delay modulation based transceiver for
simultaneous near-ﬁeld data and power transmission. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Circuits Syst.
9(1), 1–11 (2015)
119. Wang, M.L., Baltsavias, S., Chang, T.C., Weber, M.J., Charthad, J., Arbabian, A.: Wireless
data links for next-generation networked micro-implantables. In: 2018 IEEE Custom Inte-
grated Circuits Conference (CICC), San Diego, pp. 1–9 (Apr 2018)
120. Ozeri, S., Shmilovitz, D.: Ultrasonic transcutaneous energy transfer for powering implanted
devices. Ultrasonics. 50(6), 556–566 (2010)
121. Meng, H., Sahin, M.: An electroacoustic recording device for wireless sensing of neural
signals. In: 2013 35th Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine
and Biology Society (EMBC), Osaka, pp. 3086–3088 (July 2013)
122. Taalla, R.V., Areﬁn, M.S., Kaynak, A., Kouzani, A.Z.: A review on miniaturized ultrasonic
wireless power transfer to implantable medical devices. IEEE Access. 7, 2092–2106 (2019)
123. Charthad, J., Weber, M.J., Chang, T.C., Arbabian, A.: A mm-sized implantable medical device
(IMD) with ultrasonic power transfer and a hybrid bi-directional data link. IEEE J. Solid State
Circuits. 50(8), 1741–1753 (2015)
124. Chang, T.C., Weber, M.J., Charthad, J., Baltsavias, S., Arbabian, A.: End-to-end design of
efﬁcient ultrasonic power links for scaling towards submillimeter implantable receivers. IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Circuits Syst. 12(5), 1100–1111 (2018)
125. Maleki, T., Cao, N., Song, S.H., Kao, C., Ko, S., Ziaie, B.: An ultrasonically powered
implantable micro-oxygen generator (IMOG). IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 58(11), 3104–3111
(2011)
126. Ayazian, S., Hassibi, A.: Delivering optical power to subcutaneous implanted devices. In:
2011 Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology
Society, Boston, pp. 2874–2877 (Aug 2011)
127. Lee, S., Cortese, A.J., Gandhi, A.P., Agger, E.R., McEuen, P.L., Molnar, A.C.: A 250 μm ×
57 μm microscale opto-electronically transduced electrodes (MOTEs) for neural recording.
IEEE Trans. Biomed. Circuits Syst. 12(6), 1256–1266 (2018)
128. Mujeeb-U-Rahman, M., Adalian, D., Chang, C.-F., Scherer, A.: Optical power transfer and
communication methods for wireless implantable sensing platforms. J. Biomed. Opt. 20(9),
1–9 (2015)
129. Das, R., Moradi, F., Heidari, H.: Biointegrated and wirelessly powered implantable brain
devices: A review. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Circuits Syst. 14, 343–358 (2020)
130. Ash, C., Dubec, M., Donne, K., Bashford, T.: Effect of wavelength and beam width on
penetration in light-tissue interaction using computational methods. Lasers Med. Sci. 32(8),
1909–1918 (2017)
131. Ebrazeh, A., Mohseni, P.: 30 pJ/b, 67 Mbps, centimeter-to-meter range data telemetry with an
IR-UWB wireless link. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Circuits Syst. 9(3), 362–369 (2015)

Distributed Neural Interfaces: Challenges and Trends in Scaling Implantable. . .
417
132. Inanlou, F., Kiani, M., Ghovanloo, M.: A 10.2 Mbps pulse harmonic modulation based
transceiver for implantable medical devices. IEEE J. Solid State Circuits. 46(6), 1296–1306
(2011)
133. Kuan, Y., Lo, Y., Kim, Y., Chang, M.F., Liu, W.: Wireless gigabit data telemetry for large-
scale neural recording. IEEE J. Biomed. Health Inform. 19(3), 949–957 (2015)
134. Jiang, D., Cirmirakis, D., Schormans, M., Perkins, T.A., Donaldson, N., Demosthenous,
A.: An integrated passive phase-shift keying modulator for biomedical implants with power
telemetry over a single inductive link. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Circuits Syst. 11(1), 64–77 (2017)
135. Leene, L.B., Luan, S., Constandinou, T.G.: A 890fJ/bit UWB transmitter for SoC integration
in high bit-rate transcutaneous bio-implants. In: 2013 IEEE International Symposium on
Circuits and Systems (ISCAS2013), pp. 2271–2274. IEEE (2013)
136. Chae, M.S., Yang, Z., Yuce, M.R., Hoang, L., Liu, W.: A 128-channel 6 mW wireless neural
recording IC with spike feature extraction and UWB transmitter. IEEE Trans. Neural Syst.
Rehabil. Eng. 17(4), 312–321 (2009)
137. Lim, J., Rezvanitabar, A., Degertekin, F.L., Ghovanloo, M.: An impulse radio PWM-based
wireless data acquisition sensor interface. IEEE Sensors J. 19(2), 603–614 (2019)
138. Islam, M.N., Yuce, M.R.: Review of medical implant communication system (mics) band and
network. ICT Express. 2(4), 188–194 (2016). Special Issue on Emerging Technologies for
Medical Diagnostics
139. Ghanbari, M.M., Piech, D.K., Shen, K., Faraji Alamouti, S., Yalcin, C., Johnson, B.C.,
Carmena, J.M., Maharbiz, M.M., Muller, R.: A sub-mm3 ultrasonic free-ﬂoating implant for
multi-mote neural recording. IEEE J. Solid State Circuits. 54(11), 3017–3030 (2019)

