Quantum State Reconstruction
609
Q
Quantum State Reconstruction
Stefan Weigert
Quantum state reconstruction, or state reconstruction for short, aims at identifying
an unknown quantum state ( states in quantum mechanics) on the basis of exper-
imentally accessible data. The Quantum Optics community usually refers to this
inverse problem as quantum (state) tomography while the expression quantum state
estimation is often used in the ﬁeld of  Quantum computation. Reconstruction pro-
cedures depend on the physical context deﬁned by the system carrying the unknown
state, the experimentally accessible  observables, the size of the  ensemble of
systems prepared in the unknown state, and the precision of the measured data.
A two-level system (such as a spin-1/2, a qubit, or the two polarizations of a
photon) prepared in a state with density matrix ˆρ is sufﬁcient to illustrate the idea of
state reconstruction.With two non-negativeeigenvalues summing to one, the density
matrix is a positive operator, and it depends on three real parameters. In the Bloch
representation, the parameters combine to a real vector n with length |n| ⩽1,
ˆρ = 1
2
I + n · ˆσ ,
where I denotes the identity operator, and the components of the spin operator ˆσ are
given by the  Pauli matrices ˆσx, ˆσy, and ˆσz. This parametrization of the density
matrix ˆρ is immediately useful for state reconstruction since the components of the
vector n coincide with the expectation values of the  Pauli matrices in the state ˆρ,
nj = Tr[ˆσj ˆρ] ≡⟨ˆσj⟩ρ ,
j = x, y, z .
The three observables ˆσx, ˆσy, and ˆσz are informationally complete: any state ˆρ of the
two-level system is determined uniquely by the values of the measured expectations
⟨ˆσx⟩ρ, ⟨ˆσy⟩ρ, and ⟨ˆσz⟩ρ. No pair of observables allows one to reconstruct the state
of a two-level system but many other triples (and larger sets) of observables exist
which are also informationally complete. This ﬂexibility is highly desirable from
an experimental point of view. Speciﬁc reconstruction procedures will take into ac-
count any additional information: if a system is known to reside in a pure state
( states, pure and mixed), for example, it will be sufﬁcient to measure a smaller
number of expectation values.
The reconstruction of a quantum state in a laboratory is necessarily based on
expectation values which are known only approximately: any ensemble used to
measure an expectation value such as ⟨ˆσx⟩ρ is ﬁnite, and any measuring appa-
ratus invariably introduces uncertainties. Consequently, the collected data will be
compatible with a continuous family of quantum states. The reconstruction is com-
plicated by the fact that unacceptable density matrices with negative eigenvalues
may arise upon inverting the information contained in experimentally observed

610
Quantum State Reconstruction
mean values. To determine the ‘best’ candidate among the acceptable states re-
quires additional selection criteria such as the maximum-likelihood method, for
example.
In 1933, W. Pauli raised he question [1] whether the probability distributions
|⟨q|ψ⟩|2dq (to ﬁnd a particle located near position q) and |⟨p|ψ⟩|2dp (to ﬁnd the
particle with a momentum close to p) determine a single pure state |ψ⟩. This is an
early instance of quantum state reconstruction, with a negative answer: in general,
there is a family of pure states, called Pauli partners, which give rise to the same
Pauli data.
E. Schr¨odinger suggested in 1935 to think of the  wave function as a catalogue
of expectations, that is, a tool which succinctly holds the information about the ex-
pectation value of any observable [2]. In nuce, this remark contains the concept of
quantum state reconstruction. Knowing the expectation values of all observables ef-
fectively means to know the quantum state, and only a technical problem remains
to be solved, namely to identify an informationally complete set of observables, or
quorum. Given such a quorum it becomes possible to express Schr¨odinger’s equa-
tion in terms of expectation values only – thereby eliminating any reference to the
wave function or density matrix of the system [3].
The tomography of classical objects has inspired a successful method of quan-
tum state reconstruction. Quantum tomography is based on the Wigner function
( Wigner distribution), an intuitively appealing way to represent the state ˆρ of a
quantum particle. This real function resembles a classical probability distribution
for two real variables q and p although it may take negative values and, therefore,
cannot be observed experimentally. It is not difﬁcult, however, to derive marginals
from the Wigner function which are legitimate probability distributions. As shown
in 1989, suitable families of marginals provide sufﬁcient information to recover the
Wigner function and, a fortiori, the unknown state ˆρ [4]. The marginals can be mea-
sured through optical homodyning, a well-established technique of quantum optics,
as has been demonstrated experimentally in 1993 [5].
Regarding the efﬁciency of different reconstruction schemes, some quantitative
results are known for states residing in a d-dimensional space. Given a ﬁnite ensem-
ble of quantum systems in one and the same state, the statistical error is minimal if
measurements are performed with respect to d + 1 sets of mutually unbiased bases,
each containing d observables [6]. So far, the required set of observables has been
found to exist only if the dimension d equals the power of a prime number.
To extract maximal information about an unknown state of which N copies of
are provided, it is often advantageous to go beyond the traditional framework of
 projective measurements, using  positive operator-valued measurements in-
stead. Within the ﬁeld of quantum cloning ( no-cloning theorem), the quality of
a given reconstruction procedure is measured by the ﬁdelity which compares the
estimated state to the original one.

Quantum Statistics
611
Q
Primary Literature
1. W. Pauli: Die allgemeinen Prinzipien der Wellenmechanik. In Handbuch der Physik, ed. by H.
Geiger and K. Scheel (Springer, Berlin 1933, Vol. 24, 98)
2. E. Schr¨odinger: Die gegenw¨artige Situation in der Quantenmechanik. Naturwiss. 23, 823–828
(1935)
3. S. Weigert: Quantum Time Evolution in Terms of Non-Redundant Probabilities. Phys. Rev. Lett.
84, 802–805 (2000)
4. K. Vogel and H. Risken: Determination of quasiprobability distributions in terms of probability
distributions for the rotated quadrature phase. Phys. Rev. 40, 2847–2849 (1989)
5. D. T. Smithey, M. Beck, M. G. Raymer, and A. Faridani: Measurement of the Wigner distribution
and the density matrix of a light mode using optical homodyne tomography: application to
squeezed states and the vacuum. Phys. Rev. Lett. 70, 1244–1247 (1993)
6. W. K. Wootters and B. D. Fields: Optimal state-determination by mutually unbiased bases. Ann.
Phys. 191, 363–381 (1989)
Secondary Literature
7. U. Leonhardt: Measuring the Quantum State of Light (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
1997)
8. M. Paris and J. ˇReh´aˇcek (eds.): Quantum State Estimation (Springer 2004)
9. L. M. Artiles, R. D. Gill, and M. I. Gut¸ˇa: An invitation to quantum tomography. J. R. Statist.
Soc. B 67, 109–134 (2005)
Quantum Statistics
Arianna Borrelli
In quantum statistics, the behaviour of quantum systems with a large number of
degrees of freedom (e.g. an assembly of many particles) is investigated with the
help of statistical considerations [1]. Although in principle analogous to classical
statistical mechanics, the statistics of quantum systems requires more caution than
the classical one.
There are two main differences between the classical and the quantum case, and
they are linked to the  Heisenberg uncertainty principle and to the  indistin-
guishability of quantum particles of the same kind. According to the uncertainty
principle, even the most complete description of the state of a quantum system
will not allow unique predictions for the values of all observable quantities. This
intrinsically quantistic uncertainty has to be carefully combined with the classical
uncertainty due simply to our ignorance of the state of the system. This task is ac-
complished by employing the formalism of  state operator and  density matrix.
Moreover, when two or more quantum particles of the same kind (e.g. photons
 light quantum;  electrons) are present in a system, the number of the sys-
tem’s possible states must be determined by a counting procedure different from

