404
No-Cloning Theorem
Literature
1. H. Rauch, W. Treimer, U. Bonse: Test of a single-crystal neutron interferometer. Phys. Lett.
A47 (1974) 369–371
2. U. Bonse, M. Hart: An X-ray interferometer. Appl. Phys. Lett. 6 (1965) 155–156
3. H. Rauch, S.A. Werner: Neutron Interferometry, Clarendon Press, Oxford 2000
4. Y. Hasegawa, R. Loidl, G. Badurek, S. Filipp, J. Klepp, H. Rauch: Evidence for entanglement
and full tomographic analysis of Bell states in a single-neutron system. Phys. Rev. A76 (2007)
052108
No-Cloning Theorem
Stefan Weigert
There is no quantum-mechanicaldevice which outputs a perfect copy of an arbitrary
pure quantum state |ψ⟩while leaving the original intact. Such an apparatus would
be described by a unitary operator ˆU acting as
ˆU|ψ⟩⊗|0⟩= |ψ⟩⊗|ψ⟩,
where |0⟩is a ﬁxed ‘blank’ input state. However, due to the linearity of the
operator ˆU this equation is consistent only if the input states |ψ⟩are pairwise or-
thogonal. A contradiction arises if one requires that the device work correctly for
non-orthogonal states as well. It is also impossible to duplicate (or broadcast) non-
commuting mixed states.
Two proofs of the No-Cloning theorem [1, 2] have been published in 1982, both
triggered by a claim that the use of entangled states ( entanglement) would al-
low one to transmit information with supraluminal speed. However, the proposed
scheme cannot be implemented since it relies on the perfect cloning of quantum
states. Considering the elementary nature of its proof, the No-Cloning theorem and
its generalization to mixed states [3] have been discovered surprisingly late.
The No-Cloning theorem captures a fundamental aspect of the structure of quan-
tum mechanics. Its limiting character plays an important role in the theory of
quantum information. For example, the theorem forbids to copy the information
carried by a state |ψ⟩at the end of a  quantum computation. Thus, although
desirable, no safety copies of the result embodied in the state |ψ⟩can be made,
it cannot be distributed to other parties or multiplied for  quantum state recon-
struction. At the same time, the security of quantum cryptography ( quantum
communication) relies on the No-Cloning theorem: if two parties establish a se-
cret key by exchanging quantum states through a quantum channel, eavesdroppers
are not able to reliably copy the states unknown to them. The theorem is consistent

Nonlocality
405
N
with quantum teleportation ( quantum communication) since the unknown input
state is destroyed irretrievably once the process has been completed.
Quantum cloning machines have been devised to produce one or more approx-
imate copies of an unknown quantum state [4]. To achieve optimal cloning the
devices take into account the number N of identically prepared (unknown) input
states, the number M of desired output copies, whether pure or mixed states are to
be duplicated, and whether the cloner is required to work for arbitrary input states,
i.e. universally, or for a limited set of input states only. Optimal cloning machines
are conceptually linked to  quantum state reconstruction and the impossibility to
use quantum correlations ( correlations in quantum mechanics) for signaling.
Primary Literature
1. W. K. Wootters and W. H. Zurek: A single quantum cannot be cloned. Nature 299, 802–803
(1982)
2. D. Dieks: Communication by EPR devices. Phys. Lett. A 92, 271 (1982) 271–272
3. H. Barnum, C. Caves, C. Fuchs, R. Jozsa, and B. Schumacher: Noncommuting mixed states
cannot be broadcast. Phys. Rev. Lett. 76, 2818–2821 (1996)
4. V. Buˇzek and M. Hillery: Quantum copying: Beyond the no-cloning theorem. Phys. Rev. A 54,
1844–1852 (1996)
Secondary Literature
5. A. Peres: How the no-cloning theorem got its name. Fortschr. Phys. 51, 458–461 (2003)
6. N. D. Mermin: Quantum Computer Science. (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 2007,
39–40)
7. V. Scarani, S. Iblisdir, N. Gisin, and A Ac´ın: Quantum cloning. Rev. Mod. Phys. 77, 1225–1256
(2005)
Nonlocality
Henry Stapp
Nonlocality: In quantum mechanics the term “nonlocality” refers to an apparent
failure of a certain relativity-theory-based  locality assumption. This assumption
is that no information about which experiment is freely chosen and performed in
one space-time region can be present in a second space-time region unless a point
traveling at the speed of light (or less) can reach the second region from the ﬁrst.
This assumption is valid in relativistic classical physics. Yet quantum theory per-
mits the existence of certain experiments in which this locality assumption seems to
fail. Einstein called the faster-than-light effect evidently entailed by conventional
(Copenhagen) quantum theory “spooky action at a distance”. (For Copenhagen

