62
Bohr–Kramers–Slater Theory
Bohr–Kramers–Slater Theory
Helge Kragh
The Bohr–Kramers–Slater theory (or BKS theory) was proposed in 1924 as an
attempt to explain problems in physical optics and to provide a uniﬁed picture
of the continuous electromagnetic ﬁeld and the discontinuous quantum transitions
in atoms. Although the theory was short-lived it proved most important in the
subsequent development of quantum theory, not least because it replaced causal
spatio-temporal description of the transitions between stationary states with statis-
tical considerations. Moreover, it followed that energy and momentum was only
conserved statistically, not for individual atomic processes.
In early 1924 atomic physics was in a state of crisis ( quantum theory, cri-
sis period), one of the critical problems being the interaction between matter and
radiation. In a paper published in Nature in February 1924, John Clark Slater (1900–
1976) suggested the radical idea that when an atom was in a stationary state, it would
“communicate with other atoms. . . by means of a virtual ﬁeld of radiation originat-
ing from oscillators having the frequencies of possible quantum transitions and the
function of which is to provide for statistical conservation of energy and momen-
tum by determining the probabilities for quantum transitions.” Note that the ﬁeld
was thought to be emitted by atoms in their stationary states and not, as in Bohr’s
original theory, during the  quantum jumps from one state to another.
The idea to conceive the atom as a collection of “virtual harmonic oscillators”
had implicitly been suggested by Rudolf Ladenburg (1882–1952) in a paper on dis-
persion theory from 1924, but it was only with Slater’s paper and the subsequent
BKS paper that explicit use was made of the idea. Slater provided a picture of emis-
sion as well as absorption of radiation inspired by and in qualitative agreement with
Einstein’s probabilistic radiation theory of 1916–17. He considered his picture to be
a reconciliation of the continuous wave theory of the electromagnetic ﬁeld with the
discreteness of light quanta (photons  light quantum), of whose existence he had
been convinced by Arthur Compton (1892–1962)  Compton experiment.
Slater was at the time a visiting physicist at Niels Bohr’s (1885–1962) institute
in Copenhagen, and he discussed at length his theory with Bohr and his assistant
Hendrik Kramers (1894–1952) who found it interesting but also suggested mod-
iﬁcations. Neither Bohr nor Kramers shared Slater’s belief in the light quantum.
Rather than adopting a theory which harmonized the electromagnetic ﬁeld with
light quanta (Slater’s view), they wanted to connect the continuous ﬁeld responsible
for the propagation of light with the discontinuous quantum transitions in the atom.
Moreover, the idea of a statistical connection, as proposed by Slater in his Nature pa-
per, appealed greatly to Bohr and Kramers who believed that it implied that a causal
description of quantum transitions had to be abandoned. If so, they concluded, the
conservation laws of energy and momentum could not be strictly valid for individ-
ual processes, but should be understood as statistical laws. This idea seems to have

Bohr–Kramers–Slater Theory
63
B
been due to Bohr and Kramers rather than Slater. In a general sense it was not new
to Bohr, who for some time had been prepared to abandon the validity of energy
conservation in the quantum domain.
The result of the discussions in Copenhagen – and the pressure put on Slater to
go along with the statistical, non-conservation ideas of Bohr and Kramers – was
a joint paper published simultaneously in Philosophical Magazine and Zeitschrift
f¨ur Physik. Although jointly authored, the paper reﬂected Bohr’s ideas more than
Slater’s, and in fact Slater disagreed with much of it. The BKS paper kept to
Slater’s idea of a virtual radiation ﬁeld associated with the stationary state of an
atom and also incorporated the probabilistic interpretation of transition processes.
“The occurrence of a certain transition in a given atom will depend on the initial
stationary state of this atom itself and on the states of the atoms with which it is
in communication through the virtual radiation ﬁeld, but not on the occurrence of
transition processes in the latter atoms.”
Slater had originally conceived the virtual radiation ﬁeld as a kind of wave-ﬁeld
guiding the light quanta, but in the BKS paper there was no trace of this idea (which
was also part of Louis de Broglie’s theory (1892–1981)). It remained unclear what
the enigmatic virtual oscillators were, except that they were not directly observable.
The most radical feature of the BKS theory was the description of atomic processes
at the expense of sacriﬁcing the laws of detailed conservation of energy and mo-
mentum.
The BKS theory was almost purely qualitative and appealed conceptually to an
intuitive understanding of virtual ﬁelds and virtual oscillators, but if it was to be
taken seriously it had to make testable predictions. Bohr and Kramers (and, nom-
inally, Slater) applied the theory to the  Compton effect and concluded that the
direction of a recoil electron after scattering an X-ray photon would not be uniquely
determined, as required by the conservations laws, but display a wide statistical
distribution. Even before this prediction could be tested, the theory aroused much
attention, if little enthusiasm. Erwin Schr¨odinger (1887–1961) supported the BKS
theory and Bohr’s interpretation, but most other physicists either rejected it or ex-
pressed reservation. Among those who were opposed to it were Arnold Sommerfeld
(1868–1951), Albert Einstein (1879–1955), Compton and Wolfgang Pauli (1900–
1958), and it is uncertain if even Kramers supported it.
At any rate, the theory did not last for more than a year. As early as June 1924,
Walther Bothe (1891–1957) and Hans Geiger (1882–1945) in Berlin proposed an
experiment to test the theory by measuring simultaneously the scattered  X-rays
and the recoil electrons. This was one of the ﬁrst experiments using electronic co-
incidence devices, and it was not until April 1925 that they had ready their ﬁnal
result, which was “incompatible with Bohr’s interpretation of the Compton effect.”
Also Compton and Alfred W. Simon, who used a cloud chamber to determine the
direction of recoil electrons, concluded in favour of energy and momentum conser-
vation and that experiments had therefore disproved the BKS theory. Karl Popper
(1902–1994) later described the experiments of 1925 as a kind of experimentum
crucis. While this was good news to Slater, it was not to Bohr, who for a year
had defended the theory and taken it very seriously. Nonetheless, he accepted the

64
Born Rule and its Interpretation
experimental verdict and wrote to Fowler that “there is nothing else to do than to
give our revolutionary efforts as honourable a funeral as possible.”
In spite of its short lifetime, the BKS theory was singularly important. For one
thing, its radically new approach paved the way for a greater understanding that
methods and concepts of classical physics could not be carried over in a future
quantum mechanics. For another thing, the theory provided the point of depar-
ture of Kramers’ theory of dispersion of 1924 and its further development into the
Kramers–Heisenberg dispersion theory of 1925, the ﬁnal step before Heisenberg’s
formulation of quantum or  matrix mechanics.
Primary Literature
1. J. C. Slater: Radiation and Atoms. Nature 113, 307–308 (1924)
2. N. Bohr, H. A. Kramers, J. C. Slater: The Quantum Theory of Radiation. Philosophical Maga-
zine 47, 785–802 (1924)
3. W. Bothe, H. Geiger: ¨Uber das Wesen des Comptoneffekts; ein experimenteller Beitrag zur
Theorie der Strahlung. Zeitschrift f¨ur Physik 32, 639–663 (1925)
Secondary Literature
4. J. Hendry: Bohr-Kramers-Slater: A Virtual Theory of Virtual Oscillators and its Role in the
History of Quantum Mechanics. Centaurus 25, 189–221 (1981)
5. K. Stolzenburg ed.: Niels Bohr. Collected Works. Volume 5 (North-Holland, Amsterdam
1984, 3–218)
6. O. Darrigol: From c-Numbers to q-Numbers: The Classical Analogy in the History of Quantum
Theory (University of California Press, Berkeley 1992, 214–224)
Born Rule and its Interpretation
N.P. Landsman
The Born rule provides a link between the mathematical formalism of quantum
theory and experiment, and as such is almost single-handedly responsible for prac-
tically all predictions of quantum physics. In the history of science, on a par with
the  Heisenberg uncertainty relations, the  Born rule is often seen as a turning
point where  indeterminism entered fundamental physics. For these two reasons,
its importance for the practice and philosophy of science cannot be overestimated.
The Born rule was ﬁrst stated by Max Born (1882–1970) in the context of scat-
tering theory [1], following a slightly earlier paper in which he famously omitted

