P
Pachymeres, George
▶George Pachymeres
Pain
SIMO KNUUTTILA
Faculty of Theology
University of Helsinki
Helsinki
Finland
Abstract
The Latin word dolor, as it is used in medieval philosophy,
can refer to simple physical pain or to an emotion of the
sensory soul. According to Thomas Aquinas, physical
pain is an unpleasant experience of something repugnant
to the body; emotional pain of the sensory part of the
soul is a reaction to an experience of something taking
place against sensory appetite. This analysis was intro-
duced by Plato and was often repeated in ancient sources
of medieval philosophy. While medieval thinkers usually
regarded physical pain as supervenient on immediate
bodily sensations, some of them followed Avicenna in
arguing that physical pleasure and pain are also felt
directly and should be added to the touch qualities.
Avicenna distinguished between 15 sorts of bodily pain.
Latin authors usually located the experience of physical
pleasure and pain in the sensory moving power which
was also the seat of the emotions. This was in line with
the Aristotelian view that nature had provided all
animals with the sense of touch in order to keep them
away from what is harmful – pain immediately triggered
avoidance.
The most common Latin word for physical pain in medi-
eval philosophy is dolor. This term, like the corresponding
Greek word (lupe¯), can refer to simple physical pain or to
an emotion of the sensory soul. Thomas Aquinas (Summa
theologiae II-1, 35.7) describes external physical pain and
internal emotional pain as follows: external pain is caused
by something repugnant to the body and internal pain is
caused by what is repugnant to sensory appetite. External
pain follows an external perception, particularly that of
touch, and internal pain follows an act of imagination or
reason.
The distinction between physical and emotional pain
was traditional. It was introduced by Plato, who argued
that there are bodily motions which are not perceived and
others that are; of the latter some are perceived neutrally,
some are perceived as pleasant, and others as unpleasant.
Pleasures and distresses which do not simply arise from
the body and are associated with desires and evaluations
form the feeling component of all emotions (Phil. 33d,
43b-c, 47d-e; Tim. 64d). There are similar distinctions in
Aristotle and in the Stoics, who taught the extirpation of
emotions as misguided judgments, but separated these
from bodily feelings. The central idea of the traditional
analysis is the distinction between pain as an unpleasant
experience of a noxious state of some part of the body and
this state as the cause and the object of the experience.
While the experience takes place in the soul, this involves
a bodily localization of where it hurts. This distinction is
formulated in a famous passage from the Peripatetic
Strato of Lampsacus: ‘‘It is not in the foot that we feel
hurt when we stub it, nor in the head when we crack it, nor
in the ﬁnger when we cut it . . . we suppose the hurt from
the wound is not where it is sensed, but where it origi-
nated, as the soul is drawn toward the place where suffer-
ing occurred’’ (frag. 111 in Wehrli). A similar account was
known to medieval authors through Nemesius of Emesa’s
De natura hominis (8, 64.1–15).
According to Avicenna, physical pleasure and pain are
often felt as concomitants to perceptions of particular
qualities, usually those pertaining to touch, but there are
also acts of touch which are experiences of bodily pleasure
or pain without involving another underlying sensation
(Liber de anima II.3, 137–8). While medieval authors
usually regarded pain as supervenient on immediate
Henrik Lagerlund (ed.), Encyclopedia of Medieval Philosophy, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4020-9729-4,
# Springer Science+Business Media B.V., 2011

sensations, some of them, such as Pietro d’Abano, argued
in an Avicennian manner that physical pleasure and pain
are also felt directly and should be added to the touch
qualities (Conciliator 77).
Latin authors usually located the experience of
physical pleasure and pain in the sensory moving power
which was also the seat of the emotions. (See, for example,
Thomas Aquinas, (Summa theologiae II-1, 35.7; John
Duns Scotus, Ordinatio III.15, 43.) This was in line with
the Aristotelian view that nature had provided all animals
with the sense of touch in order to keep them away from
what is harmful. Pain immediately triggered avoidance.
Physical pain was discussed in medicine and in theological
questions of eternal punishment and Christ’s suffering.
It was not a central philosophical issue. Peter John Olivi
was one of the Latin authors who were interested in its
varieties – material was abundantly offered by Avicenna’s
distinction between ﬁfteen sorts of bodily pain (Canon
I.2.2.20).
See also: ▶Emotions ▶Ibn Sı¯na¯, Abu¯ ʿAlı¯ (Avicenna)
▶Philosophical Psychology ▶Thomas Aquinas
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Aquinas Thomas (1948–1950) Summa theologiae, ed. Caramello P.
Marietti, Turin
Avicenna (1582) Liber Canonis. Venice
Avicenna (1972) Liber de anima seu Sextus de naturalibus, ed. Van Riet S.
Avicenna latinus I–III. Peeters, Louvain; Brill, Leiden. Avicenna
(1968) Avicenna latinus IV–V. E´ditions Orientalistes, Louvain; Brill,
Leiden
d’Abano Pietro (1496) Conciliator differentiarum philosophorum et
praecipue medicorum. Venice
Duns Scotus John (2006) Ordinatio III.1–17, ed. Hechich PB et al. Opera
omnia, vol 9. Typis Vaticanis, Civitas Vaticana
Nemesius of Emesa (1987) De natura hominis, ed. Morani M. Teubner,
Leipzig. English translation in Telfer W (1955) Cyril of Jerusalem and
Nemesius of Emesa. The Library of Christian Classics, vol 4.
Westminster Press, Philadelphia. Verbeke G, Moncho JR (eds)
(1975) De natura hominis: Traduction de Burgundio de Pise. Corpus
Latinum Commentariorum in Aristotelem Graecorum, suppl. 1.
Brill, Leiden
Wehrli F (1950) Die Schule des Aristoteles 5: Straton von Lampsakos.
Schwabe, Basel
Secondary Sources
Cohen E (2000) The animated pain of the body. The American Historical
Review 105.1:36–68
Knuuttila S (2004) Emotions in ancient and medieval philosophy.
Clarendon, Oxford
Yrjo¨nsuuri M (2008) Perceiving one’s own body. In: Knuuttila S,
Ka¨rkka¨inen P (eds) Theories of perception in medieval and early
modern philosophy. Studies in the history of philosophy of mind,
vol 6. Springer, Dordrecht, pp 101–116
Palamas, Gregory
▶Gregory Palamas
Parisian Condemnation of 1277
DAVID PICHE´
De´partement de Philosophie
Universite´ de Montre´al
Montre´al, QC
Canada
"
If one tells the truth, one is sure, sooner or later, to be found
out.
Oscar Wilde
Abstract
The act of censorship issued by the Bishop of Paris, Ste-
phen Tempier, on March 7, 1277 constitutes one of the
most signiﬁcant events of thirteenth century intellectual
history. Brandishing the threat of excommunication to
prevent their circulation, Bishop Tempier condemned
219 philosophical and theological theses that he judged
heterodoxical. In so doing, he was explicitly attacking the
teaching of certain members of the Parisian Arts Faculty.
Beyond the confrontation between orthodox ideas and
contentious doctrines, the Parisian condemnation of
1277 allows us to observe a clash between divergent
views of the status of philosophy and speaks to us of
concurrent modes of existence. Consequently, it is not
only a question of theoretical conﬂicts, but also of episte-
mological and ethical issues that assume critical signiﬁ-
cance in the history of western thought.
The Protagonists and the Circumstances
On January 18, 1277, Pope John XXI, to whom suspicious
ideas circulating in the Parisian schools were reported,
mandated the Bishop of Paris, Stephen Tempier, to con-
duct an investigation into these allegations. Bolstered by
a commission of sixteen theologians, including the emi-
nent secular Master Henry of Ghent, Bishop Tempier
accomplished this investigative task, assigned to him by
the Pope, with great diligence. He drew up a list of 219
articles that, in his eyes, were heterodoxical and, exceeding
the mandate he had been granted by John XXI, on March
7, 1277, promulgated a decree condemning these articles
that, in his eyes, were nothing more than ‘‘blatant and
910 P
Palamas, Gregory

execrable errors.’’ The threat that henceforth hung over the
heads of the masters of Christianity’s intellectual capital
were serious, since Bishop Tempier had determined on the
penalty of excommunication for any individual caught
deliberately spreading forbidden doctrines, as well as any
person who would attend such a lecture, unless the latter
denounced the wrongdoing to the Chancellor of the Uni-
versity of Paris or the Bishop himself within a period of
seven days. As a preface to the ‘‘syllabus’’ containing the
219 censored theses (it is worth noting that certain man-
uscripts transmitting the Parisian act of censorship con-
tain 220 articles), Stephen Tempier wrote a letter to which
we must pay careful attention if we want to grasp the
explicit motives for the most important doctrinal con-
demnation of the Middle Ages. The Bishop identiﬁes the
target of his act of censorship as certain ‘‘scholars of the
Arts Faculty’’ (studentes in artibus). This expression des-
ignates the professors and students in philosophy, since,
throughout the thirteenth century, the teaching of liberal
arts, then required to gain access to higher studies, which
were in theology, law, and medicine, had expanded to
include the teaching of the Graeco-Arabic corpus of phi-
losophy, that is, essentially, the works of Aristotle and his
Arabic commentators, in the forefront of which could be
found Avicenna and Averroes. It is important to be aware
that, since the ﬁrst half of the twelfth century, ‘‘multicul-
tural teams’’ of translators, often located in Toledo, were
employed to make this philosophical corpus available in
Latin for western Christian scholars. That said, the epis-
copal letter did not name these philosophers that it accuses
of teaching ideas contrary to the Catholic faith, but several
medieval manuscripts show us that the philosophical
movement denounced by Stephen Tempier included in
its ranks the Masters Siger of Brabant and Boethius of
Dacia, key ﬁgures in the Parisian Arts Faculty in the
years 1260–1270. The letter-preface of Bishop Tempier
went further than condemning the presumed fact that
certain members of the Arts Faculty had professed or
discussed in the schools a series of doctrines judged to be
heterodoxical. It also reproached those who devoted
themselves to such controversial teaching for having
strayed beyond the boundaries of their own faculty.
Thus, it demonstrates the existing tension at the time
between, on one hand, the philosophy professionals of
the university, whose teaching then covered all ﬁelds of
knowledge, from logic to metaphysics, including physics
and ethics, and, on the other hand, the theology profes-
sors, whose concern was to clearly demarcate the borders
beyond which the competence of philosophers did not
extend, to preserve the superiority and institutional spec-
iﬁcity of their own discipline. The risk of a ‘‘conﬂict of
faculties’’ was very real, since the comprehensive philo-
sophical corpus that the Arts Masters of the 1270s were
responsible for transmitting touched on subjects – for
example, the causality of God in the natural world –
traditionally reserved for doctors in theology. What
could be done with these intersecting points where the
knowledge of philosophers encountered that of theolo-
gians? The statutes promulgated in 1272 for the Parisian
Arts Faculty attempted to offer a response to this question
with three clauses: (1) it was forbidden for Arts Masters to
discuss purely theological questions, that is subjects relat-
ing directly to the work of understanding the content of
the Holy Scriptures – for example the Trinity and the
Incarnation; (2) if it happened that Arts Masters encoun-
tered questions that touched upon both philosophy and
the Christian faith, they absolutely had to resolve them in
accordance with the teachings of the Catholic faith, under
pain of being declared heretical or excluded from their
faculty if they resolved them differently; and ﬁnally, (3) if
the Arts Masters found themselves in the presence of
philosophical doctrines contrary to the Christian faith,
they had the duty to refute them, or, if they felt incapable
of doing so, declare them false and erroneous or even pass
over them in silence. In fact, such measures placed the Arts
Masters in an untenable position, as if they had to square
the circle, since it was asked of them both to never touch
theology and to always take account of the imperatives of
the faith in their teaching duties which, however, had to be
restricted to the ﬁeld of purely philosophical knowledge.
This balancing act required of the philosophers of Paris
could explain, amongst other factors, the presence of
a crucial passage in the letter-prologue that Bishop
Tempier wrote, in which he accuses the scholars of the
Arts Faculty of having tried to conceal their adherence to
heterodoxical ideas, in afﬁrming that what is true
according to philosophy is not true according to the Cath-
olic faith, ‘‘as if there were two contrary truths,’’ writes the
Bishop who, to avoid alienating ‘‘simple people,’’ rushes to
condemn such a manner of speaking that historiography
would refer to as the ‘‘doctrine of the double truth.’’ That
no university philosopher of the time supported such
a doctrine is no longer contested by historians of today;
that Tempier interpreted the Arts Masters’ writings in this
way is an archival fact which needs to be taken into
account. The episcopal letter ﬁnished with a verdict
condemning the De amore of Andreas Capellanus,
a work of courtly literature dating from the twelfth cen-
tury, as well as works dealing with the divinatory arts and
other occult practices, Bishop Tempier judging them all as
‘‘contrary to the orthodox faith and good morals.’’ Thus,
as was the case for the other episodes of censorship in the
Parisian Condemnation of 1277 P
911
P

Christian west, a solidarity of evil was supposed between
dissident thought, libertine behavior, and occult knowl-
edge, three themes that the Bishop of Paris subjected to the
same opprobrium.
The Events that Led to the 1277 Parisian
Condemnation
The Parisian condemnation of 1277 did not arrive ex
nihilo. On the contrary, we may consider it as the culmi-
nation of a series of crucial events marking the intellectual
history of the thirteenth century. In 1210, a synod called by
the Archbishop of Sens, Peter of Corbeil, ruled against the
teaching in Paris, whether public or private, of Aristotle’s
books of natural philosophy (libri naturales), as well as
related commentaries. A sentence of excommunication
was pronounced against whosoever contravened this
directive. In 1215, the Papal Legate, Cardinal Robert of
Courc¸on, whom Pope Innocent III had charged with
reorganizing the academic curriculum in Paris, imposed
a restrictive program of studies on the Faculty of Arts. In
this document, which contains the earliest university stat-
utes known by historians, a distinction is made between
compulsory (grammar and logic), optional (mathematics
and ethics) and forbidden subjects. Reiterating the anti-
Aristotelian measures of 1210, that were accompanied by
the same sentence of excommunication, the statutes pro-
mulgated in 1215 under the auspices of the Papal Legate
forbad Arts Masters from lecturing on Aristotle’s natural
philosophy writings (including the Metaphysics), as well as
the Summae arising from these works. The institutional
measures of 1210 and 1215 demonstrate beyond all doubt
that, already at this time, certain members of high eccle-
siastical rank perceived the peripatetic philosophical sys-
tem as a threat to Christian thought as it had traditionally
developed in the west since patristic times. A subtle change
in orientation, with notable repercussions for subsequent
decades, occurred in 1231, with the appearance of Pope
Gregory IX’s bull Parens scientiarum (the mother of sci-
ences). Amongst the measures in this document, consid-
ered by historians the ‘‘basic charter’’ of the University of
Paris, it is important to remember the following: the Pope
preserved the banning of Aristotelian libri naturales, but
he mitigated it considerably by explaining that it would
only last for the period during which the contentious
writings were examined in order to purge them of any
errors discovered. (This undertaking of intellectual purg-
ing would never end, however). Furthermore, for a period
of seven years, the pope abrogated the penalty of excom-
munication that threatened the professors who would
have contravened the teaching prohibitions, and he
granted university masters the right to decide themselves
on the required content of their courses. In so doing,
Gregory IX opened the doors of the University of Paris
to peripatetic works of philosophy which had previously
been prohibited. In fact, in 1255, the Faculty of Arts issued
new statutes stipulating an obligatory program of studies
in which the whole of Aristotle’s translated works were
included, as well as apocryphal works, such as the Book of
Causes, an adaptation of Proclus’ Elements of Theology,
which seemed to have been composed in scholarly circles
in Baghdad in the ninth century of the Christian era. In
this way, the Faculty of Arts became an authentic faculty of
philosophy and its professors began the vast and profound
undertaking to rationally comprehend the whole of reality,
an undertaking that could at any moment collide with the
Christian vision of the world. Between 1267 and 1273, in
a series of lectures given at the University of Paris, the great
Franciscan theologian Bonaventure warned his contem-
poraries about the danger that certain of Aristotle’s doc-
trines represented for the Christian faith, and the peril that
a pagan philosophy sought for its own sake posed for
human redemption. In 1270, while another great theolo-
gian, the Dominican Thomas Aquinas, was busy using the
weapons of reason to ﬁght this supposedly Averroist doc-
trine that historiography, following Leibniz, would call
‘‘monopsychism,’’ Stephen Tempier, for his part, was, for
the ﬁrst time, condemning the teaching of 13 philosoph-
ical theses. The content of this ﬁrst doctrinal sanction
issued by the Bishop of Paris preﬁgures in condensed
form the much more developed act of censorship that he
would promulgate seven years later.
The Principal Doctrines Censored
Given their number and diversity, as well as the apparent
disorder in which they occur, it is obviously impossible to
offer here an exhaustive and detailed expose´ of the 219 (or
220) articles condemned on March 7, 1277. Nonetheless,
we may discern a certain number of major themes that,
once brought together, comprise the basis of the doctrinal
issue of the Parisian censorship. Certain prohibited theses
are striking because of their excessive nature and their
outrageous character in the context of the sensibility and
beliefs of a thirteenth century Christian conscience. This is
the case for articles 16, 152, 174, 175, and 180, that claim,
respectively ‘‘that if one says something is heretical
because it is contrary to the faith, we should not care
about the faith,’’ ‘‘that theological discourse is based on
fables,’’ ‘‘that there are fables and falsehoods in the Chris-
tian religion, as in other religions,’’ ‘‘that the Christian
religion prevents one from learning,’’ and ‘‘that one should
not pray.’’ Other censored theses confront head-on certain
of the most essential dogmatic foundations of Catholic
912 P
Parisian Condemnation of 1277

doctrine. This is the case, for example, of those that con-
cern the dogma of the Holy Trinity and that seem to echo
the reprimands of Stephen Tempier when he writes, in his
letter-preface, that ‘‘scholars of the Arts Faculty’’ who
profess reprehensible errors ‘‘exceed the limits of their
own faculty.’’ Consequently, it is not surprising that the
Bishop of Paris prohibited articles 1 and 2 that maintain,
respectively, that ‘‘God is not triune because the trinity is
incompatible with supreme simplicity (. . .)’’ and ‘‘that
God cannot engender a being similar to himself, because
something that is engendered by something has an origin
upon which it depends (. . .).’’ On the other hand, the
condemnation of a number of assertions does not seem
explicable, except by presupposing an ideological bias and
less than impartial attitude on the part of the Bishop of
Paris and his ‘‘commission of inquiry.’’ The interpretation
of the historical signiﬁcance of the Parisian censure of
1277 must thus consider the contingency of interpretative
patterns that the protagonists of this event could put into
place. It is not improbable that Tempier and his coreli-
gionists, seeking to rule against the spread of teaching that
they considered perilous to the truths of the Christian
faith,
worked
as
well
to
promote
the
theses
of
a particular school of thought to which they were
attached. This would explain the presence in the syllabus
of certain articles such as the following: (92) ‘‘heavenly
bodies are moved by an intrinsic principle, that is the soul,
and they are moved by the soul and the appetite, like
animals (. . .)’’; (102) ‘‘the soul of heaven is an intelligence
and the celestial orbs are not the instruments of intelli-
gences but their organs, like the ear and the eye are organs
of the sensitive power’’; (126) ‘‘the possible intellect is
actually nothing before understanding, because in an
intelligible nature, being actually something is being
what is actually understanding’’; (189) ‘‘when <heavenly>
intelligence is full of forms, it imprints these forms
on matter by heavenly bodies as with instruments’’;
(204) ‘‘separate substances are located somewhere by
means of their operation (. . .).’’ Moreover, Tempier’s syl-
labus contains theses that are surprising or striking,
because they appear atypical in their historical context.
This is the case for articles 20 and 148, which would please
vegetarians and nutritionists, in proposing respectively
‘‘that a man may become numerically and individually
another through means of nutrition’’ and ‘‘that the natural
law forbids the murder of animals lacking reason, as well
as that of animals with reason, though to a lesser degree’’;
or articles 150 and 200, that Kant would not have repudi-
ated, which stipulate respectively ‘‘that man must not be
content with authority to be certain about a question’’ and
‘‘that duration and time are nothing in reality but exist
only in apprehension.’’ We are also dumbfounded by
reading about the astral theory of generation that article
188 supports: ‘‘if the power of the stars in a liquid is of
a similar proportion to that found in the parents’ seed,
a man may be engendered from this liquid (. . .)!’’ Aside
from these theses, a large proportion of articles censored
in 1277 could be distributed over four theoretical ﬁelds
where confrontation with the champions of Catholic
orthodoxy was inevitable. (I) In the ﬁeld of philosophical
theology, numerous prohibited theses seriously under-
mine or actually deny God’s omnipotence or omniscience.
Most of them do so in adhering to a metaphysical vision
according to which the First Principle, subsisting eternally
in an impenetrable folding in of itself, can only produce
effects in lower strata of reality through the mediation of
secondary causes emanating from itself (heavenly intelli-
gences or heavenly bodies, for example). In that regard, we
may invoke articles 3, 43, 54, and 63 of Tempier’s decree,
that say respectively ‘‘that God knows nothing other than
himself,’’ ‘‘that the First Principle cannot be the cause of
diverse realities produced down here below, except
through the mediation of other causes (. . .)’’ and ‘‘that
the First Principle cannot immediately produce realities,
since they are new effects; now a new effect requires an
immediate cause that could be other than it is’’ and ‘‘that
God can not produce the effect of a secondary cause
without the secondary cause itself.’’ (II) In the area of
philosophical cosmology, a number of ideas struck down
by the prohibition of the Bishop of Paris claim that the
world in its entirety is eternal or that one of its compo-
nents has always existed and will always exist (for example,
the human species, separate substances or elements),
assertions that run counter to Catholic dogma of the
creation of the world from nothing at the beginning of
time (ex nihilo ab initio temporis). On this point, we may
refer to the following articles: (5) ‘‘all separate realities are
coeternal with the First Principle’’; (9) ‘‘there was no ﬁrst
man and there will be no last one, but, on the contrary,
there has always been and there will always be the gener-
ation of man by man’’; (87) ‘‘for all the species contained
within it, the world is eternal and time is eternal (. . .)’’;
and (107) ‘‘the elements are eternal, although they are the
effects of something new in terms of the conﬁguration
they now possess.’’ (III) In the ﬁeld of noetics, a number of
propositions that attracted the ire of Bishop Tempier
converge to support the thesis of numerical unicity and
separation of the intellect (the possible or potential one,
that is, the one which receives intelligible forms, as well as
the agent intellect, that is, the one which produces intelli-
gible content): this is the famous doctrine, evoked earlier,
that historiography has labeled ‘‘monopsychism’’ and
Parisian Condemnation of 1277 P
913
P

whose paternity was attributed, rightly or wrongly (that is
another story), to the Arabic philosopher Averroes. We
may readily understand that such a doctrine appeared
scandalous in the eyes of medieval Catholic theologians.
Indeed, claiming that there is only a single intellect for all
men, which is metaphysically separated from any one
human body, in other words that the entity who possesses
the power of thought does not belong to any one human
being, amounts to depriving individual man of all immor-
tality (since if something survives the death of the body of
man, it could only be his intellectual soul) and, conse-
quently, this is equivalent to denying any possibility of
retribution in the hereafter for acts committed down here.
In short, ‘‘monopsychism’’ saps the very foundations of
Christian morality. In that regard, we may refer to articles
32, 119, and 121, that posit respectively ‘‘that the intellect
of all men is numerically one, since even if it is separated
from a given body, it is not, however, separated from all
bodies,’’ ‘‘that the operation of the separate intellect joins
to the body in the same way as the operation of something
not possessing the form by which it operates (. . .)’’ and
‘‘that the intellect, that is, the ultimate perfection of man,
is radically separated.’’ (IV) A ﬁnal doctrinal section
groups together theses that attack the possibility of
human freedom by favoring one form or another of deter-
minism: astral, emotional, or cognitive. Articles 129, 136,
159, and 162 of Tempier’s syllabus tend in this direction, in
that they claim, respectively, ‘‘that, when a passion and
a particular knowledge are actually present, will cannot act
against them,’’ ‘‘that the man who acts out of passion acts
out of constraint,’’ ‘‘that the will of man is necessitated by
his cognition, like the appetite of the beast’’ and ‘‘that our
will is subject to the power of heavenly bodies.’’
Beyond Heterodoxy: Other Issues of the
Parisian Condemnation
Historians were able to trace the origin of most of the
articles prohibited by Tempier to the writings of Arts
Masters who worked in the years preceding the decree of
March 7, 1277, notably those of Siger of Brabant and
Boethius of Dacia. Still, many condemned theses remain
unidentiﬁed, which may be explained by invoking the loss,
indeed the destruction, of the contentious works in which
they were found, or the existence of a heterodoxical oral
teaching which left no trace, or perhaps the fact that there
are still many texts emanating from the Faculty of Arts that
were not edited and that continue to sleep in manuscript
libraries. Nonetheless, the problem is that, even in the case
of theses whose written sources are identiﬁed, historians
have noted a discrepancy between, on the one hand, what
the passages from which the censored articles were
extracted really want to say and, on the other hand, what
Tempier’s decree had them say by removing them from
their original contexts. An assertion advanced by an Arts
Master in a qualiﬁed, nuanced, and careful mode,
becomes, once pinned by the Bishop, a radical and auda-
cious thesis, claiming to be absolute truth. One example
will sufﬁce to eloquently illustrate this phenomenon of
distortion. In his treatise On the Eternity of the World,
Boethius of Dacia teaches that creation (in the strict
sense, that is, a production ex nihilo) is impossible from
the point of view of natural causality which the physician
(the philosopher of nature) must adopt, since, as experi-
ence proves, all natural agents produce their effects
starting from a matter or a subject that preexists. From
this, to know the ultimate truth about the duration of the
world, Boethius invites his readers to return to the teach-
ings of the Catholic faith, that claims that the world was
created in time, since, as he ﬁrmly established in his
treatise, philosophy possesses no method of demonstra-
tion that could prove deﬁnitively one of the two alterna-
tives, either eternity or the newness of the world. In other
words, confronting a question of this sort, that transcends
the limits of philosophy as rational knowledge drawing its
principles from the natural course of things, the philoso-
pher acknowledges his incompetence and, since he is
a believer, sends his readers back to the teachings of the
Christian faith, that admits the supernatural causality of
a God who is the Creator. This is a carefully measured
position, respectful of orthodoxy. Now, reading the decree
of condemnation of March 7, 1277, we are led to believe
that the philosopher is professing a doctrine of double
truth identical to that which Tempier is denouncing, as
we recall, in his letter-preface. Indeed, when the Bishop of
Paris transposes Boethian thought to the register of his list
of condemned articles, he has him claiming this: (90) ‘‘the
physician (naturalis philosophus) must deny without qual-
iﬁcation (simpliciter) the newness of the world, because he
relies on natural causes and reasons. As for the believer, he
may deny the eternity of the world, because he relies on
supernatural causes.’’ This is the position of Boethius as
expressed in his treatise On the Eternity of the World, with
the exception of one word which changes everything:
‘‘simpliciter’’ (without qualiﬁcation). While the Arts Mas-
ter modestly argues that the newness of the world, that is
to say, its origin in time or the fact that it began to be,
cannot be conceded by the physician as such, to the extent
that it exceeds his inevitably naturalist perspective, leaving
to the religious authorities the task of determining the
absolute truth in this matter, Bishop Tempier wrongly
understood that Boethius accepted the truth of the faith
only to oppose it at once with a naturalistic rationalism
914 P
Parisian Condemnation of 1277

elevated to the level of an absolute knowledge, in the light
of which the creationist thesis unequivocally had to be
rejected. As a general rule, Boethius and his colleagues of
the Arts Faculty never claimed ‘‘that the possible or
impossible without qualiﬁcation (simpliciter), that is,
according to all modes, is the equivalent to the possible
or impossible according to philosophy,’’ contrary to what
Tempier suggests here in article 146 of his syllabus, but
instead they taught that what is impossible from the lim-
ited point of view of natural reason, to which philosophy is
strictly bound, is possible for the person who believes in
the action of a Supreme Cause transcending the limits of
nature. Behind Stephen Tempier’s manifest lack of under-
standing of the subtleties of the Arts Masters’ position lies
what we might term ‘‘the epistemological issue’’ of the
condemnation of March 7, 1277. In the years preceding
this date, the Arts Masters, to whom devolved the task of
teaching the entirety of a philosophical corpus inherited
from the Greeks and the Arabs, became aware of the
intrinsic value of philosophy. Consequently, they devel-
oped an epistemological theory with a twofold objective:
ﬁrst, circumscribing the limits of the epistemic validity of
diverse
scientiﬁc
disciplines
for
which
they
were,
according to regulations, responsible (logic, physics,
mathematics, metaphysics, and ethics); secondly and cor-
relatively, guaranteeing the autonomy of philosophy as
purely rational knowledge compared to the tenets of the
Catholic faith and their hermeneutic consequences, which
properly concern the teaching for which Theology Masters
were responsible in their own faculty. Such a position on
the part of the Arts Masters was new in the history of
western
Christianity.
The
document
where
this
is
expressed most forcefully and clearly was, unquestionably,
the treatise On the Eternity of the World written by Boe-
thius of Dacia. While discussing the problem which gave
the book its title, the Danish scholar establishes an episte-
mological doctrine that can be viewed as the ‘‘charter’’ of
professional philosophers, consisting essentially of three
methodological rules for Arts Masters: (1) a specialist in
a particular philosophical discipline must identify the
principles on which his science is based and the legitimate
area of application of these principles; (2) as well, he must
draw all appropriate conclusions ﬂowing from the princi-
ples pertaining to his science accordingly, even if some
might diverge from the truths of the Catholic faith; and
(3) ﬁnally, in remaining ﬁrmly within the limits of his ﬁeld
of knowledge, he must deny any claim or proposition
contradicting or even undermining the principles on
which his science is based. In the eyes of a theologian like
Tempier, with a unitary and Christo-centered vision of
knowledge, according to which the profane sciences have
value only in as much as they serve the interests of Chris-
tian theology, such a conception of philosophy, that pro-
claims far and wide its epistemological independence, was
absolutely inadmissible. Article 18 of the 1277 syllabus is
perfectly eloquent in that respect: to the claim according to
which ‘‘the future resurrection must not be conceded by
the philosopher, because it is impossible that it be exam-
ined by reason,’’ a thesis that is totally consistent with the
writings of Boethius and his Arts colleagues, the Bishop of
Paris replies that ‘‘it is an error, because even the philoso-
pher must keep his intellect captive in submission to the
faith.’’ The Arts Masters want to build up in its entirety
a philosophy that is an end in itself; Tempier and his
acolytes want to bring it down to the level of a mere
auxiliary to Christian wisdom. From this, we have the
condemnation of article 145 that contends ‘‘that there is
no question that can be rationally debated that the phi-
losopher must not debate and determine, because rational
arguments are drawn from reality and philosophy must
study all of reality in its diverse parts.’’ There were ethical
consequences to the enthusiasm for philosophy as com-
prehensive self-regulated knowledge that drove the Arts
Masters condemned by Bishop Tempier. Indeed, prior to
the decree of March 7, 1277, certain members of the Arts
Faculty conceptualized a purely philosophical ideal of life
based on the acquisition of intellectual virtues and ori-
ented to attaining joyfulness of mind through the cogni-
tive union with divine realities. This was a rigorous ethical
program that came from a tradition of thought developed
by the great Arabic philosophers, from al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ to
Averroes, including Avicenna, and that ultimately had its
roots in Aristotle’s key texts, such as Book X of the
Nicomachean Ethics and Book XII of the Metaphysics. In
favoring a true philosophical asceticism that devalued the
pleasures of the ﬂesh arising from the lower powers of
sensibility in favor of intellectual pleasures ﬂowing from
the exercise of man’s most noble faculty, this new way of
life, a potential rival to Christian ethics, was essentially
addressed to professional philosophers who, thanks to
this, became aware of forming a class of elite thinkers
that was superior to other social classes. Here again, it is
Boethius of Dacia who offers the most complete manifesto
reﬂecting this trend toward an autonomous practice of
philosophy in which man’s intellectual essence is fully
realized. In his treatise On the Supreme Good, after having
determined that a morally good human life is that which is
devoted to the knowledge of what is true, the Danish
scholar concluded that the ultimate goal for human beings
down here resides in the loving and joyful contemplation
of the First Principle, which gives existence to all beings
and at which the philosopher arrives in the end of
Parisian Condemnation of 1277 P
915
P

a ‘‘journey of the mind’’ that traverses the ascending lad-
der of beings. Undoubtedly, as a consequence, Boethius
and his Arts colleagues professed ‘‘that there is no more
excellent status than to give oneself to philosophy’’ and
they let it be understood ‘‘that only philosophers are the
wise men of the world,’’ so Bishop Tempier reports in
articles 40 and 154 of the syllabus. We can well see how
such propositions could appear seditious to the theolo-
gians and men of the church who formed the ruling class
of medieval society. We also perceive what a threat the
advancing of a system of philosophical virtues capable of
competing with the order of theological values could
represent for Tempier and his acolytes. Therefore, the
ecclesiastical power had to condemn some theses such as
those that claim ‘‘that chastity is no greater good than
perfect abstinence’’ (article 181) and ‘‘that charity is no
greater good than perfect friendship’’ (article 220). The
scandalous notion of man attaining salvation through
philosophy started to emerge from the ethical discourse
of Arts Masters, as is testiﬁed by article 157 of the Parisian
decree: ‘‘if one is well ordered according to his intellect
and affections, as one can be sufﬁciently through the
intellectual virtues and other moral virtues of which the
Philosopher (i.e., Aristotle) speaks in the Ethics, one is
sufﬁciently disposed for eternal happiness.’’ However,
with respect to what we might term the ‘‘ethical issue’’ of
the Parisian condemnation, Tempier’s document acts as
a mirror that deforms as well as reﬂects its object. Indeed,
while the Arts Masters, as we have seen, favor an intellec-
tual hedonism and exhort their audience to master their
passions, the Bishop of Paris paints a picture of them as
individuals with dissolute morals, whose life would follow
such maxims as ‘‘the sin against nature, like abuse in
intercourse, although contrary to the nature of the species,
is not, however, contrary to the nature of the individual’’
(article 166) and ‘‘simple fornication, such as that of an
unmarried man with an unmarried woman, is not a sin’’
(article 183). In doing so, Stephen Tempier’s condemna-
tion sealed for one last time the alliance of the heretic and
the libertine to better denounce the Arts Masters who,
however, wanted nothing more nor less than the peaceful
coexistence of the philosopher and the theologian.
See also: ▶Arabic Texts: Philosophy, Latin Translations of
▶Aristotelianism in the Greek, Latin, Syriac, Arabic, and
Hebrew Traditions ▶Aristotle, Arabic ▶Boethius of Dacia
▶Bonaventure ▶Contemplative Happiness and Civic
Virtue ▶Epistemology ▶Ethics ▶al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, Abu¯ Nas˙r
▶Greek Texts Translated into Latin ▶Henry of Ghent
▶Heresy ▶Ibn Rushd, Muh˙ammad ibn Ah˙mad al-H˙ afı¯d
(Averroes) ▶Ibn Sı¯na¯, Abu¯ ʿAlı¯ (Avicenna) ▶Inquisition
▶Liberal
Arts
▶Metaphysics
▶Natural
Philosophy
▶Nicomachean
Ethics,
Commentaries
on
Aristotle’s
▶Philosophy, Arabic ▶Siger of Brabant ▶Thomas
Aquinas ▶Universities and Philosophy ▶Virtue and Vice
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Boethius of Dacia (1976) De aeternitae mundi, De summo bono.
In: Green-Pedersen NG (ed) Corpus Philosophorum Danicorum
Medii Aevi, VI, II. Gad, Copenhague
Deniﬂe H, Chaˆtelain E´
(eds) (1889) Chartularium Universitatis
Parisiensis, vol 1. Delalain, Paris
Piche´ D (1999) La condamnation parisienne de 1277. Texte latin,
traduction introduction et commentaire par D. Piche´ (avec la col-
laboration de Cl. Laﬂeur) (Edition and French translation of the 1277
Parisian condemnation). Vrin, Paris
Siger of Brabant (1972) Quaestiones in tertium de anima, de anima
intellectiva, de aeternitate mundi. In: Baza´n B (ed) Philosophes
me´die´vaux, XIII. Publications universitaires/Be´atrice-Nauwelaerts,
Louvain/Paris
Siger of Brabant (1981) Quaestiones in Metaphysicam. In: Dunphy W
(ed) E´dition revue de la reportation de Munich. Texte ine´dit de la
reportation de Vienne. Institut Supe´rieur de Philosophie, Louvain-
la-Neuve
SigerofBrabant(1983)QuaestionesinMetaphysicam.In:MaurerA(ed)Texte
ine´dit de la reportation de Cambridge. E´dition revue de la reportation
de Paris. Institut Supe´rieur de Philosophie, Louvain-la-Neuve
Secondary Sources
Aertsen JA, Emery K, Speer A (eds) (2001) Nach der Verurteilung von
1277. Walter de Gruyter, Berlin/New York
Bianchi L (1990) Il vescovo e i ﬁlosoﬁ. La condanna parigina del 1277 e
l’evoluzione dell’aristotelismo scolastico. Pierluigi Lubrina, Bergamo
Bianchi L (1998) 1277: A turning point in medieval philosophy? In:
Aertsen JA, Speer A (eds) Was ist Philosophie im Mittelalter?
Walter de Gruyter, Berlin/New York, pp 90–110
Bianchi L (1999) Censure et liberte´ intellectuelle a` l’universite´ de Paris,
XIIIe–XIVe sie`cles. Les Belles Lettres, Paris
Bianchi L (2002) Felicita` terrena e beatitudine ultraterrena: Boezio di
Dacia e l’articolo 157 censurato da Tempier. In: Bakker PJJM (ed)
Chemins de la pense´e me´die´vale. Me´langes Ze´non Kaluza. Brepols,
Turnhout, pp 335–350
Bianchi L (2003) New perspectives on the condemnation of 1277. Rech
The´ol Philos Me´die´v 70(1):206–229
Bianchi L (2006) Boe`ce de Dacie et l’E´thique a` Nicomaque. Documenti
e studi 17:231–248
Bianchi L, Randi E (1993) Ve´rite´s dissonantes. Aristote a` la ﬁn du Moyen
Aˆ ge. E´ditions Universitaires/Cerf, Fribourg/Paris
Courtenay WJ (1989) Inquiry and inquisition: academic freedom in
medieval universities. Church Hist 58:168–181
Courtenay WJ (1995) The preservation and dissemination of academic
condemnations at the University of Paris in the Middle Ages. In:
Baza´n B, Andu´jar E, Sbrocchi LG (eds) Les philosophies morales et
politiques au Moyen Aˆ ge, vol 3. Legas, New York, pp 1659–1667
de Libera A (1997) Faculte´ des arts ou faculte´ de philosophie? Sur l’ide´e de
philosophie et l’ide´al philosophique au XIIIe sie`cle. In: Weijers O,
Holtz L (eds) L’enseignement des disciplines a` la Faculte´ des arts,
Paris et Oxford, XIIIe–XVe sie`cles. Brepols, Turnhout, pp 429–444
de Libera A (1996) Penser au Moyen Aˆ ge. Seuil, Paris
916 P
Parisian Condemnation of 1277

de Libera A (2003) Raison et foi. Arche´ologie d’une crise d’Albert le
Grand a` Jean-Paul II. Seuil, Paris
Flasch K (1989) Aufkla¨rung im Mittelater? Die Verurteilung von 1277:
Das Dokument des Bischofs von Paris u¨bersetzt und erkla¨rt (German
translation of the 1277 Parisian condemnation). Dieterich, Mainz
Gauthier RA (1947–1948) Trois commentaires ‘‘averroı¨stes’’ sur l’E´thique
a` Nicomaque. Archives d’histoire doctrinale et litte´raire du Moyen
Aˆ ge 16:187–336
Gauthier RA (1984) Notes sur Siger de Brabant II. Siger en 1272–1275.
Aubry de Reims et la scission des Normands. Rev Sci Philos The´ol
68:3–49
Hissette R (1977) Enqueˆte sur les 219 articles condamne´s a` Paris le 7 mars
1277. Publications Universitaires, Louvain-la-Neuve
Laﬂeur Cl (ed) (1997) L’enseignement de la philosophie au XIIIe sie`cle.
Autour du ‘‘Guide de l’e´tudiant’’ du ms. Ripoll 109. Brepols,
Turnhout
Lerner R, Mahdi M (eds) (1967) Medieval political philosophy:
a sourcebook, 2nd edn (English translation of the 1277 Parisian
condemnation). Free Press, New York
Piche´ D (1998) Commentaires sur quelques articles d’une nouvelle e´di-
tion de l’acte de censure parisien de 1277. Rech The´ol Philos Me´die´v
65(2):364–383
Thijssen JMM (1998) Censure and heresy at the University of Paris 1200 –
1400. University of Pennsylvania Press, Philadelphia
Wippel JF (1977) The condemnations of 1270 and 1277at Paris. J Mediev
Renaiss Stud 7:169–201
Wippel JF (1987) Boethius of Dacia: on the supreme good, on the eternity
of the world, on dreams. Translation and introduction. PIMS,
Toronto
Wippel JF (1995) Mediaeval reactions to the encounter between faith and
reason. Marquette University Press, Milwaukee
Wippel JF (2001) David Piche´ on the condemnation of 1277: a critical
study. Am Cath Philos Quart 75(4):597–624
Parts and Wholes
▶Mereology
Parva naturalia, Commentaries on
Aristotle’s
PIETER DE LEEMANS
Katholieke Universiteit Leuven
De Wulf-Mansion Centre
Leuven
Belgium
Abstract
The present article gives an overview of the reception of
Aristotle’s Parva naturalia in the medieval West from the
twelfth to the ﬁfteenth century. It shows that the content
of the Parva naturalia, and thus of the commentaries on
them, has not always been the same as in modern editions
and that even in the Middle Ages it ﬂuctuated. In a ﬁrst
period, most commentators focused on De sensu, De
memoria, De somno, De insomniis, De divinatione per
somnum, and De longitudine only, apparently because
James of Venice’s translation of De iuventute, De
respiratione, and De vita were not anymore at their dis-
posal. In a second period, when new translations had been
made by William of Moerbeke, commentaries could focus
on all of the above texts as well as on De motu animalium.
In the second half of the fourteenth as well as in the
ﬁfteenth century, the study of the Parva naturalia at
the University of Paris was delimited to the same texts
the earliest commentators had dealt with. This is reﬂected
in the composition of several ﬁfteenth-century commen-
taries, most of them from Paris. In Germany and Central
Europe, the Parva naturalia was mostly studied on the
basis of a compendium by Joannes Kronsbein. These com-
mentaries display a typical division of De vita in two
parts; moreover, they often add De motu animalium and
De mundo and sometimes the Physiognomonica, to the
collection.
The generic title Parva naturalia refers to a collection of
short Aristotelian treatises that deal with the important
vital functions which both soul and body share. Modern
editions of this collection contain the following texts:
On Sense and Sensible Objects (Sens.)
On Memory and Recollection (Mem.)
On Sleep and Waking (Somn. vig.)
On Dreams (Insomn.)
On Prophecy in Sleep (Div. somn.)
On Length and Shortness of Life (Long.)
On Youth and Old Age (Iuv.)
On Respiration (Resp.)
On Life and Death (Vit.)
These are usually divided in two groups: the ‘‘psycho-
logical’’ Sens., Mem., Somn. vig., Insomn., Div. somn.
(= Parv. nat. 1) and the physiological Long., Iuv., Resp.,
Vit. (= Parv. nat. 2). For the last three texts there is
discussion whether they are independent entities or rather
form one single or two (Iuv., on the one, and Resp. þ Vit.,
on the other hand) treatises. Similarly, in the Middle Ages
and sometimes thereafter, Somn. vig., Insomn., and Div.
somn. have been considered as parts of one book De somno
et vigilia.
In turn, medieval commentaries on the Parva naturalia
do not necessarily cover the same treatises: some texts are
Parva naturalia, Commentaries on Aristotle’s P
917
P

omitted, others are added. The most important text to be
mentioned here that was added is Aristotle’s On the Move-
ment of Animals (Mot. an.), whose strong link with the
Parv. nat. has been underlined by modern scholarship
(e.g., Rashed 2004). The reasons for this instability were
various, due to circumstances or by deliberate choice.
The following pages will focus on some ascribed and
anonymous Latin commentaries from c. 1200 to 1500, yet
they do not aim to be exhaustive. A list of both anony-
mous and ascribed commentaries can be found in
De Raedemaeker (1965), whereas information on individ-
ual authors can be found in the repertories of C. H. Lohr
and O. Weijers. A distinction will be made between three
periods: a ﬁrst period in which the interest in Aristotle’s
natural philosophy started to ﬂourish; a second period,
from c. 1260 onwards, when the Aristotelian corpus was
completed and renewed by other translations; and a third
period, from c. 1366 onwards, when two opposite tenden-
cies can be distinguished, of respectively delimiting and
reformulating the study of the Parva naturalia. (In what
follows, the abbreviation Parv. nat. (1/2) will be used for
the ‘‘modern’’ collection, the full expression for the medi-
eval one. Likewise, Somn. vig. will refer to the Aristotelian
text, and De somno to the cluster of Somn. vig., Insomn.,
and Div. somn.)
The Rediscovery of the Parva naturalia
(Before c. 1260)
The Parva naturalia was brought up for discussion mainly
by Greek–Latin translations that were made from the
twelfth century onwards. The ﬁrst such translation
(translatio vetus) was not the work of one author alone.
Most treatises, namely, De memoria and Parv. nat. 2, were
translated
by
James
of
Venice
(Jacobus
Veneticus
Graecus). The remaining translations are anonymous:
the twelfth-century translation of De somno and the trans-
lation of Sens., to be dated before c. 1230 (Galle 2008).
Interestingly, these translations were not all equally dis-
seminated. While Parv. nat. 1 and De long. were rather
popular, only a few copies are extant of James’ Iuv., Resp.,
and Vit. (For traces of another translation by David of
Dinant, see below.)
In turn, the Arabic–Latin input was limited to trans-
lations of Averroes’ Epitome of the Parva naturalia – there
are no Long or Middle Commentaries on these texts. This
Epitome, completed in January 1170, is entitled On Sense
and the Sensible (De sensu et sensibili) and deals with Parv.
nat. 1 and Long. It is divided into three treatises – the ﬁrst
discusses Sens., the second Mem. and De somno, and the
third Long. Both the Epitome’s title and division go back to
an older Arabic tradition (Martino 2003). In turn, the
absence of Iuv., Resp., and Vit. is due to the fact that they
had not been translated into Arabic. This might also count
for Mot. an., which the Arabs did not possess either. On
various occasions Averroes underlined that its subject was
closely related to that of the Parva naturalia (De Leemans
2010). The Latin world became acquainted with the Epi-
tome by means of two translations. While the anonymous
Parisina is preserved in one manuscript only, the Vulgata
was more widely disseminated. It was probably made by
Michael Scot in about 1230, and soon inﬂuenced various
Latin commentators.
Both the Greek–Latin and Arabic–Latin transmission
of the Parv. nat. thus neglect Iuv., Resp., and Vit. (One
might get the false impression – several studies err here –
that at least James’ translation of Vit. circulated, since
several medieval pre-1260 texts mention or comment on
an Aristotelian treatise De morte et vita; yet, this was the
title under which circulated the translation of Long.). The
diffusion of the Greek–Latin translations of these texts
might have been hindered by their absence in Averroes’
popular Epitome or by intrinsic (such as the quality of the
translation) or purely circumstantial factors. Around
1250, in any case, several authors made clear that these
texts were not at their disposal (see the texts quoted by
Gauthier 1985:117*–118*).
For this period, one can make a distinction between
commentaries written in Oxford and on the continent.
The introduction of Aristotelian natural philosophy in
Oxford probably took place at the end of the twelfth
century (Burnett 1996). The oldest surviving commentar-
ies are those by Alfred of Sareshel (Alfredus Anglicus) on
the
Meteorologica
and
De
plantis.
Alfred
probably
commented also on some Parva naturalia. This is at least
what is suggested by the 1664 catalogue of the cathedral of
Beauvais, which mentions commentaries by Alfred on De
somno et vigilia and De morte et vita (= Long.) (Callus:14).
Moreover, he might have read Resp., since he refers to – yet
not explicitly quotes – the text in his De motu cordis.
The ﬁrst and most important extant Oxford commen-
tary was written by Adam of Buckﬁeld (or Bocfeld), active
in Oxford in the late 1230s and/or in the 1240s, and
focused on all of the known Parva naturalia (Parv. nat. 1
and Long.). Several versions of these commentaries exist,
yet it is unclear whether or not they should all be attrib-
uted to the same author: for one of the versions of his
commentary on De somno, for example, the authorship of
Siger of Brabant has been suggested (Dondaine and
Bataillon 1966: cf. infra). Moreover, Buckﬁeld’s commen-
tary on Sens. was used as a source for composing the so-
called ‘‘Oxford gloss,’’ a corpus of marginal and interlinear
notes compiled in the Oxford schools in the (middle of ?)
918 P
Parva naturalia, Commentaries on Aristotle’s

the thirteenth century (Galle 2008). It is not unlikely that
this counts also for the remaining Parva naturalia. One of
the students attending these courses was Henry of
Renham, who wrote glosses on the corpus vetustius in
manuscript London, British Library, Royal 12.g.ii.
Another leading representative of early Oxford Aristo-
telianism is Geoffrey of Aspall (d. 1287). Contrary to
Buckﬁeld he did not write straightforward expositions on
the Parva naturalia, yet proceeded per modum questionis.
We still possess questions on Sens., De somno, and Long.;
the questions on Mem. appear in manuscript Oxford, New
College, 285, and might be by his hand (Macrae 1968).
Less famous than the above authors is William of
Clifford (d. 1306), Master around 1265 and author of
a commentary on the Physics. Recently, it has been
convincingly argued that he is also the author of the
anonymous commentaries in manuscript Cambridge,
Peterhouse, 157. Among these is a Sententia cum
quaestionibus on De somno et vigilia, based on the
translatio vetus (Donati 2008).
Noteworthy are also the abbreviations of, among other
works of the corpus vetustius, Parv. nat. 1 and Long. in
manuscript Oxford, Bodleian Library, Tanner, 116. These
were sometimes ascribed to Simon of Faversham (d. 1306)
on feeble grounds. Instead, D.A. Callus noticed the resem-
blance with the abbreviations of the Ethics by Robert
Grosseteste, though without drawing any conclusions
(Callus 1943:49–52). (On the contrary, Simon’s author-
ship of Questiones on the Parva naturalia, based on the
translatio nova, appears to be certain – see below.)
Finally, Adam de Wyteby wrote glosses on Sens. and
perhaps also on Mem. (Gauthier 1985:125*).
In Paris, Aristotle’s natural science was initially con-
sidered a threat to Christian faith. In 1210, for example,
a prohibition was issued against the teaching of Aristotle
in Paris, which resulted in the burning of the Quaternuli of
David of Dinant. In this work, David had quoted, apart
from other works, several of the Parva naturalia. (He,
however, used none of the existing translations but
paraphrased directly from the Greek – cf. Vuillemin-
Diem 2003.) Still, this and other prohibitions, in 1215
and 1231, could not prevent the increasing popularity of
the study of Aristotelian natural philosophy. This is strik-
ingly illustrated by the presence of Aristotle’s works
(among which Parv. nat. 1 and Long.) in a manual for
students of the Arts faculty in Paris, written in c. 1230–
1240 (manuscript Barcelona, Archivo de la Corona de
Arago´n, Ripoll 109). In the 1240s Roger Bacon might
have been among the ﬁrst to lecture on Aristotle in Paris;
his commentary on Sens. is sometimes dated in this period
(ed. Steele). On March 19, 1255, the study of Aristotle at
the University of Paris was ofﬁcially adopted, when a new
syllabus proclaimed by the Arts faculty imposed the study
of all known works of Aristotle: six weeks were reserved for
the study of Sens., ﬁve for De somno, two for Mem., and
one for De morte et vita (= Long.).
In spite of the increasing popularity of Aristotle in this
period, continental commentaries on the Parva naturalia
are very rare. The main exception is the paraphrase of
Albert the Great (c. 1200–1280), which is the most ambi-
tious attempt to offer an interpretation of the Parva
naturalia in the whole of the Middle Ages (ed. Borgnet).
While other commentators limited themselves to the
available texts, Albert wanted to offer a complete science
of the soul. He thus completed his paraphrasing of Parv.
nat. 1 and Long. – for which he heavily relied on Averroes’
Epitome – with treatises on youth and old age (De
iuventute et senectute), on respiration (De spiritu et
respiratione, a paraphrase of Qust:a ibn Lu¯qa¯’s De
differentia spiritus et animae), on the movement of animals
(De motibus animalium), on nutrition (De nutrimento et
nutribili), and on the intellect (De intellectu et intelligibili).
All these topics were said to pertain to the second part of
the science of the soul, dealing with the functions of the
soul in the body (cf. Albert, Physics). (After the comple-
tion of this collection, written c. 1250–1260, Albert found
a translation of Mot. an. and used it for another para-
phrase, De principiis motus processivi – see De Leemans
2010:201–206.)
Another continental exception is the commentary on
Long., by Peter of Ireland (Petrus de Hibernia), which was
written in the middle of the thirteenth century and con-
sists of a mixture of literal explanation and quaestiones
(ed. Dunne 1993). In turn, Peter of Spain (1220–1277)
wrote a Tractatus de longitudine et brevitate vitae (ed.
Alonso 1952). This work, however, is not a commentary
on the Aristotelian text, although it is clearly inspired by it
(Dunne 2003:324–326).
The ‘‘Standard’’ Parva naturalia
(c. 1260–c. 1366)
A renewed impetus to the study of the Parva naturalia was
given by a translation of the entire collection (translatio
nova), made in 1260–1270, by William of Moerbeke
(d. 1286). While Moerbeke appears to have made entirely
new translations of Parv. nat. 2, he revised the vetus of
Parv. nat. 1. The Flemish Dominican is also credited with
a translation of Aristotle’s Mot. an. and Inc. an. – known
in the Middle Ages as De progressu animalium – as well as
of the commentary of Alexander of Aphrodisias on De
sensu,
which
highly
inﬂuenced
Thomas
Aquinas
(Gauthier 1985).
Parva naturalia, Commentaries on Aristotle’s P
919
P

Except for Alexander’s commentary (ﬁve extant man-
uscripts), all these texts were soon widely disseminated.
This eventually led to the reformulation of the content of
the Parva naturalia (as illustrated by several divisions of
science of this period): not only Parv. nat. 1 and Long., but
also the rediscovered Juv., Resp., and Vit., the newcomers
Mot. an. and Inc. an., as well as the allegedly ‘‘lost’’ treatises
De nutrimento et nutribili and De sanitate et egritudine.
(Note: Iuv., Resp., and Vit. were considered as one text,
often called De morte et vita, which was the vetus title of
Long.!) Yet, this ﬁxed content was mainly theoretical as it
seems (even if one leaves the ‘‘lost’’ treatises out of con-
sideration). For example, no commentaries on Inc. an. in
this context have been preserved, a situation which is
probably due to the text’s very technical nature and lim-
ited philosophical relevance (De Leemans 2006).
The most inﬂuential commentaries on the Parva
naturalia ‘‘new style’’ were written by Thomas Aquinas
and Petrus de Alvernia. Aquinas wrote a commentary on
Sens. and Mem. (ed. Gauthier 1985), whereas Petrus wrote
Sententiae on Long., De morte et vita, and Mot. an.
Although it is nowhere explicitly said, it is not unlikely
that, by commenting on these texts, Petrus intended to
complete Thomas’ commentary on the Parva naturalia,
just as he had completed Aquinas’ commentaries on De
celo and the Politica (De Leemans 2004). In any case, their
commentaries are often found in the same manuscripts
and have been printed together, sometimes under the
name of Aquinas only, up to the middle of the seventeenth
century. Moreover, Petrus wrote Quaestiones on Parv.
nat. 1 (ed. White; see also White 1990, 1991, 1993) and
(perhaps) on Mot. an. (De Leemans 2004).
Other
authors
whose
commentaries
reﬂect
the
reformulated content of the Parva naturalia are, at the
end of the thirteenth century, Simon of Faversham, and
in the ﬁrst half of the fourteenth century, John of Jandun,
Walter Burley, and John Buridan. Simon of Faversham
(d. 1306), regent master in Oxford and Paris and Chan-
cellor of the University of Oxford from 1304 to 1306,
wrote Quaestiones on De somno, Parv. nat. 2, and Mot.
an., whereas Quaestiones on Mem. might be lost. John of
Jandun’s (c. 1285–1328) Quaestiones on Parv. nat. and
Mot. an. date from the very beginning of his career
(cf. manuscript Vaticano, bibl. Apost., Vat. lat. 6768, fol.
145ra: Expliciunt questiones supra librum de sompno et
uigilia scripte per Johannem de Ganduno et ad hunc
ordinem quem habent reducte anno Christi 1309). They
remained to be copied in the ﬁfteenth century and were
printed several times in the sixteenth century. From about
the same time date Walter Burley’s (c. 1275–c. 1346) literal
commentaries on Parv. nat. 1, Long., and Mot. an. While
his notes of Mot. an. are largely inﬂuenced by Peter of
Auvergne (De Leemans 2001:279; ed. Scott and Shapiro),
Averroes is his guide in interpreting Long. (Dunne
2003:332). John Buridan (c. 1300 – post 1358) wrote
both commentaries per modum scripti and per modum
quaestionis on the Parva naturalia. The difference is that
his literal commentary includes a brief exposition on Mot.
an. (ed. Scott and Shapiro) whereas questions by his hand
on this text have not been preserved. His Quaestiones were
printed for the ﬁrst time in Paris in 1516.
Other commentators commented on only a few texts
(or better: commentaries on only a few texts have been
preserved). More or less contemporary with Petrus de
Alvernia’s are the commentaries on De somno and Long.
by James of Douai which offer an intermingling of Sen-
tentia and Quaestiones. James might have commented on
Sens. and Mem. as well. Questions on De somno and on De
morte in manuscript Mu¨nchen, Bayerische Staatsbibl.
Clm. 9559 have been ascribed (but not on compelling
grounds)
to
Siger
of
Brabant
(d.
c.
1284)
(Van
Steenberghen 1931). Moreover, it has been argued that
there are good reasons to assume Siger’s authorship of
the literal commentaries on De somno and Long. in man-
uscript Wien, O¨ NB, 2330 (Dondaine and Bataillon 1966).
In turn, Boethius of Dacia’s (d. c. 1284) De somniis is not
a commentary on the Aristotelian text, although it is
clearly inspired by it (ed. Pedersen; see also Fioravanti).
Other preserved commentaries are (1) Henricus de
Alemannia’s Quaestiones on Iuv., Resp., and Vit. (c. 1310),
which exhibit striking similarities with the Quaestiones of
John
of
Jandun
(Kouri
and
Lehtinen
2000);
(2) Quaestiones on the same texts as well as on Mot. An.
by the otherwise unknown Petrus de Flandria; (3) Jacobus
de Blanchis de Alexandria’s Compilatio super totam
philosophiam naturalem et moralem, which deals with
Parv. nat. 1 only; (4) Raimundus de Biterris’ commentary
on Long.; (5) John Felmingham’s (?) commentary on Sens.
Delimitation and Reformulation
(c. 1366–1500)
From the second half of the fourteenth century onwards,
but mainly in the ﬁfteenth century, some authors
delimited the study of the Parva naturalia to a selection
of texts, whereas others expanded the collection with new
texts and proposed a new division of known texts. Gener-
ally speaking, the ﬁfteenth century was a very fruitful
period for the interpretation of the Parva naturalia.
Delimitation
When the curriculum at the Parisian Arts faculty was ﬁxed
in 1366, only Parv. nat. 1 and Long. ﬁgured among the
920 P
Parva naturalia, Commentaries on Aristotle’s

Aristotelian books concerning natural philosophy, which
was prescribed for study. The same list was to be repeated
almost one century later, in the 1452 statute. As a result,
one actually gets a copy of the pre-1260 situation when the
study of the Parva naturalia focused on the same texts, yet
for different reasons.
This curriculum appears to be reﬂected for the ﬁrst
time in manuscript Mu¨nchen, Bayerische Staatsbibl., Clm.
4376, written between 1365 and 1367. It contains, among
other works, anonymous Quaestiones on Mem., De somno,
and Long., as well as Quaestiones on Sens. that are attrib-
uted to Albert of Saxony. This ascription, however, is
uncertain: another (Erfurt) manuscript attributes them
to Nicholas Oresme, and even the name of John Buridan
has been suggested (ed. Agrimi 1983; cf. Agrimi 1991).
All other commentaries with this composition date
from the ﬁfteenth century. Not surprisingly, they were
mainly written by authors active in Paris: (1) Jacobus
Faber Stapulensis (Lefe`vre d’E´taples; c. 1460–1536);
(2) Joannes de Caulaincourt (ﬂ. XV2), whose commentary
was printed several times under the name of Joannes de
Magistris; (3) Joannes Hennon (ﬂ. XV2); (4) Joannes le
Damoisiau (ﬂ. XV2); (5) Joannes Versor (d. after 1482),
who was very inﬂuential at the University of Cologne as
well as at other Universities in Germany and Central
Europe; (6) Georgius Bruxellensis (d. 1510), whose com-
mentary was edited in 1482 by Thomas Bricot (d. 1516),
who in turn added abbreviations of the Aristotelian texts
as well as some Quaestiones; and (7) Petrus Tartareti
(d. 1522).
Three other authors who focused on Parv. nat. 1 and
Long worked only in Germany: (1) Johannes Hulshout de
Mechlinia (d. 1475) (see also below); (2) Johannes
Tinctoris de Tornaco (d. 1469); and (3) Nicolaus
Theoderici de Amsterdam (d. c. 1460).
These commentaries have not yet been the object of
profound research. An impression of what one might
expect of them is given by the Tabula quaestionum,
dubitationum and conclusionum of the works by Johannes
Hennon, Johannes le Damoisiau, and Johannes de
Caulaincourt (Bakker 2005, 2006, 2007).
Reformulation
A different movement is seen in a collection of anonymous
commentaries on the Parva naturalia (De Leemans 2000).
They were written throughout the ﬁfteenth century and
are preserved for the most part in libraries in German-
speaking countries and in Central Europe. (Among these
is also the commentary in manuscript Erfurt, Ampl. F.
334, which was ascribed – on feeble grounds – to Marsilius
of Inghen; see also infra.) Exploratory research for Mot.
An. has shown that they all have signiﬁcant internal sim-
ilarity. This might be a reason to assume the existence of
a ‘‘proto-commentary,’’ used and adapted by the respec-
tive magistri for their courses.
Most remarkably, they are based on abbreviations of
the Aristotelian texts by Joannes Kronsbein. Nothing is
known about this author, except that he was a German
Dominican who wrote compendia both on Aristotle’s
moral and natural philosophy and must have been active
at the latest in the very beginning of the ﬁfteenth century.
It is from this compendium that the commentaries have
taken over a very peculiar division of Iuv., Resp., and Vit.
These are no longer considered as one, or two, or three,
but as four texts whose order could vary. Apart from
Iuv. and Resp., Vit. is split into two independent treatises:
De morte et vita (= 478b22–479b16), and De motu cordis
(= 479b17–480b30). (Note that the titles cause confusion:
it has been shown that De morte et vita is also used to
denote Long. as well as the ensemble of Iuv., Resp., and Vit.,
whereas De motu cordis is also the title of works by Thomas
Aquinas and Alfred of Sareshel.) Another characteristic is
the fact that the content is not limited to the standard
Parv. nat., but also includes Mot. an. and, much more
surprisingly, the pseudo-Aristotelian De mundo, which
had also been paraphrased by Kronsbein.
Perhaps related to Kronsbein’s compendium are two
commentaries
per
modum
quaestionis
by
Nicolaus
Tempelfeld de Brega and Paulus de Worczyn respectively.
Both authors were active in Krakow in the ﬁrst half of
the ﬁfteenth century. Their Quaestiones on the Parva
naturalia are characterized by the division of Vit. into
two independent parts. On the contrary, they do not
discuss
Mot.
an.
or
De
mundo,
but
add
the
Physiognomonica
(which was
absent
in
Kronsbein’s
compendium) to the collection.
Other Commentaries
Some commentators dealt with one or a few treatises only.
Thus, for Sens., we have a commentary by Peter de Rivo
(d. 1499), a professor at the University of Leuven. Mem.
was treated by Dominicus de Carpanis as well as by Hugo
Benzi (1376–1439); the latter also wrote a Scriptum de
somno et vigilia (ed. Fioravanti 1991). Whether or not
Matthaeolus Perusinus’ (d. 1470/1480) De memoria et
reminiscentia. Ars memorativa is a commentary on the
Aristotelian text needs to be examined. Finally, Joannes
de Slupcza (1408–1488) might have written notes on all of
Parv. nat. 1.
More important are three authors who, in spite of the
above tendencies, adopt a more classical content of the
Parva naturalia. Marsilius of Inghen (c. 1340–1396) wrote
Parva naturalia, Commentaries on Aristotle’s P
921
P

Quaestiones on Parv. nat. but not on Mot. an. It is, how-
ever, unclear whether these were written in Paris or in
Heidelberg. The same treatises were dealt with in a literal
commentary by the Spanish author Petrus de Castrovol,
published in 1498 in Lerida. A special case, in which
different traditions concur, is the commentary written by
Jacobus Tymens de Amersfordia (d. 1493), active at the
University of Cologne. He completed the commentaries
on Parv. nat. 1 and Long. by the above-mentioned Joannes
Hulshout de Mechlinia with discussions of Iuv., Resp., Vit.,
as well as of Mot. an. Moreover, he had his commentary on
Mot. an. followed by a set of 18 dubia on the librum de
progressionibus animalium (= Inc. an.). By doing so, he is
the ﬁrst Latin author ever to realize a commentary on the
Parva naturalia as deﬁned by, among others, Thomas
Aquinas and Peter of Auvergne. The latter authors might
have inspired this decision: although he proclaims himself
to be a follower of Albert the Great, it seems, at least in his
commentary on Mot. an., that Peter of Auvergne was one
of his principal sources. In turn, the inﬂuence of the
Kronsbein tradition can be seen in the division of Vit.
into two parts.
See also: ▶Albert of Saxony ▶Albert the Great ▶Arabic
Texts: Philosophy, Latin Translations of ▶Aristotle, Ara-
bic ▶Boethius of Dacia ▶Ibn Rushd (Averroes), Latin
Translations of ▶John Buridan ▶John of Jandun ▶Mar-
silius of Inghen ▶Nicholas Oresme ▶Peter of Auvergne
▶Peter of Spain ▶Robert Grosseteste ▶Roger Bacon
▶Siger of Brabant ▶Simon of Faversham ▶Thomas
Aquinas ▶Walter Burley
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Greek–Latin Translations
Brams J, Steel C, Tombeur P (moderatibus(†)), De Leemans P, Gouder E
(cooperatibus) (2006) Aristoteles Latinus database. 2. Release (CD-
ROM). Brepols, Turnhout (contains the texts – without critical appa-
ratuses – of most Greek–Latin translations of the Parva naturalia)
Albertus Magnus
Magnus Albertus (1890) B. Alberti Magni Parvorum naturalium pars
prima, ed. Borgnet A. Alberti Magni Opera omnia 9. Vive`s, Paris
(a new critical edition of De memoria is in preparation by Donati
S – Albertus Magnus-Institut Bonn – see also below Donati, in press)
Albertus de Saxonia?
Albertus de Saxonia? (1983) Le ‘Quaestiones de sensu’ attribuite a Oresme
e Alberto di Sassonia, ed. Agrimi J. Nuova Italia, Firenze (contains an
edition, introduction and notes)
Averroes
Averroes (1961) Averrois Cordubensis compendia librorum Aristotelis
qui Parva naturalia vocantur, ed. Shield AL, Blumberg H. Corpus
Commentariorum Averrois in Aristotelem versionum Latinarum
VII. Medieval academy of America, Cambridge
Boethius Dacus
Boethius Dacus (1976) Opuscula, ed. Green-Pedersen NG. Corpus
Philosophorum Danicorum Medii Aevi VI.ii. Gad, Hauniae (ed. of
De somniis on pp. 379–391)
Gualterus Burlaeus
Burlaeus Gualterus (1966) Walter Burley’s De sensibus, ed. Shapiro H,
Scott F. Mitteilungen des Grabmann-Institut 1.3. Hu¨ber, Mu¨nchen
Burlaeus Gualterus (1969) Walter Burley’s Commentary on Aristotle’s De
motu animalium, ed. Shapiro H, Scott F. Traditio 25:171–190
Joannes Buridanus
Buridanus Joannnes (1967) Jean Buridan’s De motibus animalium, ed.
Shapiro H, Scott F. Isis 58:533–552
Joannes de Janduno
See De Leemans (2000)
Nicolaus Oresmius
See Albertus de Saxonia
Petrus de Alvernia
Petrus de Alvernia (1986) Two studies related to St. Thomas Aquinas’
commentary on Aristotle’s De sensu et sensato, together with an
edition of Peter of Auvergne’s Quaestiones super Parva naturalia,
ed. White K. A dissertation presented to the School of Graduate
Studies of the University of Ottawa as partial fulﬁlment of the
requirements for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy (contains an
edition of Peter’s Questiones on Parv. nat. 1)
Petrus de Alvernia (2002) The commentary of Peter of Auvergne on
Aristotle’s On length and shortness of life, ed. Dunne M. Archives
d’Histoire Doctrinale et Litte´raire du Moyen Age 69:153–200 (con-
tains an edition with introduction)
Petrus de Alvernia (2007) Peter of Auvergne on memory. An edition of the
Quaestiones super De memoria et reminiscentia, ed. Bloch D.
Cahiers de l’Institut du Moyen Aˆ ge grec et latin LXXVII:51–110
See also: De Leemans (2000, 2004)
Petrus de Hibernia
Petrus de Hibernia (1993) Magistri Petri de Ybernia Expositio et
quaestiones in Aristotelis librum de longitudine et brevitate vitae,
ed. Dunne M. Philosophes me´die´vaux 30. Institut supe´rieur de
philosophie, Louvain-la-Neuve
Petrus Hispanus
Pedro Hispano (1952) Obras Filosoﬁcas III, ed. Alonso M. Madrid (pp
415–490: edition of his De longitudine)
Rogerus Bacon
Bacon Roger (1937) Liber de sensu et sensato. Summa de sophismatibus et
distinctionibus, ed. Steele R. Opera hactenus inedita Rogeri Baco´nis
Fasc. XIV. Clarendon, Oxford (Liber de sensu et sensato on pp 1–134)
Sigerus de Brabantia?
Sigerus de Brabantia? (1931) Siger de Brabant d’apre`s ses œuvres ine´dites,
vol 1: les œuvres ine´dites. Les philosophes belges, ed. Van
Steenberghen F. Textes et e´tudes XII. Institut supe´rieur de
philosophie, Louvain (contains lists of questiones as well as doctrinal
summaries on pp 263–267 (De morte) and pp 223–233 (De somno))
Simon of Faversham
See De Leemans (2000)
Thomas Aquinas
Aquinas Thomas (1985) Sancti Thomae de Aquino. Sentencia libri de
sensu et sensato cuius secundus tractatus est De memoria et
reminiscentia, cura et studio Fratrum Praedicatorum, ed. Gauthier
R-A. Sancti Thomae de Aquino Opera omnia XLV, 2. Commissio
Leonina, Roma
922 P
Parva naturalia, Commentaries on Aristotle’s

Ugo Bentius
Benzi Ugo (1992) Scriptum de somno et vigilia, ed. Fioravanti G, Idato A.
Nuova Italia, Firenze
Secondary Sources
Agrimi J (1991) Les ’Quaestiones de sensu’ attribue´es a` Albert de Saxe.
Quelques remarques sur les rapports entre philosophie naturelle et
me´decine chez Buridan, Oresme et Albert’. In: Biard J (ed) Itine´raires
d’Albert de Saxe. Paris-Vienne au XIVe sie´cle. E´tudes de philosophie
me´die´vale LXIX. Vrin, Paris, pp 191–204
Bakker PJJM (2005) Natural philosophy and metaphysics in late ﬁfteenth-
century Paris. Bull Philos Me´die´v 47:125–155 (=I: The commentaries
on Aristotle by Johannes Hennon, 48, 2006, pp 207–228. =II: The
commentaries on Aristotle by Johannes le Damoisiau, 49, 2007,
pp 195–237. =III: The commentaries on Aristotle by Johannes de
Caulaincourt (alias Johannes de Magistris))
Burnett C (1996) The introduction of Aristotle’s Natural philosophy into
Great Britain: a preliminary survey of the manuscript evidence. In:
Marenbon J (ed) Aristotle in Britain during the Middle Ages. Ren-
contres de Philosophie Me´die´vale 5. Brepols, Turnhout, pp 21–50
Callus (1943) Introduction of Aristotelian learning to Oxford. Milford,
London, s.d. (repr Proc Br Acad 29:229–281)
De Leemans P (2000) Medieval Latin commentaries on Aristotle’s De
Motu Animalium. A contribution to the Corpus commentariorum
medii aevi in Aristotelem Latinorum. Rech The´ol Philos Me´die´v
LXVII (2):272–360 (contains also lists of questiones on Mot. An.
by, a.o., John of Jandun, Peter of Auvergne and Simon of Faversham)
De Leemans P (2004) Peter of Auvergne on Aristotle’s De motu
animalium and the ms. Oxford, Merton College, 275. Arch Hist
Doctrin Litt M-Aˆge 71:129–202 (contains also an edition of the
introduction of Peter’s commentaries on Mot. An.)
De Leemans P (2006) Aristotle’s De progressu animalium in the Middle
Ages: translation and interpretation. In: Merisalo O (ed) Frontiers in
the Middle Ages FIDEM. Textes et e´tudes du Moyen Aˆ ge, 35. Brepols,
Turnhout, pp 525–541
De Leemans P (2010) Secundum viam naturae et doctrinae. Lire le De
motu animalium et les Parva naturalia d’Aristote au Moyen Aˆ ge. In:
Grellard C, Morel PM (eds) Les Parva Naturalia d’Aristote. Fortune
antique et me´die´vale. Se´rie Philosophie 28, Publications de la
Sorbonne, Paris, pp 197–220
De Raedemaeker J (1965) Une e´bauche de catalogue des commentaires
sur les Parva Naturalia, parus aux XIIIe, XIVe et XVe sie`cles. Bull
Philos Me´die´v 7
Di Martino C (2003) Parva naturalia. Tradition arabe. In: Goulet R,
Flamand J-M, Aouad M (eds) Dictionnaire des Philosophes
Antiques. Supple´ment. E´d. du CNRS, Paris, pp 367–378
Donati S (2008) Guglielmo di Clifford (+1306) e alcuni commenti
anonimi ai Libri naturales del ms. Cambridge, Peterhouse, 157 (De
anima, De generatione et corruptione, Meteora, De somno et vigilia,
De vegetabilibus). Documenti e studi sulla tradizione ﬁlosoﬁca
medievale 19:501–618
Donati S (2009) Albert der Große als Kommentator der Translatio Vetus
der Schrift De memoria et reminiscentia des Aristoteles: seine Vor-
lage und seine Kommentierungsmethode am Beispiel von Mem. In:
Honnefelder L, Mo¨hle H, Bullido del Barrio S (eds) Via Alberti :
Texte, Quellen, Interpretationen. Studia Albertina 2, Aschendorff,
Mu¨nster, pp 509–559
Dondaine A, Bataillon LJ (1966) Le manuscript Vindob. lat. 2330 et Siger
de Brabant. Arch Frat Praedic XXXVI:153–261
Dunne M (2003) Thirteenth and fourteenth-century commentaries on
the De longitudine et brevitate vitae. Early Sci Med VIII (4):320–336
Federici
Vescovini
G
(2004)
La
tradizione
dei
Parva
naturalia
nell’insegnamento universitario medievale (secoli XIII e XIV). In:
Crisciani C, Lambertini R, Martorelli Vico R (eds) Parva naturalia.
Saperi medievali, natura e vita. Istituti Editoriali e Poligraﬁci
Internazionali, Pisa/Roma, pp 125–141
Fioravanti G (1966–1967) La Scienzia sompnialis di Boezio di Dacia. Atti
della Academia delle Scienze di Torino 101:329–369
Galle G (2008) Interpretations of the Translatio vetus of De sensu l in
commentaries attributed to Adam of Buckﬁeld and in the Oxford
Gloss. In: Bernardini P (ed) I manoscritti e la ﬁlosoﬁa. Atti della
Giornata internazionale di Studi, Siena, 18 aprile 2007. Edizioni
dell‘Universita` di Siena, Siena
Kouri EI, Lehtinen AI (2000) Disputed questions on Aristotle’s De
iuventute et senectute, De respiratione and De morte et vita by
Henricus de Alemannia. In: Folkerts M, Lorsch R (eds) Sic itur ad
astra: Studien zur Geschichte der Mathematik und Naturwis-
senschaften. Festschrift fu¨r den Arabisten Paul Kunitzsch zum 70.
Geburtstag. Harrasowitz, Wiesbaden, pp 362–375
Lockwood DP (1951) Ugo Benzi, medieval philosopher and physician,
1376–1439. University of Chicago Press, Chicago
Lohr CH. Medieval Latin Aristotle commentaries. Traditio 23, 1967;
Traditio 29, 1973
Macrae (1968) Geoffrey of Aspall’s Commentaries on Aristotle. Mediev
Renaiss Stud 6, pp 94–134
Morel PM, Grellard C (eds) (in press) Les Parva naturalia d’Aristote et
leur fortune antique et me´die´vale (Aristote: traductions et e´tudes).
Peeters, Leuven (contains contributions on medieval commentaries
on the Parva naturalia by Brenet J-B, Brumberg-Chaumont J, De
Leemans P, Di Martino C, Grellard C)
Rashed M (2004) Agre´gat involontaire ou vinculum substantiale? Sur une
he´sitation conceptuelle et textuelle du corpus aristote´licien. In:
Laks A, Rashed M (eds) Aristote et le mouvement des animaux.
Dix e´tudes sur le De motu animalium. Presses Universitaires du
Septentrion, pp 185–202
Vuillemin-Diem G (2003) Zum Aristoteles Latinus in den Fragmenten der
Quaternuli des David von Dinant. Arch Hist Doctrin Litt M-Aˆ ge
70:27–136
Weijers O (1994–) Le travail intellectual a` la Faculte´ des arts de Paris:
textesetmaıˆtres(ca. 1200–1500). Studia Artistarum. Brepols, Turnhout
White K (1990) St. Thomas Aquinas and the prologue to Peter of
Auvergne’s Quaestiones super De sensu et sensato. Documenti e
Studi sulla Tradizione Filosoﬁca Medievale I (2):427–456
Paul of Pergula
STEPHEN F. BROWN
Institute of Medieval Philosophy and Theology
Boston College
Chestnut Hill, MA
USA
Abstract
Paul of Pergula was the ﬁrst to hold a chair of Philosophy
at Venice. We do not know much about his life, since the
chief sources of information concerning him simply
Paul of Pergula P
923
P

indicate that he ﬂourished from 1400 to 1454, that he
studied under Paul of Venice, refused the offer to be
ordained a bishop in 1448 and chose rather to administer
the Church of St. John the Almoner in Venice. His most
printed work, Logica, was published by his student and
successor, Domenico Bragadino. Another of his works,
Dubia super consequentiis Strodi, a commentary on Ralph
Strode’s Consequences, was by a statute of 1496 a required
text at the University of Padua. His Logica went through
eight editions between 1481 and 1501 and survives in ten
manuscripts, including four at the Bodleian Library in
Oxford.
Paul of Pergula (c.1400–1454) was the ﬁrst ofﬁcial master
of the School of Rialto in Venice and thus the ﬁrst person
to hold a chair of Philosophy in that city. There were
a number of Pauls who taught philosophy in the Venice–
Padua–Bologna area in the ﬁrst half of the ﬁfteenth cen-
tury: Paul of Venice (d. 1429), Paul of Pergula (d. 1451),
and Paulus Albertini (d. 1475). Often their identities
became mixed. Earlier historians, such as Girolomo
Tiraboschi and Giuseppe Valentinelli, tried to sort out
the facts concerning these three philosophers and identi-
ﬁed Paul of Pergula as a student of Paulus Nicolettus, who
today is known as Paul of Venice. The Paul who was the
ﬁrst professor of philosophy at Venice, and taught there
his whole life, is now called Paul of Pergula. He taught at
the School of Rialto from 1420 until his death in 1454.
From the works that have come down from him, we know
that he was an artium doctor. He has, however, also been
described as a professor of theology, although we have
presently no works to verify this claim. He refused the
ofﬁce of bishop in 1448 and in its stead he chose to
administer the Venetian Church of St. John the Almoner.
In 1450, he was honored by the City of Venice for his many
years of teaching. He died in 1454.
Paul of Pergula wrote a number of logical works. The
most often published volume was his Logica, an introduc-
tory text made up of six treatises that survives in eight old
editions and also in a modern form. It is a very rudimen-
tary work that in its outline follows the Logica parva of
Paul of Venice. Paul of Pergula’s six treatises are:
Summulae, which is a general outline of terms, proposi-
tions, and arguments, which is the content likewise of Paul
of Venice’s ﬁrst chapter in his Logica Parva. Paul of
Pergula’s opening treatise covers in a short form the logic
materials of Porphyry’s Isagoge, Aristotle’s Categories,
Perihermeneias and Analytics as digested by logicians
from the time of Peter of Spain on. The titles of the
other ﬁve treatises of Paul’s Logica are identical with the
chapters of Paul of Venice: (1) On Suppositions; (2) On
Proving Terms; (3) On Consequences or Inferences; (4) On
Obligations; and (5) On Insolubles, although Pergula’s
third and fourth treatises are an inversion of the order of
Paul of Venice’s chapters three and four. There is, in his
ﬁrst treatise, the Summulae, no deep theoretical discussion
of terms, propositions, or arguments. The ten categories
are explained in brief and there is no sign of the arguments
between realists and nominalists like Walter Burley and
William of Ockham over the nature of certain kinds of
qualities, or any of the other categories as inhering realities.
Alexander Sermoneta (d. 1486), in a question concerning
Porphyry’s discussion of ‘‘accident,’’ tells us that Paul of
Pergula gives a different interpretation of ‘‘accident’’
according to Porphyry than does Paul of Venice. However,
no such discussion is present in the Logica of Pergula. If
there is a foundation for Sermoneta’s deeper discussion of
Paul of Pergula’s position, it might well be found in
another work, Paul’s unedited treatise Universalia found
in codex 168 of the Philadelphia Free Library, where
Pergula discusses the ﬁve predicables of Porphyry.
A second work, A Treatise on the Composite and
Divided Senses, that has been joined to the modern edition
of the Logica, is a uniﬁed portrait of the ways of avoiding
the seven ways that fallacies concerning modal proposi-
tions might be committed. It was written explicitly for
Petrus de Guidonibus, to be shared with others, and covers
not only modal forms such as ‘‘necessary,’’ ‘‘possible,’’
‘‘contingent,’’ and ‘‘impossible,’’ but modal propositions
in a much broader sense, where they are determined by
such verbs as ‘‘I doubt,’’ ‘‘I believe,’’ ‘‘I imagine,’’ and ‘‘I
suspect.’’ In the Logica parva of Pergula’s teacher, Paul of
Venice, these are treated here and there throughout the
whole work and not in a uniﬁed way; in the Logica magna
attributed to Paul of Venice, one ﬁnds, however, a special
organized treatise like this work of Paul of Pergula.
The link to other logical works of Paul of Pergula quite
likely goes back to Paul of Venice. Paul of Venice studied at
Oxford from about 1390 to 1393 and brought back to
Padua many logical works of English authors. An example
of the English logic invasion can be seen by examining
library catalogs, such as those of the Franciscan convent of
St. Anthony in Padua. This library had no English authors
in 1396. Half a century later, among the holdings, there
were three copies of Walter Burley’s On the Purity of the Art
of Logic, six copies of William of Ockham’s Summa logicae,
a copy of Ralph Strode’s On Consequences, and a copy of
William Heytesbury’s Sophismata. The focus on English
logic was very much due to the dominance of Paul of
Venice, a dominance criticized by Erasmus, Thomas
More, and Juan Luis Vives. These works of Strode and
Heytesbury were studied by many Italians, including Paul
924 P
Paul of Pergula

of Pergula. From Paul’s pen we have Dubia super
consequentiis
Strodi,
which
was
published
as
a companion piece in the 1477 Padua edition of Strode’s
De consequentiis and was also reprinted with Strode’s text
in the Venice editions of 1488 and 1493. This commentary
of Paul of Pergula was made a required text at the Univer-
sity of Padua by the statutes of 1496. Paul of Pergula also
commented on William Heytesbury’s Regulae solvendi
sophismata
and
Sophismata.
His
Recollecta
super
sophismatibus Heytesbury, however, did not gain the
same attention as his criticism of Strode’s De consequentiis,
since Paul only dealt with seven of Heytesbury’s sophisms,
whereas his contemporary, Cajetan of Thiene (d. 1465),
treated all thirty. Finally, among the works attributed to
Paul of Pergula is his Commentary on the Sophismata
asinina of William Heytesbury. This work, like that of
Paul’s broader treatment of Heytesbury’s Sophismata, is
incomplete. He only deals with 9 of the 37 asinine soph-
isms, which gain their title from the opening words: ‘‘I
wish to prove . . . that ‘you are an ass’.’’ Quite likely, it is
because these last works of Paul of Pergula are incomplete
that they did not join the ranks of required reading at the
University of Padua that was accorded his Dubia super
consequentiis Strodi.
Conclusion
Paul of Pergula was a student of Paul of Venice and is
known mostly for the part he played, along with Paul of
Venice and Cajetan of Thiene, in spreading the inﬂuence
of English logic, especially that of Ralph Strode and
William Heytesbury. Logica was his most often published
work, but its basic character does not set it apart from
similar works, such as Paul of Venice’s Logica parva.
His commentaries on Strode’s De consequentiis and
Heytesbury’s Regulae solvendi sophismata and Sophismata
are the works that more show his distinctive positions in
discussing logical issues and providing the reasons for his
personal choices.
See
also:
▶Categories
▶Consequences,
Theory
of
▶Insolubles ▶Logic ▶Obligations Logic ▶Paul of
Venice ▶Peter of Spain ▶Ralph Strode ▶Sophisms
▶Supposition Theory ▶Terms, Properties of ▶William
Heytesbury ▶William of Ockham
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Paul of Pergula (1961) Logica. Franciscan Institute Publications, Text
Series, 13. In: Brown MA (ed) Paul of Pergula, Logica and Tractatus
de sensu composito et diviso. Franciscan Institute, St. Bonaventure,
pp 1–148
Paul of Pergula (1961) Tractatus de sensu composito et diviso. In: Brown
MA (ed) Paul of Pergula, Logica and Tractatus de sensu composito et
diviso. Franciscan Institute, St. Bonaventure, pp 149–158
Paul of Venice (1965) Suppositions and consequences. In: Boh I (ed) Paul
of Pergula on suppositions and consequences. Franciscan Stud
15:36–67
Pergulensis Paulus (1481, 1483, 1486, 1489, 1491, 1495, 1498, 1501)
Logica. In: Logica magistri Pauli Pergulensis. Guilermus Tridinensis,
Venetiis
Pergulensis Paulus (1484, 1488, 1493) Dubia super consequentiis Strodi.
Petrus Bergomensis, Venetiis
Pergulensis Paulus (1486, 1489, 1491, 1494/1495, 1500, 1501) Tractatus de
sensu composito et diviso. Iacobus Pentius, Venetiis
Secondary Sources
Ashworth EJ (1969) The doctrine of supposition in the sixteenth and
seventeenth centuries. Arch Gesch Philos 51:260–285
Ashworth EJ (1972) The treatment of semantic paradoxes from 1400 to
1700. Notre-Dame J Form Log XIII:34–52
Ashworth EJ (1973) The theory of consequence in the late ﬁfteenth and
early sixteenth centuries. Notre-Dame J Form Log XIV:289–315
Ashworth EJ (1974) Language and logic in the post-medieval period.
Synthese Historical Library, 12. Springer, Dordrecht
Boh I (1965) Paul of Pergula on suppositions and consequences. Francisc
Stud 25:30–89
Braakhuis
HAH
(1982)
Paul
of
Pergula’s
commentary
on
the
‘‘Sophismata’’ of William of Heytesbury. English logic in Italy in
the 14th and 15th centuries, ed. Maieru` A. Bibliopolis, Napoli, pp
343–357
Brown MA (1966) The role of the Tractatus ‘De obligationibus’ in medi-
eval logic. Francisc Stud 26:26–35
Karger E (1982) La supposition materielle comme supposition sig-
niﬁcative: Paul de Venise, Paul de Pergula. English logic in Italy in
the 14th and 15th centuries, ed. Maieru` A. Bibliopolis, Napoli,
pp 331–341
Maieru` A (1982) English logic in Italy in the 14th and 15th centuries.
Bibliopolis, Napoli, passim
Nardi B (1957) Letteratura e cultura veneziana del Quattrocento. La
civilta` veneziana del Quattrocentro. Sansoni, Firenze, pp 99–145
Paul of Venice
FABRIZIO AMERINI
Department of Philosophy
University of Parma
Parma
Italy
Abstract
Paul of Venice has been one of the most important logi-
cians and metaphysicians of the Late Middle Ages. His
philosophical attitude can be called Realist, since Paul
erected a philosophical system in which different forms
Paul of Venice P
925
P

of medieval Realism have been combined together in an
original way. Basically, Paul’s philosophy has been
inﬂuenced by some relevant realistic thinkers such as
John Wyclif and the late fourteenth century Oxonian
realists, John Duns Scotus and Walter Burley. From
Scotus, Paul inherits his major metaphysical doctrines:
the univocity of the concept of being; the real distinction
among categories; the extramental foundation of univer-
sals; the technical notions of formal distinction, individual
differentia, and thisness (haecceitas). Paul’s basic meta-
physical intuition – viz. that the extramental world is
made up of individual things, which can be construed as
a cluster of universal forms, formally distinct from each
other – can be traced back to Burley. Upon such meta-
physics, Paul grounds his interpretation of Aristotle’s epis-
temology and psychology, which signiﬁcantly departs in
many points from Averroes’ interpretation. On the other
hand, his eclectic and epitomizing attitude toward medi-
eval philosophy leads Paul to be open to other traditions of
thought. Thus, Paul refers to Albert of Saxony and other
Parisian physicians when he has to explain natural philos-
ophy; Thomas Aquinas plays a crucial role in Paul’s
account of Aristotle’s metaphysics; Giles of Rome instead
exerts a decisive inﬂuence on most of Paul’s Aristotelian
Commentaries; ﬁnally, Paul does not miss the opportunity
of discussing critically, in his handbooks, the logical and
philosophical doctrines of many Nominalists of the four-
teenth century, from William of Ockham and Gregory of
Rimini up to John Buridan and Marsilius of Inghen. This
methodological attitude certainly contributes to rendering
his
works
stimulating
and
historically
interesting,
although it enormously complicates the interpreter’s
attempt to single out Paul’s own position. Perhaps this is
the reason why Paul has been wrongly regarded as Nom-
inalist in logic, Thomist in metaphysics, and Averroist in
psychology.
Paul Nicoletti of Venice (Paulus Nicolettus Venetus) was
born in Udine, Italy, in 1368–1369. Around 1383, he
joined the Augustinian order in the convent of Santo
Stefano in Venice. His scholastic training begins at the
Studium Generale of Padua, where Paul was assigned in
1387 to study philosophy; in 1390, Paul was assigned by
his Order to the Studium Generale of Oxford to follow
a course of theology, which usually extended over three
years. His career as a teacher started in Padua by 1395. Paul
obtained the title of Magister in Arts and Theology by
1405 and then actually began to teach: before in Padua,
then in Siena (1420–1424), in Bologna (1424), and ﬁnally
in Perugia (1425–1428). Besides his academic career, the
life of Paul was characterized by some other signiﬁcant
facts. Among other things, in 1409 Pope Gregory XII
nominated Paul General Prior of the Augustinian Order
and from the same year Paul served as ambassador of
the Republic of Venice; in 1415 the Council of Ten of the
Republic of Venice forbade Paul from taking part in the
Council of Costanza, for reasons which are not yet
completely clear; in 1427 Pope Martin V called him to
Rome to defend the orthodoxy of St. Bernardino of Siena.
Paul of Venice died in Padua on June 15, 1429.
Paul is author of many works, both philosophical and
theological. Paul’s philosophical writings can be classiﬁed
into two groups: (1) systematic works and (2) Aristotelian
commentaries (for the complete list see Perreiah 1986;
Conti 1996). To the ﬁrst group there belong two hand-
books of logic (the Logica parva, c. 1393–1395 and the
Logica magna, c. 1396–1399); a collection of sophisms
(Sophismata aurea, c. 1399); a treatise of metaphysics
and natural philosophy (Summa philosophiae naturalis or
Summa naturalium, 1408); a question on universals
(Quaestio de universalibus, c. 1420–1424). The second
group comprises, instead, the Commentaries on the
Posterior Analytics (1406), on the Physics (1409), on the
Generation and Corruption (c. 1415–1420), on the Soul
(c. 1415–1420), on the Metaphysics (c. 1420–1424), and
on the Ars Vetus (1428), that is, on Porphyry’s Isagoge,
Aristotle’s Categories, and Pseudo-Gilbert of Poitiers’ Liber
sex principiorum. Paul’s most signiﬁcant theological work
instead is an abridgement of John of Ripa’s Commentary
on the Sentences (c. 1400–1401).
Paul of Venice has been one of the most important
logicians and metaphysicians of the Late Middle Ages.
Generally speaking, Paul can be counted among the advo-
cates
of
Realism
in
philosophy,
since
he
erected
a philosophical system in which different forms of medi-
eval Realism have been combined together in an original
way. Basically, Paul’s philosophy has been inﬂuenced by
some relevant Realistic thinkers such as John Wyclif and
the late fourteenth century Oxonian Realists (Robert
Alyngton, William Milverley, William Penbygull, John
Sharpe, John Tarteys, Roger Whelpdale), John Duns
Scotus, and Walter Burley. From Scotus, Paul inherits his
major metaphysical doctrines: the univocity of the concept
of being; the real distinction among categories; the
extramental foundation of universals; the technical
notions of formal distinction and thisness (haecceitas).
Paul’s basic metaphysical intuition – viz. that the
extramental world is made up of individual things,
which can be construed as a cluster of universal (both
substantial and accidental) forms, formally distinct from
each other – can be traced back to Burley. Upon such
metaphysics, Paul grounds his interpretation of Aristotle’s
926 P
Paul of Venice

epistemology and psychology, which signiﬁcantly departs
in many points from Averroes’ interpretation (in spite of
a well-established tradition that regarded him as an
Averroes-inspired thinker: see Momigliano 1907; Nardi
1958; Ruello 1978; Kuksewicz in Olivieri 1983).
Paul elaborated his metaphysical views especially in his
Commentaries on the Metaphysics (books 4–7 and 12), on
the Categories (chap. 5), on Porphyry’s Isagoge (prologue),
and in the Summa naturalium (part 6). Paul’s metaphysics
is a kind of realistic ontology. Its ground is the notion of
being. Following Scotus, Paul holds that the concept of
being must be endowed with a univocal sense, although
Paul is of opinion that the doctrine of the univocity of
being is not incompatible in principle with the doctrine of
analogy (Conti 1996, chap. 1). This means that when we
ask whether God exists or a man exists or a color exists,
we are searching for the same explanatory conditions of
the existence of each of these things, although such con-
ditions are different in each case. The concept of being, as
Avicenna stated, is the ﬁrst and most common concept
of our mind. We can have a simple concept of being,
and such a concept is intensionally empty although exten-
sionally full. With respect to being, the categorial table
expresses ten different modes of internally modulating
such a concept (see Exp. Phys., I, tr. 1, chap. 2; Exp.
Metaph., IV, tr. 1, chap. 1). Since Paul holds with Aquinas
that being cannot be a genus, it follows that the ten catego-
ries cannot be derived from being by means of formal
differentiae that are external to the concept of being.
Thus, the ten categories indicate only the modes into
which being can be divided immediately and exhaustively.
The categorial table classiﬁes any created thing, both
sensible and spiritual. Like Aquinas, Paul imagines that the
spiritual world is populated by entities that are com-
posed of form (essence) and being (existence), but not of
matter and form. The relationship any spiritual entity
bears to God, which entails a different form of individu-
ality for each of them, is sufﬁcient in order to individuate
and differentiate such entities from each other. Such an
individuation and differentiation, though, occurs at the
level of the species and not of individuals, for it is impos-
sible to multiply numerically spiritual entities because of
their lack of matter (Summa naturalium, part VI, chap. 5).
Unlike Aquinas, though, Paul thinks that Scotus is right in
arguing that being and essence are formally distinct in
these spiritual beings. Only God is absolutely simple, for
in Him essence and existence amount to one and the same
thing. Unlike the spiritual world, the sensible world is
populated by entities that are composed both of essence
and existence and of matter and form. When Paul applies
his categorial doctrine to the sensible world, a ﬁrst
consequence he draws is that substance and accidents
must be treated as distinct, absolute, and per se entities.
While criticizing one of the most important sources of his
Commentary on the Metaphysics, that is, the Franciscan
theologian Alexander of Alessandria (fourteenth century),
Paul argues that the property of ‘‘being or inhering in
something else’’ is not an essential property of an accident,
but only a property that necessarily ensues from an acci-
dent’s essence. A substance is different from an accident in
that, unlike a substance, an accident has been thought of
by God as an entity for which it is not logically impossible
to in-exist in another entity. Thus, Paul is more inclined to
portray accidents as absolute coexisting entities rather
than as inhering modes of being of substances (Amerini
2008). Paul thinks that this Scotus-style explanation of the
Aristotelian metaphysics is the best possible way of recon-
ciling Aristotle’s philosophy with Christian theology, espe-
cially when a conﬂict comes about (like in the case of the
Eucharist). If accidents in principle can be separated from
substances, a further consequence Paul draws is that acci-
dents are intrinsically individuated by virtue of them-
selves, while they are only extrinsically individuated by
virtue of the substance in which they inhere.
According to Paul, any object of our ordinary experi-
ence, like men and trees, turns out to be a complex entity,
made up of an underlying subject plus a bundle of prop-
erties. An individual matter and an individual form, which
are really distinct from each other, compose the subject
that underlies the properties. Although really distinct from
form, matter has no degree of entity and actuality in its
own right, but it acquires a certain kind of being only
because a form actualizes its potentiality. As a matter of
fact, Paul subscribes to the view that the essence of matter
is that of being purely in potency to a formed substance,
although Paul does not depart completely from the
Augustinian conception of forms as ‘‘seminal reasons’’
latently contained in prime matter (Conti 1996, chap. 2).
Following Scotus, but also expanding on an intuition
present in Aquinas’ writings, Paul holds that it is the
substantial form that plays a chief role in explaining the
unity and identity of a thing, in that the form is respon-
sible for a thing’s being, and to be and to be one are
coextensive and convertible properties (Conti 1996,
chap. 5, 1998); nevertheless, matter too plays a role in
differentiating things sharing one and the same form. In
spite of the pivotal role played by the substantial form,
Paul is neat in saying that neither form nor matter alone is
able to individuate anything. With respect to this, Paul
distinguishes between the proximate and the remote prin-
ciple of individuation of a thing. The proximate principle
of
individuation
is
thisness
(haecceitas),
which
is
Paul of Venice P
927
P

grounded upon an individual differentia (differentia
individualis), while the remote principle is matter plus
form in the case of material objects and form alone in
the case of spiritual beings. Obviously, remote and prox-
imate
principle
are
logically
connected
(Summa
naturalium, VI, chap. 5; Exp. Metaph., III, tr. 1, chap. 1).
In particular, an individual differentia plays a role formally
analogous to that played by a speciﬁc differentia: just as
this latter results in a species while determining a genus, so
the former results in an individual while determining
a species; so any individual differentia coincides with the
act by which a speciﬁc differentia shapes an individual
piece of matter (Exp. Cat., chap. 5). Although the substan-
tial form is the key factor when it comes to explaining the
process of a thing’s coming into being as well as its identity
and that of each of its components, nonetheless a substantial
form does not exhaust the whole essence of a thing. Here
Paul is close to Aquinas and Gilles of Rome. Common matter
and form must be included in the essence of any sensible
substance. This is a ﬁrst point in which Paul departs from
Averroes and Averroism (Amerini 2004; Galluzzo 2005).
Once a substantial subject is brought into existence,
a host of properties can settle on it. If accidental properties
are treated as really distinct from each other and from the
substance, what about substantial properties? In the case
of properties such as ‘‘being human’’ or ‘‘being animal’’
with respect to man, for instance, Paul’s position is that
they are really identical with man in the sense that none of
them can be separated from man and exist of its own (this
is an anti-Platonic constraint usually endorsed by medie-
val Realists), nonetheless they are formally distinct from
each other since they can be associated with different
foundations in a man and to different operations fulﬁlled
by a man. The fact that our mind can form different but
recurrent and properly predicable simple concepts as well
as deﬁnitions of an extramental thing is the sign that
within the thing there must be something that directs
our mind toward the formation of such concepts and
deﬁnitions (Conti 1996, chaps. 3–4).
The picture that we have sketched up to now gives the
metaphysical framework into which Paul inserts his psy-
chology and epistemology. We have said that for Paul the
substantial form is the chief item in explaining the nature
and the properties of a thing. In the case of man, this role is
played by the soul. Here Paul breaks with the theological
tradition inﬂuenced by Augustin, in that for him (1) to be
the form of a body is part of a soul’s essence (essentia) and
not only of a soul’s function (ofﬁcium), although (2) the
soul is a special kind of form insofar as it is able to fulﬁll an
operation that does not need bodily organs. Paul’s expla-
nation of the nature of a human being and of his activity of
cognition is quintessentially the same as Aquinas’. Firstly,
Paul rejects the idea that there is in a man a plurality of
substantial forms or a plurality of souls as well as the idea
that one and the same soul can undergo a process of
perfectioning (Summa naturalium, part VI, chap. 5).
This is a consequence of the basic claim that a substantial
form acts upon matter in an immediate and instantaneous
way, by transforming it into a substance and granting it an
absolute being. Secondly, Paul holds that the soul’s essence
is really distinct from its potencies, which are in turn
formally distinct from each other. Potencies ensue from
the soul’s essence but are not part of it. Among the poten-
cies of the soul, Paul signiﬁcantly includes both the possi-
ble and the agent intellect. On Paul’s account, Averroes as
well regards the possible intellect as a faculty of the soul,
although he further assumes that such a faculty is of
substantial type and unique for all men. Paul thinks that
Averroes’ conclusion is fully in step with Aristotle’s doc-
trine, but confesses that such a position, which in other
respects seems to be logically coherent, cannot be accepted
for theological reasons connected to Christian faith. Spe-
ciﬁcally, the thesis of the uniqueness of the possible intel-
lect is incapable of safeguarding the immortality of the
individual soul and any individual ethical responsibility
(Exp. De an., III, t.c. 11 ff.; Exp. Metaph., IV, tr. 1, chap. 3;
XII, tr. 1, chap. 3). Many scholars have misunderstood
Paul’s attitude toward Averroes. Conti (1992) has substan-
tially rectiﬁed their judgment. It is worth noticing that
Paul criticizes the supporters of the thesis of the unique-
ness of the possible intellect by appealing precisely to the
same arguments as Aquinas employed in his De unitate
intellectus.
The explanation of the machinery of cognition and
concept formation, which follows upon such an account
of the soul, is quite standard. Once the soul receives
a sensible species and obtains the phantasm, through the
sophisticated machinery of sensation and imagination
(Paul lists ﬁve exterior senses, but only four interior senses,
in spite of the common Avicennian background), the agent
intellect sheds its light on the phantasm and stimulates the
possible intellect, so as to enable it to abstract an intelligible
species from the phantasm. Once formed, the intelligible
species activates the process of intellectual cognition, which
ends with the formation of a concept. A concept continues
to be seen as a trail left on our mind by the activity of
cognition once this latter is over, but Paul departs from
such a Thomistic interpretation of Aristotle’s psychology
when he maintains that our mind can form individual
alongside universal concepts (Conti 1992).
The metaphysics we have presented above also pro-
vides the basis for understanding Paul’s logical and
928 P
Paul of Venice

semantic theories. As to semantics, Paul argues that com-
mon substantial names (‘‘man,’’ for example) are short-
hand for deﬁnitions (in our example, ‘‘rational animal’’);
but deﬁnitions are linguistic procedures, which are sup-
posed to mirror the essence of the things deﬁned and
a thing’s essence must include both matter and form;
therefore common substantial names primarily signify
a universal form that is composed of matter and form.
Nevertheless, a name’s modes of signifying do not per-
fectly reﬂect a thing’s modes of being, given that we can
signify a thing both in the abstract and in the concrete,
and when we signify a thing in the abstract (for instance,
by the name ‘‘humanity’’), we exclusively refer to its
formal features (Exp. Metaph., VI, tr. 1; VIII, tr. 1). Such
an asymmetry presupposes that one is accustomed to
distinguishing between signiﬁcation and reference; in
observance
to
the
tradition,
Paul
relates
such
a distinction to the distinction between a name’s signiﬁ-
cation and a name’s supposition. A name such as ‘‘man’’
signiﬁes a universal form, but supposits for the bearer of
that form. Singular names essentially work in the same
manner, while names of accidents are introduced into
speech to signify exclusively an accidental form.
Such semantic distinction is also connected by Paul to
the distinction between formal (or primary) and material
(or secondary) signiﬁcation, and it applies both to names
and to propositions (formal predication vs. identical pred-
ication). The main source of Paul’s semantics of proposi-
tions
is
Gregory
of
Rimini.
Paul’s
treatment
of
propositions follows upon the basic assumption that pred-
ication is ﬁrst of all a metaphysical relation (Question on
Universals), so that logical predication only conﬁnes itself
to mirroring the metaphysical predication. Accordingly,
a proposition such as ‘‘man is animal,’’ for Paul, signiﬁes
a thing in a complex way (complexe signiﬁcabile) insofar
as it makes explicit the inner stratiﬁed structure of the
thing to which the subject-term refers (Pagallo 1960;
Nuchelmans 1973; Conti 2004). Rather than a state-of-
affairs, a proposition formally signiﬁes the complexity of
a thing according to the way in which that thing is repli-
cated in the mind (i.e., qua existing in an objective way),
while materially it signiﬁes the extramental thing itself
(i.e., qua existing in a subjective way). The distinction
between the mode of objective or mind-dependent inex-
istence and the mode of subjective or mind-independent
existence of a proposition’s signiﬁcation enables Paul to
handle more easily all the complications following from
the different semantic attitudes of false and true sentences.
On this last point, however, Paul shows to have had some
hesitations throughout his career (Logica magna, II,
10–11; Exp. Cat., chap. 5).
As to philosophical theology, Paul of Venice must be
remembered especially for his contribution to the debate
on divine ideas, with which Paul deals in his Commentary
on the Metaphysics (book 7) and in the Question on Uni-
versals (Conti 2003). The core of his view about divine
ideas is the Augustinian conviction that divine ideas serve
the function of formal paradigms for any created thing.
God brings into existence a creature by thinking of it by
means of an exemplar. Since God’s act of thinking of
a creature logically precedes God’s act of creating that
creature, it follows that in God’s mind there must be
a multiplicity of ideas that are different in kind and uni-
versal in character. Especially in his Commentary on the
Metaphysics, Paul is explicit in denying that in God’s mind
there can be present ideas of genera, of individuals, and of
prime matter. Moreover, Paul assumes that divine ideas
cannot be self-subsisting entities (as Plato believed), in
that they are merely the results of the acts of God’s think-
ing and so they exist subjectively in God’s mind. Theolog-
ically speaking, though, divine ideas must be placed within
the Divine Word. Accordingly, divine ideas eternally coex-
ist with God, but unlike the Divine Word, they are not
co-substantial with God. In brief, divine ideas are called to
play a threefold role: ﬁrst, they are the counterpart of the
essence of the creatures in God’s mind; second, they are
God’s instruments of cognition; third, they are efﬁcient
and exemplary patterns for God’s creation of the world.
Thus, divine ideas are seen as the explanatory principle
of the intelligibility of reality. Most of this account of
divine ideas depends upon Wyclif’s, who described divine
ideas as really identical with the divine essence but for-
mally distinct from it, insofar as each idea plays a formally
different role qua co-cause in the process of creation.
Paul is aware that Wyclif’s account was charged with
heresy because of its consequences (especially divine
necessitarism and restriction of divine omnipotence). As
a ﬁnal step, Paul is careful to avoid such consequences by
distinguishing between ideas of actually realized things,
which are ﬁnite in number, and ideas of possible but not
realized things, which instead are inﬁnite in number. This
distinction preserves God’s freedom, since the created
world turns out to be just one of the possible worlds
God can think of.
See also: ▶Albert of Saxony ▶Aristotelianism in the
Greek, Latin, Syriac, Arabic, and Hebrew Traditions
▶Essence and Existence ▶Giles of Rome ▶Gregory of
Rimini ▶Ibn Rushd, Muh˙ammad ibn Ah˙mad al-H˙ afı¯d
(Averroes) ▶John Buridan ▶John Duns Scotus ▶John
Wyclif ▶Logic ▶Marsilius of Inghen ▶Metaphysics
▶Realism ▶Thomas Aquinas ▶Walter Burley
Paul of Venice P
929
P

Bibliography
Primary Sources
Ashworth Earline Jennifer (ed) (1988) Logica magna. Part II, Fascicule 8:
Tractatus de obligationibus. Oxford University Press, Oxford
Broadie Alexander (ed) (1990) Logica magna. Part II, Fascicule 3:
Tractatus de hypotheticis. Oxford University Press, Oxford
Clarke Patricia (ed) (1981) Logica magna. Part I, Fascicule 7: Tractatus de
scire et dubitare. Oxford University Press, Oxford
Conti
Alessandro
Domenico
(1990)
Quaestio
de
universalibus,
unpublished. A partial transcription from ms. Paris, BN 6433B is in
Johannes Sharpe, Quaestio super universalia. Olschki, Firenze,
Appendix V, pp 199–207
del Punta Francesco, Adams Mc Cord Marilyn (eds) (1978) Logica magna.
Part II, Fascicule 6: Tractatus de veritate et falsistate propositionis et
tractatus de signiﬁcato propositionis. Oxford University Press,
Oxford
Hughes George Edward (ed) (1990) Logica magna. Part II, Fascicule 4:
Capitula de conditionali et de rationali. Oxford University Press,
Oxford
Kretzmann Norman (ed) (1979) Logica magna. Part I, Fascicule 1:
Tractatus de terminis. Oxford University Press, Oxford
Paul of Venice (1472) Logica magna, Venice (repr. Olms, Hidesheim,
1970)
Paul of Venice (1477) Expositio in libros Posteriorum Aristotelis, Venice.
(repr. Olms, Hildesheim, 1976)
Paul of Venice (1493) Sophismata aurea, Venice
Paul of Venice (1494) Expositio super Universalia Porphyrii et Artem
Veterem Aristotelis, Venice (a provisional critical edition of Paul’s
Commentary on Porphyry’s Isagoge has been made by Conti AD
at
http://www-static.cc.univaq.it/diri/lettere/docenti/conti/Pagine/
edizioni.htm)
Paul of Venice (1498) Expositio super libros De generatione et
corruptione, Venice
Paul of Venice (1499) Expositio super octo libros Physicorum, Venice
Paul of Venice (1503) Summa philosophiae naturalis, Venice (repr. Olms,
Hildesheim, 1974)
Paul of Venice (1504) Scriptum super libros De anima, Venice
Perreiah Alan (ed) (1971) Logica magna: Tractatus de suppositionibus.
The Franciscan Institute, St. Bonaventure
Perreiah Alan (ed) (2002) Logica parva. First critical edition from the
manuscripts with introduction and commentary. Brill, Leiden
Ruello Francis (ed) (1980) Super primum Sententiarum Johannis de Ripa
lecturae abbreviatio, prologus. Olschki, Florence
Ruello Francis (ed) (2000) Super primum Sententiarum Johannis de
Ripa lecturae abbreviatio, Liber I. Sismel-Edizioni del Galluzzo,
Florence
(unpublished) Expositio super libros Metaphysicorum (Book 7 is in
course of publication by Fabrizio A and Galluzzo G, Scuola Normale
Superiore, Pise)
Williams Christopher John Fards (ed) (1991) Logica magna. Part I,
Fascicule 8: Tractatus de necessitate et contingentia futurorum.
Oxford University Press, Oxford
Secondary Sources
Amerini F (2004) Thomas Aquinas, Alexander of Alexandria, and Paul of
Venice on the nature of essence. DS 15:541–591
Amerini F (2008) Alessandro di Alessandria come fonte di Paolo Veneto.
Il caso degli accidenti eucaristici. Picenum Seraphicum 25:19–67
Bottin F (1976) Proposizioni condizionali, consequentiae e paradossi
dell’implicazione in Paolo Veneto. Medioevo 2:289–330
Bottin F (1984) Logica e ﬁlosoﬁa naturale nelle opere di Paolo Veneto. In:
Poppi A (ed) Scienza e ﬁlosoﬁa all’Universita` di Padova nel Quat-
trocento. Antenore, Padua, pp 85–124
Conti AD (1982) Universali e analisi della predicazione in Paolo Veneto.
Teoria 2.2:121–139
Conti AD (1992) Il problema della conoscibilita` del singolare nella
gnoseologia di Paolo Veneto. BISI 98:323–382
Conti AD (1993) Il soﬁsma di Paolo Veneto: Sortes in quantum homo est
animal. In: Read S (ed) Sophisms in medieval logic and grammar.
Kluwer, Dordrecht, pp 304–318
Conti AD (1996) Esistenza e verita`: forme e strutture del reale in Paolo
Veneto e nel pensiero ﬁlosoﬁco del tardo Medioevo. Edizioni
dell’Istituto Storico Italiano per il Medio Evo, Rome
Conti AD (1998) Paul of Venice on individuation. RTPM 65(1):107–132
Conti AD (2003) Paul of Venice’s theory of divine ideas and its sources. DS
14:409–448
Conti AD (2004) Complexe signiﬁcabile and truth in Gregory of Rimini
and Paul of Venice. In: Maieru` A, Valente L (eds) Medieval theories on
assertive and non-assertive language. Olschki, Florence, pp 473–494
Conti AD (2005) Paul of Venice. In: Zalta EN (ed) The Stanford encyclo-
pedia of philosophy (winter 2005 edition). http://plato.stanford.edu/
archives/win2005/entries/paul-venice/
Galluzzo G (2005) Deﬁnition in Aristotle’s metaphysics book Z, chaps.
10–11: medieval interpretations, PhD dissertation. Scuola Normale
Superiore, Pise, 199 ff
Kretzmann N (1970) Medieval logicians on the meaning of the proposi-
tion. J Philos 67:767–787
Loisi S (2006) L’immaginazione nel commento al De anima di Paolo
Veneto. SS 11:267–299
Maieru` A (ed) (1982) English logic in Italy in the 14th and 15th centuries,
Bibliopolis, Naples (see the contributions of Conti AD, Alcune note
sulla Expositio super Universalia Porphyrii et Artem Veterem
Aristotelis
di
Paolo
Veneto:
Analogie
e
differenze
con
i corrispondenti commenti di Walter Burley, pp 293–303; Mugnai
M, La expositio reduplicativarum chez Walter Burleigh et Paulus
Venetus, pp 305–320; Van Der Lecq R, Paul of Venice on composite
and divided sense, pp 321–330; Karger E, La supposition materielle
comme suppositions signiﬁcative: Paul de Venice, Paul de Pergula,
pp 331–341)
Momigliano A (1907) Paolo Veneto e le correnti del pensiero religioso
e ﬁlosoﬁco del suo tempo. Doretti, Udine
Nardi B (1958) Saggi sull’averroismo padovano dal secolo XIV al XVI.
Sansoni, Florence, pp 75–93 (Paolo Veneto e l’averroismo padovano)
Nuchelmans G (1973) Theories of the proposition: ancient and medieval
conceptions of the bearers of truth and falsity. North-Holland,
Amsterdam, pp 266–271
Nuchelmans G (1983) Medieval problems concerning substitutivity (Paul
of Venice, Logica Magna II, 11:7–8). In: Abrusci VA, Casari E,
Mugnai M (eds) Atti del Congresso Internazionale di Storia della
Logica: San Gimignano, 4–8 dicembre 1982. CLUEB, Bologna, pp
69–80
Olivieri L (ed) (1983) Aristotelismo veneto e scienza moderna. Antenore,
Padua (see the contributions of Kuksewicz Z, Paolo Veneto e la sua
teoria dell’anima, pp 130–164; Bottin F, Paolo Veneto e il problema
degli universali, pp 459–468)
Pagallo GF (1960) Nota sulla Logica di Paolo Veneto: la critica alla
dottrina del complexe signiﬁcabile di Gregorio da Rimini. In: Atti
del XII Congresso Internazionale di Filosoﬁa, vol 9. Sansoni, Flor-
ence, pp 183–191
Perreiah AR (1978) Insolubilia in the Logica parva of Paul of Venice.
Medioevo 4:145–172
930 P
Paul of Venice

Perreiah AR (1986) Paul of Venice: a bibliographical guide. Philosophy
Documentation Center, Bowling Green
Ruello F (1978) Paul de Venise the´logien ‘averroiste’? In: Jolivet J (ed)
Multiple Averroe`s. Vrin, Paris, pp 257–272
Universality of reason, plurality of philosophies in Middle Ages. XII
international congress of medieval philosophy, Palermo, 16–22 Sep-
tember 2007, Special session no 12 coordinated by Francesco del
Punta (contributions of Amerini F, Bertagna M, Borgo M, Conti
AD, Galluzzo G, Strobino R, Tabarroni A: all the contributions will be
published in the coming proceedings)
Pecham, John
▶John Pecham
Peter Abelard
IAN WILKS
Department of Philosophy
Acadia University
Wolfville, NS
Canada
Abstract
The characteristic doctrines of Peter Abelard (1079–1142)
can be arranged under the headings of logic, metaphysics,
and ethics.
Abelard rejects the position that logical theory deals
with universals taken as things (res). It deals with words,
which are able to achieve generality by association with
thoughts that are stripped of individuating detail. His
account of propositions is shaped by his distinction
between propositional force and propositional content,
and by his notion of the dictum, the causally efﬁcacious
non-thing which is what a proposition says. His account of
inference is especially focused on the nature of condi-
tionals and the sorts of relationships between terms that
can be used to verify them.
Abelard’s most characteristic metaphysical view is that
the only things which exist are individuals. Forms exist but
only as individual, not shared. Material objects are matter/
form composites whose forms are simply arrangements of
the underlying matter; material objects are thus proﬁtably
subject to mereological analysis. Humans, but not ani-
mals, have immaterial souls, and are capable of freedom.
By contrast God is not free; he can only do the things
he does.
On Abelard’s ethical theory, it is consent, not action,
that bears moral worth. A sinful consent is marked by
contempt for God, and is formed explicitly in violation
of God’s law. Meritorious consent is marked by love of
God – in other words, by charity, which is the fundamental
virtue.
Peter Abelard was a colossus of twelfth-century culture.
He is most widely known through his popular writings:
letters, an autobiography, sermons, and hymns. But his
greatness as a thinker stems chieﬂy from a series of tech-
nical writings in philosophy and theology.
He was born in 1079 near Nantes in Brittany. As
a young man he studied under two of the most eminent
philosophical minds of the time, Roscelin of Compie`gne
and William of Champeaux. After conﬂict with the latter
he established schools of his own in different places –
Melun, Corbeil, Mont Ste. Genevie`ve – before becoming
master of the cathedral school of Notre Dame. By 1117 he
had vacated this choice position following the scandal of
his romance with Heloise. Removal to various monastic
settings increased his literary productivity, and progres-
sively channeled his interests toward theology and ethics.
Open conﬂict with elements of the church hierarchy led to
a condemnation of his work in 1121 at the Council of
Soissons. In 1122 he established a ﬂourishing school at
Quincy, and in 1127 he took the position of abbot in
a monastery in Brittany. After several tumultuous years
in that situation he resumed teaching in Paris in 1132. His
work was publicly condemned again at the Council of Sens
in 1141, and he was excommunicated at that time. This
sentence was lifted in 1142, just prior to his death.
Abelard received from Boethius a three-part division
of the subject-matter of philosophy into logic, physics, and
ethics: respectively, the reasoned consideration of reason-
ing itself, of the natures of things, and of right living. This
division is a useful organizing device for setting out the
essentials of Abelard’s own philosophical work, the pre-
ponderance of which may be gathered under the headings.
These will therefore mark the section divisions of the
following summary – but with one change. As a label for
philosophical subject-matter, ‘‘physics’’ actually applies to
what we would now broadly call ‘‘metaphysics,’’ so it is
a better ﬁt with current usage to speak of Abelard’s phil-
osophical work as focusing on the areas of logic, meta-
physics, and ethics.
Logic
By far the most important source for Abelard’s logical
theory is Aristotle’s own work in this area, as conveyed
in the De interpretatione and to a lesser extent the
Peter Abelard P
931
P

Categories, and as commented upon in exegetical works by
Boethius.
Abelard employs, where possible, what has come to be
called an in voce interpretation of these works – that is to
say, a linguistic interpretation. He regards language as the
legitimate subject matter of logical theory, not the objects
which language is about. When Aristotle speaks of the
universal terms appearing in a proposition such as ‘‘Every
human is an animal,’’ he is not unambiguous as to whether
those terms are words (‘‘human,’’ ‘‘animal’’) or universal
things corresponding to those words (humanity, animal-
ity). This point elicits much controversy among commen-
tators. Abelard stakes a strong claim in the controversy by
adopting the in voce approach wherever possible.
The logician studies words taken not as mere sounds
but as sounds invested with semantic content. A word so
construed is described by Abelard as a sermo. The sermo
stands to the physical sound – the vox – as a statue stands
to the stone from which it is carved; one can say things
about the statue which abstract entirely from the proper-
ties of the stone. The properties of the sermo are likewise
often distinct from the properties of physical sound. Per-
haps the most interesting such property for logicians is the
ability of universal terms to achieve generality of meaning.
How does ‘‘human’’ manage to apply to all and only
humans? The in voce interpretative approach rules out an
answer which appeals to a universal – humanity – in way
of answering this question. Abelard instead provides
a purely semantic account of generality, the main work
of which is done by his account of the thought or under-
standing (intellectus) which a word generates in the mind
of the hearer. An intellectus is capable of recording more or
less detail of the things it represents, and therefore of being
a more or less general representation of those things.
‘‘Human’’ achieves generality of application to all humans
by generating an intellectus stripped of individuating
detail; it pertains to no particular human, and therefore
pertains to all. Hence arises the word’s generality.
At the next stage of logical analysis, attention is
directed to the process of fusing words into propositions.
Key to this process is the function of the verb. Abelard
follows Aristotle in deﬁning a verb as a sign of something’s
being said of something else. As such it confers a com-
pleteness upon a whole proposition not possessed by any
of its constituent words or phrases. Abelard develops this
point into a distinction between propositional force and
propositional content. The same propositional content
can be said assertively (‘‘Socrates runs’’), interrogatively
(‘‘Does Socrates run?’’), imperatively (‘‘I command that
Socrates run’’), and so on, depending on the particular
mode of signiﬁcation attaching to the verb. It is the same
content that undergoes this diverse treatment, and
Abelard recognizes the utility of isolating it as a distinct
semantic component of the proposition. He calls it the
dictum of the proposition.
This notion of a dictum remains a work in progress.
Abelard recognizes the importance of having such
a notion but never quite achieves a perspicuous account
of it. He describes it negatively as not being any sort of
intellectus associated with the proposition, or any of the
things denoted by the terms of the proposition. The dic-
tum is itself, in fact, not a thing at all – on that point
Abelard is adamant. He describes it positively as the cause
of key semantic features of the proposition: its truth or
falsity, its necessity or possibility, and its oppositeness
(contradictoriness, contrarity) to other propositions.
A dictum is what an assertive proposition says, and if
that proposition is true the dictum is what makes it true.
What Abelard has in mind here seems to approximate
contemporary notions like ‘‘fact’’ or ‘‘state of affairs,’’
especially if these are taken as causally efﬁcacious non-
things.
This analysis of propositional content prompts further
insights. (a) Abelard is forced to rethink the grammar of
impersonal constructions, such as ‘‘It is possible. . .,’’ ‘‘It is
true. . .,’’ and ‘‘It is good. . .,’’ where the blank is taken as
being ﬁlled by a clause which expresses a dictum (‘‘that
Socrates runs’’). At ﬁrst sight it seems as if that dictum–
expressing clause is the subject term in these cases, with
‘‘possible,’’ ‘‘true,’’ and ‘‘good’’ serving as predicate terms;
but since, as noted, the dictum is not a thing, the clause
cannot serve in that capacity. So Abelard is at pains to ﬁnd
new analyses of impersonal constructions which identify
appropriate subject and predicate terms. (b) The clarifying
insight that negation applies to the proposition as a whole
and not just to the predicate is facilitated by analyzing the
proposition into a content to which an assertive force is
applied. The negation is then construed as applying to the
assertive force, not to any part of the content. Abelard is
thus able to distinguish between ‘‘It is not the case that S is
P’’ and ‘‘S is not P.’’ He rightly regards the former as the
proper form of negation. (c) Modal propositions can be
expressed as impersonal constructions (‘‘It is possible
that. . .’’ and ‘‘It is necessary that. . .’’). As such they are
problematic in the way noted above, and call for
reformulation. ‘‘It is possible that S is P’’ can in fact be
easily reformulated as ‘‘S is possibly P,’’ the two forms
representing respectively de sensu (that is, de dicto) and
de re modalities. Abelard’s approach to impersonals gen-
erally makes him sensitive to the great importance of
this distinction, a sensitivity that enlightens his entire
approach to modal theory.
932 P
Peter Abelard

The ﬁnal stage of logical analysis involves study of
inference patterns themselves. While Abelard’s treatment
of syllogistic logic presents smaller scale insights and nov-
elties of formulation, we ﬁnd marked innovation in his
handling of conditionals (that is, statements of ‘‘if. . .
then’’ form). He argues that the entailment present in
these is as demonstrable as the entailment present in
standard syllogisms. In syllogisms the entailment of con-
clusion by premises stems from the fact that the content of
the conclusion is already contained by the premises; like-
wise, in conditionals the entailment of antecedent by con-
sequent stems from the fact that the content of the
consequent is already contained by the antecedent. In
syllogisms the entailment is demonstrated by appealing
to the formal properties of the propositions themselves. In
conditionals it is demonstrated by appealing to the rela-
tionship between terms in antecedent and consequent as
being the sort of relationship which grounds an entail-
ment. ‘‘If it is a man then it is an animal’’ exempliﬁes such
an entailment. The fact that the antecedent contains the
consequent is evident in the relationship between man and
animal; this is a relationship of species, since man is
a species of animal. Identifying this relationship sufﬁces
to demonstrate the entailment. Abelard attempts to iden-
tify other sorts of relationships between terms – referred to
as topics – which likewise demonstrate conditional entail-
ments. His attempt to codify these topics into systematic
theory is one of the most involved philosophical exercises
he undertakes.
Metaphysics
Abelard’s work in metaphysics is heavily inﬂuenced both
by Aristotle’s Categories and by his own immersion in
Christian doctrine.
Nonetheless, his most characteristic metaphysical
instinct derives from neither of these sources. That instinct
is to emphasize the individuality of things that exist, and
to oppose any theoretical approach which ambiguates
claims of individuality.
This theoretical tendency arises against the back-
ground of a position that does just the opposite, now
referred to as ‘‘Material Essence Realism.’’ Adherents of
this position do not adopt an in voce reading of Aristotle’s
logical writings, instead interpreting the universal terms
appearing in ‘‘Every human is an animal’’ as the universal
things humanity and animality. Boethius says of these
universals that they are present as a whole in many indi-
viduals, and in such a way as to make each one of those
individuals what it is. So the same animality is in many
animals, which are differentiated from one another only
by the different accidents they possess. A pivotal event in
Abelard’s career is his sustained attack on this theory.
Individual animals cannot properly be differentiated
from each other, he argues, if at base they are all the
same animal – which they would be if animality were
a universal in the Boethian sense. And if accidents did
indeed differentiate substances from each other then
they would be metaphysically prior to those substances,
which makes no sense given how accidents are understood
to relate to substances. So Material Essence Realism is
rejected whole cloth.
We have already seen what universal terms are for
Abelard. They are just words. And we have seen how
they work. They denote classes because of the applicability
of an abstracted intellectus to all members of a class. There
need be no appeal to a single form simultaneously shared
by all members. What animals have in common is not
animality, the universal thing, but just this: being an
animal, which Abelard refers to as a status, by which he
seems to mean the condition or state that things are in.
Other than to emphasize that it is not a thing, he gives
little detail about what a status is, and so the word proves
difﬁcult to translate. The point of the notion seems to be
that things are comparable without having in common
a shared form, and that this irreducible comparability is
what allows the same abstracted intellectus to be applicable
to a plurality of things.
Abelard describes material objects as composites of
matter and form, but the forms those objects possess are
not shared with other objects. Each form is individual to
its possessor, one animality to one animal, another ani-
mality to another. In fact these forms are simply the
arrangement or composition of the matter in the object
in which they are present. They have a purely material
basis. So how matter is distributed into objects is,
therefore, an issue of great metaphysical importance to
Abelard, and he responds with a treatment of part/whole
relationships that provides the outline of a mereology.
Continuous wholes – where there are no intervals among
parts – are the limiting case of individual physical objects.
More complicated are discrete wholes. Some of these are
mere pluralities, whose parts are spatially scattered. Some,
like ﬂocks of birds, have parts that are spatially proximate
but unarranged. Others, like houses, have parts that are
spatially proximate and arranged. A key point for Abelard
is to deﬁne the distinct parts of this third kind of discrete
whole; his claim is that they are the parts whose placement
in the arrangement will have the immediate effect of
bringing the whole into existence.
Various other features of the material world are can-
vassed in Abelard’s work, largely in response to the content
of Aristotle’s Categories: the nature of relations, space,
Peter Abelard P
933
P

time, change, and so on. But Abelard’s theological
interests focus his attention on two immaterial entities
as well: the human soul and God. The souls of animals
are material and thus perish when the animals die. The
souls of humans are not material. Neither are they forms,
since, Abelard argues, it makes no sense to say of a form
that it has insanity, anger, or knowledge, although it makes
perfect sense to say of a soul that it has those qualities.
Indeed, if a soul were a form in a form/matter composite
then it would be like other forms in such composites in
having a purely material basis. Human souls are meta-
physically distinct from the material order of the
world, and hence can sustain thought independently of
a physical body. Thus is a theological account of the special
dispensation
for
human
beings
brought
alongside
a relentlessly materialist account of the properties of the
world.
Abelard’s view of God is strikingly deterministic: God
can only do the things he does, and only when and how he
does them, and is likewise constrained in what he omits.
This is presented as a consequence of God’s goodness.
Divine acts and omissions are always the best among
alternatives, none of which are better than, or even as
good as, the acts and omissions themselves. In fact God
never even has to choose between equally good alterna-
tives because none such ever arise for him. Presumably
this is because his goodness never allows him down a path
where equally good alternatives would even be encoun-
tered; the path he is drawn to is without moral forks,
where every good encountered is the decisively best one
when set against alternatives. This means, in the end, that
there is a reason for everything God does or omits, and
that the world, which is the product of these absolutely
reasoned acts and omissions, is a deterministic one. There
is, of course, allowance for human freedom in this world,
since the human soul is set apart by its immateriality.
Humans can actually be free, even though God is not.
But does this not compromise the dignity of God? Not at
all, says Abelard. Being free is like eating, walking, or
sinning – not properties we should expect to ﬁnd in
a divine being anyway and, therefore, not properties
whose absence compromises the divinity of God.
Ethics
Abelard’s work in ethics is inﬂuenced both by Stoic ethics
and Christian theology.
Its most characteristic doctrine is the primacy of con-
sent (or intention) over action. An emphasis on the
believer’s interior life, and the importance of the very
quality of thoughts themselves underlying actions, is typ-
ical of the tradition of Patristic ethics. Abelard carries this
emphasis to its logical conclusion by claiming that the sin
of a sinful consent is not added to by the character of the
ensuing act (or diminished if by chance there is no ensuing
act). The act itself is sinful only in the derivative sense that
it arises from a sinful consent. How then do we tell
whether a consent is sinful? Not only do ensuing acts not
tell us, but preceding vices or desires do not tell us either,
since one may consent in a meritorious way in spite of the
prompting of one’s vices or desires.
Abelard has seemed to some commentators to be left
with no objective reference point for determining sinful
consents. But in fact he does address this concern:
a consent is sinful when it constitutes an attitude of con-
tempt (contemptus) for God. It does so when it is formed
explicitly in violation of one of God’s laws. To consent in
this way, of course, one must actually know what God’s
laws are in the ﬁrst place, and this requirement might seem
to sit uncomfortably with the fact that those in pagan
cultures are in no position to be apprised of Christian
revelation. But Abelard has a broad conception of God’s
law. It includes the superseded Old Law of the Old Testa-
ment, and the incumbent New Law of the New Testament,
but it also includes many self-evident precepts of natural
law, such as the edicts against murder, mendacity, adul-
tery, and so on. These precepts are available as items of Old
Law or New Law, but they are also available independently
of the content of Christian revelation. Pagan thinkers
clearly had cognitive access to precepts like these, as
attested in their writings. But indeed, it does not require
special intellectual gifts to achieve this access. The general
run of adults, so long as they are sound of mind, achieve it
by virtue of having conscience (conscientia). This capacity
is what permits widely shared insight into self-evident
truths – especially, but not exclusively, into the self-evident
truths of natural law. Humans in general have this insight,
so their consents in violation of natural law are genuinely
instances of contempt for God. That is why those consents
are sins. Those humans who have beneﬁted from revela-
tion and have access to what Abelard calls ‘‘positive law’’ –
formerly the Old Law, now the New Law – have all the
more capacity to identify consents which instance such
contempt.
The capstone of Abelard’s ethical system is his notion
of charity (caritas). This receives a fairly speciﬁed deﬁni-
tion: love of God for his own sake or of one’s neighbors for
the sake of God. When present as a settled disposition of
the soul it constitutes a virtue. Indeed, it is the central
virtue. If sin is contempt for God then habitually
referencing actions to one’s love for God will be a barrier
to sin. Abelard comments approvingly on past approaches
to virtue theory which simplify the ﬁeld ﬁrst by identifying
934 P
Peter Abelard

cardinal virtues and then by founding these on the one
virtue of justice; he proceeds similarly, except that he
places charity – a theological virtue, not a pagan one – in
this central role. It is the chief means of meritorious
consents, but more importantly it is the chief end of
human striving, the highest good for human beings.
The reward of heaven is the protracted exercise of
this love in the form of a beatiﬁc vision. It might seem
intuitive to distinguish meritorious consents from the
heavenly reward to which they lead, but on Abelard’s
view the consents and reward both reduce to the same
thing: the love of God (just as sinful consents and hell
both reduce to the same thing: the hatred of God).
Heaven is not, properly speaking, even a reward, he main-
tains. It is an extension of the inner life of charity that leads
to it.
See also: ▶Bernard of Clairvaux ▶Boethius ▶Categories
▶Divine Power ▶Heloise ▶Logic ▶Modal Theories and
Modal
Logic
▶Natural
Law
▶Parts
and
Wholes
▶Roscelin of Compie`gne ▶Schools in the Twelfth
Century
▶Time
▶Universals
▶Virtue
and
Vice
▶William of Champeaux
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Abelard Peter (1919–1927) Logica ‘‘ingredientibus,’’ ed. Geyer B. In: Peter
Abaelards Philosophische Schriften. Beitra¨ge zur Geschichte der
Philosophie und Theologie des Mittelalters vol 21, Heft 1–3.
Aschendorff, Mu¨nster
Abelard Peter (1933) Logica ‘‘nostrorum petitioni sociorum,’’ ed.
Geyer B. In: Peter Abaelards Philosophische Schriften. Beitra¨ge zur
Geschichte der Philosophie und Theologie des Mittelalters vol 21,
Heft 4. Aschendorff, Mu¨nster
Abelard Peter (1969a) Commentaria in epistolam Pauli ad Romanos, ed.
Buytaert EM. In: Corpus Christianorum continuatio mediaevalis, vol
11. Brepols, Turnhout, pp 39–340
Abelard Peter (1969b) Theologia Christiana, ed. Buytaert EM. In: Corpus
Christianorum continuatio mediaevalis, vol 12. Brepols, Turnhout,
pp 69–372
Abelard Peter (1970) Dialectica, 2nd edn, ed. de Rijk LM. Van Gorcum,
Assen
Abelard Peter (1971) Ethica or Scito te ipsum, ed. and trans. Luscombe
DE. In: Peter Abelard’s ethics. Clarendon, Oxford
Abelard Peter (1987a) Theologia ‘‘scholarium,’’ ed. Buytaert EM,
Mews CJ. In: Corpus Christianorum continuatio mediaevalis,
vol 13. Brepols, Turnhout, pp 309–549
Abelard Peter (1987b) Theologia ‘‘summi boni,’’ ed. Buytaert EM,
Mews CJ. In: Corpus Christianorum continuatio mediaevalis, vol 13.
Brepols, Turnhout, pp 83–201
Abelard Peter (2001) Collationes, ed. and trans. Marenbon J, Orlandi G.
Clarendon, Oxford
Abelard Peter (2010) Glossae super Periermeneias, ed. Jacobi K,
Strub C. In: Corpus Christianorum continuatio mediaevalis. Brepols,
Turnhout
Secondary Sources
Brower JE (ed) (2007) Abelard. In: Am Cathol Philos Quart 81:161–338
Brower JE, Guilfoy K (eds) (2004) The Cambridge companion to Abelard.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Jolivet J (1982) Arts du langage et the´ologie chez Abe´lard, 2nd edn. Vrin,
Paris
King
P
(1995)
Abelard’s
intentionalist
ethics.
Mod
Schoolman
72:213–231
Marenbon J (1997) The philosophy of Peter Abelard. Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, Cambridge
Marenbon J (2006) The rediscovery of Peter Abelard’s philosophy. J Hist
Philos 44:331–351
Martin CJ (1987) Embarassing arguments and surprising conclusions in
the development of theories of the conditional in the twelfth century.
In: Jolivet J, de Libera A (eds) Gilbert de Poitiers et ses contemporains
aux origines de la logica modernorum. Bibliopolis, Naples, pp
377–400
Mews CJ (1985) On dating the works of Peter Abelard. Archives d’histoire
doctrinale et litte´raire du moyen aˆge 52:73–134
Nuchelmans G (1973) Abelard. In: Theories of the proposition: ancient
and medieval conceptions of the bearers of truth and falsity. North-
Holland, Amsterdam, pp 139–163
Tweedale MM (1976) Abailard on universals. North-Holland, Amsterdam
Wilks I (2008) The logic of Abelard and his contemporaries. In:
Gabbay DM, Woods J (eds) The handbook of the history of logic,
vol 2: Mediaeval and renaissance logic. Elsevier, Amsterdam,
pp 83–156
Peter Auriol
CHRISTOPHER SCHABEL
Department of History and Archaeology
University of Cyprus
Nicosia
Cyprus
Abstract
The French Franciscan Peter Auriol (c. 1280–1322) taught
at Bologna, Toulouse, and ﬁnally Paris, where he lectured
on the Sentences in 1316–1318 and taught as master until
1321, when he was made archbishop of Aix-en-Province
shortly before his death. Auriol composed popular trea-
tises on poverty, natural philosophy, and the Immaculate
Conception, various versions of a huge commentary on
the Sentences, an important Quodlibet, and a signiﬁcant
Bible commentary. In his Sentences commentary and
Quodlibet – especially his great Scriptum commentary on
I Sentences – his explicit attacks on Thomas Aquinas, John
Duns Scotus, and other giants, his proud independence,
his provocative originality, and his general brilliance made
Auriol perhaps the most inﬂuential Parisian theologian in
the period after Scotus, although this inﬂuence was often
negative.
Auriol had a broad
readership into
the
Peter Auriol P
935
P

seventeenth century, and his works were printed fre-
quently from before 1475 to 1695. Auriol is best known
for his positions on ontology, cognition, divine fore-
knowledge, grace, and predestination. His systematic
approach allows us to trace common threads in his teach-
ing: conceptualism and the rejection of realism, a strong
emphasis on human free will and a thorough denial of
determinism, and a strict interpretation of divine simplic-
ity and necessity. His appeal to creative devices and terms
to construct his theories, among them ‘‘apparent being,’’
‘‘indistance,’’ and ‘‘indistinction,’’ make his opinions
immediately recognizable in the works of his successors,
who more often than not argued against him.
Peter Auriol (Aureoli, Aureolus, Aureolo, Aureole, Aureol,
Oriel, Oriol, Oriole), the Doctor Facundus, was born
c. 1280 or slightly earlier, near Gourdan, about 30 km
north of Cahors in southwest France. Most likely before
1300, Auriol joined the Friars Minor in the Franciscan
province of Aquitaine and probably began his higher
studies at the province’s main studium in Toulouse,
where he seems to have met Jacques Deuze, the future
Pope John XXII. In an early work Auriol mentions that
he was present at Paris at a theological lecture, so presum-
ably he studied theology in his order’s Parisian convent in
the ﬁrst decade of the fourteenth century, before being
sent to teach theology at Minorite studia elsewhere, as was
customary. We ﬁnd him as lector at the order’s Bologna
studium in 1312, according to one manuscript of his only
purely philosophical work, the Tractatus de principiis
physicis. Another early work, De paupertate, was composed
in late 1311 or early 1312, perhaps also at Bologna. After-
ward Auriol taught at the Franciscans’ Toulouse studium,
writing two treatises on Mary’s Immaculate Conception
by May 1315 in the wake of a disputation from December
1314. He was still in Toulouse in early 1316, but on May 31
of that year the Franciscan General Chapter in Naples
assigned him to lecture on the Sentences at Paris. By
then Auriol had written much of his largest and most
important work, the Scriptum on the ﬁrst book of
Peter Lombard’s Sentences, completing it during the ﬁrst
months of his teaching at Paris, since a beautiful presen-
tation copy (Vatican, Borghese 329) was ﬁnished for Pope
John XXII on May 19, 1317. It is probable that some of the
surviving reportatio material (i.e., transcripts done by stu-
dents or secretaries) from Auriol’s various lectures on the
Sentences also derives from his Toulouse years.
By the time Auriol began teaching at Paris he was
already well known. He was one of the last mendicant
bachelors of the Sentences to lecture on that text for two
years, from 1316 to 1318. Various reportationes of these
lectures circulated, some of them revised by Auriol him-
self. During this time Auriol also engaged in disputations
with masters of the faculty of theology, notably Thomas
Wylton and Hervaeus Natalis, from which some questions
survive. After Auriol’s lectures, in July 1318 Pope John
asked the chancellor of the University of Paris to promote
Auriol to master, and Auriol was regent master the follow-
ing academic year, mentioned as such in November 1318.
During his term as regent master Auriol composed his
extremely popular and inﬂuential Bible commentary, the
Compendium sensus litteralis totius divinae Scripturae. Var-
ious other scriptural texts have also been ascribed to
Auriol. During his regency he published the sixteen ques-
tions of his Quodlibet in 1320, ostensibly from a public
disputation that took place during Lent or Advent, but
surely based at least in part on earlier debates. In late
1320 Auriol was made Franciscan provincial minister of
Aquitaine, but he was still active in Paris when he was
appointed archbishop of Aix-en-Province on February 27,
1321. Pope John XXII himself consecrated Auriol in
Avignon in June of that year. Auriol died in early 1322,
probably on January 10. He was apparently never made
cardinal, despite a myth that originated much later.
In an era of towering ﬁgures, Peter Auriol was out-
standing. His works were immediately popular and
remained so: the De paupertate was printed in 1511 and
1513, while the treatises on the Immaculate Conception
were printed at least four times between 1490 and 1695,
before the modern edition of 1904 (about a dozen manu-
scripts preserve the ﬁrst tract, half of them also containing
the second). Most popular of all was Auriol’s Bible com-
mentary: besides the many manuscripts, it was printed
some 13 times from the 1470s to 1649. The modern
edition of 1896 takes up 555 pages of text. His early De
principiis was left incomplete and was never printed, but it
still survives in ﬁve manuscripts and when Martin Bauer’s
critical edition is complete, it will constitute a sizeable
volume. Stray questions from Parisian disputations, nota-
bly in MS Oxford, Balliol 63, also survive, and Lauge
Nielsen has been publishing these. Auriol’s most impor-
tant works for philosophical content are his Sentences
commentary and Quodlibet: roughly 50 codices preserve
parts of the various versions of Auriol’s Sentences com-
mentary, and a dozen or so witnesses contain the
Quodlibet. In 1596 the Scriptum on book I was printed in
a huge volume, equivalent to some 2,500 pages in a critical
edition, and in 1605 another large tome was published
including the Quodlibet and versions of books II–IV. The
1596 edition followed a faulty exemplar, so in 1952–1956
an improved diplomatic edition (based on Vatican,
Borghese 329) of the Scriptum’s prologue and distinctions
936 P
Peter Auriol

1–8 was published by E.M. Buytaert in two volumes, and
the remainder is now being published online on the Peter
Auriol Homepage. In the 1605 edition, again, the manu-
scripts followed were often poor and the redactions them-
selves mixed. In the confusing case of book III, the edition
combines three differing versions. On the basis of
a systematic analysis of the surviving manuscripts –
among them a codex containing two copies of book III
that recently turned up in a Vermont bookshop – an
international
group
is
working
to
disentangle
the
unprinted redactions of book I and all the versions of
books II–IV, eventually to publish critical editions of all
redactions and the Quodlibet.
Peter Auriol’s works were popular because of his
innovative procedure and his combative independence
vis-a`-vis earlier theologians. He approached questions by
ﬁrst presenting the most important prevailing opinions of
the day, and he was a pioneer in the practice of naming
names. His Scriptum on book I of the Sentences abounds in
over 500 explicit and often detailed citations of scholastic
theologians active after 1250, especially John Duns Scotus,
OFM (133), Thomas Aquinas, OP (122), Henry of Ghent
(54), Hervaeus Natalis, OP (51), Durand of St Pourc¸ain,
OP (47), and William of Ware, OFM (26). Several of these
theologians were still alive and active in the Parisian Fac-
ulty of Theology, such as Hervaeus and Thomas Wylton.
(Caution: in about 100 instances, the 1596 edition has the
citation wrong.) His practice of summarizing previous
positions made his Scriptum a reference work for those
who came after him. His contemporary and confrere
Francis of Meyronnes explicitly advised his readers that,
if they wanted to know who thought what, they should
look at Peter Auriol. Twenty-ﬁve years later this was still
the case for the great Augustinian Gregory of Rimini, who
sometimes quoted earlier ﬁgures via Auriol. A more strik-
ing example comes from a century after Auriol’s death,
when John Capreolus, in his defense of Thomas Aquinas
against the latter’s attackers, commonly cited those oppo-
nents through Auriol’s text.
After reviewing earlier and contemporary opinions
Auriol invariably found something wrong in all of them,
small or large, and then presented his own view. ‘‘Quid
dicendum secundum veritatem,’’ he would begin, empha-
sizing that his opinion was both different and better.
A couple of anonymous abbreviations and paraphrases
of Auriol’s Sentences commentary and Quodlibet demon-
strate that Auriol did have a following. On account of his
attacks on earlier views, however, Auriol himself became
a target for almost every major theologian active afterward
down to the Black Death. Whether they were Thomists,
like the Dominican Bernard Lombardi, or Scotists, like the
Franciscan Landulph Caracciolo, or more independent,
like the Franciscan Gerard Odonis, it was impossible for
them to avoid dealing with Auriol’s theories. Simple bean
counting shows how preoccupied they were over the
30 years after his Parisian Sentences lectures: Auriol is the
main opponent – or at least the most commonly cited
theologian after Scotus – in the works of virtually every
Parisian Franciscan for the next quarter century. At
Oxford, only the local boy William of Ockham outranks
Auriol in the Sentences commentaries of the Franciscans
Walter Chatton, Adam Wodeham, and John of Rodington.
Among the Parisian Dominicans, Hervaeus Natalis battled
Auriol directly, Raymond Bequini actually composed a
polemical work against Auriol, and Bequini’s and Bernard
Lombardi’s Quodlibeta are primarily directed at Auriol. To
varying degrees this is true of the Augustinians Gerard of
Siena, James of Pamiers, Michael of Massa, and probably
Thomas of Strasbourg. Auriol is second only to Scotus in
the amount of attention he received from the Carmelite
John Baconthorpe. This continued into the 1340s: for the
Augustinians Alphonsus Vargas of Toledo and Gregory of
Rimini, Auriol was a close second to Scotus, although
Gregory of Rimini cited Ockham as often as Auriol. The
Carmelite Paul of Perugia cited Auriol more than any
other theologian of the thirteenth and fourteenth centu-
ries. After the Black Death, this focus on Auriol faded to an
extent, but even in the ﬁfteenth century the Thomist John
Capreolus and the Scotist Peter of Nugent considered
Auriol the main threat to their champions. Auriol
remained an important thinker down to the Protestant
Reformation and well into the seventeenth century.
Auriol was systematic and brilliant, and driving him
was a search for simplicity in metaphysics, theology, nat-
ural philosophy, and even logic. Indeed, sometimes his
desire for simplicity forced him to appeal to vague nega-
tive concepts, ‘‘indistance,’’ ‘‘indistinction,’’ and ‘‘impreci-
sion’’ being examples. At other times the data of revelation
required uncomfortable modiﬁcations. In general, how-
ever, he was very successful, ‘‘ahead’’ of his time even, in
that some of his ideas would today seem common sense.
For example, take Auriol’s doctrine of place, a scientiﬁc
context where his ideas are well known. The Aristotelian
notion of place is the immobile inner surface of the
containing body, so, for example, the place of wine in
a bottle of wine is the inner surface of the bottle. Auriol
rejects this in his commentary on II Sentences, instead
defending a ‘‘vulgar’’ (common sense?) notion of place
as position in the universe, such that he is able to contem-
plate the concept of absolute space. Auriol’s view was
rejected by his successors, but it was still discussed in the
late sixteenth century, before his text was printed in 1605,
Peter Auriol P
937
P

and one wonders whether it played a role afterward in the
development of Newtonian cosmology.
Interest in Auriol’s thought has steadily grown since
the beginning of the twentieth century, and over the past
two decades his ideas have ﬁnally begun to receive the
attention they deserve. Auriol is known in particular for
his views on ontology and cognition, on the one hand, and
God’s connection with humans with respect to foreknowl-
edge, grace, and predestination, on the other. Several
excellent surveys of Auriol’s thought have now been
published, and so here Auriol’s ideas will be approached
in part through the prism of Peter of Candia, a fellow
Franciscan active c. 1380. Candia authored the most
widely read Sentences commentary of the latter half of
the fourteenth century, and he cited Auriol more often
than anyone except Scotus, John of Ripa, and Ockham.
Writing at the distance of one lifetime, Candia chose the
salient points of Auriol’s doctrine and attempted to
explain them as clearly as possible, without coloring his
presentation with his own evaluation.
It is well known that Auriol was a conceptualist. Along
with contemporary thinkers like Durand of St Pourc¸ain
and William of Ockham, Auriol holds that only particulars
have extramental existence of any kind and, correspond-
ingly, all universality and generality is a product of mental
activity. As a good Aristotelian for whom ‘‘nothing is in the
intellect that was not ﬁrst in the senses,’’ Auriol grounds all
human knowledge in sensory perception. Nevertheless,
Auriol argues strenuously for the active nature of both
the senses and the intellect, asserting that all cognitive
powers mould data in one way or another. In reaching
this conclusion, Auriol begins with his famous examples of
‘‘erroneous’’ sensory perception. Taking vision as his
example, Auriol presents eight visual ‘‘experiences’’
where what we see is not a reﬂection of ‘‘reality’’ per se.
One is the classic example of a person watching the shore
from a moving ship: it appears that the objects on shore
move. Another is that a stick partially submerged in water
seems to be broken. Auriol claims that, when we have
visual sensory experiences like these, we are having intui-
tive cognitions; for Auriol, then, unlike for Scotus, whether
a cognition is intuitive or abstractive has to do with how
that cognition appears to us (a phenomenological crite-
rion) as opposed to whether the object is actually present
and existent (an ontological criterion): if the object
appears to us to be directly present (whether it is in fact
present or not), then for Auriol we are having an intuitive
cognition and not an abstractive cognition. The sense of
sight, for Auriol, always delivers intuitive cognition, even
when we are experiencing sensory illusions. More impor-
tantly, Auriol claims on the basis of these experiences that
the senses are fundamentally active. The stick in the water
is not broken; it just appears to be broken. According to
Auriol, the fact that we have a broken stick as the object of
our sense cognition, when in fact there is no broken stick
in extramental reality, proves that the senses actively create
something upon perceptual acquaintance. Speciﬁcally,
according to Auriol, the senses place the extramental
object of cognition into what he calls ‘‘apparent being’’
(esse apparens, but he also calls it ‘‘objective being’’ and
‘‘intentional being’’). The activity of the senses is the only
way of explaining how we see a broken stick when there is
no broken stick. Moreover, for Auriol these cases of non-
veridical sensory perception show us how the senses work
in general: even in veridical sensory perception, the senses
are fundamentally active for Auriol, putting the perceived
object into apparent being, which itself is the term or
object of the sensory act. When the esse apparens – what
appears – matches the external object, the perception is
accurate, and when it does not, the perception is errone-
ous. Auriol was not a skeptic: he had conﬁdence that most
of the time we are not fooled and did not worry about the
negative ramiﬁcations for certitude that his theory posed.
Nevertheless, he was attacked on this point immediately.
What is esse apparens? Auriol claims that it is the object
of cognition itself, but put into another mode of being by
the activity of the senses. When he says this, he means it
literally: the extramental object of cognition and the esse
apparens by which we perceive it are identical according to
strict numerical identity. Thus, an extramental thing in
esse apparens is just that object as perceived, that is, as the
object of a cognitive power. If this were not the case,
according to Auriol, then a type of veil of perception
would fall between our cognitive powers and the
extramental world. When we perceive something, we are
literally perceiving that thing, not that thing as it exists
extramentally, but rather that thing as it exists as an object
of cognition. These are two different modes or ways that
numerically the same thing exists. This is as true for
intellectual cognition as for sensory cognition. For Auriol,
when we form a concept of something, our intellectual
faculties put that something in esse apparens. Yet that
concept is nothing other than that something as con-
ceived, not a separate entity with its own real existence.
According to Auriol, then, every particular thing that
exists has two modes of being: real being in extramental
reality and apparent being, but the latter can only be
actualized by someone cognizing the thing.
As mentioned above, for Auriol the world is made up
exclusively of individuals. Nevertheless, individuals can
have extremely similar characteristics. For Auriol, these
characteristics (rationes) are the extramental foundation
938 P
Peter Auriol

of our universal concepts, since each of these characteris-
tics is able to lead us to form a different concept, and since
the extreme similarity of these characteristics leads an
intellect to form precisely the same universal concept
about several individuals belonging to what we would
call a natural kind. So Auriol grounds our universal con-
cepts in extramental reality (and hence in sense cogni-
tion), while maintaining that actual universality or
generality is merely conceptual (since the characteristics
are proper to one and only one individual, being merely
extremely similar to the proper characteristics of another
individual of the same natural kind). Moreover, the uni-
versal concepts that we form of any individual simply are
that individual put into apparent being (as we saw above).
On the basis of perceptual acquaintance with Socrates, for
example, I can form the concepts ‘‘Socrates,’’ ‘‘man,’’ and
‘‘animal,’’ and all of these concepts are (by strict numerical
identity) Socrates. The universal concept ‘‘animal’’ is all
animals, but this does not entail that there is an
extramental ‘‘animality’’ separate from these individuals.
Because Auriol asserts that, on the most basic level,
everything that exists outside the mind is an individual, he
not only rejects the realism of the major scholastics of the
thirteenth and early fourteenth centuries, parallel to what
Ockham would soon do at Oxford, but he insists that the
search for a principle of individuation, something that
makes an individual an individual, is a waste of time.
External reality is made up exclusively of individuals,
and any attempt to explain how these individuals are in
fact individual will simply generate the same question
about the purported principle of individuation (why is
that individuated?), and so on ad inﬁnitum. Accordingly,
his understanding of Aristotelian hylomorphism includes
the denial that prime matter can be understood as existing
separately from form. In this way, he rejects the predom-
inant position of the Franciscan philosophical tradition,
which attributed to prime matter some minimal actuality.
Rather, matter is always understood as existing with form
in a sensible substance. The same applies to accidental
forms. Therefore, there is no reason to multiply separately
existing entities: that a particular individual man is a living
and risible animal, and also tall, fat, and pale, does not
mean that these forms have any separate being apart from
the substance. (The one possible exception to this claim is
the rational soul, which Auriol often discusses as though it
is a form different from other forms inasmuch as it is able
to have continued existence without the matter in which it
inheres; this might make Auriol a type of pluralist when it
comes to human substantial forms, but Auriol is rarely, if
ever, explicit on this topic.) Not all of the nine Aristotelian
categories of accidents have even this sort of real being in
a substance, but only quality, quantity, action, and pas-
sion. Relation, place, time, position, and state/habit have
no existence outside the mind, not even in substances.
Fixed as he was in a generally Aristotelian intellectual
world, however, it took ingenuity for Auriol to come up
with an intelligible explanation of qualitative and quanti-
tative change that saved the phenomena. Auriol’s solution
will bring us to his theory of God’s connection with
humans, since his main treatment of qualitative change
is in the context of the increase or decrease of grace,
a form, in the soul, a substance. Peter of Candia
(I Sentences, q. 5, a. 3) ﬁxes on Auriol’s own words and
then lists the main elements. The problem is, what hap-
pens when grace increases, or more precisely, what exactly
is added to the existing grace and how?
"
Lord Peter Auriol imagines that ‘that reality according to
which the smaller [existing] grace is made more intense
cannot be a whole grace that is distinctly discrete, partic-
ipating in the reality or specific nature [of that grace] as if it
were one separate piece of grace, but rather it participates
in the reality and nature of grace through a certain reduc-
tion, so that it could be called ‘con-grace’. But this reality is
completely inseparable (impraecisibilis) in reality and in
the intellect. Thus is it not per se able to be made, even
by divine power, such that it would receive separate and
demonstrated being. Nor is it per se intuitively intelligible,
but only ‘co-intelligible’, so that an angelic intellect could
not intuitively divide the augmented grace into two parts
of grace. Rather the increased grace always occurs to that
intellect as something to which ‘something of grace’ has
been added, and not grace.’ And one must imagine in
a similar way concerning all other qualitative or quantita-
tive forms. . . On this basis three propositions are inferred:
ﬁrst, what is added in the increase of grace is not properly
grace; second, what is added cannot come about by itself
without that to which it is added, because in its own
nature it is unseparated (impraecisa) reality; third, this
reality is not separately conceivable without the prior
reality. And this is his intention on this matter, via which,
as he says, one saves the numeric unity of a form and its
simplicity, and the actual inﬁnity of things is avoided, and
similarly one saves the continuity of motion, and brieﬂy
everything required for the increase in intensity of forms is
beautifully preserved in this way.
Grace is of course linked to salvation, predestination, and
divine foreknowledge of future contingents, perhaps the
context the best demonstrates the depth and extent of
Auriol’s impact and the one in which the reception of
Auriol’s theories has been investigated most fully. Auriol
argues at length in rejecting the prevailing views, those of
Peter Auriol P
939
P

Aquinas and Scotus. Auriol approaches the general prob-
lem from two directions, the ﬁrst from the perspective of
God. We can again do no better than quote Peter of
Candia’s succinct summary (I Sentences, q. 6, a. 2):
"
Because God is eternity, and consequently excludes every
temporal characteristic, while every creature is temporal
and consequently formally excludes every characteristic of
a being of eternity, therefore strictly speaking there is no
priority, posteriority, or simultaneity between God and
creature. Thus He can neither be said to be distant from
that creature by duration nor be at the same time with it,
because this would either be on the basis of eternity or on
the basis of temporality. But it cannot be by either of
these, since neither is common to the other. And so truly
and strictly speaking, God’s knowledge attains the ‘actu-
ality’ of a contingently future creature via some sort of
negative indistance. From this it appears that His knowl-
edge of the actuality of a future contingent does not make
a proposition about the future true or false, but leaves it
neutral, since with respect to that future contingent He
does not have ‘expecting’ knowledge. This is because He
would then be distant from such a future, which is not
true, unless the line of [temporal] succession were applied
to Him. But that is false, because such a line is repugnant
to the nature of eternity.
Approaching from another direction, Auriol centers his
argument on human free will. Auriol holds that any meta-
physical or logical predetermination with respect to future
events would entail that they occur of necessity. Having
denied that God’s knowledge precedes the future or makes
propositions about the future true or false, he argues more
generally as follows: if every proposition about the future
is either true or false, the future happens necessarily. Since
it appears that not all things are determined beforehand,
and indeed human free will and divine justice require that
at least some things come about contingently and not
necessarily, propositions about the contingent future are
neither true nor false, but neutral. Auriol – and some other
major scholastics – claims that this was Aristotle’s opinion
as well.
Auriol’s stress on free will entailed modiﬁcations not
only in his theory of propositional truth, but also in his
view of salvation. The standard view was that the only
cause of the elects’ predestination is God’s mercy, whereas
the reprobates are justly damned for their faults. Trying to
avoid Pelagianism and to preserve the transcendence of
divine predestination, Auriol asserts that humans who will
be saved are a quasi privative, negative, or passive cause of
their predestination in that they do not place an obstacle
or impediment in the path of grace. Auriol suggests that
God freely sends out His salviﬁc grace to everyone; those
who do not place an obstacle are saved; those who place an
obstacle thereby block this grace and are justly damned.
For Auriol, this scenario better balances human free will
and God’s omnipotence and transcendence.
The view had the added advantage of safeguarding
divine simplicity and necessity. For Auriol, immutability
and necessity are the same thing. To the extent that some-
thing is immutable, it is necessary. Since God is both immu-
table and eternal, God is necessary to the highest degree,
absolutely, such that He cannot be otherwise. If God fore-
knew something or actively predestined someone, this
would entail the absolute necessity of the outcome. The
only difﬁculty is that God does act. This forces Auriol to
make a distinction between God’s intrinsic and extrinsic
will: the intrinsic will is identical to God – atemporal,
immutable, and absolutely necessary – and cannot be the
source of activity and change; the extrinsic will is that by
which God creates, for example. Auriol refers to the ﬁrst as
the ‘‘will of complacency’’ and the second as the ‘‘will of
operation.’’ Further, in order to preserve divine freedom,
Auriol has to modify his notion of freedom to include
complacency: what is done complacently is done freely.
Auriol connects divine necessity, complacency, and
intrinsic acts of the will and intellect in his related doctrine
of the necessity of grace. Once again, Peter of Candia
provides an overview (I Sentences, q. 5, a. 2), nicely linking
the issue back to Auriol’s theory of intuitive cognition,
where we began:
"
Every created grace (caritas) is intrinsically grace, such that
it includes a contradiction for it to exist and not to be love
(dilectio), just as whiteness is intrinsically whiteness and it
is a contradiction for it to exist and not to be color. And
consequently, just as it is impossible for whiteness to be
subjectively in something that does not designate that it is
formally white, it is also impossible for grace to exist in
something that is not dear (carum) to God. Thus this form
falls necessarily under God’s complacency, such that when
it is posited in a soul, it necessarily follows that that soul is
dear (grata) to God. And just as being white is the formal
effect of whiteness, so being dear (carum) is the formal
effect of grace. Therefore it is just as impossible for some-
thing to be white without whiteness as it is for something
to be called dear (carum) without grace. And so being dear
does not stem effectively from divine acceptance, just as
being white does not stem from whitewashing. But this
form cannot be produced effectively except by God. And
through this the deﬁnition of grace according to [Auriol] is
apparent: grace is the habitual love of God infused imme-
diately by Him in the rational appetite, over which divine
940 P
Peter Auriol

complacency passes immutably and from eternity, from
which complacency it does not ﬂow effectively. And this
doctor speaks about grace just as he speaks generally
about all acts of intellect and will that are intrinsically
such. Thus for him intuitive cognition (notitia) is a certain
absolute quality that is intrinsically such, and so he main-
tains that it can exist without the presence of the object.
Aspects of Auriol’s views on divine simplicity received
a sympathetic hearing, and William of Ockham, Gerard
Odonis, and Thomas of Strasbourg put forth theories of
predestination that resembled Auriol’s in some way. Gen-
erally, however, Auriol’s theories of predestination and,
especially, divine foreknowledge provoked a vehemently
negative reaction over the next century and a half. Auriol’s
way of distinguishing between different modes of divine
willing was subject to ridicule, as was his notion of com-
placency, but the attempts to dissolve Auriol’s arguments
against previous positions were rather feeble. Although
Peter of Candia presented Auriol’s opinion at great length
and in neutral fashion, as was his practice, Auriol’s only
vocal follower was Peter de Rivo at the University of
Louvain after 1465, and Rivo’s view met with papal con-
demnation in 1474. Still, it is possible that Auriol had an
impact on his great Jewish contemporary Gersonides on
this issue, and even after Pope Sixtus IV’s condemnation,
Auriol gained an important follower in the early sixteenth
century in Pietro Pomponazzi and he may have inﬂuenced
Martin Luther himself. Auriol’s view was still widely
debated in the seventeenth century. This may be true for
many other philosophical issues as well, but we have yet to
take most of their histories beyond the Black Death.
See also (∗Especially important): ▶Adam Wodeham
▶Certainty ▶∗Durand of St. Pourc¸ain ▶∗Epistemology
▶∗Form and Matter ▶∗Future Contingents ▶∗Gerard
Odonis ▶Gersonides ▶Gregory of Rimini ▶Henry of
Ghent ▶Hervaeus Natalis ▶∗Intension and Remission
of Forms ▶∗Intuitive and Abstractive Cognition ▶∗John
Baconthorpe ▶John Capeolus ▶John Duns Scotus
▶Landulph Caracciolo ▶Michael of Massa ▶Modal
Theories and Modal Logic ▶∗Peter de Rivo ▶∗Peter
Lombard ▶Peter of Candia ▶Robert Holcot ▶Sense
Perception
(Theories
of)
▶Skepticism
▶Thomas
Aquinas
▶Thomas
Wylton
▶∗Truth,
Theories
of
▶Universals
▶∗Voluntarism
and
Intellectualism
▶Walter
Chatton
▶Will
▶∗William
of
Ockham
▶William of Ware
Bibliography
(See also the Peter Auriol Homepage: http://www.igl.ku.dk/~russ/auriol.
html)
Primary Sources
(1596) Commentariorum in primum librum Sententiarum pars prima et
secunda. Rome
(1605) Commentariorum in secundum, tertium, et quartum libros
Sententiarum et Quodlibeti tomus secundus. Rome
Aureoli Peter (1952–1956) In: Buytaert EM (ed) Scriptum super primum
Sententiarum, Prologue – Distinction VIII, 2 vols, ed. Buytaert EM.
Franciscan Institute, St. Bonaventure (diplomatic edition from man-
uscript Biblioteca Apostolica Vaticana, Borghese 329)
Boehner P (1948) Notitia intuitiva of non-existents according to Peter
Aureoli,
OFM
(1322).
Francisc
Stud
8:388–416
(edition
of
Reportatio I, prologue, q. 1)
Brown SF (1995) Petrus Aureoli: De unitate conceptus entis (Reportatio
Parisiensis in I Sententiarum, dist. 2, p. 1, qq. 1–3 et p. 2, qq. 1–2).
Traditio 50:199–248
Buytaert EM (1955) Aureoli’s unpublished Reportatio III, d. 3, q. 1–2.
Francisc Stud 15:159–174
Cera (Ceva) Bonifacius (ed) (1511) Firmamenta trium ordinum
beatissimi Patris nostri sancti Francisci, vol IV. Paris, ff. 116r–129r
(edition of De paupertate et paupere usu rerum)
Fr Gulielmi Guarre, Fr Ioannis Duns Scoti, Fr Petri Aureoli (1904)
Quaestiones disputatae de immaculata conceptione beatae Mariae
Virginis, ed. Lemmen. Collegium S. Bonaventurae, Quaracchi,
pp 23–153 (editions of De conceptione beatae Mariae Virginis
and
Repercussorium
editum
contra
adversarium
innocentiae
matris Dei)
Friedman RL, Nielsen LO, Schabel C (eds) (2000) Scriptum in primum
librum Sententiarum. Online: http://www.peterauriol.net (continu-
ing Buytaert’s effort with Vatican, Borghese 329, but sometimes as
a critical edition from many manuscripts)
Nielsen LO (2000) The debate between Peter Auriol and Thomas Wylton
on theology and virtue. Vivarium 38(1):35–98 (edition of two mis-
cellaneous questions)
Nielsen LO (2007) The quodlibet of Peter Auriol. In: Schabel C (ed)
Theological quodlibeta in the Middle Ages: the fourteenth century.
Brill, Leiden, pp 277–331 (edition of Quodlibet, q. 7)
Pasnau R (2002) Mind and knowledge (the Cambridge translations of
medieval philosophical texts III). CUP, Cambridge (trans with
Bolyard C of Scriptum I, proloque, q. 2)
Schabel C (2000) Place, space, and the physics of grace in Auriol’s
Sentences commentary. Vivarium 38(1):117–161 (edition of II
Sent., d. 2, pars 3, q. 1)
Seeboeck P (ed) (1896) Compendium sensus litteralis totius divinae
Scripturae a clarissimo theologo fr. Petro Aureoli O. Min. Collegium
S. Bonaventurae, Quaracchi
Secondary Sources
Brown SF (1964) The unity of the concept of being in Peter Aureoli’s
Scriptum and Commentarium (with a critical edition of the
Commentarium text). PhD dissertation, University of Louvain
Dreiling R (1913) Der Konzeptualismus in der Universalienlehre des
Franziskanerbischofs Petrus Aureoli (Pierre d’Auriole). Aschendorff,
Mu¨nster
Duba W (2006) Aristotelian traditions in Franciscan thought: matter and
potency according to Scotus and Auriol. In: Taifacos I (ed) The
origins of European scholarship. The Cyprus Millenium Conference.
Franz Steiner, Stuttgart, pp 147–161
Friedman RL (1997) Conceiving and modifying reality: some modist
roots of Peter Auriol’s theory of concept formation. In: Marmo
C (ed) Vestigia, imagines, verba: semiotics and logic in medieval
theological texts (XII–XIV century). Brepols, Turnhout, pp 305–321
Peter Auriol P
941
P

Friedman RL (1999) Peter Auriol on intentions and essential predication.
In: Ebbesen S, Friedman RL (eds) Medieval analyses in language and
cognition. The Royal Danish Academy of Sciences and Letters,
Copenhagen, pp 415–430
Friedman RL (2002) Peter Auriol. In: Zalta EN (ed) The Stanford ency-
clopedia of philosophy. http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2002/
entries/auriol/. Stanford University, Stanford, CA
Friedman RL, Nielsen LO (eds) (2000) Vivarium 38(1) Special issue: Peter
Auriol with contributions by Bolyard C, Conti AD, Duba WO,
Friedman RL, Nielsen LO, and Schabel C
Halverson JL (1998) Peter Aureol on predestination. A challenge to late
medieval thought. Brill, Leiden
Henninger M (1989) Relations: medieval theories, 1250–1325. Clarendon,
Oxford
Heynck V (1969) Die Kommentare des P. Aureoli zum dritten
Sentenzenbuch. Franziskanische Studien 51:1–77
Nielsen LO (1996) Dictates of faith versus dictates of reason: Peter Auriole
on divine power, creation, and human rationality. Documenti e studi
sulla tradizione ﬁlosoﬁca medievale 7:213–241
Nielsen LO (2002) Peter Auriol’s way with words. The genesis of Peter
Auriol’s commentaries on Peter Lombard’s ﬁrst and fourth books of
the Sentences. In: Evans GR (ed) Mediaeval commentaries on the
sentences of Peter Lombard. Brill, Leiden, pp 149–219
Nielsen LO (2003) Peter Auriol. In: Gracia JJE, Noone T (eds) A compan-
ion to philosophy in the Middle Ages. Blackwell, Oxford, pp 494–503
Schabel C (2000) Theology at Paris 1316–1345. Peter Auriol and the
problem of divine foreknowledge and future contingents. Ashgate,
Aldershot
Schabel C (2003) Divine foreknowledge and human freedom: Auriol,
Pomponazzi, and Luther on ‘Scholastic Subtleties’. In: Friedman
RL, Nielsen LO (eds) The medieval heritage in early modern meta-
physics and modal logic, 1400–1700. Kluwer, Dordrecht, pp 165–189
Schabel C (2006) Philosophy and theology across cultures: Gersonides
and Auriol on divine foreknowledge. Speculum 81(3):1092–1117
Schabel C (2009) Auriol’s rubrics: citations of university theologians in
Peter Auriol’s Scriptum in Primum Librum Sententiarum. In: Brown
SF, Dewender T, Kobusch T (eds) Philosophical debates at Paris in
the early fourteenth century, 3–38. Brill, Leiden
Tachau KH (1988) Vision and certitude in the age of Ockham: optics,
epistemology and the foundation of semantics, 1250–1345. Brill,
Leiden
Teetaert A (1935) Pierre Auriol. Dictionnaire de Theologie Catholique 12
(2):cols. 1810–1881
Peter Damian
TOIVO J. HOLOPAINEN
Faculty of Theology
University of Helsinki
Helsinki
Finland
Abstract
Peter Damian (c. 1007–1072), an Italian cardinal and
religious leader, has a modest place in the history of
philosophy because of his little treatise De divina
omnipotentia (On Divine Omnipotence). Damian is often
depicted as a thinker who, in his attempt to defend divine
omnipotence, denied the universal validity of the principle
of contradiction and afﬁrmed that God can change the
past. Such a view is based on a misinterpretation of
Damian’s statements. He actually held that the past cannot
be changed, but he did not see this as a limitation of divine
omnipotence but as an expression of God’s power.
Damian’s treatise reﬂects an early phase in the scholastic
deliberation on philosophical theology.
Peter Damian (Petrus Damianus or Petrus Damiani) was
born c. 1007 in Ravenna, Italy. He acquired the name
Damianus or Damiani after his elder brother Damianus,
who cared for him in his youth. He studied liberal arts and
law in Ravenna, Faenza, and Parma, and then became
a teacher of rhetoric. In 1035, he experienced a religious
conversion and entered the Benedictine monastery at
Fonte Avellana. He became prior of Fonte Avellana in
1043. Damian was actively involved in monastic reform
and the reform of the Church. He was nominated cardinal
in 1057 and died in 1072.
Damian was a voluminous writer. The most important
part of his production is his letters, some of which are
actually lengthy treatises. Of the surviving 180 letters, the
most signiﬁcant philosophically is Letter 119, known as De
divina omnipotentia. Damian sent this letter c. 1065 to
Abbot Didier (or Desiderius) of Monte Cassino and his
monks. The letter is related to a live discussion which had
taken place during Damian’s recent visit to the monastery.
It is highly rhetorical in both style and structure, which
makes it liable to misunderstanding.
In the live discussion at Monte Cassino, Damian had
afﬁrmed that God in his omnipotence is capable of every-
thing. Some of those present then asked him whether God
can bring it about that what has happened has not hap-
pened. For example, can God bring it about that Rome was
never founded? Damian does not tell us how the debate
continued. In De divina omnipotentia, he strives to show
that divine omnipotence remains intact even though the
past cannot be changed. However, he never actually utters
the statement ‘‘God cannot change the past’’ while he does
this. Damian thinks that an alarming claim like this is
better left unsaid when talking to a wider audience.
(Damian’s letters were circulated among a larger audience
than the addressees.)
An important part of Damian’s strategy in De divina
omnipotentia is to argue that the past is not so different
from the present or the future when it comes to divine
power. To begin with, Damian connects the query of his
942 P
Peter Damian

opponents to a disputed question within contemporary
logic, referred to as ‘‘the question about the consequence
of necessity and impossibility.’’ This question, inspired by
the
Aristotelian
problem
of
future
contingents,
is
concerned with statements like ‘‘What has been, necessar-
ily has been, and it is impossible that it has not been,’’
‘‘What is, necessarily is, as long as it is, and it is impossible
that it is not’’ and ‘‘What will be, necessarily will be, and it
is impossible that it will not be.’’ Damian lets us under-
stand, rightly or wrongly, that the consequence of neces-
sity and impossibility is the reason why the opponents
have presented their query. Damian retorts that a similar
problem arises with the present and the future. If God has
no power over the past because of the consequence of
necessity, then he has no power over the present or the
future either. Stating this does not solve the problem at
hand but it does put the matter in a different perspective.
Damian continues by focusing on God’s eternity and
the immutable presence of the created history in the divine
sphere. The past is past for us, but it enjoys a permanent
existence in the divine providential plan. The day when
God created the world still exists there and so does any
other day. Damian also draws attention to the divine will as
the cause of the created existence. There are things because
God has chosen them, and he gives to them whatever
existence they have. What God wills to be cannot but be.
The efﬁciency of God’s will brings it about that there is no
room for contradiction in his creation. The principle of
contradiction is valid for the created history because God
gives being in an unequivocal manner. For the same reason,
the consequence of necessity and impossibility is valid.
What has been, necessarily has been, because the past
thing cannot lose the status that God has given to it. The
past cannot be changed, but this is not a limitation of God’s
power but a consequence of his insuperable command.
Another question treated in De divina omnipotentia is
the following: Can God restore virginity to a woman who
has lost it? It is important to note that Damian views this
as a separate query which is not to be confused with that
about changing the past. He emphatically afﬁrms that God
can restore virginity to a woman who has lost it, but the
restoration that he thinks of does not include removing
some events in the past. Damian singles out two senses in
which virginity can be restored. First, God can restore
virginity ‘‘according to the fullness of merits.’’ This kind
of restoration concerns the moral status of the individual
before God. Second, God can restore virginity ‘‘according
to the integrity of the ﬂesh’’ (iuxta carnis integritatem).
This restoration concerns the physical state of the female
sexual apparatus. To support his judgment that God can
restore virginity in the latter sense, Damian offers
a discussion of miracles and God’s power over the
laws of nature. The restoration of virginity that Damian
afﬁrms as possible does not change the fact that the
virginity was lost, as the restoration of life to Lazarus
(John 11: 1–43) did not change the fact that Lazarus had
really died.
The background of Damian’s views in De divina
omnipotentia is to be sought in the works of Augustine
and Boethius. Augustine discussed themes like eternity,
providence, foreknowledge, and necessity in a number of
works, for example, The City of God and On Free Choice.
Boethius developed a different approach in The Consola-
tion of Philosophy and his two commentaries on Aristotle’s
De interpretatione (the problem of future contingents).
These works of Augustine and Boethius also contain
remarks on divine omnipotence. Peter Damian was famil-
iar with these late antique texts. However, the immediate
backdrop of Damian’s views is in the eleventh-century
school discussions based on the sources just mentioned.
Damian knew well the developments in the Italian town
schools due to his secular teaching career in the 1020s and
1030s, and De divina omnipotentia is one of our main
witnesses to this early phase of scholastic deliberation.
Another author with the same kind of schooling is Anselm
of Canterbury, who received an Italian education before he
left his home country in 1056. Damian’s De divina
omnipotentia can serve as a useful point of comparison
for many aspects of Anselm’s thought.
See also: ▶Anselm of Canterbury ▶Augustine ▶Boethius
▶Divine Power ▶Future Contingents ▶Logic ▶Modal
Theories and Modal Logic ▶Time
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Damiani Petrus (1983–1993) Die Briefe des Petrus Damiani, 4 vols, ed.
Reindel K. Monumenta Germaniae Historica. Die Briefe der
deutschen Kaiserzeit 4.1–4. Mu¨nchen (De divina omnipotentia, i.e.,
Letter 119, is in vol 3, 1989, pp 341–384)
Damien Pierre (1972) Lettre sur la toute-puissance divine, ed. Cantin A.
Sources chre´tiennes 191. Cerf, Paris
(The English translation of De divina omnipotentia in Damian Peter
(1998) Letters 91–120, trans. Blum OJ. The Catholic University of
America Press, Washington, pp 344–386, is too inaccurate for phil-
osophical purposes)
Secondary Sources
Cantin A (1972) Pierre Damien, Lettre sur la toute-puissance divine.
Introduction, texte critique, traduction et notes. Cerf, Paris
Endres JA (1910) Petrus Damiani und die weltliche Wissenschaft. Beitra¨ge
zur Geschichte der Philosophie des Mittelalters 8.3. Aschendorff,
Mu¨nster
Gonsette J (1956) Pierre Damien et la culture profane. Publications
Universitaires, Louvain/Be´atrice-Nauwelaerts, Paris
Peter Damian P
943
P

Holopainen TJ (1996) Dialectic and theology in the eleventh century.
Brill, Leiden
Holopainen TJ (2006) Future contingents in the eleventh century. In:
Hirvonen V, Holopainen TJ, Tuominen M (eds) Mind and modality:
studies in the history of philosophy in Honour of Simo Knuuttila.
Brill, Leiden, pp 103–120
Knuuttila S (1993) Modalities in medieval philosophy. Routledge,
London/New York
Marenbon J (1996) Anselm and the early medieval Aristotle. In:
Marenbon J (ed) Aristotle in Britain during the Middle Ages.
Brepols, Turnhout, pp 1–19
Moonan L (1980) Impossibility and Peter Damian. Archiv fu¨r Geschichte
der Philosophie 62:146–163
Remnant P (1978) Peter Damian: could God change the past? Can J Philos
8:259–268
Resnick IM (1992) Divine power and possibility in St. Peter Damian’s De
divina omnipotentia. Brill, Leiden
Peter de Rivo
CHRISTOPHER SCHABEL
Department of History and Archaeology
University of Cyprus
Nicosia
Cyprus
Abstract
Peter de Rivo (c. 1420–1500) was a controversial Flemish
scholar active at the University of Louvain from 1437 until
late in life. He lectured on the Sentences in 1448–1449, but
was not made master until 1477. As arts master he com-
posed many Aristotelian commentaries, some of which
survive, and later he wrote treatises on the calendar stem-
ming from a quarrel over Easter dating. He is best known
as the leading protagonist in the quarrel over future con-
tingents at Louvain against Henry of Zomeren, a master of
theology. The dispute between the two goes back before
1450, but really erupted in 1465. Until Henry’s death in
1472, Peter defended the position of Peter Auriol on the
subject of divine foreknowledge of future contingents,
maintaining that propositions about the contingent future
are neither true nor false, but neutral. Henry countered by
accusing Peter of heresy. The long dispute, which came to
physical violence, involved the faculties of arts and theol-
ogy at Louvain, the faculties of theology at Paris and
Cologne, the bishop of Tournai, the duke of Burgundy,
the Greek Cardinal Bessarion, and Pope Paul II. A number
of interesting treatises were composed in the quarrel by
Peter, Henry, and several members of Bessarion’s circle.
One of the latter group, the Franciscan Francesco della
Rovere, was elected Pope Sixtus IV in 1471 and in 1474
ofﬁcially condemned Peter de Rivo’s doctrine, and by
extension Peter Auriol’s.
The Flemish scholar Peter de Rivo’s long life was
intertwined with the development of the University of
Louvain.
Founded
in
1425,
the
university quickly
became one of the most vibrant in Europe. Peter is
famous because of his role in one of a series of controver-
sies that raged in the university’s early history. Born Pieter
van den Becken c. 1420, in Asse, about 35 km west of
Louvain, Peter enrolled at the university in 1437, became
arts master in 1442, and was named professor of philoso-
phy at the College of Faucon in 1443, when he commenced
his theological studies. Peter lectured on the Sentences as
bachelor of theology in 1448–1449, becoming thus
a ‘‘formed bachelor,’’ but he was not made master until
1477, when he was serving as rector. He died on January 6,
1500.
Peter was heavily occupied with teaching and admin-
istration in the arts faculty for decades, advancing to
professor of rhetoric in 1460. He composed commentaries
on Porphyry’s Isagoge and 12 works of Aristotle, which
survived in three manuscripts in the library of the Mag-
deburg Dom Gymnasium until World War II, when the
codex containing the commentaries on the Metaphysics
and logical writings (no. 165) was destroyed. The
remaining manuscripts (nos. 201 and 220), now in the
Berlin Staatsbibliothek, consist of two copies of Peter’s
commentaries on the Physics, De caelo, De anima, and
Meteorologica, and one copy of his commentaries on De
generatione et corruptione and De sensu et sensato.
Astronomy intrigued Peter, particularly Easter dating,
which he began studying by 1449. Late in life, he engaged
in a well-known dispute with Paul of Middleburg over the
issue. Peter’s writings from the exchange were printed in
Louvain: the Opus responsivum ad epistolam apologeticam
Magistri Pauli de Middelburgo in 1488, and the Tertius
tractatus in 1492. The Aristotelian commentaries remain
unpublished.
Peter is best known for his role in the quarrel over
future contingents at Louvain. Ironically, until recently
Peter was more famous in this regard than the scholastic
whose theory he resurrected: the Franciscan Peter Auriol
(d. 1322). Peter de Rivo entitled his collective works on the
subject A Defense of the Doctrine of Lord Peter Auriol in the
Matter of Future Contingents. In late 1446, the arts faculty
asked Peter de Rivo and the dean to investigate the suspect
doctrines of a group of arts masters led by Henry of
944 P
Peter de Rivo

Zomeren (c. 1417–1482). With the approval of the faculty
of theology, in mid-1447 the arts faculty published
a statute proscribing 11 propositions, including that
‘‘determinately one part of a contradiction in future con-
tingents is true and the other false, just as in present and
past contingents’’ – in fact, this and two of the others
‘‘must be totally suppressed.’’ Prima facie the poorly
worded statute supports Peter Auriol’s opinion. Among
authors whose works are preserved, however, Auriol’s
stance had been almost universally attacked in the
130 years since its ﬁrst expression. For his part, Henry of
Zomeren claimed that the propositions censured were
based on the teachings of Scotus.
Henry was in Paris for much of the 1450s, becoming
master of theology there in 1462. Back in Louvain he was
given the prestigious chair of theology that Heymeric of
Camp had left vacant at his death, so Henry could now set
things right. In a quodlibetal disputation in the arts faculty
in Advent, 1465, Peter defended Auriol’s doctrine. The
debate continued the following year at the same venue.
After a hiatus, in November 1469 Henry spoke out against
what he considered the heretical position that Peter had
defended. When the Advent quodlibetal session opened,
Peter resumed the debate on December 18. Henry
responded two days later, again calling Peter’s opinion
heresy. The next day Peter replied and the arts faculty
asked the university to force Henry to abide by the statute
of 1447. Despite the university’s repeated efforts to silence
both sides, the quarrel escalated, coming even to physical
violence among the supporters. Both Peter and Henry
composed treatises, several in the case of Peter who, as
professor of rhetoric, used his skills to the fullest extent to
gain supporters that he would otherwise probably not
have had.
Peter adopted Auriol’s defense of Aristotle’s ‘‘demon-
stration’’ in chapter 9 of De interpretatione that proposi-
tions about future contingents are neither true nor false,
but neutral. Furthermore, for Auriol and Peter, not even
God’s knowledge makes such propositions true or false,
because divine knowledge of what is future to us does not
precede the future’s coming about, otherwise everything
would happen necessarily. Following Auriol, Peter claims
that God’s atemporal knowledge of future contingents
cannot be expressed properly by any proposition, so deny-
ing truth to future contingent propositions does not affect
His knowledge.
Rivo’s main innovation is his articulation of various
ways to take ‘‘truth.’’ If I tell the editor on June 28, 2007,
‘‘I will submit this on March 19, 2008,’’ this proposition is
true, but only in the ‘‘popular’’ sense that the editor knows
I am trustworthy and I intend to follow up. In the Aristo-
telian sense, however, by the ‘‘rigor of logic’’ and with
truth ‘‘inhering’’ in it, my proposition is not true. I may
have my entry ready and intend to submit, and then be
punished with sudden administrative tasks. Peter’s exam-
ple is this: if Plato, whom Aristotle trusts, says to Aristotle,
‘‘I will have breakfast with you tomorrow,’’ Aristotle will
believe it faithfully, and say that it is true, but he will not
maintain that the truth inheres in Plato’s assertion. The
main problem with this is prophecy. Here Peter agrees
with Auriol that prophetic propositions signify divine
knowledge by the ‘‘intention’’ of the prophets. In Peter’s
terminology, although they are not true in Aristotle’s
sense, by the rigor of logic and with the truth inhering in
them, they are nevertheless true by the ‘‘Uncreated Truth’’
that the prophet makes them signify. And if we can believe
Plato’s promise about breakfast, then we can believe God’s
prophecies so much more, without maintaining that truth
actually inheres in them.
For Peter, when a proposition about the future is
strictly speaking true, this truth is ‘‘unimpedible.’’ It sim-
ply cannot be true now in the Aristotelian sense that ‘‘I will
submit this on 19 March’’ and yet still be possible for me
not to submit. This also applies to prophetic and other
propositions that express God’s foreknowledge: ‘‘If true
propositions about future contingents are required to
express divine foreknowledge, one asks of my adversary,
by what truth must they be true, unimpedible truth or
impedible truth? If by unimpedible truth, it follows that all
futures will come about unimpedibly. If by impedible
truth, it follows ﬁrst that God’s foreknowledge can be
maintained along with the said opinion of Aristotle, by
which he only denies unimpedible truth in propositions
about future contingents.’’
Peter also rejects, with some ridicule, the traditional
logical devices used to reconcile divine foreknowledge and
the contingency of the future. The common solution to
the problem of the consequence ‘‘God foreknows that
I will submit, therefore I will submit necessarily’’ is to
appeal to the composite and divided senses of the propo-
sition, and the distinction between absolute and condi-
tional necessity. Rivo remarks, in a way that Auriol had
and Martin Luther would later: ‘‘I have been astonished at
some people who explored the greatest causes with the
utmost subtlety, so that they scarcely left a particle
undiscussed, and yet they are satisﬁed with these
solutions.’’
Lacking the university’s support, Henry denounced
Peter and his cohort to Pope Paul II and called on his
allies for assistance: the duke of Burgundy, his alma mater
Peter de Rivo P
945
P

the faculty of theology at Paris, and the powerful Greek
Cardinal Bessarion in Rome. Peter counterattacked, accus-
ing Henry of the determinist heresy of Wyclif, and the
university appealed to the faculty of theology of Cologne.
Pope Paul ordered the bishop of Tournai to investigate,
while Bessarion held a philosophical inquiry, soliciting
tracts from Fernando of Cordova, Guillaume Baudin, the
Dominican Giovanni Gatti, and the Franciscans Giorgio
Benigno Salviati and Francesco della Rovere, about to be
elected Pope Sixtus IV in August 1471. Peter wrote
a commentary on della Rovere’s treatise and refutations
of Baudin’s and Zomeren’s own work. In the end, Sixtus
held an inquiry and, after Henry’s and Bessarion’s deaths
in 1472, Peter was forced to retract his position in 1473.
When he tried to interpret his retraction in a benign
manner, he was investigated for backsliding. Peter signed
a new retraction in 1476 and he was allowed to resume his
activities in 1477, when he was ﬁnally promoted to master
of theology. In the meantime, in 1474, Pope Sixtus IV
published a bull formally condemning the opinion of
Peter de Rivo and, therefore, Peter Auriol. Nevertheless,
in his last will and testament Peter de Rivo stipulated that
his beneﬁciaries ‘‘should conform in their teaching to the
statute drawn up by the Faculty of Theology at the request
of the Faculty of Arts.’’
See
also:
▶Basil
Bessarion
▶Future
Contingents
▶Heymeric of Camp ▶John Wyclif ▶Modal Theories
and Modal Logic ▶Peter Auriol
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Baudry L (ed) (1950) La querelle des futurs contingents (Louvain
1465–1475). Vrin, Paris
Georgius Benignus Salviati OFM (1997) De arcanis Dei. In: Etzkorn GJ
(ed) Cardinal Bessarion, De arcanis Dei, with introduction by
S.F. Brown. Miscellanea Francescana, Rome
Fredericq P (1905) L’he´re´sie a` Louvain vers 1470. Bulletin de la classe des
Lettres et de la classe des Beaux-Arts, 66:11–77
Guerlac R (trans) Baudry L (1989) The quarrel over future contingents.
Louvain, 1465–1475. Kluwer, Dordrecht
Laminne J (1906) La controverse sur les futurs contingents a` l’Universite´
de Louvain au XVe sie`cle. Bulletin de la classe des Lettres et de la
classe des Beaux-Arts, 67:372–438
Petrus de Rivo (1488) Opus responsivum ad epistolam apologeticam
Magistri Pauli de Middelburgo de anno, die, et feria dominicae
passionis. Ludovicus Ravescot, Louvain
Petrus de Rivo (1492) Tertius tractatus de anno, die, et feria dominicae
passionis atque resurrectionis. Ioannes de Westphalis, Louvain
Schabel C (1995–1996) Peter de Rivo and the quarrel over future contin-
gents at Louvain: new evidence and new perspectives. Documenti
e Studi sulla tradizione ﬁlosoﬁca medievale (Part I) 6:363–473, and
(Part II) 7:369–435
Secondary Sources
Bianchi L (2008) Pour une histoire de la ‘‘double ve´rite´.’’ Vrin, Paris
Evans JR (2001) The Boethian solution to the problem of future contin-
gents and its unorthodox rivals. PhD Dissertation, University of
Nebraska
Macken R (1997) Medieval philosophers of the former low countries. Bio-
bibliography and catalogue. Leo Belgicus, Leuven
Schabel C (2000) Theology at Paris, 1316–1345: Peter Auriol and the
problem of divine foreknowledge and future contingents. Ashgate,
Aldershot
Peter Helias
C. H. KNEEPKENS
Medieval and Renaissance Studies
University of Groningen
Groningen
The Netherlands
Abstract
Peter (Petrus) Helias (c. 1100 – after 1166) (PH).
A student of Thierry of Chartres in the 1130s, he was an
inﬂuential and renowned grammarian and rhetorician at
Paris. About 1155, PH became a canon at Poitiers.
PH’s major work is his Summa on Priscian’s Institutiones
grammaticae. Being both a commentary and a well-
structured textbook, it is the starting point of a new cur-
rent in grammar teaching. Doctrinally, PH is deeply
indebted to the anonymous grammarians of the Glosulae
tradition,
William
of
Conches,
and
the
moderate
Boethian–Neoplatonistic teaching of the philosopher
and theologian Thierry of Chartres. Adopting the summa
model gives him the opportunity to rephrase and expound
Priscian’s text and to systematically focus on major lin-
guistic problems, for example, the explanatory principles
or causes of invention, the semantic well-formedness of
a sentence, the Boethian three-pronged interpretation of
‘‘substance,’’
the
distinction
between
the
nomen
complexivum and collectivum in the discussion on equiv-
ocal nouns, the division of the grammatical accidentia into
secundariae signiﬁcationes and proprietates communes, the
distinction between construction at word level and
a construed sentence.
The ﬁrst part of his Summa (on Priscian, I–XVI) was
widely spread during the Middle Ages, but the part on
Priscian, XVII–XVIII, on syntax, was soon replaced by the
summa Absoluta cuiuslibet often incorrectly attributed to
him, for example, by Robert Kilwardby. In the later Middle
946 P
Peter Helias

Ages, his fame continued and several grammatical com-
mentaries and metrical treatises were published under his
name.
In rhetoric, PH composed a commentary on Cicero’s
De inventione (not published); there, he followed a well-
established
tradition
and
appeared
to
be
strongly
inﬂuenced by Thierry. Other works traditionally attrib-
uted to him, inter alia a commentary on the Auctor ad
Herennium and Boethius’ De trinitate are spurious.
See also: ▶Cicero in Political Philosophy ▶Robert
Kilwardby
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Helias Petrus (1993) Summa super Priscianum, 2 vols, ed. Reilly L.
Pontiﬁcal Institute of Mediaeval Studies, Toronto
Secondary Sources
Monographs
Pinborg J (1976) Die Entwicklung der Sprachtheorie im Mittelalter.
Aschendorffsche
Verlagsbuchhandlung/Arne
Frost-Hansen,
Kopenhagen/Mu¨nster
Collections
Fredborg KM (1988) Speculative grammar. In: Dronke P (ed) A history of
twelfth-century philosophy. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
pp 177–195
Fredborg KM (2000) Ciceronian rhetoric and the schools. In: Van Engen
J (ed) Learning institutionalized. Teaching in the Medieval Univer-
sity, Notre Dame, pp 21–41
Fredborg KM (2006) Rhetoric and dialectic. In: Cox V, Ward JO (eds) The
rhetoric of Cicero in its medieval and early Renaissance commentary
tradition. Brill, Leiden/Boston pp 165–192
Kneepkens CH (2000a) Grammar and semantics in the twelfth century:
Petrus Helias and Gilbert de la Porree on the substantive verb.
In: Kardaun M, Spruyt J (eds) The winged charriot. Brill,
Leiden/Boston/Ko¨ln, pp 237–275
Kneepkens CH (2000b) The Absoluta cuiuslibet attributed to P.H.: some
notes on its transmission and the use made of it by Robert Kilwardby
and Roger Bacon. In: Angelell I, Pe´rez-Ilzarbe P (eds) Medieval and
renaissance logic in Spain. Olms, Hildesheim/Zu¨rich/New York, pp
373–403
Rosier I (1987) Les acceptions du terme ‘‘substantia’’ chez Pierre Helie. In:
Jolivet J, de Libera A (eds) Gilbert de Poitiers et ses contemporains.
Bibliopolis, Napoli, pp 299–324
Journal Articles
Bursill-Hall GL (1977) Teaching grammars of the Middle Ages. Notes on
the manuscript tradition. Historiogr Linguist 4:1–29
Ebbesen S (1981) The present king of France wears hypothetical shoes
with categorical laces. Medioevo 7:91–113
Fredborg KM (1974) Petrus Helias on Rhetoric. CIMAGL 13:31–41
Hunt RW (1943) Studies on Priscian in the eleventh and twelfth centuries.
Mediaev Renaiss Stud 1:194–231
Hunt RW (1975) Absoluta. The Summa of Petrus Helias on Priscianus
minor. Historiogr Linguist 2:1–22
Peter John Olivi
MIKKO YRJO¨ NSUURI
Department of Social Sciences and Philosophy
University of Jyva¨skyla¨
Jyva¨skyla¨
Finland
Abstract
Peter John Olivi (1248–1298) was in his time well known
as social reformist, but in histories of philosophy, he has
often been ignored. He was, however, a very original
thinker who had a major inﬂuence on well-known Fran-
ciscan thinkers of the time. In social philosophy, he was an
active participant in the inﬂuential debates concerning the
Franciscan ideal of absolute poverty. From more theoret-
ical perspectives, freedom of the will and the activity of the
soul in respect to the corporeal world are the most impor-
tant tenets of Olivi’s thought, and it was in this area that he
had the most lasting inﬂuence on the western intellectual
heritage. Olivi laid the ground for distinctively modern
habits of thought. His thought centered around self-
reﬂexive and free human subjectivity, and its place in the
corporeal, mechanical world on the one hand, and in the
social–political order on the other.
Biography
Peter John Olivi (1248–1298) entered the Franciscan order
at the age of 12 in 1261, and within the order got as good
an education as one could at the time get. From 1267 to
1272, he studied in Paris with St. Bonaventure and other
famous thinkers. He did not receive a doctorate, possibly
because of his controversial opinions. Nevertheless, he
taught at Franciscan schools in southern France until
1283, when some of his views were condemned. He was
rehabilitated in 1288 with the help of his former teacher,
Cardinal Matthew of Aquasparta, and moved on to teach
for 2 years at Florence. Then he returned to France, to
Montpellier, and to Narbonne, where he died on March
14, 1298.
Precursor of Modern Thought
Although Olivi has not always been recognized even by
medieval scholars, he was one of the most original thinkers
of the age, and he also had a major inﬂuence on the
development of intellectual history. His ideas are clearly
present in writings by well-known Franciscan philoso-
phers like John Duns Scotus, Peter Auriol, and William
Peter John Olivi P
947
P

of Ockham, who nevertheless rarely cite Olivi by name.
The silence is partly due to the dubious reputation Olivi
had as the leader of a social reformist movement and the
recurring doctrinal suspicions against him. Some of his
views were condemned by the Council of Vienne (1311–
1312) and in 1326 by Pope John XXII. Most of his works
have survived in the Vatican library but remain in obscu-
rity. As research has shown beyond doubt, Olivi’s ideas on
the philosophy of history, on Aristotelian metaphysics and
especially on human freedom were highly original but
gained currency through discussions by these well-
known thinkers. In fact, Olivi turns out to be a central
innovator in respect of distinctively modern views devel-
oped in the later Middle Ages.
Olivi’s modernity is obvious from the style of his
writing. He composed works that ﬁt the standard medie-
val genres of academic writing: commentaries on Peter
Lombard’s Sentences and the Bible, quodlibetal questions,
etc. However, he writes with a personal tone that seems to
spring from an intimate experiential touch of his philo-
sophical thinking. He clearly has a liking for arguments,
and often puts forward positions only to later reject them.
In many cases, he states the common view, shows its
problems and puts a new, innovative view against it, but
ultimately refrains from taking a formal stance on the
issue. This is not because of general hesitation, since in
many cases he does not hesitate to take a strong, contro-
versial, view. Rather, it seems that Olivi enjoyed philo-
sophical reasoning even in matters that he himself thought
to be of limited real signiﬁcance and thus could be left
open. In general, his writings do not have the abstract,
universalizing overtones that are so typical for the
Scholastics.
Social Philosophy
In his commentary on the Apocalypse and in his Questions
on Evangelical Perfection, Olivi discusses the Franciscan
ideal of absolute poverty and articulates in his own way,
how using the necessities of life is possible without
claiming property of them (usus pauper). Olivi was an
early leader of the ‘‘Spiritual’’ reform movement, and
indeed it seems that to some extent the doctrinal condem-
nations against him seem to be connected with the reac-
tions against this radical reform movement. Nevertheless,
such major thinkers as John Duns Scotus and William of
Ockham follow Olivi in some central features of their own
theories of ideal poverty. These discussions led to the idea
of subjective rights that got a very central position in
modern social philosophy. In Olivi’s view, rights must be
constituted by an act of free will, and thus the natural
order does not imply any rights. This view is stated clearly
in his theory of property acquisition and of political
power.
As Olivi formulates it theoretically, Franciscan poverty
in based on giving up one’s freedom, the most valuable
thing any person has and the very foundation of person-
hood. In giving up one’s freedom, the Franciscan brother
accepts absolute obedience to God and gives up all kinds
of property rights, private as well as common. This did not
mean absolute obedience to any authority of the church,
but rather made the issue of obedience an issue of con-
science. Olivi is known as an apocalyptic thinker who
thought the Antichrist would be a Pope. Indeed, he saw
a widespread decay of the Church: ‘‘the whole Church is
infected from head to toe, confused, and turned into a new
Babylon as it were.’’ He saw the Franciscan movement as
having brought a new age to the Church, emphasizing the
role of the Holy Spirit in this new historical era.
Human Freedom
Free will is one the most central philosophical topics in
Olivi’s writings and clearly something that he thought was
crucial. This is a topic where he did not hesitate to claim
what he thought the truth was, and his ﬁercest opposition
to ‘‘worshippers of Aristotle’’ concerns denials of the
absolute freedom of the human will. As Olivi argues, our
main social practices like political power and judicial
punishment, and emotions like love, hatred, shame, and
gratitude, are all based on the assumption that people act
freely. Even personhood depends on taking oneself to be
free. Such a fundamental assumption shared by all
humans cannot be wrong, Olivi argues. He has also
some more metaphysical arguments to prove human free-
dom, but they are interesting primarily in showing how he
understood the freedom at issue.
As Olivi saw it, the freedom of the human will is based
on the capacity to control one’s will oneself so that the will
is a self-mover. This is not to be understood in the sense
that the will could not be moved from the outside. Rather,
Olivi claims that normal healthy adult humans have a will
that is able to move itself independently of external inﬂu-
ences. That is, he admitted that the will in children, mad-
men, and drunkards can be and often is moved by external
forces. A strong emotion may force a madman do some-
thing, but a mentally healthy adult person is able to con-
trol himself even in the face of a strong emotion. Freedom
is, thus, a self-reﬂexive capacity where a person takes, with
a second-order act, control over the ﬁrst-order acts of the
will directed at external objects. That is, people make
genuinely free choices when and only when they make
the choices consciously as their own choices. Olivi did
not think that the will would be constantly active in
948 P
Peter John Olivi

making free choices, though he did think that all humans
have the potential for free self-control. People
do not
always think about what they are doing, but they are
always free to take control of themselves.
Olivi rejected the Aristotelian assumption that given
the premises of a practical syllogism, the action follows as
a necessary conclusion. A free person may choose other-
wise, he says, though admitting that people do often
consider rationally what would be the best course of action
for a certain end. But people are free to follow the best
course of action or not, even without giving up the end.
Positing the end is also dependent on the will, even in the
case of the ultimate end that is sought for no other further
end. In Olivi’s example, if you hate your enemy and ﬁnd
by reasoning the best way to harm the person, this reason-
ing does not bind you to an action. You are free not to
harm the person you hate, and you are even free to begin
loving the person for his or her own sake.
Olivi uses the idiom ‘‘intellectual beast’’ to describe
what a human being without freedom would be. Person-
hood is grounded on freedom, and Olivi thinks that free
will is the ground for human dignity. He claims that if
given the choice to continue life without freedom, anyone
would prefer nonexistence.
Mind–Body Dualism
Corporeal entities are not capable of the kind of reﬂexivity
required for freedom, Olivi argues. In intentionality, there
is a distinction between the subject and the object, and in
divisible matter this makes the subject and the object
necessarily distinct things, whereas in self-reﬂexivity the
subject and the object are the same. Thus, the free, intel-
lectual soul must be incorporeal. Olivi does not, however,
give up the Aristotelian universality of the form–matter
distinction. He accepts that all individuals consist of mat-
ter and form, but claims that the human soul informs two
distinct kinds of matter: the corporeal and the spiritual. As
the intellectual part of the soul does not inform any
corporeal matter, the human soul is the form of the body
only in respect to its sensitive part. The intellectual soul
informing spiritual matter becomes, thus, a full-ﬂedged
individual capable of existence and its own kinds of action
even in separation from the body.
Some authorities within the church saw Olivi’s view as
denying the true doctrine that the soul is the form of the
body, and condemned the view. However, many impor-
tant later thinkers, for example, William of Ockham,
followed Olivi in afﬁrming that the intellectual soul is
genuinely independent from the body and capable of
existing by itself as an individual. As the idea of spiritual
matter was given up, Olivi’s theory can be seen as a direct
predecessor
of
Rene´
Descartes’
seventeenth-century
dualism.
Olivi held strongly to the view that the mind is active
and that corporeal bodies are passive. He describes sensory
perception in terms of an intentional relation where the
mind comports to the world, thus rejecting the standard
Aristotelian model where corporeal things act upon the
sensory and cognitive systems. In vision, for example, one
ought not to say that the object causally produces an act of
seeing, but that the soul actively produces a visual act
where the object is merely a ‘‘terminative cause.’’ Looked
at as a theory of attention, Olivi’s discussion contains
interesting philosophical insights.
Self-Reflexivity
Olivi’s questions on Peter Lombard’s Sentences contain
a comprehensive philosophical psychology developed
within the general context of the Aristotelian faculty psy-
chology dominant at the time. In building this system,
Olivi rarely puts forward strong claims. It is interesting to
see, however, that he did not think of consciousness as
a distinctive human capacity despite the strong claim that
the strong kind of self-reﬂexivity needed for freedom is
strictly limited to humans in distinction to other animals.
A certain kind of self-reﬂexivity is to be found already
at the level of touch, the most basic of all the senses. Touch,
as Olivi tentatively deﬁnes it, is a sense by which an animal
feels its own body in relation to health, welfare, and
success in action. It is not, thus, a sense deﬁned through
proper sensibles like heat and hardness. In a way, even the
simplest animals thus have the capacity for reﬂexive per-
ception of themselves as bodily entities. Olivi also men-
tions the Classical Stoic example of a dog sacriﬁcing its leg
to save the head, thus showing awareness of the respective
values of the different parts of the body.
Animals are not, however, capable of self-reﬂection in
the spiritual manner typical for humans. Olivi appears to
think that an animal has an image of its own body, a kind
of self-image, but it cannot understand itself as the per-
ceiver of this image. This is limited to humans. Olivi seems
to accept, but not emphasize, the traditional Aristotelian
idea that humans differ from other animals through the
power of understanding universally. Rather, Olivi’s under-
standing of the human distinction emphasizes self-
reﬂexivity and free self-control. This distinction is, for
him, the distinctive human capacity, and the foundation
of human dignity.
See also: ▶Bonaventure ▶Consciousness ▶John Duns
Scotus ▶Matthew of Aquasparta ▶Peter Auriol ▶Peter
Lombard ▶Poverty ▶William of Ockham
Peter John Olivi P
949
P

Bibliography
Primary Sources
Olivi Peter John (1922–1926) Quaestiones in secundum librum
Sententiarum. Bibliotheca Franciscana Scholastica 4–6, ed. Jansen
B. Collegium S. Bonaventurae, Quaracchi
Olivi Peter John (1986) Quaestiones logicales, ed. Brown S. Traditio
42:335–388
Olivi Peter John (1992) Quaestio de usu paupere and Tractatus de usu
paupere, ed. Burr D. Olschki, Florence
Olivi Peter John (2001) Peter of John Olivi on the Acts of the Apostles, ed.
Flood D. Franciscan Institute, St. Bonaventure
Olivi Peter John (2002) Quodlibeta quinque, ed. Defraia S. Editiones
Collegii S. Bonaventurae ad Claras Aquas, Grottaferrata
Olivi Peter John (2003) Lectura super Proverbia et Lectura super
Ecclesiasten, ed. Schlageter J. Editiones Colegii S. Bonaventurae,
Grottaferrata
Olivi Peter John (2007) Peter of John Olivi on Genesis, ed. Flood D.
Franciscan Institute, St. Bonaventure
Secondary Sources
Boureau A, Piron S (eds) (1999) Pierre de Jean Olivi (1248–1298). Vrin,
Paris
Burr D (1989) Olivi and Franciscan poverty: the origins of the Usus
Pauper controversy. University of Pennsylvania Press, Philadelphia
Kaye S (2004) Why the liberty of indifference is worth wanting: Buridan’s
Ass, friendship, and Peter John Olivi. Hist Philos Q 21:21–42
Lagerlund H, Yrjo¨nsuuri M (eds) (2002) Emotions and choice from
Boethius to Descartes. Studies in the history of philosophy of
mind. Kluwer, Dordrecht
Pasnau R (1997) Theories of cognition in the later Middle Ages. Cam-
bridge University Press, Cambridge
Piron S (1998) Les oeuvres perdues d’Olivi: essai de reconstruction.
Archivum Franciscanum Historicum 91:357–394
Putallaz F-X (1995) Insolente liberte´. Controverses et condamnations au
XIIIe sie`cle. Cerf, Paris
Peter Lombard
JOHN T. SLOTEMAKER
Department of Theology
Boston College
Chestnut Hill, MA
USA
Abstract
Peter Lombard was a theologian and bishop of Paris who
wrote
Glosses
on
select
books
of
the
Bible
and
a theological textbook called the Book of Sentences. He
had a signiﬁcant impact on the development of medieval
theology through his Sentences, as this work became the
central textbook of theology from the early thirteenth
century until the sixteenth century. Most of the philoso-
phers and theologians of the later Middle Ages wrote
commentaries on the Sentences. Through his systematic
ordering of Christian theology, Peter Lombard deeply
inﬂuenced the development of medieval philosophy and
theology.
Peter Lombard (b. c. 1095/1100 – d. 1160), theologian,
and later bishop of Paris, was born near Novara in
Lombardy and died in Paris on August 21. He studied
under Bernard of Clairvaux for a brief period at Reims,
and it was Bernard who recommended Peter to Gilduin,
the prior of St. Victor in Paris, for further theological
studies. Peter arrived in Paris in 1136 to study with
Hugh of St. Victor around the time that Hugh was com-
pleting his De sacramentis (1137). Besides attending the
lectures of Hugh, Peter Lombard probably also sought out
Peter Abelard who was lecturing in Paris and whose works
he came to know well.
Peter Lombard began teaching at the cathedral school
of Notre Dame around 1145. He became a canon in 1145,
subdeacon in 1147, and subsequently deacon and arch-
deacon, eventually being consecrated bishop of Paris on
July 28, 1159. During this period, he was also consulted on
various theological issues by Pope Eugene III; for example,
Peter was called to the consistory in Paris in 1147 to
discuss the trinitarian theology of Gilbert de la Porre´e,
Bishop of Poitiers. Gilbert’s trinitarian theology was
revisited by Peter Lombard, Bernard of Clairvaux and
abbot Suger of St. Denis at the council of Reims in 1148.
The works of Peter Lombard include his Gloss on the
Psalter (1536), Gloss on the Pauline Epistles (1148–1159),
and his Book of Sentences (1155–1157).
Biblical Commentaries
Peter Lombard’s Gloss on the Psalter is a revision of Anselm
of Laon’s Gloss on the Psalter. The work was edited and
defended by Peter’s student, Herbert of Bosham, after
Gerhoch of Reichersberg charged Peter with Christologi-
cal-Nihilism (claiming that Jesus in his humanity non est
aliquid/is not a something; see below). The work offers
a ﬁgurative interpretation of the Psalms, and does not
engage in sustained doctrinal or theological discussion.
Despite this fact, the work was important to subsequent
tradition for its comprehensive treatment of the Psalter
and its detailed introduction (accessus) to the work.
The Gloss on the Pauline Epistles, known to subsequent
generations as the Collectanea or Magna glossatura, is
a collection of Peter Lombard’s notes and lectures on the
Pauline Epistles. The work was under continual revision
950 P
Peter Lombard

until Peter was elected Bishop of Paris in 1159. This
commentary, in comparison with his earlier work, relies
on a broader range of patristic and medieval sources and
continues the accessus method of organization. Peter’s two
Glosses served as primers for his Book of Sentences as he
continued to develop his distinctive methodological
approach to the Scriptures and Christian doctrine.
The Systematization of Theology
The Sentences of Peter Lombard became the standard
doctrinal textbook between the mid-thirteenth century
and the sixteenth century in western Europe. The gradual
systematization of theology that took place in the long
twelfth century (1050–1215) had its roots in the early
theological works of Anselm of Canterbury and continued
through the works of Peter Abelard, Hugh of St. Victor,
Robert
of
Melun,
and
Odo
of
Lucca’s
Summa
sententiarium. The process of accumulation is already
evident in Robert of Melun’s amalgamation of Hugh of
St. Victor and Peter Abelard and in Odo of Lucca’s reliance
on Hugh of St. Victor and Anselm of Laon. But, of the
various sentence compilations that were composed during
the mid-twelfth century, it was the Sentences of Peter
Lombard that became the standard.
Like the other high medieval sentence compilations,
the Sentences of Peter Lombard are primarily a collection
of patristic citations from Saints Ambrose, Hilary of
Poitier, and Augustine. For his sources, Peter relied heavily
on his previous Glosses on the Psalter and the Pauline
Epistles as well as his medieval predecessors. When com-
pared to contemporary theological systems, such as Hugh
of St. Victor’s De sacramentis, it is clear that Peter aban-
doned earlier attempts to construct a historical or chro-
nological interpretation of Christian doctrine. Peter’s
theological work is a more systematic project grounded
in Augustine’s De doctrina Christiana and employs
Augustine’s distinction between things (res) and sings
(signa). For the bishop of Hippo all of Christian doctrine
is of things or of signs (omnis doctrina vel rerum est vel
signorum). Certain things (Trinity) do not signify any-
thing, but signs do; all signs are also things, but not all
things are signs. Further, the distinction between things
and signs is coupled with the distinction between things to
be enjoyed (frui), things to be used (uti), and things that
are both used and enjoyed. This latter distinction between
things to be enjoyed and things to be used is between:
(1) things enjoyed (frui) in the sense of delighting in the
thing for its own sake (not for the sake of something else),
and (2) things used (uti) as a sign for, or as a means of
ariving at, something else.
Employing Augustine’s analysis Peter divides the four
books of the Sentences into: book I, Trinity (thing/s to be
enjoyed); book II, creation, angels, the fall and grace
(things to be used); book III, the Incarnation of the
Word and the virtues (things that are objects of enjoyment
and use); book IV, the sacraments and last things (signs).
The above distinctions are developed in the introductory
sections of book I and book IV of the Sentences (I Sent.,
dist. 1; IV Sent., dist. 1 (prol.)). Peter argues that the
Triune God is the only proper object of enjoyment. Every-
thing else in the cosmos is a thing (including the sacra-
ments as signs) to be either used and enjoyed or simply
used. Peter’s Augustinian ordering of Christian doctrine
and theology is a rational structure that eventually
replaced the historical or chronological approaches to
Christian doctrine that antedated his own work.
The success of Lombard’s Sentences is due primarily to
his balanced approach to the opinions of the Fathers and
the Masters. His work often achieves a via media between
contradictory opinions. But, despite Peter’s attempt to
reconcile various opinons, certain positions held in
the Sentences became the object of heated debate in the
schools. Two examples are Lombard’s discussion of the
Holy Spirit as charity (I Sent., dist. 17); and his analysis of
the hypostatic union in which he argues that Christ, in his
human nature (qua human), is nothing (nec aliquid; III
Sent., dist.10). Lombard’s claim in book III, distinction 10
is not a variant of docetism, but argues that since Jesus’
human nature did not have an independent human
hypostasis, it was not, strictly speaking, a human thing.
Both of these distinctions attracted the attention of theo-
logians from the mid-twelfth century up through the time
of Johannes von Staupitz and Martin Luther; two
sixteenth-century theologians who were sympathetic to
Lombard’s analysis of the Holy Spirit in distinction 17 of
book I.
Alexander of Hales made the Sentences of Peter Lom-
bard his doctrinal textbook for the study of theology at the
University of Paris around 1222. The introduction of the
Sentences was to compliment the study and interpretation
of Scripture that was dominant at Paris in the twelfth and
early thirteenth century. This decision was followed by
Richard Fishacre at Oxford (c. 1245), despite opposition
from Robert Grosseteste and Richard Rufus who wanted
to maintain the centrality and sufﬁciency of the Scriptures
for theological study. Regardless of such critiques, the
Sentences of Peter Lombard became the standard theolog-
ical textbook in western Europe up until the sixteenth
century. Commentaries on the Sentences became the
chief method, along with commentaries on the Bible and
Peter Lombard P
951
P

Peter Comestor’s Historia scholastica, of attaining the level
of Master of Theology.
The initial commentaries on the Sentences were
balanced works that functioned as instruments for learn-
ing the entire breadth of scholastic theology. Early
commentators such as Alexander of Hales and Albert the
Great commented on (glossed) all four books of the
Sentences, a practice that was continued by their respective
students in the mid-thirteenth century: Bonaventure and
Thomas
Aquinas.
Both
Bonaventure
and
Thomas
commented on all four books of the Sentences distinction
by distinction, thus following closely the logical ordering
of Lombard’s work. Later, by the late thirteenth and early
fourteenth centuries, the commentaries became topical
treatises that addressed the most important philosophical
and theological questions of the day. This is evident in
Scotus’ Ordinatio where he considers fewer questions
within each distinction and omits (or collapses into
each other) certain distinctions all together. Both as
a representative of the twelfth-century Sentences collec-
tions, and throughout the various subsequent genres of
Sentence commentaries, the Sentences of Peter Lombard
were the single most important theological work of the
Middle Ages.
See also: ▶Albert the Great ▶Alexander of Hales
▶Anselm of Canterbury ▶Augustine ▶Bernard of
Clairvaux ▶Bonaventure ▶John Duns Scotus ▶Peter
Abelard ▶Richard Fishacre ▶Richard of St. Victor
▶Richard Rufus of Cornwall ▶Robert Grosseteste
▶Thomas Aquinas
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Lombard Peter (1854) Sermons, ed. Migne JP. Patrologia Latina cursus
completus, vol 171. Vive`s, Paris (collected among the works of
Hildebert of Lavardin)
Lombard Peter (1854a) Gloss on the Psalter, ed. Migne JP. Patrologia
Latina cursus completus, vol 191. Vive`s, Paris, pp 55A–1296B
Lombard Peter (1854b) Gloss on the Pauline Epistles, ed. Migne JP.
Patrologia
Latina
cursus
completus,
vol
191.
Vive`s,
Paris,
pp 1297A–1696C; 192: 9A–520A
Lombard Peter (1971–1981) Sententiae in IV libris distinctae, ed. Brady I.
2 vols, Spicilegium Bonaventurianum 4–5. Editiones Collegii S.
Bonaventurae Ad Claras Aquas, Grottaferrata
Lombard Peter (2007) The sentences – book 1: the mystery of the Trinity,
trans. Silano G. Pontiﬁcal Institute of Medieval Studies, Toronto
Lombard Peter (2008) The sentences – book 2: on creation, trans. Silano G.
Pontiﬁcal Institute of Medieval Studies, Toronto
Lombard Peter (2008) The sentences – book 3: incarnation of the word,
trans. Silano G. Pontiﬁcal Institute of Medieval Studies, Toronto
Lombard Peter (2010) The sentences – book 4: on the doctrine of signs,
trans. Silano G. Pontiﬁcal Institute of Medieval Studies, Toronto
Secondary Sources
Bougerol J (1997) The church fathers and the Sentences of Peter Lombard.
In: Backus I (ed) The reception of the church fathers in the
West: from the Carolingians to the Maurists, vol 1. Brill, Leiden, pp
113–164
Brady I (1965) Peter Lombard: Canon of Notre Dame. Recherches de
the´ologie ancienne et medieval 32:277–295
Brady I (1966) Peter Manducator and the oral teachings of Peter
Lombard. Antonianum 12:1604–1612
Colish M (1994) Peter Lombard, 2 vols. Brill, Leiden
Evans GR (2002) Mediaeval commentaries on the Sentences of Peter
Lombard: current research, vol 1. Brill, Leiden (a second volume is
forthcoming from Brill)
Landgraf AM (1948) Einfu¨hrung in die Geschichte der theologischen
Literatur
der
Fru¨hscholastik
unter
dem
Gesichtspunkte
der
Schulenbildung. Gregorius, Regensburg
Rosemann P (2004) Peter Lombard. Oxford University Press, Oxford
Rosemann P (2005) New interest in Peter Lombard: the current state of
research and some Desiderata for the future. Recherches de
The´ologie et Philosphie Medieval 72(1):133–152
Stegmu¨ller F (1947) Repertorium commentariorum in Sententias Petri
Lombardi, 2 vols. Scho¨ningh, Wu¨rzburg
Vignaux P (1935) Luther commentateur des Sentences (livre I, distinction
XVII). E´tudes de philosophie me´die´val 21. Vrin, Paris
Peter of Abano
HENRIK LAGERLUND
Department of Philosophy
The University of Western Ontario
London, ON
Canada
Abstract
Peter of Abano (c. 1250–1316) was a very inﬂuential
medical thinker from the fourteenth century. He also
had an inﬂuence on fourteenth-century philosophy in
Paris and Padua.
Peter of Abano was Italian by birth and received his basic
education in Padua. At some point in his life (unclear
when), he traveled to Constantinople where he is said to
have learned Greek. Toward the end of the thirteenth
century, he moved to Paris. In Paris, he soon got into
serious trouble with the inquisition. He was, for example,
accused of having held the position that the intellective
soul is derived from the potentiality of matter. He was,
however, never convicted and left Paris in the early four-
teenth century (c. 1306) to return to Padua. In Padua, he
got into trouble again with the inquisition, but died before
he was charged with anything. Apparently, his bones were
952 P
Peter of Abano

later burned in Padua as a sign of his heresy (Hasse
2001:636).
Peter’s
most
famous
work
is
the
Conciliator
differentiarum philosophorum et praecipue medicorum.
Presumably, it was written during his time in Paris and
then perhaps revised later on in Padua. Its possible
inﬂuence on fourteenth-century philosophy has been
very little studied (it is in general very little studied), but
it later became a standard text in medicine and was
printed numerous times in the late ﬁfteenth and
early sixteenth centuries (see Siraisi 1987, 2001; Nardi
1958).
Peter also wrote another work that was perhaps not as
inﬂuential as the Conciliator, but which was also printed
numerous times in the late ﬁfteenth and early sixteenth
centuries, namely an Expositio problematum Aristotelis.
It seems also to have been written during his Paris period
and then revised in Padua. It was often circulated later in
the fourteenth century in a shortened version by John of
Jandun.
See also: ▶John of Jandun ▶Medicine and Philosophy
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Peter of Abano (1482) Expositio problematum Aristotelis. Venice
Peter of Abano (1496) Conciliator differentiarum philosophorum et
praecipue medicorum. Venice
Secondary Sources
Burnett C (1991) Sound and its perception in the Middle Ages. In: Burnett
C, Fend M, Gouk P (eds) The second sense: studies in hearing and
musical judgment from antiquity to the seventeenth century. The
Warburg Institute, London, pp 43–69
Burnett C (1997) Hearing and music in book XI of Pietro d’Abano’s
Expositio Problematum Aristotelis. In: van Deusen N (ed) Tradition
and ecstasy: the agony of the fourteenth century. The Institute of
Mediaeval Music, Ottawa, pp 153–190
Hasse DN (2001) Pietro d’Abano’s ‘Conciliator’ and the theory of the soul
in Paris. In: Aertsen J, Emory K, Speer A (eds) Nach der Verurteilung
von 1277. Philosophie und Theologie an der Universita¨t von Paris im
letzten Viertel des 13. Jahrhunderts. Studien und Texte. Walter de
Gruyter, Berlin, pp 635–653
Lagerlund H (2008) Pietro d’Abano and the anatomy of perception. In:
Knuuttila S, Ka¨rkka¨nen P (eds) Theories of perception in medieval
and early modern philosophy. Springer, Dordrecht
Nardi B (1958) La teoria dell’anima e la generazione delle forme secondo
Pietro d’Abano. In: Nardi B (ed) Saggi sull’aristotelismo Padovanno
dal secolo XIV al XVI. G. C. Sansoni – editore, Firenze
Siraisi NG (1987) Avicenna in Renaissance Italy: the canon and medical
teaching in Italian universities after 1500. Princeton University Press,
Princeton
Siraisi NG (2001) Medicine and the Italian universities 1250–1600. Brill,
Leiden
Peter of Ailly
JOE¨L BIARD
Centre d’Etudes Supe´rieures de la Renaissance
Universite´ Franc¸ois-Rabelais de Tours
Tours
France
Abstract
Peter of Ailly was one of the most important thinkers and
philosophers of the later fourteenth and the early ﬁfteenth
century. He was deeply involved with the Papal politics of
his time and wrote several philosophical works that
remained inﬂuential well into the sixteenth century.
Peter of Ailly was born in 1351 in Compiegne. His philo-
sophical background was formed from 1364 onward at the
College of Navarre. He obtained his Arts degree in 1367,
and joined the Faculty of Theology from which he gradu-
ated in 1381. He then became Regent Master. He was
appointed Grand Master of the College of Navarre in
1384 and then Chancellor of Paris University in 1389.
From this time on Peter of Ailly was involved in the
struggles surrounding the Great Western Schism, which
divided Europe between 1378 and 1414. After the return of
Gregory IX to Rome, the College of Cardinals, reduced in
number, convened to elect a Pope. But later it was argued
that it had acted under pressure and another Pope was
elected. From that time on there existed two opposed
series of Popes, one in Rome and another in Avignon. It
was only with the Council of Constance in 1414–1418 that
the schism ended.
In 1381, Peter of Ailly became the voice of a group
of students who demanded a council to put an end to
the schism. After having published a pamphlet (Epistola
Leviathan), he was forced to ﬂee to Noyon, but then
returned to Paris in 1384. He is involved in ﬁghts against
the Chancellor of the university, which was forced to
resign in 1385, and against the Dominicans. He became
the Chaplain of King Charles VI. He then argued in sup-
port of the Popes of Avignon. He became Bishop of Le Puy,
and then Bishop of Cambrai in 1396. He experienced both
good times as the time when he in 1403 was the ambassa-
dor of the King to Benedict XIII in Avignon, and moments
of difﬁculty during which he devoted himself to his dio-
cese, as for example when he in 1408 had to take refuge in
Cambrai. Peter of Ailly was appointed Cardinal in 1411
and Papal legate in Avignon of Pope John XXIII in 1413.
Peter of Ailly P
953
P

He participated in the Council of Constance that marked
the end of the schism with the election of Martin V, and
the resignation of the Pope of Rome and the deposing of
others. During this same council, he took an active part in
the conviction of John Huss. He spent the remaining years
of his life in Avignon, where he died in 1420.
Peter of Ailly was a great scholar. He possessed a very
extensive library, and was associated with early French
humanists. He wrote a considerable number of books
(about 170 are known). His philosophical works include
a Tractatus de anima, written between 1377 and 1381, and
a Tractatus de consolatione philosophiae Boethii, dating
from the same period. He also wrote the Conceptus,
which gives an exposition of the different kinds of con-
ceptual terms and their organization in the early 1370s,
and a treatise on the Insolubilia (between 1372 and 1375)
dealing with the truth and falsity of propositions in gen-
eral, and self-reﬂexive propositions in particular. There is
also a Tractatus exponibilium, in six chapters, written
between 1384 and 1388, outlining, in a systematic fashion,
propositions with adverbial or syncategorematic terms in
such a way that they should be explicitly explained by
several underlying propositions. The authenticity of the
treatise De destructione modorum signiﬁcandi has been
challenged but is now accepted. It was written before
1388. His Questions on the Books of the Sentences (read in
1376–1377) manifests the trend of the fourteenth century
to reduce the number of issues dealt with, then to amplify
them and insert many strictly philosophical develop-
ments. All these works were widely circulated up until
the early sixteenth century.
His Imago mundi, a geography text, is still famous
because Christopher Columbus owned a copy of it. But
this is mostly a compilation made from ancient authors, in
particular Ptolemy. He also composed a dozen other cos-
mographic, astronomical, and astrological works. In the
latter, he defends the validity of astrology as a study of the
inﬂuence of the stars on the course of human history.
Among his ecclesiological and political works, two
works from his mature period should be mentioned,
namely the Tractatus de materia concilii generalis (1402–
1403) and the Tractatus de ecclesiastica potestate (1416), as
well as a small compendium written for the Council of
Constance, Tractatus de reformatione Ecclesie. He is also
the author of many sermons in both Latin and French.
In logic and philosophy of language, Peter of Ailly
manifests the inﬂuence of Ockham’s philosophy in Paris.
He gives all his attention to the theory of mental language.
William of Ockham represents a major turning point in
treating the domain of concepts as a true language, subject
to a principle of compositionality, governed by syntax, and
bearing semantic properties. According to Peter of Ailly,
the level of concepts, organized into a language, is the
major area, if not the only, of all logical, semantic, and
epistemological analysis. The division and classiﬁcation of
the types of terms, by which logic usually begins, becomes
a classiﬁcation of concepts, that is, into simple or complex,
absolute or connotative, but also into categorematic or
syncategorematic, nominal or verbal, adjectives or sub-
stantives, etc. All logical and grammatical differences
within spoken language are dependent on differences in
mental language. This is why Peter of Ailly, in the Concep-
tus, and in the Destructio modorum signiﬁcandi, denies that
there are principles of construction of spoken language,
which was the function performed by the ‘‘modes of
signifying’’ of speculative grammar. The construction or
the grammatical ‘‘regimen’’ results from the conventional
subordination of spoken terms to concepts, which are by
themselves ordered in a certain way. But we have to make
a distinction, which Peter of Ailly picks up from Gregory
of Rimini, between mental language improperly speaking,
which is only the mental image of the spoken language,
and is as such conventional, and mental language properly
speaking, which is the determining structure of the
semantic properties and the epistemological signiﬁcance
of language. A simple apprehensive cognition is the men-
tal term itself, which is a concept and which naturally
signiﬁes something.
In this context, there is no room for the idea, devel-
oped in Oxford in the late 1320s and made famous in Paris
by Gregory of Rimini in the 1340s, of the ‘‘proper and
adequate signiﬁcate of the proposition.’’ In the Commen-
tary on the Sentences (Book I, Dist. 35, q. 1), this issue is
discussed regarding the compatibility between the divine
science and the contingency of the future. Paradoxically, as
often, the general framework is dependant on Gregory of
Rimini’s commentary. Some future contingents are
incomplexe signiﬁcabilia, that is, they are possible entities,
which will possibly be expressed in the future. But are the
complex enunciables that can be expressed in the present
about the future, complexe signiﬁcabilia as some believe?
Peter states that they are rather complexe signiﬁcantia. The
whole complexity is then located in the signiﬁcant com-
plex expressions and not in the signiﬁcates. He then devi-
ates from Gregory and returns to a Buridanian position in
which only individual things are signiﬁed, and in which
these are signiﬁed either in a simple or in a complex
manner. The only other difference that we ﬁnd in the
Conceptus is that terms are also signifying aliqualiter, in
a certain way. In fact, according to an expression that we
shall ﬁnd again, for example, in the early sixteenth century
in John Mair, concepts signify ‘‘aliquid vel aliqua vel
954 P
Peter of Ailly

aliqualiter.’’ They can signify one thing or several things or
in a certain way, somehow, in the case of syncategorematic
terms, given that there are mental syncategorematic terms.
This kind of signiﬁcation is not only a modiﬁcation of the
signiﬁcation of categorematic terms, of the direct refer-
ence to some entitates, not just a way of signifying, but it is
the adverbial signiﬁcation of mental syncategorematic
terms. In the Insolubilia, Peter of Ailly is very harsh on
the theory of complexe signiﬁcabilia that he considers to be
‘‘irrational and unintelligible.’’ He rehashes a Buridanian
argument, namely that all that there is, is either one thing
or nothing, either a substance or an accident, either God
or the creation, and the complexe signiﬁcabile can in no
way be situated in this scheme. In the same treatise, Peter
of Ailly admits that some propositions, since they are self-
reﬂective, signify something about themselves, for exam-
ple, they signify that they are false. He refuses, however, the
generalization proposed by Thomas Bradwardine in his
own Insolubilia that any proposition implicitly signiﬁes its
own truth or falsity.
The relation of a cognitive power to an object is called
a notitia. The different kinds of cognitions are discussed in
the Tractatus de anima. A notitia can be both sensitive and
intellective. That which is known or knowable is called an
obiectum. But the object is not an intentional being dis-
tinct from the thing. It is the thing itself as it is in front of
the cognitive power. Every thing is not ipso facto an object,
but it is as far as it is directed to a cognitive power, at least
in the case of a present thing. In the case of past or future
things, or things simply absent from my ﬁeld of appre-
hension, it is an image, a species, which takes the place of
the object so that the cognitive power can perform its
function. The concepts or notitie are acts of the intellect,
characterized as immutatio vitalis, vital actions or changes.
In the Commentary on the Sentences, we ﬁnd as a general
deﬁnition: ‘‘a cognition is an act representing something
in a vitally perceptive power.’’ Speaking of acts implies
refusing any idea of a concept as mental content. This is
why the model here is that of a direct relationship, not that
of mediation by a representation.
The question of the intermediate, however, reappears
together with the distinction between intuitive and
abstractive cognition. In his Commentary on the Sentences
(Book I, q. 3), Peter of Ailly deﬁnes ﬁrst of all an abstractive
cognition as one that abstracts from the existence or non-
existence of the thing, while an intuitive cognition cognizes
it as present, according to its actual existence. Further-
more, he insists on the fact that an abstractive cognition
gives us the object ‘‘in a thing which represents it.’’ Agree-
ing with the deﬁnitions of Gregory of Rimini, which is
close to Scotus, Peter of Ailly outlines, in the Commentary
on the Sentences and in the Treatise on the Soul, intuitive
cognition as that by which something is known formally in
itself, whereas abstractive cognition is that by which some-
thing is known through a representation.
This idea leads (especially in the Insolubilia) to a dis-
tinction between formal and objective signiﬁcation. The ﬁrst
is that by which a concept refers itself to the thing it signiﬁes,
the second explicates the mediation through which a cogni-
tion or a concept refers to something. This intermediate
being is like an image (species) or a spoken sign. This duality
between formal and objective signiﬁcation will later be
crossed with the idea of an objective or intentional being.
Then it will be found in the theory of formal and objective
concepts at the end of the sixteenth century.
The Commentary on the Sentences is also famous for
strictly theological reasons, particularly regarding its doc-
trines of predestination and justiﬁcation, which are
known until the sixteenth century. The absolute simplicity
of the divine being prohibits all distinctions within it,
whether it be that of faculties or ideas. The order of
established secondary causes is contingent. It is the level
of ordained power. But by his absolute power, God can
directly do what he ordinarily does by the secondary
causes. This applies to the sacraments as well as to grace.
In the established order, the habit of created charity, freely
given by God, is necessary to avoid sin, although de
potentia absoluta the one does not imply the other. Pre-
science of merits is not the cause of justiﬁcation, because
justiﬁcation is unmotivated. But in the established order,
sin is the cause of reprobation. Our concept of God is
obtained by an abstractive cognition from what is created.
If we cannot have an evident cognition of God we have,
however, a probable (probabilis) cognition of him. Peter of
Ailly’s probabilism is equally invested in theology and
philosophy. This does not lead to ﬁdeism, and a fortiori
certainly not to skepticism. Absolute evidence is limited to
the noncontradictory and (according to the ordained
power) to the intuition of what exists, but reason gives
us relative certainty and conditional evidence in the nat-
ural order of ordained power, in which causal relation-
ships, such as the commandments, are contingent, and the
same hold in matters of Trinitarian theology.
The Treatise on the Consolation of Philosophy of
Boethius is presented as a work of moral philosophy. It
includes a eulogy of philosophy in the beginning, and ends
with a part on future contingents. But the main problem is
that of happiness. Peter wonders if a philosopher can
attain true happiness through natural means. He develops
a purely philosophical approach. However, the philoso-
pher reaches only a probable cognition. Peter of Ailly
does not adopt, even as a relative truth, the doctrine of
Peter of Ailly P
955
P

intellectual happiness, and he has reservations about the
Aristotelian theory formulated in the Nicomachean Ethics.
At the same time, he revisits the position of Scotus, accen-
tuated by Ockham, that faith is required for understand-
ing the true good. Peter admits the existence of a human
tendency toward the ultimate good, a summum bonum.
And he even recognizes, through a convincing argument,
that God is the summum bonum. However, the supreme
good cannot be attained by a human being in this life,
since only God gives happiness through the beatiﬁc vision.
Peter of Ailly does not develop a real political philos-
ophy, but political theories are present in his ecclesiolog-
ical work. These are marked by the context of the Great
Schism, and his position in favor of a council to resolve the
crisis. He supports the distinction of civilian and spiritual
power whose purposes are different. The spiritual power is
superior in dignity but does not exercise the prerogative
upon civil power. It is the universal Church, not the Pope,
that has the ‘‘fullness of power.’’ He often takes on the ideas
of John of Paris, and he applies the Aristotelian analysis of
the ends of the government to the Church. The political
authority must ensure the good of the community as
a whole. The Council does not have to judge the Pope,
but if the survival and unity of the Church is no longer
secured with the Pope, the General Council becomes the
representative of the Church. The source of authority is
the consent of the community.
The most famous pupil of Peter of Ailly was John
Gerson, but Peter exerted a widespread inﬂuence for two
centuries in philosophy of language, theology, and politi-
cal ecclesiology. He was for a long time viewed negatively,
but his ideas are now revalued thanks to a better under-
standing of what absolute power means as well as a more
measured assessment of his doctrines of grace and justiﬁ-
cation. His works are seen as important sources for under-
standing the logic and the epistemology of his century.
See also: ▶Future Contingents ▶Gregory of Rimini
▶Insolubles
▶Intuitive
and
Abstractive
Cognition
▶John Buridan ▶John Duns Scotus ▶John Mair
▶Mental Word/Concepts ▶William of Ockham
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Peter of Ailly (1964) De materia concilii generalis and De reformatione
ecclesie. In: Oackley F (ed) The political thought of Pierre d’Ailly.
The voluntarist tradition. New Haven/London
Peter of Ailly (1980a) Conceptus. In: Kaczmarek (ed) Modi signiﬁcandi
und ihre Destruktionen. Zwei Texte zur scholastischen Sprachtheorie
im 14. Jahrhundert, Mu¨nsteraner Arbeitskreis fu¨r Semiotik, Mu¨nster
Peter of Ailly (1980b) Concepts and insolubles, Engl. trans. by Spade
PV. D. Reidel, Dordrecht/Boston/London
Peter of Ailly (1984) Destructiones modorum signiﬁcandi, ed. Kaczmarek
B. Gru¨ner, Amsterdam
Petri de Allyaco (1490) Questiones super libros Sententiarum. Jordanus
de Quedlinburg, Strasbourg
Petri de Allyaco (1495) Conceptus et insolubilia. Pierre le Dru (Durand
Gerlier), Paris
Petri de Allyaco (1496) Exponibilia. Jean Lambert, Denis Roce, Paris
Petrus de Aillyaco (1987) Tractatus de anima. In: Pluta O (ed) Die
philosophische Psychologie des Peter von Ailly. B. Gru¨ner, Amsterdam
Petrus de Aillyaco (1993) Cardinalis Cameracensis. Tractatus super De
consolatione Philosophiae Boethii. In: Chappuis M (ed) Le Traite´ de
Pierre d’ Ailly sur la Consolation de Boe`ce, qu. 1. B. Gru¨ner, Amsterdam
Pierre d’Ailly (1930) Imago mundi. In: Buron E (ed) Ymago mundi de
Pierre d’Ailly, 3 vols. Maisonneuve, Paris
Secondary Sources
Bakker P (1996) Syncate´gore`mes, concepts, e´quivocite´. Deux questions
anonymes conserve´es dans le ms. B.N.Lat. 16 401 lie´es a` la se´mantique
de Pierre d’Ailly (ca. 1350–1420). Vivarium 34(1): 76–131
Biard J (1992) Pre´sence et repre´sentation chez Pierre d’Ailly. Quelques
proble`mes de the´orie de la connaissance au XIVe sie`cle. Dialogue
XXXI:459–474
Biard J (2006) Signe, image et repre´sentation chez Pierre d’Ailly. In:
Pacheco MC, Meirinhos JF (eds) Intellect et imagination dans la
Philosophie me´die´vale. Actes du XIe Congre`s de Philosophie
me´die´vale de la Socie´te´ internationale pour l’e´tude de la Philosophie
me´die´vale. Brepols, Turnhout, pp 1757–1767
Biard J (2008a) La position d’objet dans la the´orie de la connaissance de
Pierre d’Ailly. In: Vescovini GF, Rignani O (eds) Oggetto e spazio.
Fenomenologia dell’oggetto, forma e cosa dai secoli XIII–XIVai post-
cartesiani. Atti del Convegno (Perugia, 8–10 settembre 2005).
Micrologus’ Library 24. SISMEL-Edizioni del Galluzzo, Firenze,
pp 19–36
Biard J (2008b) Pierre d’Ailly: langage, concept et representation. In:
Biard J (ed) Le Langage mental du Moyen Aˆ ge a` l’Aˆ ge classique.
Peeters, Leuven/Paris
Buron E (1930) Ymago mundi de Pierre d’Ailly, 3 vols. Paris
Chappuis M (1993) Le Traite´ de Pierre d’ Ailly sur la Consolation de
Boe`ce, qu. 1. B. Gru¨ner, Amsterdam
Chappuis M, Kaczmarek L, Pluta O (1986) Die philosophischen Schriften
des Peter von Ailly. Authentizita¨t und Chronologie. Freibg Z Philos
Theol 33:593–615
Courtenay W (1971) Covenant and causality in Pierre d’Ailly. Speculum
46:94–119
de Gandillac M (1933) De l’usage et de la valeur des arguments probables
dans les Questions du cardinal Pierre d’Ailly sur le Livre des
Sentences. Arch Hist Doct Litt M-Aˆ ge 8:44–91
Desharnais RP (1974) Reassessing nominalism: A note on the epistemol-
ogy and metaphysics of Pierre d’Ailly. Francisc Stud 34:296–305
Glorieux P (1965) L’Œuvre litte´raire de Pierre d’Ailly. Me´langes Sci Relig
XXII(2):61–78
Lindbeck G (1959) Nominalism and the problem of meaning as illus-
trated by Pierre d’Ailly on predestination and justiﬁcation. Harv
Theol Rev 52:313–413
Maieru A (1984) Logique et the´ologie trinitaire: Pierre d’Ailly. In:
Kaluza Z, Vignaux P (eds) Preuve et raisons a` l’universite´ de Paris.
Vrin, Paris, pp 253–268
Meller B (1954) Studien zur Erkenntnislehre des Peter von Ailly. Herder,
Freibug i. B.
Oakley F (1963) Pierre d’Ailly and the absolute power of God: another
note on the theology of nominalism. Harv Theol Rev 56:59–73
956 P
Peter of Ailly

Oakley F (1964) The political thought of Pierre d’Ailly. The voluntarist
tradition. Yale University Press, New Haven/London
Oberman HA (1960) Some notes on the theology of nominalism, with
attention to its relation to the Renaissance. Harv Theol Rev 53:47–76
Parkes JP (1970) The epistemology of Pierre d’Ailly. MA thesis (History),
University of Wisconsin
Pluta O (1987) Die philosophische Psychologie des Peter von Ailly. B.
Gru¨ner, Amsterdam
Salembier L (1932) Le cardinal Pierre d’Ailly, chancelier de l’universite´ de
Paris, e´veˆque du Puy et de Cambrai, 1350–1420. Publications de la
socie´te´ d’e´tudes de la province de Cambrai, Tourcoing
Peter of Auvergne
CHRISTOPH FLU¨ ELER
Historische Hilfswissenschaften und Mittellatein
Universite´ de Fribourg
Fribourg
Switzerland
Abstract
Peter of Auvergne was both master of the Faculty of Arts
and of the Faculty of Theology at the University of Paris in
the last three decades of the thirteenth century. He is one
of the major promoters of medieval Aristotelianism and
the most productive commentator from the Faculty of
Arts at that time. His substantial body of work consists
mainly of Aristotelian commentaries pertaining to
nearly all books taught at the Paris Faculty of Arts. His
interpretations on natural philosophy and especially his
groundbreaking commentary on the Politics, shaped later
readings of this text. Like all of the Paris scholars of arts in
the late thirteenth century, Peter was strongly inﬂuenced
by Thomas Aquinas’ interpretations of Aristotle. However,
his own interpretations should be understood not only as
expanding or continuing Thomas’ commentaries but as
adding a particular accent of his own (Flu¨eler 1992; Galle
2003; Toste 2007). After more than two decades as
a teacher in the Faculty of Arts, Peter secured a chair at
the theological faculty. In the years that followed, his
teaching duties led to the production of six Quodlibeta,
which also found a wide audience.
Biography
Peter of Auvergne (Petrus de Alvernia, less often Peter de
Croco) was a master at the Paris Faculty of Arts during the
1270s, 1280s, and 1290s. Although Peter is among the few
masters of this period who are known by name, we have
practically
no
biographical
information
about
him
(Hocedez 1933). In 1296, he was promoted to doctor
theologiae, then appointed bishop of Clermont by Pope
Boniface VIII on January 21, 1302. He held this ofﬁce until
his death on September 25, 1304. It is possible, though not
certain, that this same Petrus de Alvernia was rector of the
University of Paris in 1275.
Works
The surviving works of Peter of Auvergne are all directly or
indirectly connected with his teaching duties at the Uni-
versity of Paris. What is unusual about the surviving body
of his work is the fact that it includes commentaries on
most of Aristotle’s works that were in the curriculum of
the Faculty of Arts at the time. The breadth and intensity
of this engagement with Aristotelian philosophy marks
Peter as one of the most inﬂuential commentators on
Aristotle during the Middle Ages. The commentaries can
be formally classiﬁed as commentaries in question form
and literal commentaries. The literary form of the ques-
tion commentaries – inﬂuenced by the instructional tech-
niques used in the other faculties – is, in the case of Peter as
well as of all the other masters, determined by strictly
regulated discussion practices used at the university and
results from the use of various techniques for recording
these disputations. Peter’s commentaries in question form
are as a rule made up of a list of central questions,
presented together with some counterarguments built on
Aristotelian assertions, and concluded with an answer. As
these quaestiones, or question commentary texts, were
obviously based on transcripts or notes (with the possible
exception of the quaestiones about the Metaphysics), we
can assume that they were composed during the time
when Peter taught at the Faculty of Arts. The structure of
the literal commentaries is different, in that each one
carefully subdivides and structures the content of an Aris-
totelian work, then provides a sentence by sentence inter-
pretation. Like other commentators of his time, Peter
follows the practice of commenting on variant readings
in different manuscript copies of the same Aristotelian
text. The production and dissemination of Peter’s literal
commentaries are markedly different from those of his
commentaries in question form (again with the possible
exception of the questions on the Metaphysics). They are
obviously not notes taken by a listener, but rather com-
plete written texts, indicating that they could only have
come from the period when Peter taught at the theological
faculty. This later date of composition is indicated by,
among other factors, the method of dissemination, as
these and other Aristotelian commentaries by well-
known theologians (Albert the Great, Thomas Aquinas,
Aegidius Romanus) were copied using the so-called peciae
system.
Peter of Auvergne P
957
P

On the Logica vetus, only commentaries in question
form have survived, and the questions on the works in the
Logica nova ascribed to him are of questionable origin. In
addition, a series of sophismata address logical questions.
These commentaries highlight similarities to some of the
modists. His particular interest in posing questions of
metaphysics and natural philosophy is apparent not only
in the commentaries on Aristotelian natural philosophy
and metaphysics, but also in the known works on practical
philosophy and the theological quodlibeta, which treat
such questions in exhaustive detail (e.g., in Quodlibet IV,
q.8: ‘‘Utrum potentia in materia et forma ad quam est, sint
idem secundum rem’’). The two commentaries on the
Politics may be considered prime examples of practical
philosophy. The so far unedited commentary in question
form (the most important exemplar of this text is Paris,
BnF, lat. 16089) contains a total of 126 questions about the
ﬁrst seven books. It is the oldest surviving commentary on
the Politics of Aristotle produced at the University of Paris,
a work that directly or indirectly inﬂuenced all later ques-
tion commentaries on the Politics. This commentary not
only advances the necessity of a political philosophy as
a subdiscipline of practical philosophy, but also endeavors
to establish this separate ﬁeld of study on the basis of a set
of central questions. In order to demonstrate the status of
political philosophy as a valid scholarly ﬁeld, the com-
mentator makes a thorough exploration of concepts from
metaphysics and natural philosophy. This commentary
was used by, among others, Marsilius of Padua in Defensor
pacis (Dictio 1, c. 16), who obviously regarded it as an
important
transmission
of
political
Aristotelianism
(Flu¨eler 1992, I: 120–131). Peter also wrote a literal com-
mentary on the Politics, the so-called Scriptum as
a continuation of a commentary left unﬁnished by
Thomas Aquinas, incorporating Books III–VIII.
As a bachelor of theology, Peter had also read the
Sentences of Peter Lombard, though only one group of
questions on this work has survived in a single manuscript.
Chief among the theological works are the six Quodlibeta,
which he disputed after earning the title of master (1296),
continuing the series year after year during Advent until
1301 (Schabel 2007). There are 108 questions in all (in 19
surviving manuscripts), treating completely different ques-
tions, of which the one concerning Peter’s understanding of
the ‘‘verbum mentis’’ was the most often quoted among
theologians of the fourteenth century (Cannizzo 1961).
Peter
inﬂuenced
the
reception
of
individual
Aristotelian works until early modernity through the
broad dissemination of his commentaries. This enduring
inﬂuence in the ﬁfteenth and sixteenth centuries could
be
related
to
the
fact
that
Peter
continued
two
commentaries on Aristotle left incomplete by Thomas
Aquinas (De caelo, Politica) as well as to the fact that his
other literal commentaries on Aristotelian natural philos-
ophy (Meteorologica, Parva naturalia) were often copied,
and later even printed, together with the commentaries of
Thomas Aquinas.
See also: ▶Political Philosophy ▶Thomas Aquinas, Polit-
ical Thought
Bibliography
Primary Sources
[Quaestiones super librum Praedicamentorum:] Andrews R (1987)
Petrus de Alvernia. Quaestiones super Praedicamentis. An edition.
Cahiers de I’Institut du Moyen Aˆ ge grec et latin 55:3–84
[Quaestiones super librum De memoria et reminiscentia:] Bloch D (2007)
Peter of Auvergne on memory. An edition of the “Quaestiones super
De memoria et reminiscentia.” Cahiers de I’Institut du Moyen Aˆ ge
grec et latin 78
[Quaestiones supra librum Ethicorum:] Celano AJ (1986) Peter of
Auvergne’s questions on books I and II of the “Ethica Nicomachea.”
A study and critical edition. Mediaev Stud 48:1–110
[Quaestiones supra librum De caelo et mundo:] Musatti C (2000)
Pietro d’Alvernia e le “Quaestiones super librum De caelo et
mundo” contenute nei manoscritti di Cremona. Catania PhD thesis,
edizione del testo e analisi dottrinale, Erlangen e Kassen (version I);
Galle G (2003) Questions on Aristotle’s “De Caelo”: a critical edition
with an interpretative essay. University Press, Leuven (version II
and III)
[Sententia super Parva naturalia:] Patavii (1493); Dunne M (2002) The
commentary of Peter of Auvergne on Aristotle’s “On length and
shortness of life.” Archives d’Histoire Doctrinale et Litte´raire du
Moyen Age 69:153–200
Poortman EKJ (ed) Petrus de Alvernia, Sententia super librum “De
vegetabilibus et plantis.” Brill, Leiden
[Scriptum super libros III–VIII Politicorum:] Romae (1492); Spiazzi R
(ed) Sancti Thomae Aquinatis. In octo libros Politicorum Aristotelis
expositio. Marietti, Torino; Grech GM (1967) The commentary of
Peter of Auvergne on Aristotle’s “Politics.” The Inedited Part, Book
III, less I–VI. Introduction and Critical Text. Rome
[Sententia super libros Meteororum:] Salmanticae (1497) (Hain 12852)
[Quaestiones super librum Porphyrii:] Tine´ A (1997) Le questioni su
Porﬁrio di Pierre d’ Auvergne. Archives d’Histoire Doctrinale et
Litte´raire du Moyen Age 64:235–333
[Expositio in libros III–IV De caelo et mundo] Venetiis (1495); Parisiis
(1875) (THOMAE Opera omnia XXIII, pp 222–266)
[Quaestiones super librum De sensu et sensato:] White K (1986) Two
studies related to St. Thomas Aquinas’ commentary on Aristotle’s
“De Sensu et Sensato,” together with an edition of Peter of Auvergne’s
“Quaestiones super Parva naturalia.” PhD thesis, Ottawa
Secondary Sources
Cannizzo G (1961) La dottrina del “Verbum mentis” in Pietro
d’Auvergne. Contributo alla storia del concetto di intenzionalita`.
Rivista di ﬁlosoﬁa Neo-Scolastica 53:152–168
De Leemans P (2004) Peter of Auvergne on Aristotle’s “De motu
animalium” and the MS Oxford, Merton College 275. Archives
d’Histoire Doctrinale et Litte´raire du Moyen Age 71:129–202
958 P
Peter of Auvergne

Ebbesen S (1993) “Animal est omnis homo.” Questions and Sophismata
by Peter of Auvergne, Radulphus Brito, William Bonkes, and others.
Cahiers de I’Institut du Moyen Aˆ ge grec et latin 63:145–208
Flu¨eler C (1992) Rezeption und Interpretation der Aristotelischen
“Politica” im spa¨ten Mittelalter. Gru¨ner, Amsterdam
Galle G (2003) Questions on Aristotle’s “De caelo”: a critical edition with
an interpretative essay. University Press, Leuven
Hocedez E (1933) La vie et les oeuvres de Pierre d’Auvergne. Gregorianum
14:3–36
Schabel C (2007) The “Quodlibeta” of Peter of Auvergne. In: Schabel C
(ed) Theological Quodlibeta in the Middle Ages: The fourteenth
century. Brill, Leiden, pp 81–130
Toste M (2007) Virtue and the city: the virtues of the ruler and the citizen
in the medieval reception of the “Politics.” In: Bejczy IP, Nederman
CJ (eds) Princely virtues in the Middle Ages, 1200–1500. Brepols,
Turnhout, pp 75–100
www.paleography.unifr.ch/petrus_de_alvernia
(biographical
sources,
manuscripts, and comprehensive bibliography collected by Lidia
Lanza and Marco Toste, last update: 16 December 2008)
Peter of Candia
CHRISTOPHER SCHABEL
Department of History and Archaeology
University of Cyprus
Nicosia
Cyprus
Abstract
The Greek Franciscan Peter of Candia (c. 1340–1410) was
a towering ﬁgure in intellectual and ecclesiastical affairs
during the Great Schism. His education and early teaching
took him all over Europe until he began lecturing on the
Sentences at Paris just after the Schism began. Afterward he
was active in northern Italy in the service of the future
duke of Milan and as a prelate, rising to archbishop of
Milan and cardinal. He also associated with leading
humanists and the Palaiologan dynasty. Joining the con-
ciliar movement, he was elected Pope Alexander V at the
Council of Pisa in 1409, but he died the following year. His
election no doubt helped make his main writing, his
Sentences commentary, the most popular of his day. In it
Peter provides a history of many of the main philosophical
and theological developments of the fourteenth century,
presenting with exceptional clarity and in unbiased fash-
ion the views of many leading thinkers from earlier in the
1300s, especially John Duns Scotus, John of Ripa, William
of Ockham, Peter Auriol, and Gregory of Rimini. He also
offered the main criticisms of these views from a variety of
perspectives. He did not attempt an original synthesis, but
his perceptive observations constitute a useful tool for
understanding scholasticism in the fourteenth century.
Peter of Candia, modern Herakleion, was born to Greek
parents on Crete c. 1340, during the island’s long period of
Venetian rule (1211–1669). Peter – a.k.a. Petros Philargis,
Petrus Philaretus, and Petrus Cretensis – was orphaned
during the Black Death and raised by local Franciscans,
who recognized his intelligence. In 1357, Peter joined the
order and embarked on a career reﬂecting the Franciscan
school network, studying at Minorite studia in Padua,
Norwich, and Oxford, where he attended theological lec-
tures. Peter claimed to have heard the Franciscan William
of Cremona lecture on the Sentences, which he is said to
have done at Paris in 1365–1366 and in Bologna two years
later, so Peter probably studied at one of those studia as
well. He was then sent to teach in convents in Russia,
Bohemia, and Poland. His superiors rewarded him by
assigning him to lecture on the Sentences at Paris as bach-
elor of theology, a task he began on September 28, 1378,
eight days after the outbreak of the Great Schism. The
colophon in what is considered the best manuscript of his
Sentences commentary, Vat. lat. 1081, states that it was
‘‘compiled in 1380 at the time he was reading the Sentences
at Paris,’’ but because by then bachelors were lecturing on
Sentences for only one academic year, Peter may have
ﬁnished in 1379. He was made master of theology in 1381.
By 1384, Peter had moved to Italy, where he helped
develop the University of Pavia. There Peter joined
Giangaleazzo Visconti’s service. Recognized as the most
illustrious member of a court that included Baldus de
Ubaldis and Manuel Chrysoloras, Peter became deeply
involved in humanist circles, associating closely with
Umberto Decembrio, Pier Candido Decembrio, and
Coluccio Salutati. Peter’s principial sermons delivered
before his lectures on each book of the Sentences already
revealed that he was a master Latinist, but he did not forget
his Greek. Considering Plato and Aristotle his compa-
triots, Peter retained links to the Palaiologans in Constan-
tinople and the Morea and translated some of St Jerome
into Greek. Thus, he represents an early bridge between
the Latin and Greek phases of the Italian Renaissance.
In late 1386, the Roman Pope Urban VI appointed
Peter bishop of Piacenza. He was then transferred to
Vicenza (early 1388) and Novara (mid-1389). Still active
as Giangaleazzo’s ambassador on various missions, Peter
obtained for his master the title ‘‘Duke of Milan’’ from
Emperor Wenceslas in 1394, and when the see became
vacant Peter was made archbishop of Milan on May 17,
1402. The duke died four months later, but Peter contin-
ued his professional ascent: in 1405, the Roman Pope
Peter of Candia P
959
P

Innocent VII named Peter cardinal-priest of the Church of
the Twelve Apostles. When the rival popes refused to take
steps to end the Great Schism, Peter joined the conciliar
movement, giving the sermon to open the Council of Pisa
on March 26, 1409. The council deposed Popes Gregory
XII and Benedict XIII and, on June 26, elected Peter of
Candia pope as Alexander V, the only Greek pope after the
eighth century. The election effectively created three
popes, although Alexander won the support of most of
Catholic Christendom. Unfortunately for Alexander and
his legacy, his eventful papacy lasted only ten months and
he died in Bologna on May 3, 1410. Thus, the Schism
continued and much later Alexander V was labeled an
‘‘anti-pope.’’
Among Peter of Candia’s philosophical writings are
treatises De obligationibus and, probably, De consequentiis,
currently being edited by Stephen F. Brown and Mario
Bertagna respectively. He also wrote the theological tract
De divinis nominibus, printed in early modern editions
of Francis of Meyronnes’ works. Peter’s most important
work is his commentary on the Sentences of Peter
Lombard, parts of which survive in approximately 50
manuscripts, making it the most popular example of the
genre in the latter half of the fourteenth century. This
text – principial sermons and debates plus a mere 11 ques-
tions (6, 3, 1, and 1 for the four books) divided into
33 articles – would occupy roughly 2,000 pages in
a critical edition and is being published online. Its greatest
merit is that it serves as a virtual history of fourteenth-
century thought on many issues. For this reason, Cardinal
Ehrle’s seminal book on the era, from 1925, takes Peter’s
Sentences commentary as its focal point. Peter summarizes
clearly, succinctly, and in his own words the opinions of
the giants from earlier in the century. Of Peter’s over 350
explicit citations of 32 university scholastics, only 42 refer
to a mere eight thirteenth-century authors, including
17 for Thomas Aquinas and eight for Bonaventure. By
contrast, the 24 fourteenth-century theologians cited
receive over 300 mentions, with roughly 92 for John
Duns Scotus (four for Scotists), 58 for John of Ripa, 54
for William of Ockham (11 for Ockamists), 34 for Peter
Auriol, and 13 for Gregory of Rimini, with fewer for
Francis of Meyronnes, Landulph Caracciolo, Adam
Wodeham,
Thomas
Bradwardine,
Richard
Brinkley,
Francis of Marchia, and many others, including several
of Peter’s contemporaries.
These numbers underestimate Peter’s ‘‘historicist’’
tendencies, because whole sections are devoted to
expounding the thought of Bradwardine or Auriol, for
example, on certain issues, after introducing them only
once. Peter was so talented at this that, concerning his
portrayal of Auriol’s doctrine of divine foreknowledge, in
1470 Peter de Rivo would remark that ‘‘Peter of Candia
explained his opinion with clearer words’’ than had Auriol
himself. Not only would Peter survey these earlier opin-
ions, he would usually give a succinct abstract afterward,
summarizing his survey by beginning with words like:
‘‘Therefore this doctor’s view, as I see it, consists in the
following.’’ Because of Peter’s objectivity, his abstracts are
a wonderful tool for understanding fourteenth-century
thinkers. The following typical statement is characteristic
of his unbiased approach, in this case concerning
a position of Auriol: ‘‘I don’t care whether it’s true or
not, because right now I am not reciting it to adhere to
it, but just to make clearer the truth of what will be said
later.’’ Thus, the opening question to Peter’s Prologue to
the Sentences has been aptly called his ‘‘Hundred Year
‘History’ of the Theologian’s Role.’’
Peter of Candia also offers an independent appraisal of
earlier scholars’ theories, criticizing and approving where
he thinks best, often with a touch of humor. For example:
‘‘Thus appears the solution to the arguments of the Subtle
Doctor, which in truth include many things that are not
proven demonstratively, such as that God understands
outside Himself, that He has an inﬁnite intellect, and
that He wills, so almost every argument includes some-
thing that is believed or only probable.’’ And elsewhere:
‘‘But although these things appear beautifully said, they
generate no melody in Ockham’s ears.’’ Concerning Ock-
ham: ‘‘Although one can maintain this position, because it
would be hard to disprove it, in truth, if one pays close
attention, it does not ﬁsh as deeply as the previous two.’’
In another context: ‘‘I once heard this response from
Master William of Cremona, when he was lecturing on
the Sentences, but with all due respect, he did not then have
the mind of a doctor.’’ Peter often speaks ‘‘with all due
respect,’’ and sometimes ‘‘for the sake of argument.’’
It has been suggested that Peter was not a brilliant
theologian in the sense of having an original system.
Looking back over the long university debates over the
previous 180 years and the thousands of treatises pro-
duced in that era, perhaps Peter realized the futility of
trying to be absolute and yet consistent. In book II, ques-
tion 3, article 2, when Peter saw that what he was saying on
the issue of the univocity of being was contradictory to
what he had said before, he quipped: ‘‘I upheld this posi-
tion in my second principium, against Master Gerard
Calcar, and now I am holding the opposite here – not
that I consider one position to be truer than the other, but
in order to illustrate several ways of conceiving the prob-
lem, for the pleasure of those who sometimes want to
eat bread and sometimes cheese.’’ In book I, question 6,
960 P
Peter of Candia

article 2, on divine foreknowledge of future contingents,
Peter presents objectively and at length the opinions of
Auriol, John of Ripa, and Scotus. He ﬁnds them all want-
ing and offers a rather vague ‘‘safer way.’’ In conclusion, he
lists six possible solutions, all with their own problems,
and ends by declaring: ‘‘I, like a little dog, have started the
hare for you. Capture it through whatever path of the
aforesaid ways you wish.’’ In book I, question 1, article 1,
on the nature of theology, Peter presents the positions of
Peter Auriol and Gregory of Rimini, respectively, that
theology is merely declarative, helping the theologian bet-
ter understand what he believes, and that it is instead
deductive, taking the truths of Scripture and deducing
further truths. Peter of Candia studied these positions
and the reactions of other theologians, coming up with
his own evaluation. He criticized certain aspects of each
side and appreciated their merits, adopting ﬁnally
a middle course, following Scotus and Ockham, he
claimed.
Given the nature of Peter of Candia’s major writing,
perhaps it is best to ﬁnish in his own words: ‘‘But because
I have written enough, and visibly, I believe the school has
been oppressed enough with listening to me, I will
refrain.’’ Or better, Peter’s last words in his entire work:
‘‘I was prepared to make a long discussion of this material,
but God wants me to rest from my labors.’’
See also: ▶Conciliarism ▶Gregory of Rimini ▶John
Duns Scotus ▶Manuel Chrysoloras ▶Peter Auriol
▶Thomas Bradwardine ▶William of Ockham
Bibliography
Primary Sources
(forthcoming) De consequentiis, ed. Bertanga M. Documenti e Studi sulla
tradizione ﬁlosoﬁca medievale
(forthcoming) De obligationibus, ed. Brown SF
(in progress) In IV libros Sententiarium, ed. Bakker PJJM, Brown SF,
Duba WO, Keele R, Kitanov S, Kringos A, Schabel C (incorporating
previous editions, for which see also secondary sources). http://www.
ucy.ac.cy/isa/Candia/index.htm
Secondary Sources
Bakker PJJM (1999) La raison et le miracle: les doctrines eucharistiques (c.
1250–c. 1400) PhD Dissertation, University of Nijmegen
Brown SF (1976) Peter of Candia’s sermons in praise of Peter Lombard.
In: Almagno R, Harkins C (eds) Studies honoring Ignatius Charles
Brady, Friar Minor. Franciscan Institute, St. Bonaventure, pp 141–
176
Brown SF (1991) Peter of Candia’s Hundred-Year ‘History’ of the theolo-
gian’s role. Mediev Philos Theol 1(2):156–190
Brown SF (1994–1997) Peter of Candia on believing and knowing. Fran-
ciscan Studies 54:251–276
Brown SF (2007) Aristotle’s view on the eternity of the world according to
Peter of Candia. In: Treschow M, Otten W, Hannam W (eds) Divine
creation in ancient, medieval, and early modern thought. Brill,
Leiden, pp 371–404
Brown SF (2010) Peter of Candia’s commentary on the Sentences of Peter
Lombard. In: Rosemann PM (ed) Mediaeval Commentaries on the
Sentences of Peter Lombard, vol. 2. Brill, Leiden, pp 439–469
Ehrle F (1925) Der Sentenzenkommentar Peters von Candia, des Pisaner
Papstes Alexanders V. Aschendorff, Mu¨nster
Emmen A (1954) Petrus de Candia, O.F.M. De immaculata Deiparae
conceptione. In: Tractatus quatuor de immaculata conceptione B.
Mariae Virginis. Collegium S. Bonaventurae, Quaracchi, pp 233–334
Kitanov S (2006) Peter of Candia on beatiﬁc enjoyment: can one enjoy the
divine persons separately from the divine essence? Mediaev Philos
Polonorum 35:145–166
Schabel C (2000) Theology at Paris, 1316–1345: Peter Auriol and the
problem of divine foreknowledge and future contingents. Ashgate,
Aldershot
Schabel C (2007) Early Franciscan attacks on John Duns Scotus’s doctrine
of divine foreknowledge. In: Olszewski M (ed) What is ‘Theology’ in
the middle ages? Religious cultures of Europe (11th–15th centuries)
as reﬂected in their self-understanding. Aschendorff, Mu¨nster,
pp 301–328
Peter of Maricourt
JOSE´-LUIS RIVERA
Escuela de Filosoﬁa
Universidad Panamericana
Mexico City, DF
Mexico
Abstract
Petrus Peregrinus de Maharncuria (Peter of Maricourt,
Pierre Peregrin, or Pierre de Maricourt) was a French
scientist, the author of a Letter on the Magnet (Epistula
de magnete ad Sigerium de Foucaucourt), a short, system-
atic treatise on the properties and uses of lodestone (mag-
netite), and a New Construction of a Peculiar Astrolabe
(Nova compositio astrolabii particularis). De magnete
includes a reference to an apparently lost treatise On the
Properties of Mirrors (De operibus speculorum, cf. De
magnete II.2, 353). Due to the precision of his work,
Maricourt may be considered one of the earliest scientists
in the Latin West.
The only certain information we have concerning Pierre
de Maricourt is that he was at the siege of Lucera, perhaps
for the army of Charles I of Anjou, where the Letter on the
Magnet was signed on August 8, 1269 (De magnete II.3,
397–8). The rest of our (conjectural) information depends
on identifying the author of the Letter with a certain
‘‘Magister Petrus’’ mentioned in the works of Roger
Peter of Maricourt P
961
P

Bacon (Opus majus IV.2: Bridges I.116; Opus tertium 11,
Brewer 35; 13, Brewer 43ff). However, Maricourt’s full
name occurs only as an addition in some manuscripts of
the Opus tertium (Schlund 1911a:445–449, 455), and even
if the identiﬁcation is true the information is very limited:
Bacon states that he was a Picard; from his surname
(‘‘Peregrinus’’) we may conjecture that he was a crusader
(see Schlund 1911a:453–454); and from the dates we may
infer that he probably studied at Paris in the 1250s (cf.
Arnold and Potamian 1904:x). The estimated date of the
Nova compositio (after 1263; cf. Sturlese and Thomson
1995:113) and Bacon’s Opus majus and tertium (written
before 1267) is a good argument to identify Pierre de
Maricourt with Bacon’s ‘‘Magister Petrus.’’ In any event,
Bacon praises ‘‘Magister Petrus,’’ for his emphasis on the
use of mathematics and experimentation in physics, as
opposed to the dialectical methods and the commentary
tradition dominant at Paris. These traits are conﬁrmed in
the texts of the Epistula and the Compositio.
De magnete is his most famous work, the main treatise
on magnetism in Europe until William Gilbert’s De
magnete (1600). The letter is divided in two parts: the
ﬁrst one discusses the properties of magnets, and the
second proposes the construction of some devices based
on
these
properties.
Maricourt
calls
the
parts
of
lodestones ‘‘poles,’’ as a reference to geographical poles
(De magnete I.4, 73–77), provides a method to determine
the poles of the magnet (I.4–5, 90–118), and describes
magnetic ﬁelds (I.4, 78–89). He states the basic laws of
attraction (I.6, 120–143), the magnetization of iron (I.7,
150–161), and the change of polarity by a stronger
magnetic ﬁeld (I.8, 163–177). Based on his observations,
Maricourt
concluded
that
the
orientation
of
the
magnet depends on the arrangement of the skies (I.10,
260–265).
Maricourt’s preamble to the letter describes the qual-
iﬁcations of the natural philosopher. He states that the
construction of the instruments is necessary to understand
the properties of the magnet (cf. I.1, 32–34), and that
implies ‘‘to be proﬁcient in manual works’’ (I.1, 43–44).
Moreover, Maricourt appeals to the ‘‘evidence of experi-
ment’’ (I.6, 147), the ‘‘truth proved by experience’’
(I.7, 160–161), and the ‘‘experienced truth’’ (I.9, 220) as
support for his conclusions. These features anticipate the
approach of scientists beginning in the seventeenth cen-
tury, so Bacon’s praise would be rightly deserved. How-
ever,
sometimes
Maricourt’s
vocabulary
reveals
his
scholastic training in Aristotle’s Physics, appealing, for
instance, to ‘‘agents’’ and ‘‘patients’’ (cf. I.9, 180–185)
and to ‘‘natural desires’’ (cf. I.9, 202) to explain magnetic
attraction.
Maricourt’s own proﬁciency as an engineer is reﬂected
in his description of the construction of two compasses
(ﬂoating and dry) and an alleged perpetual motion
machine, both in the second part of De magnete, and in
his Constructio astrolabii particularis.
Maricourt’s compasses are relatively standard, but his
perpetual motion machine is peculiarly based on the
properties of the magnet: a silver cylinder with iron nails
around the borders and a ﬁxed silver rod with a lodestone
near the iron nails. The idea is that the lodestone should
pull the iron nails upward because of the laws of attraction
ruling the magnet. To improve the performance of the
device, small beans of silver or brass (to prevent magne-
tizing them) may run between the nails and the borders of
the cylinder, adding speed as the beans pull the capsule
downward on the right side and the magnet pulls upward
on the left (Fig. 1). Regardless of the feasibility of such
a device, it is noticeable that Maricourt’s machine
appealed to two fundamental interactions of physics: elec-
tromagnetism and gravitation.
Maricourt’s astrolabe (Fig. 2) is also ‘‘peculiar’’ on its
own: he tried to combine the features of the classical
astrolabe in Ptolemy’s tradition, mapping the skies above
Peter of Maricourt. Fig. 1 A model of Maricourt’s perpetual
motion machine. The arrow (blue in the online version of this
Encyclopedia) indicates the direction of the movement of the
wheel; the lodestone is the egg on the left of the fixed silver
rod, pulling upward the iron nails (here as slanted black lines
on the borders of the wheel), while the (silver or brass green
and red) bullets fall on the right side, allegedly to improve
performance. (Reproduced with kind permission from Kleinert
2003:168, 2005:33.)
962 P
Peter of Maricourt

the Tropic of Cancer but requiring a plate for each latitude
at which it was used, and the more general astrolabe by al-
Zarqa¯lı¯, projecting the eastern and western halves of the
heavens from the pole to the equator. Maricourt chose to
map each half of the northern and southern hemispheres
onto a plane through or parallel to the equator, chosen as
the limit of projection. In spite of its ingenuity, this device
never seemed to be very popular, and the text of the Nova
compositio survives only in four manuscripts, without
much evidence as to determine the stemma (Sturlese and
Thomson 1995:116–117).
See also: ▶Natural Philosophy ▶Roger Bacon
Bibliography
Primary Sources
(1904) The letter of Petrus Peregrinus on the Magnet, A.D. 1269, with an
introductory notice by Brother Potamian, trans. Brother Arnold.
MacGraw, New York
de Maricourt Petrus Peregrinus (1995) Opera. In: Sturlese L, Thomson RB
(eds) Epistula de magnete, Nova compositio astrolabii particularis.
Scuola Normale Superiore, Pisa
Secondary Sources
Monographs
Bacon R (1859) Opus tertium, ed. Brewer JS. Longman, London
Bacon R (1897) Opus majus, ed. Bridges H. Clarendon, Oxford
Peter of Maricourt. Fig. 2 A partial view of one plate of Maricourt’s astrolabe. (Reproduced with kind permission from Maricourt
1995:126.)
Peter of Maricourt P
963
P

Collections
Rivera J-L (2003) Pierre de Maricourt. In: Gracia JJE, Noone TB (eds)
A companion to philosophy in the Middle Ages. Blackwell, London/
Boston, pp 538–539
Thomson RB (2005) Petrus Peregrinus. In: Glick T, Livesey SJ, Wallis
F (eds) Medieval science, technology, and medicine. An encyclope-
dia. Routledge/Taylor & Francis, New York/London, pp 388–389
Journal Articles
Kleinert A (2003) Wie funktionierte das Perpetuum mobile des Petrus
Peregrinus? N.T.M. Int J Hist Ethics Nat Sci Technol Med New Ser
11:155–170
Kleinert A (2005) Le moteur magne´to-me´canique de Pierre de Maricourt.
Comptes-rendus du se´minaire: Origine des ide´es scientiﬁques: rup-
tures et continuite´s. Centre Commun d’Histoire des Sciences et
d’Episte´mologie de Lille 1:22–34
Schlund E OFM (1911a) Petrus Peregrinus von Maricourt. Sein Leben
und seine Schriften. Ein Beitrag zur Roger Baco-Forschung.
Archivum Franciscanum Historicum 4:436–455
Schlund E OFM (1911b) Petrus Peregrinus von Maricourt. Sein Leben
und seine Schriften. Ein Beitrag zur Roger Baco-Forschung
(Forsetzung). Archivum Franciscanum Historicum 4:633–643
Schlund E OFM (1912) Petrus Peregrinus von Maricourt. Sein Leben und
seine Schriften. Ein Beitrag zur Roger Baco-Forschung (Schluss).
Archivum Franciscanum Historicum 5:22–40
Peter of Spain
HENRIK LAGERLUND
Department of Philosophy
The University of Western Ontario
London, ON
Canada
Abstract
The identity of the author known as Peter of Spain is
disputed, but what is clear is that he wrote two works on
logic, the famous Tractatus or Summule logicales magistri
Petri Hispani and a Syncategoremata. The Tractatus was
the most inﬂuential logic work of the Middle Ages,
and it was standard, reading well into the seventeenth
century.
Life and Works
There are two works attributed to the author known as
Peter of Spain. The ﬁrst one is the enormously inﬂuential
Tractatus or according to the manuscripts Summule
logicales magistri Petri Hispani. It is one of the most inﬂu-
ential logic works of the Middle Ages and was standard,
reading well into the seventeenth century. It was famously
commented on by John Buridan in the fourteenth century.
The other work is a Syncategoremata. In almost all of the
manuscripts of this work, it follows the Tractatus, and this,
together with doctrinal similarities, has led to the assump-
tion that it is by the same author as the Tractatus. Other
works have traditionally been ascribed to the author of the
Tractatus, for example, a treatise on the soul and also
commentaries on Aristotle’s De anima, but it seems
unlikely that they are by the same author.
There have been many theories as to who Peter of
Spain actually was. The most known is that he was Portu-
guese and became Pope in 1276 under the name John XXI.
Another theory is that he was Spanish and a Dominican.
A third view, which has been around since the ﬁfteenth
century, is that he was Petrus Ferrandi Hispanus
(d. between 1254 and 1259). There are other theories as
well, but there is no way to know which one is correct and
even whether any of them are correct. Both works men-
tioned above are from the early part of the thirteenth
century, however, and the content is closely related to
other logic textbooks of the same time.
The Tractatus
The Tractatus is divided into 12 treatises, they are
1. On propositions (or statements)
2. On predicables
3. On categories
4. On syllogisms
5. On topics or loci
6. On supposition
7. On fallacies
8. On relatives
9. On ampliation
10. On appellation
11. On restriction
12. On distribution
The Tractatus is a summary of logic covering both the so-
called logica antiquorum and the logica modernorum.
The ﬁrst treatise is an introduction dealing with the
subject matter of dialectics (or logic) and the different
kinds of propositions dealt with in logic. He deﬁnes
dialectics in the following way:
"
Dialectics is the art that holds the road to the principles of
all methods, and therefore dialectics should be first in the
acquisition of all the sciences (I.1, 4–6).
This deﬁnition reﬂects the absolute fundamental aspect of
logic for the scholastics. Logic is a tool or an art that,
according to scholastics, is presupposed in all science. All
study must start with logic.
964 P
Peter of Spain

Dialectics or argumentation presupposes discourse
(sermone), and discourse presupposes utterance (vox),
which in turn is sound (sono) of a special kind. A sound
is either an utterance or not. If it is not an utterance, then it
is not of interest to logic. An utterance is either signiﬁca-
tive or not. An utterance that is signiﬁcative is a sound,
which represents something, for example, ‘‘human being.’’
A non-signiﬁcative utterance does not represent anything.
A signiﬁcative utterance is either a name (nomine) or
a verb (verbo). It is a name if it signiﬁes conventionally
something without a time, while a verb signiﬁes conven-
tionally (ad placitum) something with a time. The differ-
ence is simply that since a verb signiﬁes a doing of
something, it requires time in which the doing takes
place, but a name is atemporal; it does not require time
for naming something.
An expression (oratio) is a complex signiﬁcative
utterance, that is, it is a sentence such as ‘‘The human
being is white.’’ There are also two kinds of expressions,
namely perfect or proper expressions and imperfect or
improper expressions. An improper expression is, for
example, ‘‘white human being.’’ It is improper since it
does not contain both a name and a verb. There are, of
course, different kinds of expressions according to the
different grammatical modes, such as indicative, imper-
ative, perfect, etc., but only indicative expressions are
called proposition, and hence only they are important
for logic.
A proposition is hence a perfect or proper expression
in the indicative mode, which is either true or false. There
are furthermore two kinds of propositions, namely cate-
gorical and hypothetical. The two kinds of propositions
also divide into two kinds of logics; one for categorical
propositions and the other for hypothetical.
A categorical proposition is a proposition that has
a subject and a predicate as its principle parts. In the
proposition ‘‘A human being runs’’ (‘‘homo currit’’),
‘‘human being’’ and ‘‘runs’’ are respectively the subject
and the predicate. The logical form of this proposition is
not ‘‘A human being runs,’’ however, since there is a copula
or something binding the subject and predicate (or verb)
assumed in between them. The logical form is therefore
‘‘A human being is running.’’
There are three kinds of hypothetical propositions,
namely conditional, copulative, and disjunctive. A condi-
tional proposition is made up of categorical propositions
conjoined with the words ‘‘If . . . then.’’ A conjunctive
proposition conjoins two categorical propositions with
‘‘and,’’ and a disjunctive proposition does the same thing
with ‘‘or.’’ It is the also common to state the conditions
under which these hypothetical propositions are true.
A conditional proposition is true, if, given the truth of the
antecedent, the consequent is also true. A copulative prop-
osition is true if both conjuncts are true, and a disjunctive
proposition is true, if at least one of the disjuncts is true.
After
having
outlined
the
different
distinctions
between various propositions, the Tractatus returns to
the traditional order, which means that the next part
of it deals with the predicables, that is, the topic of
Porphyry’s Isagoge. The predicables are universals, which
means that they are what can be predicated in the most
general sense. The division is the traditional one, namely
between genus, differentia, species, property (proprium),
and accident.
The treatment of the theory syllogisms in the fourth
treatise of the Tractatus is traditional. It does not include
a discussion of modal syllogisms. There is no discussion of
demonstrative syllogisms in the Tractatus.
Peter’s discussion of dialectical arguments in treatise
ﬁve is also traditional. The treatment of the loci (or topoi)
deals with the same issues as Aristotle dealt with in the
Topics, but the medieval discussions of the Topics had
changed quite a lot, however, and it was Boethius that set
the subject matter of this part of logic for the Middle Ages.
Peter’s discussion of loci is hence based on Boethius’
discussion in De differentiis topicis.
The properties of terms are part of the so-called logica
modermorum and are dealt with by Peter in treatises VI,
IX, X, XI, and XII, which contain discussion about signi-
ﬁcation, supposition, copulation, appellation, ampliation,
restriction, and distribution. To draw the distinction
between signiﬁcation and supposition, Peter notes that
some
things
are
said
with
construction,
such
as
‘‘A human being runs’’ or ‘‘a white human being,’’ and
things said without construction, such as ‘‘animal.’’
Unconstructed terms have signiﬁcation, and they signify
something in one of the ten categories.
Supposition is deﬁned by Peter as the acceptance of
a substantive term for something. Signiﬁcation is prior to
supposition in the sense that signiﬁcation is what a term
has all by itself, while supposition is what a term has in
a composition. The division of supposition differs a little
bit between the textbook authors, but it is foremost only
a difference in terminology.
Supposition is either common or discrete, according
to Peter. Common supposition is what common terms
such as ‘‘human being’’ have, while discrete supposition
is what discrete terms such as ‘‘Socrates’’ and ‘‘this human
being’’ have. Common supposition is divided into natural
and accidental supposition. The natural supposition of
Peter of Spain P
965
P

‘‘human being’’ includes all that is naturally apt to stand
for, that is, all humans that have been, are, and will be.
Accidental supposition is the supposition of a term such as
‘‘human being’’ has in conjunction with something else
such as ‘‘a human being exists.’’ In that case, ‘‘human
being’’ stands for presently existing humans.
Accidental supposition is divided into simple and
personal supposition. A common term has simple sup-
position when it stands for a universal, like in ‘‘human
being is a species.’’ Personal supposition is the acceptance
of a common term for its inferiors. It is divided
into determinate and confused supposition. A common
term has determinate supposition if it is taken indeﬁ-
nitely or with a particular sign; for example, in ‘‘a human
being runs’’ or ‘‘Some human being is running.’’ Con-
fused supposition is the acceptance of a common term
for several things by means of a universal sign. In ‘‘Every
human being is running,’’ ‘‘human being’’ has confused
supposition.
Peter makes a further division of confused supposi-
tion. There is confused supposition by the necessity
of the mode or sign (necessitate signi vel modi) and con-
fused supposition by the necessity of the thing (necessitate
rei). In ‘‘Every human being is an animal,’’ ‘‘human being’’
is by the necessity of the mode taken confusedly and
distributively for all its supposita. Given that all humans
have their own essence, the copula ‘‘is’’ is taken by
the necessity of the thing for all essences that ‘‘human
being’’ supposits for, and therefore, ‘‘animal’’ is taken
by the necessity of the thing for all animality in each
human being. By this reasoning, ‘‘human being’’ is said
to supposit confusedly, mobilely, and distributively.
It supposits confusedly and distributively because it
holds for all humans, and it supposits mobilely because
descent can be made from it to any of its supposita.
‘‘Animal’’ is said to supposit confusedly and immobilely,
since descent is not allowed.
In relation to supposition Peter also discussed notions
such as ampliation, appellation, restriction, and distribu-
tion. Ampliation and restriction is a division of personal
supposition. Restriction is the narrowing of a common
term from a larger to a smaller supposition. In ‘‘A white
human being is running,’’ ‘‘white’’ has a narrowing effect
on the supposition of ‘‘human being.’’ Ampliation is the
opposite, that is, the broadening of the supposition of
a common term. In the proposition ‘‘A human being can
be the Antichrist,’’ the term ‘‘can’’ extends the supposition
of ‘‘human being’’ to future things. Tensed or modal
proposition tend to have ampliated supposition.
Appellation is related to these two notions. Appella-
tion is the acceptance of a term for an existing thing. It is
distinct from signiﬁcation and supposition, since it only
concerns existing things while signiﬁcation and supposi-
tion is wider than that and includes also nonexistence. The
appellata of a term are the existing things it stands for.
Distribution, which has already been mentioned, is the
multiplication of a common term by a universal sign. In
‘‘Every human being,’’ ‘‘human being’’ is distributed for all
humans.
The discussion of fallacies is by far the largest part of
the Tractatus. His discussion begins by a treatment of
disputations. A disputation is an activity of one person
‘‘syllogizing’’ with another to reach a conclusion. Peter
explains that ﬁve things are needed for a disputation: the
originator or the opponent, a respondent, a disputed
proposition, the act of disputing, and the instruments of
the disputation.
There are four kinds of disputations, namely didactic
(doctrinal),
dialectical,
probative
(temptative),
and
sophistical. The didactic disputation comes to its conclu-
sions from premises peculiar to each discipline and not
from what seems true to the respondent. The instruments
of such a disputation are demonstrative syllogisms.
A dialectical disputation draws contradictions from
probable premises. Its instruments are the dialectical
syllogisms. Probative disputations argue from what
seems true to the respondent. Sophistical disputations
argue from what seems probable but is not. The difference
between the last two is that the ﬁrst disputation from what
seems true or probable to what is true, but the latter from
what seems true or probable but is not.
There are ﬁve kinds of sophistical disputations, which
derive
from
the
ﬁve
goals
of
such
disputations,
namely refutation (redargutio), falsity (falsum), paradox
(inopinabile),
babbling
(nugatio),
and
solecism
(soloecismus). Refutation is the denying of what was
previously granted or granting what was previously
denied. Falsity occurs in the case when a proposition
does not conform to reality. A paradoxical disputation is
when the conclusion is contrary to the opinion of the
many or the wise. Babbling is simply the repetition of
the same thing, and ﬁnally, solecism is a disputation
developing a discourse contrary to grammar.
The presentation of logic in the Tractatus became
standard and all discussions started on the foundation
presented there. Buridan chose to base his own view on
Peter’s not because he thought it was the best of clearest
presentation, but because it was most inﬂuential.
The Syncategoremata
Peter’s treatise on syncategorematic words is part of
a genre that developed in the early thirteenth century.
966 P
Peter of Spain

The term itself comes from Prician, and it is used to
capture words that do not have a meaning, or signiﬁca-
tion, on their own, but only in combination with the so-
called categorematic words. Peter’s treatise is divided into
ten chapters. They are as follows:
1. On composition
2. On negation
3. On exclusive words
4. On exceptive words
5. On consecutive words
6. On the verbs ‘‘begins’’ and ‘‘ceases’’
7. On the words ‘‘necessary’’ and ‘‘contingent’’
8. On conjunction
9. On ‘‘how much,’’ ‘‘than,’’ and ‘‘whatever’’
10. On answers
Composition is about ‘‘is’’ and negation is about ‘‘not.’’
With exclusive words, Peter means words such as
‘‘only’’ and ‘‘alone.’’ Exceptive words are ‘‘except’’ and
‘‘unless.’’ Consecutive words are words such as ‘‘if’’ or ‘‘if
not.’’ The conjunctive words he discusses are ‘‘or,’’ ‘‘and,’’
‘‘unless,’’ ‘‘in that,’’ and ‘‘that not.’’
There are two kinds of compositions, Peter claims,
namely (a) composition of things and (b) composition
of modes of signiﬁcation. He further divides (a) in ﬁve
kinds. There are compositions of (1) form and matter,
(2) accident with a subject, (3) power or faculties with
that which they belong to, (4) integral parts with a whole,
and (5) a difference with a genus to make a species.
There are also two different compositions of modes of
signifying. The ﬁrst composition is a quality with a sub-
stance and the second is an act with a substance. The
ﬁrst composition is signiﬁed by a noun, Peter claims.
For example, ‘‘human’’ signiﬁes ‘‘a thing that has human-
ity,’’ and if you break this apart, then there is a thing,
which is a substance, and humanity, which is a quality.
He is careful to say that there really are only two things,
a substance and a quality, but formally, he notes, there
are three things, namely a composition of the two as
well. The composition cannot be a real thing though
because then there would need to be a composition
of the substance with the composition and this would
lead to an inﬁnite regress. The second kind of com-
position is exempliﬁed by a participle. It is interesting
how he thinks word kinds can be shown to correspond to
real things.
Modal propositions are treated a little differently in
the Syncategoremata than in the Tractatus. The ﬁrst
distinction drawn is between the necessity of mode and
the necessity of things. This is a rather uninteresting
distinction simply noting that there is a difference between
a proposition which explicitly includes a modal term and
one which does not although it is necessary. The example
he uses is ‘‘Socrates is necessarily running’’ and ‘‘A man
is an animal.’’ The ﬁrst is a modal proposition with the
mode ‘‘necessarily’’ in it, although it is contingently true,
and the second is an assertoric or de inesse proposition,
although it is necessarily true. ‘‘Things’’ is ambiguous he
also notes. It can cover intentions such as ‘‘genus’’ and
‘‘species,’’ and it can cover the things that the intentions
concern. As we shall see, it is the necessity of things that
is important.
The distinctions of contingency Peter presents are
standard to the thirteenth century. First of all, contingency
is divided into that which can both be the case and not
be the case, that is, traditional contingency, and into
that which is predicated of both necessity and contin-
gence, that is, traditional possibility. It always generated
confusions calling both these contingency, but it was
standard in the thirteenth century and ultimately derives
from Aristotle.
Contingency in the ﬁrst sense is also divided into
three,
namely
contingency
that
naturally
occurs
(contingens natum), contingency that regards either of
two outcomes (contingens ad utrumlibet), and contin-
gency that rarely occurs (contingens in paucioribus).
This notion is based on some kind of statistical view of
contingency where the frequency of its occurrence is
important for how to classify something as contingent. It
is natural that men grow old and gray and hence although
contingent it is close to a necessity. Other things may occur
rarely and are hence closer to what is impossible. There is
then also a space in between where there is a ﬁfty-ﬁfty
chance of something occurring, and thus it is statistically
indeterminate, hence the term ‘‘ad utrumlibet.’’
The notion of the necessity of things is greatly
expanded under the question whether necessity and
contingency determine the compositions of subject and
predicate. Necessity and contingency is found in things, he
emphasizes. He writes that ‘‘it is because a composition
found in a proposition is necessary only because of the
necessary relationship between the subject and the predi-
cate, and therefore necessity primarily occurs in the thing
that is the subject and the thing that is the predicate and
secondarily in the composition.’’ The necessity expressed
here is twofold he notes. It is the necessity of substances
and the necessity of acts. He explicates it by saying that
‘‘one sign of necessity is that which signiﬁes necessity as
a disposition of a substance, that is, the name (noun)
‘necessary’. In another way a sign of necessity is that
which signiﬁes necessity as the disposition of an act, that
is, the adverb ‘necessarily’.’’
Peter of Spain P
967
P

He also develops a different view of ampliation in the
Syncategoremata. Almost all logicians of the thirteenth
century argued that necessity propositions do not
ampliate their terms, but are only about actually existing
things. Peter on the other hand argues that necessity
propositions are ampliated. This might have had an
inﬂuence on Buridan.
See also: ▶John Buridan ▶Modal Theories and Modal
Logic ▶Supposition Theory ▶Terms, Properties of
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Peter of Spain (1972) Tractatus called afterwards Summule logicales. First
critical edition from the manuscripts with an introduction by de Rijk
LM. Van Gorcum, Assen
Peter of Spain (1992) Syncategoreumata. First critical edition with an
introduction and indexes by de Rijk LM, with an English translation
by Spruyt J. Brill, Leiden/Ko¨ln/New York
Secondary Sources
de Libera A (1982) The Oxford and Paris traditions in logic. The Cam-
bridge history of later medieval philosophy, ed. Kretzmann N,
Kenny A, Pinborg J. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
pp 174–187
de Rijk LM (1962–1967) Logica modernorum. A contribution to
the history of early terminist logic. Vol I: On the twelfth century
theories of fallacies. Vol II.1: The origin and early development
of the theory of supposition. Vol II.2: Texts and indices. Van Gorcum,
Assen
de Rijk LM (1968) On the genuine text of Peter of Spain’s Summule
logicales I. General problems concerning possible interpolations in
the manuscripts. Vivarium 6:1–34
de Rijk LM (1971) The development of suppositio naturalis in mediaeval
logic
I.
Natural
supposition
as
non-contextual
supposition.
Vivarium 9:71–107
de Rijk LM (1982) The origins of the theory of the properties of
terms. The Cambridge history of later medieval philosophy, ed.
Kretzmann N, Kenny A, Pinborg J. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, pp 161–173
d’Ors A (1997) Petrus Hispanus O.P., Auctor Summularum. Vivarium
35:21–71
d’Ors A (2001) Petrus Hispanus O.P, Auctor Summularum(II): Further
documents and problems. Vivarium 39:209–254
d’Ors A (2003) Petrus Hispanus O.P, Auctor Summularum(III): ‘‘Petrus
Alfonsi’’ or ‘‘Petrus Ferrandi’’? Vivarium 41:249–303
Pinborg J (1972) Logik und Semantik im Mittelalter. Ein U¨ berblick.
Fromann/Holzboog, Stuttgart/Bad Canstadt
Spruyt J (1989) Peter of Spain on composition and negation. Text,
Translation, Commentary. Leiden (diss)
Spruyt J (1994) Thirteenth-century discussions on modal terms.
Vivarium 32:196–226
Tugwell Simon OP (1999) Petrus Hispanus: comments on some proposed
identiﬁcations. Vivarium 37:103–113
Tugwell Simon OP (2006) Auctor Summularum, Petrus Hispanus OP
Stellensis? Archivum Fratrum Praedicatorum 76:103–115
Petrarch
ANDREAS KAMP
Institut fu¨r Politische Wissenschaft
Universita¨t zu Ko¨ln
Cologne
Germany
Abstract
Petrarch vitally contributed to several ﬁelds that are intrin-
sically interconnected. The intellectual center of gravity
that uniﬁed these topics was his consistent orientation on
Roman antiquity.
Petrarch thoroughly and categorically excoriated the
reigning Aristotelian scholastic philosophy and theology.
He accused them of verbal wretchedness, scientiﬁc irrele-
vance, practical inefﬁciency, and a metaphysical and reli-
gious
misorientation.
He
countered
by
developing
a radically innovative philosophical program. This was
thematically focused on topics concerning man, while
formulating
as
principal
goals
the
restitution
of
a sophisticated Latin, the establishment of a practically
effective moral philosophy, and a return to simple faith.
His examples were the great authors of Roman antiquity,
including both pagan writers and Church Fathers, ﬁrst
and foremost among them, St Augustine, followed by
Cicero, Seneca, and St Ambrose.
Petrarch was distinctly dissatisﬁed with his own times,
both with the political state of affairs and with the intel-
lectual status quo. His broad knowledge of classical
Roman literature led to an innovative structuring of his-
tory. Petrarch divided history into antiquity, the long-
running ‘‘middle’’, and a future age which he hoped was
soon to unfold. In its core, he thus anticipated the well-
known distinction applied even today by all disciplines
working in the ﬁeld of history into Antiquity, Middle
Ages, and Modern Times. Petrarch also organized the single
eras hierarchically. Roman Antiquity ﬁgured as the shining
paradigm; the Middle Ages were nothing but ‘‘dark’’; and,
if his philosophical and political program was put into
action, the future era would shine more brightly than his
‘‘middle’’ age, approaching the level of antiquity.
Finally, Petrarch also developed an innovative project
concerning the political state of Italy, one that was to form
its future while being equally inspired by antique Rome.
Petrarch’s two complimentary goals consisted of freeing
Italy from foreign rule and establishing a ‘‘nationwide’’
unity.
968 P
Petrarch

Biography
Francesco Petrarca was born on July 20, 1304 at Arezzo.
His father was a notary and the family, who had been
banished from Florence 2 years previously, lived in mod-
erate circumstances. In 1312 they moved to Carpentras,
a small village in the vicinity of the papal seat at Avignon.
Here Petrarch was educated in Latin grammar and rhe-
toric. He quickly developed a deep love of the Latin ‘‘clas-
sics’’, especially of one author whom he was to favor
throughout his life: Cicero.
In 1316, following his father’s wishes, Petrarch began
to study law at near-by Montpellier. Immediately after his
father’s death in 1326 he abandoned his studies without
graduating. During this decade wasted on a topic he
deeply disliked, Petrarch began writing poems in Italian
vernacular. But most of all he spent his time devouring
Latin poetry, philosophy, and historiography – anything
he could get his hands on. The works of St Augustine,
which he got to know in 1325 at the latest, left a vital
impact on Petrarch’s sense of self and the world, as can be
traced in his Secretum, completed in 1353. The inﬂuence
exerted by St Augustine even exceeded that of Cicero.
Having taken minor orders, in 1330 Petrarch entered
into the service of the Colonna family in Avignon as
chaplain. In the following years Petrarch, who was ﬁnan-
cially well cared-for, traveled extensively, further devel-
oped his Italian poems, and started on several large-scale
works in Latin. His renown grew constantly until ﬁnally,
in 1341, he was crowned poeta laureatus in Rome. From
then on, he was ofﬁcially renowned as the supreme poet of
his day, and holds this distinction even today.
In 1353, Petrarch ﬁnally left Provence and returned to
Italy. He lived at the court of the Visconti in Milan until
1361, then with the Carrara in Padua, spent some time in
Venice and Pavia, again lived with the Carrara, and from
1368 onwards stayed primarily in his country estate in
Arqua` near Padua. These years were ﬁlled with diplomatic
missions, traveling at the behest of his patrons, but mostly
he was occupied with studying, reading, and writing.
Thus, in the seclusion of Arqua`, in 1370 he not only
wrote the exceedingly valuable autobiographical sketch
Posteritati but also his programmatic philosophical work,
De sui ipsius et multorum ignorantia.
In the night of July 18, 1374 Petrarch passed away in
his country house – according to legend, with his books at
hand.
Philosophical Program
Petrarch was not a professional philosopher. And yet, he
was to inﬂuence the further development of the history of
philosophy, since in his above-mentioned mature work De
sui ipsius et multorum ignorantia he presented a revolu-
tionary program.
It consists of two complimentary elements. On the one
hand, Petrarch broadly and drastically criticized the intel-
lectual status quo, on the other hand, he voiced the prin-
ciples of a radical, advanced change of paradigms.
Petrarch identiﬁed two characteristic features of the
status quo: depressingly low standards and an intellectual
misorientation caused by the ‘‘insane and clamoring
hordes of scholastics’’ (De ign., 1114). Since they lacked
creativity but had an overt urge to write, they simply used
other people’s thoughts and transformed them into their
own, noisily advertising them as individual ideas and
overstocking the world with a ﬂood of commentaries on
the Sententiae of Peter Lombard or the works of Aristotle
(De ign., 1112/1114). These professional commentators,
who gave themselves the airs of theologians or philoso-
phers, had managed to substitute originality with sterile
exegesis, attaining control over the ‘‘market of opinions’’.
But there was more to it: the countless treatises were
written in a miserable Latin, lacking any stylistic artistry
whatsoever (De ign., 1032/1034).
Petrarch was especially resentful of the multitude of
Aristotelian exegetes, who were active everywhere, but
especially dominant at the universities of France and
Italy (De ign., 1106). These had ludicrously made Aristotle
their God, substituting the lex christiana with the lex
aristotelica (De ign., 1040, 1048)! In their blind enslave-
ment to Aristotle, they had committed three fundamental
mistakes: (a) They concentrated on amassing heaps of
insights from the ﬁeld of natural philosophy, which were
often unproven and often unprovable or even faulty. They
certainly were completely irrelevant, since they did not
even touch on the central questions concerning man’s
nature, origins, and destination (De ign., 1038/1040,
1062, 1066). (b) They offered theoretically unsatisfactory
and practically ineffective ramblings on essential topics
such as morals or felicity (De ign., 1062/1064, 1104/
1106). (c) While Aristotle should best have been avoided
in the ﬁeld of metaphysics, his followers daringly spread
their master’s theories, which were profoundly wrong and
highly dangerous (De ign., 1090/1092, 1098, 1102).
In short, Petrarch scathingly criticized the entire hab-
itus, contents, and verbal presentation of the ‘‘scholastic’’
philosophy and theology which had developed since the
mid-twelfth century.
But his overall attack was not only directed at the
‘‘scholastics’’, it basically aimed at their spiritus rector,
Aristotle himself. To start with, Petrarch deemed his style
Petrarch P
969
P

worthy of criticism (De ign., 1104). Then, Aristotle was the
founder of natural philosophy whose results were not only
highly questionable but also completely superﬂuous, as
they lacked solutions for the existential problems of man-
kind (De ign., 1038/1040, 1062). Furthermore, Aristotle
had also failed in the ﬁeld of moral philosophy: On the one
hand, he had spoken extensively about felicity although he
had an inadequate idea of it since his thoughts were not
founded on the Christian faith (De ign., 1062/1064). On
the other hand, while educating his readers on the nature
of virtue, he did not achieve any practical effects since he
was unable to create a love of virtue or, respectively,
a hatred of sinful behavior (De ign., 1106/1108). That is
why he was not, on any account, to be listed in the canon
of ‘‘true moral philosophers and helpful teachers of vir-
tue’’ (De ign., 1108/1110). But most of all, the Aristotelian
metaphysics were to be avoided (De ign., 1102) since,
especially, the thesis of the eternity of the world stood in
striking opposition to both the truth and the Christian
faith (De ign., 1092, 1098–1104).
Accordingly, Petrarch’s overall judgment was entirely
negative: Aristotle had occupied himself extensively with
minor matters while misperceiving the decisive truths
both in the human and divine nature (De ign., 1062,
1068, 1102). As such, his philosophy was simply dangerous
and had already led many ‘‘into the pits of delusion’’ – thus
Petrarch drew a full circle to the scholastics (De ign., 1066).
Petrarch’s revolt against the reigning spirit of his time,
which was based on Aristotle and supported by ‘‘the scho-
lastics’’, rested on four leitmotifs concerning style and
rhetoric, moral philosophy, metaphysics, and Christianity.
In each of the four cases, Petrarch propagated a general
change of paradigm.
In the ﬁeld of style and rhetoric, Petrarch was an
energetic advocate of using Cicero as a model. Since his
adolescence Petrarch had admired the eloquence of Cic-
ero, who to him surpassed every other author in this ﬁeld,
no matter of which origin (De ign., 1068, 1082, 1122).
However, this orientation was not to lead to losing one’s
own creative voice, so while concisely deﬁning his own
position as ‘‘ciceronianus sum’’, Petrarch simultaneously
and explicitly warned against slipping into a blind,
unreﬂective ‘‘imitatio’’ of the model (De ign., 1122).
In the ﬁeld of moral philosophy, Petrarch presented
luminaries which he referred to as ‘‘ours’’ (De ign., 1106).
These are mainly Cicero and Seneca, as well as Horace (De
ign., 1106), all three ‘‘true moral philosophers’’, since they
had not only achieved superﬁcially educating the mind
through the power of their words, but had managed to
correctly form the readers’ willpower (‘‘voluntas’’) by
instilling in them a love of virtue, and respectively
a hatred of sin, which then led to good actions and
a virtuous life (De ign., 1106–1110). After all, goodwill
was a more dependable basis for moral action than intel-
lect, however well developed it might be (De ign., 1110).
Concerning metaphysics, Plato was to be the alterna-
tive source. Plato was the true ‘‘princeps philosophiae’’since
among all philosophers he had come closest to truth in
matters of religion (De ign., 1104, 1112, 1118). On the one
hand, his ‘‘Timaios’’ had presented a theory of divine
creation of the world that was compatible with the Chris-
tian faith, on the other hand he had developed the theory
of ideas (De ign., 1092, 1118).
In matters of faith, Petrarch suggested a basic humble
faith, the ‘‘ﬁdes humilis’’ (De ign., 1046/1048, 1064/1046).
Faith to him constituted the ‘‘highest, most certain, and
ﬁnally also the most felicitous of all sciences’’ (De ign.,
1126). More concisely, this meant following the examples
of the Church Fathers St Jerome, St Ambrose, and, ﬁrst
and foremost, the ‘‘great St Augustine’’ (De ign., 1064,
1100, 1114, 1124/1126).
But the paramount position of highest religious
authority was not the only role that Augustine played for
Petrarch. Moreover, St Augustine functioned as spiritus
rector in Petrarch’s entire spiritual universe. He was the
authority for raising the importance of Plato as the new
‘‘princeps philosophorum’’ (De ign., 1112/1124, 1118); he
had successfully retaliated Aristotle’s envious attack on
Plato’s theory of ideas (De ign., 1118); he authenticated
the turn to new models in the ﬁeld of moral philosophy,
such as Cicero or Seneca (De ign., 1106/1108, 1122); he
legitimized raising the status of Cicero to become
a paradigm of style and rhetoric (De ign., 1122); he vouch-
safed the eminent moral philosophical relevance of elo-
quence (De ign., 1108); and, ﬁnally, he consolidated
Petrarch’s conviction that only the mishap of an overly
early birth had prevented both Plato and Cicero from
being true and proper Christians, which he deemed them
to be in spirit (De ign., 1122/1124).
To sum up, De ignorantia presented the following key
positions:
1. The miserable Latin of the ‘‘scholastics’’, which entirely
lacked style and eloquence, was to be substituted by
a return to the ‘‘classic’’ Latin as exempliﬁed by Cicero.
2. Natural philosophy, which had been followed with
expansive effort by Aristotle and his adepts, had pro-
duced a wealth of unproven, unprovable, or faulty
results and had distracted mankind from the basic
essentials. It was, therefore, not only useless but
exceedingly dangerous and thus to be abandoned
deﬁnitively.
970 P
Petrarch

3. Scholars should concentrate on speciﬁcally human
issues, which were later coined with the term ‘‘studia
humanitatis’’. For this end, a practically effective moral
philosophy was required, brushing away the dominant
intellectualistic Aristotelian inﬂuence and substituting
it by an orientation on Roman models such as Cicero
and Seneca.
4. In metaphysics, the predominance of the dangerous
Aristotelian theories was to be abolished once and for
all. It was to be replaced by the Platonic philosophy,
which harmonized much more with the Christian
faith.
5. In the ﬁeld of religion, the Summae and the innumer-
able commentaries on the Sententiae were to be
relinquished. In their place, a simple faith and
a return to the thoughts of the eminent Church
Fathers, especially St Augustine, was propagated.
6. Irrespective of whether it concerned matters of style
and rhetoric, moral philosophy, metaphysics, or reli-
gion, only ‘‘classic’’ authors were deemed worthy
models. To counter ‘‘scholasticism’’ based on the
Greek, Aristotle, an entirely new canon of ‘‘classic’’
authors was propagated. With the exception of Plato,
who was introduced in the canon on account of being
vehemently praised by the Roman St Augustine, this
new canon consisted exclusively of Roman authors,
whose luminaries were Cicero and, beyond all bounds,
St Augustine.
7. A certain basic attitude was to be taken in the face of
the Roman models. Irrespective of admiration and
enthusiasm, one was to be attentive not to drop into
sterile imitation. Rather, the goal was to develop
a creative appropriation of the ‘‘classical’’ heritage.
8. With pride and rather lovingly, Petrarch referred to the
Roman
authors
as
‘‘ours’’
and
thus
created
a ‘‘national’’ tradition in the ﬁeld of intellectual his-
tory,
paving
the
way
for
the
construction
of
a speciﬁcally Italian identity.
However, there were two eminently important aspects of
the ‘‘studia humanitatis’’, which Petrarch did not mention
in De ignorantia: history and politics. In fact, however, he
did make important contributions to both.
Structuring History
A recurring constant in the intellectual biography of
Petrarch was his massive interest in history. It is no coin-
cidence that already in the 1320s he had copied the entire
Livy obtainable at the time. Furthermore, Petrarch himself
had been an active historiographer since the 1330s, when
he started writing De viris illustribus.
However, Petrarch’s relevance for historiography was
not founded on unveiling some detail about one or the
other odd battle, consul, or emperor. It lay in his radical
reappraisal and reorganization of history as such.
Since his youth, Petrarch had felt a thorough disliking
of his own era (‘‘ista aetas’’) (Posteritati, 262). This is why
he soon bore down on reading historians, trying to gain
knowledge of another era, that of antiquity (‘‘vetustas’’)
(Posteritati, 262). Thus, Petrarch constituted no less than
two fundamentally divergent epochs of history, his own,
and antiquity. The difference between them evidently was
one of quality: antiquity, which to Petrarch primarily
meant the long period of Roman dominance, was an era
of peace, justice, and virtue (Al popolo romano, 182), and,
as signiﬁed by De ignorantia, the age of intellectual greats
spanning from Cicero via Seneca through to St Ambrose
and St Augustine. In other words, antiquity was presented
as the ‘‘good’’ old days. In contrast, his own era, which had
already lasted for several centuries and which Petrarch at
one point referred to as the middle, ‘‘medium’’ age (Ad
Franciscum priorem Sanctorum Apostolorum de Florentia,
322), was an era of extensive ‘‘darkness’’ (‘‘tenebrae’’) (Ad
Agapitum de Columna, 29). In order to overcome this
darkness, both morally and intellectually, Petrarch drafted
the new direction with his De ignorantia. If this new path
was adhered to, there was hope of the dawning of a third,
more felicitous age (‘‘felicius aevum’’) (Ad Franciscum
priorem, 322).
Petrarch, thus, was the ﬁrst to ever formulate a clear
apprehension of the existence of epochs – both in intel-
lectual and in real history. These eras extended over
an exceedingly long time period, encompassing several
centuries, and were constituted by a coherent set of
speciﬁc characteristics that inﬂuenced every sphere of
life. As to quantity, Petrarch deﬁned three different
eras: antiquity, the ongoing ‘‘middle’’age, and an era
that he hoped would dawn in the near future. Basically,
Petrarch thus anticipated the chronological classiﬁcation
of epochs into Antiquity, Middle Ages, and Modern Age
that is still applied today. As to quality, Petrarch intro-
duced a deﬁnite hierarchy: there was the highlight in
the form of exemplary, luminous antiquity, then the
low point of his own, the ‘‘middle’’ age, characterized
by obstructive gloom, and then the hope of a third era
in the future, when, by consequently orienting oneself
on Roman models, one might be released from con-
temporary darkness and at least return to a relatively
high level. In other words, for history in total Petrarch
neither envisioned a permanent degeneration nor a con-
tinuing progress, but rather an up and down caused by
mankind itself.
Petrarch P
971
P

Both Petrarch’s high esteem of antiquity and his qual-
itative depreciation of the ‘‘Middle Ages’’ as a substantially
‘‘dark’’ era turned out to be exceedingly inﬂuential during
the following centuries.
Political Visions
The second vital motif for Petrarch’s dislike of his own era
consisted in the political situation of his native country.
Italy was politically fragmented. Alongside the kingdoms
of Sicily and Naples, which were under Spanish and
French reign, the Church State, the mighty seafaring
republics of Venice, Genoa, and Pisa, as well as regional
centers of power such as Milan and Florence, there were
also dozens of autonomous city states in central and
northern Italy. Armed conﬂicts and skirmishes between
the innumerable political organisms were the order of the
day. What is more, they were internally rekindled by
endless factional controversies, rebellions, expulsions,
and forceful attempts of repatriation.
From early on, Petrarch had been sadly acquainted
with this pitiful reality through the fate of his own family.
Accordingly, his diagnosis was as outspoken as it was
harsh: ‘‘In our times, Italy groans like a slave’’ (Sine
nomine, 102). The much-required therapy was to be
accordingly radical: even in politics, ancient Rome and
its extraordinary greatness were to be exemplary, since
during the Roman world dominion there had been peace
and tranquility, and justice and virtue had thrived to
the full. The practical consequences of which meant that
the fragmentary state of Italy should be overcome and the
unity of Italy, which in antiquity had been enacted from
Rome, should be restored. Also, foreign rule was to be
abolished and the old autonomy regained.
To reach the ﬁrst scope, Petrarch set high hopes in
Charles IV, who in 1347 became King of Bohemia and in
1355 Emperor of the Holy Roman Empire. By alluding to
the exemplary Gaius Iulius Caesar, Petrarch beseeched him
to meet his ‘‘highest and most holy duty’’ by uniting Italy
in peace and tranquility (Ad Carolum quartum, 374/376).
Using all his Ciceronian eloquence and a broad repertoire
of classical Roman literature (e.g., Ad Carolum quartum,
488–500) from 1351 onward Petrarch assailed Charles ever
and again for an entire decade, but to no avail.
There was no expecting the monarch from the House
of Luxemburg to help realize the second goal, since he
himself was merely another foreign prince, a ‘‘princeps
externus’’ (Ad Carolum quartum, 374). A few years previ-
ously Petrarch had indeed nourished high hopes. On the
occasion of the rebellion organized by Cola di Rienzo, in
1347 the city of Rome, the ‘‘capital of Italy’’, had been freed
from the rule of foreigners stemming from ‘‘some despi-
cable corner of the world’’ (A Cola di Rienzo e al popolo
romano,
76/78,
90).
Petrarch,
who
enthusiastically
supported Cola, was quite conﬁdent that this incidence
would set an example and that Italy, which was currently
wasting away, would rise up and end its servitude (A Cola
di Rienzo e al popolo romano, 76, 90). But in the very same
year Cola’s rule collapsed miserably, crushing with it
Petrarch’s own high hopes.
Petrarch did not manage to directly improve the polit-
ical situation in Italy. However, he was the ﬁrst to develop
the political project of freeing his native country and
building a national unity, a scope that was only to be
realized much later, in the mid-nineteenth century. But
his aspirations remained constantly present in the ‘‘collec-
tive mind’’ of Italy. It does not come as a surprise, there-
fore, that Machiavelli lets his Principe, this early sixteenth-
century work propagating the same political program, end
with a quote by Petrarch himself!
See also: ▶Aristotelianism in the Greek, Latin, Syriac,
Arabic, and Hebrew Traditions ▶Augustine ▶Church
Fathers ▶Metaphysics ▶Natural Philosophy ▶Peter
Lombard
▶Philosophical
Theology,
Byzantine
▶Platonism
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Machiavelli Niccolo` (1971) Il Principe. In: Tutte le Opere, a cura di M.
Martelli. Sansoni, Firenze, pp 255–298
Petrarca Francesco (1942) Ad Agapitum de Columna. In: Le Familiari, vol
IV: Libri XX–XXIV, per cura di U. Bosco. Sansoni, Firenze, pp 27–31
Petrarca Francesco (1964) De viris illustribus, edizione critica per cura di
G. Martellotti. Sansoni, Firenze
Petrarca Francesco (1974) Sine nomine. Lettere polemiche e politiche,
Latino-Italiano, a cura di U. Dotti, Laterza, Roma/Bari
Petrarca Francesco (1975) De sui ipsius et multorum ignorantia. In:
Opere Latine, Latino-Italiano, a cura di A. Bufano, vol II. UTET,
Torino, pp 1025–1151
Petrarca Francesco (1998) Epistola Posteritati, a critical edition with an
English translation by Enenkel K. In: Enenkel K, de Jong-Crane B,
Liebregts P (eds) Modelling the individual – biography and portrait
in the Renaissance, with a critical edition of Petrarch’s ‘‘Letter to
posterity’’. Rodopi, Amsterdam/Atlanta, pp 243–281
Petrarca Francesco (2001) A Cola di Rienzo e al popolo romano. In:
Aufrufe zur Errettung Italiens und des Erdkreises – Ausgewa¨hlte
Briefe. Latein-Deutsch, hrsg., eingel. u. u¨bersetzt v. B. Widmer,
Schwabe, Basel, pp 76–103
Petrarca Francesco Al popolo romano. In: Aufrufe zur Errettung Italiens
und des Erdkreises, pp 180–199
Petrarca Francesco Ad Carolum quartum. In: Aufrufe zur Errettung
Italiens und des Erdkreises, pp 370–383
Petrarca Francesco Ad Carolum quartum. In: Aufrufe zur Errettung
Italiens und des Erdkreises, pp 484–523
972 P
Petrarch

Petrarca
Francesco
(2004a)
Ad
Franciscum
priorem
Sanctorum
Apostolorum de Florentia. In: Epistulae Metricae, Latein-Deutsch,
hrsg., u¨bers. u. erl. v. O. u. E. Scho¨nberger. Ko¨nigshausen &
Neumann, Wu¨rzburg, pp 322–323
Petrarca Francesco (2004b) Secretum meum, Latein-Deutsch, hrsg.,
u¨bers. u. mit einem Nachwort v. G. Regn u. B. Huss. Dieterich’sche
Verlagsbuchhandlung, Mainz
Secondary Sources
Baron H (1968) The evolution of Petrarch’s thought: reﬂections on the
state of Petrarch studies. In: Baron H (ed) From Petrarch to Leonardo
Bruni – studies in humanistic and political literature. University of
Chicago Press, Chicago, pp 7–50
Billanovich G (1960) Nella biblioteca del Petrarca. IMU 3:1–58
Carrara E (1959) L’epistola ‘‘Posteritati’’ e la leggenda petrarchesca. In:
Carrara E (ed) Studi petrarcheschi ed altri scritti, raccolta a cura di
amici e discepoli. Bottega d’Erasmo, Torino, pp 1–76
Comitato Nazionale VII centenario della nascita di Francesco Petrarca
(2006) Petrarca Politico – Atti del convegno (Roma-Arezzo, 19–20
marzo 2004). Istituto Storico Italiano per il Medio Evo, Roma
de Nolhac P (1959) Pe´trarque et l’humanisme, avec un portrait ine´dit de
Pe´trarque et des fac-simile´s de ses manuscrits, ristampa Bottega
d’Erasmo, Torino
Dotti U (1987) Vita di Petrarca. Laterza, Roma/Bari
Gerosa PP (1966) Umanesimo cristiano del Petrarca – inﬂuenza
agostiniana, attinenze medievali. Bottega d’Erasmo, Torino
Goldin Folena D (1992/1993) Petrarca e il medioevo latino. Quaderni
Petrarcheschi 9/10:459–487
Kamp A (1989) Petrarcas philosophisches Programm – U¨ ber Pra¨missen,
Antiaristotelismus und ‘Neues Wissen’ in ‘‘De sui ipsius et multorum
ignorantia’’. Lang, Frankfurt M./Bern/New York/Paris
Kessler E (1978) Petrarca und die Geschichte – Geschichtsschreibung,
Rhetorik, Philosophie im U¨ bergang vom Mittelalter zur Neuzeit.
Fink, Mu¨nchen
Mommsen Th E (1959) Petrarch’s conception of the ‘Dark Ages’. In: Rice
EF (ed) Medieval and Renaissance studies. Cornell University Press,
Ithaca, pp 106–129
Regn G (2004) Aufbruch zur Neuzeit: Francesco Petrarca 1304–1374. In:
Speck R, Neumann F (eds) Francesco Petrarca 1304–1374 – Werk
und Wirkung im Spiegel der Biblioteca Petrarchescha Reiner Speck.
Dumont, Ko¨ln, pp 33–77
Ricci PG (1999) Francesco Petrarca (1304–1374). In: Ricci PG (ed) Mis-
cellanea Petrarchesca, a cura di M. Berte´. Edizioni di Storia
e Letteratura, Roma, pp 159–187
Quillen CE (1998) Rereading the Renaissance – Petrarch, Augustine, and
the language of humanism. University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor
Stierle K (2003) Francesco Petrarca – Ein Intellektueller im Europa des 14.
Jahrhunderts. Hanser, Mu¨nchen/Wien
Trinkaus Ch (1979) The poet as philosopher – Petrarch and the formation
of Renaissance consciousness. Yale University Press, New Haven
Ullman BL (1973) Petrarch’s favorite books. In: Ullman BL (ed) Studies in
the Italian Renaissance, 2 edn. with additions and corrections.
Edizioni di Storia e Letteratura, Roma, pp 113–133
Vasoli C (1992/1993) Petrarca e i ﬁlosoﬁdel suo tempo. Quaderni
Petrarcheschi 9/10:75–92
Weiss R (1977) Petrarca e il mondo greco. In: Weiss R (ed) Medieval and
humanist Greek – collected essays. Antenore, Padova, pp 166–192
Zintzen C (1992/1993) Il platonismo del Petrarca. Quaderni Petrarcheschi
9/10:93–113
Philip the Chancellor
ROLLEN EDWARD HOUSER
Center for Thomistic Studies
University of St. Thomas
Houston, TX
USA
Abstract
Philip the Chancellor’s Summa de bono (1225–1228) was
developed around a central controlling analogy. Just as
creatures are good in three ways (transcendentally, in
their natural species or kinds, and in their perfective
acts), so also are human acts morally good in three ways
(through ‘‘generic goodness,’’ the goodness of moral
species, and meritorious goodness). Philip focused his
account of goodness in creatures on the transcendentals
and his account of moral goodness on the theological and
cardinal virtues.
Biography
Philip the Chancellor (b. 1165–1185, d. December 23,
1236) was a ‘‘renaissance’’ man: poet, preacher, theologian,
and ecclesiastical politician. He was made Archdeacon of
Noyon in 1202 by one noble cousin and Chancellor of
Notre-Dame de Paris in 1217 by another, and his right to
confer the licentia docendi placed Philip amidst controver-
sies at the University of Paris. Friend to the friars, under
him the Dominicans attained two chairs in theology, the
Franciscans one.
Thought
The Summa begins with a scriptural conundrum. God
found all creation ‘‘very good’’ (Genesis 1.31), but when
called a ‘‘good teacher,’’ Jesus replied: ‘‘Why do you call me
good? No one is good but God alone’’ (Luke 18.19). Philip
answered with a distinction: goodness ‘‘is said commonly
of all things’’ but is also ‘‘appropriated’’ to God; divine
goodness is ‘‘absolute,’’ that of creatures ‘‘relative.’’ The
Summa concentrates on creatures: ﬁrst on the ‘‘good of
nature’’ and secondly on the ‘‘good of grace’’ found in
moral actions. Philip began each half of his work with
a preface laying down philosophical principles useful for
theology.
Transcendentals
The transcendentals (comunissima) are taken from ‘‘the
philosophers,’’ especially Avicenna, who is unnamed.
Philip the Chancellor P
973
P

An individual creature is intelligible at two levels of uni-
versality. Its essential features fall within Aristotle’s ten
categories, but it has even more universal features that
stand to its categorical attributes as higher genera stand
to species. These are the four transcendentals: ‘‘a being
(ens), one, true, and good.’’
Since it is the ‘‘ﬁrst’’ notion, ‘‘a being’’ cannot be
deﬁned using a higher genus. But since the transcenden-
tals are ‘‘convertible,’’ they can be described through each
other, and also through their subdivisions. ‘‘A being (ens)’’
is divided into substance and accident, but Philip uses
a second distinction to explain his metaphysical doctrine
of creation. ‘‘Every creature differs in this way from the
ﬁrst essence, because in it being (esse) and what is (quod
est) differ.’’ Here ‘‘being’’ refers to the creature’s ‘‘essence
(essentia)’’ and ‘‘what is’’ refers to its individuality. The
hallmark of the creature is unity achieved through
ontological composition.
To describe the other three transcendentals, Philip
turned to Aristotle’s description of unity: ‘‘the one is
undivided in itself and divided off from others.’’ About
truth, Philip recognized Aristotle’s notion of truth in the
mind, but he preferred the Avicennian notion of onto-
logical truth. The true is ‘‘what has indivision of being
(esse) and that which is (quod est).’’ A creature is true
to the extent it realizes its own essence. Philip noted
the Aristotelian description of the good as ‘‘what is
desired by all things’’ and also the neo-platonic con-
ception that ‘‘the good is diffusive or communicative
of being,’’ but moved beyond both: ‘‘The primary deﬁni-
tion of the good is not given causally, but through
a ‘difference’ that consists in a negation.’’ So the good
is ‘‘what has indivision of act from potency.’’ This def-
inition provides the metaphysical foundation for dis-
tinguishing goods of ‘‘nature’’ and ‘‘grace.’’ A creature is
good primarily through a ﬁrst act that gives it an actual
essence; moral goodness is achieved through a second
act – human action.
The Good of Nature
Creatures are divided into three kinds of goods. First is
‘‘the intellectual creature’’ or angel. An angel is ‘‘intellec-
tual’’ by having a ‘‘simple essence’’ devoid of matter and is
a ‘‘creature’’ having been composed from two metaphysi-
cal principles ‘‘being and what is,’’ or essence and the
individuality of a spiritual person.
Second come the inanimate things, plants, and ani-
mals recounted in the Genesis creation story, ‘‘the good
which is a corporeal creature.’’ They are composed in
several ways: substance and accident, substantial form
and matter, substance whose form is a soul.
Finally, Philip turns to ‘‘the human,’’ who is a ‘‘con-
junction of corporeal and incorporeal substance’’ or ‘‘body
and soul.’’ The soul ‘‘perfects the body,’’ but Philip’s three
deﬁnitions of the human soul all emphasize it as ‘‘an
intellectual spirit ordained. . . to beatitude’’ (Seneca). As
both perfection of the body and intellectual spirit, the soul
is itself composed substantially, not of form and matter
but of essence and individuality, ‘‘in the manner of an
intelligence.’’ The multiplicity of psychic powers – vegeta-
tive, sensory, and the trinity of concupiscible, irascible,
and rational powers – then bring the spiritual soul close to
the body.
Moral Goodness
The moral half of the Summa begins with three senses of
moral goodness: ‘‘a certain action is called ‘good generi-
cally (bona genere),’ for example, feeding the hungry; it is
also called ‘good from its circumstances,’ for example,
giving to this indigent as much as sufﬁces for him or to
the extent that he is poor; and ﬁnally it is called good from
the infusion of grace and from having the required inten-
tion.’’ Since actual grace produces the highest sort of virtue,
the study of human morality becomes the study of virtue.
Theological Virtues
Love is the basis for distinguishing generic and speciﬁc
theological virtues. ‘‘Charity is called general love, which is
not some determinate virtue, but is the reason and cause
of each virtue.’’ And ‘‘speciﬁc charity is different from
general charity, because speciﬁc love has the same thing
for its matter and for its end, since it loves the highest good
for its own sake.’’ General charity has God as its end, but
not as its object or matter. Speciﬁc charity has God for
both. The other two theological virtues have God as their
end, but not as their ‘‘matter.’’ God as ‘‘ﬁrst truth’’ is the
‘‘matter’’ of faith, while hope has the ‘‘certain expectation
of future glory’’ as its matter. Though all three theological
virtues lead to eternal life, ‘‘merit absolutely pertains to
charity, to the other virtues only relatively.’’
Cardinal Virtues
The cardinal virtues also ‘‘can be taken in two ways.’’ ‘‘For
the existence of virtue four things are required: to know, to
will, to persevere amid difﬁculties, and to attain the mean
between excess and deﬁciency.’’ These general or ‘‘univer-
sal conditions’’ of all virtue respectively ‘‘come from’’
prudence, justice, courage, and temperance. It follows
that for the cardinal virtues, considered generically,
‘‘whoever has one virtue has all.’’
Taken in a second way, however, a cardinal virtue is
considered ‘‘according to the act of its proper power and
concerning the proper matter of that power.’’ For the
974 P
Philip the Chancellor

speciﬁc cardinal virtues, ‘‘it is not necessary that when one
has one virtue one has all.’’ Courage resides in the soul’s
irascible power; its object is ‘‘the difﬁcult in the realm of
exterior passions impressed by another,’’ such as fear and
conﬁdence. Temperance resides in the concupiscible
power; its objects are ‘‘passions generated within us,’’
such as desire and aversion, and especially ‘‘desire of
corporeal pleasures.’’ Both prudence and justice reside in
the power of reason. Their objects, while different, range
wider than those of courage and temperance. Prudence
‘‘does not have its own proper and limited matter’’ because
it is concerned with the objects of all the virtues. And the
object of justice is also wide: ‘‘to order all these (moral
acts) to our proximate end.’’
Since the cardinal virtues are ‘‘universal conditions,’’
there are ‘‘other virtues reduced to these [cardinal] virtues
either as parts or as species or as their dispositions.’’ The
parts of courage are patience and perseverance; the parts
of temperance are modesty, sobriety, continence, virginity,
and the ‘‘golden crown’’ awarded an outstanding Christian
life. The parts of justice are ‘‘worship’’ owed to God,
‘‘reverence’’ owed to prelates, and ‘‘obedience’’ owed to
both. Prudence has no parts.
The Good of Grace
The third sense of moral goodness comes ‘‘from the
infusion of grace and from having the required intention’’
of not just ‘‘leading up to our end (ad ﬁnem)’’ but ‘‘into
our end (in ﬁnem),’’ God. Virtues in this highest sense add
‘‘meriting eternal life’’ to the content of the theological and
cardinal virtues.
In addition to a title, Philip’s Summa offered later
scholastics the transcendentals and the seven principal
virtues, expanded to include acquired as well as infused
cardinal virtues, a patrimony they would embrace.
See
also:
▶Albert
the
Great ▶Thomas Aquinas
▶Thomism ▶Virtue and Vice
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Philip the Chancellor (1985) Summa de bono, ed. Wicki N. Francke, Bern
Secondary Sources
Aertsen J (1996) Medieval philosophy and the transcendentals: the case of
Thomas Aquinas. Brill, Leiden
Houser RE (2003) Philip the chancellor. In: Gracia J, Noone T (eds)
Blackwell’s companion to mediaeval philosophy. Blackwell, Oxford,
pp 534–535
Houser RE (2004) The cardinal virtues: Aquinas, Albert, Philip the
Chancellor. Pontiﬁcal Institute of Mediaeval Studies, Toronto
McCluskey C (1999/2007) Philip the chancellor. In: Stanford encyclope-
dia of philosophy. http://plato.stanford.edu/philip-chancellor
Philoponus, Arabic
ELIAS GIANNAKIS
Department of History and Archaeology
University of Ioannina
Ioannina
Greece
Abstract
Yah:ya¯ al-Nah:wı¯, that is, John the Grammarian, is the Arabic
name for John Philoponus (c. CE 490–575) in the medieval
Arabic literature. His image in the Arabic sources, though
embellished with legendary details, is not far from reality.
He was a pupil of the Neoplatonist Ammonius in Alexan-
dria of Egypt and a commentator of Aristotle and Galen. He
wrote independent philosophical treatises against Proclus
and Aristotle. Being a Christian, he also wrote theological
treatises in which he expounded his views about the Trinity
and his anti-Chalcedonian tenets in the disputes of his age.
Above all, he became famous for his arguments against the
eternity of the world, which formed the basis of argumen-
tation not only in the Syro-Arabic Christian theology but
also in Arabic-Islamic (al-G˙ aza¯lı¯) and Arabic-Jewish theol-
ogy on the creation of the world (Maimonides).
Sources
The main sources about Philoponus’ life and writings in
the medieval Arab world are three bio-bibliographical
works: First, the Fihrist of Ibn al-Nadı¯m (d. 995) written
in CE 987; second, the History of Wise Men of Ibn al-Qift:ı¯
(d. CE 1248), who quotes Ibn al-Nadı¯m but with further
additions and embellishments; and third, a collection of
biographies of a number of physicians and authors of
medical writings composed by Ibn Abı¯ Us:aybiʿa (d. CE
1270). Some further references to Philoponus are also
found in Z˙ ahı¯r al-Dı¯n al-Bayhaqı¯ (d. CE 1170), while
minor ones occur here and there in various other works.
Life
According to Ibn al-Nadı¯m, Yah:ya¯ al-Nah:wı¯ lived in Alex-
andria of Egypt in the ﬁrst half of the seventh century.
He supports this incorrect claim by an observation he
makes on the basis of a statement in John Philoponus’
commentary on Aristotle’s Physics, saying: ‘‘like this year
of ours, which is the three hundred and forty third Coptic
year of Diocletian’’ (Ibn al-Nadı¯m, K. al-Fihrist, vol. 1,
Philoponus, Arabic P
975
P

p. 255). This date suggests that he was writing in CE 627.
But this mistake is already found in some Greek manu-
scripts. Based on this date, Ibn al-Nadı¯m adds that Yah:ya¯
al-Nah:wı¯ lived in the time of ʿAmr ibn al-ʿA¯s:, the com-
mander of the Arab armies, who invaded and conquered
Egypt from CE 639 onward. He also says that the two men
met and ʿAmr ibn al-ʿA¯s: held him in high esteem. Ibn al-
Qift:ı¯ adds that ʿAmr ibn al-ʿA¯s: heard with admiration
Yah:ya¯ al-Nah:wı¯’s arguments against the Trinity and the
eternity of the world. Further, Ibn al-Qift:ı¯ alone presents
a legendary story in the form of a dialogue between Yah:ya¯
al-Nah:wı¯ and ʿAmr ibn al-ʿA¯s: regarding the books in the
Ptolemaic Library in Alexandria and the burning of them
at the command of the Caliph ʿUmar (r. 634–644). Again,
Ibn al-Qift:ı¯ and Ibn Abı¯ Us:aybiʿa (both quoting ʿUbayd
Alla¯h b. Jibrı¯l), cite a curious story that Yah:ya¯ al-Nah:wı¯ in
his youth was a ferryman carrying to the ‘‘House of
Sciences’’ the eminent men who taught there. By their
contact, he became eager for acquiring knowledge, so
he sold his boat and began his studies with patience
and perseverance. Quoting Abu¯ Sulayma¯n al-Sijista¯nı¯
(d. c. 1001), Ibn Abı¯ Us:aybiʿa states that Yah:ya¯ al-Nah:wı¯
was competent in grammar, logic, and philosophy. He also
adds that he was a pupil of Ammonius who in turn
was a pupil of Proclus and that he was a Christian of
the Alexandrian Church. Ibn al-Nadı¯m says that Yah:ya¯ al-
Nah:wı¯ was a pupil of Severus and a Jacobite Christian. He
also incorrectly claims that Yah:ya¯ al-Nah:wı¯ was a bishop in
Egypt (in Alexandria, according to Ibn al-Qift:ı¯), but later
deposed, because he insisted in professing tritheism;
but when ʿAmr ibn al-ʿA¯s: met Yah:ya¯ al-Nah:wı¯, he ‘‘honored
him and found a position for him.’’ Citing some Christian
chronicles, Ibn Abı¯ Us:aybiʿa offers another story involving
Philoponus’ refutation of Eutyches’ teachings in the Chris-
tological disputes in the Council of Chalcedon.
Works
Our three bio-bibliographers list a number of Arabic
translations of works attributed to Yah:ya¯ al-Nah:wı¯. First,
they list Arabic translations of commentaries on Aristotle’s
Categories, De interpretatione, Prior Analytics (partial),
Posterior Analytics, Topics, Physics, and De generatione et
corruptione. The work entitled Commentary on Aristotle’s
‘‘ma¯ ba¯la,’’ as Steinschneider suggested, probably was
a commentary on a collection of Physical questions begin-
ning with the phrase ma¯ ba¯la. Then, they list Arabic trans-
lations of a commentary on Porphyry’s Isagoge and
a commentary on Galen’s De usu partium. Apart from
the commentaries, Arabic translations of the following
separate treatises are attributed to him: Refutation of Pro-
clus on the Eternity of the World, in 18 books, Refutation of
Aristotle, in six books, That the Force of Every Finite Body is
Finite, in one book, Refutation of Nestorius, in one book,
and two other unidentiﬁed works against the doctrines of
some other people. Furthermore, a history of medicine
and 20 other medical treatises have also been attributed to
‘‘Yah:ya¯,’’ but Meyerhof has argued against their attribution
and authenticity. None of Philoponus’ genuine works
translated into Arabic survives in full. What has turned
up so far are long extracts in a summary form from his
Commentary on Aristotle’s Physics, a summary of his Book
on the Proof for the Temporal Creation of the World, few
quotations from his book Contra Aristotelem and from his
book De aeternitate mundi contra Proclum, and some
other reworked extracts from the same work.
Thought and Influence
Philoponus’ thought in the Arabic tradition must be
examined and assessed on the basis of works that survive
in Arabic as well as on the basis of explicit references to his
doctrines by Muslim authors. So the extracts from his
Commentary on Aristotle’s Physics that are found in the
Leiden codex (written in 1129–1130) of the so-called
‘‘Baghdad Physics’’ contain some of his major points of
disagreement with Aristotle, namely: (1) on place as being
a three-dimensional extension; (2) on vacuum as logically
possible, though it never becomes actual in nature; (3) on
the motion of projectiles, which move on account of the
force imparted to them by the mover, while this force
exhausts itself in the course of the movement (impetus
theory); (4) on time, that it has a beginning, since
a temporal instant need not bound a preceding as well as
a following period; (5) on the impossibility of an actual
and traversed inﬁnity, so that Socrates cannot have an
inﬁnite number of ancestors. Both Yah:ya¯ b. ʿAdı¯ (d. 974)
and Ibn al-Samh: (d. 1027) object to Philoponus by adding
fatuous remarks here and there in the ‘‘Baghdad Physics.’’
Next, the arguments against actual inﬁnity were used by
Philoponus in order to build his proofs against Aristotle’s
and Proclus’ tenet of the eternity of the world. Similar
arguments are found in the surviving summary of the
Book on the Proof for the Temporal Creation of the World,
which, as Pines suggested, may well derive from a lost
work of Philoponus, different from the polemical ones
against Proclus and Aristotle. This summary work consists
of three treatises: In the ﬁrst treatise, it is argued that the
world
cannot
be
eternal,
for
the
Universe,
being
a corporeal object, contains only ﬁnite force. This treatise
seems to be identical with the work That the Force of Every
Finite Body is Finite mentioned by the Arab bio-bibliog-
raphers. Again, Ibn Suwa¯r (d. after 1017), probably refers
to the same work, since he reports that Philoponus’ proof
976 P
Philoponus, Arabic

for the creation of the world is based on the ﬁniteness of
the force of all bodies. In the second treatise, it is argued
that in order to obtain an inﬁnite past time, one has to
suppose that the number of individuals was inﬁnite, but
the sum of the ﬁnite life duration of a ﬁnite number of
individuals can only be ﬁnite. This argument is connected
with that of the third treatise, in which it is said that the
eternity of the world involves the eternity of mankind.
This thesis entails the consequence that Socrates was pre-
ceded by an inﬁnite number of ancestors. But this is
impossible because of the impossibility of an actual and
traversed inﬁnity. Now, although the work Contra
Aristotelem does not survive in Arabic, some of the argu-
ments are quoted and criticized in a treatise of al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯
(d. 950) against John Philoponus. Al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s opposition
to Philoponus is followed by Ibn Sı¯na¯ (Avicenna) (d.
1037), Ibn Ba¯jja (Avempace) (d. 1139) and Ibn Rushd
(Averroes) (d. 1198). None of them acknowledges any
debt to Philoponus, although they follow some of his
arguments, especially those relevant to the impetus theory.
All of them sided with Aristotle on the issue of the eternity
of the world. Again, some of the Christian philosophers
of the School of Baghdad opposed Philoponus probably
for religious reasons. As Davidson has shown, Philoponus’
arguments were the source for medieval Islamic and Jew-
ish proofs for the creation of the world. For example, the
Muslim philosopher al-Kindı¯ (d. 870) and the Jewish
writer Saadia (d. 942) draw upon Philoponus’ arguments
without mentioning him by name or quoting him directly.
The case is similar with other Muslim writers, as for
instance, the Muʿtazilite al-Khayya¯t: (d. 913), the Ashʿarite
al-G˙ aza¯lı¯ (d.1111), or al-Shahrasta¯nı¯ (d. 1153). As for al-
G˙ aza¯lı¯, Bayhaqı¯ in his biographical work on learned
men of Islam reports that Ibn Sı¯na¯ had claimed that
what al-G˙ aza¯lı¯ had written in his Tah:a¯fut al-fala¯sifa
was a rearrangement of the words of Yah:ya¯ al-Nah:wı¯.
However, Christian and Muslim writers knew Philoponus’
celebrated arguments against the philosophers’ tenet of
the eternity of the world, as Ibn Suwa¯r and al-Bı¯ru¯nı¯
(d. 1050) clearly testify. In the end, the fact remains that
Philoponus’ inﬂuence was profound and his views and
arguments were transmitted from the Arabs to the Latin
West, as Zimmermann has shown in the case of the impe-
tus theory.
See also: ▶al-Bı¯ru¯nı¯, Abu¯ Rayh:a¯n ▶al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, Abu¯ Nas˙r
▶al-G˙ aza¯lı¯, Abu¯ H˙ a¯mid Muh:ammad ▶Ibn Ba¯jja, Abu¯
Bakr ibn al-Sa¯ʾig˙ (Avempace) ▶Ibn Rushd, Muh˙ammad
ibn Ah˙mad al-H˙ afı¯d (Averroes) ▶Ibn al-Samh: ▶Ibn
Sı¯na¯, Abu¯ ʿAlı¯ (Avicenna) ▶Ibn Suwa¯r (Ibn al-Khamma¯r)
▶Impetus ▶John Philoponus ▶al-Kindı¯, Abu¯ Yu¯suf
Yaʿqu¯b ibn Ish:a¯q ▶Moses Maimonides ▶Saadia Gaon
▶al-Shahrasta¯nı¯,
Muh:ammad
ibn
ʿAbd
al-Karı¯m
▶Time ▶Yah:ya¯ ibn ʿAdı¯
Bibliography
Primary Sources
(1384–1385/1964–1965) Arist:u¯t:a¯lı¯s, al-T˙abı¯ʿa. Tarjamat Ish:a¯q b. H˙ unayn
maʿa shuru¯h: Ibn al-Samh: wa-ibn ʿAdı¯ wa-Matta¯ b. Yu¯nus wa-Abı¯
l-Faraj ibn al-T˙ayyib, 2 vols, ed. Badawı¯ ʿA. al-Qa¯hira 1384–1385/
Cairo, 1964–1965
Badawı¯ʿAbdurrah:ma¯n (1955) Aﬂu¯t:ı¯n ʿinda l-ʿArab, Islamica 20. Maktabat
al-Nahd˙a al-Mis:riya, Cairo
Giannakis Elias (1998) Yah:ya¯ ibn ʿAdı¯ against John Philoponus on place
and void. Z Gesch Arab-Islam Wiss 12:245–302
Ibn Abı¯Us:aybiʿa Ah:mad (1884) Kita¯b ʿUyu¯n al-anba¯’ fı¯t:abaqa¯t al-at:ibba¯ 2
vols, (ed) A Mu¨ller. Ko¨nigsberg
Ibn al-Nadı¯m Muh:ammad (1871–1872) Kita¯b al-Fihrist. Mit Anmerkungen
hrsg. von G Flu¨gel. Nach dessen Tode besorgt von J Ro¨diger und
A. Mu¨ller, 2 vols. Leipzig
Ibn al-Qift:ı¯ʿAlı¯(1903) Ta’rı¯h˘ al-h:ukama¯’, Auf Grund der Vorarbeiten Aug.
Mu¨llers hrsg. von J Lippert, Leipzig
Kraemer JL (1965) A lost passage from Philoponus’ Contra Aristotelem in
Arabic translation. J Am Oriental Soc 85(3):318–327
Pines Shlomo (1972) An Arabic summary of a lost work of John
Philoponus. Israel Oriental Stud 2:320–352 (repr. in his collected
works, vol 2, Jerusalem and Leiden, 1986)
Troupeau Ge´rard (1984) Un e´pitome´ arabe du De contingentia mundi de
Jean Philopon. In: Lucchesi E, Saffrey HD (eds) Me´morial A.-J.
Festugie`re. Antiquite´ paı¨enne et chre´tienne, Cahiers d’Orientalisme
10. P. Cramer, Geneva, pp 77–88
Secondary Sources
Abel A (1963–1964) La le´gende de Jean Philopon chez les arabes.
Correspondance d’Orient (Bruxelles) 10 (=Acta Orientalia Belgica),
pp 251–280
Arnzen R (1998) Aristoteles’ De anima. Eine verlorene spa¨tantike Para-
phrase in arabischer und persischer U¨ berlieferung, Aristoteles
Semitico-Latinus 9. Brill, Leiden (reviewed by D’Ancona C in Oriens
36 (2001) 340–351)
D’Ancona C (2001) Pseudo-‘‘Theology of Aristotle,’’ Chapter I: structure
and composition. Oriens 36:78–112
Davidson H (1969) John Philoponus as a source of medieval Islamic and
Jewish proofs of creation. J Am Oriental Soc 89(2):357–391 (repr.
with additions in Davidson HA (1987) Proofs for eternity, creation
and the existence of God in medieval Islamic and Jewish philosophy.
New York-Oxford, pp 86–116)
Davidson H (1979) The principle that a ﬁnite body can contain only
a ﬁnite power. In: Stein S, Loewe R (eds) Studies in Jewish religious
and intellectual history presented to Alexander Altmann. The Uni-
versity of Alabama Press, Alabama, pp 75–92
Endress G (1977) The works of Yah:ya¯ ibn ʿAdı¯. An analytical inventory.
Reichert Verlag, Wiesbaden
Furlani G (1925) Giovanni il Filopono e l’incendio della biblioteca di
Alessandria. Bull Soc Arche´olog Alex 21(N. S. 6):58–77
Giannakis E (1992) Philoponus in the Arabic tradition of Aristotle’s
Physics. Unpublished DPhil dissertation, Oxford
Giannakis E (2002/2003) The quotations from John Philoponus, De
aeternitate mundi contra Proclum in al-Bı¯ru¯nı¯’s India. Z Gesch
Arab-Islam Wiss 15:185–195
Philoponus, Arabic P
977
P

Gutas D (1986) Philoponos and Avicenna on the separability of the
intellect: a case of orthodox Christian-Muslim agreement. Greek
Orthodox Theol Rev 31(1–2):121–129
Hasnawi A (1994) Alexandre d’Aphrodise vs Jean Philopon. Notes sur
quelques traite´s d’Alexandre perdus en grec, conserve´s en arabe.
Arabic Sci Philos 4(1):53–109
Lewin B (1954) La notion de muh:dat¯ dans le kala¯m et dans la philosophie.
Un petit traite´ ine´dit du philosophe chre´tien Ibn Suwa¯r. Orientalia
Suecana (Uppsala) 3:84–93
Mahdi M (1967) Alfarabi against Philoponus. J Near Eastern Stud 26
(4):233–260
Meyerhof
M
(1930)
Johannes
Grammatikos
(Philoponos)
von
Alexandrien und die arabische Medizin. Mitteilungen des deutschen
Institutes fu¨r a¨gyptische Altertumskunde in Kairo 2(1):1–21
Meyerhof M (1948) ʿAli al-Bayhaqi’s Tatimmat Siwan al-Hikma:
a biographical work on learned men of the Islam. Osiris 8:122–217
Pines S (1986) Studies in Arabic versions of Greek texts and in medieval
science. The collected works of Shlomo Pines, vol 2. Magnes Press,
Hebrew University/E. J. Brill, Jerusalem/Leiden
Pormann PE (2003) Jean le Grammarien et le De sectis dans la litte´rature
me´dicale d’Alexandrie. In: Garofalo I, Roselli A (eds) Galenismo
e medicina tarcoantica: fonti greche, latine e arabe. Annoli dell’
Istituto Universitario Orientale di Napoli. Quaderni 7, Napoli,
pp 233–263
Steinschneider M (1913) Johannes Philoponus bei den Arabern.
Me´moires de l’Acade´mie Impe´riale de St.-Petersbourg 7(13/4):47–57
Zimmermann FW (1987) Philoponus’ impetus theory in the Arabic
tradition. In: Sorabji R (ed) Philoponus and the rejection of Aristo-
telian science. Duckworth, London, pp 121–129
Philoponus, John
▶John Philoponus
Philosophical Psychology
▶Epistemology
▶Ibn Rushd (Averroes), Latin Translations of
▶Intentionality
▶Internal Senses
▶Intuitive and Abstractive Cognition
▶John Buridan
▶John Duns Scotus
▶Mental Language
▶Mental Word/Concepts
▶Peter John Olivi
▶Philosophical Psychology, Byzantine
▶Philosophical Psychology, Jewish Tradition
▶Sense Perception, Theories of
▶Thomas Aquinas
▶William of Ockham
Philosophical Psychology,
Byzantine
JOZEF MATULA
Department of Philosophy, Centre for Medieval and
Renaissance Philosophy
Palacky University
Olomouc
Czech Republic
Abstract
Byzantine psychology can be characterized as a complex of
problems connected with the relation between the soul
and the body, divisions of the soul (tripartite division), the
immortality of the soul, internal senses (imagination,
memory), the theory of pneuma, passions, emotions,
dreams, etc. A speciﬁc feature of Byzantine psychological
thought is the continuity with the ancient theories on the
soul, mainly of Aristotle. Some of the sources of Byzantine
psychology were Aristotle’s De anima, Galen’s works, late
commentaries on the De anima (Simplicius, Philoponos,
Stephanus), and Patristic texts. The most inﬂuential ideas
about psychology in early Byzantine period come from
Nemesius, Gregory of Nyssa, Gregory of Nazianzus,
Maximus the Confessor, and John of Damascus. The
Byzantine scholars who were interested in such issues
were Michael Psellos, Michael of Ephesus, Nikephoros
Blemmydes, Sophonias, Nikephoros Choumnos, Theodore
Metochites,
Nikephoros
Gregoras,
Gregory
Palamas,
George Gemistos Plethon, and Gennadios Scholarios.
Byzantine Psychology
Psychological theories derive from anthropology. The
classical Byzantine deﬁnition of man springs from the
Greek philosophical tradition and is common to theolo-
gians, philosophers, and even elementary school text-
books. In general, man is a rational, mortal being, or
corporeal essence, endowed with speech and thought,
capable of reason and knowledge (Michael Psellos,
Nikephoros Blemmydes). Man, a being that unites two
natures in one person, was already the favorite model for
hypostatic union from the sixth century. In this context
the soul or spirit of man is contrasted to the body in
negative terms (in-corporeal, im-mortal, in-corruptible),
and man is perceived as a simultaneous synthesis of oppo-
sites: as a being of different essences united ineffably and
simultaneously (Anastasios of Sinai), or as a mixture of
opposites (Maximus the Confessor). Man is not his soul,
978 P
Philoponus, John

but a substantial composite, a hypostatic unity of two
independent substances – the soul and the body. The
nature of the soul is a self-moving incorporeal substance,
therefore
immortal
and
incorruptible
(Leontius
of
Byzance). The human being is a perfect creature between
the corporeal and incorporeal worlds, a microcosm
(mikros kosmos, ‘‘little universe’’) – man possesses in him-
self all the elements of the macrocosm (Nemesios of
Emesa). He is conceived as the essence ‘‘lying on the
borders’’ (methorion) between the spiritual and the mate-
rial, and serves as the mediator of a natural synthesis
(Maximos the Confessor Gregory of Nyssa), as ‘‘the
bond (syndesmos) of the entire creation’’ (Kosmas
Indikopleustes). Created by God, man is like the world,
‘‘a miniature world within the larger one’’ (John of
Damascus); he is composed of two natures (divine and
bestial) and occupies an intermediate place (Gemistos
Plethon).
The ideas and notions of man (a single animal, mortal,
and immortal, visible and invisible) as a king (basileus) of
the created world are adopted from the Church Fathers
(Gregory of Nazianzus, Makarios of Egypt). The concept
of man as animal derives from ancient Greek philosophy
and early Patristic thought, where a rational animal (zoon
logikon) is a standard deﬁnition of man (Athanasios,
Nemesios of Emesa). While some Christian writers seem
to have conceived of the human person as a simple dichot-
omy of body and soul, threefold deﬁnition of man is
characteristic of Byzantine patristic, monastic, and philo-
sophical literature. This arrangement is found in ancient
Platonism and Neoplatonism, as well as in the Biblical
notions of man, which refer to body, soul, and spirit
(Epistles of Saint Paul).
The Byzantine thinkers were concerned with psycho-
logical phenomena such as dreams, passions, emotions,
humoral imbalances, mental disorders as melancholy,
mania, and epilepsy. The Byzantine physicians followed
the Hippocratic tradition and, in particular, Galen in
attributing mental disorder to humoral imbalance. The
humoral account was often supplemented by another tra-
dition in which different disorders were often linked to
different areas of the brain. The mental disorders were
often associated with disturbances of function in one or
more of the cerebral ventricles. The central issue of Byzan-
tine psychology is characterized by the attempt to ascribe
a certain set of mental powers or ‘‘faculties’’ to deﬁned
localizations within the brain and particularly its ventri-
cles. Brain functions were carried out in the cerebral ven-
tricles by the psychic pneuma, or animal spirit endowed
with the power to perform sensitive and mental activities.
Although opinions differed as to which speciﬁc function
belonged to each of the ventricles, the idea of ventricular
localization was accepted until the end of Byzantium. The
internal senses were assumed to be located in the ventricles
of the brain. These ventricles were supposed to be sense
organs performing functions such as remembering or
imagining. The theory was created by assigning the various
perceptual and cognitive faculties identiﬁed by Aristotle
in his De anima to the spirit-ﬁlled cerebral ventricles
described by Galen in his discussion of the anatomy of
the brain. The description of processes of the inner sense
(especially, phantasia) was important for the explanation
of the various psychological phenomena connected with
dreams, visions, or demonology.
Writings
Avivid interest in the problems of the soul is demonstrated
in the writings of Byzantine philosophers such as Michael
Psellos, Nikephoros Blemmydes, Sophonias, Michael
of Ephesus, Nikephoros Choumnos, and Gennadios
Scholarios. A large number of short treatises discussing
particular philosophical issues on the unity of the soul
and the body, and the faculties of the soul appear in
Byzantine thought. There were also various texts in which
psychological issues were dealt with – such as theological
treatises on the soul (Nicetas Stethatos) or medical works
(Symeon Seth).
Most Byzantine philosophers wrote compendia, para-
phrases, and commentaries on the classical authors, and
Byzantine thought was inﬂuenced by the rigorous revival
of the interest in commentaries on Aristotle from the
earlier period (sixth century). Especially Philoponos’
commentary was extremely inﬂuential in Byzantium and
most Byzantine thinkers adapted his commentary on the
De anima to their anthropological treatises (Michael
Psellos, the work Doxai peri psyches falsely attributed to
Michael Psellos, John Italos, Nikephoros Blemmydes,
Sophonias,
Theodoros
Metochites,
and
Gennadios
Scholarios). Philoponos held that Aristotle agreed with
Plato about the three kinds of soul – the vegetative soul,
which is inseparable from the body, the irrational soul
which is separable from the body but inseparable from
the pneuma, and the rational soul which is the substance
which transcends all body (separable and immortal).
Authors like Gennadios Scholarios relied not only on
the ancient philosophers but also on Latin philosophers
(Albert the Great, Thomas Aquinas).
Ancient and Patristic Sources
Byzantine psychology represents a fusion of Galenic
physiology and anatomy with Aristotelian psychology.
Philosophical Psychology, Byzantine P
979
P

In Byzantine anthropologies we ﬁnd various concepts
deriving from Ancient Greek philosophy and medicine
side by side with signiﬁcant commentators of Aristotle
and the anthropological concepts of the Church Fathers.
In general, the most important source was Aristotle,
whose psychological thinking is contained principally in
his work De anima, although some speciﬁc aspects of
psychology, relating to sensation (De sensu), memory
(De memoria et reminiscentia), and sleeping and dreaming
(De somno, commented by Theodore Metochites) are
contained in Parva naturalia (commentaries by Michael
of Ephesus, Sophonias). For instance, in the thirteenth
and fourteenth centuries, Sophonias’ paraphrase of
Aristotle’s De anima or Nikephoros Blemmydes’ De
anima draws on John Philoponos’ lost commentary on
book 3 of the De anima. Later Gennadios claimed that
even Thomas Aquinas’ commentary on Aristotle’s De
anima was dependent on Philoponos.
An important ﬁgure in terms of psychology in Byzan-
tium
is
Galen,
especially
his
adaptations
of
the
Hippocratic four humors, his use of Plato, Aristotle, and
the Stoics in creating an all encompassing medical theory.
He was a signiﬁcant source for the learned Byzantine
physicians and philosophers. By the thirteenth and four-
teenth centuries, Galen was regarded by the Byzantines to
be the greatest medical authority they inherited from the
time of the early Roman Empire. As a proof of that are the
Byzantine transcriptions of Galen’s works which survive in
large numbers. Galen adopted Aristotle’s basic threefold
classiﬁcation of the internal senses (imagination, cogni-
tion, and memory) and he speciﬁed the localization of
these faculties in the anterior, middle, and posterior ven-
tricles of the brain. The head was the centre of psychic life,
and mental faculties were localized in the ventricles of the
brain. The Byzantines accepted the Galenic notion of the
brain as the organ responsible for the conversion of vital
into animal spirits. The so-called cell doctrine remained
almost unaltered during the whole of Byzantine thought.
A more coherent account of the soul is presented in the
work On Human Nature by Nemesius of Emesa; it is a
systematic attempt to harmonize medical philosophy and
Christian anthropology. This treatise is a distillation of
classical learning and attracted the attention of Early Byz-
antine thinkers (Maximus the Confessor, John of Damas-
cus); through them it inﬂuenced later Byzantine thinkers
such as Meletios the Monk, whose synopsis of Christian
and pagan ideas on the human constitution is composed
almost entirely of excerpts from earlier authors. Through
the works of Nemesius of Emesa and John of Damascus,
Byzantine authors were also acquainted with a classiﬁca-
tion of emotions (pleasure, distress, fear, and anger).
The Relation of Body and Soul
Most Byzantines accepted the Aristotelian view which
deﬁnes man as a composite of body and soul. Thinkers
mostly inﬂuenced by Aristotle accepted the deﬁnition of
soul as the vital principle and energy that gives existence
and form to body. The soul is the primary principle of
nourishment, sensation, movement, and understanding.
Aristotle’s deﬁnition of the soul as ‘‘the actuality of
a natural body which potentially has life’’ presented
a formidable challenge to Byzantine thinkers (Nikephoros
Blemmydes, Gennadios Scholarios).
The soul is the vital life principle. Some early Byzan-
tines perceived the soul in physical terms, as breath
(Didymos the Blind) or blood (this notion was criticized
by Nemesios), but later Gregory of Nyssa insisted on
a purely intellectual deﬁnition of it as ousia noera (intelli-
gent substance of the rational soul). The soul unceasingly
kindles the body to life, and suitably endows it with life
and is deﬁned as everlasting, ever-living, immortal, and
eternal. The soul was considered as a guide for the body,
giving it life and movement and causing its growth.
The soul is not harmony, temperament, or any other
quality, but it is an incorporeal being that is immortal
but usually united with the body (Nemesius of Emesa).
The soul is divided into three parts, the rational (to
noeron), the spirited (to thymikon), and the appetitive (to
epithymetikon). This terminology proves the Neoplatonic
inﬂuence. Despite the apparent afﬁnities between the
Christian and the Neoplatonic tradition, however, impor-
tant differences were continuously stressed by Byzantine
thinkers. In general, late Byzantine philosophers rejected
Neoplatonic theories on the preexistence of the soul. Some
systematic criticism of Proclus’ (Anonymous (eleventh
century), Nicholas of Methone) or Plotinus’ concept of
the soul appeared (Nikephoros Choumnos). The soul and
the body are created simultaneously and their coexistence
is deﬁnite from the embryo (Gregory of Nyssa, Arethas,
Nikephoros Choumnos). The soul cannot exist before its
body, nor does it in ecstasy depart from its own nature into
the nature of God. The soul does not have the attributes of
the sperm or of the father of the rational being but of
God, because it is produced by God and entered in
the creature (Arethas). After death the soul retains its
identity and is linked to its former body, which it recovers
at the future resurrection (John of Damascus, Nikephoros
Blemmydes).
Although the soul is united with the body, it is itself
immaterial and does not consist of any of the four material
elements (earth, water, air, ﬁre) or a combination of them.
Unlike the soul, the body is construed as three-dimensional,
visible, and corruptible (mortal). It consists of the four
980 P
Philosophical Psychology, Byzantine

elements and has four humors (black bile, phlegm, blood,
yellow bile). The Byzantines rejected the image of the body
as the cage or prison of the soul (Plato, Stoics) or as the
embodiment of evil (dualistic heresies, Manicheism).
The body, created by God himself, was conceived of as
ethically neutral, an instrument through which the soul
could sin. The soul is moved by free choice, it acts by
means of the body, whereas the body is changeable by
nature and it does not have its own motion. Byzantine
thinkers were concerned to retain an important place for
free will in their psychologies and to deny deterministic
accounts of behavior (contra-astrology). But there were
attempts at a reconciliation between the belief in astral
inﬂuence over the natural world and the Christian doc-
trines
of
divine
providence
and
human
free
will
(Nikephoros Gregoras). However, some thinkers, being
inﬂuenced by Neoplatonism, insisted that the astral bodies
were vehicles to transfer false images, fantasies, and hallu-
cinations, and to deceive man in which phantasia played
an important role (Michael Psellos).
Immortality of the Soul
Late Byzantine philosophical writings show the difﬁculties
of the interpretation of Aristotle’s account of the soul,
whether he thinks that the soul is immortal or not
(Theodore Metochites). Some Early Byzantine authors
claimed that Aristotle believed the soul to be mortal, and
they condemned him for it (Ps.-Justin Martyr, Gregory of
Nyssa). Some other thinkers claimed that Aristotle deﬁned
the soul as immortal and assigned to it an incorporeal
mode of being (Michael of Ephesus). Through the inter-
pretative tradition of the Neoplatonic commentators
(Philoponus and Ps.-Simplicius) the Byzantine thinkers
defended Aristotle’s position that the rational soul
alone is immortal (John Italos, Sophonias). They referred
to Aristotle’s texts (De anima, Physics 7–8) in which
he considers the intellect as functioning separately and
possessing an activity which does not require the body.
Aristotle’s comparison of the intellect in the body to the
pilot of a ship was used to show that he thought the
rational soul was separable and immortal (Nikephoros
Blemmydes, Theodore Metochites).
Throughout the long era of Christian Byzantium, as
with other branches of knowledge, Byzantine psychology
shows the vitality of ancient Greek philosophy. Apart from
continuity with the ancient Greek philosophical tradi-
tion and Greek Patristic sources, Byzantine psychology
is characterized by an absence of Arabic philosophical-
medical tradition (Avicenna, Averroes). Moreover, the
relationship between the Byzantine and Latin West is of
interest in connection with philosophical approaches
to Aristotle’s philosophy. The existence of numerous
translations of Latin works (mostly by Thomas Aquinas)
in Byzantium opened more gates to western scholasticism
(Gennadios Scholarios). The discussion between Platonic
and Aristotelian accounts of the soul continued in the
background of the dispute between Gemistos Plethon
and Gennadios Scholarios, and the debate continued
after the fall of Constantinople 1453 mainly in Italy
(Bessarion, Theodore Gazes, John Argyropoulos, George
Trapezountios).
See also: ▶Aristotelianism in the Greek, Latin, Syriac,
Arabic, and Hebrew Traditions ▶Emotions ▶Epistemol-
ogy, Byzantine ▶George Gemistios Plethon ▶George
Scholarios (Gennadios II) ▶Gregory Palamas ▶Internal
Senses ▶John Italos ▶John Philoponus ▶Maximus the
Confessor ▶Michael of Ephesus ▶Michael Psellos
▶Nikephoros
Gregoras
▶Nikephoros
Blemmydes
▶Nikephoros Choumnos ▶Philosophical Psychology
▶Philosophy,
Byzantine
▶Sophonias
▶Theodore
Metochites
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Anonymous (11th century) (1992) Anonymi Miscellanea philosophica.
A miscellany in the tradition of Michael Psellos (Cod. Baroccianus
Gr. 131), ed. Universite Catholique de Louvain, Faculte de
Philosophie et Lettres, Philoloque classique, Pontikos I. The Acad-
emy of Athens, Athens
Arethas (1968–1972) Scripta minora, ed. Westerink LG. Teubner, Leipzig
Bessarion Basil (1927) In calumniatorem Platonis libri 4, ed. Mohler L.
F. Scho¨ningh, Paderborn
Blemmydes
Nikephoros
(1784)
De
corpore,
ed.
Anonymous
(Boulismas D). Leipzig
Blemmydes Nikephoros (1976) Le ‘‘Traite´ de l’ame’’ de Nice´phore
Blemmydes,
ed.
Verhelst
M.
PhD
thesis,
Louvain-la-Neuve
Universite Catholique de Louvain, Faculte de Philosophie et Lettres,
Philoloque classique
Choumnos Nikephoros (1835) ’Antıyetıko`ς pro`ς Plotı˜non in Plotini
Opera omnia vol. II, ed. Creuzer, F. and Moser, H., E Typographaeo
Academico, Oxford
Italos John (1956) Quaestiones quodlibetales. Studia Patristica et
Byzantina 4, ed. Joannou P. Buch-Kunstverlag, Ettal
John of Damascus (1969) Die Schriften des Johannes von Damaskos, ed.
Kotter B. Gruyter, Berlin
Metochites Theodore (1943) Aristotelis de somno et vigilia liber adiectis
vetribus translationibus et Theodori Metochitae commentario, ed.
Drossaart LHJ. Burgersdijk & Niermans, Leiden
Metochites Theodore (1992) Ex liber De anima. In: Paraphrasis in
Aristotelis
universam
naturalem
philosopiam.
Frommann-
Holzboog, Stuttgart-bad Cannstatt, pp 183–303
Metochites Theodore (2005) Theodore Metochites on Aristotle’s De
memoria, ed. Bloch D. Cahiers de I ´Institut du Moyen Age Grec et
Latin 76:3–30
Michael of Ephesus (1903) In Parva naturalia commentaria, ed.
Wendland P. Commentaria in Aristotelem Graeca 22.1. Reimer, Berlin
Philosophical Psychology, Byzantine P
981
P

Michael of Ephesus (1904) In De partibus animalium, de Animalium
motione, de Animalium incessu, ed. Hayduck M. Commentaria in
Aristotelem Graeca 22.2. Reimer, Berlin
Nemesius of Emesa (1987) De natura hominis, ed. Morani M. Bibliotheca
Scriptorum Graecorum et Romanorum Teubneriana. Teubner, Leipzig
Nicetas
Stethatus
(2006)
Perı´
c\wη´ ς,
ed.
Plexidas
G.
Zetros,
Thessaloniki
Nicholas of Methone (1984) Refutation of Proclus’ elements of theology,
ed. Angelou AD. Brill, Leiden
Palamas Gregory (1983) The triads, ed. Meyendorff J. Paulist Press,
New York
Plethon George Gemistos (1973) Le De differentiis de Ple´thon d’apre`s
l’autographe de la Marcienne, ed. Lagarde B. Byzantion 43:312–343
Plethon George Gemistos (1988) Georgii Gemisti Plethonis contra
Scholarii pro Aristotele obiectiones, ed. Maltese EV. Teubner, Leipzig
Ps.-Psellus (1984) De anima. Patrologia Graeca 122, col J.P. Migne, Paris,
1029–1076
Psellos Michael (1948) De omnifaria doctrina, ed. Westerink LG. Centrale
Drukkerij N.V., Nijmegen
Psellos Michael (1989) Philosophica minora, ed. O’Meara DJ. Opuscula
psychologica, theologica, daemonologica, vol II. Teubner, Leipzig
Scholarios George (Gennadios) (1933) Translatio commentarii Thomae
Aquinae De anima Aristotelis, ed. Jugie M, Petit L, Siderides XA
Oeuvres comple`tes de Georges (Gennadios) Scholarios, vol 6.
Maison de la bonne presse, Paris
Sophonias (1883) In Aristotelis De anima, ed. Hayduck M. Commentaria
in Aristotelem Graeca 23.1. Reimer, Berlin
Symeon Seth (1939) Anecdota Atheniensia et alia, vol 2, ed. Delatte A.
H. Vaillant-Carmane/E´.Champion, Liege/Paris
Secondary Sources
Benakis LG (1986) Die Stellung des Menschen im Kosmos in der
Byzantinischen Philosophie. In: Wenin C (ed) L’homme et son
univers au moyen aˆge. Actes du septie`me congre`s international de
philosophie me´die´vale (30 aouˆt–4 septembre 1982). E´ditions de
l’Institut supe´rieur de philosophie, Louvain-la-Neuve, pp 56–76
Benakis LG (1989) Phantasie. In: Ritter J, Grunder K (eds) Historisches
Worterbuch de Philosophie, Band 7 (P-Q). Schwabe, Basel,
pp 524–526
Benakis LG (1991) Commentaries and commentators on the works of
Aristotle (except the logical ones) in Byzantium. In: Mojsisch B,
Pluta O (eds) Historia Philosophiae Medii Aevi: Studien zur
Geschichte der Philosophie des Mittelalters I. Gru¨ner, Amsterdam,
pp 45–54
Benakis LG (1997) Nikephoros Choumnos (1250–1327). U¨ ber die seele
gegen Plotin. In: Benakis L (ed) Neoplatonism et Philosophie
Medievale.
Actes
de
Colloque
International
de
Corfou
(6–
8.10.1995) organise´ par la Societe Internationale pour L’ Etude de
la Philosophie Medievale. Brepols, Turnhout, pp 320–321
Benakis LG (2002) Texts and studies on Byzantine philosophy. Parousia,
Athens
Blumenthal HJ (1997) Sophonias’ commentary on Aristotle’s De
anima, Ne´oplatonisme et philosophie me´die´vale. In: Benakis L (ed)
Neoplatonism et Philosophie Medievale. Actes de Colloque Interna-
tional de Corfou (6–8.10.1995) organise´ par la Societe Internationale
pour L’ Etude de la Philosophie Medievale. Brepols, Turnhout,
pp 307–317
Byde´n B (2003) Theodore Metochites’ Stoicheiosis astronomike and
the study of natural philosophy and mathematics in early
palaiologan Byzantium. Studia Graeca et Latina Gothoburgensia
66. Go¨teborg
Byde´n B (2006) Lοgοtewnıkές kaınοtοmı´eς sta pro´ ıma palaıοlo´geıa
upοmnZ´ mata stο Perı` cuwZ´ ς tοu ΑrıstοtέlZ, Υpo´mnZma
4:221–251
Fryde E (2000) The early Palaeologan Renaissance (1261–c.1360). Brill,
Leiden
Ierodiakonou K, Byden B (2008) Byzantine philosophy. In: Stanford ency-
clopedia of philosophy. http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/byzantine-
philosophy/. Accessed 8 Sept 2008
Joannou P (1956) Christliche Metaphysik in Byzanz. I, Die Illumina-
tionslehre des Michael Psellos und Joannes Italos. Studia Patristica
et Byzantina 3, Ettal
Kapriev G (2005) Philosophie in Byzanz. Ko¨nigshausen & Neumann,
Wu¨rzburg
Knuuttila S (2004) Emotions in ancient and medieval philosophy. Oxford
University Press, Oxford
Lackner W (1986) Anthropologische Themen in den Schriften des
Nikephoros Blemmydes. In: Wenin C (ed) L’homme et son univers
au moyen aˆge. Actes du septie`me congre`s international de
philosophie me´die´vale (30 aouˆt–4 septembre 1982). E´ditions de
l’Institut supe´rieur de philosophie, Louvain-la-Neuve, pp 247–251
Preus A (1981) Aristotle and Michael of Ephesus on the movement and
progression of animals. Olms, New York
Tatakis B (1949) La philosophie byzantine. Presses Universitaires de
France, Paris
Verpeaux J (1959) Nice´phore Choumnos, homme d’e´tat et humaniste
byzantin (ca 1250/1255–1327). A. et J. Picard, Paris
Vitali M-C (1986) The´odore Me´tochite et sa Paraphrasis in libros De
anima Aristotelis. In: Wenin C (ed) L’homme et son univers au
moyen aˆge. Actes du septie`me congre`s international de philosophie
me´die´vale (30 aouˆt–4 septembre 1982). E´ditions de l’Institut
supe´rieur de philosophie, Louvain-la-Neuve, pp 273–278
Philosophical Psychology, Jewish
Tradition
JAMES T. ROBINSON
The Divinity School
University of Chicago
Chicago
USA
Abstract
During the Middle Ages (especially c. 900–1500) the Jews
developed a rich and varied tradition of philosophical
psychology, ranging from the stoically-inspired theories
of Saadia Gaon to the Neoplatonism of Isaac Israeli,
from the Aristotelianism of Maimonides and Gersonides
to the anti-Aristotelianism of their sharpest critic, Hasdai
Crescas. Jews made original contributions to the technical
discussion of the soul, in discursive treatises and com-
mentaries on philosophical texts. They also discussed the
soul in traditional texts and genres – commentaries on
Bible and rabbinic literature, sermons, and liturgical
982 P
Philosophical Psychology, Jewish Tradition

poetry – thus introducing ‘‘foreign’’ ideas into the very
heart of classical Judaism.
This brief survey of Jewish psychological writings dur-
ing the Middle Ages will focus on major ﬁgures and
systematic works of philosophy and theology; it will
make only occasional reference to the exegetical, homilet-
ical, and liturgical material. The major developments will
be presented chronologically, beginning with Judaeo-
Arabic writings from the Islamic world, then turning to
Hebrew texts from Christian Europe.
Saadia Gaon (882–942)
One of the ﬁrst rabbinic Jews to write systematically about
the soul, or about any other philosophical-theological
subject, was Saadia Gaon, rabbinic leader and controver-
sialist in Iraq during the early tenth century. Saadia dis-
cusses
the
soul
in
his
biblical
commentaries
and
commentary on Sefer Yetsirah. The fullest discussion, how-
ever, is found in his theological summa The Book of Beliefs
and Opinions.
In Book 6 of The Book of Beliefs and Opinions Saadia
surveys and rejects six deﬁnitions of the soul – as accident,
air, ﬁre, a duality (soul and spirit), two kinds of air, and
the blood – before presenting his own view: that the
soul is a luminescent substance akin to, but even ﬁner
than the substance of the celestial spheres. It has its seat
in the heart, works in the body through the veins and
nerves, and possesses in general three faculties, which he
associates with three biblical terms: nefesh refers to the
appetitive faculty of the soul; ruah to the irascible or
passionate; and neshamah to the rational. The soul, he
maintains, is created in the heart when the body is fully
formed, lives with the body a ﬁxed duration of time, then
separates after death, remaining apart till body and soul
are reunited during the time of resurrection. Only then
is the single composite existence that is human being –
body and soul together – judged and given reward or
punishment.
Already in Book 6 Saadia shows his primary concern
to be not with abstract theories of the soul per se but with
divine reward and punishment. In Books 7 through 9 this
becomes the primary focus, as he presents a detailed expli-
cation of his eschatological theories. In general these sec-
tions draw much more from biblical texts than rational
inquiry. Nevertheless, some philosophical and theological
ideas are worthy of note. For example, his discussion of
resurrection confronts a basic problem of individuation
found already in earlier Christian theology: What body
exactly is reconstituted and in what state? Old or young?
Sick or healthy? The problem also of how ﬂesh is
reconstituted when combined with other things is raised.
Thus to cite one famous example: A man is eaten by a lion,
the lion drowns and is eaten by a ﬁsh, the ﬁsh is caught and
consumed by a ﬁsherman, who is subsequently burned to
ashes. How can the ﬂesh of the original man be
reconstituted once digested and incorporated physiologi-
cally into another being?
These types of paradoxes are characteristic of Saadia’s
treatment of resurrection and redemption. Although they
are not directly related to psychology, they are worthy of
consideration
in
the
history
of
the
problem
of
individuation.
Isaac Israeli (c. 855–955)
Saadia was not the only Jew engaged in philosophy during
the late ninth and early tenth century. He was rivaled by
his near contemporary Isaac Israeli – philosopher and
physician in Kairouan – who produced a very different
literary corpus with strong ties not to Stoicism and
Muʿtazilite kala¯m but to Neoplatonism. Each of Israeli’s
surviving philosophical works includes discussions of the
soul; a brief discussion of them will be given here.
Israeli’s Book of Deﬁnitions is Neoplatonic in form as
well as content. Following the Alexandrian school tradi-
tion (and more directly its Arabic epigone al-Kindı¯), it
presents a list of some 57 philosophical terms which are
organized not alphabetically but conceptually. Following
the deﬁnitions and descriptions of ‘‘philosophy’’ itself, he
presents terms from above to below, according to their
place within the cosmos: wisdom, intellect, soul, celestial
sphere, sublunar, and celestial body.
The deﬁnitions given by Israeli are strongly meta-
physical and generally ﬁt into standard Neoplatonic
emanationist cosmologies. Intellect is the ﬁrst emanation
or hypostasis, the speciﬁcality of all things and genus
of genera; it knows itself and through knowing itself
knows all other things; it is, however, of three types or
stages: actual intellect; potential intellect; and a ‘‘second
intellect’’ – which refers to the process of acquiring possi-
ble knowledge through sensation and experience, which
can then be transformed into actual knowledge. Soul is
second to intellect; it is a substance that perfects the body
that possesses life potentially (according to Aristotle), or
a substance connected with the celestial body (according
to Plato).
After harmonizing these two views (following the
standard Neoplatonic practice of harmonizing Plato and
Aristotle), Israeli provides more detailed information
about the different souls or types of soul, set in emanative
order: The rational emanates from the intellect; it is
highest in rank, is responsible for learning and knowledge
in both the theoretical and practical spheres; it is because
Philosophical Psychology, Jewish Tradition P
983
P

of the rational soul that one can receive reward or punish-
ment. The animal soul is lower than the rational, from
whose shadow it emanates; it is possessed by animals, is
concerned primarily with sensation and movement, rather
than reason and understanding; because animals cannot
reason, they are not subject to reward and punishment.
The lowest soul is the vegetative, which emanates from the
shadow of the animal; it is concerned primarily with desire
and governs the functions of nutrition, reproduction,
growth, and decay. Contrary to humans and animals,
vegetables are not in possession of reason, movement, or
sensation.
The emanative scheme presented in The Book of Def-
initions is reproduced, with some variations, in The Book
of Substances, The Chapter on the Elements, and The Book
on Spirit and Soul. In these treatises Israeli’s ideas about
soul and spirit are also sometimes explained in light of
biblical terms and expressions. It is in his work where
I Samuel 25:9 – ‘‘The soul of my Lord shall be bound in
the bundle of life with the Lord thy God; and the souls of
thine enemies, them shall he sling out, as from the hollow
of a sling’’ – emerged as a popular biblical prooftext of
both eternal reward and punishment for the soul, and
where a Jewish eschatology is ﬁrst developed out of Neo-
platonic ideas and images. Like Saadia, Israeli combines
biblical and rabbinic images with philosophy – in this case
Neoplatonic philosophy – to create a striking image of
the hereafter. For him, the soul is puriﬁed through good
acts which correspond with reason, and is sullied by bad
acts which are governed by the appetites of the animal
soul. The pure soul is released into the spiritual realm,
whereas the dark turbid soul remains below, caught in the
cosmological sphere of ﬁre, revolving eternally in this
literal hell-ﬁre.
Moses Maimonides (1138–1204)
In the two centuries following Saadia and Israeli, Jewish
thought was largely under the inﬂuence of Muʿtazilite
kala¯m and Neoplatonism. This is especially the case in
Islamic Spain, where Israeli inspired a long line of Jewish
Neoplatonists. In the twelfth century, however, kala¯m and
Neoplatonism gave way to Aristotelianism, which would
come to dominate Jewish philosophical discussion about
the soul for the remainder of the Middle Ages.
The most important and inﬂuential of the Jewish
Aristotelians was Moses Maimonides, legal scholar, com-
munal leader, physician, and philosopher in Egypt. To be
sure, Maimonides does not ﬁt neatly into any school
tradition of Aristotelianism, nor did he write systemati-
cally on the soul (or any other philosophical subject). Yet
his nonsystematic eclectic discourses and his enigmatic
judgments did much to stimulate Jewish thought for sev-
eral centuries to come. A brief description of his most
fruitful discussions of the soul will be given here.
Maimonides’ early commentary on the Mishnah, like
all his writings, was novel in many ways. It is comprehen-
sive, providing explanation of all Mishnaic tractates,
including those without Talmudic explication; and it
includes three systematic prefaces, two of which relate to
the soul. As introduction to tractate Avot, a collection of
Tannaitic wisdom sayings, Maimonides provides a syn-
thetic primer in Aristotelian ethics, which would become
the standard textbook in philosophical ethics used by Jews
throughout the later Middle Ages. In the ﬁrst few chapters,
as introduction to the doctrine of the mean, he presents
a brief discourse on the soul and its faculties. Borrowing
from al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s Select Aphorisms (sometimes word-for-
word), he defends the unity of the soul, the uniqueness of
the human soul (which is essentially different than animal
and plant souls), and describes the soul’s faculties and
their functions: nutrition, sensation, appetite, imagina-
tion, and reason – both practical and theoretical. By
knowing the soul the physician of the soul, that is, the
ethicist, can diagnose, treat, and cure the soul’s sicknesses,
leading it from extreme behavior to the mean and from
a life of vice to a life of virtue. Yet the question remains:
how does one determine what the mean is? Here Maimon-
ides diverges from al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ (and Aristotle), identifying
knowledge of God as the orienting ethical principle
toward which all actions should lead.
The other introduction relating to psychic matters
prefaces an earlier chapter of the Mishnah, Chapter. 10
(‘‘Heleq’’) of Sanhedrin. Working off the qualiﬁed ﬁrst
sentence of this chapter – all Jews have a share (heleq) in
the world to come, except . . . – Maimonides presents
a survey of different conceptions of the ‘‘world to come.’’
He counts ﬁve: the garden of Eden and Gehinnom con-
strued as places of corporeal pleasure or pain; the messi-
anic age, governed by an eternal king who rules an elite
population of immortal giants; the time of resurrection,
when all deserving souls are reconstituted with their bod-
ies and live forever in peace; a this-worldly ‘‘world to
come,’’ characterized by universal health, wealth, peace,
and security; the ﬁnal view, according to Maimonides,
combines all the others: a messianic age, when the dead
are resurrected, experience inﬁnite pleasure in the garden
of Eden, and live forever in peace and security. Following
a brief excursus on education and exegesis, in which the
primarily rhetorical and heuristic character of any doc-
trine of reward is exposed, he presents his own purely
spiritualistic view: that knowledge of God is the highest
goal and contemplation of God the greatest reward; this
984 P
Philosophical Psychology, Jewish Tradition

alone is true delight; it has no share whatsoever in any-
thing material.
Maimonides’ ethics and eschatology are repeated in
his comprehensive code of law, the Mishneh Torah. In the
‘‘Laws of Ethical Dispositions’’ Maimonides presents
a complete ethical theory – in Jewish legal context –
governed by the principles of Aristotle’s doctrine of the
mean (although there is constant tension between ethical
moderation and intellectual extremism). In the ‘‘Laws of
Repentance’’ the spiritualistic intellectualistic orientation
of the Introduction to Heleq is reproduced in striking
form: true love of God results from knowledge of God
(‘‘according to the knowledge, will be the love’’), as exem-
pliﬁed by the single-minded passion of the lover in Song of
Songs, who seeks conjunction with her beloved active
intellect, or the rabbinic ideal in Berakhot: ‘‘In the world
to come, there is no eating, drinking, or sexual relations,
but rather the righteous sit with their crowns on their
heads enjoying the radiance of the divine presence.’’
The Guide of the Perplexed – Maimonides’ philosoph-
ical-theological magnum opus – also includes signiﬁcant
material about the soul and intellect, although generally it
is difﬁcult to determine what his true opinion might have
been on any particular subject. The text itself is framed by
the noetic nature of man – created in the (intellectual)
image of God (Guide 1:1), and directed toward intellectual
perfection as his ﬁnal end (Guide 3:54) – and has discus-
sions of soul and intellect throughout. For example, in
Guide 1:72 and 2:6–7 Maimonides presents a fairly stan-
dard Neoplatonized-Aristotelian emanationist cosmology,
with the active intellect – the last of the celestial intelli-
gences – construed as the cause of existence and ﬁnal
aim of knowledge. In Guide 1:40–42 he lists various
deﬁnitions – philosophical and nonphilosophical alike –
of the equivocal terms ‘‘soul,’’ ‘‘spirit,’’ ‘‘life,’’ and ‘‘death.’’
And in Guide 1:68 he presents a summary of the Aristote-
lian doctrine of the identity of knower and thing known.
Many of the traditional theological doctrines in the Guide
are understood with the help of the theory of the active
intellect. Both prophecy and providence are explained as
resulting from a divine overﬂow through the active intel-
lect to individuals with properly prepared intellects.
There are other chapters in the Guide, however, which
complicate matters, suggesting that cognition, for Mai-
monides, is far more difﬁcult than it might ﬁrst appear.
In contemporary Maimonidean scholarship these chap-
ters have led to a series of studies and counter-studies,
arguing that Maimonides, who seems to place such great
emphasis on intellectual perfection, conjunction, and
knowledge of God, in fact believed that these designated
goals could not possibly be achieved by any human being
(except, perhaps, by Moses). Based on remarks about the
limitations of the human intellect – incapable of
apprehending even the celestial world, let alone God –
recent scholars have suggested that Maimonides was
a metaphysical critic (akin to Kant) or even a skeptic.
In Maimonides’ own time, in contrast, he was accused
of exactly the opposite: being far too enamored with the
intellectual life. Based mainly on his commentary on the
Mishnah and Mishneh Torah, he was charged with denying
the religious doctrine of resurrection, and of promoting
a purely elitist noetic doctrine of eternal reward, based
solely on intellectual accomplishment. In response to these
accusations, he wrote his ‘‘Letter on Resurrection,’’ an apol-
ogetic tract, which might be considered his last philosoph-
ical-theological writing. Resurrection, he writes there, is
rabbinic dogma, and he accepts it, just as others should; he
does not deny it or explain it metaphorically. On the
contrary, precisely because it is dogma and cannot be
proved rationally it should simply be accepted on faith;
and moreover denying it affects belief in other related
subjects, such as miracles. Nevertheless, he reafﬁrms
what he stated in earlier works: that the ﬁnal reward,
beyond any other reward, the ‘‘world to come’’ where
one reaches true life without death, is incorporeal –
made up of ‘‘souls without bodies, like angels.’’
Levi b. Gershom, Gersonides (1288–1344)
The thirteenth century was largely a time of transition in
the history of Judaism, as the centers of Jewish thought
moved from the Islamic world to Christian Europe.
Dozens of translations of philosophical writings from
Arabic to Hebrew, along with Hebrew encyclopedias,
summaries, glossaries and other reference works, laid the
foundations for the emergence of a tradition of philoso-
phy in Hebrew. Although the thirteenth century produced
some creative and original thinkers, it was not till the
fourteenth that the hard work of the translators produced
a mature philosophical culture. This is represented most
fully by Gersonides, generally considered the most original
Jewish philosopher in the later Middle Ages.
Among
the
many
subjects
that
preoccupied
Gersonides during his productive career are the soul, the
intellect, and the possibility of conjunction with the agent
intellect. He discusses these in his commentary on
Averroes’ De anima, in his commentaries on the Bible,
and most systematically in Book 1 of his theological
summa, The Wars of the Lord. The latter will be our
focus here.
Gersonides’ discussion of intellect and immortality in
the Wars is framed by Aristotle’s De anima, especially the
notoriously ambiguous text at 3:5. There Aristotle
Philosophical Psychology, Jewish Tradition P
985
P

introduced the notion of a passive (or potential or mate-
rial) intellect, which can ‘‘become all things,’’ and an active
intellect, which causes or ‘‘makes’’ all things; the latter is
‘‘separate, impassible, unmixed . . . it alone is immortal
and eternal.’’ Gersonides does not engage Aristotle
directly. For him the study of Aristotle means the study
of the commentators (Alexander, Themistius, al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯,
Averroes), who developed different and incompatible
interpretations of Aristotle and inconsistent theories of
intellect and intellection. Gersonides’ aim in the Wars is
to explain clearly the different views, show their weak-
nesses, and develop his own position out of and in con-
tradistinction to theirs. His opinion, he claims, will
emerge as superior in terms of philosophical argumenta-
tion. It will also help support the traditional doctrine of
individual immortality – at least in some degree.
The discussion of the different views, leading to his
own original hypothesis, can be summarized as follows:
According to Alexander of Aphrodisias (as Gersonides
construes his position), the material or potential or
human intellect is a disposition in the soul which comes
to be with the body; it is the capacity to know, and nothing
more. It knows through a process of abstraction: the senses
provide material forms to the imagination, and the imag-
ination intelligible forms to the intellect, which can see
them with the help of an agent or active intellect – an
external celestial incorporeal cause of thinking, which
shines light (as it were) on a potentially intelligible sub-
stance, in the same way that the sun shines light on
a potentially sensible substance. When the intellect is
thinking an intelligible, it is actually thinking; when it is
thinking an intelligible substance completely separate
from matter, it can become one with this separate intelli-
gible and survive eternally through it. The sum total of its
thoughts is called acquired intellect; when these acquired
thoughts are separate intelligibles, they survive, having
achieved some sort of union with the eternal thoughts
the mind is thinking.
Themistius,
according
to
Gersonides,
defends
a completely contrary – largely Platonizing – reading of
Aristotle, a view which Averroes then develops in detail
(as Gersonides understands him). According to this view,
the material or potential or human intellect is not
a disposition that comes to be with the body, but rather
a separate substance, which is an incorporeal one, and
eternal by nature. It itself possesses universal knowledge;
in contrast, it can know individual particular things only
through the individual body or soul. As with Alexander,
Themistius (as developed by Averroes) considers the agent
or active intellect an external cosmic intelligence, but it is
identical with the material intellect. In other words,
the potential or material or human intellect is an individ-
ual instantiation of the universal active intellect. Although
the material intellect can acquire particular knowledge
with the help of sense and imagination, this knowl-
edge does not perdure. Only the material intellect, with
the death of the body, when it returns, as it were, to its
original state in the active intellect, survives the destruc-
tion of the body.
In Gersonides’ opinion all of these views are deﬁcient
in some way, and through his criticism of them he
develops his own view, which for him answers all the
problems of the others. To sum up his criticism, in
Gersonides’ opinion Alexander can account for particular
knowledge – through abstraction – but seems incapable
of explaining universal knowledge; for if the material
intellect comes to be with the body, it is also subject to
destruction (following a basic principle of Aristotelian
science), yet universal knowledge, in Alexander’s acquired
intellect, is eternal. Themistius, for his part, cannot
account for particular knowledge, for the only way a
separate intellect can know individuals is by mixing with
the body, but if it mixes with the body, it is no longer
separate. That the material and active intellects are one in
essence, different in accident, is given the lengthiest dis-
cussion by Gersonides. He focuses on problems of indi-
viduation: if the active intellect is really one, then the
material intellect in all humans should be one, but there
is a manifest difference between individuals; and if the
material intellect, on the other hand, is many, then one
would conclude that a single thing is both one and many at
the same time.
What then is Gersonides’ own view? For him, the
material intellect is a disposition or capacity created in
the imagination. It is created, but can become eternal – for
the principle that nothing that comes to be can become
eternal is false (he argues this in Book 5). Here, for the
most part, he agrees with Alexander, and rejects the view
of Themistius and Averroes. With the active intellect,
however, Gersonides begins to break new ground. He
agrees that the active intellect is a separate external incor-
poreal cosmic intelligence, which is a cause of existence
and knowledge, but the way he deﬁnes it is different. For
Gersonides, this active intellect is the cause of all existence
in the lower world, insofar as it possesses all forms that
prime matter is capable of receiving, and in their myriad
relations. And, for the same reason, it is the cause of
thought, since in it are all the possible intelligible forms,
in all their myriad relations – it provides the grounds, as
it were, for all thinking. In this sense the active intellect
986 P
Philosophical Psychology, Jewish Tradition

is – to use Gersonides’ terminology – the order, justice,
pattern, or ‘‘nomos’’ of the sublunar world.
One question remains: If the active intellect is the
pattern of the world, can an individual human intellect
know it completely and conjoin with it, and what would
conjunction mean? For Gersonides, all knowledge comes
through experience of the world; all knowledge is scien-
tiﬁc or inductive; it is always the result of learning. In his
opinion, there is no innate knowledge or illumination
from above; even ﬁrst principles are learned. Therefore
any sort of complete cognition or union with the active
intellect is impossible; human beings, through rational
study, cannot possibly acquire complete understanding
of all forms in the world in all their complex relations;
they cannot possibly see the world from the perspective
of the active intellect. Yet precisely because the active
intellect is the pattern of the world, and the world is
a reﬂection of it, the knowledge gained through empirical
study provides some share in or taste of this universal
pattern.
It is this combination of ideas, perhaps born of
Gersonides’ own inclination toward the empirical that
led him to a remarkable conclusion: that immortality
consists in the little knowledge one acquires through the
rational scientiﬁc empirical investigation of the world, and
this little knowledge is different – and unique – for each
individual intellect. In this way does Gersonides – the
staunch Aristotelian, the sturdy empiricist – defend the
doctrine of an individual immortality.
Hasdai Crescas (c. 1340–1410/1411)
Although Gersonides was critical of his Aristotelian fore-
bears, and often worked hard to undermine their theories,
he was nevertheless committed to constructing a positive
scientiﬁc understanding of the world. Hasdai Crescas, in
contrast – chief rabbi of the Jews of Aragon, legal scholar,
polemicist, and theologian – mastered Aristotelianism for
a different reason: to topple it from within. Through his
careful study of the massive corpus of philosophical texts
available in Hebrew, he set out, in his Light of the Lord, to
free Judaism from the doctrines of Aristotle and his Jewish
epigones. In particular, he focused his attention on philo-
sophical proofs for the existence, unity, and incorporeality
of God (and the Aristotelian principles upon which they
were based), philosophical ideas about the origin of the
world, divine knowledge of individuals, prophecy as
a natural perfection, providence as consequent upon the
intellect, and – most important for our purposes – the
noetic doctrine of immortality, achieved through con-
junction with the active intellect.
The main discussion of intellect and immortality in
Light of the Lord is found in Book 2, Part 6, where Crescas
ﬁrst presents a summary of the Aristotelian theory of
knowledge and conjunction – based mainly on Jewish
adaptations – followed by a refutation of it. The ideas of
the philosophers, as Crescas understands them, are as
follows: through the acquiring of true knowledge, the
human or potential or material intellect can become con-
stituted as an incorporeal substance, called the ‘‘acquired
intellect,’’ which will exist forever. This state of existence,
this achieving of knowledge, is considered by them the
ﬁnal aim of human existence; and the intellect’s eternal
contemplation of universal truths after death is what it
means to be truly happy: it brings with it true beatitude
and leads to the highest form of pleasure.
How one can achieve this state of intellectual bliss,
however, is not entirely clear. For Crescas, there are two
different ways of understanding it. First, the view that
knowledge of any truth whatsoever will lead to some
degree of acquired intellect and some level of immortality.
This idea, which Crescas seems to draw from Gersonides,
is dependent on the view that intelligible forms in the
sublunar world are part of the plan or order or ‘‘nomos’’
in the active intellect, thus to know any part of the plan is
to know a part of the active intellect. According to this
opinion, the more knowledge one attains the greater one’s
pleasure and larger one’s share in eternal bliss. The second
view – which Crescas seems to draw from Maimonides – is
that the intellect can become constituted as an incorporeal
eternal substance only when it contemplates an incorpo-
real separate intelligence, such as God, the angels, or the
active intellect; conjunction requires knowledge of the
intelligence itself, not any part or instantiation of it.
The philosophical theory of conjunction – no matter
which way it is construed – is, for Crescas, not only
incoherent but also dangerous. First, if one achieves
some share in immortality simply by knowing any rational
truth, then anyone can attain it. Reason and philosophy,
moreover, would seem to be superior to revelation and
law, for it is through thinking, not through acting and
obeying, that ﬁnal reward is achieved. The second theory
is no less problematic – on different grounds. The problem
is that, according to Maimonides, knowledge of God (and
apparently all incorporeal substances) is possible only
through negation, and negative knowledge, knowing
what God, the angels, or the active intellect is not, cannot
lead to any positive identiﬁcation between knower and
known. By knowing what is not the active intellect one is
not led to any union with the active intellect. If conjunc-
tion with the active intellect requires complete and
Philosophical Psychology, Jewish Tradition P
987
P

positive knowledge of the active intellect, and knowledge
of the active intellect is impossible, then conjunction is
impossible. Or, to modify slightly an infamous conclusion
attributed to al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯: immortality of the soul is nothing
but an old wives’ tale.
Crescas has another argument as well, which is more
creative, and which, in many ways, leads more directly
to his own opinion on the subject. If the ﬁnal aim of
human existence, he argues, is knowledge and intellectual
cognition, which constitutes the intellect as a separate incor-
poreal substance, then the ﬁnal aim of man is to become
not-man. That is, the ﬁnal aim of man as composite of form
and matter is to become pure intellect, completely separate
from matter. Not only is this incoherent, he concludes, but it
is in violation of divine justice, for how can the intellect
alone, existing eternally, joyfully contemplating universal
truths, receive this reward for what was accomplished by
the human being during life, as body and soul.
What then is the ﬁnal aim of human existence,
according to Crescas? And if immortality is possible, and
not trivial, what is it and how is it achieved? Here Crescas
draws more from Scripture and tradition to present
a theory contrary to that of the philosophers. For him the
soul is a self-subsisting spiritual substance disposed toward
thinking. That is, the soul is not a substrate, which serves
and is subordinate to intellect; rather thinking or intellec-
tual cognition is just one of several things that contribute to
the happiness of the soul – which is the ﬁnal perfection.
In fact, thinking is itself subordinate to action, to obedience
to the law and observance of the commandments, by
which love – the highest ideal and truest happiness, is
achieved. As the Rabbis say: ‘‘Which is better, study or
action? Study, because it leads to action.’’ This is why eternal
reward is achieved even by the minor child who does
nothing more than say amen after the communal prayers.
Crescas’ critique of the Aristotelian ideas of acquired
intellect and conjunction with the active intellect had
varying success. It was used, borrowed, modiﬁed, and
developed by a host of students and followers during the
ﬁfteenth century, including Joseph Albo; and it was
rejected by others, such as Abraham Shalom, who
attempted to defend Maimonides and Gersonides against
Crescas’ attacks. As in other areas of Crescas’ philosophy,
perhaps here also it was only in Renaissance and early
modern times when his ideas were fully appreciated – for
example, in the philosophy of love of Judah Abarbanel or
the intellectual love of God of Spinoza.
See also: ▶Abu¯ l-Baraka¯t al-Bag˙da¯dı¯ ▶Alexander of
Aphrodisias
and
Arabic
Aristotelianism
▶Aristotle,
Arabic ▶Avicebron ▶Consciousness ▶Contemplative
Happiness and Civic Virtue ▶Dominicus Gundissalinus
▶Doxographies, Graeco-Arabic ▶al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, Abu¯ Nas˙r
▶Galen, Arabic ▶al-G˙ aza¯lı¯, Abu¯ H˙ a¯mid Muh:ammad
▶Gersonides
▶Happiness
▶Hasdai
Crescas
▶Ibn
Ba¯jja, Abu¯ Bakr ibn al-Sa¯ʾig˙ (Avempace) ▶Ibn Sı¯na¯, Abu¯
ʿAlı¯ (Avicenna) ▶Ibn T˙ufayl, Abu¯ Bakr (Abubacer)
▶Internal
Senses
▶Isaac
Israeli
▶Judah
Halevi
▶al-Kindı¯, Abu¯ Yu¯suf Yaʿqu¯b ibn Ish:a¯q ▶Knowledge
▶Moses Maimonides ▶Parva naturalia, Commentaries
on Aristotle’s ▶Philosophical Psychology ▶Plato, Arabic
▶Plotinus, Arabic ▶Saadia Gaon ▶Themistius, Arabic
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Texts and Translations
Altmann
Alexander,
Miklos
Stern
Samuel
(1958)
Isaac
Israeli:
a neoplatonic philosopher of the early tenth century. Oxford Uni-
versity Press, Oxford
Bland Kalman (1982) The epistle on the possibility of conjunction with
the active intellect by Ibn Rushd, with the commentary by Moses
Narboni. Jewish Theological Seminary, New York
Bos Gerrit (1994) Aristotle’s De anima translated into Hebrew by
Zerahyah ben Isaac ben Shealtiel Hen. Brill, Leiden
Davidson Herbert (1988) Averroes’ commentary on the De intellectu
attributed to Alexander. Jerus Stud Jew Th 7:205–218 (Hebrew)
Feldman Seymour (1984) Levi ben Gershom (Gersonides), The Wars of
the Lord, Book One: immortality of the soul. The Jewish Publication
Society of America, Philadelphia
Gorﬁnkle Joseph (1912) The eight chapters of Maimonides on ethics.
Columbia University Press, New York
Halkin Abraham, Hartman David (1985) Crisis and leadership: epistles of
Maimonides. The Jewish Publication Society of America, Philadelphia
Harvey Warren Zev (1973) Hasdai Crescas’ critique of the theory of the
acquired intellect. PhD dissertation, Columbia University
Hercz J (1869) Drei Abhandlungen u¨ber die Conjunction des seperaten
Intellects mit dem Menschen von Averroes (Vater und Sohn).
Hermann, Berlin
Ivry Alfred (1977) Moses of Narbonne, treatise on the perfection of the
soul. The Israel Academy of Sciences and Humanities, Jerusalem
Ivry Alfred (2002) Averroes, middle commentary on Aristotle’s De anima.
Brigham Young University Press, Provo
Ivry Alfred (2004) Averroes’ middle commentary on Aristotle’s De anima,
in the translation of Moses Ibn Tibbon. The Israel Academy of
Sciences and Humanities, Jerusalem
Landauer Samuel (1875) Die Psychologie des Ibn Sı¯na¯. ZdmG 29:335–418
Mashbaum Jesse (1981) Gersonides’commentary on Averroes’ Epitome of
the De anima: the internal senses. PhD dissertation, Brandeis University
Regev Shaul (1982) Joseph b. Shem Tov’s short commentary on Averroes’
Epistle on the Possibility of Conjunction. Jerus Stud Jew Th 2:38–93
(Hebrew)
Rosenblatt Samuel (1948) Saadia Gaon, the book of beliefs and opinions.
Yale University Press, New Haven
Weiss Raymond (1975) Ethical writings of Maimonides. Dover,
New York
Wolf Arnold (1966) Maimonides on immortality and the principles of
Judaism. Republished in Twersky I (1972) A Maimonides reader.
Behrman House, West Orange, pp 401–423
988 P
Philosophical Psychology, Jewish Tradition

Secondary Sources
Altmann A (1987) Maimonides on the intellect and the scope of meta-
physics. In: Von der mittelalterlichen zur modernen Aufkla¨rung–
Studien zur ju¨dischen Geistesgeschichte. Mohr, Tu¨bingen, pp 60–129
Davidson H (1963) Maimonides’ Shemonah Peraqim and Alfarabi’s Fusu¯l
al-Madanı¯. Proc Am Acad Jewish Res 31:33–50
Davidson H (1967) Saadia’s list of theories of the soul. In: Altmann A (ed)
Jewish medieval and renaissance studies. Harvard University Press,
Cambridge
Davidson H (1972) The active intellect in the Cuzari and Halevi’s theory
of causality. REJ 131:351–396
Davidson H (1992a) Alfarabi, Avicenna, & Averroes, on intellect. Oxford
University Press, Oxford
Davidson H (1992b) Gersonides on the material and active intellects. In:
Freudenthal G (ed) Studies on Gersonides – a fourteenth-century
Jewish philosopher-scientist. Brill, Leiden, pp 195–265
Davidson H (1992/1993) Maimonides on metaphysical knowledge.
Maimonidean Stud 3:49–103
Davidson H (2000) Further on a problematic passage in guide of the
perplexed 2.24. Maimonidean Stud 4:1–14
Eran A (1998) From simple faith to sublime faith: Ibn Daud’s pre-
maimonidean thought. Hakibbutz Hameuchad, Tel-Aviv (Hebrew)
Feldman S (1978) Gersonides on the possibility of conjunction with the
agent intellect. Assoc Jewish Stud Rev 3:99–120
Feldman S (1992) Platonic themes in Gersonides’ doctrine of the active
intellect. In: Goodmann L (ed) Neoplatonism and Jewish thought.
SUNY Press, Albany, pp 255–277
Fenton P (1992) Philosophie et exe´ge`se dans le Jardin de la me´taphore de
Moı¨se Ibn ‘Ezra, philosophe et poe`te andalou du XIIe sie`cle. Brill,
Leiden
Fontaine R (1990) In defence of Judaism: Abraham Ibn Daud. Sources
and structure of ha-Emunah ha-Ramah. Van Gorcum, Assen
Fontaine R (2006) Aristotle’s De anima in a Hebrew encyclopedia: the case
of the Midrash ha-Hokhmah. In: Pachecho MC, Meirinhos JF (eds)
Intellect and imagination in medieval philosophy, vol 1. Brepols,
Turnhout, pp 605–613
Freudenthal G (1989) Human felicity and astronomy: Gersonides’ revolt
against ptolemy. Da‘at 22:55–72 (Hebrew)
Freudenthal G (1993) Les sciences dans les communaute´s juives
me´die´vales de Provence: Leur appropriation, leur roˆle. REJ 152:29–
136
Freudenthal G (1996) Stoic physics in the writings of Rabbi Sa‘adia Ga’on
al-Fayyuˆmıˆ and its aftermath in medieval Jewish mysticism. Arab Sci
Philos 6:113–36
Freudenthal G (2002) Sefer ha-Sekhel we-ha-Muskalot alias Ketav ha-
Da‘at: the medieval Hebrew translations of al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s Risa¯la Fı¯ al-
‘Aql. A study in text history and in the evolution of medieval Hebrew
philosophical terminology. Jewish Quart Rev 93:29–115
Freudenthal
G
(2003)
‘La
quiddite´
de
l’aˆme’,
traite´
populaire
ne´oplatonisant faussement attribue´ a` al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯: traduction annote´e
et commente´e, Arab Sci Philos 13:173–237
Geoffroy M, Steel C (2001) Averroe`s, La be´atitude de l’aˆme. Vrin, Paris
Glasner R (1995) Levi ben Gershom and the study of Ibn Rushd in the
fourteenth century. Jewish Quart Rev 86:51–90
Hasse D (2000) Avicenna’s De anima in the Latin west: the formation of
a peripatetic philosophy of the soul, 1160–1300. Warburg Institute,
London/Nino Aragno Editore, Turin
Harvey S (2000) Shem-Tov Falaquera’s De‘ot ha-Filosoﬁm: its sources
and use of sources. In: Harvey S (ed) The medieval Hebrew
encyclopedias of science and philosophy. Kluwer, Dordrecht,
pp 211–247
Harvey WZ (1986) Hasdai Crescas and Bernat Metge on the soul. Jerus
Stud Jew Th 5:141–154 (Hebrew)
Harvey WZ (1988) Crescas vs. Maimonides on knowledge and pleasure. In:
Link-Salinger R, Long R, Manekin C (eds) A straight path: studies in
medieval philosophy and culture, essays in honor of Arthur Hyman.
Catholic University of America Press, Washington, pp 113–123
Harvey WZ (1998) Maimonides’ ﬁrst commandment, physics, and doubt.
In: Elman Y, Gurock JS (eds) Hazon Nahum: studies in Jewish law,
thought, and history presented to Dr. Norman Lamm. New York,
pp 149–162
Harvey WZ (2006) De la notion d’intellect-intelligent-intelligible chez
Maı¨monide. In: Hamesse J, Weijers O (eds) E´criture et re´e´criture des
texts philosophiques me´die´vaux. Brepols, Turnhout, pp 253–262
Holzman G (1996) The theory of the intellect and soul in the thought of
Rabbi Moshe Narboni Based on his commentaries on the writings of
Ibn Rushd, Ibn Tufayl, Ibn Bajja and al-Ghazali. PhD dissertation,
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem
Hyman A (2002) Eschatological themes in medieval Jewish philosophy.
Marquette University Press, Milwaukee
Ivry A (1991) Gersonides and Averroes on intellect: the evidence of the
supercommentary on the De anima. In: Dahan G (ed) Gersonide en
son temps. Science et philosophe me´die´vales. Peeters, Louvain/Paris,
pp 235–251
Ivry A (2000) The soul of the Hebrew encyclopedists. In: Harvey S (ed)
The medieval Hebrew encyclopedias of science and philosophy.
Kluwer, Dordrecht, pp 390–413
Jospe R (1988) Torah and Sophia: the life and thought of Shem Tov Ibn
Falaquera. Hebrew Union College, Cincinnati
Kellner M (1994b) Gersonides on the role of the active intellect in human
cognition. Hebrew Union Coll Annu 65:233–259
Kraemer J (2006) How (not) to read the guide of the perplexed. Jerus Stud
Ar and Isl 32:350–409
Malter H (1921) Saadia Gaon, his life and works. The Jewish Publication
Society of America, Philadelphia
Manekin C (2003) Conservative tendencies in Gersonides’ religious phi-
losophy. In: Frank D, Leaman O (eds) The Cambridge companion to
medieval Jewish philosophy. Cambridge University Press, Cam-
bridge, pp 304–342
Pines S (1979) The limitations of human knowledge according to Al-
Fa¯ra¯bı¯, Ibn Ba¯jja, and Maimonides. In: Twersky I (ed) Studies in
medieval Jewish history and literature. Harvard University Press,
Cambridge, pp 82–109
Regev S (1983) Theology and rational mysticism in the writings of Rabbi
Joseph ben Shem Tob. PhD dissertation, The Hebrew University of
Jerusalem (in Hebrew)
Rigo C (1998) Human substance and eternal life in the philosophy of
Rabbi Judah Romano. Jerus Stud Jew Th 14:181–222 (Hebrew)
Robinson JT (2007) Samuel Ibn Tibbon’s commentary on ecclesiastes,
The book of the soul of man. Mohr Siebeck, Tu¨bingen
Schlanger J (1968) La philosophie de Salomon Ibn Gabirol. E´tude d’un
ne´oplatonisme. Brill, Leiden
Stern J (2004) Maimonides on the growth of knowledge and limitations of
the intellect. In: Le´vy T, Rashed R (eds) Maı¨monide: Philosophe et
Savant (1138–1204). Peeters, Leuven, pp 143–191
Stroumsa S (1998) Twelfth-century concepts of soul and body: the
Maimonidean controversy in Baghdad. In: Baumgarten A et al
(eds) Self, soul, and body in religious experience. Brill, Leiden, pp
313–334
Tamani G, Zonta M (1997) Aristoteles Hebraicus: versioni, commenti
e compendi del Corpus Aristotelicum nei manoscritti ebraici delle
bibilioteche italiane. Supernova, Venice
Philosophical Psychology, Jewish Tradition P
989
P

Tanenbaum A (2002) The contemplative soul: Hebrew poetry and philo-
sophical theory in medieval Spain. Brill, Leiden
Zonta M (1996) La ﬁlosoﬁa antica nel Medioevo ebraico: le traduzioni
ebraiche medievali dei testi ﬁlosoﬁci antichi. Paideia, Brescia
Zonta M (2001) La tradizione Giudeo-Araba ed Ebaica del De intellectu
di Alessandro di Afrodisia e il testo originale del Commento di
Averroe. Annali di ca’ foscari 40:17–35
Zonta M (2006) Hebrew scholasticism in the ﬁfteenth century: a history
and sourcebook. Springer, Dordrecht
Philosophical Theology,
Byzantine
GEORGE ARABATZIS
Research Centre on Greek Philosophy
Academy of Athens
Athens
Greece
Abstract
The history of Byzantine philosophical theology balances
between doctrinal elaboration and a distinctive mystical
tendency. Its study may be either of a theological or
of a rationalist approach. The ﬁrst asserts ﬁrmly the
special weight of the works of theologians like John of
Damascus, Maximus the Confessor, Photios, Gregory
Palamas, and others. The second approach focuses on
the decisive part that ancient Greek philosophy played in
Byzantine theology. Although the history of this latter
offers a series of charismatic individuals, the concluding
phase of Byzantium presents two ideal-types of philoso-
pher theologians’ personalities: Gregory Palamas, who
maintained the traditional articulation and hierarchy of
the outward (Greek) Paideia and the inward (Christian)
Paideia and George Gemistos Plethon, who transcended
this model in favor of Greek philosophy. Mysticism
and the relation to the Latin Church are the other main
issues that occupied the intellectual activity of the late
Byzantine philosophico-theological thought, but the gen-
eral trends do not succeed to account for all the individual
positions of the Byzantine intellectuals who by their the-
ories and activities challenged the purity of the relevant
classiﬁcations.
Byzantine philosophical theology covers a thousand years
of history, a period that corresponds to the evolution of
a state that was simultaneously a successor to the Roman
Empire, a Christian kingdom and a home for Hellenism.
Byzantine theology was shaped through a series of
philosophico-theological debates in which the ancient
Greek philosophical heritage was at the same time rejected
and presupposed by the intellectuals of the new faith. The
struggle against heresies like monophysitism created the
need for the formulation of dogmas at a time when doc-
trinal matters were the subject of popular discussion.
Following a period of anti-philosophical apologetics,
a distinction was inaugurated between inward paideia
(Christianity) and outward (Greek) paideia. The Cappa-
docian Fathers, Gregory Nazianzus, Gregory of Nyssa, and
Basil the Great, together with John Chrysostom (fourth
century) became the key ﬁgures in the Byzantine synthesis
of Greek philosophy and Christianity. Maximus the Con-
fessor (580–662) transmuted the negative theology of
Pseudo-Dionysius Areopagita, that was largely based on
Neoplatonism, together with the legacy of Origen into
a new Christian philosophy; the negative or apophatic
theology became the special characteristic of the eastern
Christian tradition.
The Iconoclastic crisis, from 730 to 843, that
concerned the acceptance or not of the cult of the icons,
generated a discussion about the degree of abstraction and
representation that could be theologically admitted. John
of Damascus (Mansur ibn Sarjun to his real name, c. 665–
749), a great personality of Byzantine theology, although
living and working beyond the Byzantine borders in Syria
defended philosophically the cause of the icons and con-
tributed signiﬁcantly to the Byzantine philosophical the-
ology with his work The Source of Knowledge, a summa of
theological and philosophical knowledge. When the Icon-
oclastic crisis was over, the ecclesiastical men felt stronger
to assume a humanistic role regarding the Greek letters
while the dogmatic argument progressively became less
inspired and constantly referring to the classical intellec-
tual syntheses of the Fathers of the Church.
The Schism with the Church of Rome demanded for
a large amount of polemical rhetoric and an imposing
Patriarch like Photios (c. 820–893), a great humanist him-
self, is exemplary as to the evolution regarding an ecclesi-
astical man’s use of philosophy. The tenth/eleventh
centuries were marked by the powerful mystical writer
Symeon the New Theologian; but a little later we witness
a strong philosophical fermentation that created a tension
between the philosophers and the Church. The most con-
troversial of them, John Italos, possibly experimented in
a new synthesis between reason and faith. The threatening
rise of the power of the Ottomans made some men of the
state and some intellectuals consider the union with the
Latin Church as a solution to the problem, but in the
meanwhile
the
Byzantine
Orthodoxy
had
acquired
a national character; the people and the monks were
990 P
Philosophical Theology, Byzantine

strongly opposed to the idea of a possible union of the
two Churches.
In the Hesychast crisis (fourteenth century), it was
Gregory Palamas (1296–1359) the defender of the mystical
method of the hesychast-quietist monks – named by their
contemptuous
opponents
the
‘‘omphaloscopes/navel
gazers’’ – who triumphed by insisting on the tradition of
the orthodox spirituality and mysticism, while using no
less of philosophically grounded arguments. Among his
adversaries, a Latinophile party led notably by Demetrios
Kydones who translated and was inﬂuenced by the works
of Thomas Aquinas. The last great philosopher of Byzan-
tium, George Gemistos Plethon (c. 1355–1452), a neo-
pagan philosopher, believed that the rescue of the state
could be achieved, between other things, by the adoption
of a state religion inspired by the Hellenic twelve-gods
paganism, but this idea found no echo in the Greek nation
who could not be regarded as distinguished from Ortho-
doxy. Only a limited number of Byzantine intellectuals
who ﬂed the Turks mainly to Italy were converted to
Catholicism. The passage to the West was not so successful
for many of them and the reason for this ‘‘failure’’ is likely
to be found in the disillusionment of the Greeks with
Renaissance humanism; their Byzantine identity found
again comfort in the Orthodox spirituality and the Hel-
lenic tradition.
The study of Byzantine theology is a historical science
not to be confused with Orthodox theology although the
two domains are often intermingling (see Hans-Georg
Beck, 7 ff.). Two issues are thus open to the study of the
Byzantine philosophical theology: (a) the perception of
Byzantine theology as philosophically meaningful, with
the most important personalities being theologians like
John of Damascus, Maximus the Confessor, Photios,
Gregory Palamas; (b) the categorization of the Byzantine
philosophical theology into philosophical problems
that were historically dealt within the Greek philos-
ophical tradition. There lies the difference between
a theologian’s and a historian’s of philosophy approach.
The ﬁrst historian of Byzantine philosophy, Basil Tatakis
(Tatakis 1969), combined the demands for a value-
neutral history of philosophy and a respect for the Ortho-
dox tradition. The example of two distinctive Byzantine
theologians can illustrate the difﬁculties of the above
classiﬁcation: John of Damascus’ The Source of Knowledge
is divided into three parts: Dialectica – a Defense of
Orthodoxy – a Catalogue of Heresies. The Dialectica
was inﬂuenced by Aristotelian Logic and for that the
writer has been regarded as a forerunner of Scholasticism.
Although the inﬂuence of John of Damascus was great,
it did not exhaust all the philosophico-theological
possibilities and so Patriarch Photios represents a genuine
Byzantine spirit of another type; he was a very distinctive
Byzantine, a combination of an Orthodox, a Hellenist, and
a philosopher. Yet, the blend was quite different from that
of John of Damascus mainly because the part of the
Hellenist litte´rateur in him was of greater importance. In
a way, the move from John of Damascus to Photios and
what followed in the intellectual life is a measure of the
evolution of the Byzantine thought. The general process
leads from Christian philosophy to the beginnings of
Humanism.
There is no doubt that the history of philosophical
theology in Byzantium is a history of personalities as
well as a history of ideas. In the face of historical chal-
lenges, the reactions of the scholars had often a distinctive
individualistic character that facilitated the formation
of factions. The Byzantine eleventh century is a real turn-
ing point that marked not only the beginning of a new
cultural development but also the start of a fatal political
decline. The ﬁnal phase of Byzantium offers two ideal-
types concerning philosophical theology: Plethon, the
Hellenocentric, and Gregory Palamas, the man of the
Orthodox tradition. Three problems were central to the
Byzantine philosophical theology: (a) First, how much
could a Byzantine advance in the study of ancient phi-
losophy without endangering his Christian faith? As we
have seen, a limit was adopted between outward and
inward paideia that should never get crossed. While, the
declarations of distancing oneself from Greek philos-
ophy were numerous, they often meant little as to the
acknowledgment of the value of Greek philosophy. The
only intellectual that crossed deﬁnitely the limit in favor
of paganism was Plethon. (b) Another important pro-
blem concerned the relation with the Latin Church.
Progressively, the Byzantines became conscious of the
development of western Scholasticism. The formation
of a Latinophile party and the translation of Thomas
Aquinas’ works testify to this evolution, but the anti-
Latin tendency that expressed the convictions of common
people was to prevail. (c) The ﬁnal problem was that of
Byzantine mysticism. Any excess of mysticism was always
dealt by an unstated but nonetheless real common sense
principle.
Even within these distinctions, the categorization of
individual cases is not easy and the classiﬁcation of the
various tendencies is extremely difﬁcult. Gregory Palamas’
ideas were contested by Barlaam of Calabria, an Orthodox
at the start but later a Catholic, by Demetrios Kydones,
a later convert to the Latin rite but initially a friend of
Palamas’ supporter John Kantakuzenos, and also by
Nikephoros Gregoras who was equally hostile to Palamas
Philosophical Theology, Byzantine P
991
P

and to Rome. Men interested in Latin theology were
otherwise pious Orthodox like Joseph Bryennios. George
Gennadios Scholarios, the adversary of Plethon, was an
anti-unionist but interested in Scholastic theology. The
hellenocentric Plethon was opposed to the Union of
the Churches; his pupil Bessarion supported the effort
for the Union and later became a cardinal and renown
humanist. Yet, the modern use of the word ‘‘hellene’’seems
to have its origin in the Orthodox-Hesychast milieu by the
theologian Nilus Kabasilas. The various philosophical
oppositions were formed more easily because in Byzan-
tium there was traditionally a distinctive permeability
between lay and clerical intellectuals. Still, religion
persisted as a unifying factor on the basis of the Byzan-
tine’s profound sense of eusebeia (piety) that related the
earthly to the celestial world.
See
also:
▶Barlaam
of
Calabria
▶Basil
Bessarion
▶Demetrios Kydones ▶George Scholarios (Gennadios II)
▶Georgios Gemistos Plethon ▶Gregory Palamas ▶John
Italos ▶Maximus the Confessor ▶Nikephoros Gregoras
▶Photius of Constantinople
Bibliography
Primary Sources
(1857–1866) Patrologia Graeca, 2nd series, ed. Migne JP. 161 (166) vol.,
Paris
(2002) La The´ologie byzantine et sa tradition, vol. II, XIIIe-XIXe
sie`cle, ed. Conticello CG, Conticello V. Brepols, Turnhout (Coprpus
Christianorum) (two more volumes are expected)
Secondary Sources
Arabatzis G (1998) E´thique du bonheur et orthodoxie a` Byzance (IVe–XIIe
sie`cles). Foreword by Andre´ Guillou (Textes, Documents, E´tudes sur
le monde Byzantin ne´ohelle´nique et Balkanique 4). Association
Pierre Belon, Paris
Beck H-G (1959) Kirche und theologische Literatur im byzantinischen
Reich. C.H. Beck’sche Verlagbuchandlung, Munich. Handbuch der
Altertumswissenschaft, XII, 2/1; Byzantinisches Handbuch, 2/1,
(1997)
Hussey JM (ed) (1967) The Cambridge medieval history, vol IV: The
Byzantine empire, Part II: Government, church and civilization.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (especially the chapter:
Hussey JM, Tart TA Byzantine theological speculation and spiritual-
ity, pp 185–205)
Podskalsky SJG (1977) Theologie und Philosophie in Byzanz. Der Streit
um
die
theologische
Methodik
in
der
spa¨tbyzantinischen
Geistesgeschichte (14./15. Jh.), seine systematischen Grundlagen
und seine historische Entwicklung. C.H. Beck, Mu¨nchen (=Byz
Arch 15)
Runciman S (1970) The last Byzantine renaissance. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge
Tatakis B (1969) La philosophie grecque patristique et byzantine.
In: Histoire de la philosophie, 1. Orient-Antiquite´-Moyen Age.
Encyclope´die de la Ple´iade, vol 26. Gallimard, Paris, pp 936–1005
Philosophical Theology, Jewish
TAMAR RUDAVSKY
Department of Philosophy
The Ohio State University
Columbus, OH
USA
Abstract
Medieval Jewish philosophers, like their Islamic and
Christian contemporaries, were concerned to harmonize
the tenets of Judaism with ancient Greek philosophic
teachings that held sway at successive periods of Jewish
history. Confronting problems in which there seemed to
be a conﬂict between philosophical speculation (iyyun)
and acceptance of dogmas of the Judaic faith (emunah),
the goal of the Jewish philosopher was not only to buttress
faith with understanding, but to reconcile two distinct
bodies of knowledge. We shall focus upon the attempts
of several major medieval Jewish ﬁgures, including Saadia
Gaon (882–942), Maimonides (1135–1204), Gersonides
(1288–1344), and Crescas (c. 1340–1410/1411), to rec-
oncile the strictures of faith and reason in the context
of the following issues: divine predication, creation, and
theodicy.
Divine Predication
Do the different attributes of God constitute distinct
aspects or persons in the Divine essence? Jewish philoso-
phers were divided on this question, as were medieval
thinkers in general. Saadia Gaon, a tenth-century Jewish
philosopher whose works reﬂected the inﬂuence of the
Islamic Muʿtazilite, set the stage for subsequent Jewish
discussions. In his major philosophical work The Book of
Doctrines and Beliefs, Saadia followed the tradition of
Philo and the kala¯m thinkers in denying multiplicity to
God: the three attributes of Life, Power, and Wisdom are
implied in the very notion of God. It is due to the deﬁ-
ciency of human language that they cannot be expressed in
one single term.
Maimonides’ Guide of the Perplexed is the most impor-
tant work of medieval Jewish philosophy and exercised
a profound inﬂuence upon all subsequent Jewish thought,
as well as upon Christian scholasticism. His theory of
divine predication followed the Neoplatonic tradition
and was built primarily upon the distinction found in al-
Fa¯ra¯bı¯ and Avicenna between essence and existence. This
distinction implied that in the case of contingent beings
existence is accidental to essence, whereas in God essence
992 P
Philosophical Theology, Jewish

and existence are one. Hence God’s nature is totally unlike
ours, and terms used to describe God must be used either
in a homonymous way or as negative predicates. The four
essential attributes of God – life, power, wisdom, and will –
are of one simple essence; all other attributes are to be
conceived either as descriptive of divine action, or as neg-
ative attributes. However, even these four attributes, when
predicated of God, are used in a homonymous, or equivo-
cal, sense (Maimonides 1963, 1.56.131). The difference
between human and divine predicates is qualitative: since
the terms are applied by way of perfect homonymity, they
admit of no comparison between God and His creatures.
In chapters 1.58–60 of the Guide, Maimonides
develops his celebrated theory of negative predication,
arguing that ultimately negative predication alone brings
the human mind closer to an understanding of God:
‘‘Know that the description of God, may he be cherished
and exalted, by means of negations is the correct descrip-
tion’’ (Maimonides 1963, 1:58:136). This third piece of
Maimonides’ theory of divine predication represents the
logical culmination of his theory of language. Maimoni-
des’ point in these chapters is that because every afﬁrma-
tion about God is to be understood as a negation, not as
a privation, it follows that the negation of a weakness does
not imply that its opposite power is indirectly attributed
to God. Rather it implies that the term or its opposite does
not apply to God at all. So God is said to be neither weak
nor powerful, just as a wall is neither seeing nor blind. The
term ‘‘power’’ is inapplicable to God; so are all other
terms. God is simply the sort of being who neither has or
fails to have any predicate we might to apply. To apply
either privations or afﬁrmative predicates of God is to be
guilty of a category error. Maimonides presents an episte-
mological taxonomy according to which ‘‘with every
increase in the negations regarding Him. . .you come
nearer to that apprehension than he who does not negate
with regard to Him that which, according to what has been
demonstrated to you, must be negated’’ (Maimonides
1963, I:59:138). In other words, the individual who
describes God in glowing, ﬂowery language is epistemo-
logically further away from God than the individual who
recognizes that God cannot be described at all. Maimon-
ides is explicit on this point: whenever a person afﬁrms of
God positive predicates, the said person recedes from
God’s true reality. The implications of this doctrine with
respect to prayer are striking. Ultimately silence is the only
appropriate linguistic response to divine predication:
‘‘silence with regard to You is praise’’ (Maimonides 1963,
I:59:139).
Gersonides, on the other hand, disagreed with Mai-
monides’ theory of negative theology. In his major work
The Wars of the Lord, a sustained examination of the major
philosophical issues of the day, Gersonides subjects Mai-
monides’ theory to critique. He sides with Averroes who,
rejecting the Avicennan distinction between essence and
existence, argued that existence is not an accident of Being.
In following Averroes, Gersonides paves the way for
a positive theology, which permits of positive attributive
ascription.
Gersonides
disagrees
with
Maimonides,
claiming that divine predicates are to be understood as
pros hen equivocals, or derivative equivocals, rather than
absolute equivocals (as Maimonides had argued). That is,
according to Gersonides, predicates applied to God rep-
resent the prime instance or meaning of the term, whereas
human predicates are derivative or inferior instances. So,
for example, knowledge when applied to God is perfect
knowledge and constitutes the standard for human knowl-
edge, which is less perfect than divine knowledge
(Gersonides 1987, III.4:107–115). The implications of
this discussion will become apparent when we turn shortly
to the predicate of divine omniscience.
Creation
The problem of creation is a good example of the
attempted synthesis between philosophy and Jewish tenets
rooted in Scripture. Working within a framework which
upheld the inﬁnity of time, Aristotle posited an eternal
universe which had no temporal beginning. Jewish
thinkers as far back as Philo had already grappled with
reconciling this framework with the Biblical account of
creation. Saadia, for example, argued that both the
Platonic
and
Aristotelian
theories
of
eternity
and
uncreatedness of the universe are incompatible with the
Jewish view of creation ex nihilo (from nothing). After
examining and rejecting the current philosophical views
of creation, he stressed the philosophical signiﬁcance of
the Biblical viewpoint. Subsequent thinkers were equally
committed to a cosmology in which the deity willed the
universe to exist.
Maimonides’ discussion of creation is fraught with
interpretative difﬁculties. Warning (in the introduction
to the Guide) of the dangers of expounding upon creation,
he asserts that this topic must not be taught even to one
individual. In light of this warning, Maimonides’ analysis
of the doctrine of creation has been interpreted as a highly
nuanced presentation. In Guide II.13 Maimonides sum-
marizes what he considers to be the three standard views
on creation as the Scriptural, Platonic, and Aristotelian
views. The main elements of each theory, as depicted by
Maimonides, can be summarized brieﬂy as follows. The
view of Scripture (1) is that the universe was brought into
existence by God after ‘‘having been purely and absolutely
Philosophical Theology, Jewish P
993
P

non-existent;’’ through His will and His volition, God
brought into ‘‘existence out of nothing all the beings as
they are, time itself being one of the created things.’’
(Maimonides 1963, II.13:281) The Platonic view (2) states
that inasmuch as even God cannot create matter and form
out of absolute non-existence, there ‘‘exists a certain mat-
ter that is eternal as the deity is eternal. . . He is the cause of
its existence. . . and that He creates in it whatever He
wishes’’ (Maimonides 1963, II.13:283). According to Mai-
monides, the view of Aristotle (3) agrees with (2) in that
matter cannot be created from absolute non-existence, but
concludes that the heaven is not subject to generation/
corruption; that ‘‘time and motion are perpetual and
everlasting and not subject to generation and passing-
away’’ (Maimonides 1963, II.13: 284).
Which of these three views is espoused by Maimonides
himself? Ostensibly, at least, Maimonides supports (1).
Having dismissed (2) as a weaker version of (3), he argues
that (1) is no more ﬂawed than is (3). Then, pointing to
the possibility of (1), coupled with its Mosaic (and
Abrahamic) sanction, Maimonides argues that the very
plausibility of (1) suggests the non-necessity of (3). Why
does Maimonides not accept (2)? The main reason, as he
tells us, is that the Platonic view has not been demon-
strated (Guide II.25:329). If we take Maimonides at his
word, then, it is clear that (1), creation in time of the
universe out of absolute non-existence, is his view. Some
scholars, however, reading an esoteric subtext into the
Guide, have dismissed his espousal of (1) as an exoteric
stance and have searched for the underlying, or concealed,
interpretation which is Maimonides’ real view of creation.
And as commentators working through the text have
demonstrated, there is certainly ample evidence to sup-
port either (2) or (3) as his esoteric view. In fact, there is so
much conﬂicting evidence, all of which can be supported
with plausible argument, that some recent scholars have
suggested that ultimately Maimonides upheld a skeptical
stance in light of the evidence and did not take to heart any
of the three positions. Although such a skeptical view
would not be quite as heretical as espousing either (2) or
(3), it still constitutes a provisional rejection of (1), which
is tantamount to a rejection of the Mosaic theory.
Gersonides’ discussion of time and creation is
contained primarily in Wars VI.1. Like Maimonides, he
is concerned with whether time is ﬁnite or inﬁnite, as well
as with whether the creation of the world can be said to
have occurred at an instant. In order to uphold the ﬁni-
tude of time, Gersonides refutes the Aristotelian argu-
ments by attempting to demonstrate that time must have
been generated. He will argue that just as quantity is ﬁnite,
so too is time, since time is contained in the category of
quantity (Gersonides 1999:270). Having posited that the
world was created at an initial instant of time by a freely
willing agent, Gersonides must decide whether the world
was engendered out of absolute nothing or out of a pre-
existent matter. Arguing that creation out of nothing is
incompatible with the facts of physical reality, he adopts
a Platonic model of matter drawn ultimately from the
Timaeus. The opening verses of Genesis 1 are used to
distinguish two types of material reality: geshem and
homer rishon (Gersonides 1999:330–331). Totally devoid
of form, geshem is the primordial matter out of which the
universe was created. Since it is not informed, it is not
capable of motion or rest; and since it is characterized by
negation, geshem is inert and chaotic (Gersonides
1999:330–331). This primordial matter is identiﬁed with
the ‘‘primeval waters’’ described in Genesis 1:2. However,
Gersonides points out that geshem does not itself exem-
plify absolute non-being, but rather is an intermediary
between being and non-being (Gersonides 1999:334–344).
Divine Providence
We turn now to one of the most intractable problems
in medieval Jewish thought, namely that of divine
providence, and its implications for the presence of
evil in the world. Medieval philosophers, concerned with
safeguarding the freedom of human action, worried
whether God’s foreknowledge of future contingent events
entailed the necessary occurrence of these events. That the
force of God’s knowledge need not be causal was already
claimed by Saadia Gaon. In answer to the apparent para-
dox that God’s foreknowledge necessitates the objects of
his knowledge, Saadia’s response is that ‘‘he who makes
this assertion has no proof that the knowledge of the
Creator concerning things is the cause of their existence’’
(Saadia Gaon 1948:186). What concerned medieval phi-
losophers in general, and Jewish philosophers in particu-
lar, was the fact that if God is infallible, then the objects of
his knowledge cannot fail to be what God already knows
them to be. How to account for the ability of humans to
contravene the prior infallible knowledge which God has
of their actions became of paramount importance to later
Jewish philosophers.
Under what conditions does God know unactualized
particulars? Maimonides emphasizes that the term knowl-
edge is predicated equivocally of God and humans,
maintaining that God is in no way affected by what He
knows. God remains one even though His objects consti-
tute a plurality, and He remains unchanged even though
the objects of His knowledge are mutable. These points are
reﬂected in two brief assertions: ﬁrst, that God’s knowl-
edge does not contain plurality, and second, that God
994 P
Philosophical Theology, Jewish

cannot acquire at a certain time knowledge He did not
possess previously. Since the divine knowledge is a priori,
it is not affected by the ontological status of objects which
result from this knowledge. Hence Maimonides argues
that since the objects of God’s knowledge do not causally
act upon His knowledge, His essence is unaffected by their
multiplicity. The second claim, that God’s knowledge is
unaffected by any change in its objects, is supported in the
context of a distinction between absolute and relative non-
existence. Absolute non-existence is never an object of
God’s knowledge (Maimonides 1963, III.20:480). Relative
non-existents, or future contingents, are possible objects
of God’s knowledge. It is not impossible, Maimonides
claims, that God’s knowledge has as its object those
‘‘non-existent things about whose being brought into
existence we knew beforehand’’ (Maimonides 1963,
III.20:481). Like Averroes, Maimonides asserts that God’s
knowledge of future possibles does not change their
nature; neither is His nature altered by a change in the
objects of His knowledge.
Gersonides is one of the only Jewish philosophers who
upheld a form of indeterminism as a solution to the
paradox of divine omniscience. Although intimated in
a number of texts, this position is developed most fully
in treatise III of Wars, wherein he develops his main
argument that an omniscient, immutable deity cannot
know changing particulars. The underlying premise in
this argument is that all future particular objects are in
fact mutable: that is, they change from a state of non-
existence to one of existence. Gersonides claims that an
immutable deity cannot be omniscient, if omniscience
entails knowing objects which undergo change. But does
it follow from God’s knowing a future contingent that it is
necessary? In contradistinction to Maimonides, who
claims that God’s knowledge does not render the objects
of his knowledge necessary, Gersonides will want to main-
tain that divine foreknowledge and contingency are
incompatible.
Arguing that divine omniscience severely compromises
the contingency of the objects of God’s knowledge,
Gersonides dismisses Maimonides’ form of compatibilism.
Having rejected Maimonides’ attempts to harmonize
foreknowledge and contingency, and having upheld the
existence of contingency in the universe, Gersonides
adopts the one option left to him, namely that God does
not know future contingents. According to Gersonides,
God knows that certain states of affairs may or may not
be actualized. But in so far as they are contingent states, he
does not know which of the two alternatives will in fact be
actualized. For if God did know future contingents prior to
their actualization, there could be no contingency in the
world (Gersonides 1987, III.4:116ff). Gersonides claims
that God’s inability to foreknow future contingents is
not a defect in his knowledge (Gersonides 1987, III.4:
235–236). With respect to future contingents, God
knows their ordered nature or essence, and he knows
that they are contingent, but he does not know which
alternative will become actualized. But has Gersonides in
fact solved the problem of divine omniscience? Despite his
admonition to the contrary, I have argued in other works
that ultimately Gersonides’ theory of divine omniscience
does not fully account for other theological concerns, for
example prophecy (Rudavsky 2000).
Hasdai ben Judah Crescas is the last outstanding orig-
inal Jewish philosopher in the late medieval period. His
major work Sefer Or Adonai (The Book of the Light of the
Lord, 1405–1410), ﬁnished several months before his
death, was written as a polemic against his two Aristote-
lian predecessors Maimonides and Gersonides. In this
work, Crescas sought to undermine the Aristotelian cos-
mology and physics that pervaded the works of his pre-
decessors. Crescas rejects the views of both Maimonides
and Gersonides, arguing that God acts toward the world
with goodness, love, and grace. Against Gersonides, for
example, Crescas afﬁrms God’s knowledge of future con-
tingents, even those determined by human choice. He
then argues that human freedom is only apparent and
not genuine: humans think they are free because they are
ignorant of the causes of their choices. Human responsi-
bility for action lies not the actual performance of the
action, but rather in the agent’s acceptance of an action
as its own. The feeling of joy an agent feels at acquiescing
to certain actions, for example, fulﬁlling the command-
ments, is the reward for that action. So too, God experi-
ences joy in giving of himself to the world (Crescas 1990:
123–205).
Theodicy
In this last section, we shall focus upon the problem of evil
as portrayed by Maimonides in Guide II: 10–13. Maimon-
ides’ discussion represent a model attempt to explain how
it is that an ominiscient, omnipotent, and benevolent
deity permits the existence of evil in general, and the
suffering of innocents in particular. Many Jewish thinkers
took into consideration The Book of Job, and Maimonides
is no exception; his discussions of evil and divine omni-
science are applied to the travails of Job. In chapters II.11
and 12, Maimonides undertakes a classical theodicy,
drawn on conventional distinctions. Maimonides claims
that the preponderance of moral evils (those that occur
between humans) are the result of ignorance, or the pri-
vation of knowledge. Reﬂecting the platonic maxim that
Philosophical Theology, Jewish P
995
P

to know the good is to do the good, Maimonides suggests
that it is as a result of ignorance that we inﬂict harm upon
ourselves and upon others. It is only because we view the
universe from our limited perspective that we perceive
matters as worse than in fact they are; were we to adopt
a more holistic view, we would realize that humans are but
a speck of sand, and that our travails represent but a minor
chord in the vast orchestra of the universe.
Nevertheless, Maimonides realizes that this response is
not in itself satisfying for the vast number of individuals
who are unable to attain this intellectually detached per-
spective. He therefore introduces a straightforward typol-
ogy, distinguishing between metaphysical, natural, and
moral evil. The ﬁrst type of evil refers back to the onto-
logical make-up of matter itself: it is because we are
endowed with matter that we suffer the material inﬁrmi-
ties we deem evil. Laying the groundwork for his subse-
quent discussion of divine omnipotence, Maimonides
dismisses the obvious objection of why could not God
have created ‘‘coming to be’’ without ‘‘passing away’’
with an ad hominem:
"
He who wishes to be endowed with flesh and bones and
at the same time not be subject to impressions and not to
be attained by any of the concomitants of matter merely
wishes, without being awareness of it, to combine two
contraries, namely, to be subject to impressions, and not
to be subject to them (Maimonides 1963, III.12:443).
In other words, the very nature of ‘‘being a human being’’
requires essentially that we be subject to generation and
corruption, and the latter carries with it all the pains and
imperfections we associate with human life. Maimonides
adumbrates the strain to be popularized by Leibniz,
namely that this is the best of all possible worlds. God
could not have created a matter with a more perfect
nature: material stuff ‘‘is generated in the most possible
way in which it is possible to be generated out of that
speciﬁc matter’’ (Maimonides 1963, III.12: 444). Mai-
monides’ second category of evils we may term ‘‘social
evils,’’ namely those pertaining to political upheaval or
moral behavior. These two are relatively rare, in Maimon-
ides’ mind.
It is the third category of evil, what we may call per-
sonal evils, that most concern Maimonides. Here we hear
echoes of Maimonides the physician, admonishing his
ﬂock not to overindulge in eating, drinking, sexual licen-
tiousness, etc., resulting in personal harm. Maimonides
divides personal evils into evils we bring upon ourselves
physically (diseases of the body), and those we introduce
psychically (diseases of the mind). With respect to the
ﬁrst, it is clearly overindulgence that is to blame:
reminiscent of Socrates’ exhortation in the Phaedo not to
indulge in bodily pursuits, Maimonides reminds us that
vice with respect to eating, drinking, and copulation are
due to ‘‘excess in regard to quantity or irregularly or when
the quality of the foodstuffs is bad’’ (Maimonides 1963,
III.12: 445).
Diseases of the soul are a bit more complex. In the
ﬁrst place, overindulgence on the bodily side cannot
help but affect our moral temperament, and so that is
reason enough to exercise physical restraint. Furthermore,
as a result of physical overindulgence, we tend to lust
after items that will satisfy these physical desires: unlike
the pursuit of items necessary to human survival, the
desire for superﬂuous possessions is endless and leads to
inﬁnite desire, lust, and avarice. Interestingly enough, the
‘‘necessaries’’ such as air, water, and food, tend to be
more accessible and cheaper, while the less necessary
luxuries tend to be less accessible and hence more
expensive. Were we to eliminate our desires for these
luxuries, our soul would cease to suffer needless anxiety
and the concomitant evils that accrue upon their
pursuit. Hence, it is human will that introduces this
third variety of evil.
But evil must be understood against the backdrop of
divine
providence,
for
it
might
be
argued
that
a benevolent, omniscient, and omnipotent deity should
and would be able subvert evil and suffering. Maimonides
presents in chapters III:15–22 a theory of divine provi-
dence according to which the Active Intellect watches over
humans in the sublunar world as a result of a divine
overﬂow with which human intellect is united. That
a ship goes down at sea is the result of chance, but ‘‘the
fact that the people in the ship went on board. . .is,
according to our opinion, not due to chance, but to divine
will in accordance with the deserts of those people as
determined
in
his
judgments’’
(Maimonides
1963,
III.17: 472). In other words, providence is consequent
upon the perfection of human intellect and reﬂects the
causal and ontological grid whereby God orders reality: in
order for God to permit a causal nexus according to which
certain people board the ship and others not, God must
know, as it were, whether or not they are deserving of
providence.
Already commentators in Maimonides’ own time were
aware of the apparent discrepancy in Maimonides’ posi-
tion. Maimonides too was not unaware of the difﬁculties
inherent in this position, as evidenced by his attempt once
more at the end of the Guide to explain why it is that often
the righteous (who ostensibly should be most ﬁrmly
united with the divine overﬂow) nevertheless suffer.
Claiming that divine providence is constantly watching
996 P
Philosophical Theology, Jewish

over those who have obtained the intellectual overﬂow
from God, Maimonides argues in Guide III.51 that evil
attends to those who withdraw their attentions from God:
‘‘providence withdraws from him during the time when he
is occupied with something else’’ (Maimonides 1963,
III.51:625). Prophets or excellent persons suffer evil only
during times of distraction, the ‘‘greatness of the calamity
being proportionate to the duration of the period of
distraction or to the vileness of the matter with which he
was occupied’’ (Ibid).
Conclusion
We have seen that Jewish philosophy arises out of a clash of
two worldviews: the tenets of Jewish faith and belief on the
one hand, and the strictures of philosophy on the other.
This clash permeated much of Jewish philosophical debate
in the Middle Ages. Discussions pertaining to divine pred-
ication, creation, divine omniscience, and theodicy have
reﬂected this tension. In short, both these philosophers
reﬂect the medieval Jewish attempt to reconcile traditional
Jewish beliefs with what they feel are the strongest points
in Greek philosophy, be it Plato, Aristotle, or Neoplato-
nism; although a synthesis of these systems is their ulti-
mate goal, the strictures of philosophy often win out at the
expense of theology.
See
also:
▶Hasdai
Crescas
▶Gersonides
▶Moses
Maimonides ▶Saadia Gaon
Bibliography
Primary Sources
ben Gerson Levi (Gersonides) (1984) The wars of the Lord, vol 1 (trans:
Feldman S). Jewish Publication Society, Philadelphia
ben Gerson Levi (Gersonides) (1987) The wars of the Lord, vol 2 (trans:
Feldman S). Jewish Publication Society, Philadelphia
ben Gerson Levi (Gersonides) (1999) The wars of the Lord, vol 3 (trans:
Feldman S). Jewish Publication Society, Philadelphia
ben Maimon Moses (Maimonides) (1963) The guide of the perplexed
(trans: Pines S). University of Chicago Press, Chicago
Crescas Hasdai (1990) The light of the Lord (Sefer Or Adonai or Or Ha-
Shem), ed. Fisher S. Sifrei Ramot, Jerusalem
Gaon Saadia (1948) The book of beliefs and opinions (trans: Rosenblatt
S). Yale University Press, New Haven
Secondary Sources
Eisen R (1995) Gersonides on providence, Covenant and the chosen
people. State University of New York Press, Albany
Feldman S (1980) The theory of eternal creation in Hasdai Crescas and
some of his predecessors. Viator 11:289–320
Rudavsky TM (2000) Time matters: creation, time and the continuum in
medieval Jewish philosophy. SUNY, Albany
Seeskin K (ed) (2005) The Cambridge companion to Maimonides. Cam-
bridge University Press, Cambridge
Sirat C (1985) A history of Jewish Philosophy in the Middle Ages.
Cambridge University Press, Paris
Touati C (1973) La Pense´e philosophique et the´ologique de Gersonide.
Editions de Minuit, Paris
Wolfson HA (1929) Crescas’ Critique of Aristotle. Harvard University
Press, Cambridge
Philosophy, Arabic
RAFAEL RAMO´ N GUERRERO
Facultad de Filosoﬁa
Universidad Complutense de Madrid
Madrid
Spain
Abstract
In Islam, the revealed text reminds human beings of their
need to know (Qurʾa¯n, XVI, 78). Muslims embarked on an
intellectual task, which was expressed in different dis-
courses: theology, jurisprudence, mysticism, linguistics,
history, and philosophy. The latter took shape when
Islamic thought came into contact with Greek philosophy,
giving rise to a movement called falsafa: philosophy. This
movement continued and recreated Greek philosophical
thought in the Islamic world. The great issues that inter-
ested philosophers were the relationship between philos-
ophy and religion, the explanation for and conception of
the universe and its origin, and human beings and their
social and political conduct. Falsafa enjoyed productive
expansion and diffusion throughout the Islamic world,
ﬁrst in the East and later in the West, where it exerted
a powerful inﬂuence on the thought of Latinized areas: it
contributed to the transmission of Greek philosophy to
Europe and to new developments in the medieval philos-
ophy of the Latin world.
Islamic thought was grounded in the hermeneutic situa-
tions Muslims found in their religious sources. The ﬁrst
part of the profession of faith, ‘‘There is no god but God,’’
began a process of knowledge, which generated a kind of
philosophy built on the divine unity of the First Principle
as opposed to the multiplicity of the universe. The second
part, ‘‘Muh:ammad is the messenger of God,’’ reveals
another aspect of Islam, in which it deﬁnes itself as
founded on prophecy. This called for a doctrine that was
able to explain divine revelation and prophethood.
Many different thinkers took up the task, and among
these were the philosophers. They attempted to ﬁnd
a rational justiﬁcation for prophethood, afﬁrming that
Philosophy, Arabic P
997
P

the ability to have visions and the special relationship
prophets maintain with the Active Intellect, as well as the
special enlightenment they receive, were all part of human
nature.
Was this a ‘‘prophetic philosophy?’’ There was cer-
tainly a strain of philosophy that developed in this direc-
tion, produced by the party of ‘Alı¯, the Shı¯‘a. They focused
their thought on prophecy and originated a prophetic
brand of philosophy, in which there can be seen consider-
able Gnostic and Zoroastrian inﬂuences from the Persian
world. The central idea of their philosophy lies in reaching
the hidden meaning of divine revelation. On this depends
the truth of human existence: the meaning of human-
kind’s origin and destiny. The resulting esoteric and Gnos-
tic thought revealed a cognitive and scientiﬁc universe
applied to the exegesis of revelation, in which the sciences
of the Hermetic–Pythagoric tradition had their place.
This is what can be inferred from the Epistles, written by
the Ikhwa¯n al-S˙afa¯’, the Brethren of Purity, or Brethren of
Sincerity. Their philosophical system is a mixture of reli-
gion and Pythagoric, Platonic, and Neoplatonic doctrines.
The central idea is the hierarchy running downward from
the One, according to Pythagoric numeric combinations.
It concludes with the exposition of the return of Unity.
But philosophy in the Islamic world was also some-
thing else. It has been maintained that philosophy com-
prised the different aspects and forms taken by Islamic
thought, by virtue of the eastern idea of h:ikma, wisdom,
which implies a broad conception in which the divine and
the human, the mundane and the religious, are two facets
of the same reality. However, more detailed study of the
uses of the terms h:ikma and falsafa, identiﬁed in many
classical Arabic texts (Aristotle was called the ‘‘wise’’ and
the ‘‘philosopher’’), reveals that not all of the disciplines
making up Muslim thought should form part of some-
thing as speciﬁc as falsafa. The latter emerged as a form of
learning independent from, although linked to, other
expressions of Muslim thought.
This is the conception that can be inferred from some
writers. Ibn Qutayba (d. 889) held that the training of wise
men and religious authorities should be based on several
sciences: religion, philology, ethics, and also Greek philos-
ophy, in order to be able to refute it. ‘Umar Khayya¯m
(d. 1131) maintained in his Epistle on Existence that among
the categories of thinkers there are Greek-inﬂuenced phi-
losophers who use rational arguments, endeavor to know
the laws of logic, and are not content with mere arguments
from personal conviction. For al-G˙ aza¯lı¯ (d. 1111), the
philosophers are a group of researchers characterized by
the use of logic and deductive reasoning. Ibn Khaldu¯n
(d. 1406) states that the intellectual sciences differ from
traditional sciences in that the former are innate in humans
and may be grasped through rational and reﬂective ability
and therefore may also be called philosophical sciences.
Philosophical thought was therefore an expression of
Islamic thought with its own speciﬁc characteristics. Phi-
losophers were able to adopt and adapt Greek philosophy
to ﬁnd answers to theoretical and experiential problems.
Due to its evolutionary maturity, philosophy was able to
ﬁnd ways around obstacles that emerged and hindered the
development of ideas. Arabic philosophy was not external
to the context in which it emerged; its existence was
possible because the thought structured around the ideas
of the Qurʾa¯n and the h:adı¯th had already reached matu-
rity. Philosophy could be seen as a set of doctrines that
attempted to interpret Islam from outside Muslim
thought using non-Muslim tools; but also as a new way
to ﬁnding a meaning in the law of God using very different
means from those used up to that point. Philosophers
explain and interpret the meaning of Qurʾa¯nic a¯ya¯t in
the light of new methodological principles. This philoso-
phy was religious and is inseparable from other aspects of
the culture in which it was born. Its originality lay in the
discovery that human reason was capable of leading
humankind to the understanding of Truth.
The reading of Platonic, Aristotelian, and Neoplatonic
texts gave it an eclectic character. The synthesis that struc-
tured philosophical thought was a mixture of Neoplato-
nism and Aristotelianism, until Ibn Rushd. The link
maintained by this philosophy with science was another
of its characteristics, because Greek knowledge was seen as
being the unifying intellectual element. Practical knowl-
edge helped to complete the education of the perfect
human, able to master nature, and understand all its
secrets. The assimilation, use, and transformation of this
material from outside Islamic culture resulted in doctrines
dealing with issues such as the relationship between phi-
losophy, revelation, and the rational justiﬁcation of
prophethood; the explanation of the Oneness of God,
the First Being, and the formation of the universe, as
well as the relationship between the afﬁrmation of the
individual and social reality of humans, and the political
implications of membership of the Muslim community.
The basic doctrines of Islamic philosophy were articulated
around these three main issues and their most important
exponents were al-Kindı¯(d. c. 873), al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯(d. 950), and
Ibn Sı¯na¯ (d. 1037), in the East; Ibn Ba¯jja (d. c. 1138), Ibn
T˙ufayl (d. 1185), and Ibn Rushd (d. 1198), in al-Andalus.
The ﬁrst of these issues to be raised was the explana-
tion of the relationship between philosophy and religion.
Aristotelian texts had made clear the existence of Reason,
by means of which humans can reach Truth. Conceived as
998 P
Philosophy, Arabic

a tool providing rules applicable to human knowledge and
endeavor in order to avoid error, the Arabic term for logic
was al-mant:iq. The term derives from the root n-t:-q,
whose verbal noun, nut:q, originally meant ‘‘articulated,
uttered, pronounced word’’; from this, it came to mean
‘‘reason,’’ because only someone equipped with reason can
articulate words with meaning. Therefore, logic in Arabic
meant ‘‘the place of reason’’ or, rather, ‘‘the place of ratio-
nal words.’’ But Islam, as a religion, already had another
word: the word of God as expressed in the Qurʾa¯n, which
is God’s revealed word given to human beings; and as
such, nonlogical, nonrational word. What is the relation-
ship between these two words? Do they contradict or
complement each other? Are they mutually exclusive or
integrable? The problem was therefore posed between
faith in the given word and a word-creating reason;
between religion as the Word of God and philosophy as
the word of humankind. It has been said that this problem
was raised to reconcile philosophy and religion and bring
them into line with each other; some have seen it as
a rejection of religion by philosophy; others as the con-
cealment of philosophy under a blanket of religion. How-
ever, the dichotomy only makes sense when seen simply as
two different paths converging on the same Truth.
Al-Kindı¯ recognized that philosophy is the search for
truth, a long road on which traveling requires effort, as it
demands that the traveler integrates previous contribu-
tions. Truth can be attained through reason, provided it
has the support of those dedicated to it, through the
contribution made by each of their efforts. The path of
philosophy is made up of different levels, the highest of
which is that relating to knowledge of the First Truth or
knowledge of the divine nature and the oneness of God, of
the virtues to be espoused, and the evil that must be
avoided. According to al-Kindı¯, this is the same goal
announced by the prophets, who have obtained the same
knowledge via a different route from that used by the
philosophers: they did not need effort, dedication, or
time, nor did they have to resort to the discursive reason-
ing of logic and mathematics; rather they attained it with
the aid of divine Will, which inspired the prophets and
revealed the truth to them in an instant. There is agree-
ment as to the goal of philosophy and religion. Both
propound the truth; there is no disparity between their
contents. But there is a difference in the method used; one
rational, the other revealed. They are two different paths
leading to the same destination.
Al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ deepened this approach and pointed to
the superiority of philosophy over religion; the former
has its origin in reason and the latter is fruit of the imag-
ination. Philosophy is concept; religion is representation.
In philosophy, truth can be discovered by humans intel-
lectually whereas in religion, the prophet must translate it
into symbols that the rest of humankind is able to under-
stand. Neither is there any distinction between them
regarding their origin and purpose: both come from the
enlightenment of God through the Active Intellect, the last
of the realities emanating from the ﬁrst Being in the
intelligible order. The result will either be philosophy or
religion, depending on the individual faculty of the person
that is enlightened in this way. If the emanation of forms
that ﬂows from the Active Intellect activates the intellect,
then humans acquire intelligible truths, and become phi-
losophers; but if that enlightenment activates the imagi-
nation, the prophet, i.e., the only human being able to
receive this enlightenment in all its perfection, reproduces
the intelligible truths in the form of images, and commu-
nicates them to humankind. For this reason, there is only
one philosophy, one thought structure that is valid for all
of humanity, while there are many religions, because of the
different languages used as vehicles for the symbols.
Although Ibn Sı¯na¯ did not raise this problem directly in
the same terms, it seems that he was inclined toward
a solution that gave more weight to religion, which was of
great importance in his thought. But he also clearly stated
that the existence of the prophet is compatible with reason,
and proposed a rational explanation for prophecy as some-
thing innate in human beings. On the other hand, all of his
work is an account of reality following the strictest rules of
reason.
He
did
not
reject
the
approach
of
his
two predecessors and was attacked ﬁercely by al-G˙ aza¯lı¯ for
supporting doctrines that were incompatible with religion.
In al-Andalus, Ibn al-Sı¯d al-Bat:alyu¯sı¯ (d. 1127)
pointed to the possibility and need to bring reason and
revelation together, as both search for and teach one single
truth. He said this while defending a poet accused of kufr
(inﬁdelity or unbelief).
Ibn Ba¯jja did not raise the issue explicitly either, but his
afﬁrmation of the superiority of the intellectual and con-
templative life could be taken as a statement in favor of
philosophy. The idea of the recluse dedicated to knowledge,
the only one who can attain total and complete happiness
by cultivating rational faculties, appears to suggest the idea
of the superiority of reason over that given in revelation.
In
H˙ ayy
ibn
Yaqz˙a¯n,
also
called
Philosophus
autodidactus, Ibn T˙ufayl develops the theme of the recluse
who attains the pinnacle of knowledge. This text has been
interpreted mystically, but in it the author clearly puts
forward the idea that what the recluse attains through
the use of reason does not contradict what is propounded
by religious teaching: the recluse can build a philosophical
system with his own rational faculties, an interpretation of
Philosophy, Arabic P
999
P

the universe that allows the ultimate and radical principle
that underlies all reality to be attained from the most
mundane. Contemplation is the supreme aim to which
all humans must aspire, because knowledge, perfection,
and happiness are attained using the intellect, in accor-
dance with human nature.
Ibn Rushd maintained that philosophy is nothing more
than the reﬂective study of the universe, a task to which
believers are invited by revelation, because the rational
consideration of the universe cannot lead at any conclusion
that runs contrary to revelation: there is only one truth and,
consequently, philosophical truth, rational truth, cannot
contradict the truth of religion. There are diverse paths
taking humans to this truth. The author recognizes the
superiority of philosophy when he maintains that the ratio-
nal path is that which leads to science through the use of
demonstrative argument. The other paths provide valid,
but insufﬁcient, arguments for accessing the truth.
Another issue was that related to the explanation of
the entire universe by having recourse to a unique First
Principle. From a religious perspective, this could be
couched as the problem of creation by God. In Islam, the
problem of God’s relationship with the universe and
whether this was eternal or had a beginning was raised.
If one recognizes God and the world’s eternity, then the
relationship between them must also be eternal, as eternity
and necessity imply, according to the Aristotelian doc-
trine, that an eternal relationship would be limited by
necessity. As necessity excludes volition, the eternity of
the universe would imply that God lacks volition and is
subjected to necessity. But if the universe has been created,
will and freedom can be attributed to God, because from
this will originates the action that created the universe.
Theologians afﬁrmed the radical temporality of the
universe: to deny the creation of the world meant unbelief.
The opposite opinion was held by philosophers, with the
exception of al-Kindı¯, who was inﬂuenced by the theolog-
ical roots from which his thought evolved. He devoted
part of his writings to showing the ﬁnite, transitory, and
multiple character of the universe and proving the need
for an inﬁnite, eternal, and truly unique Creator, the cause
of the unity that underlies all multiplicity. Creation
depended on divine will: God simply wants things to be
and they are, as stated in Qurʾa¯nic passages, of which he
gives a philosophical explanation, based on the idea that
being originated out of non-being.
The philosophies of al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ and Ibn Sı¯na¯, developed
from Aristotelian and Neoplatonic teachings, afﬁrmed the
eternity of the universe, and offered an explanation artic-
ulated around a process of emanation, the afﬁrmation of
the theory of causality, and the necessary nature of the
universe. Al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ proposed the distinction between nec-
essary being and possible being. A necessary being is one
that cannot be not existent. Possible beings are those
whose existence can be denied without being contradic-
tory or absurd, and whose existence depends on another.
The Necessary Being of al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ endorses the features of a
combination of Plotinus’ One and, at the same time, those
of the First Unmoved Mover of Aristotle’s Physics and
Metaphysics. It is the absolute One; the perfect, self-sufﬁ-
cient, eternal, uncaused, immaterial, and without opposite
being, that moves as an intelligible and benign principle.
Because it is an intellect, it is able to think about itself.
Its superabundance gives rise to a process of emanation
that causes multiplicity to appear. This process is purely
a consequence of its existence, without volition or choice;
it generates a ﬁrst intellect in which is present the duality
of the subject that thinks and the object that is thought
about. This ﬁrst emanated being, through its thinking
about the First Being from which it originated, generates
a new intellect; on thinking about itself, it generates the
ﬁrst heaven. The second intellect, in turn and by the same
process, causes a second intellect and a third heaven, that
of the ﬁxed stars. In this way, successive intellects are
generated, until the tenth, along with the spheres of Sat-
urn, Jupiter, Mars, the Sun, Venus, Mercury, and the
Moon. The tenth intellect, identiﬁed with the Active Intel-
lect of the Aristotelian tradition, generates the Earth, the
world of generation and corruption. The universe is con-
ceived according to an ontological hierarchy, based on six
principles: the First Being, the separate intellects or second
causes, the Active Intellect, the soul, form, and matter. The
ﬁrst three are not bodies nor are they in bodies; the last
three are not bodies either, but they are joined to bodies.
Matter and form are the most imperfect principles. The
union of matter and form creates the physical bodies,
which are subject to generation and corruption. The soul
is the principle of movement, because in each being it
produces a tendency, that in human beings culminates in
the desire to know the cause that originated it and their
ﬁrst cause, the First Being; this implies that the human
being is able to trace the universe back to its origin.
Ibn Sı¯na¯ accepted this framework, although he
perfected some of al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s metaphysical concepts. He
developed the idea of being as a primary concept perceived
by direct intuition. He broadened the study of necessary
being and possible being: that which is absolute unity, and
cannot therefore have an essence–existence composition,
in so far as it has no genus or difference, is indeﬁnable and
indemonstrable.
In relation
to possible beings,
he
established a distinction between those that were possible
in themselves and those that were necessary, once they had
1000 P
Philosophy, Arabic

received existence from the necessary being. Using this
distinction, he was able to modify the emanation process,
explaining it in the following way: the Necessary or First
Being brings into existence, when it thinks, the ﬁrst intel-
lect. The ﬁrst intellect carries out a double act of thought
from which emanate three entities: this thought exists
purely because it has received its existence from the First,
and generates the soul that moves the ﬁrst heaven; it thinks
of itself as possible and generates the body of this ﬁrst
heaven; it thinks of the First Being, which is its cause, and
brings another intellect into being. This process is repeated
until the active or tenth intellect. In this process, it is the
necessity of the universe that determines its eternity.
The controversy over the universe and its origin was
resolved by Ibn T˙ufayl using empirical observation to
examine the phenomena that surrounded him. The
recluse discovers the answers to the questions formulated
in his daily existence and he progresses in knowledge
through experiments. He studies nature and the multi-
plicity of beings existing in it, reaching the conclusion of
the unity of the species. He works his way up from the
lowest levels of being to the highest and discovers that
everything that exists has an efﬁcient cause. Concerning
the problem of the eternity or creation of the universe, he
concludes that it is necessary to admit the existence of
a maker from which everything emanates, whose essence is
unique and whose being is similar to sunlight, which is the
unmoved mover and ﬁnal cause of the universe.
Ibn Rushd sets out several theories advanced on the
origin of the universe. He maintains that Aristotle’s theory
is the most congruous with the nature of being: the agent
does not produce anything, but simply unites two things
that already exist, matter and form, to actualize that which
is potential. For him, all creation, production, or genera-
tion is a deduction of the forms which exist in matter.
In wanting to reject the Platonism of his predecessors, he
had to put form within matter, as they do not exist sepa-
rately. In so far as they are present in matter simply as
potentiality, deduction, or extraction implies actualiza-
tion. Matter is the necessary prerequisite for all produc-
tion, for all creation. But it is not matter that deduces, or
causes the forms potentially contained within it to come
out, because its potentiality is purely passive. It requires
the action of the agent, which Ibn Rushd, in several pas-
sages of his works, identiﬁes with God. Matter is therefore
unable to transform itself. The consequence of this was the
afﬁrmation of the eternity of the world.
The third issue deals with the reality of human beings,
as individuals and at the political and social level, as
members of a community. The philosophers extensively
developed the idea of the human as a summary of the
cosmos, a microcosm that reﬂects its reality onto the
structure of the universe; with a body, a soul, and an
intellect.
Their
intention
was
to
follow
Aristotle’s
De anima and its conception of humans, but it was the
Neoplatonic vision that left its mark on their theories. The
human was seen as a soul joined to a body, which,
according to Ibn Sı¯na¯, constitutes the self, the true nature
of human beings. The soul, as substantial form and begin-
ning of life, is a fundamental reality, unique and single,
known by its many manifestations. These correspond to
the different functions undertaken by humans and which
follow Aristotle’s thinking: vegetative, sensitive, appetitive,
imaginative, and rational. These faculties are actualized
through bodily organs, except the latter, which does not
require any organ to manifest itself, due to its immaterial
nature.
The
Arabic
philosophers
recognize
the
interdependence that exists between the body and the
soul. The analysis of the soul is usually limited to
the study of knowledge processes. They speak of sense
perception, which is produced when humans grasp objects
that can be sensed using the sensory organs. They give
great importance to the imagination as a faculty. For them
the functions of imagination are not restricted to those
relating to the perception of individual sense images in the
absence of an observable sense object, on one hand, or the
creation and composition of new sense forms based on
those already perceived or on the decomposition of known
images, on the other. Al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ granted imagination a new
function: imitation, by virtue of which intelligible truths
can be imitated, and in this way are transformed into
symbols and images, implying imperfect knowledge of
the intelligible truths. This provides a natural explanation
for the reality of the prophetic faculties of some men, the
prophets, who receive divine revelation via the enlighten-
ment of their imagination by the Active Intellect. Finally,
intellect is the faculty that is studied in depth, because it is
intellect that perfects the soul and allows us to attain
happiness. Following Aristotle’s text, the philosophers
recognize its different levels: from its initial state of pure
potentiality to the level at which it acquires the intelligible
forms, which is after the intermediate level where intellect
obtains the ﬁrst principles of science, which are the basis of
the different forms of knowledge; and ﬁnally to practical
life, where intellect is the faculty that allows the distinction
between good and evil. The knowledge process is
explained by the intervention of the Active Intellect, iden-
tiﬁed with the tenth separate intellect, that of the intelli-
gible forms, which are conferred upon human intellect by
enlightenment. This intellect is called ‘‘Giver of forms.’’
Humans cannot survive nor develop, unless they can
associate with other human beings. Humanity will ﬁnd
Philosophy, Arabic P
1001
P

plenitude in association. Ibn Sı¯na¯ dealt with this problem,
but it was al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ who produced a theory on the social
and political character of humankind. Society is necessary
for happiness to be attained. There are imperfect and
perfect societies, and it is only in the latter that supreme
good and ultimate perfection is achieved, the real deﬁni-
tion of true happiness. These should be states ruled by
political science and organized according to the hierarchy
of the human soul. The Head of the State is Plato’s phi-
losopher–king, who must master political science. Juxta-
posed to the perfect society and the virtuous city are the
states whose motivations are not found in true virtue and
happiness, but in the pursuit of worldly goods, which only
give the appearance of goodness. These states are those of
the ignorant, corrupted, disordered, lost city; those that
set their ultimate goal as subsistence, honor, wealth, or
pleasure; their rulers and citizens hold false conceptions of
what should be the basis of the state, because they have
substituted the principles of the virtuous city for others;
also, it is possible that their conceptions are just, but their
actions are not. All lack political science, which is the true
architectural science.
Ibn Rushd maintains that, due to its independence
from the body, there is only one material intellect for all
individuals. He arrived at this opinion after revising his
initial doctrine. At ﬁrst, Ibn Rushd maintained that the
material intellect was an aptitude that existed in humanity
to enable the reception of intelligible forms. Later on, he
maintained that this intellect was generated every time
the Active Intellect acted upon an individual. In the ﬁnal
version, found in his Middle Commentary on Aristotle’s De
Anima, the material intellect is a single and eternal sub-
stance, shared by all humankind. This afﬁrmation is part
of an argument he had with Alexander of Aphrodisias,
who, having conceived the possible intellect as individu-
alized matter in each person, understood it as something
transitory and divisible. According to Ibn Rushd, this
implied that human beings did not possess their own
actions, other than the purely passive action of being
informed by the Active Intellect. Because Ibn Rushd
maintained the oneness of the material intellect, which
has the potentiality to receive all that is intelligible, he was
able to provide an account of how humans can know the
universals through the action of the Active Intellect.
Ibn Rushd, who dealt extensively with politics, was
convinced that supreme good, ultimate perfection, and
happiness could only be attained in the Perfect City, iden-
tiﬁable with the ideal caliphate of the ﬁrst four caliphs.
He develops the theory of eudemony as fundamentally
social – not merely individual – happiness, and points
out the importance of political discourse for
the
community, since language should give rise to virtuous
and just actions as an essential condition for an honest and
reasonable human life. He states that rhetoric is composed
of the arts of discourse and ethics; that is, of politics. He
differentiates between the object of practical or political
science and that of the theoretical sciences, because its
purpose consists of acts that belong to volition, based on
free will and choice. Although it belongs to the practical
sciences as for the nature of its object, its principles and its
purpose, two parts can be identiﬁed within it: the ﬁrst, that
is general or theoretical, dealing with the ways and habits
of the soul, and the second, that is strictly practical, show-
ing how these ways and habits are established in the soul
and their organization within social groups. He insists that
the main purpose of ethical discourse is the governance of
the city and, more speciﬁcally, the good that that govern-
ment must strive for. The central point here is the noble art
of city governance. For him, the theoretical part of politics
should teach to the political government how to proceed
toward the happiness of citizens, and should contain all
general principles relating to that happiness. Ibn Rushd
moves away from al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ in that he does not succumb to
purely theoretical speculation, rather he makes continual
reference to Islamic history and the politics of his era,
which allow us to better situate his view on Islamic society.
See also: ▶Aristotle, Arabic ▶Doxographies, Graeco-Ara-
bic ▶al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, Abu¯
Nas˙r ▶al-G˙ aza¯lı¯, Abu¯
H˙ a¯mid
Muh:ammad
▶Ibn
Ba¯jja,
Abu¯
Bakr
ibn
al-Sa¯ʾig˙
(Avempace) ▶Ibn Rushd, Muh˙ammad ibn Ah˙mad al-
H˙ afı¯d (Averroes) ▶Ibn Sı¯na¯, Abu¯ ʿAlı¯ (Avicenna) ▶Ibn
T˙ufayl, Abu¯ Bakr (Abubacer) ▶Isma¯ʿı¯lı¯ Philosophical
Tradition ▶al-Kindı¯, Abu¯
Yu¯suf Yaʿqu¯b ibn Ish:a¯q
▶Logic in the Arabic and Islamic World ▶Natural
Philosophy, Arabic ▶Plato, Arabic ▶Political Philosophy,
Arabic
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Avempace (1997) El re´gimen del solitario trans: Lomba Fuentes J. Edito-
rial Trotta, Madrid
Avempace (2006) Carta del Adio´s (Risa¯lat al-wada¯’) y otros tratados
ﬁloso´ﬁcos trans and notes: Lomba J. Editorial Trotta, Madrid
Averroes (2001a) The book of the decisive treatise determining the con-
nection between the law and wisdom & epistle dedicatory. Trans with
intro and notes: Butterworth CE. Islamic translation series. Brigham
Young University Press, Provo (with Arabic facing)
Averroes (2001b) La Be´atitude de l’aˆme. Latin edn, annot, trans: Geoffroy
M, Steel C (Sic et Non). Vrin, Paris
Averroes (2005) Averroes On Plato’s Republic. Trans: Lerner R. Cornell
University Press, Ithaca
Avicenna (1978–1985) La Me´taphysique du Shifa¯’, 2 vols. Trans, intro, and
notes: Anawati GC. Vrin, Paris
1002 P
Philosophy, Arabic

Avicenna (1999) Le Livre des directives et remarques (Kita¯b al-isha¯ra¯t
wa-l-tanbı¯ha¯t) trans: Goichon A-M. Vrin, Paris (reprint of 1951 edn)
Avicenna (2002) Metaﬁsica. La Scienza delle cose divine (al-Ilahiyyat) dal
Libro Della guarigione (Kita¯b al-Shifa¯’), a cura di Lizzini O, Porro P.
Bompiani, Milan
Avicenna (2008) Libro della guarigione. Le cose divine, a curadi Bertolacci
A. UTET, Torino
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ (1999) L’Harmonie entre les opinions de Platon et d’Aristote
Arabic ed. Najjar F, trans and notes: Mallet D. Institut Franc¸ais de
Damas, Damascus
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ (2001) The political writings: Selected Aphorisms and other
texts trans and annot: Butterworth CE. Cornell University Press,
Ithaca/London
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ (2001a) L’E´pitre sur l’intellect (al-Risa¯la fı¯l-ʿaql) trans: Hamzah
D, foreword: Jolivet J, postword: Brague R. L’Harmattan, Paris;
Ramo´n Guerrero R (2002) Al-Farabi: Epı´stola sobre los sentidos del
te´rmino intelecto. Traduccio´n. Revista Espan˜ola de Filosofı´a Medie-
val 9:215–223
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ (2001b) Philosophy of Plato and Aristotle, rev edn (trans with
an intro: Mahdi M, foreword: Butterworth CE, Pangle TL). Cornell
University Press, Ithaca
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ (2002) El camino de la felicidad (Kita¯b al-tanbı¯h ‘ala` sabı¯l
al-sa‘a¯da) traduccio´n, introduccio´n y notas Ramo´n Guerrero R.
Editorial Trotta, Madrid
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ (2008) Al-Farabi: Obras ﬁloso´ﬁcas y polı´ticas. Traduccio´n,
introduccio´n y notas por Ramo´n Guerrero R. Editorial Trotta/Lib-
erty Fund, Madrid
al-Kindı¯ (1974) Al-Kindı¯’s Metaphysics. A translation of Ya‘qu¯b ibn Ish:a¯q
al-Kindı¯’s treatise ‘‘On First Philosophy’’ (Fı¯ l-Falsafah al-U¯ la¯)
intro and comment: Ivry AL. State University of New York Press,
Albany
Secondary Sources
Adamson P (ed) (2007) Classical Arabic philosophy: sources and recep-
tion. The Warburg Institute/Nino Aragno Editore, London/Turin
Adamson P, Taylor RC (eds) (2004) The Cambridge companion to Arabic
philosophy. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Anawati G (1974) E´tudes de philosophie musulmane. Vrin, Paris
Cruz Hernandez M (1996) Historia del pensamiento en el mundo
Isla´mico, 3 vols. Alianza Universidad, Madrid
Daiber H (1999–2007) Bibliography of Islamic philosophy, vol I: Alpha-
betical list of publications; vol II: index of names, terms & topics.
Brill, Leiden; Bibliography of Islamic philosophy. Supplement. Brill,
Leiden/Boston
D’Ancona C (ed) (2005) Storia della ﬁlosoﬁa nell’Islam medievale, 2 vols.
Giulio Einaudi, Turin
Fakhry M (1983) A history of Islamic philosophy, 2nd edn. Columbia
University Press, New York
McGinnis J, Reisman DC (2007) Classical Arabic philosophy: an anthol-
ogy of sources. Hackett, Indianapolis/Cambridge
Ramo´n Guerrero R (2001) Filosofı´as a´rabe y judı´a. Sı´ntesis, Madrid
Philosophy, Byzantine
▶Aesthetics, Byzantine
▶Epistemology, Byzantine
▶Logic, Byzantine
▶Medicine, Byzantine
▶Metaphysics, Byzantine
▶Natural Philosophy, Byzantine
▶Philosophical Psychology, Byzantine
▶Philosophical Theology, Byzantine
▶Political Philosophy, Byzantine
▶Thomism, Byzantine
Philosophy, Jewish
AARON W. HUGHES
Institute of Jewish Thought and Heritage, SUNY,
Buffalo, NY
USA
Abstract
Although ‘‘medieval Jewish philosophy’’ as a concept and
ﬁeld of study was not coined until the modern period, the
term nonetheless denotes a series of features and concerns
shared by a number of individuals between the tenth and
sixteenth centuries. The tendency however has been to
draw a fairly circumscribed line deﬁning the ‘‘canon’’ of
medieval Jewish philosophy that is perceived to stretch
from Saadia Gaon (882–942) to Isaac Abravanel (1437–
1508). In between these two bookends exist a handful of
‘‘Neoplatonists’’ (e.g., Solomon ibn Gabirol, Abraham ibn
Ezra), their critics (e.g., Judah Halevi), the towering Aris-
totelian synthesis of Maimonides (1138–1204), followed
by a series of epigonic thinkers (e.g., Samuel ibn Tibbon,
Joseph Kaspi), and several more original thinkers (e.g.,
Gersonides and Hasdai Crescas).
Such is the master narrative of medieval Jewish phi-
losophy. In what follows I subscribe, for the sake of con-
venience, to this narrative; however, it is important to be
aware that too strict an adherence to it potentially prevents
us from including individuals traditionally left out of this
canon (e.g., Judah al-Harizi, Isaac Polleqar), movements
(e.g., rabbinic thought, kabbalah), or issues (e.g., animals,
literature, genres). With this in mind, what follows pre-
sents the general contours of medieval Jewish philosophy
and, even though it mentions speciﬁc individuals, this entry
works on the assumption that more details concerning
many of these thinkers will be dealt with more exhaustively
in cognate entries.
Problematics
Medieval Jewish philosophy, like all religious philoso-
phies,
is
the
attempt
to
reconcile
the
potentially
Philosophy, Jewish P
1003
P

irreconcilable: rationalism under the guise of Greek phi-
losophy and faith as taught by religious scripture. For
some, let us call them ‘‘religious philosophers,’’ reason
and faith naturally went together at least when properly
interpreted. For most, however, the two worldviews could
never coexist because they represented two completely
different modalities and thus two mutually exclusive sets
of authority. If reason was based on the free exercise of the
rational faculty, religion was dependent upon a series of
commandments derived, not from reason, but from reve-
lation. Whereas the majority of philosophical speculation
was, for example, predicated on the eternity of the uni-
verse (as Aristotelian physics presupposed), religion
needed an omnipotent and omniscient deity who created
the world ex nihilo.
We witness all of these tensions, and others, in medi-
eval Jewish philosophy. The Bible presents a God who
creates the universe from nothing, who is described
using anthropomorphic and anthropopathic language,
who chooses one people (i.e., the Jews) over others, and
who will redeem the world at the end of times. On the
human side, Jews possess a series of commandments –
many of which, on ﬁrst blush, appear to be irrational
(e.g., the mixing of various substances) – that govern
every aspect of their life (from circumcision to diet to
death) and whose performance is connected to religious,
if not necessarily intellectual, perfection.
The reconciliation of faith and reason, religious prac-
tice and intellectual speculation, becomes the goal of Jew-
ish philosophy. As a result, medieval Jewish philosophers
engaged in the interpretation of each one of these appar-
ently contradictory activities in terms of the other. If the
ﬁrst chapter of Genesis, for example, claims that God
created the world ex nihilo, then how might this act of
creation be compatible with Neoplatonic of Aristotelian
metaphysics? If the commandments dictate that Jewish
males must be circumcised on the eighth day after birth
or that Jews must refrain from mixing meat and dairy, how
can such practices be reconcilable with larger and more
universal sets of ethical claims?
This reconciliation was facilitated by a series of read-
ings that included a number of hermeneutical strategies,
the most important of which was allegory. Beginning
as early as Philo of Alexandria (20 BCE–50 CE), Jewish
philosophers engaged in the practice of using allegory to
show that when the biblical text says something that
apparently does not coincide with the dictates of reason,
it is not the case that the Bible is wrong, only that our
understanding of it is. The result is that the literal level of
the Bible must be reinterpreted – critics would say
interpreted away – so that it may now be seen to coincide
with reason. This use of allegory would subsequently be
employed by virtually every medieval Jewish philosopher
as a way to smooth over the potential roadblocks that
prevented the smooth harmonization of philosophy and
religion. If the philosophers thought that they had
succeeded in this, their critics accused them of perﬁdy
and of making a mockery of religious texts and the com-
mandments derived therefrom.
Canons
As should be apparent from the above, the canons of
Jewish philosophy are twofold: Jewish and non-Jewish.
As for the former, all Jewish philosophy can be under-
stood, at least phenomenologically, as the attempt to
explain rationally the traditional sources of Judaism
(e.g., Torah, Talmud). As for the latter, all Jewish philos-
ophy is the explanation of these concepts using the inter-
pretive grids
supplied by non-Jewish
philosophical
schools (e.g., Neoplatonism, Scholasticism, Humanism).
There exists, with one or two possible exceptions, vir-
tually no works written by Jews devoted solely to the topic
of philosophy. There is, for example, no ‘‘Jewish’’ Averroes
i.e., someone who was interested solely in interpreting
Aristotle and who had very little concern for religion or
religious ideas. This led Leo Strauss to make his famous (or
perhaps infamous) proclamation that the most famous
and important work of Jewish philosophy, Maimonides’
Guide of the Perplexed, ‘‘is not a philosophic book – a book
written by a philosopher for a philosopher – but a Jewish
book: a book written by a Jew for Jews’’ (1963:xv). This
signals that Jewish philosophy, while certainly a speculative
enterprise, is ﬁrst and foremost an exegetical endeavor, the
attempt to read philosophy into the Torah and vice versa. If
we want to ﬁnd ‘‘pure’’ philosophical treatises, devoid of
religious concerns, we often search in vain.
Despite the fact that there exist very few pure philo-
sophical
treatises,
nineteenth-century
German-Jewish
scholars associated with the movement Wissenschaft des
Judentums (‘‘The Science of Judaism’’) nevertheless had no
problems in deﬁning an object of study that they labeled as
medieval Jewish philosophy. They subsequently created
a canon of thinkers, and treatises, that they believed ade-
quately contributed to such a ﬁeld of study. Like all such
canons created in the nineteenth century, it put pride of
place on great men and original works, and tended to
marginalize others – especially those who wrote commen-
taries to these earlier works – as epigonic and unoriginal.
Perhaps because of the apparent freedom that Jews enjoyed
under eleventh- and twelfth-century Muslim rule and the
concomitant desire for equality in Germany, these Wissen-
schaft scholars tended to focus on the philosophers from
1004 P
Philosophy, Jewish

Muslim Spain (al-Andalus). They identiﬁed these medie-
val Andalusi Jewish thinkers with a classical ‘‘golden age’’
and viewed the period between this golden age and their
own as one of gradual decline. In their quest to revivify
Jewish life they created, what Shmuel Feiner calls,
a ‘‘pantheon of historical heroes’’ (2002:50–65) and, in
many ways, they shaped this pantheon in their own image.
In their desire to make Judaism a religion of reason, to
use the phrase of Hermann Cohen, all that did not ﬁt
within a rather strict deﬁnition of ‘‘rationality’’ was
excluded and often ridiculed as obscurantist. In other
words, ‘‘Jewish philosophy’’ was artiﬁcially extracted
from ‘‘Jewish mysticism’’ (kabbalah) or ‘‘Talmudism’’
when in fact the boundaries between them were often
quite porous. The end result is that ‘‘medieval Jewish
philosophy’’ was developed – and a canon of thinkers
and works imagined – as a way to correct perceived
excesses and lacunae in modern Judaism.
This is certainly not to claim that medieval Jewish
philosophy was simply an invention of nineteenth-century
German-Jewish scholars, however. What it does signal is
that we must be aware of the potential artiﬁciality of the
enterprise and thereby realize that their deﬁnition of Jew-
ish philosophy may in fact be too narrow or too ideolog-
ical. Moreover, we should not let received opinion about
medieval Jewish philosophy shackle the way we imagine it,
the various relationships conﬁgured between philosophers
and its discontents, in the future.
A case in point that tests the potential artiﬁciality of
‘‘medieval Jewish philosophy’’ is the curious work of Sol-
omon ibn Gabirol (1021–c. 1058) entitled The Fountain of
Life, which, although written in Arabic, survived only in
a Latin translation known as the Fons vitae. This treatise is
a purely metaphysical work and – with the possible excep-
tion of one quotation (from the mystical Sefer Yetzira, and
not the Bible) – makes no mention of Judaism whatsoever.
We thus have no idea how Ibn Gabirol either extracted his
ideas from scripture or read them into it. As a result,
subsequent Jewish philosophers largely ignored the work,
although it would come to play an important role in
Christian scholasticism, where its author was assumed
to be a Muslim (the so-called ‘‘Avencebrol’’). It was not
until the nineteenth century that Solomon Munk found
Hebrew excerpts of the work and proved their identity
with the Fons vitae that the text ﬁnally became associated
with Ibn Gabirol. So what do we do with Ibn Gabirol? Is
his Fons vitae a work of Jewish philosophy just because its
author was Jewish? The tendency is to focus less on his Fons
vitae and more on his ‘‘Jewish’’ works such as his phil-
osophical poem Keter Malkhut that explicitly addresses
Jewish themes and is replete with biblical prooftexts.
Schools
In the opening line of his Die Philosophie des Judentums,
Julius Guttmann writes: ‘‘The Jewish people did not begin
to philosophize because of any irresistible urge to do so.
They received philosophy from outside sources, and the
history of Jewish philosophy is a history of the successive
absorptions of foreign ideas which were then transformed
and adapted according to speciﬁc Jewish points of view’’
(1964:3). Although the particular datum of Jewish philos-
ophy has not changed, the philosophical lenses used to
interpret this datum have largely been contingent upon
the larger intellectual worlds in which Jews lived. In the
period under discussion there were primarily three such
philosophical schools: Neoplatonism, Aristotelianism,
and Humanism.
After the thought of Philo who, pace Harry Wolfson’s
formulation, had very little inﬂuence on subsequent Jew-
ish philosophical speculation, rationalism reenters Juda-
ism in the Islamic period, initially under the guise of
rational theology (kala¯m). One of the earliest Jewish ratio-
nalists was Saadia Gaon (882–942), whose main work, The
Book of Opinions and Beliefs, was an attempt to integrate
Jewish theological speculation with Greek thought as
mediated by Muslim rationalist theologians. In this, he
largely sets the stage for the majority of Jewish philosoph-
ical speculation in the Islamic world for the next three
centuries. For example, Saadia held that Torah and phi-
losophy mutually reinforced one another and that scien-
tiﬁc speculation could be invoked to defend traditional
Jewish beliefs such as God’s unity and the creation of
the world.
Although Saadia was primarily a theologian, albeit
with a rationalist temperament, ‘‘Jewish philosophy’’
would begin in earnest in the generations after him. In
this regard, Neoplatonism became the dominant philo-
sophical worldview between the ninth and twelfth centu-
ries. Although largely the product of Plotinus and Proclus,
Neoplatonic ideas tended to circulate in the name of
Aristotle (e.g., The Theology of Aristotle, The Book of the
Apple). Two ideas central to Neoplatonism in all of its
many guises were the doctrine of the emanation and the
myth of the soul. Based on Aristotle’s obscure discussion
in De anima, and later comments on it by the likes of
Alexander of Aphrodisias and Themistius, emanation
sought to solve the problem of how multiplicity arises
from unity. As it came to be worked out, the self-reﬂection
or self-intellection of the One entails the emergence of
a pure Intellect. By contemplating itself and its source,
this pure Intellect gives rise to a second intellect and the
outermost
sphere of
the
heavens.
The
subsequent
sequence of intellects and spheres carries down to the
Philosophy, Jewish P
1005
P

tenth and lowest of the supernal or heavenly intellects, the
Active Intellect, and the nethermost celestial sphere, that
of the moon. As developed by later Aristotelians, the
Active Intellect is responsible for the projection of univer-
sal forms or archetypes onto matter, and for actualization
of human intellect.
The myth of the soul conceives of the human soul as
ontically related to the universal Soul, whence it departs to
live in a human body. Trapped in the body, the soul can
either aspire to reascend to its celestial home or become
mired in the ﬁlth of matter. The way for the soul to
reascend is by means of the study of philosophy. Typical
Jewish Neoplatonists include Isaac Israeli (850–c. 932),
Bahya ibn Paquda (ﬂ. ﬁrst half of the eleventh century),
Solomon ibn Gabirol (1021–c. 1058), Abraham bar Hiyya
(d. c. 1136), Joseph ibn Zaddik (d. 1149), and Abraham
ibn Ezra (1089–1164).
In the late twelfth century, Aristotelianism largely
displaced Neoplatonism as the regnant discourse among
Jewish intellectuals. It was certainly not a clean break: If
Neoplatonism had absorbed many Aristotelian elements,
the opposite also held true. As a result, Aristotle’s meta-
physical structures were altered by the adoption of the
doctrine of emanation, and the purpose of knowledge
took on religious connotations since its ultimate goal was
perceived to be the apprehension of the metaphysical
world. However, the monism of Neoplatonism was gradu-
ally replaced by the dualism of form and matter, and the
human soul – no longer regarded as an emanation from
the universal Soul – became deﬁned as the form of the
body. The Neoplatonic theory of knowledge as recollection
or remembrance gave way to the Aristotelian theory of
observation and abstraction from sensual phenomena.
Finally, Aristotelian ethics lacked the religious character
of Neoplatonic ethics that enjoined humans to liberate
themselves from the bonds of matter and to elevate
themselves to the celestial home by means of spiritual
perfection. Important early Jewish Aristotelians include
Abraham ibn Daud (1110–1180) and Moses Maimonides
(1138–1204).
Perhaps owing to both the novelty and the potential
for misunderstanding, early Aristotelians such as Ibn
Daud and Maimonides tended to write esoterically, only
hinting at implicit connections between Judaism and phi-
losophy. In the post-Maimonidean era, however, many of
those who commented on Maimonides’ work were not as
concerned with maintaining the same level of secrecy. The
result is that Maimonides was translated, both literally and
linguistically, into other conceptual idioms, revealing his
secrets, as it were. Samuel ibn Tibbon (c. 1165–1232) who
lived in Provence, for instance, translated the Guide and
many other philosophical works produced by Jews and
Muslims (e.g., Avicenna, al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯) into Hebrew.
Samuel ibn Tibbon also wrote two original treatises:
A commentary on Ecclesiastes and a philosophical-
exegetical monograph by the name of Ma’amar Yiqqawu
ha-Mayim (Treatise on Let the Waters be Gathered [i.e.,
Gen 1:9]). Both treatises discuss philosophical ideas in the
form of biblical exegesis; and they both borrow and apply
methods developed by Maimonides in his Guide. Ibn
Tibbon, as well as other members of his family – for
example, his son-in-law, Jacob Anatoli (c. 1194–1256)
and his son, Moses ibn Tibbon (ﬂ. 1240–1283) – was
responsible for helping the thought of Averroes make
further inroads into Jewish philosophy. Anatoli is note-
worthy because he was one of the ﬁrst Jewish philosophers
that had direct contact with Christian Scholastics, includ-
ing the famous scholar Michael Scott, when he was the
court physician to Emperor Frederick II Hohenstaufen at
Naples. The thirteenth century, to quote Colette Sirat, was
‘‘a century of translations and encyclopedias’’ (1985:231).
Both of these were ultimately responsible for the dissem-
ination of philosophy and science to a growing class of
upwardly mobile Jewish court bureaucrats (Tirosh-
Samuelson 2003:251–252).
In many ways we can consider Samuel ibn Tibbon as
the
founder
of
Maimonideanism,
a
philosophical-
exegetical movement that radicalized Maimonides and
that would continue for centuries. This new movement
however did certainly not go unchecked or uncriticized.
The rise of Maimonideanism gave way to series of
intra-communal tensions usually referred to as the
‘‘Maimonidean Controversies,’’ which revolved around
the reception, role, and function of Maimonides’ writings.
These controversies were not simply a matter of academic
debate, but were a series of acrimonious personal and
communal conﬂicts about the direction of Jewish culture,
including the age-old struggle religion and philosophy.
The goal of philosophy in this period was to inculcate
the values of philosophy in as large an audience as possible
as opposed to working out technical philosophical prob-
lems in obscure treatises. The main way that philosophy
was produced in this period was, as mentioned, through
encyclopedias and commentaries, in addition to sermons,
dialogues, and poetry (Hughes 2008:53–106). Major
thinkers in these debates included philosophical popular-
izers such as Shem Tov ibn Falaquera (c. 1225–c. 1295). In
its most radical form, Maimonideans – as articulated in
such individuals as Joseph ibn Kaspi (1280–after 1332) –
claimed that philosophy represented the inner, hidden
meaning of the Torah. Whereas Maimonides had tried to
keep philosophy and religion in creative counterpoint,
1006 P
Philosophy, Jewish

such individuals held that the plain meaning of the Torah,
and thus all the teachings and practices of Judaism, were
simply the means to a higher, intellectual end.
In the fourteenth and ﬁfteenth centuries, Jewish phi-
losophy continued to be written and disseminated primar-
ily in the form of commentary. It is, of course, important
to be aware that although the genre of commentary out-
wardly appears conservative, upon closer inspection much
original thinking goes on in it, as commentators pro-
pound new and often highly original ideas in the guise of
earlier thinkers. In this period it is difﬁcult to determine to
just what extent Jewish philosophers were familiar with
developments in scholastic philosophy. Many of the major
Provencal philosophers – e.g., Gersonides (1288–1344),
Moses Narboni (d. c. 1362) – reveal little signs of such
inﬂuence, and the major thinker that they seem to struggle
with is Averroes. In contrast, philosophers who ﬂourish in
the late fourteenth century and early ﬁfteenth – e.g.,
Proﬁat Duran (c. 1350–c. 1415), Joseph Albo (c. 1380–
1444), Abraham Bibago (c. 1446–c. 1489) – are much
more conservative and their main task, in the aftermath
of strong persecution and proselytizing efforts on the
Iberian Peninsula, was to combat what they perceived to
be the pernicious inﬂuence of Averroism on Spanish
Jewry.
If Maimonides was the most important Jewish thinker
in the medieval period, second place must surely go to
Gersonides. He wrote philosophical commentaries on vir-
tually all of the books of the Bible, in addition to compos-
ing an original treatise, Wars of the Lord. Although
Gersonides lived in a larger intellectual environment per-
meated by scholasticism, his philosophical world was that
of Muslim Spain, despite the fact that he could not read
Arabic. Gersonides’ thought is largely concerned with
reconciling the Aristotelianism of Averroes with the the-
ology of Maimonides.
Increasingly in the ﬁfteenth century, we begin to wit-
ness the absorption and systematization of Christian
thought and philosophy, including the different currents
of Scholasticism (Thomism, Scotism, Nominalism) in
Jewish philosophy. This may well be the result of better
knowledge among Jewish elites, possible Jewish atten-
dance at Christian schools and academies, and perhaps
even the existence of similar Jewish institutions. As
a consequence we begin to see the employment of Scho-
lastic methods, especially by Iberian thinkers, and even
explicit references to Latin Scholastic authors by so-called
‘‘Jewish Averroists’’ (Zonta 14–15). Such thinkers include
Abraham Bibago (c. 1446–c. 1489), Abraham Shalom
(d. 1492), Isaac Arama (c. 1420–1494), and Isaac
Abravanel (1437–1508).
Some have argued that Hebrew Scholasticism in Iberia
is part of the attempt to defend Judaism from its two main
intellectual opponents at this time: Christianity and
radical Averroism (Tirosh-Samuelson 2003:504–505).
Others, however, claim that the absorption of Scholasti-
cism was primarily for philosophical reasons (Zonta
2006:22). Hebrew Scholasticism was also popular in
Italy, where individuals included Judah Messer Leon
(c. 1470–c. 1526) and his disciples Abraham Farissol
(1451–1525); the last major Jewish Averroist and one with
Scholastic leanings was Elijah del Medigo (c. 1458–c. 1493).
Jewish philosophy in ﬁfteenth-century Italy was also
heavily inﬂuenced by parallel developments of Humanism
in Christian thought. The recovery of Greek texts and the
revival of Platonism and Neoplatonism in the middle of
the ﬁfteenth century coincided with a parallel movement
in Jewish thinkers. One of the earliest Jewish thinkers to
absorb these Humanistic trends was the aforementioned
Judah Messer Leon, whose Book of the Honeycomb’s Flow
attempted to show how the rhetorical and aesthetical
innovations actually derived from the biblical narrative
(Hughes 2010). For Messer Leon, it was the Torah, as
opposed to the ancient orators, that exempliﬁes perfect
speech. Perhaps the best example of humanism in Jewish
garb is the enigmatic Judah Abravanel (c. 1465–after
1521). His Dialoghi d’Amore represents one of the ﬁrst
treatises in Jewish philosophy written in Italian, and it
shows the inﬂuence of Ficino’s interest in pagan ancient
wisdom and its compatibility with Judaism.
Critics
The rationalist agenda in Judaism was certainly not
without its critics. Although we have already witnessed
this criticism of Maimonides during the so-called
Maimonidean Controversies, there also exist several
important individuals who tried to offer alternatives to
philosophy. Although often trained in philosophy, their
goal was to undermine the philosophical enterprise from
within. In this regard, perhaps the best known is the pre-
Maimonidean Judah Halevi (c. 1075–1141). At the age of
50, so the legend goes, Halevi turned his back on what he
perceived to be the inauthenticity of Judeo-Arabic cultural
forms. Disillusioned with the inter-confessional Neopla-
tonism of his day, he was especially critical of how it
ignored the particularities of the historical record, espe-
cially when it came to Judaism. In his Kuzari, a dialogue,
the rabbinic protagonist responds to the philosopher’s
articulation of the ‘‘God of Aristotle’’ with the credo that
‘‘I believe in the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.’’ With
this claim he signals the importance of experience over
intellection, and that without the proper actions belief is
Philosophy, Jewish P
1007
P

ultimately unimportant. He also faults the philosophers
for their improbable speculation about divine intellects
(e.g., why should there be only ten) and about causation.
Like Halevi, Hasdai Crescas (1340–1410) attempted
to undermine the dominant philosophical system of his
age, now the Aristotelianism of Maimonides and Averroes.
He did this primarily by trying to disprove Aristotle’s
physics. In so doing, he rejected Aristotle’s conception of
a self-contained universe wherein everything moves
toward its natural place. He further rejected the Aristote-
lian account that ruled out an actual inﬁnite series of
causes. Crescas argued, on the contrary, that inﬁnite
time, inﬁnite space, and an inﬁnite series of causes was
indeed possible. This inﬁnite universe, in turn, was held
together by inﬁnite divine love that regulated both cosmic
and human affairs. Crescas also sought to undermine the
Maimonidean summum bonum of intellectual perfection
and the conjunction between the human and Active intel-
lects. Rather, he argued that human perfection was based
on the love of God actualized through the performance of
the divine commandments as revealed in the Torah.
Isaac Abravanel (1437–1508) – father of Judah
Abravanel – was highly critical of Maimonides. He faults
Maimonides, and his later followers, for deﬁning Judaism
in accord with the foreign fashion of other nations. For
Abravanel, however, Judaism has nothing in common
with foreign sciences because the teachings of the Torah
are revelations from God. He particularly faulted Mai-
monides’ attempts to deﬁne the principles or articles of
faith of Judaism. Such a task, according to Abravanel, was
impossible because all the commandments are of equal
value. He is also highly critical of Maimonides’ conception
that prophetic visions were creations of the imaginative
faculty and thus susceptible to rational description. On the
contrary, Abravanel argued that they were miraculous
occurrences and he thus defends the irrationality of mir-
acles and their importance for Judaism.
Themes
Since Aristotelian cosmology and all of the sciences that
followed in its wake were predicated on the eternality of
the universe, this seemed, at ﬁrst blush, to contradict the
biblical account of creation ex nihilo. The creation of the
universe from nothing implied an omnipotent and omni-
scient God that could work freely in the universe, and
subsequently make other facets of Judaism (e.g., revela-
tion, redemption, miracles) possible. Some Jewish philos-
ophers contended that God did in fact create the world out
of nothing (e.g., Saadia Gaon); others contended that
the world was created but that it would exist without
end (e.g., Gersonides); other that the universe was eternal
(e.g., Moses Narboni); and still others (e.g., Crescas) that
the world is eternally emanated from God by means of the
eternal divine will. The biggest debate in medieval Jewish
philosophy concerns the opinion of Maimonides on the
status of the universe (Seeskin 2005:6–34). Because he
nowhere speciﬁes his opinion clearly, later (and modern)
commentators have ascribed to him both the opinions of
creation ex nihilo and eternality, in addition to the Platonic
belief that the world was created out of preexistent matter.
Another issue of concern to medieval Jewish philoso-
phers was prophecy. Because biblical books tended to be
full of various anthropomorphisms and anthropopathisms,
these were often difﬁcult to reconcile with the rational
teachings of philosophy. The fullest discussion of prophecy
occurs in Maimonides’ Guide of the Perplexed, wherein
he argues that revelation is the product of the prophet’s
imaginative faculty. This permits prophets to take rational
truths and enwrap them in poetic and rhetorical ﬂourishes
so as to communicate philosophical truths to nonphilos-
ophers. It is up to the philosopher, however, to retranslate,
as it were, these highly literary and ﬁgurative images
back into the language of philosophy (Hughes 2010).
Indeed, as mentioned, this is in many ways the raison
d’eˆtre of the medieval Jewish philosophical program.
The problem of immortality also concerned medieval
Jewish philosophers. Virtually all agreed that there existed
some part of the individual, that which constitutes the
essence of humans qua humans, that survives the death of
the body. For them, this essence was the intellect or ratio-
nal soul. Whereas traditional Judaism and more conser-
vative thinkers would argue that immortality is derived
from the proper relationship that the individual has with
God through the observance of the commandments, the
philosophers tend to locate immortality in the acquisition
and mastery of the secular sciences. There is also some
debate as to whether immortality is personal or imper-
sonal. Most seem to imply that it is the latter since only the
perfected intellect can become immortal, with the corpo-
ral and hence individualizing aspects departing with the
death of the body.
Another central feature of medieval Jewish philosophy
was the status of divine attributes. Ontologically, how are
we to assign attributes to God (e.g., might, justice) with-
out jeopardizing his unity? If God does possess attributes,
in what way can they be said to exist? When the Bible
speaks of God’s strength or God’s speech, how does it
employ such terms? Are they symbols, metaphors, or
analogies? Most of the Jewish philosophers stress the
absolute unity and unfathomability of the divine essence,
while at the same time claiming that we can know some-
thing of God’s attributes of action (e.g., righteousness,
1008 P
Philosophy, Jewish

lovingkindness). Saadia, for example, denies the existence
of separate divine attributes and instead insists on the
perfect unity of God with His knowledge, wisdom, life,
and so on. Maimonides, on the other hand, argues that all
of the attributes that are applicable to God are ‘‘negative,’’
that is, they are attributes whose opposites are to be
negated of God. To say that God possesses life, for exam-
ple, means that we negate of God the trait of death. In an
attempt to preserve divine unity, however, Gersonides
argued that attributes are predicated of God primarily
and only predicated of creatures in a secondary manner.
So although God and his creatures may appear to be
similar, they are in fact only analogous and no relation
between the two need be implied.
Increasingly in the post-Maimonidean period, the
issue and status of belief became central to Jewish philos-
ophy. In the twelfth century, belief (emunah; Ar. I‘tiqa¯d)
referred primarily to a ‘‘belief’’ or a ‘‘conviction,’’ which
led those like Maimonides to distinguish between rational
and traditional beliefs. Maimonides’ cognitive approach
made certain beliefs obligatory (e.g., creation, prophecy,
messiah) and this required Jews to be instructed in the
dogmas of the tradition. Increasingly in the thirteenth and
fourteenth centuries, inﬂuenced by the Averroist tradition,
Jewish philosophers began to distinguish between knowl-
edge and true opinion. Only the former, according to the
likes of Gersonides and Moses Narboni, are a sufﬁcient
condition for human happiness and immortality. In the
ﬁfteenth centuries, Jewish philosophers such as Isaac
Abravanel argued that beliefs, as principles that derive
from a strong and certain conviction as opposed to dem-
onstration, are in fact superior to rational knowledge.
Conclusions
In sum, medieval Jewish philosophy is essentially a series
of reading strategies provided by rationalist Jews to phi-
losophize about Judaism. Inﬂuenced by Islamic legal spec-
ulation, Neoplatonism, Aristotelianism, and Humanism
these individuals reﬂected upon the central tenets of Juda-
ism (e.g., God, Torah, prophecy) and attempted to show
how they were compatible with the teachings of philoso-
phy. In all of their endeavors, Jewish philosophers sought
to mediate the series of tensions – both real and perceived
– between rationalism and religion. Although their intel-
lectualist program did not go unchecked or uncriticized,
they nevertheless succeeded in changing the contours of
Judaism by redeﬁning traditional terms and concepts.
See also: ▶Abraham ibn Ezra ▶Alexander of Aphrodisias
and Arabic Aristotelianism ▶Arabic Philosophical Texts,
Jewish Translations of ▶Aristotelianism in the Greek,
Latin, Syriac, Arabic, and Hebrew Traditions ▶Aristotle,
Arabic ▶Avicebron ▶Ethics, Jewish ▶al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, Abu¯
Nas˙r ▶al-G˙ aza¯lı¯, Abu¯ H˙ a¯mid Muh:ammad ▶Gersonides
▶Hasdai Crescas ▶Ibn Ba¯jja, Abu¯ Bakr ibn al-Sa¯ʾig˙
(Avempace) ▶Ibn Rushd, Muh˙ammad ibn Ah˙mad al-
H˙ afı¯d (Averroes) ▶Ibn Sabʿı¯n, ʿAbd al-H˙ aqq ▶Ibn Sı¯na¯,
Abu¯ ʿAlı¯ (Avicenna) ▶Ibn T˙ufayl, Abu¯ Bakr (Abubacer)
▶Ikhwa¯n
al-S˙afa¯ʾ,
Encyclopedia
of
▶Isaac
Israeli
▶Isma¯ʿı¯lı¯
Philosophical
Tradition
▶Judah
Halevi
▶Kala¯m
▶al-Kindı¯,
Abu¯
Yu¯suf
Yaʿqu¯b
ibn
Ish:a¯q
▶Logic, Jewish ▶Moses Maimonides ▶Natural Philoso-
phy, Jewish ▶Philosophical Psychology, Jewish Tradition
▶Philosophical Theology, Jewish ▶Political Philosophy,
Jewish ▶Saadia Gaon
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Abravanel Isaac (1982) Principles of faith, trans. Kellner M. Fairleigh
Dickinson University Press, Rutherford
Abravanel Judah (2009) Dialogues of love, trans. Bacich D, Pescatori R.
University of Toronto Press, Toronto
Albo Jospeh (1929–1930) Sefer ha-`Ikkarim, 4 vols, ed. and trans. Husik I.
Jewish Publication Society of America, Philadelphia
ben Gerson Levi (1984–1999) Wars of the Lord, 3 vols, trans. Feldman S.
Jewish Publication Society of America, Philadelphia
Crescas Hasdai n.d. Or ha-Shem. Sifrei Ramot, Jerusalem
Gaon Saadya (1948) The book of beliefs and opinions, trans. Rosenblatt S.
Yale University Press, New Haven
Halevi Judah (2001) Le Kuzari: Apologie de la religion me´prise´e, trans.
Touati C. Verdier, Paris
Ibn Daud Abraham (1986) The exalted faith, trans. Samuelson N.
Fairleigh Dickinson University Press, Rutherford
Ibn Falaquera Shem Tov (1987) Epistle of the debate, trans. Harvey S.
Harvard University Press, Cambridge
Ibn Gabirol Shlomo (1962) The fountain of life, abridged trans.
Wedeck H. Philosophical Library, New York
Ibn Paquda Bahya (1973) The book of directions to the duties of the heart,
ed. and trans. Mansoor M. Routledge, London
Ibn Tibbon Samuel (2007) Commentary on Ecclesiastes, ed. and trans.
Robinson J. Mohr Siebeck, Tu¨bingen
Maimonides Moses (1963) The guide of the perplexed, 2 vols, trans.
Pines S. University of Chicago Press, Chicago
Messer Leon Judah (1983) The book of the honeycomb’s ﬂow, ed. and
trans. Rabinowitz I. Cornell University Press, Ithaca
Secondary Sources
Feiner S (2004) Haskalah and history: the emergence of a modern Jewish
historical consciousness, trans. Naor C, Silverstein S. Littmann
Library, Oxford
Frank DH, Leaman O (eds) (2003) The Cambridge companion to medi-
eval Jewish philosophy. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Guttmann J (1964) Philosophies of Judaism: a history of Jewish philoso-
phy from biblical times to Franz Rosenzweig, trans. Silverman DW.
Schocken, New York. Originally published as Guttmann J (1933) Die
Philosophie des Judentums. Reinhardt, Mu¨nchen
Hughes AW (2008) The art of dialogue in medieval Jewish philosophy.
Indiana University Press, Bloomington
Philosophy, Jewish P
1009
P

Hughes AW (2010) The invention of Jewish culture: bible, philosophy,
and the art of translation. Indiana University Press, Bloomington
Seeskin K (2005) Maimonides on the origin of the world. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge
Sirat C (1985) A history of medieval Jewish philosophy. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge
Strauss L (1988/1952) Persecution and the art of writing. University of
Chicago Press, Chicago
Tirosh-Samuelson H (2003) Happiness in premodern Judaism: virtue,
knowledge, and well-being. Hebrew Union College Press, Cincinnati
Zonta M (2006) Hebrew scholasticism in the ﬁfteenth century: a history
and sourcebook. Springer, Dordrecht
Photios of Constantinople
JOZEF MATULA
Department of Philosophy, Center for Medieval and
Renaissance Philosophy
Palacky University
Olomouc
Czech Republic
Abstract
Photios, together with Arethas and Leo the Mathematician,
is a representative of the ‘‘ﬁrst Byzantine Renaissance’’ and
a major ﬁgure in the transitional period of Byzantine
intellectual history in the ninth and tenth centuries. He
revived classical education in Byzantium, and through his
activities humanism became a constitutive element of
Byzantine thought. Photios’ Amphilochia (composed
between 867 and 877) is one of the most important Byz-
antine philosophical documents, in which he deals with
philosophical and theological topics. It contains the ﬁrst
known commentary on Aristotle’s Categories of the ninth
century (qu. 137–147), in which he discusses various
topics of Aristotle’s philosophy (theory of predication,
the concept of substance, species and genera, categories).
Biography
Photios (810/820–891/893), patriarch of Constantinople
(858–867, 877–886), was one of the dominant ﬁgures in
the Byzantine religious, social, and political life of the
ninth century. He was also one of the most prominent
members
of
the
Court
of
Constantinople
and
a protagonist in the controversy over the ﬁlioque clause
(Dvornik 1948). His religious career is related to theolog-
ical disputes, the restoration of icons, and political activ-
ities connected with missions to the Slavs. He laid the
foundations of education, which made him one of the
most famous scholars of the Byzantine Empire. He was
interested in theological issues, grammar, poetry, rhetoric,
philosophy, medicine, and law. His works are signiﬁcant as
evidence of the philosophical activities of the ﬁrst half of
the ninth century (Tatakis 1949; Lemerle 1971).
Most important for the history of philosophy is
Photios’ Bibliotheca (sometimes called Myriobiblon), com-
posed around 837/838, which is a collection of extracts of
280 volumes of classical authors, the originals of which are
now to a great extent lost. In this work, he devoted several
pages to preserve various ancient philosophical theories
on free will and predestination (codices 214 and 251),
skepticism (codex 212), and number symbolism (codex
187). He also compiled the Lexikon, a list of notable words,
expressions, and references to facilitate the reading of
sacred and secular authors, which was published later
than the Bibliotheca. His most important work is the
Amphilochia, a collection of some 300 questions and
answers on difﬁcult points in the Scripture, addressed to
Amphilochius, the archbishop of Cyzicus. Amphilochia
supplements the picture of Photios’ reading of classical
philosophy, treating both theological problems and secu-
lar questions.
In Mystagogy of the Holy Spirit, Photios developed
dialectical arguments against the Latin doctrine of the
ﬁlioque. He remains faithful to the Orthodox dogma and
always in agreement with traditional patristic and concil-
iar positions. He also wrote a treatise against the
Paulicians, based on a similar work by Peter of Sicily,
and his homilies contain abundant material for Byzantine
political history and art. His many letters are addressed to
popes, rulers, as well as military, civil, and church leaders.
Thought
Photios did not write any comprehensive philosophical
treatise, and he did not create an independent system of
thought. As a philosopher, he cannot be separated from
his theological thought, which has its origins in the Scrip-
ture, the Church Fathers, and Church Councils. His main
interest in philosophy is logic and dialectic (Kustas 1973).
He considered secular learning and logical methods to be
a special preparation for theological matters. Philosophi-
cal thinking is, according to him, a process of understand-
ing notions that are then compared to religious truths, and
through this process they are denied or accepted.
Photios, versed in ancient literature, revived the inter-
est in antiquity in Constantinople (Tatakis 1949; Lemerle
1971; Ha¨gg 1975). An important place is given to Plato,
Aristotle, the Stoics, the Neoplatonists (Proclus, Porhyry),
and
the
commentators
(Ammonius,
Simplicius,
Philoponus, Olympiodorus). In Bibliotheca, he quotes
from the lost writings of the skeptic Aenesidemus, the
1010 P
Photios of Constantinople

Neoplatonist Hierocles, Aristides, and from an anony-
mous biography of Pythagoras.
Photiosunderstands Plato and Aristotle as the successors
of Pythagoras (codex 249), and both thinkers are, in his view,
fundamentally in agreement as far as the notions of provi-
dence and the immortality of the soul are concerned. He is
familiar with Plato’s works, though his knowledge seems to
have come chieﬂy from intermediary sources. Photios often
mentions Plato, but he nowhere undertakes an analysis of
a Platonic dialogue (unless such an analysis is lost). Plato is
a great stylist, but Photios faults him for his attack of rhetoric
and poetry. He analyzes the concepts of genera and species
and argues against the theory of Ideas (Amphilochia, q.77).
He ﬁnds the Platonic doctrine of Ideas unacceptable,
because the Ideas cannot function as genuine predicates
in the sensible world, which is God’s creation, and God’s
creative power needs no assistance of them.
From all the ancient philosophers, Photios ﬁnds the
greatest afﬁliation with Aristotle. He is interested in Aris-
totelian logic, and he comments on the Categories. Ques-
tions
137–147
of
the
Amphilochia
form
a
small
Aristotelian treatise, where he explains the ten categories.
The main philosophical problems related to Aristotle’s
Categories are connected with the ontological status of
species and genera. He seems to follow the interpretative
approach of Porphyry, Ammonius, and John Damascene
(Anton 1994a; Benakis 1978–9; Schamp 1996b). The
intention of Photios’ comments is to make corrections
to Aristotle’s theory before he can use them to clarify
the doctrine of being, the concept of God, the Trinity,
and the angels.
These comments on the Categories probably come
from a full-length commentary on Aristotle’s work. In
contrast to Aristotle’s text in the Categories, Photios
stresses that his account of the last six categories is more
detailed than Aristotle’s and in better balance with the
treatment of the ﬁrst four (qu. 142–143). He suggests
that the last six categories are not composite, because
each one of them is the result of combining two categories,
but in such a way that something new emerges. He uses the
analogy of friendship and rulership to illustrate this the-
ory. Friendship is constituted by the union of two friends
but cannot be identiﬁed with either of them, nor can it be
said to be composed of the two as parts. Similarly, in the
case of the category of ‘‘where,’’ although we combine two
categories, a new category emerges that cannot be identi-
ﬁed either with substance or with quality, nor can it be said
to be composed of them as parts (Ierodiakonou 2005).
The centerpiece of the Amphilochia is a theory of
substance (ousia), which Photios claims to be his own
(qu.138). Photios uses Aristotle’s Categories as a basis but
he proceeds to examine substance independently of Aris-
totle. He disagrees with Aristotle that the distinction
between ﬁrst and second substance is limited to individual
substance versus universal substance. The individual (ﬁrst
substance) and the universal (second substance) cannot be
predicated synonymously either with regard to themselves
or with regard to substance. The individual and the uni-
versal, although they share the name substance, each calls
for a different determination, as what determines ﬁrst
substance is totally different from what determines second
substance. According to Photios, substance has many
meanings (pollachos legomenon) and refers to matter,
form, the efﬁcient agent that gives form to matter, or in
a metaphorical sense it indicates possessions and money.
The substance is the existence of each being, the opposite
of which is nonbeing or substance as hyperousia and pro-
ductive of all beings (Anton 1994a). He distinguishes
between ﬁrst substances consisting of form and matter,
and self-subsisting beings consisting of what are only
analogues of form and matter. The latter make up
a distinct class, the realm of angels and of immaterial
reason. His aim is to revise the understanding of substance
– he added two meanings of it: divine substance as tran-
scendent substance (ousia hyperousios) and the angels as
bodiless substance (asomatos ousia).
Photios’ interest in ancient philosophy derives from
his interest in theological issues (ﬁlioque, apology of
icons). His use of Aristotle’s teachings (on substance,
genera, and species) serves to underscore theological
dogmas and prevent aberrations of religious discourse
(Arianism). Photios’ devotion to religious questions is
thus connected with his attempt to combine ancient
wisdom and revealed theology.
See also: ▶Aristotelianism in the Greek, Latin, Syriac,
Arabic, and Hebrew Traditions ▶Philosophy, Byzantine
▶Platonism
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Photios (1983–1988) Epistulae et Amphilochia, vols 1–6.2. Bibliotheca
Scriptorum Graecorum et Romanorum Teubneriana, ed. Laourdas
B, Westerink LG. Teubner, Leipzig
Photios (1991) Bibliothe`que, 8 vols, ed. Henry R. Socie´te´ d´e´dition
Les Belles lettres, Paris, pp 1959–1977 (index by Schamp J)
Secondary Sources
Anton JP (1994a) The Aristotelianism of Photios’ philosophical theology.
In: Schrenck LP (ed) Aristotle in late antiquity. The Catholic Uni-
versity of America, Washington, DC, pp 158–183
Anton JP (1994b) The origins of Photios’ religious aesthetics. In:
Boudouris K (ed) Philosophy and orthodoxy. International Center
for Greek Philosophy, Athens, pp 18–40
Photios of Constantinople P
1011
P

Benakis L (1978–79) To`
πρόβλημα τω˜ν γενικω˜ν e᾽ννοιω˜ν καιo῾
e᾽ννοιολογικος ρεαλισμος τω˜ν Βυζαντινω˜ν. Filοsοjίa 8–9:311–340
Dvornik F (1948) The Photian schism, history and legend. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge
Ha¨gg T (1975) Photios als Vermittler antiker Literatur. Pauly-Wissowa
XXII/1:684–727
Ierodiakonou K (2005) The Byzantine reception of Aristotle’s Categories.
Synthesis Philosophica 20(1):7–31
Kapriev G (2005) Philosophie in Byzanz. Ko¨nigshausen & Neumann,
Wu¨rzburg
Kustas GL (1973) Studies in Byzantine rhetoric. Patriarchikon Idryma
Paterikon Meleton, Thessalonike
Lemerle P (1971) Le premier humanisme byzantin. Presses Universitaires
de France, Paris
Schamp J (1996a) La ‘‘localisation’’ chez Photios: traduction commente´e
de Questions a` Amphilochios, 145. In: Motte A, Denooz J (eds)
Aristotelica Secunda. Me´langes offerts a` Christian Rutten, Centre
d’E´tudes
aristote´liciennes.
Faculte´
de
Philosophie
et
Lettres,
Universite´ de Lie`ge, Lie`ge, pp 265–279
Schamp J (1996b) Photios aristote´lisant? Remarques critiques. In:
Billerbeck M, Schamp J (eds) Kainotomia. Die Erneuerung der
griechischen
Tradition.
Universita¨tsverlag
Freiburg,
Fribourg,
pp 1–17
Tatakis B (1949) La philosophie Byzantine. Presses Universitaires de
France, Paris
Planoudes, Maximos
▶Maximos Planoudes
Plato, Arabic
RU¨ DIGER ARNZEN
Thomas Institut
Universita¨t zu Ko¨ln
Cologne
Germany
Abstract
There is yet no comprehensive and systematic study of the
Arabic transmission of Plato’s works and the knowledge
about Plato’s philosophy in the medieval Islamic civiliza-
tions. From the tenth to the thirteenth centuries, biogra-
phers and philosophers writing in Arabic composed
various biographies and bibliographies on Plato, which
trace back to different Greek sources such as Thrasyllus
and Theon of Smyrna. The reception of Plato’s works was
primarily restricted to paraphrases and summaries,
among which Galen’s Synopsis of the Platonic corpus
played a major role. None of Plato’s works has been pre-
served in a complete Arabic translation, and it is a matter
of doubt whether there were ever such translations. Apart
from this rather fragmentary transmission, a number of
Greek commentaries on at least four Platonic dialogues
were known in the Arabic-speaking world. The major
topics of Arabic Platonism are the temporal creation of
the world, Plato’s theory of the state, the concept of love
(both in terms of its metaphysical as well as its medical
implications), the theories of the intellect and the tripar-
tite soul, and the concept of Platonic Forms and its onto-
logical
counterpart,
the
Two-World
Theory.
More
inﬂuential than the authentic Plato was the vulgarized
Plato of gnomological and doxographical anthologies
and popular wisdom literature, and the pseudepigraphic
Plato of gnostic, occult, and Neoplatonic writings. The
conﬂation of these traditions during the twelfth and
thirteenth centuries initiated a new Arabic Platonism
without Plato.
Introduction
The medieval Arabic–Islamic world speaks of Plato as
a divine philosopher and sage. Yet his heritage is located
largely outside the properly philosophical tradition in
Arabic. The philosopher Plato and his dialogues exerted
a less intense and lasting inﬂuence than the vulgarized
Plato of late antique gnomological and doxographical
anthologies, the invented Plato of gnostic, occult and
neo-Pythagorean traditions, and the pseudepigraphic
Plato of Neoplatonic writings and their Arabic transmis-
sion (cf. Rosenthal 1940, 1941a, b; Endress 1997:49–52;
Walbridge 2000:83–103; Jeck 2004:59–142).
Arabic Vitae of Plato
Details about the life of Plato, whose Arabicized name is
Aﬂa¯t:u¯n, were known through translations of Greek
sources based on the reports by Theon of Smyrna,
Pseudo-Plutarch, Porphyry’s History of Philosophy, and
other, unidentiﬁed biographical sources (cf. Walzer
1960:235; Peters 1979:31). Most of these Arabic vitae,
dating from the tenth to the thirteenth centuries, empha-
size the (allegedly) symbolic-allegorical or even cryptic
style of Plato’s writings. Among the teachers of Plato,
Socrates, Timaeus, the Athenian stranger of the Laws and
the Eleatic stranger of the Sophist are mentioned.
According to the philosopher al-ʿA¯mirı¯, Plato excelled
Socrates and Pythagoras in his knowledge of mathematics
and natural science (cf. Rowson 1988:72–75, 203–213). In
al-Mubashshir b. Fa¯tik’s Mukhta¯r al-h:ikam wa-mah:a¯sin
al-kalim and al-Shahrasta¯nı¯’s Kita¯b al-milal wa-l-nih:al,
Plato is portrayed as a descendant of the mythological
1012 P
Planoudes, Maximos

Asclepius. Other prominent biographical topics are Plato’s
journeys to Sicily and Egypt, his foundation of the Pla-
tonic Academy, and his intellectual relationship with
Pythagoras and Aristotle. Apart from the sources already
mentioned, the most detailed accounts of Plato’s life are
found in (Pseudo-?)H˙ unayn b. Ish:a¯q’s Nawa¯dir al-fala¯sifa,
Ibn al-Nadı¯m’s Fihrist, al-Shahrazu¯rı¯’s Nuzhat al-arwa¯h:
wa-rawd˙at al-afra¯h:, Ibn al-Qift:ı¯’s Taʾrı¯kh al-h:ukama¯ʾ, Ibn
Abı¯ Us:aybiʿa’s ʿUyu¯n al-anba¯ʾ fı¯ t:abaqa¯t al-at:ibba¯ʾ, and the
anonymous Muntakhab S˙iwa¯n al-h:ikma (for translations
and studies, cf. Gutas forthcoming).
Arabic Bibliographies of Plato’s Oeuvre
All works mentioned in the ‘‘classical’’ Greek reports on
Plato’s œuvre, such as those by Thrasyllus, Albinus, and
Galen, were known by title to the Arabic-writing bibliog-
raphers and historians. The earliest and most comprehen-
sive Arabic discussion of the Platonic corpus is found in
a treatise entitled The Philosophy of Plato (ed. Rosenthal
and Walzer 1943). This treatise, which is usually ascribed
to the philosopher al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, describes Plato’s works in
a non-tetralogical arrangement reﬂecting the supposed
development of Plato’s thought. It certainly draws on
Greek sources, presumably Galen or other closely related
Middle Platonic sources (cf. Tarrant 1993:32–38). Another
pinax, preserved in Ibn al-Nadı¯m’s Fihrist, is based on at
least two other sources. The ﬁrst source Ibn al-Nadı¯m is
referring to is the tetralogical arrangement of Plato’s dia-
logues provided by the mathematician Theon of Smyrna,
while it is not quite clear whether Ibn al-Nadı¯m indeed
follows strictly Theon’s system of division (cf. Lippert
1894:39–50; Tarrant 1993:58–68). Second, Ibn al-Nadı¯m’s
account is at least partly indebted to the catalogue of
philosophical and scientiﬁc books prepared by one of his
contemporaries, the philosopher Yah:ya¯ ibn ʿAdı¯. This cat-
alogue must have drawn on further sources, as the dia-
logue Critias is referred to under the title Atlanticus, which
corresponds with Thrasyllus (as reported by Diogenes
Laertius), but not with Theon. While the bibliography in
Ibn al-Qift:ı¯’s Taʾrı¯kh al-h:ukama¯ʾ is heavily indebted to Ibn
al-Nadı¯m’s Fihrist, Ibn Abı¯ Us:aybiʿa must have had access
to additional sources. He not only mentions dialogues
omitted in the lists of Ibn al-Nadı¯m and Ibn al-Qift:ı¯
(such as Epinomis, Lysis, and Politicus), but also refers by
transliterations of the Greek titles to some dialogues men-
tioned in the earlier bibliographies by Arabicized titles or
descriptions only (cf. Gutas forthcoming). With the
exception of al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, all bibliographers mention also
spuria that cannot be related to any Greek pinax of Pla-
tonic works. They also sometimes include the same work
twice which points to the fact that the bibliographers used
more than one Graeco-Arabic source, without being able
to identify different references to one and the same work.
Translations, Summaries, and Commentaries
The Arabic transmission of Plato’s works is sporadic,
complicated, and as yet not systematically researched
(for the history of research on the Arabic Plato, cf. Gutas
forthcoming, ﬁrst section; a collection of authentic frag-
ments and pseudo-Platonica in Arabic has been edited by
Badawı¯ 1974). None of the works has been preserved in
a complete translation; indeed, it is a matter of doubt
whether there were ever any complete translations into
Arabic (cf. Rosenthal 1940:393; Reisman 2004:264).
The medieval bibliographers report the following trans-
lations: (1) Leges, translated by H˙ unayn b. Ish:a¯q and
by Yah:ya¯ b. ʿAdı¯; (2) Respublica, translated or paraphrased
by
H˙ unayn
b.
Ish:a¯q;
(3)
Sophistes,
translated
by
Ish:a¯q b. H˙ unayn together with the Commentary by
Olympiodorus; and (4) Timaeus, translated by Yah:ya¯ b.
al-Bit:rı¯q and corrected by Yah:ya¯ b. ʿAdı¯. Of the following
dialogues, Arabic fragments of varying length and often of
a paraphrastic nature have come down to us: Crito, Leges,
Meno, Phaedo, Respublica, Symposium, Timaeus (for edi-
tions and studies cf. Daiber 1999, vol 2, 434–439; Gutas
forthcoming).
From H˙ unayn b. Ish:a¯q’s own report, we know that he
and his pupils translated Galen’s Summaries (lost in
Greek) of the following eight works: Cratylus, Euthydemus,
Leges, Politicus, Parmenides, Respublica, Sophistes, and
Timaeus (cf. Bergstra¨sser 1925; Boudon-Millet 2000:455–
460). Of these translations, only the Arabic version of
Galen’s Synopsis of the Timaeus is extant today (ed.
Kraus and Walzer 1951; cf. Festugie`re and Tonneau 1952).
In addition to these translations and summaries,
a number of Greek exegetical works were known to the
Arabs: (1) Galen’s Commentary on the medical contents
of the Timaeus (cf. Schro¨der and Kahle 1934; Boudon-
Millet 2000:459); (2) excerpts of Proclus’ Commentaries
on Phaedo, Respublica, bk. X, and Timaeus (cf. Schmutte
and Pfaff 1941; Endress 1973, 28f.; Rowson 1988);
(3) a certain ‘‘Exposition’’ of the Timaeus by Plutarch (of
Chaeronea?, cf. Pines 1936:90); and (4) Olympiodorus’
Commentary on the Sophistes (cf. above).
Furthermore, philosophers writing in Arabic them-
selves composed works discussing, summarizing, or
commenting on the Platonic sources available to them.
For example, al-Kindı¯ dealt with the theories of numbers,
solids, and harmonic proportions provided in Respublica
and Timaeus (cf. Rescher 1967; Adamson 2007:160–180);
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ and Ibn al-T˙ayyib composed expositions of the
Leges; Abu¯ Bakr al-Ra¯zı¯ commented upon Plutarch’s
Plato, Arabic P
1013
P

Exposition of the Timaeus; Tha¯bit b. Qurra dealt with
geometrical problems of the Meno and the Respublica;
and Ibn Rushd (Averroes) wrote a paraphrase of the
Respublica (cf. Gutas forthcoming).
Elements of Arabic Platonism
Future research is still required to determine the relation
between the fragmentary transmission of Platonic works
and the doctrines ascribed to Plato in the Arabic tradi-
tion. However, there can be little doubt that even the
most fundamental doctrines were taken into consider-
ation not as coherent elements of a comprehensive sys-
tematic philosophy, but rather as disjecta membra which
could be ﬁtted together only by means of Aristotelian,
Neoplatonic, or genuinely Islamic conceptions. From
the very beginning of the Arabic reception up to the
seventeenth-century philosophical schools of Shiraz and
Isfahan, the topos of the harmony between the doctrines
of Plato and Aristotle formed a major motif of the
varying forms of Arabic Platonism (cf. Endress 1991;
D’Ancona 2006).
Al-Kindı¯, the ﬁrst philosopher of the Arabic tradition,
tried to reconcile various theories propounded by Plato
and Aristotle, in particular their doctrines of the ﬁrst cause
as well as of the intellect and the soul (Endress 1991;
Adamson 2007). Plato’s theory of the state, or what was
known about it, heavily inﬂuenced the political theories of
Abu¯ Bakr al-Ra¯zı¯, al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, the Ikhwa¯n al-S˙afa¯ʾ, and
others (cf. Walzer 1985:8–18, 424–490; Bafﬁoni 1994,
2004; Daiber 1996). The Timaeus could be used to support
the doctrines of the creation of the world in time and of
divine providence, which appealed to many philosophers
writing in Arabic (cf. D’Ancona 2003). Al-Kindı¯, al-
Daylamı¯, Miskawayh, and others adopted and modiﬁed
(by means of Neoplatonic concepts) Plato’s thoughts on
love (cf. Rosenthal 1940; Walzer 1957). The theory of the
tripartite soul expounded in Respublica and Timaeus, as
well as the separation of body and soul in the Phaedo
exerted an enormous inﬂuence on Islamic theories of the
soul, its immortality, and its virtues (cf. Rosenthal 1940;
Peeters 1979; for the Phaedo see especially Bu¨rgel 1971;
Bielawski 1974; Biesterfeldt 1991). The philosophy of
Shiha¯b al-Dı¯n al-Suhrawardı¯ initiated a long-lasting
debate about Platonic Forms and Paradigms that were
discussed in connection with various Two- or Three-
World Theories (cf. Arnzen 2009a, 442f.).
Gnomologies and Doxographies
Plato is one of the most prominent ﬁgures in medieval
Arabic gnomologies, doxographies, and anthologies of
(alleged) quotations (cf. Rosenthal 1940, 1941a). Most
gnomological collections, which ultimately depend on
a Greek corpus dating from late antiquity, transmit wise
sayings from various authorities, but there are also collec-
tions focusing solely on Plato (cf. Gutas 1975; Arnzen
2009b). While the early Arabic doxographies include
mostly authentic materials, those of the later period by
and large tend to incorporate materials taken from
pseudepigrapha and inauthentic gnomologies. Further-
more, we know works of a hybrid genre, which include
authentic quotations from Platonic works and Galen’s
Summaries together with pseudepigraphic doxographical
and gnomological materials (cf. Arnzen 2009b).
Pseudepigrapha
The vast genre of Arabic pseudo-Platonica comprises three
main corpora. The ﬁrst and most remote group in terms of
authenticity is formed by treatises on occult and hermetic
sciences. Prominent examples of alchemical works are the
so-called Summa Platonis, the Book of Tetralogies (Kita¯b
al-Rawa¯bı¯ʿ) in dialogue form, and the Kita¯b Mus:ah:h:ah:a¯t
Aﬂa¯t:u¯n, which forms part of the Corpus Jabirianum and
introduces a certain Timaeus into the secrets of alchemy
(cf. Singer 1946; Ullmann 1972, 155f.; Thillet 2005). Other
works of this corpus deal with astrology, occult practices
performed on living and dead animals, or magic art
based on symbolisms of numbers and letters or spells
(cf. Ullmann 1972:287, 365, 452; Pingree 1993). Many of
these treatises were translated into Latin during the
Middle Ages (cf. Hasse 2002).
A second group of pseudo-Platonica is constituted by
works aiming at moral reﬁnement and political education,
for example, a number of Platonic Testaments, various
epistles, and the so-called Exhortation Concerning the Edu-
cation of Young Men, which adopts neo-Pythagorean con-
cepts of economics, pedagogy, and politics (cf. Rosenthal
1941b). Another inﬂuential work of this group is the Book
of the Laws (Kita¯b al-Nawa¯mı¯s, obviously alluding to Plato’s
Leges) which treats the relationship between religion, phi-
losophy, and sociopolitical issues (cf. Tamer 2005).
Finally, there is the rather disparate group of extracts
from the Arabic Plotiniana and Procliana. Sections falsely
attributed to Plato include excerpts of the Liber de Causis,
an
Arabic
adaptation
based
primarily on
Proclus’
Elementatio theologica, as well as excerpts of the Arabic
adaptations of Plotinus’ Enneads IV–VI (cf. D’Ancona and
Taylor 2003; D’Ancona 2004). This group of pseudo-
Platonica forms the main source of inspiration for the
post-Suhrawardian Arabic Platonism without Plato.
See also: ▶Abu¯ Bakr al-Ra¯zı¯, Muh:ammad ibn Zakarı¯ya¯ʾ
(Rhazes)
▶al-Bı¯ru¯nı¯,
Abu¯
Rayh:a¯n
▶Doxographies,
1014 P
Plato, Arabic

Graeco-Arabic ▶al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, Abu¯ Nas˙r ▶al-Kindı¯, Abu¯
Yu¯suf Yaʿqu¯b ibn Ish:a¯q ▶al-Mubashshir ibn Fa¯tik ▶Polit-
ical Philosophy, Arabic ▶al-Shahrasta¯nı¯, Muh:ammad ibn
ʿAbd al-Karı¯m ▶al-Suhrawardı¯, Shiha¯b al-Dı¯n Yah:ya¯
al-Maqtu¯l ▶Translations from Greek into Arabic ▶Yah:ya¯
ibn ʿAdı¯
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Badawı¯ ‘Abd al-Rah:ma¯n (1974) Aﬂa¯t:u¯n fı¯ l-Isla¯m. Tehran University
Press, Tihra¯n
Bergstra¨sser Gotthelf (1925) H˙ unain ibn Ish:a¯q u¨ber die syrischen und
arabischen Galen-U¨ bersetzungen. Brockhaus, Leipzig
Kraus Paul, Walzer Richard (1951) Galeni Compendium Timaei Platonis
aliorumque dialogorum synopsis quae extant fragmenta. Plato
Arabus, vol I. Warburg Institute, London (repr Nendeln, 21973)
Reisman David C (2004) Plato’s Republic in Arabic. A newly discovered
passage. Arabic Sci Philos 14:263–300
Rosenthal Franz, Walzer Richard (1943) Alfarabius. De Platonis
philosophia. Plato Arabus, vol II. Warburg Institute, London (repr
Nendeln, 21973)
Schmutte Joseph, Pfaff Franz (1941) Galeni De consuetudinibus. Edidit
Ioseph M. Schmutte [. . .]. Additum est novum fragmentum ex Procli
in Platonis Timaeum commentariis haustum quod ex versione Arab-
ica reddidit Franz Pfaff. Corpus Medicorum Graecorum. Suppl 3.
Teubner, Leipzig
Schro¨der Heinrich Otto, Kahle Paul (1934) Galeni in Platonis Timaeum
commentarii fragmenta. Appendicem arabicam addidit Paulus
Kahle. Corpus Medicorum Graecorum. Suppl 1. Teubner, Leipzig
Walzer Richard (1985) Al-Farabi on the perfect state. Abu¯ Nas:r al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s
Maba¯diʾ A¯ra¯ʾ Ahl al-Madı¯na al-Fa¯d˙ila. A revised text with introduc-
tion, translation, and commentary. Clarendon Press, Oxford
Secondary Sources
Adamson P (2007) Al-Kindı¯. Oxford University Press, Oxford
Arnzen R (2009a) Arabisches Mittelalter. In: Horn C, Mu¨ller J, So¨der J
(eds) Platon-Handbuch. Leben – Werk – Wirkung. J.B. Metzler,
Stuttgart, pp 439–446
Arnzen R (2009b) On the contents, sources and composition of two
Arabic pseudo-Platonica: Multaqat:a¯t Aﬂa¯t:u¯n al-ila¯hı¯ and Fiqar
ultuqit:at wa-jumiʿat ʿan Aﬂa¯t:u¯n. Oriens 37:7–52
Bafﬁoni C (1994) Frammenti e testimonianzedi autori antichi nelle Epistole
degli Ih˘wa¯n as:-S˙afa¯ʾ. Istituto Italiano per la Storia Antica, Roma
Bafﬁoni C (2004) The general policy of the Ikhwa¯n al-S˙afa¯ʾ: Plato and
Aristotle restated. In: Arnzen R, Thielmann J (eds) Words, texts and
concepts cruising the Mediterranean Sea: studies on the sources,
contents and inﬂuences of Islamic civilization and Arabic philosophy
and science, dedicated to Gerhard Endress on his sixty-ﬁfth birthday.
Peeters, Leuven/Paris/Dudley
Bielawski J (1974) Phe´don en version arabe et la Risa¯lat al-Tuffa¯h:a. In:
Barral JM (ed) Orientalia Hispanica sive studia F.M. Pareja
octogenario dicata, vol 1. Brill, Leiden, pp 120–134
Biesterfeldt HH (1991) Phaedo arabus: Elemente griechischer Tradition in
der
Seelenlehre
islamischer
Philosophen
des
10.
und
11.
Jahrhunderts. In: Binder G, Effe B (eds) Tod und Jenseits im
Altertum. Wissenschaftlicher Verlag Trier, Trier, pp 180–202
Boudon-Millet V (2000) Galien de Pergame. In: Goulet R (ed)
Dictionnaire des philosophes antiques, vol 3. CNRS Editions, Paris,
pp 440–464
Bu¨rgel JC (1971) A new Arabic quotation from Plato’s Phaido and its
relation to a Persian version of the Phaido. In: Actas, IV Congresso de
Estudos A´ rabes e Islaˆmicos, Coimbra-Lisboa, 1 a 8 de setembro de
1968. Brill, Leiden, pp 281–290
Daiber H (1996) Political philosophy. In: Nasr SH, Leaman O (eds)
History of Islamic philosophy, 2 vols. Routledge, London/New
York, pp 841–885
Daiber H (1999) Bibliography of Islamic philosophy, 2 vols. Handbuch der
Orientalistik. Abt. 1: Der Nahe und Mittlere Osten, 43. Brill, Leiden
D’Ancona C (2003) The Timaeus’ model for creation and providence. An
example of continuity and adaptation in early Arabic philosophical
literature. In: Reydams-Schils GJ (ed) Plato’s Timaeus as Cultural
Icon. University of Notre Dame Press, Notre Dame, pp 206–237
D’Ancona C (2006) The Topic of the ‘harmony between Plato and Aris-
totle’: some examples in early Arabic philosophy. In: Speer A,
Wegener L (eds) Wissen u¨ber Grenzen: Arabisches Wissen und
lateinisches Mittelalter. De Gruyter, Berlin/New York, pp 379–405
D’Ancona C, Taylor RC (2003) Le Liber de causis. In: Goulet R, avec la
collaboration de Flamand J-M, Aouad M (eds) Dictionnaire des phi-
losophes antiques. Supple´ment. CNRS Editions, Paris, pp 599–647
Endress G (1973) Proclus Arabus. Zwanzig Abschnitte aus der Institutio
theologica in arabischer U¨ bersetzung, eingeleitet, herausgegeben und
erkla¨rt. Orient-Institut der DMG/Steiner, Beirut/Wiesbaden
Endress G (1991) La ‘‘Concordance entre Platon et Aristote’’, l’Aristote
arabe et l’e´mancipation de la philosophie en Islam me´die´val. In:
Mojsisch B, Pluta O (eds) Historia philosophiae medii aevi. Studien
zur Geschichte der Philosophie des Mittelalters. Gru¨ner, Amsterdam/
Philadelphia, pp 237–257
Endress G (1997) The circle of al-Kindı¯. Early Arabic translations from the
Greek and the rise of Islamic philosophy. In: Endress G, Kruk R (eds)
The ancient tradition in Christian and Islamic Hellenism. Studies on
the transmission of Greek philosophy and sciences, dedicated to H.J.
Drossaart Lulofs on his ninetieth birthday. Research School CNWS,
Leiden, pp 43–76
Festugie`re A-J, Tonneau RM (1952) Le Compendium Timaei de Galien.
Revue des e´tudes grecques 65:97–118
Gutas D (1975) Greek wisdom literature in Arabic translation. A study of the
Graeco-Arabic gnomologia. American Oriental Society, New Haven
Gutas D (forthcoming) Platon. Tradition arabe. In: Goulet R (ed)
Dictionnaire des philosophes antiques, vol 5. CNRS Editions, Paris
Hasse DN (2002) Plato Arabico-latinus: Philosophy – wisdom literature –
occult sciences. In: Gersh S, Hoenen MJFM (eds) The Platonic
tradition in the Middle Ages. A doxographic approach. De Gruyter,
Berlin/New York, pp 31–65
Jeck UR (2004) Platonica Orientalia. Aufdeckung einer philosophischen
Tradition. Klostermann, Frankfurt am Main
Klein-Franke F (1973) Zur U¨ berlieferung der platonischen Schriften im
Islam. Israel Orient Stud 3:120–139
Lippert J (1894) Studien auf dem Gebiete der griechisch-arabischen
U¨ bersetzungslitteratur. Sattler, Braunschweig
Peters FE (1979) The origins of Islamic Platonism: the school tradition.
In: Morewedge P (ed) Islamic philosophical theology. State Univer-
sity of New York Press, Albany, pp 14–45
Pines S (1936) Beitra¨ge zur islamischen Atomenlehre. Heine, Berlin/
Gra¨fenhainichen
Pingree DE (1993) Plato’s Hermetic Book of the cow. In: Prini P (ed) Il
Neoplatonismo
nel
Rinascimento.
Istituto
della
Enciclopedia
Italiana, Roma, pp 133–145
Rescher N (1967) Al-Kindı¯’s treatise on the Platonic solids. In: Rescher N
(ed) Studies in Arabic philosophy. University of Pittsburgh Press,
Pittsburgh, pp 15–37
Plato, Arabic P
1015
P

Rosenthal F (1940) The knowledge of Plato’s philosophy in the Islamic
world. Islam Cult 14:387–422 (repr Rosenthal F (1990) Greek phi-
losophy in the Arab world. Aldershot)
Rosenthal F (1941a) Addenda to Islamic culture, vol. XIV (1940)
pp. 387–422. Islam Cult 15:396–398 (repr Rosenthal F (1990)
Greek philosophy in the Arab world. Aldershot)
Rosenthal F (1941b) Some Pythagorean documents transmitted in
Arabic. Orientalia NS 10:104–115, 383–395
Rowson EK (1988) A Muslim philosopher on the soul and its fate:
al-cA¯mirı¯’s Kita¯b al-Amad cala¯ al-abad. American Oriental Society,
New Haven
Singer DW (1946) Alchemical texts bearing the name of Plato. Ambix
2:115–128
Strohmaier G (2002) Platon in der arabischen Tradition. Wu¨rzburger
Jahrbu¨cher fu¨r die Altertumswissenschaft. Neue Folge 26:185–200
Tamer G (2005) Politisches Denken in pseudoplatonischen arabischen
Schriften. In: Gannage´ E (ed) The Greek strand in Islamic political
thought. Proceedings of the conference held at the Institute for
Advanced Study,
Princeton,
16–27
June
2003.
Me´langes
de
l’Universite´ Saint-Joseph 57. Dar el Kotob, Beyrouth, pp 303–335
Tarrant H (1993) Thrasyllan Platonism. Cornell University Press, Ithaca/
London
Thillet P (2005) Remarques sur le Liber quartorum du pseudo-Platon. In:
Viano C (ed) L’alchimie et ses racines philosophiques. La tradition
grecque et la tradition arabe. Vrin, Paris, pp 201–232
Ullmann M (1972) Die Natur- und Geheimwissenschaften im Islam.
Handbuch der Orientalistik. Abt. 1: Der Nahe und Mittlere Osten,
Erga¨nzungsband 6. Brill, Leiden
Walbridge J (2000) The leaven of the ancients. Suhrawardı¯ and the
heritage of the Greeks. State University of New York Press, Albany
Walzer R (1957) Platonism in Islamic philosophy. Entretiens de la
Fondation Hardt pour l’e´tude de l’antiquite´ classique, vol 3.
Vandœuvres/Gene`ve, pp 203–224 (repr Walzer R (1962) Greek into
Arabic. Essays on Islamic philosophy. Oxford University Press,
Oxford, pp 236–252)
Walzer R (1960) Aﬂa¯t:u¯n. In: Encyclopaedia of Islam, vol 1, new edn. Brill,
Leiden, pp 234–236
Platonism
STEPHEN GERSH
The Medieval Institute
University of Notre Dame
Notre Dame, IN
USA
Abstract
This article provides a survey of the medieval phase of the
history of Platonism. Spanning the period from the ninth
to the fourteenth century, the medieval phase represents
a direct tradition of Platonism to the extent that it is based
on the reading of Plato’s Timaeus, and an indirect tradi-
tion to the extent that it depends on non-Christian and
Christian authors of late antiquity. Medieval Platonism is
also characterized by its close relation to the medieval
curriculum of the Trivium (verbal arts) and Quadrivium
(numerical arts), and by its dependence on sources written
originally in or translated into Latin. Moving in chrono-
logical sequence, the article focuses on arguably the three
most important groups of thinkers within the medieval
Platonic tradition from the threefold angle of their use of
textual authorities, their modes of reasoning, and their
doctrinal positions. Thus, (1) John Scottus Eriugena (early
to middle ninth century) represents a Platonism, which
might be termed ‘‘Patristic’’; (2) Thierry of Chartres and
Bernard
Silvestris
(early
twelfth
century)
represent
a Platonism exhibiting a blend of ‘‘Humanistic’’ and
‘‘Encyclopedic’’ tendencies; and (3) Dietrich of Freiberg
and Berthold of Moosburg (late thirteenth to early four-
teenth centuries) represent a Platonism that might be
labeled ‘‘Scholastic.’’
Medieval Platonism can be understood, to a large extent,
as a complicated and evolving response to Plato’s Timaeus.
The most important part of this dialogue (to 53c) was
translated into Latin and equipped with a commentary by
Calcidius during the early fourth century. Complete Latin
translations of Plato’s Meno and Phaedo by Aristippus of
Catania and a partial Latin translation of the Parmenides –
attached to Proclus’ incomplete commentary on the
dialogue – by William Moerbeke acquired a limited circu-
lation from the thirteenth century onward. However, the
translation and commentary of Calcidius represented not
only the deﬁnitive presentation of Plato’s own doctrine
during the Middle Ages, but also the nucleus around
which various further ‘‘Platonic’’ doctrines could be con-
ﬁgured. These additional teachings were derived either
from non-Christian authors of late antiquity or from the
Church Fathers, in the latter case acquiring indirectly the
superior doctrinal authority of their biblical source.
Two general features of this Timaeus-inﬂuenced tradi-
tion may be distinguished. First, medieval Platonism was
elaborated on the basis of the Trivium and Quadrivium.
In line with the philosophical preoccupations of the
Timaeus itself, medieval thinkers tended to emphasize
grammar and rhetoric over dialectic among the verbal
arts, and arithmetic, astronomy, and music over geometry
among the numerical arts. Although the sevenfold curric-
ulum was modiﬁed in the twelfth century with the intro-
duction of further arts and again in the thirteenth century
under the inﬂuence of the Aristotelian university curricu-
lum, the general interpretation of Platonism in terms of
the liberal arts remained paramount. Secondly, medieval
Platonism was developed in the context of the Latin lan-
guage. Given that the study of Greek language and
1016 P
Platonism

literature was never part of the medieval curriculum, the
various non-Christian and Christian texts used to supple-
ment the ‘‘Platonism’’ of the Timaeus and the other dia-
logues were exclusively those written by Latin authors.
In this article, the period of ‘‘medieval Platonism’’ will
be deﬁned as beginning in the ninth century, where an
intellectual phenomenon that is both authentically medi-
eval and genuinely philosophical appears for the ﬁrst
time, and as ending in the fourteenth century, after
which the ‘‘Platonic’’ philosophy is sufﬁciently inﬂuenced
by humanistic approaches to be considered as post-medi-
eval. Even when considered within these chronological
limits, however, ‘‘medieval Platonism’’ emerges as a very
complex historical and philosophical notion. In order to
provide an adequate description within a brief compass, it
will perhaps be most useful to proceed a by considering
three historically distinguishable groups of thinkers in
chronological order, and b by examining separately the
authoritative texts, the methods of reasoning, and the
doctrinal assumptions of each group.
The literary activity of John Scottus Eriugena, a
scholar of Irish origin working in northern France, can
be placed in the early to middle ninth century. Although
he can also be considered a typical representative of the
powerful grammatical and logical tradition established by
Alcuin of York in the previous century, Eriugena was
absolutely unique in developing a comprehensive philo-
sophical system from these and other elements, and
expounded it at length in his treatise entitled On Natures.
He is the ﬁrst writer of the medieval period whom it would
be reasonable to describe as a Platonic philosopher,
although he probably did not grasp the extent to which
he was a follower of that tradition In fact, he combines
overt criticism of certain doctrines explicitly held by ‘‘the
Platonists’’ with a less emphatic dependence on many
other Platonic teachings, for example by attacking the
transmigration of souls in his early Glosses on Martianus
Capella but introducing the world soul into the fourth
book of On Natures. This twofold approach to the Platonic
tradition broadly follows a pattern established by certain
writers of late antiquity in seeing the Platonists as the
ancient thinkers who had a partial illumination of Chris-
tian truth.
From the textual viewpoint, the Platonism of Eriugena
might best be characterized as ‘‘Patristic.’’ The writer’s
dependence primarily upon Augustine among the Latin
Church Fathers is apparent in his early treatise On Predes-
tination – which starts from a dispute over the correct
interpretation of Augustine on this topic – and continues
in the later On Natures. His dependence on (Pseudo-)
Dionysius the Areopagite among the Greek Church
Fathers, a literary relation made possible by his own pre-
vious achievement of translating the complete works of
this pseudonymous writer into Latin, is the most obvious
hermeneutic feature of On Natures as a whole. Beginning
in his earliest works, Eriugena further combines the tex-
tual authority of Boethius with that of Augustine and
Dionysius. Boethius’ writings can be seen as having pro-
vided him with a unique paradigm for the conceptual
assimilation of Platonic thought, since they presented
simultaneously an explicit Platonism in On the Consola-
tion of Philosophy and three kinds of implicit doctrine: the
Platonism of Augustine’s scriptural exegesis in Boethius’
On the Trinity, a Neo-Pythagorean variant of the same
tradition in his On Arithmetic and On Music, and the
Platonism of Greek Aristotelian Commentary in Boethius’
two commentaries On Porphyry’s Introduction.
From the methodological viewpoint, Eriugena’s Plato-
nism is grammatical and dialectical in character. It is
‘‘grammatical’’ to the extent that (1) its philosophical
doctrines are developed from a movement between the
linguistic signiﬁer and a linguistic signiﬁed – especially in
the form of etymologies – and from a movement between
one linguistic signiﬁed and another – particularly in the
form of the (pagan) allegory or the (Christian) spiritual
sense, and also to the extent that (2) these developments of
philosophical doctrine occur in the context of reading –
the decoding of hidden meanings – rather than writing –
the encoding of hidden meanings. Among examples of
etymologies yielding Platonic meaning, one might men-
tion from the Glosses on Martianus Capella the interpre-
tation of Calcidius’ term entelechia applied to the world
soul as ‘‘interior eternity’’ and also the interpretation of
Martianus Capella’s an(o)ia applied to divination as
‘‘super-intelligence.’’ Among examples of allegories yield-
ing Platonic meaning, one might mention from the third
book of On Natures the interpretation of the ﬁrst three
days of creation as signifying the emanative power of God,
the distinction between the higher and the lower worlds,
and the Forms of the four elements respectively. Eriugena’s
Platonism is ‘‘dialectical’’ to the extent that its philosoph-
ical doctrines are developed from the movement among
linguistic signiﬁeds of such speciﬁc logical types as terms,
propositions, and syllogisms.
In order to make its relations with the later tradition
clear, we might summarize the content of Eriugena’s
Platonism under the headings of theology, cosmology,
and psychology, these terms not being applied in exactly
this way by the original authors. In connection with the
theological domain, several important doctrines may be
distinguished. On the one hand, there is the teaching that
afﬁrmative language applied to God – for example, saying
Platonism P
1017
P

that ‘‘God is living’’ – actually signiﬁes God’s immanence
in the creature and represents a metaphorical usage with
respect to God himself, but that negative language – for
example, saying that ‘‘God is not living’’ – actually refers to
God’s transcendence of the creature and represents a literal
usage with respect to God himself. This doctrine is
adapted from Pseudo-Dionysius. Another important doc-
trine in connection with the theological domain is the
notion that Aristotelian categories like substance, quality,
and quantity can provide a framework for afﬁrmative
language applied to God – for example, in saying that
‘‘God is existent,’’ ‘‘God is good,’’ and ‘‘God is great’’ –
but that the accidental categories must be converted into
substantial form – for example, by understanding ‘‘God is
good’’ to mean ‘‘God is goodness,’’ etc. Here, the source is
Augustine together with Boethius. With respect to the
cosmological sphere, several important doctrines may be
distinguished First, there is the notion – derived from the
dialectical tradition – that God or Nature comprises four
species: the ‘‘Not-Created and Creating’’ or God as begin-
ning, the ‘‘Created and Creating’’ or the causes of spatial
and temporal effects, the ‘‘Created and Not-Creating’’ or
the effects of the nonspatial and nontemporal causes, and
the ‘‘Not-Created and Not-Creating’’ or God as end. Given
that the relations between the ﬁrst and fourth species,
between the second and third, and between the two pairs
are said to exhibit various degrees of mind-dependence
with respect not only to the divine but also to the human
mind, the articulation of this complex structure reveals the
extent to which the emanative relation between cause and
effect typical of ancient Platonism has been shifted from
the realist into the idealist register. A second important
doctrine with respect to the cosmological sphere – derived
from the patristic tradition – is the notion that the six
biblical days of creation represent not God’s separate acts
of producing various things in a sequence of temporal
phases but a set of relations between God and different
things linking the nontemporal and temporal spheres
themselves. In connection with the psychological domain,
there is one doctrine that reﬂects the ﬁrst doctrine men-
tioned in connection with the theological domain. Just as
with respect to God an afﬁrmative statement – saying that
‘‘God is living’’ – refers to God’s immanence in the crea-
ture in general and a negative statement – saying that
‘‘God is not living’’ – refers to his transcendence of the
creature in general, so with respect to Man an afﬁrmative
statement – saying that ‘‘Man is animal’’ – refers to his
immanence in the lower creature and a negative state-
ment – saying that ‘‘Man is not animal’’ – refers to his
transcendence of the lower creature. This extrapolation
from Pseudo-Dionysius is highly original.
Thierry of Chartres, whose more usual medieval name
Thierry ‘‘the Breton’’ (Brito) shows his national origin and
Bernard of Tours, who acquired the nickname Bernard
‘‘Silvestris’’ from the prominent role of silva (‘‘matter’’)
in his writing, were the two leading members of a proto-
humanistic circle of scholars working in northern France
during the ﬁrst half of the twelfth century, which is usually
albeit controversially labeled ‘‘The School of Chartres.’’
That these writers thought of themselves as followers of
the Platonic tradition is indicated by Bernard’s dedication
of a work to his teacher Thierry in which – repeating
a formula that Augustine once applied to Plotinus – the
pupil describes the master as the reincarnation of Plato.
The Platonism of Thierry emerges most clearly in his three
commentaries on Boethius’ On the Trinity and in the
summary of a lecture-course covering Boethius’ On the
Trinity, On the Hebdomads, and Against Eutyches and
Nestorius, and that of Bernard in his commentaries on
Virgil’s Aeneid, books I–VI and on Martianus Capella’s
On the Marriage of Philology and Mercury, and in his
poetical and philosophical work Cosmography.
From the textual viewpoint, the Platonism of Thierry
of Chartres and Bernard Silvestris might best be charac-
terized as a mixture of the ‘‘Humanistic’’ and the ‘‘Ency-
clopedic,’’ the former term indicating their preoccupation
with ancient Latin writers and the latter term the compil-
ing style of the ancient Latin writers with whom they were
preoccupied. Among these ancient writers, Apuleius was
the author of a treatise On Plato and his Doctrine, which
supplied a biography of the philosopher and an account of
some of his theories. Calcidius translated and commented
on Plato’s Timaeus, demonstrating the possibility of com-
bining ‘‘Middle Platonic’’ and ‘‘Neoplatonic’’ doctrines of
ﬁrst principles. The work entitled Asclepius and attributed
to the quasi-mythical writer ‘‘Thrice-Great’’ Hermes –
whose
authority
for
Christian
readers
had
been
established by Lactantius – served as a kind of parallel
witness to the pseudo-Dionysian theology. Macrobius
commented on Cicero’s Dream of Scipio, providing the
only summary of the ‘‘Neoplatonic’’ doctrine of the three
ﬁrst principles or hypostases available to the medieval
reader. Martianus Capella was the author of a treatise On
the Marriage of Philology and Mercury, which explained
the structural relation among the seven liberal arts in
Platonic or Pythagorean terms.
From the methodological viewpoint, Thierry of
Chartres’ and Bernard Silvestris’ Platonism is grammat-
ical and dialectical in the manner deﬁned earlier.
However, Bernard’s philosophy – at least in the case of
his Cosmography – is also rhetorical in character. It is
‘‘rhetorical’’ to the extent that (1) its philosophical
1018 P
Platonism

doctrines are developed from a movement between the
linguistic signiﬁer and a linguistic signiﬁed – especially in
the form of etymologies – and from a movement between
one linguistic signiﬁed and another – particularly in the
form of the (pagan) allegory or the (Christian) spiritual
sense, and also to the extent that (2) these developments of
philosophical doctrine occur in the context of writing –
the encoding of hidden meanings – rather than of
reading – the decoding of hidden meanings. Bernard’s
rhetorical practice adapts to Platonic purposes a number
of semantic distinctions that have been explained in his
commentaries. Within the sphere of allegory, Bernard dis-
tinguishes between single terms (nouns) having primary
and secondary meanings, for example, the Sun signifying
the heavenly body and the Form of the Good, and com-
bined terms (nouns þ verbs) having primary and second-
ary meanings, for example, the fabrication of the world soul
signifying a mythical craftsman’s activity and the dynamic
structure of nature. Within the allegorical sphere, Bernard
also distinguishes between single terms having a plurality of
(primary and secondary) meanings, for example, the god-
dess Juno signifying both the element of air and the prac-
tical life, and pluralities of terms having a single (or
primary) meaning, for example, both the god Jupiter and
the man Anchises signifying the Christian God.
The content of Thierry of Chartres’ and Bernard
Silvestris’ Platonism might be summarized under the
headings of cosmology and psychology, theology being
somewhat absorbed into cosmology in this system. The
cosmological doctrine includes at least four points of
interest. First, there is what might be termed the theory
of four considerations. According to Thierry, the universe
can be considered in four ways: in ‘‘absolute necessity’’ or
where the Forms of things exist in a transcendentally
enfolded state in God; in ‘‘necessity of complication’’ or
where the Forms are unfolded above individual things, in
‘‘determinate possibility’’ or where the Forms are unfolded
within individual things, and in ‘‘absolute possibility’’ or
where the Forms of things exist in an immanently
enfolded state in Matter. Although the fourfold consider-
ation of the universe was probably derived from Augustine
and the creative process of enfolding and unfolding prob-
ably from Boethius’ On the Consolation of Philosophy, the
combination of these ideas to produce an emphatically
idealist sense of divine causality seems to be Thierry’s
innovation. A second important feature of this twelfth-
century cosmology is the preoccupation with arithmetic.
In
dependence
upon
the
Pythagorean
tradition
represented in the Latin-speaking world by Boethius’ On
Arithmetic and according to which the transcendent
Forms are equivalent to numbers, Thierry can argue
dialectically that Equality and Inequality are inseparable
determinations of divine power, that the generation of
persons within the Trinity involves Equality whereas the
production of the creature outside the Trinity involves
Inequality, that the generation of persons within the Trin-
ity can be expressed by the formula 1  1 = 1, and that the
production of the creature outside the Trinity represents
the multiplication of 1  2, 1  3, 1  4, etc. Thirdly, there
is what might be termed the theory of four causes.
According to Thierry, there are four causes of the world’s
substance: the efﬁcient cause, which is the Being of God;
the formal cause, which is the Wisdom of God; the ﬁnal
cause, which is the Goodness of God; and the material
cause, which is the four elements; it being necessary to
posit such an efﬁcient cause because the world is mutable,
such a formal cause because the world is orderly, such
a ﬁnal cause because the world is not self-sufﬁcient, and
such a material cause because the world must proceed
from disorder. The originally Aristotelian theory of the
four causes was probably derived from Macrobius’ Com-
mentary on the Dream of Scipio, and the identiﬁcation of
God with the Platonic transcendent Form probably from
Boethius, although the emphatically immanent sense of
divine causality produced by the combination of the two
doctrines seems to be Thierry’s innovation. A fourth
important feature of this twelfth-century cosmology is
the preoccupation with music. Following the Pythagorean
doctrine
made
available
to
Latin
readers
through
Calcidius’ Commentary on the Timaeus and according to
which immanent forms are connected by proportions,
Bernard can describe allegorically the absence of propor-
tions in Matter and the introduction of such proportions
by Form, the separation of the elements according to their
properties of hotness, coldness, dryness, and wetness, and
the consequent perfecting of the world’s body.
It is in connection with the psychological doctrine of
Thierry of Chartres and Bernard Silvestris that the prob-
lems of assimilating Platonic philosophy become more
evident. By the ninth century, the relation of derivation
between the world soul and individual souls – suggested
by the Artiﬁcer’s production of soul in the Timaeus – was
viewed as problematic because of the Christian emphasis
on the autonomy of individual moral responsibility.
Eriugena’s response to the problem had been to separate
the problematic horizons of the universal and individual
souls entirely by identifying the universal soul with the
form of Life in which individual living things participate,
and to treat individual souls – together with their idealized
bodies – as constituents of something called the ‘‘pleni-
tude of humanity.’’ In the twelfth century, the world soul
had again become the focus of debate. Now the relation of
Platonism P
1019
P

identity between universal soul as third hypostasis and
Holy Spirit as third person – suggested by combining the
Christian Trinity with the Neoplatonic hypostases – was
seen as problematic because of the Christian dogma of
consubstantiality in the Trinity. Thierry of Chartres
attempts to solve the problem by distinguishing between
the ‘‘supreme Trinity’’ and the ‘‘trinity of perpetual things’’
and treating the latter as an external reﬂection of the
former. Thus, the three persons of the supreme Trinity
can have a non-subordinating relation among themselves,
whereas the three members of the trinity of perpetual
things may have a subordinating relation. Moreover, the
third member of the latter trinity can be identiﬁed not
only with the world soul of the Timaeus but also with the
‘‘Nature’’ mentioned in Cicero’s dialogues and the ‘‘Spirit’’
mentioned in the Hermetic Asclepius. Bernard Silvestris
seems to have followed this solution in identifying the
relation of external reﬂection between the supreme Trinity
and the trinity of perpetual things with a relation of
allegorical expression. Concerning the problem of the
relation between the universal soul and the individual
soul, it is worth noting that, whereas this problem had
been solved in the early medieval period by considering
the universal soul primarily in terms of its lower phase of
Life and then identifying the latter with God – as Form of
Life – the same problem will be solved in the later medieval
period by considering the universal soul primarily in
terms of its higher phase of Intellect and then identifying
the latter with God – as Agent Intellect.
Dietrich of Freiberg and Berthold of Moosburg are two
of the most distinguished members of the late thirteenth
and early fourteenth-century German philosophical tra-
dition founded by Albert the Great. Dietrich held many of
the most important academic and administrative posi-
tions of the Dominican order both in Paris and in
Germany, while Berthold held more minor positions of
the same order at least in Germany. Both can be consid-
ered Platonists to the extent that they start from Albert’s
position that Plato and Aristotle are fundamentally in
agreement and that they specialize in the interpretation
of intensely Platonic sources, although Berthold begins to
emphasize certain differences between Plato and Aristotle,
which indicate the superiority of the former. With respect
to their exposition of Platonism, the most important of
Dietrich’s numerous works are perhaps On the Beatiﬁc
Vision, On the Intellect and the Intelligible, and On Being
and Essence, while Berthold is represented by his single
enormous work entitled Exposition of Proclus’ Elements of
Theology.
From the textual viewpoint, the Platonism of Dietrich
of Freiburg and Berthold of Moosburg might best be
characterized as ‘‘Scholastic.’’ Within the largest repertoire
of philosophical texts assembled during the Middle Ages,
the earlier Greek writings most often studied by these
Scholastic Platonists were undoubtedly the works of Aris-
totle and Proclus’ Elements of Theology. The former
represented an authority to be overtly challenged or subtly
undermined, whereas the latter furnished a paradigm of
the systematic organization of Platonic thought through
dialectical exposition. Various works of a decidedly Pla-
tonic character were drawn from different cultural
milieus: from the Arabic world, the anonymous Book of
Causes, which provided a summary of Neoplatonic ema-
nation theory; from Jewish literature, the Fountain of Life
by Avicebron, with its inﬂuential theory of the universal
relation between form and matter; and from the Byzantine
world, Eustratios’ Commentary on Aristotle’s Nicomachean
Ethics, which provided a defense of the theory of Forms.
The earlier Latin writings most often studied by the Scho-
lastic Platonists were perhaps the works of Anselm of
Canterbury and the Physical Key of ‘‘Theodorus.’’ The
former was celebrated for proving the existence of God
through his deﬁnition, whereas the latter provided
a summary of Eriugena’s doctrine detached from its
author’s controversial name.
From the methodological viewpoint, the most deci-
sive change in the medieval approach to Platonism
occurs in the work of Dietrich of Freiburg and Berthold
of Moosburg. Whereas between the ninth and twelfth
centuries the grammatical method of decoding hidden
meanings in the form of etymologies and allegories or
the rhetorical method of encoding hidden meanings in
the form of etymologies and allegories had been as
prominent as the dialectical methods of constructing
propositions, and syllogisms among thinkers with Pla-
tonic leanings, during the thirteenth and fourteenth
centuries the dialectical methods come to the forefront.
Berthold of Moosburg provides dramatic evidence of
this shift in his voluminous Exposition of Proclus’ Ele-
ments of Theology. The preface to this work includes some
remarks about the history of philosophy in which the
commentator explains that Plato had originally expressed
his thought in concealed teachings, that Plotinus’ contri-
bution was to remove the coverings, and that Proclus
ﬁnally organized the thought into propositional form.
In the main body of the work, each of the 211 proposi-
tions that make up the Elements of Theology receives
a separate treatment divided into A discussion of Proclus’
proposition subdivided into (1) analysis of earlier pro-
positions presupposed by the current proposition and
(2) analysis of the proposition itself, and B discussion of
Proclus’ proof.
1020 P
Platonism

The shift toward dialectic in these late medieval
thinkers is reinforced by their shift toward idealism. It
had
been
a
feature
of
Christian
Platonism
since
Augustine’s time to view the derivation of ﬁrst principles
less as an emanative process completed by intellection –
that is, where the One is followed by Intellect – than as an
emanative process commenced by intellection – that is,
where God is coextensive with Intellect. This position was
assumed in Eriugena’s doctrine of the four species of
Nature and Thierry of Chartres’ doctrine of the four con-
siderations, given that in both cases a dialectical process
within the divine intellect underlay the corresponding
dialectical process in the human intellect. Now toward
the end of the thirteenth century, Dietrich of Freiberg
continues this approach but also radicalizes it by intro-
ducing the ontological category of ‘‘conceptional being.’’
This latter represents neither a self-thinking subject – as
was generally the case with the earlier idealisms – nor
a mere being of reason, but rather the self-knowing,
which knows itself in a subject’s thinking of its object,
the subject being the various created intellects and the
object Being qua Being. Dietrich’s doctrine of concep-
tional being is certainly a novelty in medieval thought
although it is anticipated in certain respects by Plotinus’
notion of authentic being in Enneads VI. 4–5.
In order to make its relations with the earlier tradition
clear, we might again summarize the content of Dietrich of
Freiberg’s and Berthold of Moosburg’s Platonism under
the headings of theology, cosmology, and psychology.
Among the more important doctrines within the theolog-
ical domain there is one in which the rejection of Aristotle
in favor of Plato comes into focus. Berthold’s Exposition of
Proclus’ Elements of Theology begins by noting that,
although these philosophers agree that multiplicity is
a distinction of things or reasons, they disagree about the
basis for this distinction. For Aristotle, unity is a ‘‘tran-
scendental,’’ since the opposition of being and nonbeing –
which is transcendental – is the basis of the distinction
between unity and multiplicity. But Plato is more correct
in saying that unity – that is, the ‘‘One’’ – is above being
and nonbeing, and that the basis of the distinction
between unity and multiplicity is degree of power. This
discussion is explicitly based on Aristotle’s Metaphysics
and Eustratios’ Commentary on Aristotle’s Nicomachean
Ethics, but also assumes the teaching of Dietrich of
Freiberg. Toward the end of his treatise On Intellect and
the Intelligible, Dietrich turns to considering the highest
objects of intellect – including terms like unity and being –
and explains that these constitute ‘‘reasons’’ that are iden-
tical with God. Although one can distinguish within the
cognitive process in each case a reason in God, in the agent
intellect,
and
in
the
possible
intellect,
and
also
a determinate phantasm accompanying each intelligible
object, there is ultimately no plurality of reasons in the
activity of intellection. This decidedly Platonic conclusion
to Dietrich’s discussion of intellect and the intelligible
closely follows Augustine’s account of angelic knowledge.
Among the doctrines utilized by Dietrich and Berthold
within the domain of cosmology, the notion of ‘‘essential
cause’’ is particularly important. As derived explicitly
from Proclus’ Elements of Theology, this idea replaces the
notion of horizontal causal relations between two individ-
ual things on the same level of reality with vertical causal
relations between a more universal thing on one level and
a more particular thing on another. Strictly speaking, an
essential cause is that which pre-contains its effect in
a higher mode than that in which the latter itself exists,
and therefore causes the latter through its own essence as
an intellective principle. The cosmological structure of the
four ‘‘manners’’ unfolds according to this principle of
essential causality. Thus, Dietrich and Berthold also derive
from Proclus’ treatise a basic analysis of reality in terms of
the four levels of body, soul, intellect, and unity – each
level having special characteristics marking it off from
other levels – although the medieval thinkers deviate
from their ancient predecessor in emphasizing that body,
soul, and intellect are simultaneously multiplicities of
‘‘real’’ beings and unities of ‘‘conceptional beings.’’
Another doctrine utilized by Dietrich and Berthold within
the domain of cosmology and having particular impor-
tance is that of being and essence. With something of
a departure from the Elements of Theology, this doctrine
combines the notion of a cause pre-containing its effect in
a higher mode than that in which the latter itself exists
with a new understanding of
emanative causality.
According to the latter, the sameness constituting one
side of the relation between cause and effect is associated
strictly with the essence whereas the difference constitut-
ing the other side of that relation is associated strictly with
being. Finally, among the more important doctrines in the
psychological domain there is one in which it is less
a question of rejecting Aristotle in favor of Plato than of
reading Aristotle through Plato. Dietrich’s On the Blessed
Vision provides a detailed account of both the agent intel-
lect and possible intellect of Aristotle in order to show that
the beatiﬁc vision must occur in the former. The relation
between the agent intellect, which knows itself and its
object internally and essentially and the possible intellect,
which knows itself and its object externally and acciden-
tally clearly involves essential causality and emanation. By
identifying it with the relation between the hidden mind
and exterior thought described in Augustine’s On the
Platonism P
1021
P

Trinity, Dietrich can show that ‘‘the Philosopher’’ agrees
with theology.
This article has attempted to argue brieﬂy that, behind
the bewildering multiplicity of methodological and doc-
trinal forms, ‘‘medieval Platonism’’ has a conceptual unity
and a deﬁnite structure. However, it has not been possible
to discuss all the signiﬁcant ﬁgures here. A complete list
would have to include in the twelfth century Adelard of
Bath who combined the study of Plato with an interest in
Arabic science, Bernard of Chartres who is responsible for
the earliest glosses on the Timaeus, which can be associ-
ated with a named author, and William of Conches who
commented on Plato, Macrobius, and other Platonists and
other world. In the thirteenth century, the contributions
of Ulrich of Strasbourg who codiﬁed the Albertist synthe-
sis of Platonism and Aristotelianism and of Meister Eck-
hart who presented a powerful new rhetorical expression
of Platonism in his vernacular Sermons would also have to
be acknowledged.
See also: ▶Albert the Great ▶Augustine ▶Berthold of
Moosburg ▶Boethius ▶Dietrich of Freiberg ▶John
Scottus Eriugena ▶Pseudo-Dionysius, the Areopagite
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Berthold of Moosburg (1984) Expositio super Elementationem Procli, 7
vols (to date), ed. Pagoni-Sturlese MR, Sturlese L. Meiner, Hamburg
Calcidius (1962) In Platonis Timaeum, ed. Waszink JH. Timaeus a Calcidio
translatus commentarioque instructus. Brill, London/Leiden
Dietrich of Freiberg (1977a) De intellectu et intelligibili, ed. Mojsisch B.
Opera omnia, I, Schriften zur Intellekttheorie. Meiner, Hamburg,
pp 125–210
Dietrich of Freiberg (1977b) De visione beatiﬁca, ed. Mojsisch B. Opera
omnia, I, Schriften zur Intellekttheorie. Meiner, Hamburg, pp 1–124
Scottus Eriugena John (1978) Glosae Martiani, ed. Jeauneau E´. Quatre
the`mes e´rige´niens. Institut d’E´tudes Me´die´vales Albert-le-Grand,
Montre´al-Paris, pp 101–161
Scottus Eriugena John (1996–2003) In: Jeauneau E´ (ed) Periphyseon,
5 vols. Brepols, Turnhout
Silvestris Bernard (1978) Cosmographia, ed. Dronke P. Brill, Leiden
Thierry of Chartres (1971a) Commentum super Boethii librum De
trinitate, ed. Ha¨ring NM. In: Commentaries on Boethius by Thierry
of Chartres and his school. Pontiﬁcal Institute of Medieval Studies,
Toronto, pp 55–116
Thierry of Chartres (1971b) De sex dierum operibus, ed. Ha¨ring NM. In:
Commentaries on Boethius by Thierry of Chartres and his school.
Pontiﬁcal Institute of Medieval Studies, Toronto, pp 553–575
Secondary Sources
Beierwaltes W (1985) Denken des Einen. Studien zur neuplatonischen
Philosophie
und
ihrer
Wirkungsgeschichte.
Klostermann,
Frankfurt a. M.
De Libera A (1994) La mystique rhe´nane d’Albert le Grand a` Maıˆtre
Eckhart, 2nd edn. Seuil, Paris
Gersh S (1978) From Iamblichus to Eriugena. An investigation of the
prehistory and evolution of the pseudo-Dionysian tradition. Brill,
Leiden
Gersh S (1986) Middle Platonism and Neoplatonism. The Latin tradition,
2 vols. University of Notre Dame Press, Notre Dame
Ha¨ring NM (1955) The creation and creator of the world according
to Thierry of Chartres and Clarenbaldus of Arras. AHDLMA
22:137–216
Mojsisch B (1977) Die Theorie des Intellekts bei Dietrich von Freiberg.
Meiner, Hamburg
Moran D (1989) The philosophy of John Scottus Eriugena. A study of
idealism in the Middle Ages. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Stock B (1972) Myth and science in the twelfth century. A study of
Bernard Silvester. Princeton University Press, Princeton
Platonism, Renaissance
STEPHEN GERSH
The Medieval Institute, University of Notre Dame
Notre Dame, IN
USA
Abstract
This article provides a survey of the Renaissance phase in
the history of Platonism and covers the period roughly
1440–1600. Renaissance Platonism is distinguished from
medieval Platonism on account of its access to Greek texts
and Latin translations of works by Plato himself and by his
ancient commentators which had been unavailable earlier.
The brief initial phase of Renaissance Platonism is
represented by the work of humanist translators of Plato
for whom the ethical aspects of Plato’s early dialogues were
the primary concern. A much longer second phase was
initiated by Marsilio Ficino for whom the cosmological
and theological elements in the dialogues of Plato’s middle
and later periods and the ‘‘Platonism’’ (really Neoplato-
nism) of late antique thinkers became the main focus. With
respect to the latter phase, this article discusses (1) four
main tendencies in Renaissance philosophy: a new under-
standing of human subjectivity, exploration of the relations
between rhetoric and magic, a new understanding of the
role of mathematics, and the elaborate historiography of
philosophy; (2) ﬁve major Platonic philosophers in whom
the interplay of these tendencies can be traced: Nicholas of
Cusa, Marsilio Ficino, Giovanni Pico della Mirandola,
Francesco Patrizi da Cherso, and Giordano Bruno.
The Platonism of the Renaissance is distinguished from
the medieval phase of the same tradition by its increased
1022 P
Platonism, Renaissance

access to serviceable Latin translations and in certain cases
also to original Greek texts of Plato’s and the ancient
Platonists’ writings. This new situation resulted primarily
from the activity of collectors bringing Greek manuscripts
from Byzantium to Italy in the decades before 1453 and of
humanists wishing to promote a general pedagogy based
on the study of ancient literature.
A ﬁrst phase of Platonic translation and study can be
associated for the most part with the humanists them-
selves. In the early 1400s Uberto and Pier Candido
Decembrio – with the assistance of a Byzantine e´migre´
named Manuel Chrysoloras – produced a translation of
Plato’s Republic. In the 1440s another version of the
Republic and versions of the pseudo-Platonic Axiochus
and Eryxias were composed by Antonio Cassarino. Before
1427 Leonardo Bruni produced translations of the Apol-
ogy, Crito, and Phaedo, of the ﬁrst part of the Phaedrus, of
the Gorgias, and of several Letters. Among humanists of
later decades, Cencio de’ Rustici translated the Axiochus
and De virtute, Lorenzo Lippi the Ion, Rinuccio Aretino
the Crito, Axiochus, and Euthyphro, Francesco Filelfo three
Letters, and Angelo Poliziano a section of the Charmides.
With this group may be associated the Aristotelian theo-
logian George of Trebizond – a Byzantine convert to
Catholicism – who translated the Laws, Epinomis, and
Parmenides in the 1450s.
Typical of the humanist approach to Plato is
a preoccupation with the literary, pedagogic, and ethical
issues raised by the early ‘‘Socratic’’ dialogues, and espe-
cially with the analysis of different political institutions in
the Republic. This interpretation does not make use of the
ancient commentary tradition with respect to Plato. In
stark contrast with this stands the work of Ficino. His
approach to Plato may be characterized by its emphasis
upon the theological, cosmological, and eschatological
doctrines of the middle and later dialogues, together
with its speciﬁc agenda of reconciling philosophy and
Christianity through Platonism. In this interpretation,
the ancient commentary tradition with respect to Plato
acquires an overwhelming importance.
Marsilio Ficino’s public career as a Platonist com-
menced in earnest in 1462 when he was asked to translate
Cosimo de’ Medici’s Greek codex of Plato, and within
about two years he had translated ten dialogues two of
which – the Parmenides and the Philebus – he read aloud to
Cosimo on the latter’s deathbed. The complete Platonis
Opera omnia together with Ficino’s important introduc-
tory notes – the argumenta – was printed in 1484,
although provisional MSS versions of many of the dia-
logues were obviously being used by the translator and
circulated among his associates before that date. Also in
1484, Ficino’s commentary on the Symposium, also known
as De amore and itself written in dialogue form, was
printed for the ﬁrst time. Ficino’s extended commentaries
on the Phaedrus, Sophist, Philebus, Timaeus, Parmenides,
and an extract of Republic VIII (dealing with the so-called
nuptial number) were published in the collected volume
Commentarium in Platonem in 1496, although some of the
commentaries were still unﬁnished at that point.
The Renaissance interpretation of Platonism depends,
in the ﬁrst instance, on sources not exploited within the
medieval philosophical curriculum. Among the late
ancient Greek works beginning to have an impact at this
time were the Hermetic Corpus, Plotinus’ Enneads, and
Iamblichus’ On the Mysteries of the Egyptians of which
Ficino’s translations were published in 1471, 1492, and
1497 respectively. Together with this group may be con-
sidered Proclus’ Platonic Theology of which the translation
by Pietro Balbi was circulating in MS from 1462. The
Greek text
of
Syrianus’ Commentary
on
Aristotle’s
Metaphysics was studied during the last decades of the
ﬁfteenth century, and that of Damascius’ On First Princi-
ples after the middle of the sixteenth, although neither
work had been translated. Ancient Greek sources were
occasionally supplemented by Byzantine works: for exam-
ple, Michael Psellus’ On the Operation of Demons,
Nicholas of Methone’s Refutation of Proclus’ Elements of
Theology, and George Gemistos Plethon’s Commentary on
the Zoroastrian Oracles, and on at least one occasion by an
Arabic work: namely, the so-called Theology of Aristotle of
which a translation appeared in 1519.
The Renaissance interpretation of Platonism also
depends on sources which had been utilized within the
medieval philosophical curriculum, although it expands
the reading of those sources by presenting them in new
combinations with one another and with Greek writings.
For the writers of the ﬁfteenth and sixteenth centuries as for
their medieval predecessors, Augustine and Dionysius the
Areopagite provide the fundamental rationale for the study
of Platonism within a Christian context. Medieval trans-
lations of ancient Greek works such as Proclus’ Elements of
Theology, Minor Theological Treatises, and Commentary on
the Parmenides – completed by William of Moerbeke in
1268, 1280, and 1286 respectively – continue to be used
and indeed become more widely known. Arabic works in
medieval translations, including the treatise known as On
Causes, remain in circulation. Medieval writers such as
Anselm of Canterbury, William of Conches, Thierry of
Chartres, Thomas Aquinas, Henry of Ghent, and Giles of
Rome provide further useful models for theorizing in the
Christian Platonic manner. Among medieval writers,
Ramon Llull exercised more inﬂuence over philosophers
Platonism, Renaissance P
1023
P

of the ﬁfteenth and sixteenth centuries than he did over
any nearer his own time.
That Platonic philosophy was not universally wel-
comed during the Renaissance is shown by the outbreak
of two controversies which were deliberately linked for
polemical reasons. The ﬁrst concerned the compatibility
between Platonic doctrine and Christian morality, and
was raised by the theory of the community of wives in
the Republic, the frequent homosexual suggestions in dia-
logues like the Charmides and Symposium, and the refer-
ences to Socrates’ daemon in the Apology. The second
concerned the relative merits of Plato and Aristotle, and
was material to the encounter between Byzantine theolo-
gians and Latin scholastics at the Councils of Ferrara and
Florence (1438–1439) called to debate union between the
Orthodox and Catholic churches. The development of
both controversies is perhaps best documented by the
extensive treatise Against the Calumniator of Plato of Car-
dinal Bessarion (1469) directed at George of Trebizond.
That Platonic philosophy was not universally welcomed
during the Renaissance is also indicated by the fact that
university education in Italy continued to be dominated
by Aristotelian studies. Although the important Platonic
philosophers of the ﬁfteenth and sixteenth centuries had
all studied in major European universities – for example,
Nicholas of Cusa, Marsilio Ficino, Giovanni Pico della
Mirandola, Francesco Patrizi, and Giordano Bruno – it is
a notable fact that they pursued their professional careers
almost exclusively outside such an environment. The
exception was Patrizi who managed to secure a chair of
Platonic Philosophy at the University of Ferrara in 1578
with the assistance of Duke Alfonso II. In the dedicatory
epistle to his New Universal Philosophy printed in 1591, he
urges the Pope and various cardinals to arrange for Plato-
nism to replace Aristotelianism in the universities or at
least to be accorded a status equal to the latter. In the
following year, Patrizi obtained a further chair of Platonic
Philosophy at the University of Rome with the help of
Pope Clement VIII.
The use of a term like ‘‘Renaissance Platonism’’ as
suggesting a unitary intellectual phenomenon is perhaps
somewhat questionable in a situation, such as that
obtaining during the ﬁfteenth and sixteenth centuries,
where the works of various independent thinkers rather
than the collective activity of an institution are at issue.
Nevertheless, since there are certain common features
bringing the ﬁfteenth- and sixteenth-century thinkers
into a group and distinguishing their Platonism from
medieval Platonic or Aristotelian philosophy, we will
retain the term ‘‘Renaissance Platonism’’ at least as
a convenient shorthand expression.
In comparison with its medieval forerunner, the Pla-
tonism of the ﬁfteenth and sixteenth centuries is charac-
terized especially by its greater emphasis upon the
problems of practical philosophy. This emerges in the
sphere of ethics with the debate over homosexual and
heterosexual love occasioned by the reading of Plato’s
dialogues in Bessarion and Ficino, and in the sphere of
politics with the attempts of Nicholas of Cusa to apply
Platonism to the agenda of religious concord and of
Francesco Patrizi to apply the same philosophy to the
agenda of counter-reformation. In fact, the Platonism of
the ﬁfteenth and sixteenth centuries is characterized by
a tendency to elevate practical philosophy to the level of
theoretical philosophy and sometimes even to undermine
the distinction between the two types of philosophy. These
developments can be studied in the context of several
related phenomena: namely, a new understanding of
human subjectivity, exploration of the hidden relations
between magic and rhetoric, a new approach to mathe-
matical thinking, and a greater awareness of the historical
foundation of philosophy itself.
The new understanding of human subjectivity is
revealed in certain tendencies toward individualism and
relativism. Whereas the human subject of medieval think-
ing was assimilated to a framework of generic and absolute
qualities – except to the extent that the Christian doctrine
of salvation depended on the notion of individuality in the
moral domain – the human subject of ﬁfteenth- and
sixteenth-century speculation played a more practical
role in the constitution of itself and its world. This new
approach can be seen in Nicholas of Cusa’s epistemology
where the human being is in a certain sense liberated by its
own limitation. For Nicholas, since the relations existing
between a ﬁnite human being and another ﬁnite human
being and between all ﬁnite human beings and the inﬁnite
divine truth are incommensurable, the human subject is
forced to deﬁne itself epistemologically with respect
to these two spheres through a creative process of
‘‘conjecture’’ (coniectura).
Exploration of the hidden relations between rhetoric
and magic is the major theme in Giordano Bruno’s
‘‘Llullian’’ treatises on memory and by extrapolation in
his other writings on cosmology, ethics, and politics. Here,
there is what one might term a rhetorical element derived
from the contrast between the manipulation of the divine
names as a topical system in Llull’s medieval combinatory
art and the manipulation of images as a mnemonic system
in the ancient treatise To Herennius. There is also what
might be called a magical element recalling the contrast
between the manipulation of internal or mental images
called
‘‘cabala’’
by
Pico
della
Mirandola
and
the
1024 P
Platonism, Renaissance

manipulation of external or sensory images called ‘‘magic’’
by the same author. Giordano Bruno is able to translate
the ﬁrst contrast into the second by activating the under-
lying metaphysical structure of correspondences on which
both the rhetorical and the magical systems depend.
The new understanding of the role of mathematics
takes the form of a shift from theologically orientated
arithmetic to physically orientated geometry. Medieval
thinking assumed a descending hierarchy of metaphysics,
mathematics, and physics in which a mathematics rooted
in metaphysics was applied to the physical sphere and in
which that mathematics involved the semantic properties
of number studied hermeneutically. In the ﬁfteenth- and
sixteenth-century speculation we see the beginning of
a shift to a similar descending hierarchy in which
a mathematics rooted in physics is applied to the meta-
physical sphere and in which that mathematics involves
the spatial properties of number studied logically. Pico
della Mirandola’s deduction of the properties of meta-
physical principles from the arithmetical equivalences of
Hebrew names may be considered an example of specula-
tion in the former mode, and Patrizi’s interpretation of the
emanation of metaphysical principles from one another in
terms of a three-dimensional diffusion of light in space as
an example of the latter.
Fifteenth- and sixteenth-century Platonism is also
distinguished from earlier Platonism by its conscious ref-
erence to a complicated historiography of philosophy
pioneered by Ficino. Here, we ﬁnd separately or in
combination: (1) a systematic interpretation of the devel-
opment of philosophy before Plato – including the notion
of a tradition of ‘‘ancient theology’’ (prisca theologia)
stemming from Zoroaster or Hermes Trismegistus – an
increasing emphasis on arithmetical and geometrical
thinking allegedly derived from Pythagoras, a renewed
interest in the cosmological thinking found in the frag-
mentary remains of Empedocles and Anaxagoras, and
a systematic presentation of the different Platonisms of
late antiquity – including the distinction between the six
‘‘Academies’’ (Academiae), and the contrast between the
‘‘Roman’’ and the ‘‘Lycian’’ schools; (2) various attempts
to reconcile the philosophies of Plato and Aristotle: for
instance, Nicholas of Cusa’s idea of a coincidence of oppo-
sites between the two and Patrizi’s notion of a ‘‘mystical’’
sense within Aristotle’s writings; (3) a development of the
thesis that Dionysius the Areopagite – the ‘‘pinnacle’’
(culmen)
of
Platonic discipline
and
the
‘‘column’’
(columna) of Christian theology – wrote during the apos-
tolic period, that his writings were then deliberately
concealed through the jealousy of the later non-Christian
Platonists, that certain thinkers like Philo Judaeus, Origen,
and Ammonius Saccas had intimations of their content,
and that the philosophy of Plotinus and Augustine’s
reading of the Books of the Platonists (libri Platonicorum)
amounted to the deﬁnitive rediscovery of the original
Dionysian
teachings;
and
(4)
the
beginnings
of
a distinction between the doctrines of Plato himself and
of later Platonists, for example, Pico della Mirandola’s idea
that it was the later followers of Plato who altered the
master’s doctrine in order to elevate the ‘‘Good’’ or the
‘‘One’’ dogmatically as a ﬁrst principle before Being itself.
In order to understand the philosophical issues of
Renaissance Platonism in greater depth, we must now
turn to the contributions of its most important individual
thinkers. In chronological order, these are: Nicholas of
Cusa, Marsilio Ficino, Giovanni Pico della Mirandola,
Francesco Patrizi, and Giordano Bruno.
With Nicholas of Cusa (1401–1464) the question of
human subjectivity is developed into a methodologically
rigorous form of idealism. The notion typical of any
idealistic system that real objects are to some extent
mind-dependent is elaborated in Nicholas’ On Learned
Ignorance and Apology for Learned Ignorance speciﬁcally
under the inﬂuence of two earlier doctrines. These are the
reinterpretation of the separately-subsisting Platonic
Forms as either thoughts of God or attributes of the
Divine by Pseudo-Dionysius, and the derivation of the
plurality of the Platonic Forms from the inherently mul-
tiple human mind’s attempts to grasp the unity of the
divine substance by a certain commentator on Boethius
whose name is not known to Nicholas himself. We can
identify this commentator as Thierry of Chartres.
Nicholas views ultimate reality, which must be
understood philosophically as God reﬂected in the created
universe or as the created universe reﬂecting God, in terms
of a complicated structural harmony. When considered
from the most exalted viewpoint, reality emerges as the
‘‘coincidence of opposites’’ (coincidentia oppositorum)
seemingly advocated by Dionysius. This coincidence
represents a dialectical relation between terms which are
logically opposed sometimes on the same metaphysical
level, for example, ‘‘rest’’ and ‘‘motion,’’ sometimes on
different levels, for example ‘‘absolute’’ and ‘‘contracted’’
or ‘‘learned’’ and ‘‘ignorant,’’ and sometimes in both these
senses, for example ‘‘maximum’’ and ‘‘minimum.’’ Since
these terms are predicated at the same time and in the
same respect of a single subject, a suspension of the
principle of noncontradiction fundamental to Aristotelian
thinking is clearly intended. Nicholas can argue in On the
Beryl that it was because of his mistaken belief in the
universal applicability of this law that Aristotle was unable
to resolve fundamental metaphysical problems concerning
Platonism, Renaissance P
1025
P

the nature of physical change and the nature of substance
in a successful manner. When considered from a less
elevated viewpoint, reality appears as a structure of medi-
ation which exempliﬁes the principle of ‘‘everything in
everything’’ (quodlibet in quolibet) probably derived from
Proclus. This structure may consist of three terms – such
as the ‘‘absolute maximum’’ or God, the ‘‘contracted max-
imum’’ or the universe, and the ‘‘absolute and contracted
maximum’’ or Christ on which the structure of the treatise
On Learned Ignorance is based – where there is a single
mediation. Alternatively, it may consist of four terms –
such as the ﬁrst oneness or ‘‘God,’’ the second oneness or
‘‘Intellect,’’ the third oneness or ‘‘Soul’’, and the fourth
oneness or ‘‘Body’’ around which the main discussion of
On Conjectures, book I is organized – where a double
mediation is implied. For Nicholas, the coincidence of
opposites is related to the mediated structure in the same
manner as the nondiscursive enfolding of concepts is
related to the discursive unfolding of those same concepts.
But real objects are only mind-dependent to some
extent because such objects are ultimately unknowable.
In Nicholas’ philosophy, the disjunction between the
mind and its object is expressed mathematically as
a disproportion between the ﬁnite and the inﬁnite, and
a means of overcoming this disjunction is then provided
by mathematical symbolism. Two kinds of argument are
developed at length in On Learned Ignorance, book I. First,
a ﬁnite geometrical term such as a line, a triangle, or
a circle can be rendered inﬁnite conceptually and then
applied symbolically to a corresponding object: here
Maximum, Trinity, and Unity respectively. Secondly,
the line, when rendered inﬁnite, can be equated with the
triangle, and the triangle, when rendered inﬁnite, with
the circle. Nicholas claims to derive this application of
the coincidence of opposites from Pythagoras.
Augustine is perhaps the decisive inﬂuence on the
philosophy of Marsilio Ficino (1433–1499). This fact can
be shown by comparing the former’s interpretation of the
Mosaic account of creation – of which the applications of
an alternation of revealing and concealing and of
a structure based on the number 6 to angelic thinking
are the salient features – with the latter’s account of the
history of philosophy. Ficino here introduces a general
historical schema. This envisages the secular and the
sacred histories as two parallel sequences both of which
are bisected by the coming of Christ. The segment of the
secular history corresponding chronologically to the Old
Law contains a phase of revelation from the beginnings of
philosophy until Plato, and a phase of concealment after
the time of Plato. The segment of secular history
corresponding chronologically to the New Dispensation
contains a phase of revelation in Dionysius’ presentation
of
Platonism,
a
phase
of
concealment
when
the
Dionysian writings were hidden, a further phase of reve-
lation in Plotinus’ and Augustine’s rediscovery of the
elements of Platonism compatible with Christianity, and
a further phase of concealment when the Plotinian–
Augustinian tradition was replaced by Scholasticism.
Ficino also introduces several more speciﬁc historical
schemata. According to one schema, philosophy is
identiﬁed with certain ancient mysteries which were pro-
gressively revealed by Hermes Trismegistus, Orpheus,
Aglaophamus, Pythagoras, Philolaus, and Plato. In some-
times removing Philolaus at the same time as adding
Zoroaster to this list, Ficino seems to be intent on
retaining exactly six phases of revelation. According to
another schema, the true Platonic philosophy is under-
stood to have been concealed by Xenocrates, Arcesilaus,
and Carneades, but then revealed by Ammonius Saccas,
Plotinus, and Proclus. In explicitly contrasting three Greek
and three non-Greek ‘‘Academies,’’ Ficino seems again to
be preoccupied with the association between revelation
and the number 6.
Such original interpretations of Augustine’s doctrine
provide Ficino with the best context for assimilating var-
ious Plotinian ideas new to the Latin world. An example of
such an assimilation is the fundamental doctrine of the
‘‘hypostases’’ which is subtly transformed in Ficino’s Pla-
tonic Theology. According to Ficino, there are ﬁve primary
levels of being – ‘‘God’’ (deus), ‘‘Angel’’ (angelus), ‘‘Soul’’
(anima), ‘‘Quality’’ (qualitas), and ‘‘Body’’ (corpus) –
rather than three as in Plotinus. These hypostases are
distinguished from one another according to the presence
or absence of speciﬁc characteristics such as activity and
passivity, motion and rest, and unity and multiplicity –
a feature more Augustinian than Plotinian. Ficino further
deviates from Plotinus’ theory of the hypostases by
emphasizing the mediating position of self-moving Soul
between the immobile Angel and the mobile Quality, and
also by interpreting each of the hypostases Angel, Soul,
and Quality as a species ‘‘primal in a certain genus’’
(primum in aliquo genere) rather than as a genus. Also
according to Ficino, the ﬁrst hypostasis as well as the
second hypostasis is fundamentally intellective in nature –
another feature more Augustinian than Plotinian. Finally,
each of the ﬁve primary levels of being is interpreted as
furnishing the speculative limit for a different earlier phi-
losopher, that is, God for Plato, Angel for Anaxagoras,
Soul for Heraclitus, Quality for the Stoics, and Body for
Democritus.
Ficino employs his revised version of Plotinus’
doctrine of hypostases in order to interpret Plato’s thought
1026 P
Platonism, Renaissance

in two important areas. When writing as theorist of the
theological in his Platonic Theology and Commentary on
the Phaedrus, Ficino identiﬁes both the abstract categories
of Plato’s Parmenides and the Olympian deities of Plato’s
Phaedrus with hypostatic levels. In the former case, the
‘‘One’’ becomes God, the ‘‘One-Many’’ becomes Angel,
and the ‘‘One and Many’’ becomes Soul whereas in the
latter, Jupiter and the other deities can become different
intellects, different Ideas within Intellect, or intellective
modalities according to context. When writing as theorist
of the erotic in his dialogue De amore, Ficino identiﬁes the
‘‘heavenly Venus’’ and the ‘‘earthly Venus’’ of the Sympo-
sium with intellective or psychic modalities. The former
becomes an angel’s ascending movement toward God or
a soul’s ascending movement toward an angel, the latter
the soul’s descending movement toward procreation.
Although the work of Giovanni Pico della Mirandola
(1463–1494) has given rise to many divergent interpreta-
tions on the part of modern scholars, a sufﬁciently careful
reading of his main texts makes his relation to the
ﬁfteenth-century Platonic tradition reasonably clear. We
may start from the famous Nine Hundred Conclusions –
which represent not a conventional written treatise on
philosophy, but a collection of philosophical propositions
to be debated orally – and from the Oration (later subtitled
On the Dignity of Man) designed to introduce that dispu-
tation. Here, the importance of understanding reality as
a coincidence of opposites is indicated by Pico’s labeling of
a methodologically important section of the Conclusions
‘‘paradoxical conclusions according to my own opinion
introducing new doctrines of philosophy,’’ and that of
understanding reality as a structure of mediation is
indicated by Pico’s constant use of the verbal expression
‘‘just as. . .so also’’ (sicut. . .ita) within the formulation of
the different propositions. Both the coincidence of
opposites and the structure of mediation are connected
with the notion that man – and an individual human being
as well as the collectivity is clearly understood here – can
bring all levels of reality into union because he uniquely
has no properties of his own.
It is important to understand the novel treatment of
the relation between practical and theoretical philosophy
by Pico, in which the former is elevated to the level of the
latter and indeed is combined with it in a subtle manner.
For Pico, the mediating structure of reality is not only
something to be discovered theoretically, but also some-
thing to be manipulated in a practical sense, this same
operation being called ‘‘cabala’’ (cabala) when it takes
place within the soul itself but ‘‘magic’’ (magia) when it
takes place in respect of bodily things. In the Oration and
the Nine Hundred Conclusions, Pico describes the essential
features of the cabala which he has been studying with the
assistance of Jewish scholars such as Flavius Mithridates.
He notes that it is an oral teaching revealed to Moses
alongside the written law that was transmitted as an
esoteric method of interpreting that written law through
the manipulation of the numerical properties of the
Hebrew alphabet, and conﬁrms the doctrines of the
greatest philosophy and more importantly the essential
teachings of Christianity. For Pico, Cabalism is not simply
another philosophical component within the syncretistic
system of ‘‘ancient theology,’’ but a general hermeneutical
technique which can be practiced in relation to all other
forms of philosophy. To the extent that it depends on
a manipulation of the mediating structure of reality both
within the soul itself and with respect to bodily things, this
process of ‘‘making marriage in the world’’ (maritare
mundum) is also identiﬁed with the theurgy of such
ancient thinkers as Iamblichus and Proclus.
Pico’s relation to the ﬁfteenth-century Platonic tradi-
tion is indicated most clearly in his treatise On Being and
Unity. This essay seems to be the only completed section of
a projected larger work in which he would explain,
according to the Oratio, the ‘‘harmony of Plato and Aris-
totle’’ (Platonis Aristotelisque concordia) proposed by
many earlier thinkers, but not demonstrated hitherto. In
fact, On Being and Unity actually illuminates the relations
both between Plato and Aristotle and between Plato and
the ‘‘Platonists.’’ On the ﬁrst question, Pico shows that the
agreement between the two ancient thinkers is to be
sought neither in asserting that Plato speaks the truth
concerning divine things and Aristotle the truth regarding
the natural world, nor in distinguishing an exoteric Aris-
totle rejecting Plato from an esoteric Aristotle agreeing
with him, but in emphasizing the irreducible polysemy
of the term ‘‘Being’’ which the two philosophers explore
from different viewpoints. On the second question, Pico
argues that the doctrine of certain ‘‘Platonists’’ that the
One is to be placed unequivocally as a hypostasis above
Being, which they believe to be the central teaching in
Plato’s Parmenides, and opposed to the Aristotelian doc-
trine of the convertibility of Being and Unity, fails to
appreciate a text whose essential message is the necessity
of hermeneutical suspension before the highest Truth.
The decisive inﬂuences on the philosophy of Francesco
Patrizi (1529–1597) – in addition to more immediate
predecessors on whom he depends such as Marsilio
Ficino – were the last members of the ancient Platonic
schools. In the encyclopedic treatise in which Patrizi most
proclaims his own innovations, entitled New Universal
Philosophy,
and
divided
into
four
sections
called
‘‘Panaugia,’’ ‘‘Panarchia,’’ ‘‘Pampsychia,’’ and ‘‘Pancosmia,’’
Platonism, Renaissance P
1027
P

he cites Proclus – of whose Elements of Theology he pro-
duced a new Latin translation – Damascius – the Greek
text of whose On First Principles is known to have been
included in his library – and Simplicius – whose Corollary
on Place inspired his novel doctrines of space and light –
with some frequency. Nevertheless, Patrizi’s philosophical
innovations consisted not only of the unprecedented
range of philosophical sources which he commanded,
but also of the highly creative manner in which the deriv-
ative materials were combined with one another.
The New Universal Philosophy contains – particularly
in the ‘‘Panarchia’’ – a new theory concerning the order of
hypostases. Patrizi calls the ﬁrst principle of reality the
‘‘One-All’’ (Un’omnia) in order to show that it can be
viewed as either coordinated or uncoordinated with
subsequent things. To the extent that the One-All is coor-
dinated with other things in such a manner as to reﬂect the
Trinitarian distinction of persons, it can also be called the
‘‘paternal depth’’ (paternum profundum). The ﬁrst princi-
ple is followed by a sequence of nine hypostases: ‘‘Unity’’
(unitas), ‘‘Being’’ (essentia), ‘‘Life’’ (vita), ‘‘Intellect’’
(intellectus), ‘‘Soul’’ (anima), ‘‘Nature’’ (natura), ‘‘Qual-
ity’’ (qualitas), ‘‘Form’’ (forma), and ‘‘Body’’ (corpus). Soul
here occupies a mediating ﬁfth position between a group
of four terms which are treated as incorporeal and a group
of four terms which are treated as corporeal. The nine
hypostases can be viewed as either coordinated or
uncoordinated in relation to the One-All. Their coordina-
tion with the One-All is shown where a unity –
corresponding to the Father – a ﬁrst intellect (itself
containing unity, being, life, and intellect) – corresponding
to the Son – and a second intellect (also containing unity,
being, life, and intellect) – corresponding to the Holy
Spirit – are distinguished within the paternal depth.
Their uncoordination with the One-All is shown in
a projection of the nine hypostases in a ﬁrst dimension as
a ‘‘series’’ (series) of similar terms (ﬁrst unity, second
unity, third unity, etc.), in a second dimension as ‘‘levels’’
(gradus) of different terms (ﬁrst unity, ﬁrst being, ﬁrst life,
etc.), and in a third dimension as ‘‘chains’’ (catenae)
of light (linking the previous sets of terms). The combi-
nation of three dimensions constitutes space – deﬁned as
a ‘‘hypostatic extension subsisting through itself’’ (extensio
hypostatica, per se substans) in the ‘‘Pancosmia’’ – this
space being ﬁlled with and constituted by divine light.
Since this geometrical space is to be contrasted with
physical space – the latter containing bodies which are
not only three-dimensional geometrical forms, but
also possess the characteristic of resistance – Patrizi’s the-
ory clearly demonstrates the common purpose of ancient
Platonism and modern science in placing the quantitative
criteria of mathematics above the qualitative criteria
of physics.
Patrizi sees this original philosophical theory as the
deﬁnitive interpretation of Platonism and opposes it to
Aristotelianism. Especially in his Peripatetic Discussions
and Apology, Aristotle is excluded from the venerable
tradition of ‘‘ancient theology’’ with arguments to the
effect that there is much in Aristotle that is untrue and
that what is true in Aristotle is plagiarized from earlier
thinkers. On some occasions, Patrizi follows the more
usual line of reconciling Plato and Aristotle. Relying on
such texts as the pseudo-Aristotelian On the World and
Theology of Aristotle, he achieves the reconciliation by
associating the doctrine of the soul’s ﬁrst actuality with
the exoteric Aristotle and doctrine of the separate human
soul with the esoteric Aristotle, or else by associating
the acceptance of the doctrine of the world soul with the
earlier Aristotle and the denial of the doctrine of the world
soul with the later Aristotle. Whatever one may think of
these arguments, Patrizi was a good historian of philoso-
phy in noting the incompatibility between Aristotle’s
teaching and Christianity with respect to questions of
God’s omnipotence, the creation of the world, God’s
providence, and the immortality of the soul.
With Giordano Bruno (1548–1600) the question of
human subjectivity reappears in an emphatic combination
with the question of transcendence and immanence, as
shown by the discussion of a series of ‘‘considerations’’
(considerazioni) which concludes the Italian dialogue On
Cause, Principle, and Unity. This section makes explicit the
philosophical rationale underlying the apparently shifting
conception of the relation between the Creator and the
created world according to at least three distinct view-
points which dominate the earlier part of Bruno’s text. In
some passages, the emphasis falls upon a dualistic relation
between God, in whom cause and principle coincide, and
the universe where cause and principle are distinct,
a ‘‘cause’’ being by deﬁnition transcendent only and
a ‘‘principle’’ by deﬁnition both transcendent and imma-
nent with respect to its effect. From this dualistic view-
point, the physical properties of the universe can be
rendered transcendent by human thinking and transferred
to God – an application of Nicholas of Cusa’s method of
rendering ﬁnite terms inﬁnite. Other passages in Bruno’s
dialogue shift the emphasis to a threefold conception of
reality explicitly associated with the distinction of three
hypostases in Plotinus’ Enneads where ‘‘God’’ (Dio) is
cause and principle, ‘‘Universal Intellect’’ (intelletto
universale) is cause only, and ‘‘World Soul’’ (anima del
mondo) is cause and principle. This theory differs from
Plotinus’ not only in replacing a threefold structure of
1028 P
Platonism, Renaissance

things with a threefold structure of viewpoints, but in
understanding the entire theory predominantly from the
angle of ‘‘natural things’’ (cose naturali). In line with this
emphasis Bruno combines the doctrine of the three hypos-
tases with metaphysical reinterpretations of pre-Socratic
thought,
for
example,
the
teachings
attributed
to
‘‘Parmenides’’ that the ﬁrst principle is indistinctly formal
and material, to ‘‘Empedocles’’ that love and strife repre-
sent the dialectical opposition in intellect, and to ‘‘Anax-
agoras’’ that particular forms are latent within matter. In
other passages, the emphasis falls upon a monistic notion
of God as the universe in which this ultimate reality can be
viewed either as form or as matter – a combination of
Nicholas of Cusa’s notion of the simultaneously tran-
scendent and immanent deity with Plotinus’ doctrine
of matter in both the intelligible and sensible worlds.
From this monistic viewpoint, the normal distinction
between concrete particulars and abstract universals is
replaced by a new conception of a relatively concrete
universal or abstract particular. The combination of
the question of human subjectivity with the question
of transcendence and immanence in the dialogue On
Cause, Principle, and Unity is also articulated in more
speciﬁcally epistemological terms. For Bruno, we cannot
know the supernatural essence directly, but only by using
the most humble trace of its substance called a ‘‘vestige’’
(vestigio) as a starting-point, such a trace being called
a ‘‘veriﬁcation’’ (veriﬁcazione) when drawn from the phys-
ical and a ‘‘sign’’ (segno) when drawn from the mathemat-
ical sphere.
Further developments of these themes occur in
Bruno’s other Italian dialogues, and in his Latin treatises
and poems. The notion that the physical properties of the
universe can be rendered transcendent by human thinking
is elaborated in The Ash-Wednesday Supper in order to
argue for the inﬁnity of the universe as composed of an
inﬁnity of worlds. The metaphysical reading of pre-
Socratic philosophy continues in On the Inﬁnite, the Uni-
verse, and Worlds where it is turned more explicitly toward
critique of Aristotle’s physical doctrine. The notion that
signs can be drawn from the mathematical sphere is elab-
orated in On the Triple Minimum in order to demonstrate
the limits of quantitative thinking with respect to the
understanding of ultimate reality. It is important to note
that Bruno’s series of treatises on mnemonics applies the
same metaphysical principles. Thus, the combinatory
mechanism consisting of four sets of images arranged in
wheels described in On the Shadows of Ideas constitutes
a practical application of the familiar Platonic system of
correspondences. Here, the concrete images of memory
are ultimately inseparable from the abstract ideas of
Platonism and can be manipulated in order to accomplish
the human soul’s return to concord and unity.
See
also:
▶Augustine
▶George
Gemistos
Plethon
▶Giovanni Pico della Mirandola ▶Nicholas of Cusa
▶Pseudo-Dionysius the Aeropagite
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Bruno Giordano (1889) De triplici minimo et mensura. Iordani Bruni
Nolani Opera Latine Conscripta 1/3, ed. Tocco F, Vitelli H. Le
Monnier Firenze
Bruno Giordano (1991) De umbris idearum, ed. Sturlese R, pref. Garin E.
Olschki, Firenze
Bruno Giordano (2002a) De la causa, principio et uno. Opere italiane,
vol 1, ed. Aquilecchia G, intro. Ordine N, comm. Aquilecchia G, etc.
UTET, Torino
Bruno Giordano (2002b) De l’inﬁnito, universo e mondi. Opere italiane,
vol 2, ed. Aquilecchia G, intro. Ordine N, comm. Aquilecchia G, etc.
UTET, Torino
Bruno Giordano (2002c) La cena de le ceneri. Opere italiane, vol 1, ed.
Aquilecchia G, intro. Ordine N, comm. Aquilecchia G, etc. UTET,
Torino
Ficino Marsilio (1981) [Commentary on the Phaedrus] Marsilio Ficino
and the Phaedran Charioteer, ed. and trans. Allen MJB. University of
California Press, Berkeley
Ficino Marsilio (2001–2006) Platonic theology, 6 vols, ed. Hankins J,
Bowen W, trans. Allen MJB, Warden J. Cambridge
Ficino Marsilio (2002) Commentaire sur le Banquet de Platon, De l’
Amour, ed. and trans. Laurens P. Les Belles Lettres, Paris
Nicholas of Cusa (1932a) Apologia Doctae Ignorantiae, ed. Klibansky R.
Nicolai de Cusa Opera omnia iussu et auctoritate Academiae
Litterarum Heidelbergensis II. Meiner, Leipzig
Nicholas of Cusa (1932b) De Docta Ignorantia, ed. Hoffmann E,
Klibansky R. Nicolai de Cusa Opera omnia I. Meiner, Leipzig
Nicholas of Cusa (1972) De coniecturis, ed. Koch J, Bormann K, Senger
HG. Nicolai de Cusa Opera omnia III. Meiner, Hamburg
Nicholas of Cusa (1988) De beryllo, ed. Senger HG, Bormann K. Nicolai
de Cusa Opera omnia XI/1, new edn. Meiner, Hamburg
Patrizi Francesco. Apologia. See Gregory T (1955) L’ Apologia e le
Declarationes di F. Patrizi. Medioevo e Rinascimento. Studi in
onore di Bruno Nardi. Firenze, pp 385–424
Patrizi Francesco (1581) Discussionum Peripateticarum tomi IV… ad
Pernam Lecythum, Basel
Patrizi Francesco (1593) Nova de universis philosophia… Mammarelli,
Ferrara
Pico della Mirandola Giovanni (1942) De hominis dignitate, Heptaplus,
De ente et uno e scritti vari, ed. Garin E. Aragno, Firenze
Pico della Mirandola Giovanni (1999) 900 Conclusions philosophiques,
cabalistiques et the´ologiques, ed. and trans. Schefer B. E´ditions Allia,
Paris
Secondary Sources
Allen MJB (1998) Synoptic art. Marsilio Ficino on the history of Platonic
interpretation. Olschki, Firenze
Copenhaver B, Schmitt CB (1992) Renaissance philosophy. Oxford Uni-
versity Press, Oxford/New York
Cranz FE (2000) Nicholas of Cusa and the renaissance, ed. Izbicki TM,
Christanson G. Ashgate, Aldershot
Platonism, Renaissance P
1029
P

Craven WG (1981) Giovanni Pico della Mirandola. Symbol of his age:
modern interpretations of a renaissance philosopher. Droz, Geneva
Hankins J (1994) Plato in the Italian renaissance, 3rd edn, 2 vols. Brill,
Leiden/New York
Kraye J (2002) Classical traditions in renaissance philosophy. Ashgate,
Aldershot
Kristeller PO (1943) The philosophy of Marsilio Ficino, trans. Conant V.
Columbia University Press, New York (repr. P. Smith, Gloucester,
1964)
Kristeller PO (1964) Eight philosophers of the Italian renaissance.
Stanford University Press, Stanford
Leinkauf T (1990) Il neoplatonismo di Francesco Patrizi da Cherso come
presupposto della sua critica ad Aristotele. La Nuova Italia, Firenze
Tigerstedt EN (1974) The decline and fall of the Neoplatonic interpreta-
tion of Plato, an outline and some observations. Societas Scientiarum
Fennica, Helsinki
Yates FA (1964) Giordano Bruno and the hermetic tradition. Routledge
and Kegan Paul, London (repr. Routledge, New York, 1999)
Plethon, George Gemistos
▶George Gemistos Plethon
Plotinus, Arabic
CRISTINA D’ANCONA
Dipartimento di Filosoﬁa
Universita` di Pisa
Pisa
Italy
Abstract
One of the most inﬂuential among the works translated
into Arabic, the Enneads IV–VI circulated in the Arabic-
speaking world under Aristotle’s name. The Arabic version
belongs to the set of translations done by the scholars
gathered around al-Kindı¯ (Endress 1973, 1997). This
early translation gave rise to three texts: the so-called
Theology of Aristotle, an Epistle on the Divine Science falsely
attributed to al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, and a collection of sayings attrib-
uted to a ‘‘Greek Sage’’ (al-Shaykh al-Yu¯na¯nı¯). To the
Plotinian doctrines assimilated and adapted within the
Kindı¯’s circle an extraordinary impact was granted by
Aristotle’s alleged authorship, and this in almost all the
ﬁelds of Arabic philosophy outside logic and physics. No
matter what solutions the fala¯sifa espoused, their agenda
of problems was signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced by the Arabic
Plotinus in metaphysics and cosmology (the separatedness
and absolute simplicity of the First Principle, its universal
causality through the mediation of the ﬁrst Intellect, the
separate substances and cosmic Soul) as well as in psy-
chology (the spirituality and immortality of the human
soul, the union of soul with the separate Intellect).
The Enneads and Their Arabic Translation
Even though his importance for Arabic philosophy equals
only Aristotle’s, the name of Plotinus is almost unknown
in Arabic philosophical literature, as highlighted by
Rosenthal’s telling formula ‘‘Plotinus: the power of ano-
nymity’’ (Rosenthal 1974). This anonymity was by no
means a neutral one. It is not the case that Plotinus’
writings in Arabic bear no name or a misspelled one;
indeed, most of them circulated under Aristotle’s own
name, thereby generating one of the most decisive features
of Arabic–Islamic philosophy: the intermingling of
Aristotelian and Neoplatonic tenets, apparent not only
in eastern Arabic–Islamic philosophy up to Avicenna and
later, but also in the West of the Muslim world, including
Averroes – at least in the sense that such an intermingling
settled the agenda of the problems the latter had to solve.
The main Plotinian text in Arabic is the so-called Theology
of Aristotle, a treatise in ten chapters where the attribution
to Aristotle of materials taken from Enneads IV–VI is
explicit from the outset. At the beginning of the Arabic
text, we are told that this book is the Uthu¯lu¯jiya¯ (a loan
word for yeοlοgίa) of the philosopher Aristotle, the
meaning of the Greek term being ru¯bu¯biyya, that is, divine
sovereignty; Aristotle’s Uthu¯lu¯jiya¯, according to the Arabic
text, is commented upon by Porphyry. In fact, what
follows this premise is a series of extracts from Enneads
IV–VI.
How did Plotinus’ writings reach the Arabic-speaking
world, and under what circumstances did they turn out to
be ‘‘Aristotle’s’’ work? While there is no scholarly consen-
sus about the latter question, as for the former some
conclusions are ﬁrmly established nowadays. The ﬁrst
and most important one is that the Arabic version was
done on the basis of the Enneads, that is, Porphyry’s
edition of Plotinus’ writings, and not – as maintained in
past scholarship – on the basis of some alternative way of
circulation of them. The hypothesis that the Arabic trans-
lation was issued from some form of circulation of Ploti-
nus’ teaching other than the Enneads was suggested by
(1) the difference between the Greek text and the Arabic
version, both in structure and contents, and (2) the testi-
monies about the existence of non-Enneadic versions of
Plotinus’ writings. Conﬂating (1) and (2), some scholars –
including no less a specialist than Paul Henry, the coeditor
of the Enneads – advanced the idea that what was lying in
the background of the Arabic Plotinus was one or another
1030 P
Plethon, George Gemistos

of these non-Enneadic versions of his writings. None of
them has come down to us, but Porphyry’s witness in the
Vita Plotini about the early circulation of some treatises as
well as about the existence of notes taken from Plotinus’
lectures, plus some facts in the literary tradition both
direct (a marginal scholium) and indirect (extensive quo-
tations by other writers, e.g., Eusebius), suggested that
some of Plotinus’ writings were available even before the
production of the Enneads by Porphyry, some 30 years
after Plotinus’ death. If one takes into account that the
structure of the Theology of Aristotle is completely different
from that of the Enneads, it comes as no surprise that in
the eyes of the ﬁrst generation of scholars who studied
comparatively the Greek and Arabic texts the latter
was likely to derive not from Porphyry’s edition – the
Enneads – but from one or another of these non-Enneadic
versions
(Henry 1937,
1938:xiv,
followed
by Cruz
Herna´ndez (1974, 1981:55). Since at the end of the Vita
Plotini, which is put at the beginning of the Enneads,
Porphyry informs us that he added some complements
to Plotinus’ writings (‘‘commentaries,’’ ‘‘headings,’’ and
‘‘summaries’’), and since the beginning of the Arabic text
says that this book is the Theology of Aristotle commented
by Porphyry, the prevailing opinion was that the work
translated into Arabic was one of these Porphyrian com-
plements, the favorite one being the ‘‘commentaries’’
(Dieterici 1883; Paret 1959–1960; Pines 1971; Thillet
1971); this opinion has been challenged by Zimmermann
(1986). However, decisive proofs that the Arabic version
was made out of an exemplar of the Enneads have been
provided by Schwyzer (1941); later on, Henry changed his
mind on this point (Henry 1982). So, the ﬁrst question
raised above – how did Arabic-speaking scholars get in
touch with Plotinus’ writings? – can safely be answered as
follows: a manuscript of the Enneads reached Baghdad
within the ﬁrst decennia of the ninth century, and was
translated into Arabic there. This conclusion is grounded
on the data given at the beginning of the Arabic Theology,
where three names are mentioned that locate the transla-
tion in space and time: the Christian ‘Abd al-Ması¯h: ibn
Na¯‘ima al-H˙ imsı¯(i.e., from Emesa, Syria), as the translator
of the Uthu¯lu¯jiya¯ into Arabic; al-Kindı¯, as the revisor of the
translation, and Ah:mad the son of the caliph al-Mu‘tas:im,
to whom al-Kindı¯ was appointed as a tutor, as the
addressee of the revision. Since al-Kindı¯ is mentioned as
the revisor, his circle and the Baghdad caliphal court are
the milieu where the translation was done; since al-
Mu‘tas:im reigned between 833 and 842, this is the span
of time in which it was produced. Although incomplete –
since, as we have seen before, only treatises belonging to
Enneads IV–VI feature in the Arabic corpus – the Arabic
Plotinus provides important information on the lost
Greek manuscript that served as the basis for the transla-
tion. A considerable part of treatise IV 7[2] is lost in the
Greek direct tradition (the lacuna was recognized and the
loss was made good thanks to the extensive quotations of
IV 7[2] made by Eusebius); now, this part is extant in
Arabic: the obvious implication is that the Greek MS out
of which the translation was done was not affected by the
lacuna. This licenses two conclusions: (1) the missing part
did belong in the Enneads as they were edited by Porphyry,
against the hypothesis that the complete text that features
in Eusebius’ quotation counts as the witness of a non-
Enneadic version of Plotinus’ writings (Kraus 1936);
(2) the Greek manuscript that served as the basis for
the Arabic translation, although lost, can be safely said to
be independent of the entire Greek direct tradition, since it
did not share in the conjunctive error common to all the
Greek MSS, that is, the lacuna mentioned above
(D’Ancona 2006). We have just seen that the translation
was done within the forties of the ninth century; this
means that the Greek MS out of which it was produced
anteceded the archetype of the Greek tradition, because
the latter can be traced back to the end of the ninth century
(as a matter of fact, some features of the Greek MSS of the
Enneads show that the archetype belonged in the so-called
Collection philosophique, a group of MSS produced in
Byzantium in the last quarter of the ninth century). All
in all, one can say that a Greek MS of the Enneads reached
Baghdad, where it served as the basis of the Arabic version;
later on, another MS of the Enneads affected by the lacuna
gave rise in Byzantium to the entire direct tradition. The
implication is that one can have recourse to the Arabic text
as to the indirect witness of a MS of the Enneads that is not
only independent of the archetype, but also earlier than it.
Another issue that seems to be settled is that of the so-
called Syriac Vorlage. One of the most apparent doctrinal
changes in the Arabic with respect to the Greek text
consists in the transformation of Plotinus’ One into God
Almighty, and of its emanative power into creation out of
nothing. Although ﬁtting perfectly with Islam, this adap-
tation was traced back by past scholarship to the Christian
Syriac milieus of the sixth century. The reason for this lies
in that scholars were working with the assumption that
a Greek text based on Plotinus’ teaching was reworked in
order to ﬁt with a monotheistic and creationist context
well before its translation into Arabic. Since there are some
traces of Syriac in the Theology – the most evident example
being the term for ‘‘chapter,’’ that is, ‘‘mı¯mar,’’ a term of
Syriac origin – the conclusion was drawn that the mono-
theistic adaptations took place along with the translation
into Syriac, so producing a text, already in a Semitic
Plotinus, Arabic P
1031
P

language, out of which the Arabic version was allegedly
made (Baumstark 1902; Kraus 1940–1941; Anawati 1974).
Doubts about the existence of this alleged Syriac adapted
version of Plotinus have been raised by Zimmermann
(1986), and a fresh reexamination of the available evidence
has led Brock (2007) to conclude that it is highly improb-
able that such a text did exist. On the other hand, Brock
points to the Neoplatonic inﬂuence on the Syriac
Christian milieu in which Ibn Na¯‘ima al-H˙ imsı¯ was
educated.
From the Arabic Plotinus to the Theology of
Aristotle
Doubts about the Aristotelian authorship of the Theology
are as early as the sitxteenth century. There was no medi-
eval Latin translation of the Theology of Aristotle, but in
1519 a Latin version was published in Rome (the version
was done by Pietro Nicola Castellani on the basis of the
previous translation, now lost, done by Moses Rovas in
Cyprus), and another version was published in 1571 by
Jacques Charpentier (see Fenton 1986; Kraye 1986; Aouad
1989:565). The Latin text is based on the so-called Longer
Version of the Theology, in 14 chapters, whose Arabic
antecedent is only fragmentarily extant (on the ‘‘Longer
Version’’ see Fenton 1986, the survey of previous literature
in Aouad 1989:564–570, and Treiger 2007). Soon after,
Francesco Patrizi, who published the Latin version as an
appendix to his Nova de universis philosophia, was struck
by the difference between Aristotle’s usual position and
the blatant Platonism of ‘‘his’’ Theology: the explanation
he advanced was that the Theology contained the exoteric
doctrine heard by Aristotle from Plato’s lips, as shown not
only from Patrizi’s remarks, but also by the very title given
to this appendix, Mystica Aegyptiorum et Chaldaeorum
a Platone voce tradita, ab Aristotele excepta et conscripta
philosophia. The solution devised by Patrizi clearly indi-
cates his awareness that the Theology gave a non-
Aristotelian ring – an awareness that increased during
the seventeenth century in Europe (see Kraye 1986). In the
Bibliotheca Graeca (1716, III:162–164) Fabricius remarks
that the doctrines of the Theology, far from being Aristo-
telian, are akin to those of the Hermetic Poimandres, ‘‘ut
Platonicum potius aliquem quam Aristotelem auctorem esse
res ipsa clamet.’’ However, Fabricius did not identify the
‘‘Platonic’’ source: this move was done by Th. Taylor at the
beginning of the nineteenth century (Taylor 1812, III:403–
413; see also Taylor 1816). Later on, towards the end of the
century, the Orientalist F. Dieterici provided the editio
princeps of the Arabic text (Dieterici 1882) and its German
translation
(Dieterici
1883).
On
the
basis
of
this translation, V. Rose, the specialist of the Aristoteles
pseudepigraphus, identiﬁed more systematically than
Taylor had done the Plotinian treatises that count as
a source for the various chapters of the Theology (Rose
1883). The next decisive steps in the literary history of the
Arabic Plotinus belong to the twentieth century. In 1940
another Orientalist, P. Kraus, discovered in a Cairene MS
an Epistle on the Divine Science attributed to al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯,
which he identiﬁed as the Arabic abridged version of
four treatises of the ﬁfth Ennead (Kraus 1940–1941).
These four treatises are different from those lying in the
background of the Theology, but share with the latter
several monotheistic adaptations: this gave a hint towards
the existence of an original translation of materials drawn
from the Enneads, lying in the background of the two
complementary texts, the Theology and the Epistle.
A third Orientalist, F. Rosenthal, discovered that the ‘‘say-
ings’’ attributed in various doxographies and in a MS of
the Bodleian Library to the so-called al-Shaykh al-Yu¯na¯nı¯
(‘‘The Greek Sage’’) were nothing if not other parts
of the Arabic Plotinus (Rosenthal 1952–1955). The
doxographies that include passages taken from Plotinus
and attributed to the ‘‘Greek Sage’’ are, chronologically
arranged, the following: (1) the Muntakhab S˙iwa¯n al-
h:ikma derived from the lost S˙iwa¯n al-h:ikma attributed to
al-Sijista¯nı¯, (2) al-Shahrasta¯nı¯’s Kita¯b al-milal wa-l-nih:al,
and (3) al-Shahrazu¯rı¯’s Rawd˙at al-afra¯h (see the relevant
entries in this volume). In all likelihood, the three
doxographies and the sayings of the Bodleian MS depend
upon one and the same source, the lost S˙iwa¯n al-h:ikma,
a compilation of earlier sources that can be traced back to
the beginning of the eleventh century. At variance with
what happens in the case of the Theology and the
Epistle, the Plotinian passages attributed to the ‘‘Greek
Sage’’ and the Theology do overlap here and there. The
three texts – the Theology, the Epistle on the Divine Science,
and the ‘‘Sayings of the Greek Sage’’ – share in the same
linguistic features and doctrinal adaptations, so that
Rosenthal’s conclusion imposes itself: they derive from
one and the same ‘‘Arabic Plotinus Source.’’ When G.
Endress published in 1973 his Proclus Arabus (see the
entry on Proclus, Arabic in this volume), the systematic
analysis of the syntax, terminology, and doctrinal adapta-
tions that he extended also to the Arabic version of Pro-
clus’ Elements of Theology and to the Liber de causis
allowed him to conclude that the ‘‘Arabic Plotinus
Source,’’ together with the Elements of Theology, with
their offspring known as the Liber de causis, and with
some Alexander of Aphrodisias, were translated and
adapted within one and the same circle of scholars: the
‘‘Kindı¯’s circle’’ (Endress 1973, 1997). On this ground, and
on the basis of a reexamination of the entire dossier,
1032 P
Plotinus, Arabic

Zimmermann (1986) has advanced the hypothesis that the
works by Plotinus, Proclus, and Alexander of Aphrodisias
were meant to fulﬁl the demand for a theological comple-
ment to Aristotle’s Metaphysics. In the eyes of the scholars
of this circle, and mostly of its ‘‘spiritus rector’’ al-Kindı¯
(Endress 1997), a more detailed account of the causality of
the Immobile Mover sketched in Book Lambda was
needed, in order to show that Greek philosophy reached
the same truth as the Qurʾa¯n about God and his creation.
Such an account could be found in a set of post-
Aristotelian authors – Alexander, Plotinus, Proclus –
who stressed both the separatedness and the causality of
a unique and transcendent First Principle.
There is no scholarly consensus about the details of the
transformation of the ‘‘Arabic Plotinus source’’ into the
Theology of Aristotle – in particular, about the two related
issues of (1) the chaos versus intentional structure of the
Theology, and (2) the purposiveness versus mistaken
nature of the attribution to Aristotle – but the origins of
the text within the Kindı¯’s circle and its role in building the
Arabic Aristotle are established on ﬁrm grounds.
Doctrine
Taken as a whole, the Arabic Plotinus contains a full
account of the main tenets of Plotinian metaphysics and
psychology: the spirituality and immortality of the human
soul; the existence of a cosmic Soul; the existence and
causality of the intelligible realm, that is, a level of reality
that can be grasped only by intellect and escapes sense
perception; its identity with the divine Intellect, that is,
a separate intellectual principle that inherits both from
Plato’s Demiurge and Aristotle’s ‘‘thinking of thinking’’;
the existence, beyond Intellect, of another principle higher
than it and perfectly simple, the One, which in turn
inherits from the Idea of Good ‘‘beyond Being’’ of Plato’s
Republic. The three principles – the One, Intellect, and
Soul – that form the core of Plotinus’ metaphysics are
omnipresent in the various texts derived from the ‘‘Arabic
Plotinus Source.’’
More in detail, the Theology begins with an account
of the descent of the human soul into the world of com-
ing-to-be and passing away (the source is the ﬁnal
part of Plotinus’ treatise On the Immortality of the Soul,
IV 7[2]); to this, a famous passage is appended, taken from
Plotinus’ treatise IV 8[6], where the ascent of the human
soul to the intelligible realm is described. Quite emphat-
ically introduced by the words ‘‘A speech by him, kala¯m
lahu’’ – that is, by the author of the Uthu¯lu¯jiya¯ – the
passage where Plotinus, speaking in the ﬁrst person,
describes his experience of contemplation of the intelligi-
ble realm has been put into Aristotle’s own mouth. In the
Arabic version, ‘‘Aristotle’s’’ ascent culminates in an
instant vision of the First Principle beyond the intelligible
realm. But a human soul cannot stand such a vision, and
in returning to its usual mode of cognition, that is, dis-
cursive reason, wonders about the reason why a spiritual
entity capable of seeing the intelligible realm and the First
Principle is linked to the body. Chapter I of the Theology
ends with Plotinus’ response to this question: Plato has
taught that a wise and good Creator has sent the souls to
the world of coming-to-be and passing away. A wide pas-
sage with no correspondence in the Greek text adds to this
Plotinian idea something new: an account of Plato’s phi-
losophy, praised by the author of the Theology (i.e., ‘‘Aris-
totle’’) for having taught the existence of the intelligible
realm, of God Almighty beyond it, and his creation out of
nothing both of the intelligible and the visible worlds
(Dieterici
p.
4.12–14.9
=
Badawı¯
p.
18.11–28.3).
Chapter II, based on Plotinus’ IV 4[28] and IV 3[27], is
devoted to the question of the memory that the soul can
have of its stay in the intelligible realm, once descended in
the world of coming-to-be and passing away (Dieterici p.
14.10–32.6 = Badawı¯ p. 29.1–44.18). Chapter III contains
the main part of Plotinus’ treatise On the Immortality of
the Soul, IV 7[2], and deals with the proofs of the spiritu-
ality and immortality of our souls (Dieterici p. 32.8–43.19
= Badawı¯ p. 45.1–55.19). Chapter IV is taken from the
beginning of Plotinus’ treatise V 8[31], On the Intelligibile
Beauty, and deals with the nobility of the intelligible realm
and its superiority to the visible world (Dieterici
p. 44.1–54.2 = Badawı¯ p. 56.1–64.5). Chapter V is based
on the beginning of treatise VI 7[38], where Plotinus
explains how to account for the ‘‘reasoning’’ of the Demi-
urge in the Timaeus: the title of the Arabic chapter shows
by itself the adaptations mentioned above, ‘‘Account of the
Creator, his creation of what he has created and the status
of the things in him’’ (Dieterici p. 54.3–63.16 = Badawı¯ p.
65.1–73.16). Chapter VI depends upon the central part of
Plotinus’ IV 4[28] and endorses its criticism of astrology
and magic: stars do not produce events in the sublunar
world, at the most they provide hints to the events to come
(Dieterici
p.
64.1–75.5
=
Badawı¯
p.
74.1–83.17).
Chapter VII, issued from the ﬁnal part of Plotinus’ IV 8
[6], On the Descent of Soul into the Bodies, accounts for the
reasons of the descent of the soul into the world of com-
ing-to-be and passing away, and for the conditions for its
return to the intelligibile realm it comes from (Dieterici p.
75.16–85.6 = Badawı¯ p. 84.1–91.21), so creating a long-
lasting topic of Arabic–Islamic philosophy, that of the
‘‘Provenance and Return,’’ as runs the title of a treatise by
Avicenna (K. al-Mabda’ wa-l-ma‘a¯d, ed. Nu¯ra¯nı¯ 1984).
Chapter VIII derives from a variety of sources, VI 7[38],
Plotinus, Arabic P
1033
P

IV 4[28], V 1[10], and V 8[31], and deals with the intel-
ligible realm, the pure intellects and souls dwelling in it,
the generation of Intellect from the One, and the union of
the human soul with Intellect (Dieterici p. 85.7–125.3 =
Badawı¯ p. 92.1–120.18). Chapter IX, issued from the ﬁrst
two chapters of IV 7[2] and the last two of V 1[10], is
devoted to the presence in human souls of a part or faculty
that remains constantly united with Intellect and the
intelligible world (Dieterici p. 125.4–135.11 = Badawı¯ p.
121.1–133.3). Finally, Chap. X, based on V 2[11], VI 7[38],
and V 8[31], deals with the causality of the First Principle,
the True One: this principle creates Intellect with no inter-
mediary, be it the ‘‘thought’’ (or decision) of creating it.
Indeed, the First Principle creates solely by its being,
bi-anniyatihi faqat:, with no instruments or movement
whatsoever. This means that the Theology endorses Ploti-
nus’ model of the causality of intelligible principles that
produce their effects with no alteration whatsoever, the
example being the emanation of heat from ﬁre or cold
from snow: two effects that are given by the very fact that
their principle exists. Another source of the topic of crea-
tion bi-anniyyati faqat: is Plotinus’ exegesis of the Platonic
Demiurge, whose ‘‘reasoning’’ (lοgismός) in the Timaeus
is interpreted in treatise VI 7[38] – widely taken up in
the Theology – as showing the intrinsic rationality of the
visible world: Plotinus’ exegesis is meant to exclude the
literal interpretation of such a ‘‘reasoning’’ as a delibera-
tion about what should be done. The immobile and
spontaneous causality of the Plotinian divine Intellect
becomes in the Theology the prominent feature of crea-
tion, that is, the production of being out of nothing, done
by a principle that is said to be ‘‘pure Being’’ and creates
‘‘solely by its Being.’’ In deﬁning the First Principle as the
highest and purest instance of ‘‘Being’’ the Theology parts
company with Plotinus, who had located the One beyond
Being. At variance with the Greek Plotinus, in the Arabic
version the True One, also named ‘‘Pure Being,’’ ‘‘First
Agent,’’ and ‘‘God Almighty,’’ creates the Intellect. The
latter is created directly, with no intermediary, whereas
the lower levels of being (the cosmic Soul, the celestial
spheres, and the sublunar world) are created by God
through the mediation of Intellect. This recasting of the
doctrine of the three principles One, Intellect, and Soul is
the hallmark of the Arabic Plotinus and features also in the
Liber de causis, even though the latter derives from Pro-
clus’ Elements of Theology, where Intellect does not play
the prominent role it had in Plotinus. This fact, together
with other elements of the Arabic Plotinus that feature in
it, licenses the conclusion that the Liber de causis is the
work of an author who has conﬂated the Arabic Proclus
and the Arabic Plotinus, and it has been advanced that this
author was al-Kindı¯ himself. The Theology of Aristotle
remained unknown to Latin Middle Ages, but the Latin
translation of Liber de causis granted a considerable
inﬂuence on Latin medieval philosophy to the most typ-
ical tenet of the Arabic Plotinus, known through the
axiom ‘‘Causa prima creavit esse animae mediante
intelligentia’’ (Liber de causis, Prop. 3).
The Theology of Aristotle and Arabic
Philosophy
The inﬂuence of the Arabic Plotinus, conveyed in partic-
ular by the Theology of Aristotle, was considerable. After al-
Kindı¯, whose pivotal role in the production of the Arabic
Plotinian corpus has been mentioned above, and who
made use himself of many topics of the Arabic Plotinus
(see for instance On First Philosophy, p. 25.4–9 and
97.8–10
Rashed-Jolivet;
Epistle
on
the
True
Agent,
p. 169.5–8 Rashed-Jolivet; Epistle Explaining What the
Soul Remembers of What it had in the World of Intellect,
German transl. Endress 1994), the Theology was taken into
account by al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯in his Book on the Harmony of the Two
Opinions of the Two Sages, the Divine Plato and Aristotle,
p. 64.7–65.10 Martini Bonadeo (commentary, p. 199–202)
p. 65.14–18 (comm., p. 203–206); p. 69.15–70.7 (comm.,
p. 213–216); p. 72.8–16 (comm., p. 219–220); p. 72.16–
73.10 (comm., p. 221–223); p. 74.1–16 (comm. p. 225–
226). The latter passage is the most important, containing
as it does the extensive quotation of the account of
‘‘Aristotle’s’’ ascent into the intelligible world. After al-
Fa¯ra¯bı¯, this passage will be quoted by several other fala¯sifa,
both East and West (see below). The Farabian authorship
of the Harmony has been challenged, but the main tenets
of the Theology form the backbone also of Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s Princi-
ples of the Views of the Citizens of the Best State, a work
whose authenticity lies beyond doubt (one may compare
for instance, on the key issue of creation outside time,
p. 92.8–16 Walzer with Theology, p. 162.14–163.8; 174.22–
175.3; 177.8–10; 187.8–10 Badawı¯).
The pupil of a pupil of al-Kindı¯, al-‘A¯mirı¯ (see the
relevant entry in this volume) is heavily if tacitly indebted
to the Theology in his K. al-Amad ‘ala¯ l-abad (Book on the
Afterlife): compare for instance Chap. V, p. 88–95 Rowson,
with Theology I, p. 3.13–17 Dieterici = p. 6.7–11 Badawı¯;
III, p. 38.6–10 Dieterici = p. 50.9–12 Badawı¯; Chap. VII,
Sect. 7, p. 102–103 Rowson with Chap. VI of the Theology
(Dieterici, p. 64.1–75.5 = Badawı¯, p. 74.1–83.17); and
Chap. XV, Sect. 7, p. 140–141 Rowson with Chap. VII of
the
Theology
(Dieterici,
p.
75.16–85.6
=
Badawı¯,
p. 84.1–91.21). Other parallel passages or doctrinal inﬂu-
ences are indicated in D’Ancona et al. (2003:95, 293–294,
293, 300, 317, and 341).
1034 P
Plotinus, Arabic

The Arabic Plotinus lies in the background also
of several doctrines expounded in the Epistles of the
Ikhwa¯n al-S˙afa¯’ (see the relevant entry in this volume); in
particular, Epistle I, p. 138 G˙ a¯lib contains a description of
the ascent into the intelligible world, which is indebted to
the passage of Chap. I of the Theology mentioned above
(Diwald 1975:23). This passage is known also to Ibn Zur‘a,
one of the ‘‘Baghdad Aristotelians’’ (see Kraus 1940–
1941:271 and Zimmermann 1986:183), and to Miskawayh
(al-Fawz al-as:g˙ar, p. 99.9–12 ‘Udayma): see the relevant
entries in this volume. Other doctrines of the Theology
echoed in the Epistles include the topics of creation outside
time (Epistle III, 9: Diwald 1975:450–451); of creation
‘‘mediante Intelligentia’’ (Epistle III, 1: Diwald 1975:55;
Epistle III, 4, Diwald 1975:179), and of the substantiality,
and separability of the human soul from the body (Epistle
III, 4: Diwald 1975:185).
Avicenna, who has commented upon the Theology, is
heavily indebted to it as for several topics that structure his
thought: the absolute simplicity of the First Principle, the
generation of the First Intellect from the necesse esse (‘‘ex
uno non nisi unum’’), the ‘‘provenance’’ of soul from and
its ‘‘destination’’ to the intelligible world. Echoes of the
Theology are widespread in Avicenna’s works, from the
earlier ones, like the Compendium on the Soul (see Gutas
1988:19) and the Provenance and Destination (see Gutas
1988:31) to the last ones, like the Fair Judgment (only
fragmentarily extant). The Fair Judgment contained
Avicenna’s Notes on the Theology, as he himself informs
in a letter to his friend Abu¯ Ja‘far Kiya¯’. The Letter to Kiya¯’,
where he accounts for the structure of the Fair Judgment (a
work already lost when he wrote the letter), contains an
opinion about the Theology that has been interpreted in
different ways, since the moment the letter was discovered
(Kraus 1940–1941): some scholars saw in Avicenna’s
remark a doubt about the Aristotelian authorship (as exem-
pliﬁed in the translation given by Gutas (1988:63–64):
‘‘despite the fact that the Theologia is somewhat suspect’’);
others see in it a note of caution about the doctrines
held in it (as exempliﬁed in the translation given by
Zimmermann (1986:184): ‘‘for all one may ﬁnd to object
to in the Uthu¯lu¯jia¯’’): see the dossier in Aouad (1989:583–
584). Both the Letter to Kiya¯’ and the Notes by Avicenna on
the Theology, which survived in part the loss of the Fair
Judgment, are edited (Badawı¯ 1947:37–74, the Notes;
p. 120–122, the Letter) and have been translated into
French (Vajda 1951). (For a survey up to 1989, see
Aouad 1989:583–586; after this date, see De Smet 2001,
2002; D’Ancona et al. 2003:102–111.)
After Avicenna, the Theology continued to be viewed as
part and parcel of Aristotle’s metaphysics and ‘‘divine
science.’’ In his Book on the Science of the Metaphysics,
‘Abd al-Lat:ı¯f al-Bag˙da¯dı¯ included a summary of the
Theology: see the dossier in Aouad (1989:586–587) and
Martini Bonadeo, ‘Abd al-Lat:ı¯f al-Bag˙da¯dı¯ On Metaphysics
(forthcoming). A survey on the inﬂuence of the Theology
on the eastern post-Avicennian philosophers belonging in
the so-called Ishra¯qı¯ (Illuminationist) tradition has been
provided by Aouad (1989:587–599). This survey includes a
list of extant commentaries up to the end of the seventeenth
century; for an up-to-date account see also Rizvi (2007).
As for the circulation of the Arabic Plotinian corpus in
the Muslim West, even though no systematic analysis has
been done to the present day, it is fair to say that there are
no evident proofs of a direct and extensive knowledge.
However, some doctrines and typical features of the Ara-
bic Plotinus reached al-Andalus indirectly, a possible way
being the Epistles of the Ikhwa¯n al-S˙afa¯’ (known in al-
Andalus), not to mention the works of the eastern fala¯sifa
like al-Fa¯ra¯bi and Avicenna, who had already endorsed
some typical tenets and wordings of the Theology. Also,
at least two items of the Neoplatonic complements to
Aristotle’s metaphysics produced within the circle of al-
Kindı¯ did circulate in al-Andalus: the Liber de causis,
which was translated into Latin in Toledo by Gerard of
Cremona, and the Arabic propositions of Proclus’ Ele-
ments of Theology attributed to Alexander of Aphrodisias,
which had a substantial inﬂuence on Ibn Ba¯jja (see
Altmann 1965; Endress 1973:53–54, and D’Ancona
2008). In his H˙ ayy ibn Yaqz˙a¯n, Ibn T˙ufayl reproduces, in
all likelihood without any awareness of the source he is
quoting from, the passage on the ascent of the soul into the
intelligible world and to the First Principle beyond it
(trans. Goodman p. 152). A balanced account of the Neo-
platonic sources of Averroes is still to be made, but one can
at least say that most problems he had to solve were settled
by the tradition of the falsafa that he inherited, with its
typical intermingling of Aristotelian and Neoplatonic
doctrines. Among these, a point raised by Merlan
(1963:20–21), and later on almost forgotten in the schol-
arship deserves attention: the ultimate source of the doc-
trine of the union of soul with the separate Intellect
(ittis:a¯l) is Plotinus, not Alexander of Aphrodisias.
As a matter of fact, Alexander’s Agent Intellect is the
Immobile Mover itself, while it is in the Arabic Plotinus
(Theology, Chaps. VIII and IX) that the soul, in ascending
into the intelligible world, reaches the union with an
Intellect that is a separate substance distinct from and
subordinated to the First Principle. In his Epistle On Intel-
lect, al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ insisted upon the fact that the Agent Intel-
lect that the human soul strives for is by no means the First
Cause (p. 32–33 Bouyges). This is the cluster of problems
Plotinus, Arabic P
1035
P

that forms the background of Averroes’ solutions. On
other crucial issues, like for instance God’s knowledge of
individuals, the inﬂuence of the Neoplatonism of the
Kindian texts on Averroes can also be detected.
See also: ▶‘Abd al-Lat:ı¯f al-Bag˙da¯dı¯ ▶Alexander of
Aphrodisias and Arabic Aristotelianism ▶al-ʿA¯mirı¯, Abu¯
l-H˙ asan ▶Aristotle, Arabic ▶Doxographies, Graeco-
Arabic ▶al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, Abu¯ Nas˙r ▶Gerard of Cremona
▶Ibn Ba¯jja, Abu¯ Bakr ibn al-Sa¯ʾig˙ (Avempace) ▶Ibn
Rushd, Muh˙ammad ibn Ah˙mad al-H˙ afı¯d (Averroes)
▶Ibn T˙ufayl, Abu¯ Bakr (Abubacer) ▶Ibn Sı¯na¯, Abu¯ ʿAlı¯
(Avicenna) ▶Ikhwan al-S˙afa¯’, Encyclopedia of ▶Isma¯ʿı¯lı¯
Philosophical Tradition ▶al-Kindı¯, Abu¯ Yu¯suf Yaʿqu¯b ibn
Ish:a¯q ▶Nas:ı¯r al-Dı¯n al-T˙u¯sı¯ ▶Plato, Arabic ▶Platonism
▶Porphyry, Arabic ▶Proclus, Arabic ▶al-Shahrasta¯nı¯,
Muh:ammad
ibn
ʿAbd
al-Karı¯m
▶al-Shahrazu¯rı¯,
Muh:ammad ibn Mah:mu¯d Shams al-Dı¯n
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Editions and Translations of the Arabic Plotinus
(1959) Plotini Opera, Tomus II, ediderunt Henry P,
Schwyzer H-R.
Enneades IV-V, accedunt Plotiniana Arabica quæ anglice vertit G.
Lewis, Descle´e de Brouwer, Paris
A¯shtiya¯nı¯ SJD (ed) (1976) Ut¯u¯lu¯jiya¯. Talı¯f-i Aﬂu¯t:ı¯n, tarjamah-i Ibn
Na¯‘imah H˙ ims:ı¯, ba¯ ta‘lı¯qa¯t-i qa¯d˙ı¯ Sa‘ı¯d Qummı¯. ba¯ muqaddimah va
tas:h:ı¯h:-i A¯shtiya¯nı¯ SJ, muqaddimah-i Ingilı¯sı¯-i Sayyid H˙ usayn Nas:r,
Anjuman-i Sha¯hansha¯hı¯-i Falsafah-i I¯ra¯n (Iranian Academy of Phi-
losophy), Tehran, 1396/1976
Badawı¯ ‘A (ed) (1955) Al-Aﬂa¯t:u¯niyya al-muh:datha ‘inda l-‘Arab.
Maktabat al-Nahd˙a al-Mis:riyya, Cairo (repr. Wika¯lat al-Mat:bu¯‘a,
al-Kuwayt 1977)
Badawı¯ ‘A (ed) (1966) Aﬂu¯t:ı¯n ‘inda l-‘Arab. Plotinus apud Arabes.
Theologia Aristotelis et fragmenta quae supersunt. Da¯r al-Nahd˙a
al-Mis:riyya, Cairo
D’Ancona C et alii (ed) (2003) Plotino. La discesa dell’anima nei corpi
(Enn. IV 8[6]. Plotiniana Arabica (pseudo-Teologia di Aristotele,
capitoli 1 e 7; ‘‘Detti del Sapiente Greco’’). Il Poligrafo, Padova
Dieterici F (1882) Die sogenannte Theologie des Aristoteles aus arabischen
Handschriften zum ersten Mal herausgegeben. J.C. Hinrichs’sche
Buchhandlung, Leipzig (rist. Rodopi, Amsterdam 1965)
Dieterici F (1883) Die sogenannte Theologie des Aristoteles aus dem
arabischen
u¨bersetzt
und
mit
Anmerkungen
versehen.
J.C.
Hinrichs’sche Buchhandlung, Leipzig (Reprographischer Nachdruck
der Ausgabe Leipzig 1883, Druckerei Lokay, Reinheim, s.d.)
Rubio L (ed) (1978) Pseudo-Aristoteles. Teologı´a. Traduccio´n del a´rabe,
introduccio´n y notas. Ediciones Paulinas, Madrid
Editions and Translations of Other Relevant Texts
Abu¯ Rı¯da M‘A (ed) (1950–1953) Rasa¯’il al-Kindı¯ al-falsaﬁyya, h:aqqaqaha¯
wa-ah:rajaha¯ ma‘a muqaddima . . . M.‘A. Abu¯ Rı¯da, Da¯r al-ﬁkr
al-‘arabı¯, I-II, Cairo (Cairo 19782)
Arnzen R (ed) (1998) Aristoteles’ De anima. Eine verlorene spa¨tantike
Paraphrase in arabischer und persischer U¨ berlieferung. Arabischer
text
nebst
Kommentar,
Quellengeschichtlichen
Studien
und
Glossaren. Brill, Leiden/New York/Ko¨ln
Badawı¯ ‘A (ed) (1947) Arist:u¯ ‘inda l-‘Arab. Dira¯sat wa-nus:u¯s: g˙ayr
manshu¯ra. Maktabat al-Nahd˙a al-Mis:riyya, Cairo
Badawı¯ ‘A (ed) (1971) Commentaires sur Aristote perdus en grec et autres
e´pıˆtres, publie´s et annote´s. El Machreq E´diteurs, Beyrouth
Bardenhewer O (ed) (1882) Die pseudo-aristotelische Schrift ueber das
reine Gute bekannt unter dem Namen Liber de Causis. Freiburg im
Breisgau (repr. Frankfurt a.M. 1961)
Bouyges M (ed) (1999) Alfarabi: Risa¯lat fı¯ l-‘aql. Texte arabe inte´gral en
partie ine´dit e´ditabli par M. Bouyges (repr. in Abu¯ Nas:r al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯,
Texts and Studies III, collected and reprinted by Sezgin F in collab-
oration with Amawi M, Ehrig-Eggert C, Neubauer E, Institute for the
History of Arabic-Islamic Science at the Johann Wolfgang Goethe
University, Frankfurt a. M (ed. or. 1938)
Endress G (ed) (1973) Proclus Arabus. Zwanzig Abschnitte aus der
Institutio
Theologica
in
arabischer
U¨ bersetzung.
Imprimerie
Catholique, Wiesbaden-Beirut
Endress G (ed) (1994) Al-Kindı¯ u¨ber die Wiedererinnerung der Seele.
Arabischer Platonismus und die Legitimation der Wissenschaften im
Islam. Oriens 34:174–221
Goodman L (trans) (1972) Ibn Tufayl’s Hayy Ibn Yaqzan, a philosophical
tale. Twain, New York
Ivry AL (1974) Al-Kindi’s Metaphysics. A translation of Ya‘qu¯b ibn Ish:a¯q
al-Kindı¯’s treatise ‘On ﬁrst philosophy’ (fı¯ al-Falsafah al-U¯ la¯), with
Introduction and Commentary. SUNY, Albany
Martini Bonadeo C (ed) (2008) Al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ L’armonia delle opinioni dei
due sapienti, il divino Platone e Aristotele, introduzione, testo arabo,
traduzione e commento, prefazione di G. Endress, Plus, Pisa (Greco,
Arabo, Latino. Le vie del sapere, 3)
Martini
Bonadeo
C.
‘Abd
al-Lat:ı¯f
al-Bag˙da¯dı¯
On
Metaphysics
(forthcoming)
Nu¯ra¯ni ‘A (1984) Ibn Sı¯na¯, K. al-Mabda’ wa-l-ma‘a¯d. Wisdom of Persia
Series XXXVI, Tehran
Rashed R, Jolivet J (1999) Œuvres philosophiques et scientiﬁques
d’al-Kindıˆ, vol II, Me´taphysique et cosmologie. Brill, Leiden (Islamic
Philosophy, Theology and Science, 29)
Rowson EK (1988) A Muslim philosopher on the soul and its fate: al-
‘A¯mirı¯’s Kita¯b al-Amad ‘ala¯ l-abad. American Oriental Society, New
Haven
Rudolph U (ed) (1989) Die Doxographie des pseudo-Ammonius. Ein
Beitrag zur neuplatonischen U¨ berlieferung im Islam. Steiner,
Stuttgart
‘Ud˙ayma A, Arnaldez R (ed) (1987) Al-Fawz al-as:g˙ar li-Miskawayh (. . .)
Le Petit Livre du Salut, trad. franc¸aise et notes par R. Arnaldez.
Maison Arabe du Livre, Tunis
Walzer R (ed) (1985) Abu¯ Nas:r al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, Maba¯di’ a¯ra¯’ ahl al-madı¯na
al-fa¯d˙ila. A revised text with introduction, translation and commen-
tary by R. Walzer, Clarendon, Oxford; new edition by Endress G,
Great Books of the Islamic World, Chicago 1998
Secondary Sources
DPhA = Dictionnaire des Philosophes Antiques (1989) publie´ sous la
direction de R. Goulet avec une pre´face de Hadot P, CNRS E´ditions,
Paris, vol I; 2003 (Supple´ment)
EI2 = Encyclope´die de l’Islam. Nouvelle e´dition (. . .) Brill, Leiden,
Maisonneuve; Larose, Paris, various dates
Adamson P (2003) The Arabic Plotinus. A philosophical study of the
Theology of Aristotle. Duckworth, London
Adamson P (2001) Aristotelianism and the Soul in the Arabic Plotinus.
J History Ideas 62:211–232
Adamson P (2004a) Non-discursive thought in Avicenna’s commentary
on the Theology of Aristotle. In: McGinnis J (ed) Interpreting
1036 P
Plotinus, Arabic

Avicenna: science and philosophy in medieval Islam. Brill, Leiden,
pp 87–111
Adamson P (2004b) Correcting Plotinus: soul’s relationship to body in
Avicenna’s commentary on the Theology of Aristotle. In: Adamson P,
Baltussen H, Stone MWF (eds) Philosophy, science and exegesis in
Greek, Arabic and Latin commentaries. Institute of Classical Studies,
London, vol 2, pp 59–75
Altmann A (1965) Ibn Ba¯jjah on man’s ultimate felicity. In: Harry Austryn
Wolfson jubilee volume, English section, I, American Academy of
Jewish Research, Jerusalem, pp 47–87 (repr. in Id., Studies in Reli-
gious Philosophy and Mysticism, Cornell U.P., Ithaca 1969)
Anawati GC (1974) Le ne´oplatonisme dans la pense´e musulmane. E´tat
actuel des recherches. In: Plotino e il neoplatonismo in oriente e in
occidente. Atti del convegno internazionale, Accademia Nazionale
dei Lincei, Roma 5–10 ottobre 1970 (problemi attuali di scienza
e cultura, 198), pp 339–405 (repr. in E´tudes de philosophie
musulmane, Vrin, Paris 1974, pp 155–221)
Aouad M (1989) La the´ologie d’Aristote et autres textes du Plotinus
Arabus. In: DPhA I pp 541–590
Baumstark A (1902) Zur Vorgeschichte der arabischen Theologie des
Aristoteles. Oriens Christianus 2:187–191
Brague R (1997) La philosophie dans la The´ologie d’Aristote. Pour un
inventaire. Documenti e studi sulla tradizione ﬁlosoﬁca medievale
8:365–387
Brock S (2007) A Syriac intermediary for the Arabic theology of
Aristotle? In search of a chimera. In: D’Ancona C (ed) The Libraries
of the Neoplatonists. Proceedings of the meeting of the European
Science Foundation Network ‘‘Late antiquity and Arabic thought.
Patterns in the constitution of Europaean culture’’ held in
Strasbourg, March 12–14 2004 (. . .). Brill, Leiden (Philosophia
Antiqua 107), pp 293–306
Bucur C, Bucur BG (2006) The place of splendor and light: observations
on the paraphrasing of Enn 4.8.1 in the Theology of Aristotle. Le
Muse´on 119:271–292
Cruz Herna´ndez M (1974) El neoplatonismo y el punto de partida de la
ﬁlosofı´a a´rabe. In: Miscela´nea de estudios dedicados al profesor
Marı´n Ocete, vol I, Granada, pp 239–242
Cruz Herna´ndez M (1981) Historia del pensamiento en el mundo
isla´mico. I. Desde los orı´gines hasta el siglo XII. Alianza Editorial,
Madrid
Daiber H, review of Kraye J, Ryan WF, Schmitt C-B (eds) Pseudo-Aristotle
in the Middle Ages. The Theology and other texts. The Warburg
Institute, London, Der Islam 65 (1988), pp 130–134
D’Ancona C (1990) Cause prime non est yliathim. Liber de causis, prop. 8
[9]: le fonti e la dottrina. Documenti e studi sulla tradizione ﬁlosoﬁca
medievale 1:327–351 (repr. in Recherches sur le Liber de causis, Vrin,
Paris 1995 [E´tudes de Philosophie Me´die´vale, 72], pp 97–119)
D’Ancona C (1992) La doctrine de la cre´ation mediante intelligentia dans
le Liber de causis et dans ses sources. Rev Sci Philos The´ol 76:209–233
(repr. in Recherches sur le Liber de causis, pp 73–95)
D’Ancona C (1992) Esse quod est supra eternitatem. La Cause premie`re,
l’eˆtre et l’e´ternite´ dans le Liber de causis et dans ses sources. Arch Hist
Doctrin Litt M-Aˆ ge 59:41–62 (repr. in Recherches sur le Liber de
causis, pp 53–71)
D’Ancona C (1999) Porphyry, universal soul and the Arabic Plotinus.
Arabic Sci Phil 9:47–88
D’Ancona C (2000) L’inﬂuence du vocabulaire arabe: Causa Prima est esse
tantum. In Hamesse J, Steel C (eds) (2000) L’e´laboration du
vocabulaire philosophique au Moyen Age, Actes du Colloque Interna-
tional de Louvain-la-Neuve et Leuven, 12–14 Septembre 1998. Brepols,
Turnhout (Rencontres de Philosophie Me´die´vale, 8), pp 51–97
D’Ancona C (2001) Pseudo-Theology of Aristotle, Chapter I: Structure
and composition. Oriens. Zeitschrift der internationalen Gesellschaft
fu¨r Orientforschung, 36:78–112
D’Ancona C (2004) The Greek Sage, the pseudo-Theology of Aristotle
and the Arabic Plotinus. In Arnzen R, Thielmann J (eds) Words, texts
and concepts cruising the Mediterranean Sea. Studies on the sources,
contents and inﬂuences of Islamic civilization and Arabic philosophy
and science dedicated to Gerhard Endress on his sixty-ﬁfth birthday.
Peeters, Leuven, pp 159–176
D’Ancona C (2006) The Arabic version of Ennead IV 7(2) and its Greek
model. In Montgomery JM (ed) Arabic theology, arabic philosophy.
From the many to the one: essays in celebration of Richard M. Frank.
Peeters, Leuven (Orientalia Lovaniensia Analecta, 152), pp 127–156
D’Ancona C (2007) Ex uno non ﬁt nisi unum. Storia e preistoria della
dottrina avicenniana della Prima Intelligenza. In Canone E (ed) Per
una storia del concetto di mente, II. Olschki, Firenze, pp 29–55
D’Ancona C (2008) Degrees of abstraction in Avicenna. How to combine
Aristotle’s De Anima and the Enneads. In Knuuttila S, Karkaineen
P (eds) Theories of perception in medieval and early modern phi-
losophy. Springer Science þ Business Media B.V., pp 47–71
D’Ancona C (2008) Man’s conjunction with intellect: A Neoplatonic
source of western Muslim philosophy. Proc Israel Acad Sci Human
8:57–89
D’Ancona C, Taylor RC (2001) Le Liber de causis. In: DPhA Suppl,
pp 599–647
De Smet D (2001) La doctrine avicennienne des deux faces de l’aˆme et ses
racines ismae´liennes. Studia Islamica 93:77–89
De Smet D (2002) Avicenne et l’ismae´lisme post-fatimide, selon la Risa¯la
al-mufı¯da fı¯ ı¯d˙a¯h: mulg˙az al-qas:ı¯da de ‘Alı¯ b. Muh:ammad b. al-Walı¯d
(ob. 1215). In: Janssens J, De Smet D (eds) Avicenna and his Heritage.
Acts of the International Colloquium, Leuven – Louvain-la-Neuve
September 8–11, 1999, Leuven University Press, Leuven, pp 1–20
Diwald S (1975) Arabische Philosophie und Wissenschaft in der
Enziklopa¨die. Kita¯b Ih˘wa¯n as:-S˙afa¯’ III. Die Lehre von Seele und
Intellekt. O. Harrassowitz, Wiesbaden
Endress G (1997) The circle of al-Kindı¯. Early Arabic translations from the
Greek and the rise of Islamic philosophy. In: Endress G, Kruk R (eds)
The Ancient tradition in Christian and Islamic Hellenism. Studies on
the Transmission of Greek Philosophy and Sciences dedicated to H.J.
Drossaart Lulofs on his ninetieth birthday. CNWS Research, Leiden,
pp 43–76
Endress G (2007) Building the library of Arabic philosophy. Platonism
and Aristotelianism in the sources of al-Kindı¯. In D’Ancona C (ed)
The Libraries of the Neoplatonists. Proceedings of the Meeting of the
European Science Foundation Network ‘‘Late Antiquity and Arabic
Thought’’. . ., Brill, Leiden (Philosophia Antiqua, 107), pp 319–350
Fenton P (1986) The Arabic and Hebrew versions of the Theology of
Aristotle. In: Kraye J, Ryan WF, Schmitt C-B (eds) Pseudo-Aristotle
in the Middle Ages. The Theology and other texts. The Warburg
Institute, London, pp 241–264
Gardet L (1951) En l’honneur du mille´naire d’Avicenne. L’importance
d’un texte nouvellement traduit. Revue Thomiste 59: 333–345 (repr.
as ‘‘Avicenne commentateur de Plotin’’ in E´tudes de philosophie et de
mystique compare´es, Vrin, Paris 1972, pp 135–146 [Bibliothe`que
d’Histoire de la Philosophie])
Genequand Ch (1987–1988) Platonism and Hermetism in al-Kindı¯’s Fı¯
al-nafs. Z Gesch Arab-Islam Wiss 4:1–18
Genequand Ch (1996) La me´moire de l’aˆme: Porphyre et la The´ologie
d’Aristote. Bull E´tudes Orient 48:102–113
Geoffroy M (2002) La tradition arabe du Perιnο~u d’Alexandre
d’Aphrodise et les origines de la doctrine farabienne des quatre
Plotinus, Arabic P
1037
P

degre´s de l’intellect. In: D’Ancona C, Serra G (eds) Aristotele
e Alessandro di Afrodisia nella tradizione araba, Atti del colloquio
internazionale Padova, 14–15 maggio 1999. Il Poligrafo, Padova
(Subsidia Medievalia Patavina, 2), pp 191–231
Gutas D (1988) Avicenna and the Aristotelian tradition. Introduction to
reading Avicenna’s philosophical works. Brill, Leiden (Islamic Phi-
losophy, Theology and Science, 4)
Henry P (1937) Vers la reconstitution de l’enseignement oral de Plotin.
Bull Acad R Belg: Cl Lett 23:310–342
Henry P (1938) Les e´tats du texte de Plotin (E´tudes plotiniennes, I).
Descle´e de Brouwer – L’E´dition Universelle, Paris
Henry P (1982) The oral teaching of Plotinus. Dionysius 6:3–12
Kraus P (1936) Un fragment pre´tendu de la recension d’Eustochius des
œuvres de Plotin. Rev Hist Relig 113:207–218 (repr. in Id., Alchemie,
Ketzerei, Apokryphen im fru¨hen Islam. Gesammelte Aufsa¨tze
hrsg. von R. Brague, Olms, Hildesheim-Zu¨rich-New York 1994,
pp 301–312
Kraus P (1940–1941) Plotin chez les Arabes. Remarques sur un nouveau
fragment de la paraphrase arabe des Enne´ades. Bull Inst Egypte
23:263–295
Kraye J (1986) The Pseudo-Aristotelian Theology in sixteenth- and
seventeenth-century Europe. In: Kraye J, Ryan WF, Schmitt C-B
(eds) Pseudo-Aristotle in the Middle Ages. The Theology and other
texts. The Warburg Institute, London, pp 265–286
Kutsch W (1954) Ein arabisches Bruchstu¨ck aus Porphyrios (?) Perι
cυwZ˜ς, und die Frage des Verfassers der Theologie des Aristoteles.
Me´langes de l’Universite´ saint-Joseph 21:265–286
Lewis G (1949) A reexamination of the so-called Theology of Aristotle.
PhD Thesis, St. John Baptist College, Oxford
Merlan Ph (1963) Monopsychism, mysticism, metaconsciousness. Prob-
lems of the soul in the Neoaristotelian and Neoplatonic tradition.
M. Nijhoff, The Hague
Paret R (1959–1960) Notes bibliogaphiques sur quelques travaux re´cents
consacre´s aux premie`res traductions arabes d’œuvres grecques.
Byzantion 29–30:387–446
Peters FE (1979) The origins of Islamic Platonism: the school tradition.
In: Morewedge P (ed) Islamic philosophical theology. SUNY, Albany
(Studies in Islamic Philosophy and Science), pp 14–45
Pines S (1954) La Longue Recension de la The´ologie d’Aristote dans ses
rapports avec la doctrine ismae´lienne. Rev E´tudes Islam 22:7–20
Pines S (1971) Les textes arabes dits plotiniens et le courant ‘porphyrien’
dans le ne´oplatonisme grec. In: Le Ne´oplatonisme, Actes du Colloque
international du CNRS, Royaumont 9–13 Juin 1969, E´d du CNRS,
Paris, pp 301–317
Rose V (1883) review of Dieterici F, Die sogenannte Theologie des
Aristoteles aus dem Arabischen u¨bersetzt und mit Anmerkungen
versehen, Deutsche Literaturzeitung fu¨r Kritik der internationalen
Wissenschaft 4:843–846
Rizvi S (2007) (Neo) Platonism revived in the light of the Imams: Qadi Sa‘id
al-Qummi (d. AH 1107/AD 1696) and his reception of the Theologia
Aristotelis. In: Adamson P (ed) Classical Arabic philosophy: sources
and reception. The Warburg Institute, London, pp 176–207
Rosenthal F (1952–1955) Asˇ-Sˇayh˘ al-Yu¯na¯nı¯ and the Arabic Plotinus
source. Orientalia 21:461–492; 22:370–400; 24:42–65 (repr. in
Greek philosophy in the Arab world. A collection of essays, Greath
Yarmouth 1990)
Rosenthal F (1974) Plotinus in Islam: the power of anonymity. In: Plotino
e il Neoplatonismo in oriente e in occidente. Atti del convegno
internazionale Roma, 5–9 Ottobre 1970. Accademia Nazionale dei
Lincei, Roma, pp 437–446 (repr. in Greek Philosophy in the Arab
World)
Rowson EK (1992) The Theology of Aristotle and some other Pseudo-
Aristotelian texts reconsidered. J Am Orient Soc 112:478–484
Schwyzer H-R (1941) Die pseudoaristotelische Theologie und die Plotin-
Ausgabe des Porphyrios. Rheinisches Museum 90:216–236
Stern S (1961) Ibn H˙ asda¯y’s Neoplatonist. A Neoplatonic treatise and its
inﬂuence on Isaac Israeli and the longer version of the Theology of
Aristotle. Oriens. Zeitschrift der internationalen Gesellschaft fu¨r
Orientforschung 13–14:58–120
Taylor Th (1812) A dissertation on the philosophy of Aristotle in four
books. London 1812 (repr. Kessinger Publishing, 2003)
Taylor Th (1817) Instance of Arabian forgery. Classical J 15:279–286
Thillet P (1971) Indices porphyriens dans la The´ologie d’Aristote. In: Le
Ne´oplatonisme,
Actes
du
Colloque
international
du
CNRS,
Royaumont 9–13 Juin 1969, E´d du CNRS, Paris, pp 293–302
Thillet P (1992) Note sur la The´ologie d’Aristote. In: Porphyre, La Vie de
Plotin, II. E´tudes d’introduction, texte grec et traduction franc¸aise,
commentaire, notes comple´mentaires, bibliographie, par Brisson L,
Cherlonneix J-L, Goulet-Caze´ MO, Grmeck MD, Flamand J-M,
Matton S, O’Brien D, Pe´pin J, Saffrey HD, Segonds APh, Tardieu M,
Thillet P, Vrin, Paris (Histoire des Doctrines de l’Antiquite´ Classique,
16), pp 625–637
Treiger A (2007) Andrei Iakovlevic Borisov (1903–1942) and his studies of
medieval Arabic philosophy. Arabic Sci Phil 17:159–195
Vajda G (1951) Les notes d’Avicenne sur la The´ologie d’Aristote. Revue
Thomiste 59:346–406
Van Ess J (1965) Ju¨ngere orientalistische Literatur zur neuplatonischen
U¨ berlieferung im Bereich des Islam. In: Flasch K (ed) Parusia.
Studien zur Philosophie Platons und zur Problemgeschichte des
Platonismus. Festgabe fu¨r J. Hirschberger, Minerva, Frankfurt a.M.,
pp 333–350
Walzer R (1962) Platonismus in der islamischen Philosophie (arabische
U¨ bersetzungen aus dem Griechischen). In: Antike und Orient im
Mittelalter. Miscellanea Mediaevalia 1, de Gruyter, Berlin, pp 179–195
Zimmermann FW (1986) The origins of the so-called Theology of Aris-
totle. In: Kraye J, Ryan WF, Schmitt C-B (eds) Pseudo-Aristotle in the
Middle Ages. The Theology and other texts. The Warburg Institute,
London, pp 110–240
Zimmermann FW (1994) Proclus Arabus rides again. Arabic Sci Phil
4:9–51
Political Aristotelianism
CHRISTOPH FLU¨ ELER
Historische Hilfswissenschaften und Mittellatein
Universite´ de Fribourg
Fribourg
Switzerland
Abstract
Aristotle’s Politics has had a long and enduring inﬂuence
on political theory from the thirteenth century up to the
present (Horn and Neschke-Hentschke 2008). Medieval
reception began in the sixth decade of the thirteenth
century with the translation of the work from Greek into
1038 P
Political Aristotelianism

Latin by William of Moerbeke. In the period following this
successful transmission of the Aristotelian text, extensive
commentaries were written by well-known scholars such
as Thomas Aquinas, Albert the Great, and Peter of
Auvergne, demonstrating the interest of both religious
schools and universities in developing political philosophy
as an independent discipline and integrating it into their
curricula.
Thus the discipline of political science, or political
philosophy, came into existence in close conjunction with
the reception of the eight books of the Politics. The Politics
remained predominant in political theory in the Latin
West until the ﬁfteenth century, inﬂuencing numerous
commentaries and other literary genres, notably mirrors
for princes and tracts on the power of the pope, De
potestate papae (Miethke 2000). Political Aristotelianism,
however, is not limited to the reception of Aristotle’s
Politics, but involves a more complex understanding of
the entire body of Aristotelian works. In addition to the
foundation
laid
for
practical
philosophy
by
the
Nichomachean Ethics, the Rhetoric as well as the Metaphys-
ics and Aristotelian natural philosophy have inﬂuenced
medieval Aristotelian political philosophy (Lambertini
2004).
Reception
The reception of the Politics remains limited to the Latin
West. The work has left barely detectable traces in Byzan-
tine, Arab, or Jewish philosophical works. The Byzantine
philosopher Michael Ephesus (tenth century) left only
some notes regarding this work, and the existence of an
Aristotelian political philosophy naturally could not have
remained hidden from Averroes (d. 1198), indicating that
the work was not accessible in the Arab West. As a result,
the Byzantines, Arabs, and Jews were more likely to base
their arguments on Plato’s political philosophy, especially
the Republic, a work that was only available for direct study
in the West beginning in the early Quattrocento, when it
was translated by Italian humanists. William of Moerbeke
tracked down the Politics in Greece about 1260, at the
beginning of his translation efforts, and began by making
an incomplete translation of Books 1 through 2.11
(1254a–1273a30). A few years later, he turned again to
the Politics and was able to ﬁnish a complete translation of
the work by about 1265. This Flemish or northern French
translator used a word-for-word (verbum de verbo) trans-
lation method. Moerbeke markedly enriched the western
vocabulary for political terminology through his intro-
duction of numerous neologisms.
The ﬁrst commentaries on this version of the Politics
were written by the Dominican friars Thomas Aquinas
and Albert the Great. In addition, the Politics was added
to university curricula shortly after its translation.
According to a statement by Pierre Dubois, Siger of
Brabant is supposed to have disputed questions from
Aristotle’s Politics, including a defense of the primacy of
the law above even the most virtuous of human beings in
Pol. III.10 (1281b). The most inﬂuential commentaries at
the University of Paris were the two written by Peter of
Auvergne
(d.
1304).
His
Quaestiones
super
libros
politicorum, with its 126 questions on the ﬁrst seven
books, is without doubt a by-product of his teaching
responsibilities at the Faculty of Arts. Not only did the
questions prove exceptionally provocative of response
over time, clearly inﬂuencing all later political commen-
taries in question form until the ﬁfteenth century (Flu¨eler
1992), they also contain the ﬁrst transmission of university
debates on subjects in political science, as well as
a methodological foundation for practicing the discipline.
In addition to his questions on the Politics, Peter wrote
a literal commentary which, together with the incomplete
commentary by Thomas Aquinas, shaped reception of
the work through early modernity. Commentators of the
fourteenth century include scholars such as Guido
Vernani, Walter Burley, Nicholas Oresme, and Nicolas de
Waldemonte (ps. John Buridan), among others. During
the ﬁfteenth century Donatus Acciailoli, Guillelmus
Becchius Florentinus, Henricus Toke, Henricus Totting
de Oyta, Johannes Versoris, and Leonardus Bruni Aretini
wrote commentaries on the Politics, and there are numer-
ous anonymous works of this character. Although the
Politics did not belong to the group of works, such as the
Nichomachean Ethics for example, which were read year
after year at arts faculties, it does appear to have been
taught on a regular basis, as evidenced by the detailed
lecture plans of the University of Vienna (Flu¨eler
2004:135–138).
Development
On the most important points of Aristotelian political
philosophy (Horn 2008:1–19) medieval commentators
and authors generally follow Aristotle, though they
might set new accents or pose new questions that go
beyond the scope of Aristotle’s position. The question of
the epistemological status of the study of political science
is explicitly treated, in order to distinguish this ﬁeld of
study from others in terms of its subject matter, goal, and
intended purpose. Issues of nature and the basis of lord-
ship are more thoroughly examined than in Aristotle’s
own works, with the earliest receptions in the late thir-
teenth and early fourteenth centuries relying more on
metaphysical models (e.g., Peter of Auvergne, Thomas
Political Aristotelianism P
1039
P

Aquinas, Dante). These methodological questions are
based mainly on the ﬁrst book of the Politics and discuss
the general nature of lordship and servitude in connection
with Aristotle’s arguments concerning slavery. Monarchy
is considered the best form of rule by most authors, who
therefore generally misunderstand Aristotle’s carefully
nuanced opinions on the subject (Lambertini 2001; Ubl,
in Flu¨eler 2002).
Aristotle’s Politics inﬂuenced political discourse and
political language far beyond the scope of the commen-
taries, as demonstrated by Thomas Aquinas. Not only did
Aquinas treat the Politics explicitly in his commentary on
the work (1269–1271), but his mirror for princes, De regno
(1271–1273), written at the same time as the commentary
or slightly later, also could not have been written without
a knowledge of the Politics. The strength of the link
between the tradition of mirrors of princes and the recep-
tion of the Politics is also demonstrated by the De regimine
principum by Giles of Rome, which was famous for
presenting the fundamentals of Aristotelian political
thought in an understandable way. Even Dante still con-
sidered political science a new ﬁeld of study (Mon 1.1.5).
However, Dante’s main point of reference is not Aristotle’s
Politics, with which he was also familiar, but rather the
radical Aristotelians’ theory of the Intellect and Happi-
ness, which he attempted to translate into political theory.
Marsilius of Padua also utilized contemporary politi-
cal Aristotelianism (Defensor pacis I.16) in order to
address central questions of the time that could not
have been addressed by Aristotle (Defensor pacis I.1.3).
The question of the relationship between worldly and
spiritual power was never discussed by Aristotle but
could still be answered in a variety of ways using an
Aristotelian model.
See also: ▶Dante Alighieri ▶Giles of Rome ▶Marsilius of
Padua ▶Mirrors for Princes ▶Peter of Auvergne ▶Polit-
ical Philosophy ▶Thomas Aquinas, Political Thought
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Dante (2006) In: Shaw P (ed) Monarchia. Scholarly Digital Editions,
Birmingham
de Alvernia Petrus (1951) Scriptum super libros III–VIII politicorum. In:
Thomae Aquinatis S (ed) In libros politicorum Aristotelis expositio.
Marietti, Taurini, pp 141–438
de Aquino Thomae (1971) Sententia libri politicorum. In: Opera omnia,
vol XLVIII. Ad Sanctae Sabinae, Romae
de Aquino Thomae (1979) De regno. In: Opera omnia, vol XLII. Romae
de Waldemonte Nicolaus (ps. John Buridan) (1513) Quaestiones super
VIII libros politicorum. Paris (Repr. 1968)
Magnus Albertus (1891) Politica. In: Borgnet (ed) Opera omnia, vol VIII.
Parisiis
Oresme Nicole (1970) Le Livre de Politiques d’Aristote. Published from
the Text of the Avranches Manuscript 223. With a critical introduc-
tion and notes by A.D. Menut. Philadelphia
Scholz Richard (ed) (1933) Marsilii de Padua defensor pacis. Hahn,
Hannover
Secondary Sources
Biller P (2000) The measure of multitude. Population in medieval
thought. Oxford University Press, Oxford
Blythe J (2005) Ideal government and the mixed constitution in the
Middle Ages. University Press, Princeton
Flu¨eler Ch (1992) Rezeption und Interpretation der aristotelischen
Politica im spa¨ten Mittelalter. Gru¨ner, Amsterdam
Flu¨eler Ch (2002) The reception of Aristotle’s politics in the Middle Ages.
Vivarium 40:1–13
Flu¨eler Ch (2004) Ethica in Wien anno 1438. Die Kommentierung der
Aristotelischen Ethik an der Wiener Artistenfakulta¨t. In: Knapp FP,
Miethke J, Niesner M (eds) Schriften im Umkreis mitteleuropa¨ischer
Universita¨ten um 1400. Lateinische und volkssprachige Texte aus
Prag. Unterschiede, Gemeinsamkeiten, Wechselbeziehungen/Brill,
Wien und Heidelberg/Leiden, pp 92–138
Horn C, Neschke-Hentschke A (2008) Politischer Aristotelismus. Die
Rezeption der aristotelischen ‘‘Politik’’ von der Antike bis zum 19.
Metzler, Jahrhundert, Weimer
Lambertini R (2001) La monarchia prima della ‘‘Monarchia’’: le ragioni
del regnum nella ricezione medievale di Aristotele. In: Pinchard B,
Trottmann C (eds) Pour Dante. Dante et l’Apocalypse. Lectures
humanistes de Dante. Champion, Paris, pp 39–75
Lambertini R (2004) Politische Fragen und politische Terminologie in
mittelalterlichen
Kommentaren
zur
Ethica
Nicomachea.
In:
Kaufhold M (ed) Politische Reﬂexion in der Welt des spa¨ten
Mittelalters/Political thought in the age of scholasticism. Essays in
Honour of Ju¨rgen Miethke. Brill, Leiden, pp 109–127
Miethke J (2000) De potestate papae. Die pa¨pstliche Amtskompetenz im
Widerstreit der politischen Theorie von Thomas von Aquin bis
Wilhelm von Ockham. Mohr Siebeck, Tu¨bingen
Toste M (2007) Virtue and the city: the virtues of the ruler and the citizen
in the medieval reception of the ‘‘Politics’’. In: Bejczy IP, Nederman
CJ (eds) Princely virtues in the Middle Ages, 1200–1500. Brepols,
Turnhout, pp 75–100
Political Philosophy
ARTHUR STEPHEN MCGRADE
Department of Philosophy (Professor Emeritus)
University of Connecticut
Storrs, CT
USA
Abstract
This survey will be concerned almost entirely with the
Latin West. Other strands of medieval political thought
are discussed elsewhere in the volume in articles on Polit-
ical Philosophy, Byzantine; Political Philosophy, Arabic;
and Political Philosophy, Jewish. Here I consider ﬁrst the
1040 P
Political Philosophy

sources, historical contexts, and genres of medieval polit-
ical philosophy, then some major topics discussed and
positions taken on them.
Sources
Medieval political philosophy continues classical reﬂec-
tions, with the additional inﬂuence of Christianity. (The
relation of philosophy to religion here is the converse of
that in Islam. Christianity entered a Graeco-Roman world
that already had well-developed philosophical traditions,
with the result that Christian authors often sought to
justify or interpret their faith philosophically. In Islam,
religion preceded philosophy, and the task of justiﬁcation
fell to the devotees of the latter.) A third major class of
sources is law. Just as philosophy was in place when Chris-
tianity appeared, there was also a reﬁned legal culture to be
related to Christian ideas.
Philosophical Texts
The chief philosophical sources for political thought were
Plato and Neoplatonism; Stoicism and Cicero; and Aris-
totle (only a few of whose works were accessible to medi-
eval thinkers before the thirteenth century).
Plato and Neoplatonism
Only one of Plato’s dialogues was known in the Latin
Middle Ages, but much of his thought had been assimi-
lated by the church fathers, directly or through later Pla-
tonists. The realm of ideal being posited by Plato, more
real than, and a model for, the natural world, was the
background for all western philosophical thought through
the twelfth century. The most important part of this posi-
tion for politics was the vision of an ideal polity to which
all human beings should belong. Plato’s picture of the soul
as a bundle of appetites, inherently unordered until
constrained by a spirited element to obey reason also
exercised a pervasive inﬂuence.
Stoicism and Cicero
The Stoic idea of a cosmic rational principle (logos) was
also broadly inﬂuential. The most important aspect of this
for political thought was the conception of a natural law
valid independently of human legislation. On this basis,
personal moral integrity and devotion to one’s commu-
nity were championed by Cicero.
Aristotle
Although Aristotle’s Politics arrived late in the West, its
inﬂuence on political thought after 1250 was enormous.
Major features of the work were its critical and
comparative analysis of a wide range of political structures
and its presentation of these as outcomes of deliberate
human action. (It is unclear whether the Politics was
translated in medieval Islam.)
The Bible and Its Interpreters
It is difﬁcult to exaggerate the extent to which western
political thought during the Middle Ages and through the
seventeenth century is informed by the Christian Bible.
Politically Central Themes
The Scriptures are rich in social and political implications.
The peculiar dynamic of political thought in medieval
Christendom is set up most directly by contrasts between
scriptural passages of two kinds. On one hand are those
depicting Jesus’ love and humility; on the other are those
proclaiming his majesty as Son of God (‘‘the logos made
ﬂesh,’’ Christianity’s central addition to classical philoso-
phy) and his position as judge of the world and all its
inhabitants at the end of time.
The Church Fathers
The doctrine of the Incarnation was formally deﬁned in
fourth- and ﬁfth-century councils. In particular, Jesus was
held to unite in his person two natures, a divine and
a human. The meek and sacriﬁcially loving Jesus was
available as a human model for living under virtually any
political order. Jesus as God on earth could, however, serve
as a basis for claims to divine mission and commanding
authority by emperors, kings, or church leaders recog-
nized as representing him.
Later Exegetes
When Christianity came to be embraced by lay rulers,
their apologists could also appeal to Old Testament kings
as a model for royal or imperial control of both religious
and secular affairs. A biblically grounded contrary case was
made (most vigorously from the eleventh century
onward) for clerical – especially papal – jurisdiction over
all of life. A controversial twelfth-century exegesis of the
book of Revelation foretold a spiritual church not guided
in legal fashion by popes and bishops. In a related thir-
teenth-century reading, also controversial, the gospels
presented Christ and the apostles as legally completely
poor, without any earthly rights or authority.
Legal Sources
Medieval political thinkers drew on a variety of legal
sources.
Political Philosophy P
1041
P

Roman Law
The collections of laws promulgated in the early sixth
century by the Emperor Justinian I comprised much of
classical Roman law and also many laws for religion made
after the Empire’s ofﬁcial conversion to Christianity.
Medieval study and application of this body of civil law
(Corpus iuris civilis) began in the twelfth century and was
continuously reﬁned thereafter, peaking with the civilian
Commentators of the fourteenth century.
Feudal Law
The rules governing the personal relationships of ﬁdelity
and mutual obligation between superior and inferior cen-
tral to feudalism were only put into writing in the twelfth
century, when the institution itself was in decline. Given
its principles of consent and accountability, one should be
cautious about using the term ‘‘feudal’’ pejoratively.
Church Law
Besides deﬁning doctrine, general (ecumenical) and
regional church councils decided many disciplinary issues.
After the patristic period, the most important councils in
the West were those held under Charlemagne in the eighth
and ninth centuries and general councils called by popes,
such as the Third and Fourth Lateran Councils of 1179
and 1214. Beginning in the twelfth century, collections of
conciliar rules (canons) and other authoritative texts were
made. The most inﬂuential was Gratian of Bologna’s
Decretum (c. 1140). Later portions of the canon law
(Corpus iuris canonici) consisted of papal doctrinal state-
ments and decisions on practical matters. Each major
portion of the canon law was subjected to learned
commentary.
Contexts
Even the most all-embracing medieval political texts were
oriented toward speciﬁc historical situations. In the course
of a millennium, these contexts changed dramatically.
Imperial Disintegration (410–732)
The sack of Rome by the Visigoths in 410 was a milestone
in the collapse of the western Roman Empire. The last
western emperor died in 476, and although Germanic and
Frankish tribal chiefs who exercised power in this period
often sought formal acceptance from Byzantium, they
recognized no effective jurisdiction from the East after
the early sixth century. Elsewhere, Islam arose in Arabia,
came into enduring conﬂict with the eastern Empire, and
spread across north Africa and into Spain.
During this unorganized period, two developments
were signiﬁcant for political thought. One was the growth
of monasticism, especially in communities following the
Rule of Benedict of Nursia (c. 480–550), communities
which were sometimes inspiring examples of organization
and endurance. The monastic program of seeking God
through progress in humility also provided some coun-
terweight to other values driving political life in medieval
society.
A second development was the assertion of ecclesias-
tical independence from, or indeed superiority to, lay
rulers. The key term in later debates about papal power,
plenitudo potestatis (fullness of power), was used by Pope
Leo I, although not with regard to clerical–lay relations.
The most inﬂuential text was Pope Gelasius I’s rebuke in
494 of a Byzantine emperor for intervening in current
doctrinal conﬂicts:
"
There are two (Duo sunt) by which the world is chieﬂy
governed: the sacred authority of bishops and the royal
power. . .. Although you rule over the human race in
dignity. . . you understand that, according to the order of
religion, in what concerns the receiving and correct
administering of the heavenly sacraments you must be
subject rather than in command.
New Europe (732–1077)
Further Muslim advance into Europe from Spain was
halted by Charles Martel in 732 at the battle of Poitiers.
Charles’ grandson Charlemagne extended Frankish over-
lordship to much of present-day western Europe. Charle-
magne was crowned Roman emperor by Pope Leo III in
Rome on Christmas day 800. The political signiﬁcance of
this act came to be interpreted differently by popes and lay
rulers. Carolingian and later rule during this period was
theocratic, with the divinely favored emperor or king
taking a leading part in church affairs. At the same time,
clerical and, particularly, papal claims to superiority over
the laity were elaborated.
Reformation and Renaissance (1077–1215)
In 1077, the emperor Henry IV did brief penance for
resisting Pope Gregory VII’s measures for church reform.
Papal authority grew in both theory and practice during
the eleventh and twelfth centuries. In the version of
Gelasius’ Duo sunt that entered canon law, the clause
making clear that the emperor’s submission to bishops
referred only to sacraments was deleted, as was the clause
recognizing that the emperor ruled over the human race.
Indeed, Gregory VII claimed that only the pope was enti-
tled to the imperial insignia. The concept of positive law
was clearly articulated in this period, primarily in appli-
cation to papal legislation. The revival of Roman law
1042 P
Political Philosophy

studies provided some support for imperial authority, and
an anonymous Norman author defended royal authority
as sacred: the king is by nature a man but by grace
a christus, a God-man (Williams 1951), and lay political
structures became more complex on their own. All this
took place in the midst of economic progress and cultural
achievements properly termed a Renaissance, one some-
times credited with discovering the individual.
Enlightenment (1215–1302)
The recovery of Aristotle’s metaphysical, scientiﬁc, ethical,
and political texts, along with further development of
earlier medieval work in theology and legal studies, con-
tributed to a thirteenth-century intellectual assurance evi-
dent in the brilliance of university masters and jurists and
also in the educated individuals who advised or served the
powerful in politics and religion. In politics, this century
of enlightenment was a period of further development for
the kingdoms of England and France and of conﬂict
between powerful emperors and popes over the Italian
peninsula (with city-republics and duchies negotiating
their lives between them). In religion, Pope Innocent III
convoked the Fourth Lateran Council (1215) to promote
deeper Christianization of the laity. This program
included required annual confession of sins to a priest,
preaching and teaching by the clergy, and determined
prosecution of heresy. The new mendicant orders,
Dominicans and Franciscans, played key parts in these
measures. As examples of humble discipleship, the friars
represented a reaction against the commercialization of
traditional relationships and were accordingly preferred
by many as confessors. They were also leading intellectual
lights of the time and were heavily employed as agents of
the papal Inquisition.
Power and Poverty, Real and Verbal
(1302–1453)
Major contexts for political philosophy in the late Middle
Ages can be described in contrasts drawn between the real
and the ﬁctive or merely verbal. Civil lawyers, developing
an idea of Pope Innocent IV’s, distinguished the ﬁctive
legal personality of a political community (a kingdom,
say) from its real members when they attempted to
accommodate the de facto independence of kingdoms
such as England and France from the theoretically univer-
sal dominion of the Empire. Reasoning employed here
also found application to smaller communities, old and
newly formed. For example, a city that actually ran its own
affairs had a case for recognition as legitimately free,
a ruler to itself, a civitas sibi princeps.
A harsher distinction between real and verbal was
made by a henchman of the king of France, addressing
Pope Boniface VIII regarding his claims to supreme
authority in the bull Unam sanctam (1302): ‘‘Your power
is verbal, ours is real.’’ A little later, different assertions
of papal unreality were made by rebel Franciscans (includ-
ing William of Ockham) who accused John XXII of
heresy (hence of being a pseudo-pope) for denying the
total legal poverty of Christ and his apostles. John in turn
accused the friars themselves of practicing a merely ﬁctive
poverty. Other disputes about papal reality occurred dur-
ing the schism of 1378–1417, when as many as three
individuals at once claimed to be pope. The conciliar
movement managed to negotiate unity in the papacy,
but even with the rich resources of medieval corpora-
tion theory it remained unclear by the time of John
Torquemada’s Summa de ecclesia (1453) what, if any,
authority the body of the church had with respect to its
papal head.
Genres
Comprehensive Treatises
A number of medieval treatises set out a general view of
the political domain: Augustine of Hippo’s City of God,
John of Salisbury’s Policraticus, Thomas Aquinas’ On
Kingship to the King of Cyprus, Giles of Rome’s On the
Rule of Princes, Dante Alighieri’s Monarchia, Marsilius of
Padua’s Defender of Peace, the third part of William of
Ockham’s Dialogus, John Wyclif’s De civili dominio, and
several defenses of papal power.
Mirrors for Princes
Advice books to rulers were popular in the ninth and
twelfth to thirteenth centuries. Those of general signiﬁ-
cance include Bernard of Clairvaux’s On Consideration,
written to guide Bernard’s former student Pope Eugenius III,
and works by Aquinas and Giles of Rome mentioned
above. John of Salisbury’s Policraticus is a high-deﬁnition
mirror for both rulers and courtiers.
Commentaries on Aristotle
Commentaries on the Politics were of two types, literal
phrase-by-phrase explications, of which Thomas Aquinas’
is a good example for the portion of the work covered (to
1280a6), and commentaries in question form, of which
Albert the Great’s is a model of philosophical engagement,
posing and resolving objections to the Philosopher’s views
at every step. Peter of Auvergne wrote inﬂuential com-
mentaries of both types.
Political Philosophy P
1043
P

Sentence Commentaries and Other Theological
Treatises
Much important material for political philosophy is
embedded in theological treatises, such as commentaries
on Peter Lombard’s Sentences. Discussions of the sacra-
ment of penance could, for example, include material on
business ethics. The core of Thomas Aquinas’ political
thought is contained in his discussion of law beginning
at q. 90 of ST IaIIae, but his later treatments of charity,
justice, prudence, and the vices opposed to them are also
signiﬁcant.
Disputed and Quodlibetal Questions
The standard unit of scholastic discourse, the quaestio,
organized around arguments for and against a single
proposition, lent itself to discussion of political issues,
including hereditary as against elective monarchy and
the rule of law as against personal rule. A dialogue between
masters can sometimes be traced in their respective ques-
tions (McGrade et al 2001).
Topics
The nature and aims of politics as recognized in medieval
philosophical thought and the regimes proposed to
achieve these aims are sketched below to provide guidance
to fuller discussions elsewhere in this volume.
The Nature of Politics
The founding text of medieval political thought was
Augustine of Hippo’s On the City of God Against the
Pagans, written to refute the charge that abandoning the
old gods in favor of Christianity was responsible for the
sack of Rome in 410. According to Augustine, no human
being dominated any other in the state of innocence
described in Genesis. The pervasive fact of such domina-
tion in later times is due to Adam’s original sin of rebellion
against the rightful dominance of God. On this account all
politics is unnatural, for the essence of earthly empires,
kingdoms, cities, and even families is the control of some
by others. Relationships of dominance and subjection are
a punishment but also a partial remedy for loving self
more than God, since uncontrolled self-will would pro-
duce a world even worse than the one in which we ﬁnd
ourselves. Politics is a matter of damage control. Genuine
happiness, including freedom from our own drive for
domination, can come only by God’s grace, through
faith in Christ.
From this position, two approaches to political action
were taken, both involving the church. The more familiar
one, sometimes referred to as political Augustinism, was
to promote the power and authority of the church, pro-
vider of the means of grace. The other approach was to
minimize the church’s involvement in secular politics,
relying on its ministry to individuals for whatever ame-
lioration of civic life might be possible. Bernard of
Clairvaux exempliﬁes both approaches and the tension
between them by endorsing the principle that earthly
powers should act at the pope’s nod (nutum), while
entreating the pope to avoid immersion in secular
business.
Other approaches to politics, with less or in some cases
no discernible emphasis on human corruption, were taken
mainly in the later Middle Ages. Thomas Aquinas argued
for the naturalness of politics and the possibility of
nonexploitative forms of authority aimed at a genuine,
albeit not ultimate, this-worldly happiness. Marsilius of
Padua saw natural human desire for a ‘‘sufﬁcient’’ life as
the proper motive of political association and regarded
contemporary papal exercise of power as an unwholesome
disturbance of natural processes. For Marsilius, blessed-
ness in the next life was indeed to be had only by following
Christian teaching, but it was crucial that the clergy have
no coercive power to enforce their teaching.
Natural Norms
Commitment to some form of natural law or natural
rights was universal among medieval political thinkers,
but conceptions varied. Natural law was seen by some as
an instinct implanted by nature in humans and other
animals for their own well-being. Other thinkers, includ-
ing Thomas Aquinas and William of Ockham, connected
natural law with the capacity to grasp what actions are
intrinsically rational.
Two Latin expressions are ordinarily translated as
‘‘natural law’’: lex naturalis and ius naturale. Ius also had
two other senses. As ‘‘what is right’’ ius was the object or
objective of justice. In the sense of ‘‘a right’’ ius was
a power of action or control inhering in a bearer or subject.
The relation of this distinction to modern ideas of rights
has been much discussed in recent scholarship (Tierney
1997; Brett 1997).
Justice
Many lines of thought inﬂuenced medieval discussions of
justice, including Roman law, Ciceronian civic virtue, and
Aristotelian ethical and political analysis. Accepting the
Roman law deﬁnition of justice as a constant and perpet-
ual will to render each his due, Augustine of Hippo won-
dered how anyone could do this who did not render God
his due. The conclusion was often drawn that true justice
1044 P
Political Philosophy

could exist only in a Christian society. Even when the
legitimacy of non-Christian polities was conceded, the
possibility of giving equal political recognition to Chris-
tians and non-Christians was rarely even implied,
although William of Ockham suggested that since
believers and unbelievers had sometimes in the past lived
together in peaceful association (societas paciﬁca), a non-
Christian world ruler might be acceptable in future.
Francisco de Vitoria argued on scholastic grounds for
the political rights of the native Americans in the context
of Spanish conquests.
Peace
For Augustinians, peace, like justice, was a matter of right
order, ultimately in relation to God, a ‘‘tranquillity of
order’’ in which body, soul, and mind were subordinate
each to the next, and mind to God. Augustine also recog-
nized a useful but spiritually unquiet earthly peace based
on agreement about who was to rule and who obey. The
peace defended by Marsilius of Padua, though earthly, was
also deﬁned by tranquillity, one arising from the temper-
ate functioning of all parts of a community.
Common Good
Since for Aristotle the aim of political association is not
simply life but the good life, his conception of the com-
mon good could readily be used to give earthly politics
a morally and culturally elevated dimension and to
encourage civic virtue. The idea of the common good
was carried further in the identiﬁcation of God as the
common good of the universe (Kempshall 1999).
Property and Poverty
Some authors held that private property, like government,
was a result of sin, while others argued that property was
a reasonable and in that sense natural institution and
would have arisen even without sin. In either case, issues
about the use of material things needed to be addressed,
and in an increasingly complex society this led to signiﬁ-
cant economic thought. Controversy about the Franciscan
ideal of poverty, a life free of legal rights, involved funda-
mental questions about natural rights.
Coercion
Christians served in the Roman army as early as the second
century, but serious discussion of the moral issues
involved in warfare began with Augustine of Hippo,
who was cited as an authority throughout numerous
later discussions of just war. Spreading Christianity to
non-Christian territories came not to be acceptable in
itself as a justiﬁcation for war. Defense of orthodoxy
against heresy or schism was, however, especially from
the twelfth century.
Regimes
Medieval thinkers discussed a variety of governmental
arrangements as means for achieving the aims just
outlined.
Monarchy: Papal, Imperial, Royal
Of all medieval monarchies, that of the papacy was most
elaborately defended, both in the canon law and commen-
taries thereon and in a series of more systematic works by
fourteenth- and ﬁfteenth-century authors: Giles of Rome,
James of Viterbo, Augustine of Ancona, and John Torque-
mada. Papal apologists – hierocrats or curialists – did not
seek to abolish lay structures of government in favor of
direct papal administration, but the plenitudo potestatis
claimed for the pope included superiority over all human
law and ultimate jurisdiction over all other rulers, clerical
or lay.
The critics of unrestricted papal power defended other
regimes as complements to or replacements for papal
authority. The favored candidate for Dante Alighieri, Mar-
silius of Padua (at times), and William of Ockham was the
Roman Empire. The Empire’s legitimacy at the time of
Christ was important to all three of these thinkers. For
Dante the ﬁnal aim of imperial rule was fulﬁllment of
humanity’s intellectual potential in a global civilization.
Marsilius and Ockham assigned more modest aims to
temporal government, but for Marsilius the achievement
of communal tranquillity required that all coercive power
be vested in a single civil government or principate. This
entailed that in a Christian community the civil ruler’s
ecclesiastical authority would be as great as that exercised
by emperors in any earlier century. As against Marsilius’
monism, Ockham presented the argument that the best
regime was compatible with the existence of jurisdictions
independent of the supreme secular authority.
Other critics of curialism, such as John of Paris and
John Wyclif, were oriented toward royal regimes. John of
Paris, like Ockham, was a dualist. Wyclif gave the civil
ruler an important negative religious function, that of
compelling Christian clergy to live modestly, following
the example of Christ and his apostles.
Kingship was also commended by authors who
believed in at least the moral subordination of civil to
spiritual authority. In John of Salisbury’s organic model
of society, the princely head is an earthly image of the
divine majesty, while yet being a minister of the priestly
Political Philosophy P
1045
P

soul of the community. In the treatise Thomas Aquinas
wrote for the king of Cyprus, kings are responsible for the
moral well-being of their subjects, but for salvation it is
necessary that every individual be subject to the Roman
pontiff. In Giles of Rome’s treatise on kingship, the king is
to be the source of law and an inspiring model of personal
virtue for all his subjects, but Giles’ On Ecclesiastical Power
is an emphatic declaration of papal supremacy.
Republicanism
Ptolemy of Lucca considered a ‘‘political’’ or republican
government the only one ﬁt for a virtuous people. Marsil-
ius of Padua proposed discussion involving the whole
citizenry as the best way to produce satisfactory laws and
viable government. Constitutionalist ideas were developed
with regard to the church in the conciliar movement of the
late fourteenth and ﬁfteenth centuries.
The Mixed Constitution
Serious consideration was given by late medieval Aristo-
telians to the mixed constitution of Politics 1297a6 (Blythe
1992). Traditional emphasis on the rule of law made by
a representative body gave England a government that
could be expounded by John Fortescue as both royal and
political.
The Variability of Legitimate Regimes
Many authors, including Thomas Aquinas, held that dif-
ferent secular regimes were appropriate for different peo-
ples and circumstances. Ptolemy of Lucca strongly favored
a republican regime for a freedom-loving people but
thought monarchy, which he equated with despotism,
necessary in most cases. Marsilius of Padua held that the
broadly participatory deliberative process mentioned
above could result in the citizenry’s establishing any of
a number of types of government. In the circumstances of
his day he was prepared to delegate even the community’s
own proper function as supreme human legislator to
a single individual, the Roman emperor. William of
Ockham developed the position that monarchy was ordi-
narily the best regime for both temporal affairs and the
church, but that circumstances might occasionally require
other forms of government – and that although the papal
headship of the church had been instituted by Christ it was
nevertheless beneﬁcial (expediens) for the community of
the faithful to have power to change the church’s govern-
ment from monarchic to aristocratic, at least temporarily.
Resistance
Tyranny was regularly deplored by medieval authors and
tyrannicide occasionally deemed licit. In most secular
contexts, power was sufﬁciently diffused to allow some
party to claim authority on behalf of the community to
correct a faulty ruler. William of Ockham used the biblical
idea of ‘‘fraternal correction’’ as a basis for resistance to
what he regarded as heresy on the part of John XXII. There
was also, however, a tradition holding that bad rulers were
divine punishment for the sins of the people.
Conclusion
Past research in medieval political thought has revealed
signiﬁcant continuities with modern thought. Recent
work on the idea of natural rights is a striking example.
More such continuities will certainly be found through
further study of major texts and exploration of the large
body of quodlibetal and disputed questions. Much
can also be learned from aspects of the Middle Ages
that are less prominent today or until recently have
seemed entirely archaic. For example, a study of medieval
monastic rules from the perspective of political philoso-
phy could be of scholarly and human interest. More
urgently, today’s ‘‘radical Islam’’ directs attention to
issues of religion and politics that were central to the
radical Christianity of twelfth- and thirteenth-century
Europe – with its Crusades, popular religious move-
ments, Inquisition, papal–imperial conﬂicts, and per-
sonal spirituality. A more nuanced appreciation of the
struggles over such issues at that time might give a better
sense of how they present themselves to many Muslims
and others today.
See also: ▶Albert the Great ▶Augustine of Ancona
▶Bernard of Clairvaux ▶Canon Law ▶Cicero in
Political Philosophy ▶Civil (Roman) Law ▶Conciliarism
▶Contemplative Happiness and Civic Virtue ▶Corpora-
tion Theory ▶Dante Alighieri ▶Economic Thought in
the Middle Ages ▶Feudal Law ▶Francisco de Vitoria
▶Giles of Rome, Political Thought ▶Guido Terreni
▶Heresy ▶Inquisition ▶Jacques Almain ▶James of
Viterbo
▶Jesuit
Political
Thought
▶John
Calvin,
Political Thought ▶John Fortescue ▶John of Paris
▶John of Salisbury ▶John Torquemada ▶John Wyclif
▶Marsilius
of
Padua
▶Martin
Luther,
Political
Thought ▶Mirrors for Princes ▶Natural Law ▶Natural
Rights
▶Nicholas
of
Cusa
▶Peter
of
Auvergne
▶Platonism
▶Political
Aristotelianism
▶Poverty
▶Ptolemy of Lucca ▶Reason of State ▶Remigio dei
Girolami ▶Roman Empire ▶Thomas Aquinas, Political
Thought ▶Toleration ▶Tyranny ▶Universities and
Philosophy ▶War (Just War, Holy War) ▶William of
Ockham
1046 P
Political Philosophy

Bibliography
Primary Sources
For Primary Sources, see the articles on authors and topics cross-
referenced above.
Secondary Sources
The studies listed below cover broader subjects or are useful in other ways:
Black A (1992) Political thought in Europe 1250–1450. Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, Cambridge
Blythe JM (1992) Ideal government and the mixed constitution in the
Middle Ages. Princeton University Press, Princeton
Brett AS (1997) Liberty, right and nature: individual rights in later
scholastic thought. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Burns JH (ed) (1988) The Cambridge history of medieval political
thought c. 350–c. 1400. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Burns JH (1992) Lordship, kingship, and empire: the idea of monarchy
1400–1525. Clarendon Press, Oxford/New York
Canning JP (1996) A history of medieval political thought 300–1450.
Routledge, London
Canning JP, Oexle OG (eds) (1998) Political thought and the realities of
power in the Middle Ages. Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, Go¨ttingen
Carlyle RW, Carlyle AJ (1903–1936) A history of medieval political
theory in the West, 6 vols. W. Blackwood and Sons, Edinburgh/
London
Cochrane CN (1940) Christianity and classical culture: a study of thought
and action from Augustus to Augustine. Clarendon, Oxford
Coleman J (2000) A history of political thought from the Middle Ages to
the Renaissance. Blackwell, Oxford
de Lagarde G (1934–1970) La naissance de l’esprit laı¨que au de´clin du
moyen aˆge, 1st edn, 6 vols; new edn, 5 vols. E. Nauwalaerts/Presses
Universitaires de France, Louvain/Paris
Gewirth A (1951) Marsilius of Padua: the defender of peace, vol I:
Marsilius of Padua and medieval political philosophy. Columbia
University Press, New York
Gierke O (1900) Political theories of the Middle Ages, trans. Maitland FW.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Gilson E´ (1952) Les me´tamorphoses de la Cite´ de Dieu. Publications
Universitaires de Louvain/Librairie Philosophique J. Vrin, Louvain/
Paris
Kantorowicz EH (1957) The king’s two bodies: a study in mediaeval
political theology. Princeton University Press, Princeton
Kempshall MS (1999) The common good in late medieval political
thought. Clarendon, Oxford
McGrade AS (1990) Ethics and politics as practical sciences. Acta
Philosophica Fennica 48:198–220
McGrade AS, Kilcullen J, Kempshall M (eds) (2001) The Cambridge
translations of medieval philosophical texts, vol 2: Ethics and polit-
ical philosophy. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Moore RI (1987) The formation of a persecuting society: authority and
deviance in western Europe 950–1250. Blackwell, Malden/Oxford
Nederman C (2004) Body politics: the diversiﬁcation of organic meta-
phors in the later Middle Ages. Pensiero politico medievale 2:59–87
O’Donovan O, O’Donovan JL (eds) (1999) From Irenaeus to Grotius:
a sourcebook in Christian political thought. Eerdmans, Grand
Rapids/Cambridge
Tierney B (1997) The idea of natural rights: studies on natural rights,
natural law, and Church law 1150–1625. Eerdmans, Grand Rapids/
Cambridge
Ullmann W (1961) Principles of government and politics in the Middle
Ages. Methuen, London
Ullmann W (1962) The growth of papal government in the Middle Ages,
2nd edn. Methuen, London
Williams GH (1951) The Norman anonymous of 1100 AD: toward the
identiﬁcation and evaluation of the so-called anonymous of York.
Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts
Political Philosophy, Arabic
CHARLES E. BUTTERWORTH
Department of Government and Politics
University of Maryland
College Park, MD
USA
Abstract
Political philosophy, the attempt to replace opinion about
political affairs by knowledge, arises in the medieval Ara-
bic–Islamic tradition of the Middle East with al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯
(870–950) and ends with Averroes (1126–1198). Two
important ﬁgures precede al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ – al-Kindı¯ (Abu¯
Yu¯suf Yaʿqu¯b ibn Ish:a¯q al-Kindı¯, died 866) and al-Razı¯
(Abu¯ Bakr Muh:ammad ibn Zakariyya¯ al-Ra¯zı¯, 864–925),
but neither engages in political philosophy. Al-Kindı¯,
acclaimed ‘‘the philosopher of the Arabs,’’ was renowned
for his excursions into Greek, Persian, and Indian wisdom
and for his detailed knowledge of astronomy. Although
some of his writings contain the germs of a political teach-
ing, he is primarily interested in ethics and accepts the
milieu in which we live as a ﬁxed variable, something not
worth trying to alter. Al-Razı¯ sees the philosophic life as
‘‘making oneself similar to God. . . to the extent possible
for a human being’’ and prescribes for human conduct
with that goal in mind. He discerns that one who aspires to
philosophy must focus on things such as gaining
a livelihood, acquisition, expenditure, and seeking ruler-
ship, but goes no further. That is, he never investigates
how ethics, household management, and political rule are
related or even what they comprise and contents himself
with speaking of political rule in ethical terms.
Moreover, as the following narrative reveals, Arabic
political philosophy does not develop in a unilinear fash-
ion. There is a dialogue of sorts between those who con-
tribute to it, in that later philosophers refer to their
predecessors explicitly as well as indirectly. And there is
constant tension about the relationship between reason
and revelation, with some thinkers almost blurring the
two while others keep them ﬁrmly distinct. Finally,
although there is a brief ﬂicker of the philosophic ﬂame
Political Philosophy, Arabic P
1047
P

coming back to life with Ibn Khaldu¯n (1332–1406), it is all
too short-lived.
Abu¯ Nas:r Muh:ammad ibn Muh:ammad ibn T˙arkha¯n ibn
Awzalagh al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ was born in about 870 either in
Kazakhstan or Turkestan. He arrived in Baghdad after
890. Around 942, political upheavals forced him to Aleppo,
then Egypt, and ﬁnally Damascus, where he died in 950.
Widely acclaimed ‘‘the second teacher,’’ that is, second after
Aristotle, al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ founded the Arabic–Islamic political
philosophy insofar as the fact that he is the ﬁrst to explore
the challenge revealed religion presents to traditional phi-
losophy in its claim that the creator provides for human
well-being by means of an inspired prophet–legislator.
He does so by showing that the political science of
Plato and Aristotle with its traditional separation between
practical and theoretical knowledge no longer sufﬁces for
the radically new situation created by revealed religion.
That older political science can identify the actions and
ways of life needed for sound political rule to ﬂourish, but
is silent about opinions – especially the theoretical opin-
ions set forth in religion – and thus unable to identify the
kind of rulership needed now that religion holds sway. Nor
can it speak about the opinions or actions addressed by the
jurisprudence and theology of revealed religion. These
tasks require a political science bringing theoretical and
practical science together along with prudence and show-
ing how to order them in the soul of the ruler.
Al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s new political science presents religious
beliefs as opinions and acts of worship as actions. For
him, both are prescribed for a community by a supreme
ruler or prophet. His new political science views religion as
centered in a political community whose supreme ruler
appears to be identical with the founder of a religion.
Indeed, the goals and prescriptions of the supreme ruler
are those of the prophet law-giver. Everything said or done
by this supreme ruler ﬁnds justiﬁcation in philosophy, and
religion thus depends on theoretical as well as practical
philosophy. Similarly, by presenting the art of jurispru-
dence as a means to identify particular details the supreme
ruler failed to regulate before his death, al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ makes it
depend upon practical philosophy and thus to be part of
this broader political science.
His new political science offers a comprehensive view
of the universe and identiﬁes the practical acumen per-
mitting the one who possesses this understanding, either
the supreme ruler or a successor endowed with his qual-
ities, to rule wisely. Able to explain the various ranks of all
the beings, this political science also stresses the impor-
tance of religion for uniting the citizens and for helping
them attain the virtues that prolong decent political life.
Al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ thereby reaches to the core of revealed religion
and presents it as consonant with the best understanding
of the philosophy set forth by Plato and Aristotle. Politics
is central to the proper human life because only in a well-
ordered regime can people pursue their true end or pur-
pose – ultimate happiness or perfection.
Abu¯ ʿAlı¯ al-H˙ usayn ibn Sı¯na¯ or Avicenna was born in
Afshana in 980. His family soon moved to nearby Bukha¯ra¯
where he began his studies. After the Qurʾa¯n and related
literature, he pursued mathematics, Islamic jurisprudence,
and philosophy. Avicenna served as an administrator for
the local ruler and as jurist for, and advisor to, other minor
rulers. He also managed the affairs of the widows of rulers
and served as physician to Shams al-Dawla, the Buyid
prince of Hamadha¯n and Qirmisin – being named his
chief minister or vizier on two occasions. Despite his
engagement in politics, Avicenna composed no compre-
hensive treatise on the subject.
In the ﬁrst chapter of the introductory volume to his
famous Healing, Avicenna explains the general order of the
whole work. After the part on logic is another part devoted
to natural science. It is followed by a third part about
mathematics, and the whole compendium concludes
with Avicenna’s explanation of the divisions and aspects
of metaphysics. He says nothing about practical philoso-
phy or science until the very end of his discussion of
metaphysics or divine science. As he puts it, his ‘‘summary
of the science of ethics and of politics’’ is placed there ‘‘until
I compose a separate, comprehensive book about them.’’
Avicenna’s fuller teaching reveals, however, that ethical
and political science belong after divine science intrinsi-
cally and not provisionally. The human manifestation of
divine science and its practical proof, they testify to divine
providence for humankind and thus to the truth of reve-
lation more clearly than any of the other sciences investi-
gated in the Healing. Because the correctness of what they
teach can also be veriﬁed by Aristotelian or pagan reason-
ing processes, Avicenna elucidates the relationship he dis-
cerns between pagan philosophy and the revelation
accorded the Prophet Muh:ammad. His description of
Plato’s Laws as a treatise on prophetic law-giving indicates
how interrelated he deems philosophy and revelation.
Moreover, in elucidating the political aspects of prophecy
and divine law, he addresses the most fundamental polit-
ical questions: the nature of law, purpose of political
community, need for sound moral life, importance of
providing for divorce as well as marriage, conditions for
just war, considerations that lay behind penal laws, and the
end of human life. Although he is silent about the origin of
private property as well as how future successors to the
prophet–lawgiver might be raised so that they will have
1048 P
Political Philosophy, Arabic

moral habits and character traits suitable to such
a position, he provides the basic principles for readers to
pursue these issues on their own.
Differently stated, Avicenna’s political teaching pro-
vides an introduction to the fundamentals of political
science, but does not make political life central to human
well-being. His prophet dwells on beliefs having no imme-
diate political relevance. Indeed, some are antipolitical or
ascetic, as though the highest goal toward which thoughtful
humans should strive is to weaken the ties between the soul
and their body thereby achieving separation from the body.
Thus, the great turn toward political philosophy initiated
by al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ is ignored and even obscured by Avicenna.
After Avicenna, philosophy moves West to Andalusia.
The ﬁrst to come to light there is Abu¯ Bakr Muh:ammad
ibn Yah:ya¯ ibn al-S˙a¯’ig˙ or Ibn Ba¯jja. Born in Saragossa
between 1085 and 1090, he escaped political turmoil ﬁrst
in Granada and then Seville, serving as chief minister or
vizier to local governors loyal to the Almoravid dynasty in
both cities. He died in Fez in 1139.
Ibn Ba¯jja is highly praised by his successors for his
promise, but also blamed for having allowed diversions to
distract him from his writing. Important as are his trea-
tises on music, astronomy, logic, natural science, meta-
physics, and even al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s logical writings. Of greater
interest here is his focus on the solitary – the individual
whose intellectual and moral qualities put him at odds
with the dominant opinions in imperfect regimes. Ibn
Ba¯jja pursues the theme in his Regimen of the Solitary,
comparing this exceptional individual to a weed in that
he comes on his own to form correct opinions about the
world and how to live as a human being that are in sharp
contrast with the false, unsound opinions of his own city as
well as of most other cities in existence at any time. He
ﬂourishes in spite of his surroundings, developing into
a specimen distinct from those dominant in his own milieu.
Ibn Ba¯jja reaches back to Plato and the Republic to
establish the importance of the subject. He grounds his
account in what al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ has said about the tensions
arising for those possessed of sound opinions and charac-
ter as they interact with the dominant opinions and role
models. Precisely because the best solution – bringing into
being a perfect city that provides education suitable for all
the citizens – is not likely, perhaps not even possible, Ibn
Ba¯jja focuses on the individual who manages to arrive at
a proper understanding of the universe and the goal of
human beings within it. That is, he indicates what that
understanding should be and suggests obliquely how it
differs from the opinions and actions all too evident in
actual regimes. But Ibn Ba¯jja never indicates how the
solitary
individual
is
to
be
formed
or
governed.
Suggestions about the way the universe is to be intellectu-
ally apprehended and the soul of one who arrives at such
an apprehension notwithstanding, the account remains
too imprecise and inconclusive to offer the guidance for
which Ibn Ba¯jja so whets readers’ appetites.
In this respect, he unwittingly contributes to the intel-
lectual tension introduced by Avicenna. Rooted as his
enterprise is in the educational task of Plato’s Republic
and of al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s larger political teaching, Ibn Bajja’s
attention to the spiritual forms encourages those who
would like to link philosophy – especially political philos-
ophy – with religious and metaphysical themes. Indeed,
Ibn Ba¯jja contributes so to that nonrational perspective
that his immediate successor, Ibn T˙ufayl, deems it neces-
sary to restate the history of philosophy within Islam so as
to redress the balance.
Abu¯ Bakr Muh:ammad ibn ʿAbd al-Malik ibn T˙ufayl al-
Qaysı¯ was born in Guadix, not far from Granada, in 1110.
Reputed for his learning in philosophy, jurisprudence, the-
ology, and logic, as well as natural science, he gained the
favor of the Almohade ruler, Abu¯ Yaʿqu¯b Yu¯suf, whom he
served for many years as a political advisor and physician.
Only his philosophical novel, H˙ ayy ibn Yaqz˙a¯n (Alive, Son
of Awake), has survived. He died in Marrakesh in 1185.
In the philosophical introduction to that work, Ibn
T˙ufayl focuses on the relationship between the rational
acquisition of knowledge and the path to it pursued by
those who favor mysticism or Suﬁsm. The work itself
consists of three major parts. In the introduction, Ibn
T˙ufayl explains his reasons for writing a book such as
this and provides a general critique of philosophy, theol-
ogy, and mysticism within the Arab world at his time. It is
followed by the story of H˙ ayy and by a formal conclusion
in which Ibn T˙ufayl returns to the main theme of the work.
The tale is a response to a request that he unfold, what
he knows ‘‘of the secrets of the Oriental wisdom mentioned
by the master, the chief, Abu¯ ʿAlı¯ ibn Sı¯na¯.’’ H˙ ayy is either
self-generated from a lump of clay or comes into being as do
all humans but has been put into the sea in a basket because
his mother, the sister of a very proud monarch, wedded
beneath her status in secret, and feared for the fruit of this
union should her brother learn of H˙ ayy’s existence. How-
ever generated, he grows up on a deserted island, nursed by
a doe until he can fend for himself. During seven periods of
seven years each, he discovers his natural surroundings and
the way they interact, ascending by a series of basic induc-
tive reasoning to an understanding of physics and its many
divisions as well as mathematics and its parts. He also gains
insight into the nature of the heavenly bodies and into the
character of the creator as well as of his messenger and
prophet, Muh:ammad.
Political Philosophy, Arabic P
1049
P

Not until he encounters Asa¯l, the inhabitant of
a neighboring island who is discontent with the way his
fellow citizens practice religion, does H˙ ayy learn to speak.
The two return to Asa¯l’s island intent upon showing peo-
ple the correct path, but fail miserably. Intelligent as each
is, neither has any awareness of how to speak to human
beings whose primary concerns are the securing of basic
needs and then the enjoyment of pleasant respite. Only
Salama¯n, a friend of Asa¯l’s who discerns that most people
cannot appreciate the truths H˙ ayy wishes them to grasp
but is content to let them ﬂounder, understands the limits
of human reason. His complacent disinterest in the well-
being of his fellow citizens bafﬂes H˙ ayy and Asa¯l, to be
sure. But it also deprives them of the possibility of learning
about a law-giver’s and prophet’s greatest skill: being able
to persuade others of his vision.
The tale ends with H˙ ayy and Asa¯l deciding to return to
their desert island in order to spend their remaining
days meditating about divine matters. A reader who has
followed the narration through to the end may discern how
important it is for those who know or are somehow
inspired to be able to communicate their insights to others.
Unless those who understand the way things are also have
a sound grasp of rhetoric, they will never be able to help
others elevate their thoughts and achieve a better politi-
cal order. Through this delightful tale, then, Ibn T˙ufayl
reminds the reader of al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s account of the ﬁrst ruler
as prophet as well as law-giver and philosopher.
Abu¯ l-Walı¯d Muh:ammad ibn Ah:mad ibn Muh:ammad
ibn Rushd or Averroes, as he is more commonly known in
the West, is renowned for his intellectual excellence and
profound accomplishments in jurisprudence, medicine,
poetry, philosophy, natural science, theology, and, above
all, for his commentaries on Aristotle. He was born in
Cordoba in 1126. The most important event in Averroes’
life must be his presentation by Ibn T˙ufayl to Abu¯ Yaʿqu¯b
as the person most qualiﬁed to undertake the task of com-
menting on Aristotle’s works. While engaged in those
commentaries, he served as a judge, was the personal phy-
sician to Abu¯ Yaʿqu¯b, and composed treatises on topics of
more immediate concern to fellow Muslims, most notably,
the Decisive Treatise. Later, accused of being overly occu-
pied with philosophy and ‘‘the sciences of the ancients,’’ he
was banished for two years. Shortly after returning to favor
at the court in Marrakesh, he died in 1198.
In the Decisive Treatise, he investigates the relationship
between philosophy and divine law and, more pointedly,
the important role of prophecy. Central to the argument
set forth there is Averroes’ clear sense of the limits of
reason and need to speak to people in language they
understand – precisely what H˙ ayy and Asa¯l lacked.
Referring to a famous Qurʾa¯nic passage (16:125), he
notes that most scholars agree upon the need to address
people with different levels of learning in ways suitable to
them just as the Qurʾa¯n recommends. It is because religion,
like politics, must take the whole citizen body into account
that different kinds of speech and even different kinds of
practices are justiﬁed. Moreover, those who would deny
that the revealed law works in such a manner put the
citizenry into danger. By explaining complicated matters
of faith to those not able to follow the reasoning, these
would-be teachers lead the less gifted into confusion and
frequently into disbelief.
For Averroes, there is a major danger in using dialectic
or demonstration to address those who can comprehend
only preaching or rhetoric. On the grounds that the law-
giver, that is, the prophet, is similar to a physician – the
lawgiver caring for souls and the physician for bodies –
Averroes draws the practical consequences. First, such
misguided teachers are doing little more than telling the
populace not to heed the ministrations of the physician.
Indeed, such teachers drive the people away from the one
individual who can help them recover the health of their
soul and preserve it from future sicknesses. The goal of the
lawgiver or prophet is not to make the people physicians,
but to teach them the basic fundamentals with respect to
the all-important health of their soul. For such an under-
taking, there is no need to fret about the intricacies of the
revealed book. The surface teaching sufﬁces. That is what
Averroes seeks to safeguard through his defense of rhetoric
and the surface understanding of Scripture.
This is the core teaching of the Decisive Treatise,
a writing for which Averroes apologizes but that he felt
compelled to write in order to overcome the terrible strife
between the proponents of religion and those of philoso-
phy then prevalent. It is prompted by his own broad
understanding of the complexity of the human soul tem-
pered by a peculiar sense of what is needed for sound
political life. In this manner, he brings philosophy and
religion together even as he reinforces the central focus of
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s political teaching.
In sum, Arabic political philosophy is best characterized
as political philosophy within the medieval Arabic–Islamic
tradition. As such, its major concern is the relation-
ship between reason and revelation – especially as it is
manifested in the act of law-giving. That in turn leads to
inquiry into the larger question of prophecy and of what
qualiﬁes a human being to become a law-giving prophet.
See also: ▶Abu¯ Bakr al-Ra¯zı¯, Muh:ammad ibn Zakarı¯ya¯ʾ
(Rhazes) ▶al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, Abu¯ Nas˙r ▶Ibn Ba¯jja, Abu¯ Bakr ibn
al-Sa¯ʾig˙
(Avempace)
▶Ibn
Khaldu¯n,
Abu¯
Zayd
1050 P
Political Philosophy, Arabic

ʿAbdarrah˙ma¯n ▶Ibn Rushd, Muh˙ammad ibn Ah˙mad al-
H˙ afı¯d (Averroes) ▶Ibn Sı¯na¯, Abu¯ ʿAlı¯ (Avicenna) ▶Ibn
T˙ufayl, Abu¯ Bakr (Abubacer) ▶al-Kindı¯, Abu¯ Yu¯suf
Yaʿqu¯b
ibn
Ish:a¯q
▶Moses
Maimonides
▶Political
Philosophy
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Averroes (1974) Averroes on Plato’s ‘‘Republic’’, trans. Lerner R. Cornell
University Press, Ithaca
Averroes (2001) Averroe¨s, the book of the decisive treatise: determining
the connection between the law and wisdom, and epistle dedicatory,
trans. with intro and notes: Butterworth CE. Brigham Young Uni-
versity Press, Provo
Averroes (2002) Averroe`s (Ibn Rusˇd). Commentaire moyen a` la
Rhe´torique d’Aristote, 3 vols, ed. and trans. Aouad M. Vrin, Paris
Avicenna (1908) Fı¯ Aqsa¯m al-‘ulu¯m al-‘aqliyya (On the divisions of the
rational sciences). In: Tis‘ Rasa¯’il (Nine epistles). Cairo, pp 104–118
Avicenna (1960) Kita¯b al-Shifa¯’, al-Ila¯hiyya¯t (book of the healing: divine
sciences), ed. Anawati G, Zayid S. al-Hai’a al-‘A¯mma li Shu’u¯n al-
Mat:a¯bi‘ al-Amı¯riyya, Cairo
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ (2001a) Alfarabi, the political writings: ‘‘Selected Aphorisms’’
and other texts, ed. and trans. with an intro: Butterworth CE. Cornell
University Press, Ithaca
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ (2001b) Attainment of happiness. In: Alfarabi, philosophy of
Plato and Aristotle, trans. with an intro: Muhsin Mahdi. Cornell
University Press, Ithaca
Ibn T˙ufayl (1995) H˙ ayy ibn Yaqz˙a¯n, trans. Goodman LE. Gee Tee Bee,
New York
al-Kindı¯ (2002) The epistle of Ya‘qu¯b ibn Ish:a¯q al-Kindı¯ on the device for
dispelling sorrows, trans. Jayyusi-Lehn G. Br J Middle Eastern Stud
29(2):121–135
al-Razı¯ (1993) Abu¯ Bakr Muh:ammad Ibn Zakariyya¯ al-Ra¯zı¯: the book of
the philosophic life, trans. Butterworth CE. Interpretation 20(3)
(Spring):227–236
Secondary Sources
Mahdi M (2001) Alfarabi and the foundation of Islamic political philos-
ophy: essays in interpretation. University of Chicago Press, Chicago
Political Philosophy, Byzantine
IVAN CHRISTOV
Faculty of Theology
University of Soﬁa
Soﬁa
Bulgaria
Abstract
Byzantine political philosophy (BPP), in general, is
a reﬂection on the political practices and the nature of
the empire, on the divine origin of emperorship, on the
hierarchical order of imperial government, civil ranks, and
the community of Christian states, under the guidance of
the Byzantine Emperor. In a more particular sense, it is
a reﬂection that goes further and comments on its own
foundations in Christian metaphysics, epistemology, and
axiology. This second approach to the BPP is rather prob-
lematic because of the scarce textual evidence. The Byzan-
tines felt not much need to theorize, taking for granted
that their empire is a gift from God. It was usual in that
time to impose the general theological and philosophical
modes of thought on political thought, not taking into
account their sophisticated interaction with facts. Thus,
the BPP tended to be just a part of the imperial ideology.
The founder of BPP was admittedly Eusebius of Cesarea
(c. 263–339). He adapted in Christian terms the Roman
and Hellenistic idea of emperorship as an image of the
kingship of Zeus and originated the Byzantine conception
of the divine origin of imperial government. Eusebius’
reﬂections laid the intellectual basis of Byzantine theoc-
racy and due to their inﬂuence on the church fathers and
historians, they gained immense importance both in the
East and in the West. The later BPP was rather fragmentary
and consisted mainly of advice to the emperors. It took the
literary form of ‘‘Mirrors for Princes,’’ providing samples
of rhetorical speech, diplomacy, and court ﬂattery, far
from originality. The main sources we have about the
BPP within this genre are the works by the deacon
Agapetos; Patriarch Photios; Theophylact, Archbishop of
Ochrid; Kekaumenos; Nikephoros Blemmydes; and John
Apokaukos, Bishop of Naupact.
The Empire
According to the BPP, the Byzantine Empire was consid-
ered a terrestrial image of the kingdom of God, and the
emperor was seen as God’s vicegerent or viceroy on earth.
This put the reﬂections on the empire in an eschatological
context and made them an essential part of the Christian
Philosophy of history. The Byzantine Empire was ‘‘a cho-
sen vessel’’ for the salvation of the human race and
a realization of Divine Providence. It conveyed the plan
of salvation, bringing to completion the highest achieve-
ments of mankind, providentially granted to Jews,
Hellenes, and Romans. Among the most important of
them were the universal form of state and the universal
language. It was the Roman Empire that for the ﬁrst time
brought the whole human race together in one unity and
agreement, imposing legislation and a state constitution of
more than a regional or national importance. Due to its
might, it participated in the Majesty of the Kingdom of
God, for it transcended, as far as an earthly realm could,
every other power on earth. According to the conception
of translatio imperii, the Byzantine Empire was considered
Political Philosophy, Byzantine P
1051
P

a successor of the Roman Empire, its capital Constantino-
ple was titled ‘‘New Rome,’’ and the Byzantines called
themselves ‘‘Romans’’ (rho¯maioi). The Greek language of
the Byzantine Empire was another gift by the Divine
Providence to complete its universal nature. Greek not
only expresses the spiritual and cultural heritage of
Hellenes, but what is more important – this is the language
of the Christian ke¯rugma, the language conveying the way
to salvation. Therefore, the Byzantine Empire has embod-
ied the two great powers that came forth to civilize and
unite the whole world – the monarchy of the Roman
Empire and the teaching of Christ. The capital Constanti-
nople was also called the ‘‘Queen of Cities’’ and the ‘‘New
Jerusalem.’’ It was considered as both a political and reli-
gious center of the Christian world. Constantinople was
hailed in hymns and stimulated the emergence of a par-
ticular literary genre of the Laudes Constantinopolitanae.
The Emperor
Being a reﬂection of the Kingdom of God on earth, the
empire should mirror the hierarchical order of heaven,
stemming from one Supreme Being. It could only have
one sovereign, as there is only one God. It is on these
grounds that the monarchy was considered the best form
of government. Presided by the emperor, it should ensure
universal peace, justice, and unity of faith, binding in the
entire human race in hierarchical order. United by the
Byzantine Empire, humankind should become ‘‘one
ﬂock with one Shepherd.’’ The BPP took the pagan con-
cept of the god-emperor and transformed it into Christian
terms as a ‘‘Vicar of Christ’’ and ‘‘Chosen of God,’’ both
granting the divine origin of his sovereignty and opposing
pagan pantheism. This is the reason behind the ambiguous
stance of the emperor. On the one hand, he had absolute
power insofar as he was bound to be a proper image of the
Almighty God, but on the other he was granted his powers
not by nature but by grace. This gave a Christian nuance to
the ancient conception on the elective nature of monarchy,
moderating its absolutist claims. The Byzantine Emperor
could be dethroned by the persons who had formally
elected him (this actually happened to 43 of the emperors)
and the people of Byzantium were granted the right to
mutiny against their sovereign.
The Political Practices
According to the BPP, the emperor was chosen and guided
by the Logos of God. That is why he was considered the
only source of order and stability in Byzantine society. The
Byzantine Emperor was the source of law, both human
and divine. His privileged position was expressed by the
formula of the ‘‘animated law’’ (nomos empsychos). The
law was personiﬁed in the institution of the emperor.
It was through him that God ensured direct control over
the human law. On the one hand, this led BPP to inter-
pretations on behalf of the thesis that he (like the Roman
emperor) is above law, but on the other hand, it was taken
to mean his prerogatives to make corrections in the oth-
erwise inﬂexible law, with a view to greater humanity. The
ﬁrst stance put stress on the theocratic tendencies in the
institution of the emperor. It was evoked to represent
Christ in the political as well as in the mystical life of the
Byzantines. According to their proximity to the sacred
person of the emperor, there was a hierarchical order of
ranks and all of them were subjected to the custom of
prostration. The Byzantine court was famous for its cere-
monies, aimed at the mystical gloriﬁcation of the emperor.
The emperor also represented Christ at many church
celebrations and customs such as to invite 12 guests to
a meal on Christmas Day and to wash the feet of 12 poor
men from the street. He was considered the upholder of
the church law and order. Without his signature, the
decrees of church councils were not valid. Being the
defender of the church and the canons, the emperor reg-
ulated the hierarchy of the Church and defended the
decrees of the councils. Yet the sacred position of the
emperor did not endow him with an absolute power
over the Church and the society. The theological distinc-
tion of grace and nature reﬂected on the distinction the
Byzantines made between the institution of the emperor
and the emperor as a person. The divine origin of the
institution remained unquestioned, while the emperor
himself had to meet some moral and political require-
ments to be elected for this position. The legal right of
mutiny against the emperor (admitted in western political
thought much later in thirteenth to fourteenth century),
the practice of dethroning an emperor, excommunication,
and even of anathemizing the emperor by the patriarch
served as a warranty against the claims of the person on
the throne to interpret the prerogatives of his institution,
given by the grace of God, in terms of natural law. That is
why there was a kind of a social contract in Byzantine
society as well as implicit harmony and cooperation
between emperor and patriarch, between state and church.
The Community of Christian States
The concept of the universal nature of Byzantine Empire
and its divine origin led to the idea that it is the sole
legitimate empire on earth. The Byzantines believed that
their state was chosen to fulﬁll Divine Providence and they
never admitted the existence of another. Insofar as this
contradicted the political reality, they could only recognize
other states, developing the ideology of the granting of
privileges and royal insignia by the Byzantine Emperor.
1052 P
Political Philosophy, Byzantine

‘‘The Byzantine hierarchy of states’’ according to this
theory, was a hierarchically dependent community, based
on the level of their kings’ kindred relation to the Byzan-
tine Emperor. Even the pragmatism of the late Byzantine
emperors could not help them in their quest for western
help against the Ottoman Turks to properly surpass the
limitations of this ideology. This ﬁnally led to the fall of
Byzantium
and
destroyed
the
theoretical
illusions,
cherished by the BPP about the empire as an almighty
reﬂection of the majesty of the Kingdom of Christ that will
remain unconquered until the ﬁnal consummation.
See also: ▶Mirrors for Princes ▶Nikephoros Blemmydes
▶Philosophical
Theology,
Byzantine
▶Photios
of
Constantinople ▶Political Philosophy
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Agapetus CP Diaconus (1865) Expositio capitum admonitorium, per
partitiones adornata. PG t. LXXXVI.1, coll. 1164A–1186B, Paris
Barker Ernest (1957) Social and political thought in Byzantium from
Justinian I to the Last Palaeologus. Clarendon Press, Oxford
Blemmydes Nikephoros (1906) Andrias basilikos. Studien zu den
griechischen Fu¨rstenspiegeln, vol I. Program Maximians-Gymnasium,
Mu¨nchen
Eusebius (1902) Tricennelia, ed. I. Heikel. Eusebius Werke, vol I, (GCS 7),
pp I–XVIII, J. C. Hinrichs, Leipzig
Kekaumenos (1896) Strategicon et incerti scriptoris de ofﬁciis regiis
libelus. In: Vasilievskij B, Jernstedt V (eds) Zapiski Istoriko-
ﬁlologicheskogo
Fakul’teta
Imperatorskogo
Peterburgskogo
universiteta. Tipograﬁja B. S. Balasheva i Co, Sankt-Peterburg
Magister Thomas (1865) Oratio de regis ofﬁcii ad Andronicum II
Palaeologum. PG t. CXLV, coll. 448A–500D, Paris
O’Meara Dominic, Schamp Jacques (eds) (2006) Miroirs de prince de
l’Empire roman au IVe sie`cle. Academic/Editions du Cerf, Friburg/
Paris
Photios (1983) Ep. 1, Michaeli principi Bulgarorum. Photii Patriarchae
Constantinopolitani Epistula et Amphilochia, vol I: Epistolarum
pars prima, 1–39. Teubner, Leipzig
Theophylactus
(1864)
Bulgariae
arciepiscopus
Institutio
regia ad
Porphyrogenitum Constantinum. PG t. CXXVI, coll. 253A–288B, Paris
Secondary Sources
Anastos M (1978) Byzantine political theory: its classical precedents and
legal embodiment. In: Vryonis Sp Jr (ed) The Past in medieval and
modern Greek culture. Byzantina kai Metabyzantina 1. Undena,
Malibu, pp 13–53
Angelov D (2007) Imperial ideology and political thought in Byzantium
1204–1330. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Beck H-G (1970) Res Publica Romana. Vom Staatsdenken der Byzantiner.
Bayerische Akademie der Wissenschaften, philosoph-historische
Klasse,
Sitzungsberichte,
2.
Bayerische
Akademie
der
Wissenschaften, Mu¨nchen
Beck
H-G
(1981)
Nomos,
Kanon
und
Staatsraison
in
Byzanz.
O¨ sterreichische
Akademie
der
Wissenschaften,
philosoph-
historische Klasse, Sitzungsberichte, 384. O¨ sterreichische Akademie
der Wissenschaften, Wien
Cameron A (1983) Eusebius of Caesarea and the rethinking of history. In:
Gabba E (ed) Tria Corda. Scritti in onore di Arnaldo Momigliano.
Biblioteca di Athenaeum 1. New Press, Como, pp 71–88
Do¨llger F (1953) Byzanz und die europa¨ische Staatenwelt. Ausgewa¨hlte
Vortra¨ge und Aufsa¨tze. Buch-Kunstverlag, Ettal
Dvornik F (1966) Early Christian and Byzantine political philosophy.
Origins and background, vol 1–2. The Dumbarton Oaks Center for
Byzantine Studies, Washington
Gadolin A (1970) A theory of history and society. With special reference
to the Chronographia of Michael Psellos; 11th century Byzantium.
Stockholm studies in the history of literature 11. Almquist & Wiksell,
Stockholm/Go¨teborg/Uppsala
Hunger H (1982) State and society in Byzantium. Proc R Ir Acad
82C:197–209
Karagiannopoulos IE (1970) E¯ politike¯ theo¯ria to¯n Byzantino¯n. Byzantina
2:39–61
Nicol DM (20076) Byzantine political thought. The Cambridge history of
medieval political thought, c. 350–c. 1450. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, pp 51–87
Obolensky D (1971) The Byzantine commonwealth. Eastern Europe,
500–1453. Weidenfeld and Nicolson, London
Ostrogorsky G (1956) The Byzantine Empire and the hierarchical world
order. Slavon East European Rev 35:1–14
Runciman S (1977) The Byzantine theocracy. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge
Treitinger O (1938) Die ostro¨mische Kaiser- und Reichsidee nach ihrer
Gestalttung im ho¨ﬁschen Zeremoniel. Vom ostro¨mischen Staats-
und Reichsgedanken. W. Bierdermann, Jena
Political Philosophy, Jewish
ABRAHAM MELAMED
Department of Jewish History and Thought
University of Haifa
Haifa
Israel
Abstract
Medieval Jewish political philosophy is the outcome of the
encounter between Jewish political theology, based on
biblical and rabbinic literature, on the one hand, and
Greek political philosophy, notably Platonic, on the
other. Jewish scholars encountered the Platonic heritage
through Arabic translations, summaries, and commentar-
ies of The Republic and The Laws, produced between the
tenth and late twelfth centuries by Muslim scholars, nota-
bly al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, Ibn Ba¯jja, and Averroes. The political aspects
of the Hebrew Bible and rabbinic literature were now
interpreted in the prism of these inﬂuences. The Hebrew
prophet was identiﬁed with the Platonic active philoso-
pher; the Jewish king and king-messiah were described in
terms of the Platonic philosopher-king, and the reign of
Solomon, which will be reestablished with the coming of
Political Philosophy, Jewish P
1053
P

the messiah, was described as an ideal Platonic state,
reinterpreted in theological terms.
Biblical and rabbinic literature deals with temporal polit-
ical issues in various contexts. However, while these
canonical texts have a clear position in the sphere of
political theology, they do not contain any political phi-
losophy in the strict ‘‘Greek’’ sense of the term. Distinct
Jewish political thought appears only when biblical and
rabbinic political theology encounter Greek political phi-
losophy. The ﬁrst encounter, an isolated instance, takes
place in the Hellenistic period, when Philo of Alexandria
describes the leadership of Moses in terms of the Platonic-
Philosopher-King. Philo, however, although he inﬂuenced
Christian thought deeply, was completely unknown in
Jewish culture until the Renaissance, thus his political
thinking was irrelevant in their cultural world.
Like medieval Jewish philosophy as a whole, medieval
Jewish political philosophy is the outcome of the great
encounter between Jewish culture, as it evolved in biblical
and rabbinic literature, on the one hand, and the heritage of
Greek science and philosophy as transmitted to medieval
culture through the great Arabic translation enterprise of
the eighth to tenth centuries CE, on the other. This includes
Arabic translations, paraphrases of and commentaries on
the main Greek political writings, notably Plato, by Muslim
scholars such as al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, Ibn Ba¯jja, and Averroes. Like
Jewish philosophy as a whole, political philosophy too
strived to cope with this loaded encounter in varied ways.
Political theology deals with the political signiﬁcance
and implications of divine revelation, as manifested in the
canonical writings of every monotheistic faith. Political
philosophy, as ﬁrst formulated in the writings of Plato and
Aristotle, deals with the essence of every human society,
the basic principles and purpose of its existence. The
medieval monotheistic cultures: Judaism, Christianity,
and Islam, inherit the Greek political heritage.
Their differences of opinion and consequently the
difference in the manner they use the inheritance are in
the realm of political theology. There is considerable
agreement between Judaism and Islam on the one hand
and an essential difference between both of them and
Christianity on the other, a result of the historically dif-
ferent circumstances in which each religion evolved. The
worldview manifest in the Jewish Halakhah or Muslim
sharı¯‘a is essentially holistic; the law encompasses both
temporal and spiritual aspects of human existence. Chris-
tianity, on the other hand, differentiated between the two
swords, temporal and spiritual, and consequently sepa-
rated the practical political realm from the spiritual, which
was deemed superior, a-political and supra-political in
essence. Judaism and Islam focused on the political charac-
teristics of their respective revelations, conceived to be a
divine law, bestowed upon the human association through
the prophet–messenger, depicted also as a legislator and
political leader. Consequently, the main issues of religious
thought, such as the divine attributes, the purpose of the
Torah, the nature of revelation and prophecy and the
essence of supreme human perfection, all became political.
These essential differences also dictated the literary
genres of political writing and the classical texts they made
use of. As a result of the separation between the temporal
and the spiritual, medieval Christian thinkers could also
separate political from general philosophic–theological
thought, and develop a distinct political literature. In Jewish
culture, we can not ﬁnd even one treatise dedicated specif-
ically to politics in the narrow meaning of the term. Due to
the particular nature of Jewish political theology, its political
discussions always appears in halakhik contexts such as
Maimonides’ Code, or his three introductions to the Com-
mentary on the Mishnah, and within the general theo-
philosophic discussions, such as Saadia Gaon’s Book of
Doctrine and Beliefs, Judah Halevi’s Kuzari, Maimonides’
Guide of the Perplexed, Joseph Albo’s Book of Roots, Isaac
Abravanel’s Commentary on the Bible, and many others.
That led in the past to the conclusion that no political
discussion of any signiﬁcance and originality is to be
found in the history of Jewish thought. This imagined
state of affairs is explained by the apparent lack of rele-
vance of the political arena for the Jews, who throughout
most of their history lacked political independence and
lived in exile. Both assumption and conclusion, however,
are erroneous. Only when scholars started to seek the
sources in their particular Jewish background, and not
from an external Christian vantage point that is irrelevant
for them, was the rich reservoir of medieval Jewish polit-
ical thought discovered, and became a legitimate ﬁeld in
the study of the history of Jewish philosophy.
The difference in political theology also dictates the
Greek political tradition upon which religious traditions
chose to base themselves. Medieval Christian political
thought is massively based upon Aristotle’s Politics.
The Aristotelian political discussion, which considered
political issues separately from their general philosophical
context, is well suited to the dualistic Christian worldview
that distinguishes the temporal from the spiritual. Western
Christian scholars were completely unacquainted with the
Platonic political tradition until the Italian Renaissance.
In Muslim culture, and accordingly in medieval Jewish
thought, however, the situation was in effect the reverse.
Their political thought is massively inﬂuenced by Plato’s
Republic and the Laws, with modiﬁcations from the
1054 P
Political Philosophy, Jewish

Aristotelian Nicomachean Ethics, in their Arabic transla-
tions, paraphrases, and commentaries, later translated
into Hebrew, most importantly Averroes’ Commentary
on Plato’s Republic. Although in all other branches of
philosophy and science Muslim and Jewish scholars are
massively based upon the Aristotelian tradition, the text of
the Politics never reached them, although they knew of it.
The ﬁrst direct quotation from the Politics in a Jewish text
appears in Albos’ Book of Roots, already toward the mid-
ﬁfteenth century. Their political thought was massively
based upon the Republic, which well suited the holistic
framework of the Jewish and Muslim political theologies.
Political discussions appear already in the earliest
medieval Jewish theo-philosophic works, since the tenth
century CE, such as Saadia Gaon’s Book of Beliefs and
Opinions, Halevi’s Kuzari, and Abraham ibn Daud’s Book
of Exalted Faith. The ultimate fruit of these encounters is
Maimonides’ Guide, composed in the late twelfth century.
Maimonides created the full synthesis between the Pla-
tonic philosopher-king and the biblical prophet, who is
identiﬁed, following al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, as a philosopher and polit-
ical leader. As in other branches of medieval Jewish phi-
losophy, in political philosophy as well, Maimonides
constitutes the apex of these developments. Consequently,
he also creates the term of reference for subsequent Jewish
thinkers up to early modern times. Maimonides’ point of
departure
is
the
Aristotelian
assertion
(in
the
Nichomachean Ethics, not the Politics!) that man is
a political animal by nature (Guide II, 40; III, 27). One
can only survive and provide for one’s essential material
needs in an organized society, which is also essential for
the fulﬁllment of his ultimate intellectual perfection,
which is the knowledge of God.
To create and maintain the proper political organiza-
tion, law is needed, with authority to implement and
enforce it. A unique feature in Maimonides’ presentation
of the Mosaic prophecy is Moses’ role as the ﬁrst lawgiver,
who conveyed the revealed Torah to the people of Israel
(Guide II, 39). The superiority of the Torah over all other
(human) law is manifest both in its origin and scope. Its
divine origin means that the Torah will always offer sound
guidance for avoiding evil and doing good. Human law is
capable at best of approximating it. Further, while the
scope of divine law is all-inclusive and covers the material,
social and spiritual aspects of human existence, human
law refers only to the (inferior) material and social spheres
(Guide II, 40; III, 27–28).
If the Torah is a revealed divine law, then the prophet,
whether as lawgiver (Moses) or one who exhorts the
people and their rulers to obey the law (all other proph-
ets), becomes a political leader. The prophet is ﬁrst of all
a philosopher, who knows God’s attributes of action, the
only divine attributes humanly knowable. The knowledge
of these attributes is also the most relevant for the fulﬁll-
ment of his political duties. Having the knowledge, he
must also practice what he has learned by attempting to
imitate God through leadership of human society. Thus
the governance of the state becomes a microcosmic reﬂec-
tion of the way God rules the universe by loving-kindness,
judgment, and righteousness (Guide I, 54; III, 53–54).
While the Aristotelian tradition emphasizes the theoretical
knowledge of God, the Platonic–Farabian and Jewish tra-
ditions emphasize practical imitation of divine attributes.
Maimonides oscillates between the philosopher’s urge as
a private person to isolate himself in his intellectual activ-
ities, and his duty as a ‘‘public prophet,’’ to fulﬁll his
educational and political mission. Like (the Socratic) Jer-
emiah, Maimonides struggles as a philosopher and com-
munal leader between Ibn Ba¯jja’s inclination toward
intellectual governance of the solitary individual, and the
Platonic–Farabian – and very Jewish – emphasis on social
involvement (Guide III, 51, 54). Ultimately, he opts for
social involvement. Dialectically, the very one who has
reached the state where he can exist in complete intellec-
tual isolation is obliged to engage massively in political
life. In platonic terms, he who sees the light of the sun
must return to the darkness of the cave and educate its
ignorant dwellers and save their souls. In Maimonidean
terms, he who reached the uppermost rungs of the ladder
attainable to humanity is compelled to descend in order
to govern and educate the common people (Guide I, 15).
Likewise, Moses ascends Mount Sinai only to descend
and lead the people to the Promised Land (Guide III, 22).
Also the king-messiah is described by Maimonides as
a philosopher-king. The perfect political community
established by Moses and reaching its climax with the
reign of Solomon, will be reestablished with the coming
of the king-messiah, son of David, who will again create
a perfect Platonic type state in the land of Israel.
Maimonides political philosophy, the issues it raised
and the opinions it offers became the point of departure
for all subsequent Jewish thinkers. The debate about the
political functions of the philosopher–prophet became
a bone of contention in future generations. Some continue
the Platonic–Farabian–Maimonidean emphasis on the
prophet’s political mission. Others insist upon his intel-
lectual isolation. While most Jewish thinkers, albeit hesi-
tantly, accepted limited monarchy either as a perfect
regime or the lesser evil, Abravanel stands in almost iso-
lated opposition, insisting upon the inequities of monar-
chy and advocating a republican theocracy (Commentary
of Deuteronomy 17 and I Samuel 8). Likewise, in sharp
Political Philosophy, Jewish P
1055
P

contrast to the Maimonidean system, Abravanel describes
both humanity’s original state and the messianic era in
starkly antipolitical terms. All these thinkers continue to
be based on the Platonic–Farabian–Averroist political
terms of reference well in the Renaissance. Christian-
Scholastic and Aristotelian political philosophy barely
inﬂuenced them, although the centers of Jewish culture
gradually shifted from the Muslim to the Christian-Latin
cultural environment since the late twelfth century. This
state of affairs was the direct outcome of the holistic nature
of Jewish political theology.
See also: ▶Arabic Philosophical Texts, Jewish Translation
of ▶Aristotelianism in the Greek, Latin, Syriac, Arabic,
and Hebrew Traditions ▶Aristotle, Arabic ▶Ethics, Jew-
ish ▶al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, Abu¯ Nas˙r ▶Greek Texts Translated into
Hebrew ▶Ibn Ba¯jja, Abu¯ Bakr ibn al-Sa¯ʾig˙ (Avempace)
▶Ibn Rushd, Muh˙ammad ibn Ah˙mad al-H˙ afı¯d (Averroes)
▶Judah Halevi ▶Moses Maimonides ▶Philosophy,
Jewish ▶Plato, Arabic ▶Political Philosophy ▶Political
Philosophy, Arabic ▶Saadia Gaon
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Abravanel Isaac (1997–2007) In: Shutland A (ed) (Hebrew) Commentary
on the Torah, 5 vols. Horev, Jerusalem
Albo Joseph (1929) Book of roots. In: Husik I (ed, trans, and notes)
Hebrew text and English translation, 5 vols. Jewish Publication
Society, Philadelphia
Anatoli Jacob (1866) The Goad of the students (Hebrew). Mekizei
Nirdamim, Lyck
Averroes (1969) Averroes’ commentary on Plato’s Republic. In: Rosenthal
EIJ (ed, trans, intro and notes) Hebrew text and English translation.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Gaon Sa’adia (1967) The book of beliefs and opinions (trans: Rosenblatt
S). Yale University Press, New Haven
Halevi Judah (1998) The Kuzari: in defence of the faith (trans and annot:
Korobkin ND). J. Aronson, Northvale
Maimonides (1963) The guide of the perplexed, 2 vols (ed, trans, intro
and notes: Pines Sh and intro essay: Strauss L). Chicago University
Press, Chicago
Maimonides (1975) Commentary on the Mishnah, introduction to Seder
Zeraim (trans: Rosner F). Feldhaim, New York
Nissim of Gerona (2003) In: Feldman AI (ed) Twelve sermons (Hebrew).
Ha’Rav Kook Institute, Jerusalem
Polkar Isaac (1984) In: Levinger Y (ed) The defense of the law (Hebrew).
Tel Aviv University Press, Tel Aviv
Secondary Sources
Berman L (1967) Greek into Hebrew: Samuel ben Judah of Marseilles,
fourteenth century philosopher and translator. In: Altmann A (ed)
Jewish medieval and renaissance studies. Harvard University Press,
Cambridge, pp 289–320
Berman L (1980) Maimonides on the fall of man. AJS Rev 5:1–15
Funkenstein A (1977) Maimonides: political theory and realistic Messia-
nism. Miscellanea Medievalia. Berlin/New York, pp 81–103
Kreisel H (1999) Maimonides’ political thought. SUNY Press, Albany
Lerner R (1964) Natural law in Albo’s book of roots. In: Cropsey J
(ed) Ancients and moderns. Basic Books, New York, pp 132–147
Melamed A (2003) The philosopher–king in medieval and renaissance
Jewish political thought. SUNY Press, Albany
Melamed A (2005) Is there a Jewish political philosophy? – the medieval
case re-considered. Hebr Polit Stud 1:24–56
Pines Sh (1988) The limitations of human knowledge according to Al
Farabi, Ibn Bajja and Maimonides. In: Twersky I (ed) Studies in
medieval Jewish history and literature, vol 1. Harvard University
Press, Cambridge, pp 91–121
Ravitzki A (1990) Kings and laws in late medieval Jewish thought (Nissim
of Gerona vs. Isaac Abravanel). In: Landman L (ed) Scholars and
scholarship: the interaction between Judaism and other cultures.
Yeshiva University Press, New York, pp 67–90
Rosenthal EIJ (1966) Torah and Nomos in medieval Jewish philosophy.
In: Loewe R (ed) Studies in rationalism, Judaism and universalism
in Honour of L. Roth. Routhledge and Kegan Paul, London,
pp 215–230
Strauss L (1988) Philosophy and law (trans: Baumann F, with an intro:
Lerner R). Jewish Publication Society, Philadelphia
Porphyry, Arabic
CRISTINA D’ANCONA
Dipartimento di Filosoﬁa
Universita` di Pisa
Pisa
Italy
Abstract
The author of the Isagoge, Porphyry was ﬁrst and foremost
seen as an authoritative commentator of Aristotle by his
Arab readers. Following in the footsteps of Ammonius and
his school in Alexandria, also in the Arabic-speaking
world the Isagoge was placed at the beginning of the
Organon, and has been incessantly commented upon in
medieval Arabic philosophy. The Alexandrian tradition
also disseminated the topic, ultimately derived from
Porphyry, of the harmony between Plato and Aristotle.
Some works other than the Isagoge were known to
some extent in the Arabic-speaking world but Porphyry’s
name is linked ﬁrst and foremost to the logical corpus of
Aristotle, and only secondarily to other parts of the corpus
(Physics, Nicomachean Ethics). Porphyry was also known
as the ‘‘commentator’’ of the spurious Theology (in fact,
Plotinus’ Enneads).
Biobibliographical Information in the Arabic
Sources
The K. al-Fihrist by Ibn al-Nadı¯m has an entry on Por-
phyry and refers to the entry on Aristotle for additional
1056 P
Porphyry, Arabic

information on his works; the subsequent biobiblio-
graphies depend upon the Fihrist, even though on one
speciﬁc issue two of them include further data. The
biobibliographical accounts on Porphyry in the Arabic
sources have been translated into various languages by
Bidez (1913:54∗–60∗), (all the main sources), Smith
(1993:8–11), and Adamson (2007) (the account in the
K. al-Fihrist), and have been analyzed time and again
(Mu¨ller 1882:24–30; Steinschneider 1889:97–99; Ga¨tje
1971:76–79; Segonds 1982:169–176), but a synopsis of
the overlaps and differences among the Arabic surveys
will be useful here. The main Arabic sources are the fol-
lowing (in chronological order): K. al-Fihrist, p. 253.12–18
Flu¨gel [=F] to which the information given in the entry on
Aristotle should also be added (see below); Ibn al-Qift:ı¯’s
Tarikh al-h:ukama¯’, p. 256.13–257.9 Lippert [=Q]; Ibn Abı¯
Usaybi‘a’s ‘Uyu¯n al-anba¯’ fı¯ t:abaqa¯t al-at:ibba¯’, p. 24 Mu¨ller
[=IAU]; Barhebraeus’ Ta’rı¯kh mukhtas:ar al-duwal, I, p. 84
(Latin); II, p. 133 (Arabic) [=B]; H˙ ajjı¯ Khalı¯fa’s Kashf al-
Z˙unu¯n, vol VII, n 7,331 [=K]; to them, Casiri’s Bibliotheca,
I, pp 185–186 [=C] can be added (on these sources, see the
bibliography below; in particular on the K. al-Fihrist, see
the entry on Translations from Greek into Arabic in this
volume). It will appear from the synopsis below that the
K. al-Fihrist forms the basis of all the subsequent accounts,
even though Q and B seem to have had access to additional
information, partly reﬂected in the much later biblio-
graphical survey by K. As for C, he relies on Q and B, as
the author himself says.
Porphyry’s Life and Philosophical Affiliation
According to the Arabic sources, Porphyry came from
Tyre, Syria (F, Q, IAU, B, K, C); his lifetime was after
Alexander (F) and Galen (F, Q) but before Ammonius
(F, C). He lived under the emperor Diocletianus (B) and
was a renowned and subtle commentator of Aristotle’s
works (F, Q, B, C). Indeed, Q (followed by K and C)
expands this bit of information, describing how, in
Porphyry’s time, people bafﬂed by the difﬁculty of
Aristotle’s books addressed to him the request of
commenting upon them; Porphyry replied that Aristotle’s
system of science was too difﬁcult to be understood with-
out an introduction, and he wrote the Isagoge in order to
comply with the request; the Isagoge was then placed before
Aristotle’s writings (p. 257.3–4 Lippert), a story which is
clearly reminiscent of Ammonius’ commentary on the
Isagoge (p. 22.12–23 Busse), and is repeated also in other
Alexandrian commentaries (e.g., Elias; on the Neoplatonic
exegesis of Aristotle’s logical corpus in Alexandria, see
Hadot 1987, 1991, 1992; on the inﬂuence of this tradition
in the Arab world, see Hein 1985). B mentions also the
name of Chrysaorius – the addressee of the Isagoge – as the
friend who asked Porphyry to explain Aristotle’s doctrines,
an information coming ultimately from Ammonius, that
does not appear in Q. Thus, the Arabic Porphyry is unan-
imously presented as a thinker of Aristotelian allegiance,
indeed as a leading commentator on Aristotle, a proﬁle
which features also in the Theology of Aristotle (see the
entry on Plotinus, Arabic in this volume), where ‘‘Por-
phyry from Tyre’’ is presented twice as the commentator
of Aristotle’s book on ‘‘Theology’’ (p. 3.6 and 8.4 Badawı¯),
and in other sources (see below ‘‘Other Works’’).
Works
As we have just seen, in the K. al-Fihrist Porphyry is ﬁrst
and foremost a commentator on Aristotle. Obviously, Ibn
al-Nadı¯m did not create this image, but simply recorded it:
Porphyry ‘‘expounded the books of Aristotle, as we have
mentioned in the place where we have given an account of
Aristotle’’ (p. 253.13–14 Flu¨gel, trans. Dodge, p. 610); after
this sentence, Porphyry’s original works are listed. In
what follows, the order is basically that of the entry in
the K. al-Fihrist; also, the titles of the works are given in the
form they have there.
Isagoge
(Kita¯b
I¯sa¯g˙u¯jı¯
fı¯
l-madkhal
ila¯
l-kutub
al-mant:iqiyya): F, Q, B, C.
Introduction to the Categorical Syllogisms (Kita¯b
al-madkhal ila¯ al-qiya¯sa¯t al-h:amliyya): F, Q, B, C.
On Intellect and the Intelligible (Kita¯b al-‘aql wa-l-
ma‘qu¯l): F.
Two Books to Anebo (Kita¯ba¯ni ila¯ Ana¯bu¯n): F, Q, B, C.
Refutation of Longinus (?) On the Intellect and the
Intelligible (Kita¯b al-radd ‘ala¯ ?) [see below on the spellings
of this name] fı¯ l-‘aql wa-l-ma‘qu¯l: F, Q, B, C.
Book of the Elements (Kita¯b al-ust:uqsa¯t): F, Q, B, C.
Accounts of the Philosophers (Kita¯b Akhba¯r al-fala¯sifa):
F, Q, B, K, C.
Book on Sleep and Awakening (Kita¯b al-nawm wa-l-
yaqt:a): F.
With the exception of On Intellect and the Intelligible
(whose relationship with the Refutation of Longinus [?] on
the same topic will be discussed below) and On Sleep and
Awakening (mentioned only by Ibn al-Nadı¯m in the section
on oneirocritics, p. 316.24 Flu¨gel), the list of Porphyry’s
original works is the same in all the bibliographical surveys;
the obvious implication is that Q and K are derivative (as
usual, IAU skips the bibliographical information, and C,
as we have seen before, explicitly relies on Q and B).
The same is true for the commentaries: F mentions, in
relationship with the various items of the entry on
Aristotle, Porphyry’s commentaries on the Categories, De
interpretatione, Physics and Ethics, and the same titles
Porphyry, Arabic P
1057
P

feature in Q and K (C omits the commentary on the
Physics); for more details on these commentaries, see below.
Porphyry’s Works in Arabic
Among the works by Porphyry known to the Arab biblio-
graphical sources only the Isagoge is extant, but others
have left some traces: the commentaries on the Physics
and Nicomachean Ethics, the Letter to Anebo and the His-
tory of Philosophy, all of them lost or only fragmentarily
extant in Greek. To this, a short Arabic writing on the soul
should be added, that has been attributed to Porphyry but
is unknown in Greek. Some hypotheses have been
advanced in scholarship about the works whose titles
were known to Ibn al-Nadı¯m and his followers, but did
not circulate in Arabic. Finally, it has been argued that
further works by Porphyry, although unknown to biblio-
graphical sources and not mentioned by any Arab writers,
have inﬂuenced Arabic philosophy.
Extant or Attested Works
Works on Aristotle
Isagoge.
The Arabic version is extant and edited (al-
Ahwa¯nı¯ 1952; Badawı¯ 1952): it was the work of Abu¯
‘Uthma¯n al-Dimashqı¯, one of the collaborators of H˙ unayn
ibn Ish:a¯q (see the entry on Translations from Greek into
Arabic in this volume), and it was done on the basis of one
of the numerous Syriac versions of the Isagoge (see the
entry on Translations from Greek into Syriac in this vol-
ume), i.e., that of Athanasius of Balad (see Gyekye
1979:16–17; Hugonnard-Roche 1994). However, the
knowledge of Porphyry’s Isagoge antedates this transla-
tion: among the works of al-Kindı¯, an epistle on it is
recorded (Risa¯la al-as:wa¯t al-khamisa, lost to us, but men-
tioned in the K. al-Fihrist, p. 256.16 Flu¨gel). Al-Kindı¯
might have been acquainted with the contents of the
Isagoge through the compendium of Aristotle’s logic trans-
lated or compiled by Ibn al-Muqaffa‘, a work which, fol-
lowing in the footsteps of the Alexandrian tradition, places
the Isagoge before the Organon (on the date and author-
ship of this work, see the entry on Translations from Greek
into Arabic in this volume). Also, Ibn al-Nadı¯m records
a certain Ayyu¯b ibn al-Qa¯sim al-Raqqı¯ as the translator of
the Isagoge from Syriac into Arabic (p. 244.16 Flu¨gel). The
Isagoge was widespread, not to say omnipresent in Arabic
philosophy: according to Gyekye (1979:17), between 850
and 1550 no less than 50 commentaries were written on it.
Among them, the most important are Ibn al-T˙ayyib’ com-
mentary (ed. Gyekye 1975), Avicenna’s paraphrasis (the
K. al-Madkhal of the K. al-Shifa¯’, ed. al-Ahwa¯nı¯ et al.
1952), and two writings by Averroes: the abridgment
contained in the D˙ aru¯rı¯ fı¯ l-mant:iq, entitled al-Qawl fı¯
l-ma‘a¯nı¯ l-fa¯‘ila li-l-tas:awwur (see Endress 1999:343) and
the Middle Commentary (Talkhı¯s kita¯b Isa¯g˙u¯jı¯, ed. and
trans. Davidson 1969a, b).
Commentary
on
the
Physics.
In
the
K.
al-Fihrist,
p. 250.21–22 Flu¨gel, Ibn al-Nadı¯m mentions in his
account on Aristotle’s Physics the commentary by Por-
phyry on books I–IV, translated by Bası¯l, in all likelihood
the same translator of the Sayings of the Pseudo-Menan-
der, and the father of two other translators of the school of
H˙ unayn, Tadha¯rı¯ (Theodore) and Is:t:ifa¯n. This commen-
tary is lost in Greek, even though it has left several traces in
later authors, chieﬂy Simplicius. The Treatise on the Meta-
physics attributed to Abu¯ Bakr Zakariya¯’ al-Ra¯zı¯ (ed. Kraus
1939) records an opinion uttered by Porphyry in the
‘‘second treatise of the Physics.’’ Hence, this passage has
been included as fr. 463F in Smith’s collection of
Porphyry’s fragments (see Smith 1993). Containing as it
does several opinions on nature and its action (Alexander,
Philoponus, Porphyry), this passage has attracted much
attention in scholarship since then (see Brown 1972;
Genequand 1984; Adamson 2007).
Commentary on the Nicomachean Ethics.
In the K. al-
Fihrist, p. 252.2 Flu¨gel, a commentary by Porphyry (lost
in Greek) is mentioned in relationship to Aristotle’s Ethics
(‘‘K. al-akhla¯q, fassarahu Furfu¯riyyu¯s, Book of Ethics, Por-
phyry commented upon it’’), and al-Fara¯bı¯ refers to it in
his K. al-jam‘, p. 56.13 Martini Bonadeo (see Martini
Bonadeo 2008:170). In the K. al-Fihrist, the translation
of both Aristotle’s work and Porphyry’s commentary is
attributed to Ish:a¯q ibn H˙ unayn. Several hypotheses have
been advanced to explain the oddity that Aristotle’s Ethics
is said to fall into 12 books, instead of the 10 of the Greek
Nicomachean Ethics, and some of these hypotheses include
a discussion also of Porphyry’s commentary: see the sur-
vey by Zonta (2003:193–194) as for the idea that an addi-
tional book inserted in the Arabic version between books
VI and VII was a Neoplatonic compilation that can be
traced back to Porphyry. Citations from this commentary
have been discovered by Ghorab (1972) in the K. al-sa‘a¯da
wa-l-is‘a¯d attributed to al-‘A¯mirı¯, and the inﬂuence of
Porphyry’s commentary on Miskawayh’s K. Tahdhı¯b al-
akhla¯q has been argued for by Walzer (1956).
Other Works
Two Books to Anebo.
‘‘Anebo,’’ the pseudonym of
Iamblichus who was the real addressee of the lost ‘‘Letter’’
by Porphyry, is recorded in Arab bibliographies: the
K. al-Fihrist, followed by Ibn al-Qift:ı¯, mentions two
1058 P
Porphyry, Arabic

books ‘‘to Ana¯bu¯.’’ Also, the K. al-Fihrist lists among
the works of Abu¯ Zakariya¯’ al-Ra¯zı¯ a Refutation of the
Book to Anebo by Porphyry (p. 300.18–19 Flu¨gel), which
contained an explanation of ‘‘the Aristotelian doctrines
on theology’’: see the discussion in Ga¨tje (1971:77). In the
K. al-Milal wa-l-nih:al by al-Shahrasta¯nı¯, p. 345–347
Cureton, a passage from this writing To Anebo is quoted,
where Porphyry’s metaphysical and cosmological doc-
trines are expounded (see Gabrieli 1946). It is worth
noting that this account begins with Shahrasta¯nı¯’s state-
ment that Porphyry is a follower of Aristotle and is in
complete agreement with him. As a proof, the Letter to
Anebo is quoted, where Porphyry contends that Plato did
not maintain the generation of the cosmos in time, but
only argued that it is dependent on a principle other than
it and anterior to it.
Accounts
of
the
Philosophers.
Of
this
work,
the
Filόsοjος ῾istοrίa only fragmentarily extant in Greek,
Ibn al-Nadı¯m says he saw the fourth chapter in Syriac, an
information repeated by Ibn al-Qift:ı¯. Up-to-date analysis
of the Arabic testimonies, including a survey of the main
problems, by Cottrell (2008). Rosenthal (1937) had
detected in Mubashshir ibn Fa¯tik’s Choicest Maxims and
best Sayings an account of the ‘‘Life of Zeno of Elea’’ which
he tentatively traced back to the Accounts of the Philoso-
phers (Rosenthal 1937:39), even though Porphyry is not
mentioned as the source of the account on Zeno; this is
considered as fr. XXX in Sodano’s edition of the fragments
of Porphyry’s Filόsοjος ῾istοrίa (see Sodano 1997:
144–153). Rosenthal traced back tentatively to the same
source also the ‘‘Life of Solon’’ recorded in al-Mubashshir
(=fr. 203 A Smith = fr. I of Book I Sodano; see Segonds
1982:170–171; Sodano 1997:38–40). Rosenthal also pro-
vided a detailed comparison between the ‘‘Life of Pythag-
oras’’ recorded in Ibn Abı¯ Us:aybi‘a, p. 38–41 Mu¨ller and
the Life of Pythagoras by Porphyry, admittedly a part of the
Filόsοjος ῾istοrίa (see Rosenthal 1937:43–56); an
account on Pythagoras’ doctrine of the spheres is attrib-
uted to Porphyry also in Bı¯ru¯nı¯’s India (I, p. 43 Sachau: see
Segonds 1982:171). Also the K. al-Milal wa-l-nih:al by
al-Shahrasta¯nı¯ refers to Porphyry as for Anaxagoras’ doc-
trines: this account is included as fr. 205F in Smith and as
fr. VI of Book I in Sodano. There is no scholarly agreement
about another account in Shahrasta¯nı¯’s K. al-Milal wa-l-
nih:al, that on Empedocles. Even though Porphyry is not
mentioned, Altheim-Stiehl (1954) argued that Empedo-
cles’ doctrines as recorded by al-Shahrasta¯nı¯ should be
traced back to the Filόsοjος ῾istοrίa, a conclusion
challenged by De Smet (1998), who has shown that the
account in the K. al-Milal wa-l-nih:al depends on
the Arabic doxography of the Pseudo-Ammonius edited
by Rudolph (1989), a Neoplatonic reworking of a
doxographical survey by Hippolytus of Rome, adapted to
the Muslim theological controversies of the ninth century
(on this dossier, see also Brague-Freudenthal 2005).
Finally, Ibn al-Nadı¯m records in the section on the ﬁrst
philosophers Porphyry’s account about Thales as the ﬁrst
philosopher:
this, Ibn al-Nadı¯m says, comes from
Porphyry’s History (Ta’rı¯kh), a work extant in Syriac, two
chapters of which have been translated into Arabic
(p. 245.13–14 Flu¨gel). According to Dunlop (1957), this
translation was the work of Ibn Suwa¯r, one of the scholars
of the Aristotelian circle of Baghdad (see the entry on Ibn
Suwa¯r in this volume), and also Abu¯ Sulayma¯n al-Sijista¯nı¯
(another leading Aristotelian scholar of the time) was
acquainted with Porphyry’s Accounts of the Philosophers.
However, the title given in the K. al-Fihrist does not point
to the Filόsοjος ῾istοrίa, but to the Chronicle (so
Altheim-Stiehl 1954:14; Segonds 1982:169; see also
Cottrell 2008, p. 528 n. 23, correcting several mistakes in
previous scholarship). According to Sodano (1997:48),
nothing prevented Porphyry from speaking about Thales
in the Chronicle and also in the Filόsοjος ῾istοrίa.
A passage by Shahrasta¯nı¯’s K. al-Milal wa-l-nih:al where
Porphyry deals with Thales (=fr. 204F Smith) is then con-
sidered by Sodano (1997:42–43), as fr. V from Book I of the
Filόsοjος ῾istοrίa. On all this, see Cottrell (2008:546–
555).
Dubia seu spuria
Kutsch (1954) discovered in the MS Istanbul, Aya Sofya
2457 a short writing on the soul which is attributed to
Porphyry (Maqa¯la li-Furfu¯riyyu¯s fı¯l-nafs). Not mentioned
in bibliographies, this writing has been connected by
Kutsch (1954:267) with the pseudo-Theology of Aristotle.
The literal correspondences between the Maqa¯la li-
Furfu¯riyyu¯s fı¯ l-nafs and the Theology made Kutsch
surmise, also on the basis of the fact that Porphyry features
as the commentator of the Theology (see above), that
the entire Theology was nothing if not an account of
Aristotle’s
theological
doctrines
as
expounded
by
Porphyry. In Kutsch’s eyes, Porphyry made use by and
large of his Plotinian readings to present Aristotle’s theol-
ogy, and this work lay in the background of the Arabic
Theology.
Hypotheses About Porphyry’s Works
Mentioned in the Bibliographical Sources
Introduction to the Categorical Syllogisms
This work, lost in Greek but known to Boethius, who
made use of it (Bode´u¨s 2008:10), was translated into
Porphyry, Arabic P
1059
P

Arabic by Abu¯ ‘Uthma¯n al-Dimashqı¯, according to the K.
al-Fihrist, p. 253.15 Flu¨gel (followed by Ibn al-Qift:ı¯).
On Intellect and the Intelligible
Only the K. al-Fihrist (p. 253.16 Flu¨gel) lists this title,
which may hint at the treatise that Porphyry himself
mentions in the Vita Plotini 18.10–11, That the Intelligibles
Subsist Outside the Intellect (lost in Greek). Ibn al-Nadı¯m
mentions an ‘‘old translation’’ of this work, with no fur-
ther details. It has been surmised that this title should be
read together with the subsequent item, the Refutation
Against Longinus (?) On the Intellect and the Intelligible;
see the discussion in Ga¨tje (1971:77–78).
Refutation Against Longinus (?) On the Intellect and
the Intelligible
This title features in the K. al-Fihrist (p. 253.16 Flu¨gel)
where the skeleton of the name is meaningless; the spelling
of the name is different but not particularly helpful in
other bibliographies (‘‘Ba¯hyiu¯s,’’ ‘‘Pammachius,’’ and
others); see again the discussion in Ga¨tje (1971:77–78).
One may surmise that this title echoes two writings men-
tioned in the Vita Plotini: (a) the treatise Against Those
Who Keep the Intellect Apart from the Intelligible, i.e., the
‘‘retractatio’’ that Porphyry wrote after having read the
response of Plotinus’ pupil Amelius to his writing That
the Intelligibles Subsist Outside the Intellect; and (b) a letter
that he wrote to his former teacher Longinus, who had
criticized Plotinus (see Ga¨tje 1971:78). On the circulation
of the Vita Plotini in Arabic, see Thillet (2007); one may
add that, even though there are no traces of an Arabic
translation of it, the Vita Plotini did surely reach Baghdad
in the ninth century, since this writing did not circulate
separated from the Enneads, of which it serves as a preface
(on the translation of the Enneads, see the entry on
Plotinus, Arabic in this volume).
Book of the Elements
The K. al-Fihrist (p. 253.17 Flu¨gel) lists among Porphyry’s
works a K. al-ust:uqsa¯t which has been tentatively trans-
lated by Dodge (1970:610) as ‘‘Seeking an Explanation,’’
on the basis of the variant reading K. al-istafsa¯r in one of
the MSS of the Fihrist. However, the other bibliographies,
(Ibn al-Qift:ı¯ and Barhebraeus), read K. al-ust:uqsa¯t (Casiri
renders it as Liber elementorum); this work, says Ibn al-
Nadı¯m, was in Syriac. Beutler (1953:300) lists this work
dubitatively as n. 65 in his survey of Porphyry’s writings,
and suggests a writing on mathematics. However, taking
into
account
that
ust:uqsa¯t
is
the
transliteration
of stοiweı˜a (compare, in the entry on Proclus, Arabic in
this volume the so-called Ust:ukhu¯siyya al-sug˙ra¯, the
‘‘minor
Elementatio,’’
p.
252.22
Flu¨gel),
one
may
tentatively surmise that this title points to Porphyry’s
Sentences, which, like Proclus’ Elements of Theology, is
subdivided into propositions. On the possible echoes of
one of Porphyry’s Sentences in Arabic, see Thillet
(1971:299).
Hypotheses About Works Other Than Those
Mentioned in the Bibliographical Sources
Walzer (1965) strongly argued in favor of the inﬂuence on
Arabic philosophy of Greek works whose Arabic transla-
tion has not been found. This was especially true, in
Walzer’s eyes, for Porphyry. He did point to the Commen-
tary to the Myth of Er included in Porphyry’s lost com-
mentary to Plato’s Republic, to the lost commentary on the
De intepretatione – which he thought was known to al-
Fa¯ra¯bı¯ – and mostly to the lost writing on the ‘‘Harmony
between Plato and Aristotle.’’ This writing is unknown in
Arabic and to bibliographers, but counted for Walzer as
one of the main sources of inspiration for several Arab
philosophers: not only and predictably al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, whose
K. al-jam‘ echoed Porphyry even in the title, but also al-
‘A¯mirı¯ (to whom Walzer attributed the K. al-sa‘a¯da wa-l-
is‘ad) and Miskawayh, whose Tahdhı¯b al-akhla¯q could be
used to ‘‘get a fuller picture of what this book may have
been like’’ (Walzer 1965:286). Walzer was conﬁdent that
the K. al-sa‘a¯da wa-l-is‘ad did make it ‘‘almost certain’’
that the Arabs knew Porphyry’s lost Harmony, which
could be reconstructed as being a collection of quotations,
mainly from Plato and Aristotle, about ethical and polit-
ical topics. Also, Walzer thought that in Miskawayh this
harmony was reached, following Porphyry’s lead, in the
sense that Aristotle counted as the appropriate guide for
this world, and Plato for the world-to-come. For an up-to
date discussion, see Martini Bonadeo (2008:1–14).
Finally, Porphyry’s role in the pseudo-Theology of Aris-
totle should be mentioned. A survey of the past scholarship
that saw in the Theology of Aristotle a reworking by Por-
phyry of Plotinus’ writings ‘‘which an unknown late Greek
or Syriac writer came to attribute to Aristotle’’ (Walzer
1965:283) has been provided by Aouad (1989:553–555).
This reconstruction implies, to say it in Walzer’s words,
that ‘‘the essential features of Porphyry’s paraphrase of
a number of Plotinus’ essays may be recovered through
a thorough analysis of the Arabic Theology of Aristotle,
rearranged in its original order and freed from later addi-
tions’’ (Walzer 1965:285). Pines (1971) and Thillet (1971)
side with Walzer; this reconstruction has been challenged
by Zimmermann (1986).
See also: ▶Aristotle, Arabic ▶al-Bı¯ru¯nı¯, Abu¯ Rayh:a¯n
▶Doxographies, Graeco-Arabic ▶al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, Abu¯ Nas˙r
1060 P
Porphyry, Arabic

▶Miskawayh, Abu¯ ‘Alı¯ ▶al-Mubashshir ibn Fa¯tik ▶Phi-
losophy, Arabic ▶Plotinus, Arabic ▶Presocratics in the
Arab World ▶al-Shahrasta¯nı¯, Muh:ammad ibn ʿAbd al-
Karı¯m ▶Translations from Greek into Arabic ▶Trans-
lations from Greek into Syriac
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Editions of the Arabic Isagoge
al-Ahwa¯nı¯ Ah:mad Fu’a¯d (ed) (1952) Isa¯g˙u¯jı¯ ma‘a h:ayat Furfu¯riyyu¯s wa-
falsafatihi (. . .). ‘I¯sa¯ al-Ba¯bı¯, Cairo
Badawı¯ ‘Abdurrah:ma¯n (ed) (1952) Mant:iq Arist:u¯. K. Isa¯g˙u¯jı¯, III. Da¯r al-
kutub al-mis:riyya, Cairo, pp 1021–1068
Da¯nishpazu¯h Muh:ammad Ta¯qı¯ (ed) (1978) Mant:iq Ibn al-Muqaffa‘.
Anjuman-i Sha¯hansha¯hı¯ Falsafah-i Tihra¯n, Tehran
Bio-Bibliographies
(1760) Bibliothecae arabico-hispanae Escurialensis sive librorum omnium
manuscriptorum quos arabice ab auctoribus magnam partem Arabo-
Hispanis compositos Bibliotheca Coenobii Escurialensis complectitur
recensio et explanatio opera et studio Michaelis Casiri (. . .) Tomus
Prior. Antonius Perez de Soto imprimebat, anno MDCCLX, Matriti
Barhebraeus (1663) Ta’rı¯kh mukhtas:ar al-duwal, Historia compendiosa
dynastiarum authore Gregorio Abul-Pharajio Malatiensi medico
(. . .) Arabice edita et latine versa ab Pocockio E (. . .). excudebat H.
Hall (. . .), Oxoniae
Dodge B (1970) al-Nadı¯m. The Fihrist, a tenth-century survey of Muslim
culture. Columbia University Press, New York/London
Flu¨gel G (ed) (1871–1872) Ibn al-Nadı¯m, Kita¯b al-Fihrist, mit Anmerkungen
hrsg. Flu¨gel G. I, II (=Ro¨diger, Mu¨ller). F.C.W. Vogel, Leipzig
Mu¨ller A (ed) (1882–1884) Ibn Abı¯ Us:aybi‘a, ‘Uyu¯n al-anba¯’ fı¯ t:abaqa¯t al-
at:ibba¯’, ed. Ibn al-T˙ah:h:a¯n I (=Mu¨ller A). Cairo/Ko¨nigsberg (repr
Sezgin F (1995) Islamic medicine, vols 1–2. Frankfurt a. Μ.)
Mu¨ller A, Lippert J (eds) (1903) Ibn al-Qift:ı¯, Ta’rih˘ al-h:ukama¯’, auf Grund
der Vorarbeiten A. Mu¨llers, hrsg. Lippert J. Dieterich’sche, Leipzig
Rudolph U (ed) (1989) Die Doxographie des pseudo-Ammonius. Ein
Beitrag zur neuplatonischen U¨ berlieferung im Islam. Steiner, Stuttgart
Other Primary Sources
al-Ahwa¯nı¯ F et al (eds) (1952) Ibn Sı¯na¯, al-Madkhal (K. al-Shifa¯’, 1. al-
Mant:iq). Mat:ba‘a al-Amı¯riyya, Cairo
Badra¯n MF (1947–1955) Kita¯b al-milal wa-l-nih:al li-l-Shahrasta¯nı¯, I–II.
Maktabat al-Anjlu¯ al-mis:riyya, Cairo
Baumstark A (1900) Aristoteles bei den Syrern vom 5. bis 8. Jahrhundert.
1 (einziger) Band: Syrisch-arabische Biographien des Aristoteles.
Syrische Kommentare zur ΕΙSΑGOGΗ des Porphyrios, Teubner,
Leipzig (repr. Scientia Verlag, Aachen 1975)
Davidson HA (ed) (1969a) Averrois Cordubensis Commentarium
Medium in Porphyrii Isagogen et Aristotelis Categoriae (. . ..) textum
hebraicum recensuit et adnotationis illustravit H.A.D. Corpus
Commentariorum Averrois in Aristotelem, vol 1a. The Medieval
Academy of America, 78, Cambridge
Davidson HA (ed) (1969b) Averroes. Middle Commentary on Porphyry’s
Isagoge translated from the Hebrew and Latin versions and on
Aristotle’s Categoriae, translated from the original Arabic and the
Hebrew and Latin versions, with notes and introduction by H.A.D.
Corpus Commentariorum Averrois in Aristotelem versio anglica,
The Medieval Academy of America, vol 1, a, 1–2. Cambridge
Georr Kh (1948) Les Cate´gories d’Aristote daus leurs versions syro-
arabes, Institut Franc¸ais de Damas, Beyrouth
Gyekye K (ed) (1975) Ibn al-T˙ayyib’s commentary on Porphyry’s Eisagoge.
Recherches publie´es sous la direction de l’Institut de Lettres Orientales
de Beyrouth, N.S., B: Orient Chre´tien, 2. Dar el Machreq, Beirut
Gyekye K (ed) (1979) Arabic logic. Ibn al-T˙ayyib’s commentary on
Porphyry’s Eisagoge. Studies in Islamic philosophy & science. State
University of New York Press, Albany
Kraus P (ed) (1939) Rasa¯’il falsaﬁyya li-Abı¯ Bakr Muh:ammad ibn
Zakariyya¯’ al-Ra¯zı¯. Fouad I University, Cairo
Martini Bonadeo C (ed) (2008) Al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯. L’armonia delle opinioni dei
due sapienti, il divino Platone e Aristotele, introduzione, testo arabo,
traduzione e commento, prefazione di Endress G. Plus, Pisa
Smith A (ed) (1993) Porphyrii philosophi Platonici Fragmenta. Fragmenta
arabica
D.
Wasserstein
interpretante.
Bibliotheca
Scriptorum
Graecorum et Romanorum Teubneriana, Stuttgart/Leipzig
Sodano AR (ed) (1997) Porﬁrio. Storia della ﬁlosoﬁa. Testo greco-arabo
a fronte. Rusconi, Milano
Secondary Sources
Adamson P (2007) Porphyrius arabus on nature and art: Fragment 463F
Smith in Context. In: Karamanolis G, Sheppard A (eds) Studies in
Porphyry. Bull Inst Class Stud (Suppl). Institute of Classical Studies,
London, pp 141–163
Altheim F, Stiehl R (1954) Porphyrios und Empedokles. Max Niemeyer,
Tu¨bingen
Altheim F, Stiehl R (1962) New fragments of Greek philosophers II.
Porphyry in Arabic and Syriac translation. East West 13:3–15
Anawati GC (1974) Le ne´oplatonisme dans la pense´e musulmane.
E´tat actuel des recherches. In: Plotino e il neoplatonismo in Oriente
e in Occidente, Atti del convegno internazionale, Accademia
Nazionale dei Lincei, Roma 5–10 ottobre 1970. problemi attuali di
scienza e cultura, 198. Accademia nazionale dei Lincei, Roma,
pp 339–405 (repr (1974) E´tudes de philosophie musulmane. Vrin,
Paris, pp 155–221)
Aouad (1989) La ‘‘The´ologie d’Aristote’’ et autres textes du Plotinus
Arabus. In: Goulet R (ed) Dictionnaire des Philosophes Antiques I.
Ed. du CNRS, Paris, pp 541–590
Beutler R (1894–1980) Porphyrios (21). In: Pauly A, Wissowa G, Kroll W,
Witte K, Mittelhaus K, Ziegler K (eds) Paulys Realencyclopa¨die der
classischen Altertumswissenschaft, vol. 22.1 (Beutler 1953)
Bidez J (1913) Vie de Porphyre, le philosophe ne´o-platonicien, avec les
fragments des traite´s et De Regressu animae. Gand (repr G. Olms,
Hildesheim, 1964)
Bode´u¨s (2008) Porphyre. Commentaire aux Cate´gories d’Aristote.
Edition critique, traduction franc¸aise, introduction et notes par
Bode´u¨s R. Vrin, Paris
Brague R, Freudenthal G (2005) Ni Empe´docle, ni Plotin. Pour le
dossier du pseudo-Empe´docle arabe. In: Dillon J, Dixsaut M (eds)
Agonistes. Essays in honour of Denis O’Brien. Ashgate, Burlington,
pp 267–284
Brown V (1972) Avicenna and the Christian philosophers in Baghdad.
In: Stern SM, Hourani A, Brown V (eds) Islamic philosophy and the
classical tradition. Essays presented by his friends and pupils to
Richard Walzer. Cassirer, Oxford, pp 35–48
Cottrell E (2008) Notes sur quelques-uns des te´moignages me´die´vaux
relatifs a` l’Histoire Philosophique (῾Z jilόsοjος ῾istοrίa) de
Porphyre. In: Akasoy A, Raven W (eds) Islamic thought in the
Middle Ages. Studies in text, transmission and translation, in honour
of Hans Daiber. Brill, Leiden/Boston, pp 523–555
D’Ancona C (1999) Porphyry, universal soul and the Arabic Plotinus.
Arabic Sci Philos 9:47–88
De Smet D (1998) Empedocles Arabus. Une lecture ne´oplatonicienne
tardive.
Verhandelingen
van
de
Koninklijke
Academie
voor
Porphyry, Arabic P
1061
P

Wetenschappen, letteren en Schone Kunsten van Belgie¨, Klasse der
Letteren, Jaargang 60(165). Brussels
Dunlop DM (1957) Bibliographical material from the S˙iwa¯n al-h:ikma.
J R Asiat Soc 82–89
Endress G (1999) Averrois Opera: a bibliography of editions and contri-
butions to the text. In: Endress G, Aertsen JA (eds) Averroes and the
Aristotelian tradition. Sources, constitution and reception of the
philosophy of Ibn Rushd (1126–1198). Proceedings of the fourth
symposium Averroicum, Cologne 1996. Islamic philosophy, theology
and science 31. Brill, Leiden/Boston/Ko¨ln, pp 339–381
Finnegan J (1956) Avicenna’s refutation of Porphyrius. In: Avicenna
commemoration volume. Iran Society, Calcutta, pp 187–203
Gabrieli F (1946) Plotino e Porﬁrio in un eresiografo musulmano.
La Parola del passato 3:338–346
Ga¨tje H (1971) Studien zur U¨ berlieferung der aristotelischen Psychologie
im Islam. Winter, Heidelberg
Genequand Ch (1984) Quelques aspects de l’ide´e de nature, d’Aristote a`
al-Ghaza¯lı¯. Rev The´ol Philos 116:105–129
Genequand Ch (1996) La me´moire de l’aˆme: Porphyre et la The´ologie
d’Aristote. Bull E´tudes Orient 48:102–113
Ghorab AA (1972) The Greek Commentators on Aristotle quoted in
al-‘A¯mirı¯’s ‘‘As-sa‘a¯da wa-l-is‘a¯d’’. In: Islamic philosophy and
the classical tradition (Festschrift R. Walzer), ed. Stern SM,
Hourani A, Brown V. Cassirer, London, pp 77–88
Hadot P (1974) L’harmonie des philosophies de Plotin et d’Aristote selon
Porphyre dans le commentaire de Dexippe sur les Cate´gories. In:
Plotino e il neoplatonismo in Oriente e in Occidente. Atti del
convegno internazionale. Accademia nazionale dei Lincei, Roma,
pp 31–47 (repr Hadot P (1999) Plotin, Porphyre. E´tudes Ne´oplato-
niciennes. Les Belles Lettres, Paris, pp 335–382)
Hadot I (1987) La division ne´oplatonicienne des e´crits d’Aristote. In:
Aristoteles. Werk und Wirkung. Paul Moraux gewidmet. II:
Kommentierung, U¨ berlieferung, Nachleben, hrsg. Wiesner J. de
Gruyter, Berlin, pp 249–285
Hadot I (1991) The role of the commentaries on Aristotle in the
teaching
of
philosophy
according
to
the
Prefaces
of
the
Neoplatonic commentaries on the ‘Categories’. In: Oxf Stud Anc
Philos (Suppl), ed. Blumenthal HJ, Robinson H. Clarendon, Oxford,
pp 175–189
Hadot
I
(1992)
Aristote
dans
l’enseignement
philosophique
ne´oplatonicien. Les pre´faces des commentaires sur les ‘Cate´gories’.
Rev The´ol Philos 124:407–425
Hein Ch (1985) Deﬁnition und Einteilung der Philosophie. Von der
spa¨tantiken Einleitungsliteratur zur arabischen Enzyklopa¨die. P.
Lang, Frankfurt/Bern/New York
Hugonnard-Roche H (1994) Les traductions syriaques de l’Isagoge de
Porphyre et la constitution du corpus syriaque de logique. Revue
d’Histoire des Textes 24:293–312 (repr Hugonnard-Roche H (2004)
La logique d’Aristote du grec au syriaque. E´tudes sur la transmission
des textes de l’Organon et leur interpre´tation philosophique. Textes
et traditions, 9. Vrin, Paris, pp 89–97)
Kohlschitter S (1991) Parmenides and Empedocles in Porphyry’s history
of philosophy. Hermathena 150:43–53
Kutsch W (1954) Ein arabisches Bruchstu¨ck aus Porphyrios (?) Perι
cuwZ˜ς, und die Frage des Verfassers der Theologie des Aristoteles.
Me´langes de l’Universite´ saint-Joseph 21:265–286
Maro´th M (1975) Die Eisagoge bei den Arabern. Zˇ iva antika 25:457–460
Peters FE (1968) Aristoteles Arabus. The oriental translations and com-
mentaries on the Aristotelian corpus. Brill, Leiden
Pines S (1971) Les textes arabes dits plotiniens et le courant ‘porphyrien’
dans le ne´oplatonisme grec. In: Le Ne´oplatonisme. Actes du Colloque
international du CNRS, Royaumont 9–13 juin 1969. E´d du CNRS,
Paris, pp 301–317
Rosenthal F (1937) Arabische Nachrichten u¨ber Zeno den Eleaten. Ori-
entalia 6:21–67 (repr (1990) Greek philosophy in the Arab world.
A collection of essays. Variorum, Aldershot)
Rosenthal F (1968) Sayings of the ancients from Ibn Durayd’s Kita¯b
al-Mujtana¯. Orientalia 27:29–54, 150–183
Segonds A-Ph (1982) Les fragments de l’Histoire de la Philosophie. In: des
Places E´ (ed) Porphyre. Vie de Pythagore. Lettre a` Marcella. Collec-
tion des Universite´s de France. Association Guillaume Bude´, Les
Belles Lettres, Paris, pp 163–176
Sodano AR (1960) Una citazione apocrifa della Lettera ad Anebo di
Porﬁrio nel Kita¯b al-Milal wa-n-Nihal di Muhammad asˇ-Sˇahrasta¯nı¯.
Rendiconti della Accademia di Archeologia, Lettere e Belle Arti di
Napoli 35:35–56
Steinschneider M (1889–1896) Die arabische U¨ bersetzungen aus dem
Grieschischen (rist. Akademische Druck und Verlagsanstalt, Graz, 1960)
Stern SM (1957) Ibn al-Tayyibs commentary on the Isagoge. Bull Sch
Orient Afr Stud 19:419–425
Thillet P (1971) Indices porphyriens dans la The´ologie d’Aristote. In: Le
Ne´oplatonisme.
Actes
du
Colloque
international
du
CNRS,
Royaumont 9–13 juin 1969. E´d du CNRS, Paris, pp 293–302
Thillet P (2007) Was the Vita Plotini known in Arab philosophical circles?.
In: Stern-Gillet S, Corrigan K (eds) Aristotle and Neoplatonism.
Reading ancient texts, vol 2. Essays in honour of Denis O’Brien.
Brill, Leiden, pp 199–210
Walzer R (1956) Some aspects of Miskawayh Tahdhib al-aklhaq. In: Studi
orientalistici in onore di Giorgio Levi della Vida, I–II. Istituto
Italiano per l’Oriente, Roma, II, pp 603–621
Walzer R (1962) Platonismus in der islamischen Philosophie (arabische
U¨ bersetzungen aus dem griechischen). In: Antike und Orient im
Mittelalter. Miscellanea Mediaevalia 1. de Gruyter, Berlin, pp 179–195
Walzer R (1965) Porphyry in the Arabic tradition. In: Porphyre. Entretiens
Hardt, XII. Foundation Hardt, Vandœuvres/Gene`ve, pp 275–299
Zimmermann (1986) The origins of the so-called theology of Aristotle. In:
Pseudo-Aristotle in the Middle Ages: the ‘‘Theology’’ and other texts,
ed. Kraye J, Ryan WF, Schmitt C-B. London, pp 110–240
Zonta M (2003) Les E´thiques. Tradition syriaque et arabe. In: Goulet R
(ed.) Dictionnaire des Philosophes Antiques, Supple´ment, E´d du
CNRS, Paris, pp 191–198
Posterior Analytics, Commentaries
on Aristotle’s
JOHN L. LONGEWAY
Department of Philosophy
University of Wisconsin
Kenosha, WI
USA
Abstract
Beginning with the translation of Aristotle’s Posterior Ana-
lytics into Latin in the course of the twelfth century, the
Latin authors of the Middle Ages presented a theory of
demonstration – an argument that produces scientiﬁc
1062 P
Posterior Analytics, Commentaries on Aristotle’s

knowledge by presenting the cause of the truth of the
conclusion, based on that work, and largely exposited in
connection with commentaries on it. Different versions of
the theory were developed with different metaphysical
commitments. Robert Grosseteste wrote the ﬁrst widely
circulated commentary, developing an Augustinian ver-
sion of the theory. Then two different versions were devel-
oped by the Aristotelians, Albert the Great and Thomas
Aquinas. William of Ockham developed a fourth version
within his nominalist metaphysics. In all these versions,
demonstration of natural causal knowledge was accom-
modated as well as demonstrations in mathematics. It was
supposed by all that demonstrative knowledge is produced
by the operation of human faculties within the environ-
ment of the natural world, but Augustinian thinkers
presupposed the illumination of natural essences by the
divine light in some way, consistent with their supposition
that natural things enjoyed their essences through partic-
ipation in forms in the mind of God, so that their func-
tioning could only be understood through those forms.
Thomists assumed that the natural essences of particulars
had a causal force of their own, considered as universals, that
was reﬂected in demonstrations in natural science, since it
was responsible for the causal propensities of particulars.
Following an Averroist line, Albert the Great (and his fol-
lower, Giles of Rome) and Ockham assumed that the causal
connections
underlying
demonstrative
knowledge
are
entirely between natural particulars, so that demonstration
does not explain fundamental natural causal propensities.
In the Middle Ages, the theory of demonstration exposited
in Aristotle’s Posterior Analytics was considered the culmi-
nation of logical studies. Elaborated in commentaries,
logical treatises, and opuscula on speciﬁc problems, it
corresponds to modern Philosophy of Science exploring
how we come to know necessary causal regularities, how
scientiﬁc knowledge differs from other sorts of cognition,
how mathematics differs from the other sciences, and why
it is more certain.
An Aristotelian demonstration is a syllogism that pro-
duces scientiﬁc knowledge, knowledge not simply that
something is the case, but why it is the case. One may
have cognition that is quite certain without scientiﬁc knowl-
edge (including our understanding [intellectus] of the ﬁrst
principles of demonstration, which are not themselves
demonstrated), and Aristotle’s Posterior Analytics is not a
treatise on general epistemology. To produce and transmit
scientiﬁc understanding, Aristotle thought we had to dupli-
cate, in the deductive order of the science, the order of causes
found in reality, though the causes need not be efﬁcient
causes. He takes mathematics to be theparadigmatic science.
A demonstrative science requires that we know the
meaning of the terms entering into it; have knowledge of
certain axioms applicable to many sciences; knowledge of its
own immediate, indemonstrable ﬁrst principles; and knowl-
edge of real deﬁnitions of the subject of the science and its
various species and attributes. The principles of a demon-
stration must be true, provide the reason for the truth of the
conclusion, be necessary and per se. Aristotle lays down no
rules for discovering the ﬁrst principles fromwhich a science
begins, though he points out that one needs experience of
the subject, and that the ﬁrst principles will explain why the
subject has the attributes it does. Statements are per se in
two ways: if the subject term includes the predicate explicitly
within its deﬁnition, so that ‘‘A human being is rational’’ is
per se, and if the predicate includes the subject implicitly in
its deﬁnition as the proper subject for that sort of accident,
so that ‘‘A human being is able to laugh’’ is per se. The
middle term of a demonstration expresses the cause why
the predicate of the conclusion belongs to its subject. The
predicate of the conclusion, the ‘‘attribute,’’ does not follow
logically from the essence of the subject.
Aristotle allowed that less ideal demonstrations might
not give a full explanation of the cause why the fact is true.
These are demonstrations that it is the case (quia) as
opposed to demonstrations why it is the case (propter
quid). So one might argue from effect to cause rather
than cause to effect, as does the demonstration that stars,
unlike the planets, are far away because they twinkle. Or,
principles might be imported from another science. If one
proves that circular wounds heal more slowly because they
have a large ratio of area to circumference, one must
borrow, in medicine, a principle provable only in geome-
try. Since the physician relies on the authority of the
geometer here, the demonstration (but not the whole
science of medicine) is said by medieval authors to be
‘‘subalternate’’ to geometry.
The Posterior Analytics entered the West through the
translation of James of Venice between 1125 and 1150. The
commentarial tradition of the Arabs and Greeks became
known chieﬂy due to Albert the Great, who reported in his
commentary the content of Themistius, and a lost work by
al-Farabi on demonstration, or perhaps Averroes’ critical
remarks on that work, as well as the work on demonstra-
tion of Averroes himself, which was not otherwise widely
known until the ﬁfteenth century. James of Venice also
translated the commentary of Alexander of Aphrodisias,
or possibly that of Philoponus, which is close to that of
Alexander, and though it quickly dropped from circula-
tion much survived in marginal glosses.
Despite James’ twelfth-century translation, and earlier
discussions such as that of Richard Rufus, the founding
Posterior Analytics, Commentaries on Aristotle’s P
1063
P

commentary in the western tradition is that of Robert
Grosseteste, written around 1230. Grosseteste presents a
demonstrative science of demonstration. He argues that
Aristotle ﬁrst gives a deﬁnition of demonstration as a syllo-
gism producing scientiﬁc knowledge, then a deﬁnition of
scientiﬁc knowledge, and then, in a series of syllogisms,
deduces the properties that a demonstration must have,
considered in itself as a free-standing syllogism, in relation
to other demonstrations and as part of a science. The second
book, he claims, discusses the art of deﬁnition as the way to
discover demonstrations, and how it is that deﬁnition occurs
as middle term causing the truth of the conclusion.
Grosseteste reconciled Aristotle’s work with Platonism
by treating demonstration as the means by which a fallen
humanity must come to knowledge of the world. The
mind unaffected by the fall would see in God the exem-
plary forms of all things. But as it is, such knowledge is
impossible, though the light of God illumines the forms
of the natural things we encounter, so we come to know
them. Such forms are universal and unchanging, and
ground necessary truths. But knowledge of a real deﬁni-
tion of a substance does not impart knowledge of its causal
powers. This requires experience of its causal activity.
Such experience gives us knowledge as to what a given
agent will do by nature if unimpeded, but it may not do it
most of the time, or even very often, because it is usually
prevented. Such knowledge occurs through the knowledge
of ‘‘material deﬁnitions’’ that depend on prior, ‘‘formal
deﬁnitions.’’ The formal deﬁnition of a thing speciﬁes the
exemplary form as a ﬁnal cause, while its material deﬁni-
tion speciﬁes how it must be realized in matter to perform
that function, that is, to be an efﬁcient cause of certain
effects. (The distinction between formal and material
deﬁnition relies on an interpolation from Alexander/
Philoponus’ commentary in the text of James’ translation.
From Aquinas on, people were aware of this error.)
Efﬁcient and ﬁnal causes do not occur in mathematics,
and we can see triangles as they really are in themselves by
direct mental view. Thus mathematical demonstrations are
higher (potior) than natural demonstrations, since what
they show is always the case, and more easily known.
These two sorts of demonstration Grosseteste identiﬁes
as demonstrations of the highest sort (potissimae).
One science can be subalternate to another, according
to Grosseteste, in several ways. So music, the science of
audible proportion, falls under the science of proportion
‘‘univocally,’’ he says, but is not a part of it, since audibility
is an accident of proportion, not a difference that estab-
lishes some species of it. Music, like all natural things, is an
accidental unity held together only by its relation to its
higher form or purpose, and proportion is a necessary
part of the real nature of music, given its deﬁning end,
which is to present proportions to the hearing. Grosseteste
does not consider the case of the circular wound as
subalternation at all, for circularity in no way constitutes
the function of a wound.
In a second sort of subalternation, Grosseteste holds,
the science of the parts of a thing, which realize its func-
tioning, must be brought into play. So the science of har-
mony is subalternate to the science of numbers, ‘‘almost
univocally,’’ since numbers are essential parts of propor-
tions, and must be known if proportions are to be known.
This
account
was
intimately
connected
with
Grosseteste’s metaphysics. He thought the material
world arose from light, in itself a simple form without
parts, the whole form present at each point in space.
Matter can only be understood as arising from light in
accord with geometrical laws as light propagates itself
through space. Thus all of natural science is subalternate
to mathematics, for though mathematics does not bear
on light considered in itself, it governs the way in which
light realizes itself in space.
The next important commentary after Grosseteste’s was
Albert the Great’s, written between 1245 and 1260. The
Aristotelian Albert objected to Grosseteste’s metaphysical
views, and so rejected his account of subalternation and the
role of mathematics in the natural sciences. Albert neither
treated a substantial form as an exemplar to preexisting
matter, nor accepted the development of lower forms of
individuals from higher forms in the mind of God. For
Albert the unity of a particular thing does not arise as an
expression of a higher unity, nor can knowledge of partic-
ular natures in themselves be obtained through reﬂection
on higher forms. Each science must stand on its own.
Consider the science of harmony. Sounds do have
mathematically expressible accidents, but the science of
proportions does not establish the nature of sounds. The
subject of harmony is a certain kind of sound, not a certain
kind of proportion. Nature operates by its own principles,
and it accomplishes the aims of a higher form only because
God created it from nothing so that it would accomplish
those aims of itself. It did not evolve from a higher form
striving to realize itself in matter.
Thomas Aquinas agrees with this in his literal com-
mentary on the Posterior Analytics (1269–1272). But he
disagrees on other things. Albert does not allow that the
nature of a thing can cause it to have properties not part of
its essence. He thinks every accident in a thing is to be
traced to another accident, in the thing or outside it, which
brings it about that the ﬁrst accident inheres in it. No
accident, not even an attribute, a proper accident neces-
sarily belonging to that sort of thing, is caused in it by its
1064 P
Posterior Analytics, Commentaries on Aristotle’s

essence, for this would mean that the nature of a thing,
considered in itself, not insofar as it is a particular in
particular circumstances, efﬁciently causes something,
and that universals as such are realities playing a causal
role in the world. On the contrary, Thomas argues that
a thing’s nature efﬁciently causes its primary attribute
necessarily and without exception.
Thomas takes it that ﬁrst principles in the highest sort
of demonstration must be strictly necessary, universally
true in every case at every time. Albert thinks the necessity
involved is of another sort, a conditional necessity, so that
the attribute belongs to its subject necessarily, if nothing
prevents it. Aquinas argued that the middle term of the
highest sort of demonstration is the real deﬁnition of the
subject. This led him to claim that the minor premise is
per se in the fourth way listed in Posterior Analytics I 4,
since the fourth way indicates an efﬁcient causal connec-
tion, and the minor premise will be true because of the
efﬁcient causal connection between the essence of the
subject and the attribute proven of it.
Albert argued that a demonstration of the highest sort
has the ‘‘causal deﬁnition’’ of the attribute as its middle
term. An attribute is an accident, and so has no proper real
deﬁnition, indicating what it is entirely in itself, since what
it is involves its belonging to an appropriate subject really
distinct from it, and it actually belongs to such a subject
only under favorable conditions. So a ‘‘real’’ deﬁnition for
the attribute expresses things extrinsic to the attribute, its
subject and that which brings it to actuality in the subject.
For this reason, Ockham insists that the deﬁnition of an
attribute is a nominal deﬁnition, identifying an accidental
unity, not a real one. Albert’s preference for the deﬁnition of
the attribute as the middle term follows Averroes’ opinion
that the highest sort of demonstration should demonstrate
not a mere potentiality, but an actual state of affairs.
Aquinas granted that on his view, a demonstrable attribute
in a natural thing would have to be a potentiality, though
an actuality could be demonstrated in a mathematical
demonstration.
Giles of Rome later defended Albert’s position.
Thomas had argued that Albert’s candidate for the highest
sort of demonstration assumed as its major premise that
the deﬁnition of the attribute belongs to the subject. But
this is demonstrable, and not a ﬁrst principle, for the
deﬁnition of the attribute belongs to the subject only
because of the subject’s essential nature, and the highest
sort of demonstration is from demonstrative ﬁrst princi-
ples. Giles objected that the major premise in Thomas’
demonstration is trivial, there being no real distinction
between the subject and its essence, and so the purported
demonstration begs the question. The argument had been
made against Albert that the deﬁnition of the attribute and
the attribute itself were identical, so that his candidate for
demonstration of the highest sort begged the question, but
Giles (and Ockham after him) pointed out that the deﬁ-
nition of the attribute, being a causal deﬁnition of some-
thing whose existence depends on other things, refers
obliquely to things other than the attribute itself, and
so is not in fact really identical with it. The same point
cannot be made in defense of the afﬁrmation of the real
deﬁnition of the subject, and so Giles turned the tables on
his opponents.
In reply, John of Cornwall and Walter Burley claimed
there are two sorts of concepts of a substance, quidditative
concepts, captured in real deﬁnition, and concepts that
express the quiddity only confusedly. Someone who does
not know what the quiddity of a lion is may nonetheless
have a non-quidditative concept of the lion if he has
encountered lions. To avoid begging the question in
a demonstration of the highest sort, one must assert the
quidditative concept of the non-quidditative concept, for
instance, one must assert the essence of lions of the kind
exempliﬁed by these creatures from Africa that one has
seen in the zoo. Giles replies that the non-quidditative
concept refers to the same reality the real deﬁnition
describes, even if it does so confusedly, so that asserting
the real deﬁnition of the confused concept simply asserts
that the reality is itself, and is a triviality after all.
Ockham agreed with Scotus and Aquinas that the
deﬁnition
of
the
subject
is
the
middle
term
in
a demonstration of the highest sort, but he denies that
the subject efﬁciently causes an attribute in itself. He
insists that what follows demonstratively follows on
some real structure of really distinct parts within the
subject. A genus-difference deﬁnition of a thing that
does not identify really distinct parts in it cannot serve as
a demonstrative middle term. Moreover, since God is
perfectly simple, no demonstration concerning God can
be constructed. But some deﬁnitions do identify real parts
of the deﬁned. This happens, most notably, in mathemat-
ics, where the deﬁnition of a subject obliquely conveys
parts of the subject, for instance, as in the deﬁnition of
a triangle, which is something composed from lines. This,
clearly
related
to
Grosseteste’s
demonstration
in
a subalternate science that is ‘‘almost univocal,’’ is the
only possibility for the highest sort of demonstration. It
alone meets Thomas’ criterion for such a demonstration,
showing the attribute to belong actually to the subject
necessarily and in every case, Albert’s demand that the
attribute be occurrent and not merely a capacity, and
Giles’ requirement that the attribute be really distinct
from the subject.
Posterior Analytics, Commentaries on Aristotle’s P
1065
P

For Ockham, a demonstration arising from natural
efﬁcient causes takes the following pattern: ‘‘When nothing
opaque is between the moon and the sun, the moon is
illuminated by the sun, when the moon is in such a place,
there is nothing opaque between, therefore the moon is
then illuminated.’’ Hence, the attribute ‘‘illuminable,’’ pred-
icated of its subject without further determination, is inde-
monstrable, but the attribute ‘‘illuminated when in such
a place,’’ predicated of its subject with a further determina-
tion, can be demonstrated. This agrees closely with the
highest form of demonstration in Albert and Giles of
Rome, but Ockham does not regard it as demonstration of
the highest sort, since its conclusion is hypothetical rather
than categorical.
In the sixteenth century, controversy arose over the
application of the ‘‘Science of Demonstration’’ to mathe-
matics, and how we discover a demonstration through
‘‘analysis and synthesis.’’ In the seventeenth and eighteenth
centuries, with the new Platonisms and the anti-Aristotelian
bias of the new science, the theory of demonstration came
to be ignored in mainstream philosophy, though the strong
empiricist tendencies in the tradition outside Thomism
may have inﬂuenced the later development of Empiricism.
See also: ▶Albert the Great ▶Arabic Texts, Latin Trans-
lations of ▶Aristotelianism in the Greek, Latin, Syriac,
Arabic, and Hebrew Traditions ▶Causality ▶Giles of
Rome ▶Ibn Rushd, Muh˙ammad ibn Ah˙mad al-H˙ afı¯d
(Averroes) ▶Induction ▶James of Venice ▶John Duns
Scotus ▶John Philoponus ▶Knowledge ▶Logic, Arabic,
in
the
Latin
Middle
Ages
▶Natural
Philosophy
▶Platonism ▶Robert Grosseteste ▶Thomas Aquinas
▶Thomism ▶Walter Burley ▶William of Ockham
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Albert the Great (1890–1899) Opera omnia, vol 2: Posteriorum
Analyticorum, ed. Borgnet A. Vive`s, Paris
Aquinas Thomas (1882) Opera omnia, vol 1: Commentarium in libros
Posteriorum Analyticorum. Vatican Polyglot Press, Rome (transla-
tion: Aquinas Thomas (1970) Commentary on the posterior analyt-
ics of Aristotle (trans: Larcher FR). Magi Books, Albany)
Aristotle (1968) Analytica posteriora: translationes Iacobi, Anonymi sive
‘Ioannis’, Gerardi et recensio Guillelmi de Moerbeke. Aristoteles
Latinus, IV 1–4, ed. Minio-Paluello L, Dod BG. Descle´e de Brouwer,
Bruges/Paris
Averroe¨s (1562–1574) Aristotelis opera cum Averrois commentatoris,
I Part 2a, Magnis Commentariis in Posteriora Resolutoria; Part 2b,
Expositionis
Mediae
in
Librum
Demonstrationis
Aristotelis,
IX Quaesita Demonstrativa in Libros Posteriorum, and Diversorum
Arabum Quaesita, ed. Iuntina. Apud Iunctas, Venetiis (repr.
Minerva, Frankfurt/Mainz, 1962)
Burleigh Walter (1982) Quaestiones super librum Posteriorum, ed.
Sommers MC. Pontiﬁcal Institute of Mediaeval Studies, Toronto
Giles of Rome (1488) Egidius super libros Posteriorum Aristotelis.
Bonetus Locatellus, Venice
Giles of Rome (1976) De medio demonstrationis, ed. Pinborg J. Misc
Mediaev 10:240–268
Grosseteste Robert (1982) Commentarius in Posteriorum Analyticorum
libros, ed. Rossi P. The Catholic University of America Press, Florence
John of Cornwall = Pseudo-Scotus (1891–1895) In libris Posteriorum
Analyticorum Aristotelis quaestiones. In Duns Scotus, Opera
omnia, vol 1. Vive`s, Paris, pp 342–430
Ockham William (1967) Opera theologica, vol 1: Scriptum in librum
primum Sententiarum (Ordinatio), Prologus et Distinctio I, ed.
Ga´l G, Brown SF. Franciscan Institute, St. Bonaventure [Prologue.
Questions 2 through 6. For translation, see Longeway (2007)]
Ockham William (1974) Opera philosophica, vol 1: Summa Logicae, ed.
Ga´l G, Brown SF. Franciscan Institute, St. Bonaventure
Secondary Sources
Longeway JL (2005) Medieval theories of demonstration. In: Stanford
encyclopedia of philosophy. plato.stanford.edu/entries/demonstra-
tion-medieval/
Longeway JL (2007) Demonstration and scientiﬁc knowledge in William
of Ockham: a translation of Summa Logicae III-II: De Syllogismo
Demonstrativo, and selections from the Prologue to the Ordinatio.
University of Notre Dame Press, Notre Dame
Marrone SP (1983) William of Auvergne and Robert Grosseteste. New
ideas of truth in the early thirteenth century. Princeton University
Press, Princeton
Serene EF (1982) Demonstrative science. Chapter 24 of the Cambridge
history of later medieval philosophy, ed. Kretzmann N, Kenny A,
Pinborg J. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Wallace WA (1972) Causality and scientiﬁc explanation. Medieval and early
classical science, vol I. University Press of America, Washington, DC
Wallace WA (1980) Albertus Magnus on suppositional necessity in the
natural sciences. In: Albertus Magnus and the sciences, ed. Weisheipl
JA. Pontiﬁcal Institute of Mediaeval Studies, Toronto, pp 103–128
Wallace WA (1981) The uses of hypothesis (Suppositio) in scientiﬁc
reasoning. In: Studies in Aristotle, ed. O’Meara DJ. The Catholic
University of America Press, Washington, DC
Walton WM (1952) The second mode of necessary or per se propositions
according to St. Thomas Aquinas. Mod Schoolman 29:293–306
Wood R (1996) Causality and demonstration: an early scholastic posterior
analytics commentary. Monist 99:325–356
Poverty
VIRPI MA¨KINEN
Helsinki Collegium for Advanced Studies
University of Helsinki
Helsinki
Finland
Abstract
Poverty was a relative matter in the Middle Ages, as it is
nowadays. There were different modes of poverty:
voluntary poverty for the religious, the simulated poverty
1066 P
Poverty

of hypocrites, and the involuntary poverty of mendicants
forced to beg in order to survive. Since mendicancy was
a serious problem throughout the Middle Ages, the church
and, later on, society were forced to create and develop
forms of poor relief. The church recommended benevo-
lence toward the poor who did not have means of suste-
nance, mainly encouraging people to give alms. The
common opinion was that one should give alms from
one’s surplus and take care of oneself and those closest to
one ﬁrst. The recipient should be in need. However, two
natural law principles, the maxims of necessitas non habet
legem and of communis omnium possessio founded on
canon law, ordered the almsgiving. From the thirteenth
century onward scholastics emphasized that property was
necessary for functioning in the public sphere, both in the
state and in the church. They promoted the idea of limited
wealth needed to support life and that a person’s moral
responsibility involved having property. The Franciscan
ideal of poverty as the renunciation of all modes of rights
was criticized as being against the natural duty of subsis-
tence. There was also an important discussion on individ-
ual rights and actions, which led to the doctrine of natural
rights in the late Middle Ages. Poverty was also seen as one
central theme in late medieval political theory concerning
the relationship between ownership and political rule.
Various concepts marked a contrast between the inferior-
ity of the pauper and the superiority of the person who
possessed
power
(potestas)
or
civic
liberty
(civis,
burgensis), or wealth (dives).
In the Middle Ages, as nowadays, since poverty (paupertas)
was a relative matter, it was quite broadly deﬁned.
A pauper (pauper) was ‘‘a person who permanently or
temporarily found her- or himself in a situation of
weakness, dependence, or humiliation, characterized by
privation of the means to achieve power and social esteem
(which means varied with period and place): these
included money, relations, inﬂuence, power, knowledge,
skill, nobility of birth, physical strength, intellectual capac-
ity, and personal freedom, rights, and dignity.’’ (Mollat
1978) Absolute poverty was deemed a miserable state,
lacking the necessities of daily life (food, clothing,
housing, and health), which might lead to the state of
extreme necessity.
Etymologically the words ‘‘poverty’’ and ‘‘poor’’ came
from the Latin pauper, ‘‘poor,’’ which originally came from
pau- and the root of pario, ‘‘giving birth to not much’’ and
referred to unproductive farmland or livestock. The
words used to denote poverty in the Middle Ages also
describe the causes and effects of poverty, as well as the
attitudes toward the poor. There were words referring to
impecuniousness and destitution in general, such as
egens, egenus, indigens, inops, insufﬁciens, mendicus, and
miser; shortage of food (esuriens, famelicus) or clothing
(nudus), physical defects (caecus, claudus, contractus);
inﬁrmity in general (inﬁrmus), mental deﬁciency (isiotus,
imbellicis, simplex); situations of adversity such as those
involving the loss of one’s nearest relations (orphanus,
vidua) or loss of liberty (captivus), and ﬁnally, punishment
and exile (bannus, exiliatus). There were also some words
which referred to a feeling of compassion (miserabilis,
miserabilis persona). In medieval canon law, the concept
of miserabiles personae including widows, orphans, the
sick, and the old referred to the poor (Mollat 1978).
Individual thinkers used different words when writing
about poverty. A Cistercian monk and theologian, Ber-
nard of Clairvaux (1090–1153), for example, used at least
three different words with speciﬁc and different meanings
when speaking about poverty. Pauperes referred to a group
of the wretched for whom material assistance was required
as a matter of justice. Egenus referred to a category com-
posed of needy individuals, orphans, widows, and pil-
grims. Indigentes referred to a deﬁciency of an accidental
nature.
Certain word associations and contrasts shed further
light on the condition of the poor in the Middle Ages. The
frequent association of pauper with agricola or laborator
tells us a great deal about the origins of poverty, many of
the poor being drawn from the ranks of men who worked
the earth with their hands to eke out a meager subsistence.
Prior to the eleventh century, people lived in precarious
conditions, and the number of peasants was large. Words
illuminating the struggle for daily bread and suggesting
uncertainty about the future and susceptibility to disaster,
evoking anxiety and distress (anxietas, angustia) as well as
lack of necessary resources (carentia, penuria) were used.
Mendicancy was a serious problem throughout the
Middle Ages. Several studies deal with the difﬁcult ques-
tion of estimating the amount of poverty or pauperism in
the Middle Ages. Some economic historians have argued
that between the thirteenth and the ﬁfteenth centuries
there was no such grinding and hopeless poverty, no
such chronic semi-starvation in any class as exists today
among large classes in the great cities. The proportion of
medieval people who lived without adequate food and
clothing for long periods of time was probably smaller
than nowadays.
The reduction of poverty was not regarded as a social
goal in medieval society or even in the church, as both the
lack of systematic poor relief and of legislation proved.
Poverty was mainly taken as a matter of course and no
efﬁcient efforts were made to discover the reasons for it.
Poverty P
1067
P

The church, however, recommended benevolence
toward the poor who did not have means of sustenance,
encouraging people mainly to give alms. The inﬂuential
canon law collection, Gratian’s Decretum (c. 1140),
contained the patristic citations, which maintained duty-
oriented charity towards neighbors, stating, for example:
‘‘Feed the poor. If you do not feed them you kill them.’’
(D. 86 c. 21) or ‘‘The one who keeps more for oneself than
he or she needs is guilty of theft.’’ (D. 42 c. 1) Two
important natural law principles governed benevolence
toward the poor founded on the Ordinary Gloss to the
Decretum. First, the maxim necessitas non habet legem (D.
5 c. 26), which meant that a person in extreme need had
a duty, or even a right, to subsistence and might, therefore,
rightfully take the property of others to sustain their own
life. An Italian canonist, Hostiensis (d. c. 1287), for exam-
ple, wrote that ‘‘One who suffers the need of hunger seems
to use his right (ius suum) rather than to plan a theft.’’
Second, the natural law maxim communis omnium
possessio (D. 1 c. 7) held that everything created by God
for mankind was held and used in common to take what is
needed to sustain life. The Italian canonist Huguccio
(c. 1140–1210), for example, stated that by natural law
we should keep what is necessary and distribute what is left
to the needy. Ruﬁnus wrote referring to Ambrose that:
‘‘No one may call his own what is common, of which if he
takes more than he needs, it is taken with violence.’’ In that
both maxims were a commonplace of medieval moral
theology and church law, human law cannot altogether
eliminate the original commonness of things under natu-
ral law. Thus property owners must help the poor from
their surplus or a person in extreme need could even take
another’s property in order to save his life.
The responsibility for organizing poor relief belonged
to dioceses, which collected money, especially in the form
of tithes. Taxes were requested to be given to the poor. The
ﬁrst declaration of the church’s responsibility to give legal
aid to the poor (including widows and orphans) was made
at the Council of Chalcedon in 451. Monasteries and other
religious institutions took care of the poor, the Franciscan
Order, which was established in the 1220s, taking as its
main task the care of urban poor living outside the city
walls. The confraternity, one of the most popular forms of
lay association throughout late medieval Europe, made
a signiﬁcant contribution to the relief of the poor in the
medieval city. Beginning from the fourteenth century, the
relationship between religion, society, and charity both in
private and public life found new forms.
The large number of mendicants necessitated criteria
for determining who were poor enough to receive alms.
For Pope Innocent III (1198–1216), almsgiving required
‘‘heart, mouth and act’’: from the heart arises sympathy for
the poor, from the mouth arises a request and encourage-
ment, and from the acts generosity. Augustine (354–430)
already had distinguished between two kinds of alms-
givers: those who give from their heart and those who
give from their property. According to Innocent, four
regulations had to be taken into account in the poor relief:
reasons, consequences, means, and order. The sudden
need had to be met with love of one’s neighbor. The
consequences of helping the poor should be blessed for
every party, the means of helping being alms. The order of
helping meant that almsgiving should be regular, the most
important aspect being benevolentia, the helper’s inten-
tion. If a giver did what was in accordance with his obli-
gation, he performed a good act, since where an act was
connected with loving one’s neighbor and right intention,
benevolentia, it was meritorious. Helping the poor regard-
less of one’s own penury was a meritorious act but no one
was obliged to help anybody in such circumstances.
Thomas Aquinas (1224–1274), for example, deﬁned alms
as being ‘‘a deed whereby something is given to the needy,
out of compassion and for God’s sake,’’ which motive
belonged to mercy, so that almsgiving was an act of
mercy. The Greek word for almsgiving, eleemosyne, was
derived from having mercy, eleein, as well as, the Latin
miseratio. Since mercy was an effect of charity, it follows
that almsgiving was an act of charity through the medium
of mercy (Summa theologiae, 2a 2ae, q. 32, a. 1).
A French secular theologian, William of Saint-Amour
(c. 1200–1272) maintained that the measure of mercy was
to be proportional to the human condition. Those having
only one tunic should not be compelled to divide it with
others, for then both would remain unclothed. Zacheus,
who gave half of his possessions to the poor while
retaining enough for his own sustenance, was for William
an example of proper almsgiving. William also used
Zacheus to argue that private property should not be
denied but limited so that no one should appropriate
more than sufﬁces for one’s own needs (De periculis, 58).
Thomas Aquinas also dealt with the various require-
ments of helping the poor, which he distinguished as time,
place, and matter. The order of love (ordo caritatis)
required that one should preferably help those who were
more closely associated with the giver. However, when
someone was in extreme necessity one should ‘‘succor
a stranger. . . rather than one’s own father, if he is not in
such urgent need’’ (a. 3). Almsgiving was therefore never
limited regarding its recipient since one had to give alms
without limitation both to good and bad, pious and unbe-
lievers, friends and enemies if they were in need. The giver
should give of his surplus, because one must ﬁrst of all
1068 P
Poverty

look after oneself and then after those over whom one has
charge, and then relieve the needs of others with what
remains. On the part of the recipient, it is requisite that
one should be in need. However, since it is not possible for
one individual to relieve the needs of all, one was not
bound to relieve all who are in need, but only those who
could not be succored if someone not did help them (Sth
q. 32, a. 5).
Scholars also discussed the amount of alms. The com-
mon opinion was that to relieve someone’s need more than
sufﬁciently was not praiseworthy, it being better to give to
several who are in need. Thomas Aquinas, for instance,
stated that one should give alms so that the recipient may
have relief, not an easy life, that is, not to have dainties,
ﬁner food, and clothing (Sth, 2a 2ae, q. 31, a. 1) and
referred to Ambrose (338–397): ‘‘When you give alms to
a man, you should take into consideration his age and his
weakness; and sometimes the shame which proclaims his
good birth; and again that perhaps he has fallen from
riches to indigence through no fault of his own’’ (De
ofﬁciis I, 30).
The ideas of charity toward the poor of the most
inﬂuential medieval Jewish philosopher, Moses Maimon-
ides (1135–1204) differed from those of Christian philos-
ophers. Maimonides pointed out that charity in which the
donor did not know the recipient or the recipient the
donor, was more meritorious than types of giving in
which the donor could take satisfaction from the appreci-
ation of the recipient. Giving before being asked was also
preferable to giving after being asked.
However, the scholastics added that if someone omits
to give alms, it is a mortal sin; on the part of the recipient
when one sees that his need is evident and urgent, and
that he is not likely to be succored otherwise, and on the
part of the giver, when he has superﬂuous goods which he
does not need for the time being, as far as he can judge
with probability. Nor need he consider every case that
may possibly occur in the future, for this would be to
think about the morrow, which our Lord forbade us to do
(Matt. 6:34), but he should judge what is superﬂuous and
what is necessary according as things probably and
generally occur.
Theologians also made several interesting comments
on probability regarding the future, which was connected
with wealth. For instance, when one is attempting to
resolve the question of whether it is lawful to beg or not,
one has to proceed on the grounds of probable predictions
such as whether it is more likely that one can provide the
necessities of life by begging or by doing something else.
A notable scholastic theologian and philosopher, Henry of
Ghent (c. 1217–1293), for instance, ended the reﬂection by
stating that begging is more likely to assure the sustenance
of one’s life and cause less solicitude if one is able to
give something in return, for example, by teaching, by
praying, or by offering some other spiritual remuneration.
Such calculations of probability concerning the future on
the ground of our quasi-statistical knowledge of regulari-
ties in the world were quite common in the thirteenth
century.
These kinds of theological and moral philosophical
statements regarding almsgiving implied the idea that
the poor were somehow ‘‘a useful object’’ for salvation
by good works. Despite the main purpose of medieval
scholars being to encourage people to give alms, such
implications also hindered the development of poor relief.
In medieval Christianity poverty was also a religious
ideal for those living in monasteries and other religious
orders. There were various words referring to religious pov-
erty: voluntary poverty (paupertas spontanea), evangelical
poverty (paupertas evangelica) and spiritual poverty
(paupertas spiritus). Poverty was one of the monastic
vows or evangelical counsels (with chastity and obedience)
from the very beginning of monastic life. Religious pov-
erty involved a twofold obligation: ﬁrst, self-denial in
order to place oneself at the service of God and others.
In this sense, poverty concerned puriﬁcation of one’s own
soul (especially the will) from all worldly matters
(concupiscentia) to aid in imitating Christ in his material
poverty (imitatio Christi). Second, religious poverty
involved giving up all personal property to live with com-
mon possessions (Matt. 19:21–31 and Acts 4:32). The
monastery itself may possess both goods and money.
Voluntary poverty was understood as a beneﬁt to the
individual, a form of self-discipline. Since spiritual life was
highly valued in the medieval church, a poor monk or nun
was seen as the image of Christ himself, an ideal manifested
in Christian mysticism. The medieval church sanctioned
poverty and this was also included in the interpretation of
the real poor, not only those who were dedicated to it for
spiritual reasons. The ﬁgure of poor Christ as reﬂected in
the poor can also be seen in the extended use of the
expression pauper Christi, not only limited to a religious
life of voluntary poverty for love of God.
The Franciscan Order has traditionally forgone all
individual and common forms of ownership and even of
using money. The Franciscan rule of poverty in the Regula
Bullata of 1223 (‘‘Let the Friars appropriate nothing for
themselves, neither a house, nor a place, nor anything else’’)
was interpreted in the thirteenth century in terms of the
concept of use of fact (usus facti) as opposed to all property
rights (dominium, ius). The notion of factum as opposed
to ius indicates the nonlegal status of the Franciscans,
Poverty P
1069
P

since their activity was legally indifferent. The use of fact
concerned only things necessary for sustenance without any
rights over them. The Franciscan doctrine of absolute pov-
erty responded to the challenge presented by early thir-
teenth-century economic and social changes. The ‘‘poor
friars’’ were willing to combat ‘‘the ills of the new society,’’
but they were themselves inevitably its product as well.
The Franciscan ideal of poverty already had its oppo-
nents in the mid-thirteenth century. Since some rigorous
Franciscans had given all their property as alms to the
poor at once and lived in extreme poverty, some theolo-
gians raised the question of the moral justiﬁcation of
voluntary poverty. William of Saint-Amour, who led
the opposition to the mendicants at the University of
Paris in the mid-thirteenth century, stated that the act
of relinquishing all temporal possessions without caring
for the future exposes one to the danger of several sins,
such as ﬂattery, lying, stealing, perjury, and homicide,
since one is required to beg for sustenance. If one gives
all one’s possessions to the poor at once, it only lessens
their misery for a short period, because one can no longer
provide sustenance for oneself and continue to give alms.
Thus the suffering of the poor continues and perhaps
leads
to
death.
Furthermore,
extensive
almsgiving
and poverty subject one to the danger of starvation.
One who risks starvation attempts suicide, which was
contrary to the precepts of the Decalogue. William
observed that one could easily avoid such dangers and
sins if one retained some temporal possessions. (De
periculis, 55–57).
Secular theologians also criticized the absolute poverty
of the Franciscans as being opposed to Aristotelian virtue
ethics. Aristotle’s Nicomachean Ethics inﬂuenced the
notions of social and political beneﬁts provided by wealth.
Another source used along with Aristotle was the Conso-
lation of Philosophy of Boethius (480–524/525), a Christian
philosopher who stated that the good life depends on
external goods acquired in a proper way. A French secular
theologian at the University of Paris, Gerard of Abbeville
(d. 1272) maintained that living either in absolute poverty
or in luxury were both vices, since according to Aristotle,
perfect virtue was a medium between two extremes.
However, he also pointed out that wasting one’s posses-
sions is in some way self-destructive, because life always
involves some amount of possessions. Temporal goods
were not only a necessary condition for the good life,
but also contributed to it. Citing Aristotle’s Politics (trans-
lated into Latin c. 1260), the French philosopher and
theologian Godfrey of Fontaines (c. 1250–1309) declared
that the amount of wealth is not important for human
perfection; more important is the attitude one has toward
property – the idea of moderation, which was a descen-
dant of Aristotle’s doctrine.
Another danger in voluntary poverty, in which
a person gave up all property rights and lived in absolute
poverty, was, according to Gerard of Abbeville, that such
a situation involves one’s own life depending on another’s
will (ex alterius voluntate dependeat). This also seems to
hark back to Aristotle’s doctrine of self-sufﬁciency
(autarchia).
William of Saint-Amour’s and Gerard of Abbeville’s
polemical works provoked responses from the other side.
The Dominican Thomas Aquinas composed a direct chal-
lenge to William’s De periculis. The title of Aquinas’ work
is Contra impugnantes Dei cultum et religionem (‘‘Against
Those Who Attack the Religious Profession,’’ 1256/1257).
In his response, Aquinas stated that voluntary poverty
belongs to Christian perfection itself. Therefore, it was
impossible to be perfect without being poor. However, in
his later work, Summa theologiae, Aquinas’ opinion has
changed and he saw poverty as only an instrument of
perfection, which one is free to use or not.
As a Franciscan reply to the attack of Gerard’s Contra
adversarium Bonaventure wrote his Apologia pauperum
contra calumniatorem (‘‘Defence of Poverty Against the
Slanderer’’) at the end of 1269. For Bonaventure, the
meaning of poverty in its Franciscan mode consisted in
the imitation of poor Christ, which was characterized by
a prohibition of the use of money, the right to live by
begging and the renunciation of all property rights both
individually and collectively. The most remarkable idea in
Bonaventure’s defense was that he introduced a juridical
discussion into the interpretation of poverty. The friars’
poverty included only a simple use (simplex usus) of uten-
sils without any kind of dominium, understood in the
meaning of iura in re.
The Franciscan ideal of the renunciation of all prop-
erty rights and of all rights whatsoever posed another kind
of question concerning the natural rights of human
beings. In the late thirteenth and early fourteenth century,
there was a turn to the moral subject and his capacity for
right action, that is, to subjective capacity and subjective
rights; the emphasis on the active individual who had
control over the moral and physical environment. Godfrey
of Fontaines, for example, asked whether it was licit to give
up all modes of rights maintaining that each person has
a God-given natural obligation of self-preservation and,
following from this duty, one had certain rights that were
inalienable and could not lawfully be renounced, the most
important being the fundamental right to subsistence, that
is, the right to life. For Godfrey, the right to subsistence
not being a universal, natural right obliged each person
1070 P
Poverty

only in the situation of extreme necessity. However, such
ideas were later developed as individual natural rights in
the early modern period.
William of Saint-Amour also pointed out the ‘‘merits
of wealth’’ in contrast to religious poverty. In his De
periculis novissimorum temporum (1255), written against
the mendicant orders, he maintained that Scripture
emphasizes the duty of taking care of others and ourselves.
Christians, therefore, needed a certain number of posses-
sions to fulﬁll this duty of charity. William’s way of
connecting wealth with morality was common to theolo-
gians from the thirteenth century onward and shows
changing attitudes toward poverty. His ideas of the certain
merits of wealth implied a notion of social and even
individual beneﬁt provided by wealth – a point that the
humanists later maintained in their support of secular
values against ascetic monks and begging friars.
Most medieval scholars assumed that the institution of
private property was normal and right and that property
should thus be respected. Despite the institution of private
property being understood as the consequence of the fall,
it was taken as a necessary condition to protect a peaceful
community in accordance with the Aristotelian idea of
common good. A Franciscan theologian, Alexander of
Hales (c. 1200–1245), argued that natural law prescribes
community for the state of innocence and respect for
property for the fallen state. For another Franciscan phi-
losopher and theologian, William of Ockham (c. 1288–
1347), ‘‘common possession of all things’’ belonged to the
natural law in the state of innocence, but the ‘‘acquisition
of what is taken from air, land, and sea, the restitution of
a thing or money left for safekeeping’’ belonged to natural
law ‘‘on supposition,’’ supposing Adam’s sin and, suppos-
ing that because human law has since made a division of
property, it is a requirement of natural law to respect
another’s property.
Whereas earlier scholastics had condemned riches both
as hindering the soul’s progress toward sanctity and for the
purpose of obtaining a higher social position for oneself,
the late fourteenth- and ﬁfteenth-century scholastics began
to point out that afﬂuence also confers certain social and
political beneﬁts upon communities. They also saw a con-
nection between wealth and morality in that riches may
contribute to man’s moral growth. Late thirteenth-century
theologians had noted the social and political beneﬁts of
property and the importance of a working and thrifty
population in obtaining it. Thomas Aquinas, for example,
accepted trade, which maintains the family, relieves the
needy, and contributes to the public beneﬁt. Common
opinion also held that one should save in anticipation of
accidents to oneself and for the needs of the poor.
In fourteenth-century Florence it was already a gener-
ally accepted notion that the relief of the poor and other
caring and helping systems should be under the support
and control of the city. A Renaissance humanist, Leonardo
Bruni (c. 1370–1444), for example, stated that the ‘‘upper
class is protected by property, the lower class by the state.’’
From the ﬁfteenth and sixteenth centuries onward, alms-
giving moved from individual alms and mercy to more
institutionalized public assistance.
Institutionalization also caused a change in attitudes
toward the poor. Begging came to be seen as shameful and
dishonorable. The term pauper retained its religious con-
notation, but other words acquired new and harsher
meanings. The pauper came to be seen as disgusting
(abjectus), dirty, dressed in rags, foul-smelling, and cov-
ered with sores. Hostile and disparaging neologisms also
came into use. For example, words associated with beg-
ging began to assume idleness on the beggar’s part. Poverty
was considered a form of social parasitism or even (as in
the case of beggary) a crime (Mollat 1978). A Dutch
humanist and theologian, Erasmus of Rotterdam (1466–
1536), for instance, wrote about the poor: ‘‘perhaps nature
made those people vagabonds.’’
Labor came to correspond to a person’s social status,
but also determined the pauper’s character, as worthiness
to receive aid from others depended on whether one
was unﬁt for work, unable to ﬁnd work, or unwilling to
engage in work. Distinctions were thus drawn between
the ‘‘true pauper’’ and the ‘‘sturdy beggar.’’ The attitudes
toward mendicant orders also came to change. New
types of the poor were those who worked hard but still
did not earn enough to support their families. Economic
crisis recruited new people into the ranks of the paupers
as well.
The tendency of policing the poor in cities also started
by the late Middle Ages. The idea of police was, however,
to regulate the community’s life, not to organize poor
relief. The regulations concerned mendicancy, security,
criminality, health, and cleanliness. Mendicancy came to
be punishable.
This tendency was seen in the De subventione
pauperum sive de humanis necessitatibus (1526) of
a Spanish humanist, Juan Luis Vive`s (1492–1540) who
criticized individual alms and praised institutional public
relief. Vive`s’ tract has been called the ﬁrst systematic work
of social thinking and institutional reform that focused on
the public exercise of compassion through a government-
organized means-tested scheme directed to the poor. The
tract has also been described as pioneering the welfare
state in maintaining that municipal government should
be given the responsibility of securing a subsistence
Poverty P
1071
P

minimum for all its residents, not on the grounds of
justice but for the sake of more effective exercise of
a morally required charity. According to Vive`s, the assis-
tance scheme would be closely targeted to the poor. He
also asserted a general obligation to be willing to work: ‘‘If
the poor cannot be parasites, why could the rich?’’ Despite
the difﬁculties and doubts aroused by policing the poor,
public assistance came to be an essential function of gov-
ernment from the sixteenth century onward.
Poverty was also seen as a central theme in late
medieval political theory concerning the relationship
between ownership and political rule. Various antonyms
established a contrast between the inferiority of the pauper
and the superiority of the person who possessed power
(potestas) or civic liberty (civis, burgensis), or wealth
(dives), which corresponds to a different stage in the
evolution of the notion of medieval poverty. Traditionally
a ruler adjudicates on property as supreme owner.
According to De potestate regali et papali (1332) by John
of Paris (d. 1306), a Dominican theologian and contro-
versialist, a community (i.e., a state, church, or particular
communities) acquired property only from individuals,
and the head of the community is only an administrator of
the community’s property, not its owner. For John, this
also applied the pope, who does not have unrestricted
power over church property, still less over the properties
of lay people. John’s assumption that original appropria-
tion is by individuals and his remark that individuals
acquire property by ‘‘labor and industry’’ have led to
suggestions that he anticipated Locke’s theory of property.
John, however, indicated that individuals acquire property
under human law, which was the traditional view among
medieval theologians following Augustine. Property was
acquired under human law, but it was acquired by indi-
viduals, not directly by rulers.
An Italian physician and theologian, Marsilius of
Padua (c. 1270–1342), opposed Pope John XXII (1316–
1330) in his Defensor pacis (1324). The pope rejected the
Franciscan doctrine that the highest form of religious
poverty was to reject all kinds of property rights, both
individual and common. According to the pope, no one
can justly use consumables (such as food or clothes)
without owning what they use – one had to have at least
the right to use them. Concerning the question of prop-
erty, Marsilius represented the Franciscan ideal as being
that it was not only legitimate for the religious to live
without ownership of property, but it was what Christ
intended for all the clergy. Therefore, Marsilius pointed
out, the pope and clergy should have no lordship
(dominium) at all, either in the sense of coercive jurisdic-
tion or in the sense of ownership of property. Marsilius
deﬁned the poor as powerless – and demanded that the
pope should be poor.
See also: ▶Canon Law ▶Economic Thought in the Mid-
dle Ages ▶Natural Law ▶Natural Rights ▶Roman
(Civil) Law
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Aquinas Thomas (1888–1906) Summa theologiae, ed. Leonina. Opera
omnia, vols 4–12. S. Sabina, Rome
Aquinas
Thomas
(1970)
Contra
impugnantes
Dei
cultum
et
religionem, ed. Leonina. Sabina, Rome
Bonaventure (1898) Apologia pauperum. Opera omnia edita cura et
studio pp. collegii a S. Bonaventura, vol VIII. Collegium S.
Bonaventurae, Quaracchi, pp 30–330
Francis of Assisi (1993) Regula Bullata. Die Opuscula des Hl. Franziskus
von Assisi, ed. Esser K. Spicilegium Bonaventurianum XIII. Editiones
Collegii S. Bonaventurae ad Claras Aquas, Grottaferrata
Gerard of Abbeville (1938/1939) Tractatus Gerardi de Abbatisvilla: Conta
adversarium perfectionis, ed. Clasen S. Archivum Franciscanum
Historicum (1938) 31:276–329; (1939) 32:89–200
Godfrey of Fontaines (1904–1937) Les Quodlibets de Godefroid de
Fontaines, vols I–XV, ed. De Wulf M, Peltzer A, Hoffmans J, Lottin
O. Institut supe´rieur de philosophie de l’universite´, Louvain
Gratianus (1879) Decretum Magistri Gratiani, ed. Friedberg A, Tauchnitz
B. Corpus Iuris Canonici, vol I. Leipzig
Vives Juan Luis (2002) De subventione pauperum sive de humanis
necessitatibus: Introduction, critical edition, translation and notes,
Libri II, ed. Matheeussen C, Fantazzi C, De Landtsheer J. Brill,
Leiden/Boston
William of Ockham (1940/1963) Opus nonaginta dierum, caps. 1–6, ed.
Bennet RF, Sikes JG. Guillelmi de Ockham, Opera Politica, vol 1.
University Press, Manchester, pp 287–374 (1940); caps. 7–124, ed.
Sikes J, Ofﬂer HS. Opera Politica, vol 2. University Press, Manchester,
pp 375–858 (1963)
William
of
Saint-Amour
(1632)
Tractatus
brevis
de
periculis
novissimorum
temporum,
ed.
Alithophilius.
Opera
omnia.
Constantiae, Paris, pp 17–72
Secondary Sources
Brunner O (1984) Sozialgeschichte Europas in Mittelalter, 2. Auﬂ.
Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, Go¨ttingen
Coleman J (1991) Property and poverty. In: Burns JH (ed) The Cam-
bridge history of medieval political thought c. 350–c. 1450. Cam-
bridge University Press, Cambridge, pp 607–652
Cusato MF (2009) Poverty. In: The Cambridge history of medieval phi-
losophy, vol. II. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp 577–592
de Vinck J (trans) (1966) Defense of the mendicants. Works of St.
Bonaventure, vol IV. St. Anthony Guil, Paterson
Dyer C (1989) Standards of living in the later Middle Ages: social change
in England c. 1200–1520. Cambridge medieval textbook. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge
Evans GR (2009) Law and nature. In: The Cambridge history of medieval
philosophy,
vol
II.
Cambridge
University
Press,
Cambridge.
pp 565–576
Henderson J (1994) Piety and charity in late medieval Florence. Univer-
sity of Chicago Press, Chicago/London
1072 P
Poverty

Kantola I (1994) Probability and moral uncertainty in late medieval and
early modern times. Luther-Agricola-Society, Helsinki
Kilcullen J (1995) The origin of property: Ockham, Grotius, Pufendorf,
and some others. http://www.mq.edu.au/hpp/politics/prop.html.
Accessed 15 Jan 2009
Lambert MD (1961) Franciscan poverty: the doctrine of the absolute
poverty of Christ and the Apostles in the Franciscan order 1210–
1323. SPCK, London
Lambertini R (2000) La poverta` pensata. Mucchi Editore, Modena
Lawrence CH (1994) The Friars: the impact of the early mendicant
movement on western society. Lingman, London/New York
Little LK (1978) Religious poverty and the proﬁt economy in medieval
Europe. Cornell University Press, Ithaca
Ma¨kinen V (2001) Property rights in the late medieval discussion on
Franciscan poverty. Peeters, Leuven
McGovern JF (1970) The rise of new economic attitudes – economic
humanism, economic nationalism – during the later middle ages
and the Renaissance, A.D. 1200–1500. Traditio 26:217–253
McKeon PR (1964) The development of the concept of property in
political philosophy: a study of the background of the constitution.
Ethics XLVIII:304–312
Mollat M (1978) The poor in the Middle Ages: an essay in social history
(trans: Goldhammer A). Yale University Press, New Haven/London
Roumy F (2006) L’origine et la diffusion de l’adage canonique Necessitas
non habet legem (VIIIe-XIIIe s). In: Mu¨ller WP, Sommar ME (eds)
Medieval church law and the origins of the western legal tradition:
a tribute to Kenneth Pennington. The Catholic University of America
Press, Washington, pp 301–319
Swanson SG (1997) The medieval foundations of John Locke’s theory of
natural rights: rights of subsistence and the principle of extreme
necessity. Hist Polit Thought 18:399–456
Tierney B (1959) Medieval poor law: a sketch of canonical theory and its
application in England. University of California Press, Berkeley
Tierney B (1997) The idea of natural rights: studies on natural rights,
natural law and church law 1150–1625. Scholars, Atlanta
Van den Eijnden JGJ (1994) Poverty on the way to God: Thomas Aquinas
on evangelical poverty. Peeters, Leuven
Presocratics in the Arab World
CARMELA BAFFIONI
Dipartimento di Studi e Ricerche su Africa e Paesi Arabi
Facolta` di Studi Arabo-Islamici e del Mediterraneo
Universita` degli Studi di Napoli ‘‘L’Orientale’’
Napoli
Italy
Abstract
Aristotle is the main source for the so-called Presocratics
in the Arab world; other important references can be
found in biographers and bibliographers. In general,
only the Presocratics whose doctrines can be reconciled
with Muslim theology are considered by the Arabs. The
names of the Presocratics are variously transcribed in
Arabic; their chronologies are uncertain, and sources say
nothing about their education, philosophical activity or
disciples, their physical appearance or the titles of their
writings. The Presocratics approach nature from an
eternalistic perspective; in spite of this, the Muslims
chose some of these thinkers with a view to seeing in
their doctrines a preﬁguration of their own philosophical
views: for example, the water of Thales becomes the water
on which the throne of God is placed. Pythagoras is said to
be ‘‘a monotheist from H˙ arra¯n.’’ Heraclitus is mainly
known as the author of a cyclical ontological system
beginning and ending with God. Anaxagoras’ doctrine of
panta homou is developed into the theory of kumu¯n and
z˙uhu¯r – of ‘‘latency and appearance,’’
which proposes
a creation of all things together that are destined to evolve
from one form to another. Atomism is a view shared in
Islam in a strictly scientiﬁc perspective, for example, by
Abu¯ Bakr al-Ra¯zı¯ (d. c. 925) and by orthodox theologians,
to assert the absolute freedom and will of God against the
Aristotelian theory of secondary causality.
Biographical Information
Aristotle is the main source for the so-called Presocratics in
the Arab world. Other than Aristotle, sources for them
include biographers, bibliographers, and doxographers, as
well as works on history, literature, heresiography, and phi-
losophers. The former are the most reliable because of their
antiquity, while Muslim historians and philosophers usually
adapt the data on ancient thought to their own purposes or
place ancient thinkers in theoretical frameworks. The
amount of data at our disposal is less than what might
appear, however, because the sources rely on one another.
Only Presocratics whose doctrines can be reconciled
with Muslim theology are considered: Parmenides, for
example, is seldom quoted, probably because his concep-
tion of ‘‘being’’ (to on) as an absolute but impersonal
entity was at odds with the Qurʾa¯nic idea of God. This
entry deals with Thales, Anaximander, Anaximenes, Her-
aclitus,
Empedocles,
Pythagoras,
Anaxagoras,
and
Democritus. The eleventh century heresiographer al-
Shahrasta¯nı¯ selected ‘‘the seven wise men’’ of antiquity
that had been ‘‘illuminated from the lamp of prophecy.’’
S˙a¯‘id al-Andalusı¯ (d. 1070) in his Genealogy of Nations
names Thales, Empedocles, Pythagoras, Anaxagoras, and
Democritus as the ‘‘ﬁve philosophers par excellence.’’
The names of the Presocratics are variously tran-
scribed in Arabic; their chronologies are uncertain, often
as a result of confusion: Zeno of Elea is confused with
Zeno of Cyzicus for example, and sometimes anecdotes
refer to persons with the same name.
Sources say little about their education, philosophical
activity, disciples, physical appearance, or the titles of their
Presocratics in the Arab World P
1073
P

writings. Al-Shahrasta¯nı¯ introduces Empedocles as a con-
temporary of the prophets David and Luqma¯n. Anaxago-
ras is among the most quoted Presocratic thinkers, though
the dates and places of origin proposed for him are diverse:
some sources place him immediately after Anaximenes –
hence al-Shahrasta¯nı¯ links him with the Milesian school,
not the town of Clazomenes – but others consider him
a contemporary of Zeno of Elea, of Democritus, or of
Aristotle; sometimes he is quoted together with Pythago-
ras, Democritus, and Diogenes the Cynic. According to
the eleventh century Egyptian historian and savant
Mubashshir b. Fa¯tik and to the thirteenth century
Illuminationist philosopher al-Shahrazu¯rı¯, his works were
burnt at the time of Galen. Democritus is often introduced
as a contemporary of the Persian king Artaxerxes I. He is by
far the most quoted Presocratic, though not always with
reference to atomism or to his moral statements (cf. the
Greek Democrates). Ibn al-Nadı¯m, the tenth century
author of the famous al-Fihrist (‘‘The Index’’) of names
of authors and works in different ﬁelds of knowledge,
places Democritus among the ‘‘makers of gold and silver,’’
perhaps because of confusion between Democritus of
Abdera and Bolos of Mendes, the Hellenistic author of
Geoponika in the fourth century to third century BCE, also
called Bolos Democritus. Unlike the other Greek supporters
of atomism – Leucippus, Epicurus, and Metrodoros of
Chios – Democritus is associated with various names;
some generic titles are attributed to him, as is a book on
animals showing what they have in common with humans.
Doctrine
The name ‘‘Presocratics’’ comes from the object of their
speculations – nature – rather than from their chronology,
whereas Socrates and the Sophists were interested in the
human being and the formation of thought and morals.
The Presocratics approach nature from an eternalistic
perspective according to the principle that ‘‘nothing
comes out from nothing,’’ considered by Muslims to be
a negation of the existence of God and of creation, their
basic theological tenet. This may explain the scarcity of
data on these thinkers and why not all of them are
addressed in Muslim sources.
Different
views
on
issues
such
as
astronomy,
meteorology, cosmology, psychology, physics, anatomy,
physiology, and zoology are ascribed to Anaximander,
Anaximenes, and Anaxagoras; various gnomic sayings
are attributed to Anaximenes, Anaxagoras, and Democri-
tus. Views on metaphysics and on the theory of vision are
related to Democritus.
The Muslims chose some of these thinkers with a view
to presenting their doctrines as precursors of their own
philosophical views. The Arabic sources therefore tend to
ascribe to most of these thinkers the embryonic idea of an
eternal and unique God, the principle of all things; but
they are also reproached for ignoring or expressing badly
the related function of an active cause. This last charge
may have been inspired by the perplexities expressed
regarding the Anaxagorean doctrine of the nous in Plato’s
Phaedo, a work that was well known to the Arabs.
The ‘‘principle’’ – or ‘‘principles’’ – the various authors
place at the basis of their thought are in general exactly
indicated (water for Thales, the inﬁnite for Anaximander,
air for Anaximenes, numbers for Pythagoras, homeomeries
for Anaxagoras, the four ‘‘roots’’ for Empedocles, atoms for
Democritus), but their doctrines are adapted to the new
theological perspective, just as when the Christian Church
Fathers quoted the same doctrines; when some tenets con-
tradict this perspective, the authors are strongly criticized.
Thus, the water of Thales becomes the water on which the
throne of God is placed; the ‘‘matter’’ in Anaximenes is
equated with the divine Pen that wrote the heavenly
Qurʾa¯n, and his ‘‘air’’ coincides with the Tablet on which
this Qurʾa¯n was written, because air is seen as capable of
receiving forms.
Pythagoras, according to some sources a pupil of
Anaximander, is said to be ‘‘a monotheist from H˙ arra¯n.’’
The Ikhwa¯n al-S˙afa¯’ adopted a numerological approach to
reality on the basis of the Pythagorean tenet that ‘‘existing
beings correspond to the nature of number.’’ So the
Pythagorean idea of the number 1 as the principle of
numbers, and not as a number itself, explains that God
is the origin of beings and not a being Himself. If God is
like the number 1, the Active Intellect is compared to the
number 2, the Universal Soul to the number 3, and Nature
or Matter to the number 4. Number is considered the best
way to clarify the nature of God and His relationship with
created beings, emphasizing His absolute distinction from
other beings and presenting Him as the sole cause of
everything else. The doctrine that considered soul as
a fallen divinity imprisoned in the body as in a ‘‘tomb’’
can play no role in Islam, but Pythagoras is considered one
of the greatest representatives of the theory of the immor-
tality of soul, from a reinterpretation of one of his Golden
Sayings. Pythagoras is the main source for mathematical
and musical theories in Islam, often associated with
Nicomachus of Gerasa, who is sometimes confused with
Aristotle’s father.
Tradition attributed to Heraclitus strong links with the
East; skeptical doctrines were inspired by him, even
though attributed to the Sophists. However, the Arabs
knew him mainly as the author of a cyclical ontological
system, beginning with God (conceived in terms of light
1074 P
Presocratics in the Arab World

and unknowable to humans). From him, Love is pro-
duced, as a pure light that rules a multiplicity of intelligible
worlds, inhabited by spiritual substances. Then, without
any explanation, Struggle appears, that produces the sub-
lunar world in continuous opposition, whose natural con-
dition is then war. The souls crave to return to the realm of
Love and, in order to help them, God sends a Messiah in
every era. Complete salvation will be achieved only when
the Saviour will come at the end of times (Rudolph
1989:67–69).
Al-Shahrasta¯nı¯ links a vision of God similar to that of
Qurʾa¯n with Empedocles, and hints at an ontological
succession of Neoplatonic inspiration. The theories of
the Arab Empedocles about the soul and the hierarchy
of beings have recently been connected with the thought of
a controversial eleventh century Spanish author, Ibn
Masarra (De Smet 1998). In Empedocles, we meet one of
the typical cases of transformation of an ancient doctrine
for philological rather than ideological reasons. Neikos –
Hatred – one of the two opposite powers that combine the
four roots and give rise to the generation and corruption
of all existing beings, becomes in Arabic g˙alaba, ‘‘Victory,’’
as a result of iotacization – the tendency in Byzantine
Greek to use iota (i) rather than the diphthong epsilon/
iota (ei), thus reading nikos rather than neikos.
In the Muslim accounts, the homeomeries of Anaxag-
oras are moved by the Intellect, which is assimilated in
a God who disposes or even creates them, hence deter-
mining generation according to ﬁxed proportions. Anax-
agoras’ doctrine of panta homou is developed into the
theory of kumu¯n and z˙uhu¯r – of ‘‘latency and appearance.’’
This theory, which is mixed with the Aristotelian doctrine
of potential and actual being, proposes a sort of creation of
all things together that are destined to evolve from one
form into another, as a spike develops from a grain, a bird
from an egg, and a man from the sperm. The only differ-
ence with Aristotle would be that for Anaxagoras inﬁnite
homeomeries exist in actuality.
Doctrines inﬂuenced by the kala¯m vision of divine
attributes were also referred to Anaxagoras. According to
these, the will of the Creator differs neither from that
which is willed nor from Him who wills; and an act is
not different from Him who acts or from the object of the
action; in fact, will and action have no essential form: they
subsist either in the actor or in the object acted upon.
In spite of the uncertainties and misunderstandings
about the founder of the doctrine, atomism is a view
shared in Islam by thinkers of different persuasions. Ara-
bic sources speak of inﬁnite atoms of various forms, indi-
visible, and in necessary and casual movement. This led to
a strict scientiﬁc Islamic atomism afﬁrmed by the
physician and philosopher Abu¯ Bakr al-Ra¯zı¯ (d. c. 925),
who denied prophethood and admitted ﬁve eternal prin-
ciples: God, soul, space, time, and matter conceived as
a composition of atoms and void. Accounts of his atom-
ism by his Isma¯ʿı¯lı¯ adversaries show clear similarities with
the original doctrines. On the other hand, atomism was
supported by orthodox theologians, who adopted an
atomistic occasionalism to enhance the absolute freedom
and will of God and his constant power over and link with
creation. In their opposition to the Aristotelian theory of
causality, these theologians subsumed into their beliefs the
doctrines of the author, who was sharply criticized by
Aristotle.
See also: ▶Abu¯ Bakr al-Ra¯zı¯, Muh:ammad ibn Zakarı¯ya¯ʾ
(Rhazes) ▶Atomism ▶Doxographies, Graeco-Arabic
▶Ibn Masarra, Muh˙ammad ibn ʿAbdalla¯h ▶Ikhwa¯n
al-S˙afa¯ʾ, Encyclopedia of ▶al-Mubashshir ibn Fa¯tik
▶Natural
Philosophy,
Arabic
▶al-Shahrasta¯nı¯,
Muh:ammad ibn ʿAbd al-Karı¯m
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Daiber Hans (1980) Aetius Arabus. Die Vorsokratiker in arabischer
U¨ berlieferung. Steiner, Wiesbaden
Rudolph Ulrich (1989) Die Doxographie des Pseudo-Ammonios.
Ein
Beitrag
zur
Neuplatonischen
U¨ berlieferung
im
Islam.
Kommissionsverlag Franz Steiner Wiesbaden GMBH, Stuttgart
Translations
Bafﬁoni Carmela (1981) Una ‘storia della ﬁlosoﬁa greca’ nell’Isla¯m del XII
secolo, I: Talete e Anassimene. Elenchos 2(2):355–374
Bafﬁoni Carmela (1982) Una ‘storia della ﬁlosoﬁa greca’ nell’Isla¯m del XII
secolo, II: Anassagora ed Empedocle. Elenchos 3(1):87–107
Bafﬁoni Carmela (1983) Una ‘storia della ﬁlosoﬁa greca’ nell’Isla¯m del XII
secolo, III: Pitagora. Elenchos 4(1):93–132; 4(2):261–435
Bafﬁoni Carmela (1985/1987) Una ‘storia della ﬁlosoﬁa greca’ nell’Isla¯m
del XII secolo, IV: I ‘primi sapienti’. Elenchos 6(2):411–452; 8
(2):381–429
Jolivet Jean, Monnot Guy (1993) Shahrastani, Livre des religions et des
sectes, vol II. Peeters/UNESCO, Leuven
Secondary Sources
Bafﬁoni C (1982) Atomismo e antiatomismo nel pensiero islamico.
Istituto Universitario Orientale, Napoli
Bafﬁoni C (1983) Moto e quiete in Dio nel K. al-milal di Sˇahrasta¯nı¯. In: Lo
Jacono C (ed) Scritti in memoria di Paolo Minganti, Annali
dell’Universita` di Cagliari (Facolta` di Scienze Politiche), Cagliari,
vol 9, pp 39–53
Bafﬁoni C (1984) La scala pitagorica in al-Kindı¯. In: Traini R (ed) Studi in
onore di Francesco Gabrieli nel suo ottantesimo compleanno, 2 vols.
Universita` di Roma ‘‘La Sapienza’’, Roma, vol I, pp 35–41
Bafﬁoni C (1985a) Atomisti greci in alcune fonti arabe del pensiero antico.
In: L’atomo fra scienza e letteratura, Atti delle XII Giornate
ﬁlologiche genovesi (Genova 20–21 febbraio 1984). Istituto di
Filologia classica e medievale, Genova, pp 107–139
Presocratics in the Arab World P
1075
P

Bafﬁoni C (1985b) Platone, Aristotele e il pitagorismo kindiano. Annali
dell’Istituto Universitario Orientale di Napoli 45:135–144
Bafﬁoni C (1986) Filosoﬁa della natura e alchimia nei commenti ad
Aristotele della Scuola di Alessandria. In: Serra L (ed) Atti del
Congresso Internazionale ‘‘Gli interscambi culturali e socio-
economici fra l’Africa Settentrionale e l’Europa mediterranea’’
(Amalﬁ5–8 dicembre 1983), 2 vols. Istituto Universitario Orientale,
Napoli, vol I, pp 403–431
Bafﬁoni C (1990) Sulle tracce di sofı`a. Tre ‘divini’ nella Grecia classica.
Bibliopolis, Napoli
Bafﬁoni C (1994) ‘Detti aurei’ di Pitagora in trasmissione araba. In:
Placella V, Martelli S (eds) I moderni ausili all’ecdotica. Edizioni
scientiﬁche italiane, Napoli, pp 107–131
Bafﬁoni C (2003) Anaxime`ne, Anaximandre, Anaxagore et De´mocrite
dans la tradition arabe. In: Goulet R (ed) Dictionnaire des Philo-
sophes antiques, supple´ment. CNRS, Paris, pp 748–773
De Smet D (1994) He´raclite, philosophe de la guerre, dans la tradition
arabe. In: Guerre & Paix – War & Peace, Acta Orientalia Belgica, vol 9
[1995]. Bruxelles/Louvain-la-Neuve/Leuven, pp 131–140
De Smet D (1998) Empedocles Arabus. Une lecture ne´oplatonicienne
tardive. KAWLSK, Brussel
Dhanani A (1994) The physical theory of Kala¯m. Atoms, space and void in
Basrian Mu‘tazilite cosmology. Brill, Leiden/New York/Ko¨ln
Wolfson HA (1976) The philosophy of the Kalam. Harvard University
Press, Cambridge/London
Primary and Secondary Intention
▶Intention, Primary and Secondary
Prior Analytics, Commentaries on
Aristotle’s
▶Modal Theories and Modal Logic
▶Syllogism, Theories of
Prochoros Kydones
IVAN CHRISTOV
Faculty of Theology
University of Soﬁa
Soﬁa
Bulgaria
Abstract
Prochoros Kydones (c. 1333 Thessaloniki to c. 1370 Con-
stantinople), (also spelled Prochorus Cydones), is a key
ﬁgure in the spiritual and intellectual history of Byzan-
tium in the fourteenth century. It was to a great extent due
to him and his brother Demetrios Kydones that Thomism
spread to the Christian East. Translating main works of
Thomas Aquinas and becoming proponents of his ideas,
the two brothers stimulated intense theological contro-
versy, in the course of which Byzantine thought contended
its identity against western Scholasticism. Prochoros is by
no means an original thinker. His signiﬁcance lies in the
fact that he applies the concepts and principles of Tho-
mistic philosophy to the context of the Palamite contro-
versy. He opposed the Christian Aristotelianism of
Thomas Aquinas and the Scholastic method of distinc-
tions to the Neoplatonic aspects of Palamas’ thought.
Following Thomas Aquinas, Prochoros identiﬁes Being,
Essence, and Energies in God. Thus, the Divine energies
do not constitute anything different from the Divine
essence. From this point of view Palamas is ambiguous
claiming both the non-hypostatic nature of the energies
and their particular ontological status between God and
creation; emanating from the essence, they constitute the
Divine Wisdom (Intellect), which is Divine but not God,
and is also non-created. Opposing these trends of thought,
Prochoros formulated a conception of logic and rational
discourse, which was unacceptable for Palamite theology.
Life
The biographical information we have about Prochoros is
scarce and mainly based on the letters of his brother
Demetrios Kydones, defending him against the attacks of
his opponents.
Born into a noble family in Thessaloniki, which after
the death of his father suffered misery, Prochoros chose
the monastic life and entered the brotherhood of Megisti
Lavra monastery on Mount Athos (c. 1333). In c. 1363, he
was ordained a priest–monk and originally held in high
respect by the abbot Jacob Trikanas because of his theo-
logical erudition and literary skills. Under the inﬂuence of
his brother Demetrius during the 1360s Prochoros trans-
lated from Latin about 20 theological and philosophical
texts, among themare the following: De differentiis topicis,
lib. 1–2 by Boethius; De vera religione (lib. II), De beata
vita, De libero arbitrio, and Enchiridion and Eight Epistulae
by Augustine; De mundi aeternitate, In Metaphysicam
(proemium), Summa theologiae, III (82 articuli), Quaestio
de potentia, and Quaestio de spiritualibus creaturis by
Thomas Aquinas;
and parts
of
In quattuor
libros
Sententiarum commentaria by Hervaeus Natalis. His
interest in the Latin tradition came along with a rising
dissatisfaction with Palamite Theology. This urged him to
expound his position in treatises he could never ﬁnish
1076 P
Primary and Secondary Intention

because of his premature death. His main work On Essence
and Energies of God (De essentia et operatione Dei),
wrongly attributed to Gregory Akyndinos, is largely
based on Scholastic theology and most of all on Thomistic
texts to refute the Palamite distinction of Divine essence
and energies.
Prochoros’ anti-Palamite stance gradually brought
him into conﬂict with the brotherhood in the monastery
and Philotheos Kokkinos, who regained his position as
a patriarch in 1364. It was in his defense that Prochoros
wrote An Answer to the Atonic Palamites, supporting the
doctrines of his inclination that had been anathematized
in the Tomos of 1351. Shortly afterward (in the middle of
1367 or the beginning of 1368) he wrote On Cataphatic
and Apophatic Method of Proof in Theology and Contem-
plation of God by Sight as well as a text defending the
theological signiﬁcance of syllogism. A series of letters,
pleading his cause with the patriarch and the abbot of
the monastery, date back from this period. After June
1367, Prochoros left for Constantinople where a Church
Council, chaired by the patriarch, led to his condemnation
in April 1368. Soon afterward, in 1370/1371, he died in
Constantinople.
Thought
Prochoros could hardly be regarded as an original thinker.
What he actually did was to apply the Thomistic doctrine
to the Palamite debates. The teaching of transcendentals
played a particular role in his anti-Palamite views. A series
of identiﬁcations that Prochoros did have followed from
it: of essence and being, essence and energies, essence and
potency, essence and wisdom, and essence and truth.
These identiﬁcations led to his condemnation and were
included in the Tomos of 1368. Provided that the tran-
scendental of being is associated with essence, it follows
that the concepts which unfold being in Aristotelian meta-
physics are also identiﬁed with it – potency, act, and truth.
Following the Scholastic method of distinctions, the iden-
tiﬁcation of essence with being is reached in the way of
distinguishing the various kinds of potency and act, and
consequentially excluding those of them, which presup-
pose complete or partial nonidentity of the being of God
with his essence. The Christian nuances of this view do not
conceal the Aristotelian background. The teaching of
Palamas, against which these arguments are aimed, is
articulated in the language of Neoplatonic philosophy,
connecting potency and act with the concept of emana-
tion. This led him to a certain ambiguity as to the status of
the Divine energies. In his doctrine they are both non-
hypostatic and non-separated from the essence of God
and on the other hand are Divine but not God Himself.
The Aristotelian basis of Kydones’ views (opposed to
the Neoplatonism of Palamitic doctrine) was the reason
for his views about the use of syllogism to be condemned,
though at ﬁrst glance they concurred with that of Palamas’.
Unlike the other anti-Palamites, Prochoros allows for the
application of syllogism in Theology. In the Tomos of
1368, four of his arguments, in favor of the use of syllo-
gisms and proofs, are quoted. (1) Truth is inseparable
from syllogism being either its principle or identical with
it; (2 (connected with the ﬁrst)) all true discourse is in
syllogistic form; (3) rational knowledge is in harmony
with Revelation; (4) in the present human state syllogism
is the only available instrument for ﬁnding the truth. The
Tomos does not analyze these statements, taking their
heterodoxy for granted. This refers at least to 1, 2, and 4.
Firstly, the principle of syllogism is according to Palamas
not truth itself, but its manifestation – the energies that
constitute the Divine intellect or Wisdom. On the con-
trary, according to Thomas the basis of syllogism and of
any knowledge are transcendentals and truth is one of
them. Secondly, the discourse in syllogistic form does
not surpass the metaphor and the symbol. These are
different ways to articulate in speech the experience of
Divine energies; in the ﬁrst case – their presence in nature
and natural intellect, in the second – the touch of their
transcendence. However the highest achievement of truth,
according to Palamas (like in Neoplatonism), is not in the
speech but rather in silence. This was an essential point in
his theological substantiation of the monastic practice of
hesychia.
The condemnation of Prochoros involved his brother
Demetrios Kydones in the Palamite controversy and was
among the factors of even more radical differentiation of
conceptual patterns of eastern and western theology.
See
also:
▶Demetrios Kydones ▶Gregory Palamas
▶Thomism, Byzantine
Bibliography
Primary Sources
(1973/1976) Gre¯goriou tou Akyndinou. Pragmateia eis to peri ousias kai
energeias ze¯te¯ma. Zˇiva Antika 23:317–365 (1973); 26:161–192,
487–499 (1976)
Acindyni Gregorii (1865) Liber De essentia et operatione Dei. PG t. CLI.
Paris (coll. 1191–1242)
Candal M (1954) El libro VI de Pro´coro Cidonio (Sobre la luz tabo´rica).
Orient Christ Period XX:258–297
Hunger H (1984) Prochoros Kydones, U¨ bersetzung von acht Briefen des
Hl. Augustinus. Wiener Studien. Beiheft 9. O¨ sterreichische Akademie
der Wissenschaften, Wien, pp 19–80
Hunger H (1990) Prochoros Kydones. U¨ bersetzungen von S. Augustinus,
De libero arbitrio I 1–90, und Ps.-Augustinus, De decem plagis
Prochoros Kydones P
1077
P

Aegyptiorum. Wiener Studien. Beiheft 14. O¨ sterreichische Akademie
der Wissenschaften, Wien, pp 13–53, 55–69
Nikitas DZ (1990) Boethius, De topicis differentiis kai oi byzantines
metaphraseis to¯n Manue¯l Olobo¯lou kai Prochorou Kydo¯ne¯. Corpus
philosophorum Medii Aevi. Philosophi Byzantini 5. Athens/Paris/
Brussels, pp 205–232
Tinnefeld F (1994) Ein Text des Prochoros Kydones in Vat. gr. 609 u¨ber die
Bedeutung
der
Syllogismen
fu¨r die
theologische
Erkenntnis.
Philohistoˆr: Miscellanea in honorem Caroli Laga septuagenarii, ed.
Schoors A, van Deun P. Peeters, Louvain, pp 515–527
Secondary Sources
Filovski J, Petrusˇevski MD (1973) Belesˇki kon deloto ΟΥSΙΑS ΚΑΙ
ΕΝΕΡGΕΙΑS od Grigorii Akindin. Zˇiva Antika 23:33–67
Kapriev G (2005) Philosophie in Byzanz. Ko¨nigshausen und Neumann,
Wu¨rzburg, pp 310–316
Mercati G (1931, 19732) Notizie di Procoro e Demetrio Cidone, Manuele
Cale´ca e Teodoro Meliteniota ed altri appunti per la storia della
teologia e della letteratura bizantina del secolo XIV. Studi e testi 56.
Biblioteca Apostolica Vaticana, Citta` del Vaticano
Nikitas DZ (1984) E¯ byzantine¯ metaphrase¯ tou Boe¯tiou ‘De differentiis
topicis’ apo tou Prochorou Kydo¯ne¯. Ellenika 35:275–315
Papadopoulos St (1974) Thomas in Byzanz. Thomas-Rezeption und
Thomas-Kritik in Byzanz zwischen 1354 und 1435. Theol Philos
49:274–304
Podskalsky G (1977) Theologie und Philosophie in Byzanz. Der Streit um die
theologische Methodik in der spa¨tbyzantinischen Geistesgeschichte
(14./15. Jh.), seine systematischen Grundlagen und seine historische
Entwicklung. C.H.Beck’s Verlagsbuchhandlung, Mu¨nchen
Podskalsky G (2003) Von Photios zu Bessarion. Harrassowitz, Wiesbaden
Rigo A (2004) Il monte Athos e la controversia palamitica dal concilio del
1351 al Tomo sinodale del 1368. Gregorio Palamas e oltre. Studi
e documenti sulle controversie teologiche del XIV secolo bizantino,
a cura di Rigo A. Leo S. Olschki, Firenze, pp 20–51
Tatakis B (1949) La philosophie byzantine. Presses universitaires de
France, Paris
Proclus, Arabic
ELVIRA WAKELNIG
Department of Classics and Ancient History
Warwick University
Coventry
UK
Abstract
The name of the Greek philosopher Proclus ﬁgures quite
prominently in the Arabic philosophical literature. How-
ever, his doctrines are often changed beyond recognition.
Fourteen Proclean works were allegedly translated into
Arabic and Syriac, but today none of these translations is
known to be extant in its entirety. Among them, his Proofs
that the World is Eternal and his Elements of Theology were
the most inﬂuential ones. The latter was reworked in
several recensions and became a main source for Neopla-
tonic thought in Arabic: the One identiﬁed with pure
Being was established as the ﬁrst principle and the cause
of everything else; the concept of emanation and creatio
mediante intelligentia was expounded; the hierarchy of
being was arranged in the scheme One – Intellect –
Soul – Nature, and the dichotomy between spiritual and
corporeal world was stressed.
Biographical and Bibliographical
Information
The name of the late antique Neoplatonist Proclus (ren-
dered into Arabic mostly as Buruqlus, but also by varia-
tions like Ubruqlus, Ubruqlı¯s, Furuqlı¯s) was well known in
the Arabic–Islamic world since the early days of the trans-
mission of Greek philosophy into Arabic. However, while
philosophical doctrines presented in his name, often in
doxographical sources, are not always genuine, some of his
original teaching was attributed to Aristotle. The question
of the eternity of the world was frequently linked to Pro-
clus, although he was not always pictured correctly as an
eternalist whose arguments were refuted by Philoponus
(e.g., in the most famous Arabic bio-bibliography of the
tenth century composed by Ibn al-Nadı¯m, the Fihrist, and
in al-Qift:ı¯’s History of Learned Men, al-ʿA¯mirı¯’s On the
Afterlife). Sometimes he was also said to have been opposed
to the doctrine of the world’s eternity (in al-Kaskarı¯’s trea-
tise On the Unity and Trinity of God), but purposefully
misinterpreted by his adversaries (according to the
doxography of the Ps.-Ammonius; see also al-Shahrasta¯nı¯,
who seems to have had access to Ps.-Ammonius when
composing his Book of Religions and Sects).
Arabic sources preserve hardly any information about
Proclus’ life or his school. His birthplace and lifetime are
given erroneously in the Fihrist and by al-Qift:ı¯.
The Fihrist lists fourteen Proclean writings, which were
translated into Arabic and/or Syriac (three of them are
said to have been extant only in Syriac, two of them are
unidentiﬁable, and different titles may actually refer to
one and the same work). So far, none of these translations
is known to have survived in its entirety.
The title Eighteen Issues which John the Grammarian
Refuted refers to Proclus’ Proofs that the World is Eternal,
lost in Greek, but translated into Arabic twice. None of
these translations is known to have been preserved
completely. The older one of them may go back to the
very early days of translating Greek philosophical works
into Arabic. It survives in at least two rather recent Turkish
manuscripts that contain only the ﬁrst eight arguments.
However, this older translation in a more complete recen-
sion was most probably used by al-Shahrasta¯nı¯, as he
1078 P
Proclus, Arabic

quoted proofs 1, 3–6, 8, 10, 13 with possible traces of
12 and 16 in his Book of Religions and Sects. The second
and better translation was done by Ish:a¯q b. H˙ unayn (pre-
sumably in the second half of the ninth century), but only
the ﬁrst nine arguments are known to be extant today.
One or the other of the translations of this work by
Proclus and/or John Philoponus’ refutation of it (not
known to be extant in Arabic) were known to and used
by, for example, Abu¯ Bakr al-Ra¯zı¯, Ibn Sı¯na¯, al-Bı¯ru¯nı¯, and
al-G˙ aza¯lı¯.
Another quite inﬂuential Proclean text in Arabic is the
Elements of Theology. Up to now it is not clear whether
a complete Arabic translation ever existed or whether only
parts of the work, maybe in the form of some late antique
reworking, were rendered into Arabic. The Fihrist lists two
titles, which may refer to an Arabic version of the Elements
of Theology, a ‘‘Theology’’ (which could also indicate
a translation or partial translation of the Platonic Theology,
although that does not seem to be highly probable)
and a Book on the First Good. What has been preserved
are, however, relatively short treatises containing each
a number of Proclean propositions and thus providing
in their entirety evidence for at least one third of the
Greek text of the Elements of Theology in Arabic. The
treatise that renders the Proclean propositions in Arabic
most closely is an alleged excerpt by Alexander of
Aphrodisias from Aristotle’s ‘‘Theology’’ (which also
includes ﬁve genuine texts by Alexander). It must have
been translated in the circle of translators and thinkers
around the ninth century Arabic philosopher al-Kindı¯,
most probably by Ibn al-Bit:rı¯q. In the same milieu,
maybe by al-Kindı¯ himself the Exposition of the Pure
Good was composed. Also based on the Elements of The-
ology, it is characterized by a more severe reworking of the
Proclean material with regard to language as well as to
doctrine and is often attributed to Aristotle. So far two
recensions of the Exposition of the Pure Good, apparently
independent of each other and containing not exactly the
same propositions, have surfaced. There is also evidence
for yet another recension or the common source for the
other two recensions in al-ʿA¯mirı¯’s paraphrase of some
Proclean propositions, namely his Chapters on the Meta-
physical Topics. One of these recensions was translated into
Latin under the title Book on the Causes (Liber de causis)
and had a deep impact on western philosophy in the
Middle Ages. An Arabic text titled the Book on Motion
and attributed to Aristotle also contains some proposi-
tions of the Elements of Theology reworked in a similar way
as in the recensions of the Exposition of the Pure Good.
However, in this Book on Motion the Proclean proposi-
tions are combined with Aristotelian materials and most
interestingly with renderings of some propositions taken
from Proclus’ Elements of Physics.
Thus, the Book on Motion is so far the main textual
evidence for an Arabic translation of the Elements of Phys-
ics. One of the two titles listed in the Fihrist – namely
Deﬁnitions of the Natural Principles and Book on the
Indivisible Part – could refer to a translation of this par-
ticular Proclean work. Additionally, in his treatise On the
Continuous Bodies Being Inﬁnitely Divisible Yah:ya¯ b. ʿAdı¯
presents the ﬁrst ﬁve propositions of the Elements of
Physics, for which he may, however, have relied on a Syriac
translation.
In
his
answers
to
the
philosophical
questions
addressed to him by a Mosul Jew, Yah:ya¯ also quotes Pro-
clus, this time by name, and most probably using the
latter’s Ten Doubts Concerning Providence, whose Arabic
translation seems to be mentioned in the Fihrist under the
title Ten Problematic Questions.
In
the
Greek-Latin
tradition,
the
Ten
Doubts
Concerning Providence are transmitted with two other
treatises as the Tria opuscula. In the Arabic, there is some
evidence for a possible translation of at least one of the
remaining two treatises, namely the On the Existence of
Evils. Miskawayh may refer to it in his Minor Triumph and
‘Abu¯ l-H˙ asan al-T˙abarı¯ seems to quote from it in his Hip-
pocratic Treatments.
Ibn al-Nadı¯m also lists a Proclean work called Expla-
nation of Plato’s Statement that the Soul is Immortal in
Three Chapters, which is generally taken to be a translation
of the lost Greek monograph of Proclus on Plato’s three
proofs of immortality of the soul. Textual evidence of this
writing is preserved in three short Arabic texts that are
independent of each other, but seem all to derive ulti-
mately from an Arabic version of this Proclean work.
These three texts are Plato’s Proofs of the Soul’s Immortality,
which is preserved at the end of Ibn Sı¯na¯’s Commentary on
the Theology of Aristotle; Delicate Result of Plato’s Syllogisms
that the Soul Does Not Decay, which is preserved as mar-
ginal gloss to a pseudo-Platonic treatise; and the sixth
chapter of the second part of Miskawayh’s Minor Triumph.
At the end of the summary of H˙ unayn’s translation of
Galen’s On Dispositions an excerpt of Proclus’ Commen-
tary on the Timaeus is attached. It covers a passage (89e–
90c), which is dealt with in Galen’s treatise. However, it is
not clear whether this Proclean excerpt was already part of
a Greek text based on Galen, or whether it has been added
to the Arabic translation taken either from an Arabic
version of Proclus’ commentary or translated directly
from the Greek by H˙ unayn. Some traces of the Proclean
work may also be detected in al-Bı¯ru¯nı¯’s India. However,
Ibn al-Nadı¯m does not mention an Arabic translation of it.
Proclus, Arabic P
1079
P

What he lists in his Fihrist instead are the following
three treatises ascribed to Proclus, for which no Greek
correspondences could have been established so far:
Firstly, the Minor Elements of which only an excerpt sur-
vives in the philosophical compilation preserved in the
Oxford Manuscript, Marsh 539.
Secondly, Proclus’ Commentary on the Pythagorean
Golden Verses the ﬁrst part of which is preserved in
a recension by Ibn al-T˙ayyib. The attribution to Proclus
has not yet been conﬁrmed, but there is also little ground
to doubt it. The last part of the above mentioned excerpt
from the Minor Elements is very close in content to a
passage in Ibn al-T˙ayyib, which may suggest that the
Minor Elements refer to the Proclean commentary on the
Golden Verses as well.
Thirdly, Ten Questions on Physical Problems, of which
only the ﬁrst eight seem to have been preserved. The text is
written in the tradition of the Problemata Physica and
deals with topics such as the four elements, sleep, tickling,
and hair. There is strong evidence that this text was used
by Job of Edessa when composing his Syriac Book of
Treasures. However, Job does not mention Proclus.
Doctrinal Development
Whereas most of what is preserved of the Arabic trans-
lations of Proclus’ works other than the Elements of The-
ology seems to be reasonably faithful to the Greek original,
all the extant textual evidence of the Elements of Theology
has undergone considerable reworking. The 20 proposi-
tions contained in the alleged excerpt of Alexander of
Aphrodisias from Aristotle’s ‘‘Theology’’ (edited under
the title Proclus Arabus by Gerhard Endress and enhanced
by two further propositions, which are similar with regard
to terminology and doctrinal reworking, by Fritz Zimmer-
mann) focus on the One as the ﬁrst principle and the cause
of all being. The One itself is said to be pure being, not
beyond being as Proclus himself would claim. It is also
pictured as generating the unchangeable ﬁrst matter,
although the Proclean concept of emanation is still present
in the text. The same holds true for the hierarchy of
hypostases (henads, intellects, souls, natures), but the
main distinction on the level of being with which the
corpus Proclus Arabus operates is only threefold: One –
forms – bodies. The Exposition of the Pure Good in its
various extant recensions, which probably all stem from
what may tentatively by termed ‘‘Ur-’’ or ‘‘Proto-Liber de
causis,’’ shares some of these characteristics, but empha-
sizes the idea of creation far more than the propositions in
the Proclus Arabus. It even implies the concept of a creatio
mediante intelligentia. Likewise the Proclean hierarchy of
being with its complicated details is in general suppressed
and replaced by the Plotinian scheme of One – Intellect –
Soul – Nature. In both cases, that is, in the case of the
Proclus Arabus as well as in the case of the Exposition of the
Pure Good, the textual reworking is taken to have been
exerted under late antique Christian inﬂuence.
See also: ▶al-ʿA¯mirı¯, Abu¯ l-H˙ asan ▶al-Kindı¯, Abu¯ Yu¯suf
Yaʿqu¯b ibn Ish:a¯q ▶Philoponus, Arabic ▶Plotinus, Arabic
▶Porphyry, Arabic
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Editions of Arabic Translations of Proclus’ Works:
Badawı¯ ʿAbdurrah:ma¯n (1971) Commentaires sur Aristote perdus en grec
et autres e´pıˆtres, Beirut: Dar el-Machreq (contains the Arabic edition
of Prop. 77 of Proclus Arabus under the name of Alexander of
Aphrodisias, p 42)
Badawı¯ ʿAbdurrah:ma¯n (1977) al-Aﬂa¯t:u¯niyya al-muh:datha ʿinda l-ʿArab,
al-Kuwayt: Waka¯lat al-Mat:bu¯ʿa¯t (contains Arabic edition of Proofs
that the world is eternal, pp 34–42; Exposition of the pure Good,
pp 3–33; Minor elements, pp 257–258; Ten questions on physical
problems, pp 43–49)
Endress Gerhard (1973) Proclus Arabus. Zwanzig Abschnitte aus der
Institutio Theologica in arabischer U¨ bersetzung. Orient-Institut der
Deutschen Morgenla¨ndischen Gesellschaft in Kommission bei F.
Steiner, Wiesbaden/Beirut (contains 20 Proclean propositions in an
alleged excerpt of Alexander of Aphrodisias from Aristotle’s
Theology in Arabic and German with a study and a detailed discus-
sion of Proclean works in Arabic)
Linley Neil (1984) Ibn at:-T˙ayyib. Proclus’ commentary on the Pythago-
rean Golden Verses. Arethusa Monographs, Buffalo (Arabic and
English)
Pfaff Franz (1941) Kommentar des Proklos zu Platons Timaios C. 43
(89E–90C) aus dem Cod. Arab. Agia Sophia 3752 (pp 214–218). In:
Schmutte J (ed) Galeni De consuetudinibus (= Corpus Medicorum
Graecorum. Suppl. III). Teubner, Leipzig/Berlin (contains a German
translation of the Proclean fragment on the Timaeus, pp 53–60)
Thillet Pierre, Oudaimah Saleh (2001–2002) Proclus Arabe. Un nouveau
Liber de causis?, Bull E´tudes Orient 53–54:293–368 (Arabic and
French)
Zimmermann Fritz (1994) Proclus Arabus rides again, Arabic Sci Philos
4:9–51 (Arabic edition and English translation of Prop. 98 of Proclus
Arabus with study)
Editions of Works by Arabic Authors Using No Longer Extant Trans-
lations of Proclean Works:
Badawı¯ ʿAbdurrah:ma¯n (21978) Arist:u¯ ʿinda l-ʿArab, al-Kuwayt: Waka¯lat
al-Mat:bu¯ʿa¯t (contains Plato’s proofs of the soul’s immortality
(Arabic), pp 73–74)
Badawı¯ ʿAbdurrah:ma¯n (21980) Aﬂa¯t:u¯n fı¯ l-Isla¯m, Beirut: Da¯r al-Andalus
(contains Delicate result of Plato’s syllogisms that the soul does not
decay (Arabic), pp 331–332)
Endress Gerhard (1984) Yah:ya¯ Ibn ʿAdı¯’s critique of atomism. Three
treatises on the indivisible part. Zeitschrift fu¨r Geschichte der
arabisch-islamischen Wissenschaften 1:155–179 (on Yah:ya¯’s use of
Proclus’ Elements of Physics pp 169–172)
Miskawayh (1987) al-Fawz al-as:g˙ar: Le petit livre du Salut. In: ‘Ud˙ayma S˙.
(ed), Arnaldez R (trans) al-Mu‘assasat al-Wat:anı¯yah li-l-tarjama wa
1080 P
Proclus, Arabic

l-tah:qı¯q wa-l-dira¯sa, Bayt al-h:ikma, Tunis (uses Proclus’ monograph
on Plato’s three proofs of immortality of the soul and refers to
Proclus’ On the Existence of Evils, pp 81–84)
Sezgin Fuat (1990) Facsimile-Edition of The Hippocratic Treatments.
Al-Mu‘a¯laja¯t al-Buqra¯t˙ı¯ya by Abu¯ l-H˙ asan al-T˙abarı¯ Ah˙mad b.
Muh˙ammad, Frankfurt am Main: Publications of the Institute for
the History of Arabic Islamic Science, Series C, 47:1–2 (short quota-
tion of On the Existence of Evils, p 25)
Wakelnig Elvira (2006) Feder, Tafel, Mensch. Al-´A¯mirı¯s Kita¯b al-Fus:u¯l fı¯
l-Ma´a¯lim al-ila¯hı¯ya und die arabische Proklos-Rezeption im 10. Jh.
Brill, Leiden/Boston (al-´A¯mirı¯’s paraphrase of a recension of the
Exposition of the pure Good in Arabic and German with a study)
Yah:ya¯ ibn. ʿAdı¯ (1988) al-Maqa¯la¯t al-falsaﬁyya. In: Khalı¯fa¯t S (ed)
Manshu¯ra¯t al-Ja¯miʿa al-Urdunı¯ya, Amman (using Proclus on prov-
idence, p 335)
Primary Sources Containing Information on Proclus’ Life, Works and
Doctrines in Arabic:
Holmberg Bo (1989) A treatise on the unity and trinity of God by Israel of
Kashkar (d. 872). Introduction, edition and word index. Plus Ultra,
Lund (contains a doxographical account of Proclus in Arabic:
pp (Arabic) 10 and 24)
Ibn al-Nadı¯m (1871–1872) Kita¯b al-Fihrist mit Anmerkungen hrsg. von G
Flu¨gel, nach dessen Tode besorgt von J Ro¨diger und A Mu¨ller. F. C. W.
Vogel, Leipzig (I, p. 252)
al-Qift:ı¯ (1903) Ibn al-Qift:ı¯’s Ta‘rı¯h˘ al-h:ukama¯’ auf Grund der Vorarbeiten
Aug. Mu¨ller hrsg. von J Lippert. Dieterich’sche Verlagsbuch-
hanldlung, Leipzig, p 89
Rowson Everett (1988) A muslim philosopher on the soul and its fate:
Al-´A¯mirı¯’s Kita¯b al-Amad ʿala¯ l-Abad. American Oriental Society,
New Haven (contains a mention of the ‘‘eternalist’’ Proclus in Arabic
and English, pp 84–85)
Rudolph Ulrich (1989) Die Doxographie des Pseudo-Ammonios. Ein
Beitrag zur neuplatonischen U¨ berlieferung im Islam. Deutsche
Morgenla¨ndische Gesellschaft Kommissionsverlag F. Steiner, Wies-
baden/Stuttgart (contains a doxographical account of Proclus in
Arabic and German, partly under Democritus’ name, pp 108–111)
al-Shahrasta¯nı¯ (1993) Livre des Religions et des Sectes II, traduction avec
introduction et notes par J Jolivet et G Monnot. Peeters/UNESCO
(contains an account of a number of Proclus’ arguments for the
world’s eternity and doxographical material similar to the one in
Ps.-Ammonius in French translation, pp 339–347)
Secondary Sources
Daiber H (1991) Nestorians of 9th century Iraq as a source of Greek,
Syriac and Arabic. A survey of some unexploited sources. Aram
3:1–2, 45–52
D’Ancona Costa C (1995) Recherches sur le Liber de Causis. Vrin, Paris
D’Ancona C, Taylor R (2003) Liber de causis. In: Goulet R (ed)
Dictionnaire des Philosophes Antiques. Supple´ment, E´ditions du
Centre National de la Recherche Scientiﬁque, Paris, pp 599–647
Endress G (2000) The new and improved Platonic Theology: Proclus
Arabus and Arabic Islamic Philosophy. In: Segonds AP, Steel
C (eds) Proclus et la The´ologie Platonicienne. Belles Lettres, Leuven/
Paris, pp 553–570
Hasnawi A (1997) Deux textes en arabe sur les preuves platoniciennes de
l’immortalite´ de l’aˆme. Medioevo 23:395–408
Jolivet J (1979) Pour le dossier du Proclus arabe: al-Kindı¯ et la The´ologie
Platonicienne. Studia Islamica 49:55–75
Lewin B (1957) Job d’Edesse et son livre des tre´sors. Contribution a`
l’e´tude de ses sources. Orientalia Suecana 6:21–30
Rosenthal F (1961) From Arabic books and manuscripts VII: some
Graeco-Arabica in Istanbul. J Am Oriental Soc 81:7–12
Wakelning E (in press) Proklos alias Hermes oder der Philosoph aus
Tarsus. In: Vallat P (ed) Proceedings of the Colloque international:
Damascius et le parcours syrien du ne´olpatonisme. Doxographische
Nachrichten u¨ber Buruqlus bei Pseudo-Ammonios, Israel al-Kaskarı¯
und Abu¯ l-H˙ asan al-T˙abarı¯
Westerink LG (1973) Proclus on Plato’s three proofs of immortality. In:
Zetesis. Album Amicorum Door Vrienden en Collega’s Aangeboden
Aan Prof. Dr. E. de Strycker. De Nederlandsche Boekhandel,
Antwerpen/Utrecht, pp 296–306
Proofs of the Existence of God
TOMAS EKENBERG
Department of Philosophy
Uppsala University
Uppsala
Sweden
Abstract
The question whether God exists, although not in itself an
issue for a faithful Muslim, Christian, or Jew, continually
attracted the interest of religious thinkers throughout the
Middle Ages. Fueled by metaphysical, epistemological, and
logical considerations inspired by Ancient Greek philoso-
phy, the discussions brought to the forefront questions
about being and existence, time and causal dependence,
the limits of human knowledge, and the strengths and
limitations of reasoning and demonstration.
Introduction
Medieval philosophical discussions of the existence of
God would not, in general, concern the question whether
God exists as such so much as whether God’s existence can
be established indubitably by an argument, and if so, how.
The
problems
discussed
were
therefore
intimately
connected to the question of the relative signiﬁcance of
faith and understanding in the life of the religious person.
In dealing with the subject, thinkers from the three great
monotheistic religions could ﬁnd ample sources of inspi-
ration outside their own cultural spheres. Doctrines such
as the triunity of God, for instance, particular to Chris-
tianity, was by most maintained to be a matter of faith, and
was as a rule treated as a separate issue. By contrast, we
ﬁnd in all three traditions arguments to the existence of
God based on the notion that God is the ﬁrst cause of our
universe of causes and effects.
Proofs of the Existence of God P
1081
P

Early attempts at proving God’s existence drew inspi-
ration primarily from Platonist philosophy. Later Aristotle
came to dominate as an inﬂuence, both indirectly as
a target for attacks from Christian and Islamic theologians
and as a direct source among Arabic philosophers and
Christian scholastics. Aristotelian philosophy enriched
the discussion about how to deal philosophically with
the question of God’s existence in at least four important
ways: (1) by confronting philosophers with a certain meta-
physical framework against the background of which the
concept of existence could be assessed, (2) by supplying
a theory of human cognition, (3) by providing methodo-
logical discussions about the validity of arguments and
what is required of scientiﬁc demonstration, and, ﬁnally,
(4) by supplying, in the Physics and in the Metaphysics,
actual examples of proofs for God’s existence in the form
of arguments for a ﬁrst mover.
The arguments for the existence of God may be seen
as loosely arranging themselves around three basic ideas:
ﬁrst, that of the world consisting in a hierarchy of beings
with respect to intrinsic value, secondly, that of God as
a primary creative cause, and, thirdly, that of the universe
being manifestly orderly and purposeful. These patterns
of thought gave rise to arguments that are in the philo-
sophical literature after Kant considered as falling
into three classes of proof: the ontological, the cosmo-
logical, and the teleological. While this classiﬁcation
may serve as a rough guide, one should note that some
medieval arguments draw on more than one of the three
basic ideas.
Goodness and Being
The ﬁrst type of arguments, those from hierarchy, took
their departure from a metaphysical framework with roots
in Neoplatonism. A point on which most medieval phi-
losophers would distance themselves from the important
Neoplatonic heritage, however, was the question of the
existence of the Supreme Being. According to Plotinus, the
One is so high on the scale of beings that the One is beyond
being, and therefore, properly speaking, the One is not at
all. While retaining the Platonic notion of a hierarchy of
being, the medievals would hold that God occupies the top
level of the order of the things there are. Proving the
existence of God within this framework is essentially a
matter of establishing that there is indeed a single highest
entity in the hierarchy, and that this entity is identical to
the monotheistic God.
Augustine puts forward an argument for God’s exis-
tence in De libero arbitrio, book 2. The argument focuses
on the supposed divine properties of eternity and immu-
tability. If it can be shown that there exists some one thing
eternal and immutable which is also superior to human
reason, then God exists. Such a thing does indeed exist,
Augustine argues, and this thing is truth. Some things are
eternally and immutably true, namely, necessary truths
such as those of mathematics. What makes the true things
true is truth itself, and since the truths made true by truth
are eternally and unchangeably true, truth itself must be
eternal and unchangeable. Furthermore, truth is superior
to human reason. According to Augustine, truth imposes
a norm on human reason by which human reason must
abide, and so, metaphorically speaking, truth is the judge
of reason; therefore it is better, and so higher on the
hierarchy of being. There is an interesting twist to the
last stage of the argument. Where one would perhaps
expect Augustine simply to identify God with truth itself,
Augustine hedges the question and argues that either God
is truth, or if there is something higher still, then this
higher thing is God.
The ﬁrst argument for the existence of God in the
Middle Ages proper can be found in Candidus Wizo, a
student of Alcuin. In a short work titled Dicta candidi de
imagine dei, Candidus argues, following Augustine, that
all things can be divided into what exists, what lives,
and what understands. The three classes of things consti-
tute an order in terms of both power and goodness.
An animal, which both lives and exists, is more power-
ful and also better than a stone, which merely exists.
A human being, who has understanding, is better and
more powerful than both. When the human being realizes
that his own power has limits, he must admit there is
a being who has the power to rule over the very existence
of what lives and understands, and this being, Candidus
adds, is God.
In the Monologion 1–3 Anselm of Canterbury argues
from the existence of good things to the existence of
a being Supreme with respect to goodness, greatness, and
being. All good things are good through, or by virtue of,
some one thing. There is one thing, which makes all good
things good (reiﬁcation of property). Moreover, this thing
is itself good, indeed good to the highest degree (self-
predication). Since it is the best thing it is also the greatest
thing, in the sense that no other thing is equal or surpasses
it in goodness. Further, all things that exist exist through
something, and it cannot be the case that they exist
through many separate things and there cannot be any
existential cross-dependencies. Thus, there is some one
thing on which all things, including itself, depend for
their existence. Dependent existence is according to
Anselm a lesser form of existence than self-dependent
existence, so the thing on which all other things depend,
is itself existent to the highest degree.
1082 P
Proofs of the Existence of God

In the Proslogion, Anselm puts forward his most
famous and inﬂuential argument – perhaps one of the
most discussed pieces of reasoning of all time. If one
understands God to be that than which a greater cannot
be thought, one must, according to Anselm, also accept
that God is. To think that that than which a greater cannot
be thought is only in the understanding (in intellectu) is to
think incoherently, since it is greater for it to be both in
reality (in re) and in thought.
Anselm’s ﬁrst critic was the contemporary Gaunilo of
Marmoutiers, whose response On Behalf of the Fool was
circulated as an appendix to the Proslogion, together with
replies to Gaunilo by Anselm. Gaunilo raises several ques-
tions, focusing particularly on what follows from claiming
that something is understood, or, as Anselm puts it, that
something is in the understanding. The gist of his critique
is that the existence of a thing can never be adduced from
thought or concept alone. He illustrates his point by
arguing that if Anselm were right, one should be able to
argue from the mere thought of an island most excellent of
all to the existence of that same island.
The rediscovery and dissipation of the full canon of
Aristotle’s organon and his Metaphysics in the mid-twelfth
century onward was accompanied by an increased focus
on problems of epistemology, against the background of
which Anselm’s argument would be viewed in new ways.
Two
major
epistemological
approaches
dominated:
Augustinian theories of Divine illumination, and Aristo-
telian theories of abstraction. According to the former,
human concept formation depends at least partly on
direct supernatural assistance; according to the latter, con-
cepts (intelligible species) are the result of a cognitive
process of abstraction, which depends on data supplied
by the senses. On neither theory is there suggested a way
for human beings to gain a concept of God by natural
means alone. Most often, scholastics following either
approach would hold that it is possible for humans to
know that God is, but not what He is, that is, his quiddity
or essence. It seems therefore Anselm’s formula ‘‘that than
which a greater cannot be thought’’ is either not a proper
concept of God, or, if it is, must have been supernaturally
implanted. Defenders of Anselm’s argument such as the
authors of the Summa fratris Alexandri Halensis and Bon-
aventure would indeed claim that Anselm’s argument is
valid, but they also argue that our knowledge of God’s
existence is a naturally impressed disposition, or that the
claim that God exists is self-evident, and thus the point of
putting forward an Anselmian argument starts to look
questionable. Nevertheless, Bonaventure took serious
interest in Anselm’s argument, and put forward several
versions of it, formulated against the background of the
doctrine of the transcendentals. For instance he argues, in
his Commentary on the Sentences, that truth is a property
of God, and therefore God’s being (or God’s ‘‘to be’’: his
esse) is so true that God cannot be thought not to be (bk. 1
dist. 8, art. 1, q. 1). He also put forward a rejoinder to
Gaunilo’s beautiful-island argument, arguing that the
notion of an island is the notion of an inherently imper-
fect, inherently limited, categorical being while God must
be described through the transcendentals, which do not
imply imperfection. The concept of a perfect island is
therefore incoherent and so cannot rationally be thought
of as a thing than which no greater thing can be thought.
(De mysterio trinitatis q. 1, art. 1, ad 6).
Thomas Aquinas suggests in the Summa theologiae
that there are ﬁve ways to prove God’s existence, none of
which follow Anselm’s Proslogion argument. Aquinas’
fourth way is, however, in the tradition of Anselm’s strat-
egy in the Monologion, starting from the observation that
different things exhibit goodness, truth and being to dif-
ferent degrees, to the conclusion that there must be some
one thing, itself the most accomplished with respect to
goodness, truth, and being, which is the cause of all other,
and this is God. While sympathetic to proofs based on the
notion of a hierarchy, Aquinas appears to explicitly reject
the Proslogion argument in both SCG and ST, although the
exact target is perhaps not so much Anselm as Anselm’s
thirteenth century advocates. According to Aquinas, God’s
existence is not self-evident (per se notum) to human
beings, neither in the form of an implanted piece of
knowledge nor as a conclusion drawn from self-evident
premises. The latter would require knowledge about God’s
essence, to which man lacks access. Instead God’s existence
must be proved by appeal to God’s effects, that is, observ-
able facts of the sensible realm of creation.
Scotus, on the other hand, considered a ‘‘touched-up’’
version of Anselm’s argument a valid proof for the exis-
tence of a ﬁrst (i.e., highest) being in the order of emi-
nence. According to Scotus, that than which nothing
greater can be thought ‘‘without contradiction’’ can be
readily proved to exist (e.g., De primo principio 4.65).
However, proving the existence of such a best being is
merely a part of Scotus’ proof for the existence of God as
an inﬁnite being (see below).
Creation and Causation
The second family of arguments originally grew out of
heated debates about whether the world has a beginning
(and an end) in time. Many medievals accepted Aristotle’s
causal apparatus, but considered the view that the world is
eternal, prevalent in ancient Greek thought, as at least
problematic, and would ﬁnd the related idea that matter
Proofs of the Existence of God P
1083
P

is eternal at odds with the doctrine of creation ex nihilo.
A key role in the history of arguments for creation is
played by Alexandrian Christian John Philoponus (c.
490–570s) and his works Contra Proclum and Contra
Aristotelem. In the latter work, now extant only in frag-
ments, Philoponus argues against the eternity of the world
(including the supralunar realm) by attacking Aristotle’s
Physics arguments for the eternity of time and motion.
In Physics 8, Aristotle had argued that it is impossible
that there was ever a ﬁrst motion, since every motion is the
actualization of a preexisting potentiality. On the assump-
tion of a ﬁrst motion, one must admit the existence of
a thing, which, prior to the ﬁrst motion, has the potential-
ity of being in motion. The thing in question must either
have been there always, in a state of rest, or it must have
come into existence at some prior point. Now if it was at
rest, there must according to Aristotle have been a cause for
its state of rest, and if it came to be, there must have been
a cause for its becoming. In any case, there is motion before
the ﬁrst motion; hence, the initial assumption of the exis-
tence of a ﬁrst motion must be abandoned, and the series
of motions must be eternal. Since time, moreover, is either
a motion itself or a measure of motion, time too is eternal.
In his Contra Aristotelem, Philoponus argues that
Aristotle’s argument, if valid, would be a refutation not
only of creation ex nihilo, but also of that eternal motion
which Aristotle himself thought the heavens were engaged
in. Since in eternal motion there is no preceding potenti-
ality for motion, Aristotle’s deﬁnition of motion as the
actualization of the movable qua movable cannot be valid.
Philoponus puts forward a series of further counter-
arguments, which trade on the theoretical unmanageability
of inﬁnities. Exploring the Aristotelian notion of the trans-
mutation of the four (sublunar) elements of one into
another, Philoponus argues that any given now existing
element must be the outcome of a ﬁnite number of trans-
formations, since an inﬁnite series cannot be traversed.
A second argument appeals to the impossibility of adding
to an inﬁnite: if current motions increase the total number
of motions completed, then the past number of motions
cannot be inﬁnite, since an inﬁnity cannot be increased.
A third, similar, argument rests on the premise that an
inﬁnite cannot be multiplied. If the sphere of Saturn has
completed an inﬁnite number of revolutions, and the
sphere of the planet Jupiter, for example, rotates roughly
three times faster, then the number of Jupiter’s revolutions
should be three times inﬁnity, which is absurd.
Similar arguments, appealing to the impossibility of
adding to and multiplying inﬁnities, can be found among
the Islamic scholastics of the kala¯m tradition, and it has
been argued that Philoponus was the ultimate source of
these (Davidson 1969, 1987). Unlike Philoponus himself,
and unlike later Arabic philosophers and Christian scho-
lastics, who espoused various forms of hylomorphism, the
majority of writers of the Muʿtazilite and Ashʿarite schools
advocated a form of atomism, the so-called doctrine of
accidents. The universe consists of featureless atoms,
arranged into bodies or beings, the characteristics of
which, such as composition and movement, are all mere
accidents as opposed to being somehow dependent on
internal structure, nature, or essence. According to what
became the standard kala¯m proof of creation, the acci-
dents, which are present in bodies, are subject to destruc-
tion and must, therefore, have been generated. Further,
bodies cannot be free of accidents, and in particular not
precede them. Now since the accidents are generated, so
too must the very bodies be, and since the universe con-
sists of only bodies and accidents, the world as a whole
must have been generated.
Al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ and Avicenna rejected the kala¯m arguments
for creation in time and maintained that the universe is
eternal. Al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ also read Philoponus ﬁrsthand, and
attacked him in at least four of his works. Instead of
arguments for God based on arguments for creation, al-
Fa¯ra¯bı¯ appropriated the Aristotelian arguments in the
Physics and the Metaphysics for a ﬁrst mover (Hammond
1947:18–22). In these arguments, Aristotle appeals to the
impossibility of an inﬁnite regress of movers, and so these
latter arguments appear prima facie at odds with
Aristotle’s argument for there not being any ﬁrst motion.
According to Averroes and Maimonides, al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ set out
to answer this problem in his work On Changeable Beings,
now lost. In it al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ reportedly argued that although
there is no ﬁrst motion, and the series of motions is
inﬁnite, the motions or objects involved do not exist
together, or simultaneously, and so do not taken together
constitute an actual inﬁnite. Moreover, while time is in
a sense an inﬁnite magnitude, it is neither a spatial, nor an
‘‘actual’’ magnitude.
Avicenna put forward an argument for the existence of
God based on the distinction between what is possible of
existence and what is necessary of existence. The distinc-
tion itself constitutes a challenge to the Aristotelian statis-
tical (temporal-frequency) interpretation of possibility
and necessity. While in the Aristotelian picture eternal
things tend to be viewed as necessary since they exist at
all times, Avicenna operated with a causal interpretation
of modalities where a possible is a thing that requires
a cause for its existence (be the thing eternal or not) and
a necessary is that which is uncaused. Through an a priori
examination of the concept of existence, Avicenna aims to
prove the existence of a being necessary in the sense of
1084 P
Proofs of the Existence of God

uncaused, a being he identiﬁes with God. Each existing
thing is either possible or necessary, and since what is
sought is the necessary, the most important step in the
proof is showing that the existence of an arbitrary possible
entails the existence of the necessary. Any chain of causes
and effects made up solely of possibles, regardless of
whether it is ﬁnite or inﬁnite, must terminate in a cause
which is not itself an effect, that is, in a necessary. The total
aggregate of possibles as a whole cannot be otherwise than
itself a possible, and so per deﬁnition it requires a cause. In
his Third Way, Aquinas argues in a similar way from the
existence of contingent things. While Aquinas presents
his argument as relying on sensory experience, however,
Avicenna explicitly claims his proof does not rely on
experience,
but
solely on
the
nature of
existence
(Marmura 1980: 339).
Both G˙ aza¯lı¯ and Maimonides took a more complex
stance vis-a-vis the question whether the world had
a beginning in time. In his Incoherence of the Philosophers,
G˙ aza¯lı¯ puts forward Philoponus’ arguments against eter-
nity from the impossibility to multiply and add to inﬁn-
ities with the aim of showing that the kala¯m arguments for
creation, although these too associated with serious prob-
lems, are at least as rationally defensible as the arguments
of Avicenna and Aristotle. Maimonides thinks the claim of
the world’s eternity has neither been proved by Aristotle
nor disproved by the kala¯m, and argues in the second book
of his Guide of the Perplexed that the existence of God as
a ﬁrst mover can be shown to follow from 26 premises, 25
of which he considers self-evident or easily provable. The
26th premise, stating the world is eternal, Maimonides
claims to be ‘‘possible,’’ and grants for the sake of
argument.
While Bonaventure considered [1] Philoponus’ argu-
ments valid, and [2] as established the claim that the world
had a beginning in time (Sentences 2, dist. 1, p. 1, art. 1,
q. 2), Aquinas held, at the time of writing ST, that the
world’s eternity can be neither proved nor disproved.
Aquinas’ arguments for a ﬁrst mover and a ﬁrst efﬁcient
cause, the ﬁrst and second of his ‘‘ways,’’ should therefore
be seen as neutral with respect to this issue. By employing
the distinction between causes essentially and merely acci-
dentally required for a given effect, he argues, following
Avicenna and Averroes, that only series of accidental
efﬁcient causes can proceed back to inﬁnity (ST I, 46,
art 2, ad 7). Consequently, Aquinas’ ﬁrst and second
ways concern essential, or per se causes.
Like Aquinas, Scotus thinks very carefully about the
status of his arguments, but unlike Aquinas, he presents
his argument for the existence of God as a proof proper, as
an Aristotelian demonstration, as a series of deductions
from premises necessary, certain and self-evident. In his
view, a demonstration propter quid (of the ‘‘reasoned’’
fact) of God’s existence is not possible to construct, but
a demonstration quia (of the bare fact) is.
In
his
very
complex
proof,
Scotus
begins
by
establishing that there exists in actuality a ﬁrst entity in
three different orders of things: the order of efﬁcient
causes, the order of ends or ﬁnal causes, and the order of
eminence or excellence. A key role in the arguments is
played by the notion of an essentially ordered series of
beings with respect to causality. In such a series, at each
element pair, (1) the causes involved are contemporane-
ous, (2) a cause depends on the prior cause in the series for
its own causality, and (3) the prior cause is more perfect,
more eminent, than the posterior. Such a series cannot be
inﬁnite, according to Scotus, since without a ﬁrst cause,
the series as a whole would be uncaused. Scotus then
argues that three primacies — that of being a ﬁrst cause,
an ultimate end, and the most excellent being — are
properties of one and the same being, and that this ﬁrst
being is intelligent and endowed with will. Finally, he
argues the ﬁrst being is inﬁnite.
Order and Finality
The medievals partly adopted the Aristotelian conception
of nature or essence. But whereas Aristotle would consider
order and purpose immanent with respect to the natures,
medieval thinkers thought order and purpose had
a transcendent source: as being due to God the creator of
the natural world. Rather than Aristotle, they would thus
side with Plato, who in his Timaeus appears to put the
ordering of the universe in the hands of an external
craftsman or demiurge. In the third type of argument,
proving the existence of God is a matter of proving that
the layout of the universe as we ﬁnd it requires that it
be the result of purposeful fashioning, and thus that
it be the product of an intelligent and benevolent
Creator.
In the Christian tradition, an early proponent of argu-
ments from perceived order and ﬁnality is Athanasius
(c. 296–373). In book 3 of his Contra gentes, he argues
that the orderly movement of the sun, the moon, and the
stars should be enough for making us grant that there is
God, and if we consider that the things we ﬁnd around us
are often composed of elements with mutually conﬂicting
natures – something hot combined with something cold,
something dry with something wet – resulting in things
that line up with the purposes and needs of human beings,
we should even more be thus convinced.
Although Boethius too, in the Consolation (book 1,
prose 6), gives voice to a pattern of thought similar to
Proofs of the Existence of God P
1085
P

Athanasius’, arguments from perceived order and orderli-
ness play no major role in medieval Christian philosoph-
ical thinking about the existence of God until the
thirteenth century, when the inﬂuence of Aristotelian
empiricism, and the new focus on epistemology, moves
thinkers away from arguments a priori drawing on con-
ceptual and metaphysical concerns toward arguments
based on premises considered veriﬁable by experience.
Aquinas
argues
in
his
Fifth
Way
that
the
near
exceptionless regularity by which natural changes ter-
minate in an optimal state can only be explained by
there being an end which governs each change as such.
Now since acting for an end (or acting with an end in
view) can only be done by things capable of thought,
there must be an entity with intelligence, namely God,
who directs natural things that lack intelligence toward
their ends.
See also: ▶Anselm of Canterbury ▶Augustine ▶Bona-
venture ▶Causality ▶Change and Motion ▶Epistemol-
ogy
▶Essence
and
Existence
▶Form
and
Matter
▶al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯,
Abu¯
Nas˙r
▶al-G˙ aza¯lı¯,
Abu¯
H˙ a¯mid
Muh:ammad ▶Ibn Rushd, Muh˙ammad ibn Ah˙mad
al-H˙ afı¯d (Averroes) ▶Ibn Sı¯na¯, Abu¯ ʿAlı¯ (Avicenna)
▶Intuitive and Abstractive Cognition ▶John Duns
Scotus
▶John
Philoponus
▶Kala¯m
▶Metaphysics
▶Moses Maimonides ▶Saadia Gaon ▶Thomas Aquinas
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Anselm (1946a) Monologion. In: Schmitt FS (ed) Sancti Anselmi opera
omnia, vol 1. Thomas Nelson, Edinburgh
Anselm (1946b) Proslogion. In: Schmitt FS (ed) Sancti Anselmi opera
omnia, vol 1. Thomas Nelson, Edinburgh
Aquinas Thomas (1952–1956) In: Caramello P (ed) Summa theologiae.
Marietti, Turin
Aquinas Thomas (1961–1967) In: Marc P, Pera C, Caramello P (eds)
Summa contra gentiles. Marietti, Turin
Athanasius (1971) In: Thomson RW (ed and trans) Contra gentes. Oxford
University Press, Oxford
Augustine (1970) De libero arbitrio. Corpus christianorum series latina,
vol 29. Brepols, Turnhout
Averroes (1969) Tahafut al-Tahafut (The Incoherence of the Incoherence)
(trans: van den Bergh S). Luzac, London
Avicenna (2005) In: Marmura ME (ed and trans) The metaphysics of the
healing: a parallel English-Arabic text. Brigham Young University
Press, Provo
Bonaventure (1882) In primum librum sententiarum. In: Collegii PP,
Bonaventurae
S
(eds)
Opera
omnia,
vol
1.
Collegium
S.
Bonaventurae, Quarrachi
Bonaventure (1885) In secundum librum sententiarum. In: Collegii PP,
Bonaventurae
S
(eds)
Opera
omnia,
vol
2.
Collegium
S.
Bonaventurae, Quarrachi
Bonaventure (1891) Quaestiones disputatae; De mysterio trinitatis. In:
Collegii PP, Bonaventurae S (eds) Opera omnia, vol 5. Collegium S.
Bonaventurae, Quarrachi
Candidus (1872) Dicta candidi de imagine dei. In: Haure´au B (ed)
Histoire de la philosophie scolastique, vol 1. Durand et Pedone-
Lauriel, Paris, pp 134–137
Duns Scotus John (1966) In: Wolter AB (ed and trans) A treatise on God
as ﬁrst principle; a revised Latin text of the De primo principio
translated into English along with two related questions from an
early commentary on the Sentences. Forum Books, Chicago
Gaunilo (1946) Pro insipiente. In: Schmitt FS (ed) Sancti Anselmi opera
omnia, vol 1. Thomas Nelson, Edinburgh
Maimonides Moses (1963) The guide of the perplexed (trans: Pines S).
University of Chicago Press, Chicago
Philoponus John (1987) Against Aristotle on the eternity of the world (De
aeternitate mundi contra Aristotelem), fragments compiled and
trans. Wildberg C. Duckworth, London
Secondary Sources
Bencivenga E (1993) Logic and other nonsense: the case of Anselm and his
God. Princeton University Press, Princeton
Craig WL (1979) The Kalam cosmological argument. Macmillan, London
Craig WL (1980) The cosmological argument from Plato to Leibniz.
Macmillan, London
Cross R (2005) Duns Scotus on God. Ashgate, Aldershot
Davidson HA (1969) John Philoponus as a source of medieval Islamic and
Jewish proofs of creation. J Am Oriental Soc 89(2):357–391
Davidson HA (1987) Proofs for eternity, creation, and the existence of
God in medieval Islamic and Jewish philosophy. Oxford University
Press, Oxford
Dumont SD (1984) The quaestio si est and the metaphysical proof for the
existence of God according to Henry of Ghent and John Duns Scotus.
Franziskanische Studien 66:335–367
Fakhry M (1986) The ontological argument in the Arabic tradition: the
case of al-Farabi. Studia Islamica 64:5–17
Hammond R (1947) The philosophy of Alfarabi and its inﬂuence on
medieval thought. Hobson Book Press, New York
Kenny A (1969) The ﬁve ways: St Thomas Aquinas proofs of God’s
existence. Routledge and Kegan Paul, London
Klima G (2000) Saint Anselm’s proof: a problem of reference, intentional
identity and mutual understanding. In: Holmstro¨m-Hintikka G (ed)
Medieval philosophy and modern times. Kluwer, Dordrecht, pp 69–88
Marmura ME (1980) Avicenna’s proof from contingency for God’s exis-
tence in the metaphysics of the Shifa. Mediaeval Stud 42:337–352
Matthews S (2001) Reason, community and religious tradition: Anselm’s
argument and the Friars. Ashgate, Aldershot
Oppenheimer P, Zalta E (1991) On the logic of the ontological argument.
Philos Perspect 5:509–529
Oppy GR (1995) Ontological arguments and belief in God. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge
Sorabji R (1983) Time, creation and the continuum: theories in antiquity
and the early middle ages. Cornell University Press, Ithaca
Psellos, Michael
▶Michael Psellos
1086 P
Psellos, Michael

Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite
ALEXANDER TREIGER
Department of Classics with Religious Studies
Dalhousie University
Halifax, NS
Canada
Abstract
Pseudo-Dionysius (active c. 500 CE) is a Greek-writing
Christian theologian whose identity remains an unsolved
mystery. Under the pseudonym of Dionysius the Areopa-
gite, St. Paul’s Athenian convert (Acts 17:34), he composed
four treatises (The Celestial Hierarchy, The Ecclesiastical
Hierarchy, The Divine Names, and The Mystical Theology)
and ten epistles. He may have authored additional trea-
tises, referenced in his extant works, but no traces of these
survive, with the possible exception of The Symbolic The-
ology (Mali 2002). Taken together, Dionysius’ extant writ-
ings present a coherent theological system, deeply
indebted to Athenian Neoplatonism, in particular to the
philosophy of Proclus (Perl 2007; Klitenic Wear and Dil-
lon 2007).
Identity
Much effort has been expended in the attempt to uncover
Dionysius’ identity, yet none of the proposed solutions
(Severus of Antioch, Peter the Fuller, Peter the Iberian,
Sergius of Resh‘ayna¯, and others) is satisfactory. A more
fruitful approach may be to identify the milieu in which
his writings were produced and to analyze their earliest
reception.
Internal
evidence,
including
Dionysius’
description of liturgical practices, indicates that he may
have been active in Syria (Louth 1989). This is corrobo-
rated by his strong emphasis on the church hierarchy,
likely directed against antinomian Messalian tendencies,
prevalent in that region (Golitzin 2003). The possible link
to Origenist circles in Palestine has also been explored
(Perczel 1999, 2000, 2001). Dionysius’ debt to Athenian
Neoplatonism is undeniable, and it has been suggested that
he could have received his philosophical education in
Athens, as his pseudonym perhaps implies, and have been
a student of Proclus or Damascius (Lilla 1994), though
this is uncertain. The Dionysian writings were ﬁrst used
by the Miaphysites (Severus of Antioch and others)
against the Chalcedonians in support of their Christolog-
ical position but were later eagerly adopted by the Chal-
cedonians as well. This is largely due to the impact of
the Chalcedonian bishop John of Scythopolis’ scholia
on the Dionysian corpus (mid-sixth century), written
with a view to defending its orthodoxy (Rorem and
Lamoreaux 1998).
Doctrine
In accordance with the Neoplatonic tradition, going back
to Plato’s description of the Idea of the Good as ‘‘beyond
being’’ (epekeina te¯s ousias, Rep., VI, 509b), Dionysius sees
God as the creative cause of all being, which itself tran-
scends the realm of being (hyperousios). Insofar as God is
the cause of all the created beings, He is known through
each and every one of them, and at the same time, insofar
as He transcends the realm of being, He is not known
through any of them: ‘‘He is all things in everything and
nothing in anything, known to all from all things and to
no one from anything’’ (DN, VII.3, 872A). This is the
foundation of the two ways of speaking about God:
cataphatic or afﬁrmative theology, in which positive state-
ments about God, based on His self-manifestation in the
created realm, are made, and apophatic or negative theol-
ogy, in which such statements are denied. Though negative
statements about God are superior to afﬁrmative ones,
ultimately all statements about God, both afﬁrmative
and negative, are to be left behind and one is to enter the
‘‘truly
mystical
darkness
of
unknowing’’
(MT,
I,
1000B–1001A), paralleling the darkness penetrated by
Moses on Mount Sinai (Ex. 20:21 LXX). It is through
unknowing that, according to Dionysius, God is most
appropriately known and through silence that He is
most ﬁttingly praised (MT, I, 1001A; Ep. 1, 1065A–B;
DN, VII.3, 872A–B).
God’s self-manifestation in the created realm, which
forms the basis of cataphatic theology, takes various
shapes, from the Incarnation to scriptural and liturgical
symbolism. Hence, much of the Dionysian corpus is
concerned with such symbolism, in particular with the
interpretation of divine names (Rorem 1984). This is done
in three stages. The lost or ﬁctitious work Theological
Representations (summarized in DN, I–II and MT, III,
1032D–1033A) dealt with names associated with the doc-
trines of the Trinity and the Incarnation. The Divine
Names dealt with scriptural descriptions of God derived
from the intelligible realm (e.g., being, life, and wisdom).
Finally, the lost or ﬁctitious Symbolic Theology (summa-
rized in Ep. 9; cf. CH, XV) dealt with scriptural descrip-
tions of God drawn from the sensible realm, including
such seemingly inappropriate imagery as God’s falling
asleep and being drunk. In the powerful apophatic ﬁnale
of The Mystical Theology, Dionysius takes up these descrip-
tions again, but this time, he systematically denies their
applicability to God (MT, IV–V).
Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite P
1087
P

The purpose of God’s symbolic procession into the
created realm is to purify, illumine, and unite all beings
back to Himself (this triad – puriﬁcation, illumination,
and union – is adopted by Dionysius from Proclus). Puri-
ﬁcation, illumination, and union are effected through the
two ‘‘hierarchies’’ (a term coined by Dionysius himself):
the celestial hierarchy and the ecclesiastical hierarchy. The
celestial hierarchy comprises nine orders of angelic beings,
arranged in triads (the seraphim, cherubim, and thrones;
dominions, powers, and authorities; principalities, arch-
angels, and angels). The ecclesiastical hierarchy, also
arranged in triads, comprises three sacraments (baptism,
Eucharist, and consecration of the oil), three ranks of the
clergy (hierarchs, priests, and deacons), and three ranks of
laity (monks, lay people, and three minor groups: cate-
chumens, penitents, and demon-possessed). Both hierar-
chies enable their members to imitate God and to be
united to Him as far as possible (CH, III, 165A–B).
Influence
Dionysius’ writings were inﬂuential in the original Greek,
as well as in Latin, Syriac, Arabic, Georgian, Armenian,
and Slavonic translations. There were as many as six trans-
lations of the Dionysian corpus into Latin between the
ninth and the ﬁfteenth centuries (by Hilduin, Eriugena,
John
the
Saracen,
Robert
Grosseteste,
Ambrogio
Traversari, and Marsilio Ficino, in addition to an inﬂuen-
tial paraphrase by Thomas Gallus). Athanasius the Librar-
ian (ninth century) translated John of Scythopolis’ scholia
into Latin. The scholia were subsequently integrated into
a comprehensive textbook of Dionysian philosophy,
which also included Eriugena’s and John the Saracen’s
translations of the corpus and three Latin commentaries
on The Celestial Hierarchy: by Eriugena, John the Saracen,
and Hugh of Saint-Victor. This textbook was used at the
University of Paris and other universities and schools from
the thirteenth century onwards (Harrington 2004).
Dionysius’ writings were widely read and commented
upon in the Latin West (de Andia 1997; Boiadjiev et al.
2000; Coakley and Stang 2008). The false belief that Dio-
nysius was identical with the Gallic martyr Saint Denis, the
patron saint of France, contributed to the popularity of his
works. Eriugena adopted such Dionysian ideas as the
distinction between afﬁrmative and negative theology,
the understanding of God as ‘‘superessential’’ (echoing
Dionysius’ hyperousios), and the understanding of the
world as God’s self-manifestation. The Victorines (Hugh
of St. Victor and Thomas Gallus), followed by Bonaven-
ture, Hugh of Balma, and the anonymous author of the
fourteenth century English treatise The Cloud of Unknow-
ing, adopted the Dionysian theme of mystical unknowing,
yet combined it with Bernard of Clairvaux’s emphasis on
love that transcends knowledge. Contrary to Dionysius’
original intention, they interpreted mystical unknowing as
involving affective union with God in love. This interpre-
tation was rejected by the Dominicans Albert the Great
and Thomas Aquinas, both of whom composed commen-
taries on Dionysius’ works (Albert on the entire corpus,
and Aquinas on The Divine Names). Aquinas rejected the
Neoplatonic understanding of God as transcending the
realm of being and reinterpreted the Dionysian notion
that God is hyperousios as meaning that He is not any
particular being but the very act of being, expressed by
the inﬁnitive ‘‘to be’’.
The Dionysian corpus was held in highest esteem also
in Rhineland mysticism, particularly by Meister Eckhart
and Johannes Tauler. Nicholas of Cusa’s On Learned Igno-
rance owes a debt to the Dionysian notion of mystical
unknowing. A comprehensive commentary on the Diony-
sian corpus, based on Eriugena’s translation and drawing
on the entire scholastic tradition, was written by Denis the
Carthusian. With the Renaissance and especially the Ref-
ormation, Dionysius’ credentials as a purported disciple of
St. Paul and even his orthodoxy started being questioned.
Luther regarded him as more of a Platonist than
a Christian and warned his readers to ‘‘stay away from
that Dionysius, whoever he was.’’ Lorenzo Valla, and fol-
lowing
him
Erasmus,
expressed
doubts
about
the
subapostolic dating of the Dionysian writings, though
the question was not settled until the end of the nineteenth
century, when these writings’ dependence on Proclus (d.
485) was conclusively demonstrated by Hugo Koch and
Joseph Stiglmayr.
Despite the undeniable importance of Dionysius for
western Christianity, the commonly cited assessment that
his writings were more inﬂuential in the West than in the
East is in need of qualiﬁcation. In the original Greek,
Dionysius’ writings were foundational for later Greek
theologians, such as Maximus the Confessor, John of
Damascus, Simeon the New Theologian, and Gregory
Palamas (de Andia 1997; Boiadjiev et al. 2000; Coakley
and Stang 2008). Sergius of Resh‘ayna¯’s Syriac translation
and a revision of that translation by Phocas (late seventh
century) were used by numerous Syriac authors, including
Jacob of Edessa, John of Dara, Moses bar Kepha, Simeon
de-Taybutheh, John of Dalyatha, and Bar-Hebraeus
(Beulay 1987; Strothmann 1977–1978). Stephen bar
Sudhaili’s (?) Book of the Holy Hierotheos, a document of
sixth-century Syriac Origenism, is ascribed to Dionysius’
putative teacher Hierotheos.
In the early eleventh century, Dionysius’ works were
also
translated
into
Arabic
and
circulated
in
the
1088 P
Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite

Arabic-speaking Christian circles in Syria and Egypt
(Treiger 2005). Even prior to that, some Dionysian
inﬂuence is discernible in the ninth-century Arabic
Neoplatonic treatises: the Liber de causis and the Theology
of Aristotle (D’Ancona Costa 1995; Adamson 2002).
Through these treatises, Dionysius may have exerted
certain inﬂuence on Islamic philosophy as well.
See also: ▶Albert the Great ▶Being ▶Church Fathers
▶Denys the Carthusian ▶Gregory of Palamas ▶Hugh
of St. Victor ▶John Scottus Eriugena ▶Maximus the
Confessor ▶Meister Eckhart ▶Nicholas of Cusa ▶Plato-
nism, Renaissance ▶Platonism ▶Sergius of Reshʿayna¯
▶Thomas Aquinas
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite (1857) Patrologiae cursus completus,
Series graeca, vol 3, ed. Migne J-P. Paris
Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite (1987) The complete works (trans:
Luibheid C). Paulist Press, New York
Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite (1990–1991) Corpus Dionysiacum, 2
vols (Patristische Texte und Studien, vols 33 and 36), ed. Suchla BR,
Heil G, Ritter AM. Walter de Gruyter, Berlin/New York
Secondary Sources
Monographs
Adamson P (2002) Arabic Plotinus: a philosophical study of the ‘‘Theol-
ogy of Aristotle.’’ Duckworth, London
Beulay R (1987) La lumie`re sans forme: introduction a` l’e´tude de la
mystique
chre´tienne
syro-orientale.
E´ditions
de
Chevetogne,
Chevetogne, Belgium
D’Ancona Costa C (1995) Recherches sur le ‘‘Liber de causis.’’ Vrin, Paris
Golitzin A (1994) Et introibo ad altare Dei: the mystagogy of Dionysius
Areopagita, with special reference to its predecessors in the eastern
Christian tradition. Patriarchikon Idruma Pateriko¯n Meleto¯n,
Thessaloniki
Harrington LM (2004) A thirteenth-century textbook of mystical theol-
ogy at the University of Paris: the ‘‘Mystical theology’’ of Dionysius
the Areopagite in Eriugena’s Latin translation with the scholia trans-
lated by Anastasius the Librarian and excerpts from Eriugena’s
‘‘Periphyseon.’’ Peeters, Paris/Leuven/Dudley
Klitenic Wear S, Dillon J (2007) Dionysius the Areopagite and the Neo-
platonist tradition: Despoiling the Hellenes. Ashgate, Aldershot/
Burlington
Louth A (1989) Denys the Areopagite. Morehouse, Wilton
Perl E (2007) Theophany: the neoplatonic philosophy of Dionysius the
Areopagite. State University of New York Press, Albany
Rorem P (1984) Biblical and liturgical symbols within the pseudo-
Dionysian synthesis. Pontiﬁcal Institute of Mediaeval Studies, Toronto
Rorem P (1993) Pseudo-Dionysius: a commentary on the texts and an
introduction to their inﬂuence. Oxford University Press, New York/
Oxford
Rorem P, Lamoreaux JC (1998) John of Scythopolis and the Dionysian
Corpus: annotating the Areopagite. Clarendon, New York/Oxford
Strothmann W (1977–1978) Das Sakrament der Myron-Weihe in der
Schrift
‘‘De
ecclesiastica
hierarchia’’
des
Pseudo-Dionysios
Areopagita in syrischen U¨ bersetzungen und Kommentaren, 2 vols.
Wiesbaden
Suchla BR (2008) Dionysius Areopagita: Leben – Werk – Wirkung.
Herder, Freiburg
Collections
Boiadjiev T, Kapriev G, Speer A (eds) (2000) Die Dionysius-Rezeption im
Mittelalter: Internationales Kolloquium in Soﬁa vom 8. bis 11. April
1999 unter der Schirmherrschaft der Socie´te´ Internationale pour
l’E´tude de la Philosophie Me´die´vale. Brepols, Turnhout
Coakley S, Stang CM (eds) (2008) Re-Thinking Dionysius the Areopagite.
Special Issue of Modern Theology 24.4
de Andia Y (ed) (1997) Denys l’Are´opagite et sa poste´rite´ en Orient et en
Occident: Actes du Colloque International, Paris, 21–24 septembre
1994. Institut d’e´tudes augustiniennes, Paris
Lilla S (1994) Denys l’Are´opagite (Pseudo-). In: Goulet R (ed)
Dictionnaire des philosophes antiques, vol 2. CNRS, Paris, pp
727–742
Mali F (2002) Hat es die Schrift De symbolica theologia von Dionysius
Ps.-Areopagita gegeben? Anmerkungen zu den Nachrichten des
Sergius von Resˇ‘aina u¨ber Dionysius Ps.-Areopagita. In: Tamcke
M
(ed)
Syriaca:
Zur
Geschichte,
Theologie,
Liturgie
und
Gegenwartslage der syrischen Kirchen, 2. Deutsches Syrologen-
Symposium (Juli 2000, Wittenberg). Lit, Mu¨nster, pp 213–224
Perczel I (2000) Sergius of Reshaina’s Syriac translation of the Dionysian
Corpus: some preliminary remarks. In: Bafﬁoni C (ed) La diffusione
dell’eredita` classica nell’eta` tardo-antica e medievale. Filologia,
storia, dottrina. Atti del Seminario nazionale di studio (Napoli-
Sorrento, 29–31 ottobre 1998). Edizioni dell’Orso, Alessandria,
pp 79–94
Perczel I (2001) Pseudo-Dionysius and Palestinian Origenism. In: Patrich
J (ed) The Sabaite Heritage in the Orthodox church from the ﬁfth
century to the present. Peeters, Leuven, pp 261–282
Journal Articles
Golitzin A (2003) Dionysius Areopagites: a Christian mysticism? Pro
Ecclesia 12.2:1–52
Perczel I (1999) Une the´ologie de la lumie`re: Denys l’Are´opagite et E´vagre
le Pontique. Revue des e´tudes augustiniennes 45.1:79–120
Treiger A (2005) New evidence on the Arabic versions of the Corpus
Dionysiacum. Le Muse´on 118:219–240
Ptolemy of Lucca
JAMES M. BLYTHE
Department of History
University of Memphis
Memphis, TN
USA
Abstract
Ptolemy of Lucca (Tolomeo Fiadoni) (c. 1236–1327) was
a student of Thomas Aquinas, Dominican prior in Lucca
and Florence, and bishop of Torcello. He is chieﬂy known
for his contributions to political thought. His most impor-
tant book is De regimine principum, a continuation of
Ptolemy of Lucca P
1089
P

Thomas’ De regno, but he also wrote historical works,
treatises defending hierocratic papal authority and limit-
ing the powers of the Roman Empire, a commentary on
the days of creation, and a history of the church. Ptolemy
provided a previously lacking theoretical grounding for
the realities and aspirations of Guelph republican city-
states, and thereby anticipated many of the tenets of
Renaissance civic humanism. He presented republican
government as the only suitable alternative for a virtuous
people and identiﬁed monarchy with tyranny or despo-
tism. He was perhaps the ﬁrst writer to use the word
‘‘republic’’ as an antonym of ‘‘monarchy,’’ instead of as
a generic term for government. He was one of the ﬁrst
medieval writers to praise the Roman Republic in com-
parison
with
the
Empire.
His
analysis
of
Rome
complemented his original treatment of ancient Greek
governments often praised as mixed constitutions and of
the ancient Hebrew government, all of which he compared
to certain medieval republics. He extended the common
Four World Monarchy theory by denoting the church as
a ﬁnal ﬁfth world monarchy, thereby reducing the Roman
Empire to a time-bound state.
Ptolemy of Lucca, born Tolomeo Fiadoni to a Luccan
merchant family, entered the Dominican Order at San
Romano in Lucca and studied under Thomas Aquinas,
probably in Rome (1264–1268). In 1272, he accompanied
Thomas to Naples and studied with him there until his
teacher’s death in 1274, serving at times as his confessor.
Around 1278 he wrote De iurisdictione imperii, incorrectly
known as Determinatio compendiosa, defending papal
authority in conﬁrmation of the Roman emperor.
After returning to Lucca (date unknown), he was
elected prior of San Romano several times between 1289
and 1299 and likely wrote De operibus sex dierum, incor-
rectly known as Exameron, a treatise on the six days of
creation. In 1294 he was in Naples for the brief pontiﬁcate
of Celestine V. In Lucca, he befriended Countess Capoana,
widow of Count Ugolino of Pisa, after the latter’s murder
in 1289. She lived at San Romano and named Ptolemy one
of her executors. He served as executor for other impor-
tant ﬁgures, including Labro Vulpelli – a top ofﬁcial of the
Ricciardi Bank, whose wife Agnese became a conversa at
San Romano – and Cardinal Leonardo Patrasso. From
1300–1302 Ptolemy served as prior of Santa Maria Novella
in Florence, returning in 1302 to Lucca as prior of San
Romano.
There
he
wrote
De
regimine
principum,
a continuation of Thomas’ incomplete treatise on govern-
ment (sometimes called De regno), Annales, a historical
chronicle, and two short treatises on the Roman Empire.
In 1309 Ptolemy moved to Avignon, as Cardinal
Leonardo’s chaplain, moving to the house of Cardinal
William of Bayonne after his patron’s death in 1311. In
Avignon he wrote his church history, Historia ecclesiastica
nova, dedicated to William. In 1318, Pope John XXII
appointed him bishop of Torcello in the Venetian lagoon,
and in 1320 he became entangled in a dispute with his
superior, the patriarch of Grado (essentially archbishop of
Venice) over the appointment of an abbess, leading to his
excommunication in 1321 for disobedience, contempt,
perjury, and mismanagement of episcopal property. John
resolved the conﬂict, and Ptolemy, reportedly senile and
accused of nepotism for allowing his avaricious nephews
free reign, died in ofﬁce.
Ptolemy traveled more than most contemporaries:
throughout Italy and France, to Germany, and probably
to Spain. Most of these trips were on behalf of his order:
ﬁrst as student and later as abbot, provincial preacher
general, representative to provincial and general chapters,
and elector of the master general. As he tells us, while
traveling he consulted local archives and libraries.
Ptolemy is primarily known as a political thinker. He
provided a previously lacking theoretical grounding for
the realities and aspirations of Guelph republican city-
states, and thereby anticipated many of the tenets of
Renaissance civic humanism. He divided secular govern-
ment into political and regal forms, strongly preferring the
former as the only suitable alternative for a virtuous and
freedom-loving people. Unlike most scholastic writers, he
loathed monarchy, identifying it with tyranny or despo-
tism, while conceding that most peoples lacked the virtue
needed for republican self-governance. He was perhaps
the ﬁrst writer to use, although inconsistently, the word
‘‘republic’’ as an antonym of ‘‘monarchy,’’ instead of as
a generic term for government. He was one of the ﬁrst
medieval writers to praise the Roman Republic in com-
parison to the empire, describing as ideal the former’s
government, which in his view evolved to incorporate
democratic and aristocratic elements. In an original ver-
sion of the common organic metaphor of society, Ptolemy
raised the possibility of a government constructed with
such harmony among its components that it achieves
perfect stability, another idea usually associated with the
Renaissance. His analysis of Rome complemented his
original treatment of ancient Greek governments praised
as mixed constitutions and the ancient Hebrew govern-
ment, all of which he compared to certain medieval repub-
lics. His work is especially rich with speciﬁc examples,
something lacking in much scholastic writing, and even
contains some personal anecdotes. He tells us, for
1090 P
Ptolemy of Lucca

example, of his joy in reading and writing and of historical
events he witnessed.
Ptolemy was a rare political theorist in being both
a republican and a supporter of papal hierocracy, although
this was a reasonable position for one with his Guelph
background, and he never envisioned papal interference
with the government of a republic. In his expositions of
imperial power he maintained that the pope’s authority
over the Empire, although ratiﬁed by the Donation of
Constantine, stems ultimately from his God-given author-
ity as vicar of Christ. Ptolemy extended the common Four
World Monarchy theory, in which (usually) the Assyrian,
Persian, Greek, and Roman Empires succeed each other,
with the Roman lasting until the end of time, by denoting
the church as a ﬁnal, Fifth Monarchy, thereby reducing the
Roman Empire to a time-bound state, but one with
a special protective relationship to the church so long as
it lasted.
Ptolemy’s historical works are ﬂawed, but they some-
times depict events that he himself witnessed and serve as
especially important sources for the history of Lucca and
Tuscany in the eleventh through thirteenth centuries. The
same goes for the history of the papacy from the early
Middle Ages until 1294, and – if Ptolemy is responsible for
the book’s ﬁrst continuation – to 1316, despite it being one
of the early sources of the myth of a female Pope John (not
yet Joan) and other apocryphal stories. It was also signif-
icant for its early catalog of the work of Aquinas and
information on his life.
New learning and political developments of Ptolemy’s
time called previous assumptions into question. Conse-
quently, he engaged in a struggle, never quite successful, in
almost everything he wrote, to reconcile conﬂicting out-
looks, such as natural and supernatural causation, Augus-
tinian
and
Aristotelian
concepts
of
government,
hierocratic and republican rule, and the active and the
contemplative life. He also never found a satisfactory bal-
ance between his love of detail and his concern with
pattern and meaning. One conﬂict, conditioned by his
relationship with several important women, is that
between the Aristotelian view of women as defective men
and his conviction that women were different from men,
but had an equally important role. For example, he
discussed at length whether women should be soldiers,
concluding that they should not, but only because they
had a more important role in the household. At the end of
De regimine principum, Ptolemy proposed to write
a separate treatise on household government and another
on the virtues required for rulers and subjects, but he
probably never wrote them.
Several other works Ptolemy mentioned are in the same
category. He possibly intended for all or most of his works
to form parts of an unﬁnished grand history of the world,
comprising a secularly oriented Historia quadripartita and
a spiritually oriented Historia tripartita. He also referred to
a proposed treatise on moral philosophy, a catalog of the
emperors, and a catalog of the Frankish kings.
Since Ptolemy’s most original work was a continuation
of a treatise of Thomas Aquinas and usually ascribed to
Thomas, it achieved considerable circulation and was
treated as authoritative. Although it is difﬁcult to trace
direct inﬂuence, it emerges clearly in the writings of sev-
eral later writers, such as John Fortescue (c. 1395–c. 1477),
Girolamo Savonarola (1452–1498), Niccolo` Machiavelli
(1469–1527), and Claude de Seyssel (died 1520), and was
likely a factor in much of the political thought of the
fourteenth through sixteenth centuries. His ecclesiological
work also attracted interest at least through the four-
teenth-
and
ﬁfteenth-century
conciliar
debates.
De
iurisdictione imperii appeared in a revised edition after
Ptolemy’s death and was used in the work of Alvarus
Pelagius
(c.
1280–1352)
and
William
of
Ockham
(c. 1288–c. 1347), among others, and it was included in
a ﬁfteenth century compilation of writings on church and
state.
See
also:
▶John
Fortescue
▶Marsilius
of
Padua
▶Remigio dei Girolami ▶Thomas Aquinas, Political
Thought ▶William of Ockham
Bibliography
Primary Sources
(For Ptolemy’s works, the name in parentheses is the one that appears as
author in the edition cited)
Ptolemy of Lucca (Anonymous). De regimine principum. Citta` del
Vaticano Biblioteca Apostolica: Vat. Lat. 810, s.xiv: ff. 1ra–58vb
Ptolemy of Lucca (Ptolomaeus Lucensis) (1727a) Annales. In: Rerum
Italicarum scriptores, ed. Muratori LA, vol 11. Societa` Palantina,
col 1249–1306. Milan
Ptolemy of Lucca (Ptolomaeus Lucensis) (1727b) Historia ecclesiastica
nova. In: Rerum Italicarum scriptores, ed. Muratori LA, vol 11,
col 751–1242. Milan
Ptolemy of Lucca (Tholomeus von Lucca) (2009) In: Clavuot L and
Schmugge L (eds) Historia ecclesiastica nova: Nebst Fortsetzungen
Bis 1329). Monumenta Germaniae Historica, Scriptores, 39.
Hahnsche Buchhandlung, Hanover
Ptolemy of Lucca (Nicolaus Aragonii) (1761) Tractatus de iurisdictione
ecclesiae super Regnum Siciliae et Apuliae, ed. Baluze S, Mansi JD.
Miscellanea,
vol
1.
Lucca,
apud
Vincentium
Junctinium,
pp 468–473
Ptolemy of Lucca (Ptolemaeus Lucensis) (1876) Annales. In: Documenti
di Storia Italiana, vol 6. Chronache dei Secoli XIII e XIV, ed. Minutoli
C. Cellini, Florence, pp 35–104
Ptolemy of Lucca P
1091
P

Ptolemy of Lucca (Tholomaeus de Luca) (1880) Exaemeron, seu De
operibus sex dierum tractatus, ed. Masetti T. Ex Typographis S.
Bernardini, Siena (cited in this article by the correct name, De
operibus sex dierum)
Ptolemy of Lucca (Anonymous) (1909a) Tractatus Anonymus de Origine ac
translatione et Statu Romani imperii. In: Determinatio compendiosa
de iurisdictione imperii. Fontes Iuris Germanici Antiqui, ed. Krammer
M. Bibliopolis Hahnianus, Hanover/Leipzig, pp 66–75
Ptolemy
of
Lucca
(Tholomeus
Lucensis)
(1909b)
Determinatio
compendiosa de iurisdictione imperii, ed. Krammer M. Fontes
Iuris
Germanici
Antiqui.
Monumenta
Germaniae
Historica.
Bibliopolis Hahnianus, Hanover/Leipzig, pp 1–65 (cited in this arti-
cle by the correct name, De iurisdictione imperii et auctoritate
summi pontiﬁcis)
Ptolemy of Lucca (Tholomaeus von Lucca) (1930) Die Annalen des
Tholomeus von Lucca, ed. Schmeidler B. Monumenta Germaniae
Historica. Scriptores Rerum Germanicorum. N.S., t.8. Berlin (2nd
edn, 1955)
Ptolemy of Lucca (Ptolemaeus Lucensis) and Thomas Aquinas (Thomas
de Aquino) (1949a) De regimine principum ad regem Cypri. In:
Thomas Aquinas, Opuscula omnia necnon Opera minora. Tomus
Primus:
Opuscula
philosophica,
ed.
Joannes
Perrier
RP.
P.
Lethielleux, Paris, pp 221–445
Ptolemy of Lucca (Ptholomaeus de Luca) and Thomas Aquinas (Thomas
de Aquino) (1949b) De regimine principum ad regem Cypri. In:
Thomas Aquinas, Politica Opuscula Duo, ed. Matthis J. Marietti
(reissued 1971)
Ptolemy of Lucca (Ptolomaeus Lucensis) (1954) De regimine principum
(De regno), ed. Busa R. Marietti, Turin. http://www.corpustho-
misticum.org/xrp.html. Accessed October 2006
Ptolemy of Lucca (1997) Ptolemy of Lucca, on the government of rulers
(De regimine principum), with portions attributed to Thomas
Aquinas, trans. Blythe JM. University of Pennsylvania Press,
Philadelphia
Secondary Sources
Blythe JM (1992) Ideal government and the mixed constitution in the
middle ages. Princeton University Press, Princeton
Blythe JM (2000) Civic humanism’ and medieval political thought. In:
Hankins J (ed) Renaisance civic humanism. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, pp 30–74
Blythe JM (2002) Aristotle’s politics and ptolemy of lucca. Vivarium
40:103–136
Blythe JM (2009) The life and works of Tolomeo Fiadoni (Ptolemy of
Lucca) Brepols, Turnhout, Belgium
Blythe JM (2009) The worldview and thought of Tolomeo Fiadoni (Ptol-
emy of Lucca) Brepols, Turnhout, Belgium
Blythe JM, La Salle J (2008) Did Tolomeo Fiadoni (Ptolemy of Lucca)
insert ‘civic humanist’ ideas into Thomas Aquinas’s treatise on king-
ship? Reﬂections on a newly-discovered manuscript of Hans Baron.
In: Peterson DS, Bornstein DE (eds) Florence and beyond: culture,
society, and politics in Renaissance Italy. University of Toronto Press,
Toronto
Davis CT (1974) Ptolemy of Lucca and the Roman Republic. Proc Am
Philos Soc 118:30–50
Davis CT (1975) Roman patriotism and Republican propaganda: Ptolemy
of Lucca and Pope Nicholas III. Speculum 50:411–433
Dondaine A (1961) Les ‘Opuscula Fratris Thomae’ chez Ptole´me´ de
Lucques. Archivum Fratrum Praedicatorum 31:142–203
La Salle J, Blythe JM (2005) Was Ptolemy of Lucca a civic humanist?
Reﬂections on a newly-discovered manuscript of Hans Baron. Hist
Polit Thought 26:236–265
Mohr W (1974) Bemerkungen zur Verfasserschaft von De regimine
principum. In: Mu¨ller J, Koblenberger
H (eds) Virtus Politpca.
Frommann Verlag and Gu¨nther Holzboog, KG, Stuttgart/Bad
Cannestatt, pp 127–145
O’Rahilly A (1929a) Notes on St. Thomas: IV. De regimine principum.
Irish Ecclesiast Rec 31:396–410
O’Rahilly A (1929b) A notes on St. Thomas: V. Tholomeo of Lucca,
continuator of the De regimine principum. Irish Ecclesiast Rec
31:606–614
Osborne T (2000) Dominium regalem et politicum. Sir John Fortescue’s
response to the problem of tyranny as presented by Thomas Aquinas
and Ptolemy of Lucca. Mediev Stud 62:161–188
Panella E (1984) Note di Biograﬁa Domenicana tra XIII e XIV Secolo.
Archivum Fratrum Praedicatorum 54:231–280
Panella E (1989) Livio in Tolomeo da Lucca. Studi Petrarcheschi
6:43–52
Panella E (1993a) Rilettura del ‘De operibus sex dierum’ di Tolomeo dei
Fiadoni da Lucca. Archivum Fratrum Praedicatorum 63:51–111
Panella E (1993b) Tholomaeus de Fiadonis Lucanus. In: Kaeppeli T,
Panella E (eds) Scriptores Ordinis Praedicatorum Medii Aevi, vol 4.
Istituto Storico Domenicano, Rome, pp 318–325
Schmugge L (1976) Zur U¨ berlieferung der Historia ecclesiastica nova des
Tholomeus von Lucca. Deutsches Archiv 32:495–545
Schmugge L (1977) Notizen su einer Bisher Verschollenen Handschrift
der Historia Ecclesiastica Nova des Tholomeus von Lucca. Quellen
und Forschungen aus Italienischen Archiven und Bibliotheken
57:347–353
Schmugge
L
(1982)
Kanonistik
und
Geschichtschreibung:
Das
Kirchenrecht als Historische Quelle bei Tholomeus von Lucca und
Anderen Chronisten des 13. und 14. Jahrhunderts. Zeitschrift der
Savigny-Stiftung fu¨r Rechtsgeschichte. Kanonistische Abteilung
68:219–276
Taurisano I (1914) I Domenicani in Lucca. Baroni, Lucca
Wootton D (2006) The true origins of republicanism: the disciples of
Baron and the counter-example of Venturi. In: Albertone M (ed) Il
Repubblicanesimo Moderno: L’idea di Repubblica nella Riﬂessione
Storica di Franco Venturi. Bibilopolis, Naples pp 271–304. Another
version with only minimal differences, The true origins of republi-
canism or De vera respublica, is available at http://www.york.ac.uk/
crems/downloads/trueorigins.pdf
1092 P
Ptolemy of Lucca

