Emil Dinga
Camelia Oprean-Stan
Cristina Roxana Tănăsescu
Vasile Brătian
Gabriela-Mariana Ionescu
Economic and Financial 
Market Behaviour 
The Autopoietic Market 
Hypothesis

Economic and Financial Market Behaviour

Emil Dinga  •  Camelia Oprean-Stan
Cristina Roxana Tănăsescu
Vasile Brătian  •  Gabriela-Mariana Ionescu
Economic and 
Financial Market 
Behaviour
The Autopoietic Market Hypothesis

ISBN 978-3-031-31701-9        ISBN 978-3-031-31702-6  (eBook)
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-31702-6
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer 
Nature Switzerland AG 2023
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are solely and exclusively licensed by the 
Publisher, whether the whole or part of the material is concerned, specifically the rights of 
translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations, recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on 
microfilms or in any other physical way, and transmission or information storage and retrieval, 
electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dissimilar methodology now 
known or hereafter developed.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this 
publication does not imply, even in the absence of a specific statement, that such names are 
exempt from the relevant protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
The publisher, the authors, and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information 
in this book are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the 
publisher nor the authors or the editors give a warranty, expressed or implied, with respect to 
the material contained herein or for any errors or omissions that may have been made. The 
publisher remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.
This Palgrave Macmillan imprint is published by the registered company Springer Nature 
Switzerland AG.
The registered company address is: Gewerbestrasse 11, 6330 Cham, Switzerland
Emil Dinga
Romanian Academy
Bucharest, Romania
Cristina Roxana Tănăsescu
Lucian Blaga University of Sibiu
Sibiu, Romania
Gabriela-Mariana Ionescu
Romanian Academy
Bucharest, Romania
Camelia Oprean-Stan
Lucian Blaga University of Sibiu
Sibiu, Romania
Vasile Brătian
Lucian Blaga University of Sibiu
Sibiu, Romania

v
This work has been supported by a Hasso Plattner Excellence Research 
Grant (LBUS-HPI-ERG-2020-XX), financed by the Knowledge Transfer 
Center of the Lucian Blaga University of Sibiu.
Acknowledgement

vii
Contents
	1	 Social Selection in the Financial Market: Preliminary Issues     1
	2	 Social Selection in the Financial Market: Logical Mechanism   41
	3	 Autopoietic Market Hypothesis: The Concept of Autopoiesis   87
	4	 Autopoietic Market Hypothesis: The Financial Autopoiesis
175
	5	 Autopoietic Market Hypothesis—The Mechanism
257
Index
319

ix
Fig. 1.1	
Typology of mutation and selection in the living world 
(biological, respectively logical). (Source: Authors)
2
Fig. 1.2	
Social fitness functioning. (Source: Authors)
7
Fig. 1.3	
Ethics generating. (Source: Authors)
26
Fig. 1.4	
Genealogy of the ethical sense. (Source: Authors)
27
Fig. 1.5	
Relationship between ex-ante and ex-post ethics. (Source: 
Authors)
28
Fig. 1.6	
An abstract typology of change. (Source: Dinga et al., 
Co-evolution of symbolic species in the financial market. A 
framework for economic and political decision-­making, 
Springer, 2023, Chap. 1, Fig. 1.11)
30
Fig. 2.1	
A general scheme of social fitness formation of the focal 
individual. (Source: Authors)
44
Fig. 2.2	
Elasticity versus plasticity in cultural geodesic kinematics. 
(Source: Authors)
47
Fig. 2.3	
Correlation human individual–symbolic individual: the way of 
life. (Source: Authors)
50
Fig. 2.4	
Correlation human individual–symbolic individual: the social 
fitness selection. (Source: Authors)
57
Fig. 2.5	
A conceptual topology of the performative depth of financial 
fitness. (Source: Authors)
68
Fig. 2.6	
A conceptual typology of the performative depth of financial 
fitness. (Source: Authors)
73
Fig. 3.1	
Sensation, perception and representation in the cognition 
matter. (Source: Authors)
91
Fig. 3.2	
Four co-evolutions in LLS functioning. (Source: Authors)
101
List of Figures

x 
List of Figures
Fig. 3.3	
Causal factors of master properties of systems. (Source: Authors)
108
Fig. 3.4	
Self-organization in the financial sphere. (Source: Authors)
119
Fig. 3.5	
A typology of autopoiesis from the perspective of cognition. 
(Source: Authors)
121
Fig. 3.6	
Logical relationships between autopoieticity and the automatic 
stabilizer. (Source: Authors)
133
Fig. 3.7	
Autopoieticity curve related to the behavioural entropy. 
(Source: Authors)
136
Fig. 3.8	
Logical relationships between autopoieticity and constructal 
law. (Source: Authors)
140
Fig. 3.9	
Inter-actions between dissipative systems is ‘preferred’ to 
inter-actions with the environment. (Source: Authors)
143
Fig. 3.10	
Relationship between autopoieticity and network. (Source: 
Authors)
146
Fig. 4.1	
Mechanism of autopoietic mutation. (Source: Authors)
178
Fig. 4.2	
Logical relationship autopoiesis—self-selection. (Source: 
Authors)
188
Fig. 4.3	
APMH positioning on the ‘map’ of financial market models/
modelling. (Source: Authors)
191
Fig. 4.4	
The two representational models. (Source: Authors)
193
Fig. 4.5	
The three entangled processes to pass from the natural field 
towards the social field. (Source: Authors)
195
Fig. 4.6	
Logical correlation among types of utilities and types of 
actional paradigms. (Source: Authors)
201
Fig. 4.7	
Logical correlation among the three species of capital. (Source: 
Authors)
204
Fig. 4.8	
Comparative forms of substantive and symbolic curves 
(absolute and marginal) of utility. (Source: Authors)
206
Fig. 4.9	
Tunnel of optimality vs. tunnel of sustainability. (Source: 
Authors)
211
Fig. 4.10	
Impact of substantive utility and symbolic utility on integral 
utility. (Source: Authors)
213
Fig. 4.11	
Self-catalysis of the symbolic utility. (Source: Authors)
215
Fig. 4.12	
The APMH thresholds of value (V) functioning. (Source: 
Authors)
224
Fig. 4.13	
The APMH thresholds of nucleus (N) functioning. (Source: 
Authors)
225
Fig. 4.14	
Functioning of the regulative criterion of APMH paradigm. 
(Source: Authors)
231
Fig. 4.15	
Functionality of APMH paradigm. (Source: Authors)
235
Fig. 4.16	
Behaviour of APMH paradigm. (Source: Authors)
238

xi
  List of Figures 
Fig. 5.1	
Dynamics of affinity proportionality factors with the duration 
of phenotype uninterrupted corroboration. (Source: Authors)
264
Fig. 5.2	
The logical difference of the mutation between the biological 
and the symbolic species. (Source: Authors)
267
Fig. 5.3	
The reciprocal relationship of the affinity proportionality 
factors with the duration of the phenotype corroboration. 
(Source: Authors)
268
Fig. 5.4	
Qualitative/logical positioning of the three types of selection 
in the APMH model. (Source: Authors)
274
Fig. 5.5	
The mechanism of selection in APMH model. (Source: Authors)
274
Fig. 5.6	
The mechanism of transcription and translation of genetic 
mutation in the APMH model. (Source: Authors)
278
Fig. 5.7	
General scheme of the financial market evolution within 
APMH model. (Source: Authors)
281
Fig. 5.8	
The mechanism of financial self-organization within APMH 
model. (Source: Authors)
291
Fig. 5.9	
The causal device in the financial autopoietic chreode of 
APMH model. (Source: Authors)
298
Fig. 5.10	
Reciprocal positioning of the structural components of the 
chreodic mechanism. (Source: Authors)
301
Fig. 5.11	
Phenomenology of the financial autopoietic chreode in APMH 
model. (Source: Authors)
301
Fig. 5.12	
The two meanings of the behaviour efficiency. (Source: 
Authors)
302

xiii
Table 2.1	
Financial fitness classes and financial market models
74
Table 4.1	
Dynamics (causal kinematics) of the praxiological paradigms 
in the history
209
Table 4.2	
Logical positioning of fundamental principles of financial 
markets models
219
List of Tables

1
CHAPTER 1
Social Selection in the Financial Market: 
Preliminary Issues
Elements of Social Selection 
in the Financial Market
The General Concept of Social Selection
Preamble
­
1
2
­
3
4
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature 
Switzerland AG 2023
E. Dinga et al., Economic and Financial Market Behaviour, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-31702-6_1

2
 
­
1.1
Social Selection Versus Natural Selection
We have seen, in general terms, what natural selection is in the world of 
biology. We also saw the content of the selection (within co-evolution) of 
symbolic species preference, price and information. In this paragraph we 
aim to establish the relationship (similarities and differences) between nat­
ural selection and what we might call social selection (or, as we prefer to 
say, cultural selection).
How the Current Hypothesis in the Financial Field Call 
the Concept of Social Selection?
5
­
­
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

3
•	 the dominance of the neoclassical basis on which the theories in the 
case were built up—the striking example is, of course, Efficient 
Market Hypothesis (EMH). The problem with the neoclassical 
approach is that the humans are thought either as (mechanical) balls 
on a table or as (unconscious) molecules in a gas;
•	
6
­
7
•	 either if the agents are considered capable of hyper-rationality or just 
of bounded rationality, the deliberation and decision-making are 
almost always associated with a kind of rationality;
•	 even the heresies are maintained more or less close to a rational calcu­
lus, although based on other postulates (Peters, 1994—the fractally 
distribution of returns related to time horizon of economic game is 
more postulated than demonstrated, since exactly based on these 
fractal structure, the stability and efficiency of the financial market 
are proved; Dowling, 2005—the deriving of the memes, themes, 
sentiments and strategies is close enough to the same neoclassical 
ground, based on molecular replication paradigm, although the 
author claims an evolutionary approach of the financial phenome­
non; Lo, 2019—whose intention to move away from the neoclassical 
school seems to be the most determined, generally fails to provide a 
solid evolutionary theory, that is, with all of its conceptual and mech­
anistical ingredients);
•	 any case, the current approaches of the financial market functioning, 
has too less to do with a structural (or structuralist) examination of 
this crucial market of the contemporary economies. However, in the 
society (although in rather a Lamarckian way than in a Darwinist 
one), so including the financial market is clearly working a selection, 
namely, a social selection, that is, exactly what we will provide in this 
chapter. Because the evolutionism necessarily implies the structural­
ism and vice versa.
What Social Selection Is It?
Social selection is a selection that has, as its selector environment, the 
human society as a whole. Of course, the phenotypes on which social 
selection is exerted belong to symbolic species, as they have been 
1  SOCIAL SELECTION IN THE FINANCIAL MARKET: PRELIMINARY ISSUES 

4
previously defined and described. As we will show, social selection is not 
pure, but it is a hybrid that combines different types of selection—includ­
ing natural selection. The relevance of the examination of social selection 
applied to symbolic species derives directly from the previously introduced 
assumption that the environment of symbolic species in society is the cul­
tural geodesic (CG), as a ‘device’ for objectifying the situational context 
that characterizes the society in question.
Predicates of Sufficiency of Social Selection
­
­
8
•	 bold
 italic upper P bold italic upper S Subscript bold italic upper S bold italic upper S Superscript bold 1
9
•	 (bold
 italic upper P bold italic upper S Subscript bold italic upper S bold italic upper S Superscript bold 2 ) the selector (or selector medium) is the cultural geodesic;
•	 (bold
 italic upper P bold italic upper S Subscript bold italic upper S bold italic upper S Superscript bold 3 ) the selection criterion is the social fitness;
•	 bold
 italic upper P bold italic upper S Subscript bold italic upper S bold italic upper S Superscript bold 4
10
11
	
	
Social Fitness
12
The literature does not treat the concept of social fitness from an 
abstract and generalizing perspective but rather in an applicative manner, 
most often associated with the concept of wellbeing. To this end, a 
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

5
number of welfare objectives or purposes are listed and checked whether 
and to what extent they are met in the society concerned. Also, most of 
the time, the very concept of wellbeing is limited to socio-professional 
categories and examined as such (McGene, 2013).
For the abstract and generalized treatment of the concept of social fit­
ness, the term adequacy—which is the hallmark or essence of fitness—
requires some clarification. We will say that an individual/species is suitable 
for his/her environment if the following predicates of sufficiency are veri­
fied (note with SF social fitness):
•	 bold
 italic upper P bold italic upper S Subscript bold italic upper S bold italic upper F Superscript bold 1
13
14
•	 bold
 italic upper P bold italic upper S Subscript bold italic upper S bold italic upper F Superscript bold 2
15
•	
bold
 italic upper P bold italic upper S Subscript bold italic upper S bold italic upper F Superscript bold 3
16
17
18
­
19
	
	
Some additional details on our position on the matter of adequacy 
(and, implicitly, social fitness) are useful here:
	(1)	 adequacy/fitness are not a-contextual, but are ‘dated’—both tempo­
rally and spatially. We say that fitness is dependent on the context or is 
contextual. Thus, whenever we want to talk about the social fitness of 
1  SOCIAL SELECTION IN THE FINANCIAL MARKET: PRELIMINARY ISSUES 

6
an individual (or, rather, of a species), the correct notation must be 
the following:
	
notation that must be read as follows: the social fitness of individual i or 
species s (upp
e r S upper F Subscript t Superscript i divided by s ) is given by the adequacy (or degree of adequacy) of indi­
vidual ‘i’ or of the species ‘s’ (up
p er A Subscript t Superscript i divided by s ) to the cultural geodesic (CGt) necessar­
ily generated by the situational context of the locality ‘L’ (upp
er S upper C Subscript t Superscript upper L)—the lower 
index ‘t’ means the moment (or sometimes, the time interval) for which 
the social fitness assessment is made—Nota bene: the logical constant ‘∣’ 
will be read ‘conditioned by…’;
	
	
­
­
­
20
21
­
22
1.2
 Short Discussion
•	 There is a causal correspondence between expectations (or, as some 
authors call them, affections or even emotions, of course, in a general 
sense) and the predicates of sufficiency of social fitness—and this 
both with regard to the symbolic individual/species and regarding 
cultural geodesic.
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

7
 
•	 Both inside the expectations and inside the predicates of sufficiency, 
there is an inter-conditioning between the symbolic individual/spe­
cies, on the one hand, and the cultural geodesic, on the other hand.
Nota bene: only the predominant aspects/degrees were retained, both 
for the causal relations and for the inter-conditioning ones (thus, e.g., in 
the case of the causal relations, we can have determinations of the way of 
life from the needs or desires, too, respectively from compliance or partici­
pation; likewise, in the case of inter-conditionings, we can have inter-­
conditionings also between expectations addressed to CG and way of life 
towards i/s, etc.).
Similarities and Differences Between Social Selection and Natural 
Selection
The examination of the similarities and differences between social selec­
tion (i.e., selection operating on symbolic or logical species) and natural 
selection (i.e., selection operating on biological or natural species) is, in 
our view, of the greatest importance and relevance for highlighting the 
1  SOCIAL SELECTION IN THE FINANCIAL MARKET: PRELIMINARY ISSUES 

8
mechanism of social selection. We will continue to point out the most 
important similarities, respectively differences, between the two types of 
selection (we note with NS: natural selection, respectively with SS: social 
selection; we also note with NF: natural fitness, respectively with SF: social 
fitness).
•	 Similarities
–– direct selection is exercised on the phenotype (adult individual);
–– the application of the fitness criterion is made on the instantia­
tion/manifestation of the phenotype (if the phenotype does not 
manifest or, equivalently, does not acquire an instantiation of 
space and time, i.e., a locality, the fitness criterion cannot be 
applied);
––
23
­
24
–– the evolutionary process is complete: genetic mutation, epigene­
tic 
impact, 
transcription, 
translation, 
directed/directional 
selection;
––
­
25
–– behaviour is based on two types of causation: (a) genetical and (b) 
memetical.
•	 Differences
–– the natural phenotype is a result of its development (the criterion 
for completing the development is, in general, the acquisition of 
reproductive capacity)—the social phenotype is ‘born’ directly 
adult (we no longer have a developmental process);
––
26
––
­
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

9
1.1
–– in the case of SS, in addition to genetic and memetic causality, 
there is also semetic causality. In this context, there is also a differ­
ence in the weight of the three types of causalities of behaviour: 
(a) in the case of NS: genetically caused behaviour predominates; 
(b) in the case of SS: semetically caused behaviour predominates 
(on the ‘2nd place’, as a share in the total causality, the memetic 
causality is located).
As the examination of social selection becomes more in-depth, other 
correlations between the two types of selection will be highlighted, the 
fundamental reason for this possibility being, of course, that the human 
individual (natural biological phenotype) is also the sole generator of the 
symbolic/logical species that work or can work in society—for example, 
the trading strategy, that is, the financial individual of the symbolic species 
called financial market, is imagined, designed and implemented by the 
biological individual (Nota bene: remember that all symbolic species are 
initiated/created by the biological individual, thus they being a species of 
artefacts).
The Relationship Between Social Selection and Natural Selection
The question is: what is the relationship between natural selection and 
social selection, in systems where biological species and symbolic/logical 
species co-exist and where, in particular, biological individuals are also 
components (in one way or another) of symbolic species? We will examine 
this issue in the particular case of interest in this study, namely, the sym­
bolic species called financial market.
•	
­
­
1.2
27
1  SOCIAL SELECTION IN THE FINANCIAL MARKET: PRELIMINARY ISSUES 

10
­
­
­
­
–– there are positions that state that there are (or may be, i.e., they 
are not prohibited in principle) ‘specialized’ biological genes for 
different behaviours, attitudes, values and so on, which concern 
the economic phenomenon, so that these genetic endowments 
act as predictors for the identification of preferences and even 
some modi operandi (Lehrer & Ding, 2016). This biologically 
originated predestination is obviously very similar to the Calvinist 
predestination in the field of religion—somehow, the genetic 
structure of a person forces that person to a certain behaviour;
––
­
­
­
28
­
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

11
­
­
2012
––
­
­
­
29
•	 less obvious is the inverse causal relationship, from social to natural. 
In this regard, the ways and degrees in which economic behaviour 
and social conditions (e.g., the normative framework) accentuate the 
genetic differences of human individuals are studied (Benjamin et al., 
2007). However, in order for the social effect on the biological indi­
vidual to persist, that is, to be transmitted to his/her genetic device, 
a number of additional assumptions must be made:
–– in order the economic (or, equivalent, social) behaviour to result 
in genetic mutations, certain properties of this behaviour should 
affect the genetic device. Let us look at the ‘available’ 
possibilities:
first of all, the mutation in question must have taken place at 
the physical level, that is to say at the level of the genetic device 
(physically affecting the genes of the biological individual). It is 
obvious that such a phenomenon is practically impossible, if we 
seek to detect a direct causal line economic behaviour—bio­
logical genes;
­
­
1  SOCIAL SELECTION IN THE FINANCIAL MARKET: PRELIMINARY ISSUES 

12
30
–– however, we can also examine the case where the social impact on 
the biological entity is realized at the population level, that is, not 
directly, physically, at the genome level:
31
­
­
32
social specialization is not always and in mass proportion (and, 
above all, it is not preserved throughout the life of an individ­
ual) a cause of population selection. Especially, as the techno­
logically conditioned civilization develops, the change of 
occupations and/or fields of specialization becomes more fre­
quent, which makes this conditioning, in terms of population 
restructuring from the perspective of having a certain genetic 
endowment, become insignificant, remaining more of a theo­
retical possibility.
In summary, our position in this matter is as follows:
	(a)	 the conditioning of natural selection on social selection cannot be 
neglected, but it must be considered as ‘wrapped’ by the socialization 
of the biological individual: certain native endowments/predisposi­
tions (such as talents) that are or can be granted to the biological are 
always used through instruction and education, so the biological cau­
sality of social selection always remains in the background, as a sub­
strate more or less activated. Even when this activation occurs (e.g., 
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

13
when the individual ‘guesses’ his/her native skills and chooses a social 
career in line with these skills), s/he uses always use, in fact, the social 
‘vehicle’;
	(b)	 the conditioning of social selection on natural selection is much less 
possible (we probably have real black swans here), but we do not rule 
out a certain impact that, only from a population (not physical) per­
spective, the social can have—so, also at a potential level—on natural 
selection;
	
	
­
33
 Short Discussion
34
­
•	 regarding mutation
–– information is, certainly, the most volatile entity in the financial 
field, no matter its nature, origin or presumptive impact;
–– as a consequence, information, which grounds the decision (and, 
so, the action on the financial market) has the potential to gener­
ate modifications in the agents’ behaviour;
–– that potential to generate mutations has a necessary character, not 
a contingent one; even if, for example, an agent decides to ignore 
1  SOCIAL SELECTION IN THE FINANCIAL MARKET: PRELIMINARY ISSUES 

14
the information change, that information has already modified 
the behaviour in that case;
–– we consider the implicit information (information ‘translated’ by 
agents from the observed behaviour of other contemporary or 
non-contemporary agents) is the main source of mutation in the 
financial behaviour, but other types of information, as well—
although with less frequency and, probably, less impact—generate 
mutations in the financial gene (Nota bene: in our opinion, the 
financial gene is the preference or, better said, the proference—i.e., 
a preference conducted by propensity);
–– to be mentioned that the mutation in the financial field happens 
under the free will auspices.
•	 regarding cumulative selection
–– by either prudence or resolutory incompetence, the economic 
agents in the financial field do not react immediately or propor­
tionally with the happened mutation;
–– this leads to the conclusion that, inherently, by the own way of 
reacting to the mutation, agents in the financial field ‘wait’ the 
mutations to accumulate over an established threshold (as shown 
in the book) before adopting a new behaviour (new decisions and 
new actions);
–– it is, again, clear that the cumulative selection in the financial field 
is performed through the free will dominance (Nota bene: not 
necessarily in a rational way, of course);
•	 regarding saltationist selection
–– much more obviously than in the natural world, the saltationist 
selection is possible (and, probably, dominant) in the social field 
(again in either rational or irrational way).
The specific of the social selection is already discussed in the economy 
of the book, so we will not repeat them here.
Formal Selection Versus Functional Selection
The distinction between formal selection and functional selection is sig­
nificant (i.e., it has a referential) for both natural selection and social selec­
tion. The predicate formal has, here, its Aristotelian meaning, of formal 
cause, that is, of constraint of the ‘program’ type of a process under the 
control of that ‘program’.
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

15
Formal and Functional in Natural Selection
35
­
36
­
37
Regarding the functional component of natural selection, we can say 
the following:
•	 its content refers, on the one hand, to the adaptation of the pheno­
type to the environment—that is, to small contextual transforma­
tions of the individual in the process of living in the environment, 
transformations that do not manifest at the genotype level and there­
fore are not inter-generationally transmitted by the natural repro­
duction of phenotype;
•	 it should be mentioned (as it has been done before, where appropri­
ate) that the genetic mutation, integrated into the fitness of the bio­
logical offspring, is tested by the environment—so, either accepted 
or rejected—exactly in the process of functioning of the individual 
(feeding, intra-species or inter-species competition, reproduc­
tion, etc.);
1  SOCIAL SELECTION IN THE FINANCIAL MARKET: PRELIMINARY ISSUES 

16
•	 the functional component of natural selection achieves, in fact, the 
predominance, at the population level, of a certain fitness carried by 
the genetic dowry, which faces the challenges of the environment;
•	
­
38
Formal and Functional in Social Selection
Formal and functional aspects in social selection are much less discussed in 
the literature. Perhaps, two were the main causes for this state of affairs: 
(a) operational cause: the incomparably greater difficulty of this problem, 
given the quasi-impossibility of experiments; (b) conceptual cause: the 
presence of free will, given by the presence of the cultural being who is the 
human being, greatly complicates the process of social evolution (starting 
with mutation, continuing with transcription/translation and ending with 
testing/selecting social fitness). Although there is, of course, a continuity 
between natural and cultural, the cultural is ‘imperialist’ in the matter of 
social selection, so it is necessary to build a solid theoretical infrastructure 
on which to build the specific theory of social selection. In the following, 
we will briefly present our opinion on this matter.
Formal Aspects of Social Selection
­
­
39
40
­
41
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

17
Therefore, what we want to call the formal component of social selec­
tion refers to the situational framework of society, a framework that, on 
the one hand, generates symbolic/logical species and, on the other hand, 
exerts the action of social selection on these species. A completely general 
typology and of significance rather exemplary of the formal component of 
social selection can be the following:
•	 spontaneous axiological matrix: traditions, customs, identity;
•	
­
42
•	 organizational institutions of the state: legislative institutions, execu­
tive institutions, judicial institutions, institutions of (coercive) 
force—police, gendarmerie, army;
•	
43
•	 mass media: written, spoken, video (current and/or archived): espe­
cially through opinion leaders or opinion formers;
•	
44
Regarding the formal component of social selection, there is a peculiar­
ity (compared to the formal component of natural selection) on which it 
is useful to make further investigations: it is about the fact that this com­
ponent is both the genotype of the symbolic/logical species and the selec­
tor environment. This particularity is, moreover, the basis of the 
preponderance of Lamarckism (over Darwinism) in social evolution in 
general. We therefore make the following considerations in this regard:
•	 since any symbolic/logical species is a (non-material/non-product) 
artefact, it results that it can only appear as an objectification/imple­
mentation of the situational framework, as outlined above. This 
causal determinism obviously has a formal meaning, so the genera­
tion of the phenotype of the symbolic species is made/allowed/con­
ditioned by the situational framework which, through this, constitutes 
the (social) genotype;
•	
45
1  SOCIAL SELECTION IN THE FINANCIAL MARKET: PRELIMINARY ISSUES 

18
•	 regardless of the way in which a phenotype instituted/modified by 
the social genotype appears, the phenotype in question must ‘plead’ 
its fitness also in front of the generating genotype, that is, in front of 
the situational framework or, more directly, in front of the cultural 
geodesic of that situational framework;
•	 therefore, there is a double functionality of the situational framework 
within the society: as generator (cause, condition) of the phenotype 
or its modification, respectively as court for testing the fitness of the 
social phenotype in question and of selection decision (acceptance 
vs. rejection);
•	 one of the immediate and very strong consequences of this double 
functionality of the situational framework is the self-evolution of 
symbolic/logical species. In fact, it was this state of affairs that led us 
to formulate the hypothesis/conjecture that will be developed by the 
research: the hypothesis/conjecture of the social autopoieticity. One 
of the authors developed a proposal for social autopoieticity, based 
on his own concept, namely, the concept of a living logical system, a 
proposal that will be adapted to the case of the symbolic species 
called financial market (Dinga, 2021).
Functional Aspects of Social Selection
The functional aspects of social selection refer, in analogy to the case of 
natural selection, to the real manifestation (objectification) of the formal 
‘program’ which, precisely through this manifestation, exposes to the 
selector environment the (social) fitness that will be the object of the selec­
tion process. Like so many other concepts, which we referred to earlier 
(growth, evolution, progress), the concept of selection is ambivalent: both 
the acceptance/validation and the rejection/invalidation of an individual 
(more precisely, of a fitness that the symbolic individual in cause exhibits) 
are both selections—we can say positive or affirmative selection in case of 
acceptance/validation, respectively negative selection in case of rejection/
invalidation but, in any case, we speak also about selection.
In addition to the difference in mechanism, which we referred to above 
(namely, in the case of social selection, the selector coincides with the 
genotype, as opposed to the case of natural selection), there is also a dif­
ference between the two types of selection: if, in the case of natural selec­
tion, the adequacy of fitness (both in terms of mode and grade) was 
‘examined’ exclusively from the perspective of the success that fitness 
entails in the functioning of the biological individual, including in terms 
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

19
of intra- or inter-individual or species competitiveness, in the case of social 
selection there are two social courts against which social fitness is exam­
ined: (1) the court of institutional adequacy and (2) the court of perfor­
mative adequacy.
The Court of Institutional Social Fitness
­
1.2
­
­
­
•	 the degree of non-compliance must be considered, here, a hierarchi­
cal concept: the more the violated norm is situated towards the 
genus norm than towards the species norm, the more recommend­
able the refutation of fitness;
•	 thus, if fitness violates (i.e., is inconsistent with) a constitutional 
norm, its refutation is indisputable (e.g., a trading strategy that has 
the drug or human person as the object of the transaction). If, how­
ever, the violated rule is below the constitutional norm—for exam­
ple, it is at the level of primary/institutional legislation—its refutation 
retains a small chance of not being objectified, and if the violation 
concerns a procedural norm—for example, at the level of secondary 
legislation—the chance of being refuted is even lower;
•	
­
46
­
47
1  SOCIAL SELECTION IN THE FINANCIAL MARKET: PRELIMINARY ISSUES 

20
•	
­
­
­
48
49
50
51
­
52
The Court of Performative Social Fitness
53
­
­
­
­
­
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

21
•	
­
54
­
•	
­
­
­
­
55
­

56
From the above, the idea has already emerged that, unlike mutation 
(which is random, in the natural case, respectively hybrid, in the social 
case), the selection is at least directed. Being at least directed means it can 
1  SOCIAL SELECTION IN THE FINANCIAL MARKET: PRELIMINARY ISSUES 

22
be designed as well. We will operate the necessary delimitations in 
this matter:
Directed selection (DS) is found in both the natural and the social case. 
The content of directed selection consists in the existence of an automatic 
evolutionary arrow (a concept we referred to in Financial Market Analysis 
and Behaviour. The Adaptive Preference Hypothesis, hence FMAB-APH 
(Dinga et al., 2022)). The automatic evolutionary arrow can be defined by 
the following predicates of sufficiency (PS):
•	
left
 
p
arenthesis bold italic upper P bold italic upper S Subscript bold 1 Superscript bold italic upper D bold italic upper S Baseline right parenthesis
­
57
•	
left
 
p
arenthesis bold italic upper P bold italic upper S Subscript bold 2 Superscript bold italic upper D bold italic upper S Baseline right parenthesis : it is constitutive of the evolutionary process, that is, it has a 
necessary character. The evolutionary arrow could not be missing 
from the mechanism of evolution, under the sanction of the disap­
pearance of the evolutionary process itself (Nota bene: we will see 
next what ‘remains’ of the phenomenology of change if there is no 
evolution);
•	
left
 
p
arenthesis bold italic upper P bold italic upper S Subscript bold 3 Superscript bold italic upper D bold italic upper S Baseline right parenthesis : it is unidirectional, that is, prohibits reversibility. This is an 
issue that can raise some questions. First of all, what is meant by the 
reversibility of fitness? From a terminological point of view, it would 
mean dealing with an involution, but (as we have shown before) 
involution is an … evolution, just as a decrease is an increase or a 
regress is a progress. Suppose that, after a certain fitness (as nature 
and/or grade) has been validated by the selector, a change in the fit­
ness in question occurs in the next period which can be evaluated as 
a logical negation of the previous change, already validated (in other 
words, the result of the change in question is to bring fitness to the 
level—as nature and/or grade—prior to the first change that was 
validated). Obviously, we cannot say that the evolutionary arrow has 
the opposite meaning, so it produced a reversibility of fitness, because 
time (it is about a clock time, in this case) continued to ‘move forward’;
•	
left
 
p
arenthesis bold italic upper P bold italic upper S Subscript bold 4 Superscript bold italic upper D bold italic upper S Baseline right parenthesis : it is an-axiological, meaning there is no second-order direc­
tionality, so to speak, aimed at guiding the first-order directionality: 
the directed evolutionary arrow is not based on value criteria—the 
best fitness has only a performative significance. Needless to say, this 
conclusion results from the fact that deliberation cannot be accepted 
in nature, deliberation occurs only in culture;
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

23
•	
left
 
p
arenthesis bold italic upper P bold italic upper S Subscript bold 5 Superscript bold italic upper D bold italic upper S Baseline right parenthesis
58
59
­
From a formal point of view, directed selection (DS) is therefore generated 
by the logical conjunction:
	
	
•	
60
–– the first three predicates of sufficiency mentioned in the case of 
directed selection are also kept in the case of the projected selec­
tion, that is, we have:
	
	
	
	
––
left
 
p
arenthesis bold italic upper P bold italic upper S Subscript bold 4 Superscript bold italic upper P bold italic upper S Baseline right parenthesis
­
61
1  SOCIAL SELECTION IN THE FINANCIAL MARKET: PRELIMINARY ISSUES 

24
­
––
left
 
p
arenthesis bold italic upper P bold italic upper S Subscript bold 5 Superscript bold italic upper P bold italic upper S Baseline right parenthesis : it implies the non-coincidence between logical and chrono­
logical. This predicate represents not only the negation of the cor­
responding predicate in the case of directed selection, but also an 
extension of its sphere. The characterization of this suffix can be 
done as follows:
­
62
being a deliberative selection, and this deliberation being of 
teleological type, the projected selection can consider not only 
a predetermined goal (in which case a feedback acts), but also 
an intentional goal for the future (in which case a feed-forward 
acts). Again, we are dealing with a logical and chronological 
non-coincidence.
It should be noted that, as will be seen later, the projected selection can 
even use visionary or fantasy to introduce selection-purpose criteria into 
social evolution.
Cumulative Selection Versus Saltationist Selection
­
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

25
­
­
2007
63
64
65
Ethics and Morals in Social Selection
The concepts of situational framework and cultural geodesic, respectively, 
are well known from our previous analyses. Among the selective compo­
nents (as, by the way, among the components of the social genotype) are 
also those norms (either codified or not) that refer to the principles of 
ethics, respectively, of morals. We adhere, in this matter, to the position 
according to which ethics represents the idiosyncratic moral structure of 
the individual, and morals is the generalized/communized ethics at the 
level of society as a whole.
Conceptual Elements Regarding Ethics and Morals
­
1  SOCIAL SELECTION IN THE FINANCIAL MARKET: PRELIMINARY ISSUES 

26
­
1.3
­
­
66
­
67
 
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

27
68
1.4
Ethics can be examined as an ex-ante ethics or as an ex-post ethics in 
relation to action. Regarding this dichotomy, we note the following:
•	
­
69
70
­
71
•	 authentic ethics is always ex-ante and can never be ex-post;
•	
72
 
1  SOCIAL SELECTION IN THE FINANCIAL MARKET: PRELIMINARY ISSUES 

28
 
•	
73
•	 any consideration of ex-post ethics leads us directly to utilitarianism.
1.5
Impact of Ethics/Morals in the Social Selection
Prima facie, it seems that the value grid of ethics/morality should act in a 
similar way to the one in which the other norms of cultural geodesic act, 
as it being one of the components of the latter. However, we believe that 
a more detailed examination of this issue is needed:
•	
­
­
74
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

29
•	 secondly, there is, symmetrically, a reason why the ethical/moral 
norms in cultural geodesic should have priority, both in the genesis 
of fitness and in its selection. The justification for this statement is 
that the an-ethical/a-moral norms are, by law, mandatory, so they 
are of a necessity for the social agent/actor in question;
•	
75
–– the ethical/moral norms in cultural geodesic have not only a logi­
cal (and chronological) priority in social selection, but also have 
the greatest force of discrimination (Nota bene: in addition, we 
appreciate that they have the highest accuracy in the discrimina­
tory process, given the general dichotomous (i.e., relatively un-­
interpretative) nature of this category of rules);
––
­
­
76
77
Social Selection and Typology of Change
Social selection is a stage/phase in the social evolutionary process, that is, 
in the evolution of society as a whole. The questions are (a) Which is the 
logical nature of evolution and (b) What is its place in all possible forms of 
change? So, in fact, a first issue that needs to be clarified is the typology of 
change in the world, a typology in which evolution will have to appear, 
possibly with its distinct forms.
1.6
1  SOCIAL SELECTION IN THE FINANCIAL MARKET: PRELIMINARY ISSUES 

30
 
­
 Short Discussion
	(1)	 Change is of two types: (a) first-order change—which affects both 
objects and subjects (both non-cultural and cultural); (b) change of 
order 2—which targets only cultural subjects.
	
	
­
­
78
There are, therefore, three cases of evolutionary processes in which 
selection is operational. Let us look at some features:
•	
79
­
­
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

31
•	 in the case of evolution as transformation, social selection will focus 
on accepting those transformations that are compatible or imposed 
by the common goals of private economic agents and society as a 
whole. As a result, the transformation of the symbolic species in 
question will follow this teleologically projected evolutionary 
direction;
•	 in the case of evolution as progress (the most performative form of 
evolution), social selection will take into account those changes that 
validate the fundamental values of the axiological matrix of the soci­
ety in question. As we have already hinted, values are primitive in 
relation to purpose, so, in general, it can be said that the progress in 
society is part of a ‘tunnel’ of values. With the necessary caution, it 
can also be stated that a responsible society (first and foremost, free 
and democratic) will always select those social fitness that aims at or 
guides society in a progressive way.
Notes
1.	 We are not tired of reminding the reader not to confuse the random with 
the stochastic (e.g., only the stochastic can be assigned probability 
distributions).
2.	 We will see that, in the social field, there is a logic living (this concept will 
be developed in the right place).
3.	 The term natural biological individual is not pleonastic, because, as we 
will see below, there is also a social biological individual (as it seems, there 
are also technological individuals, based on AI—artificial intelligence—or, 
in the mixed case, trans-human biological individuals—combination of 
natural/social biological individual and technological individual).
4.	 Unless we accept the hypothesis of the divine project of creation—a case 
that will not be the subject of this investigation.
5.	 See, for example, the authors’ books: (1) (Dinga et al., 2022); (2) (Dinga 
et al., 2023).
6.	 It is easy to show that, for the subject, the randomness does not exist, 
because it cannot be observed in the absence of a pattern of observation. 
But a pattern of observation means to ex-ante accept a distribution of those 
observations, which transform the randomness into stochasticity.
7.	 B.F. Dowling localizes the latent information in the so-called bytes from 
which the memes are derived, based on either intuition or rationality mod­
els more or less elaborated (Dowling, 2005).
1  SOCIAL SELECTION IN THE FINANCIAL MARKET: PRELIMINARY ISSUES 

32
8.	 We remind you that the system/set of sufficiency predicates associated 
with any concept must simultaneously verify the following logical condi­
tions (a kind of sufficiency predicates of … sufficiency predicates): (a) con­
sistency (non-contradiction); (b) coherence; (c) completeness (the 
principle of sufficient reason).
9.	 Sometimes (and perhaps more semantically justified) we will use, instead of 
the phrase symbolic species, that of logical species or, still, of logically living 
species. Although the literature prefers the name of symbolic species, it 
should be noted that the symbolic or symbolist aspect—as treated by gen­
eral semiotics—requires much more complicated conditions (predicates of 
specific sufficiency). However, the expressions symbolic species, respec­
tively, logical species (or logically living species), must be considered, in 
this study, as semantically equivalent, so as having the same reference/
denoted.
10.	 As will be seen below, the two selective polarities will be combined in a 
hybrid selection (which, in fact, will also call for the ‘hybridization’ of 
Darwinism with Lamarckism).
11.	 The absence of social selection (or, equivalently, the presence of a pseudo-­
social selection) occurs under the logical condition:
	

12.	 By functioning is meant all the attributes that aim at the occurrence, exis­
tence, manifestation (e.g., action) and evolution of the symbolic individ­
ual, respectively, of the symbolic species in question.
13.	 In the literature regarding the motivations/intentions of the human sub­
ject, we talk about affections, which are three in number: (a) needs; (b) 
desires; (c) propensities (Nota bene: this is the same propensity that we 
used in defining and describing the preference). A proposal on the expecta­
tions of the human subject can be found in Welton (2012).
14.	 We are of the opinion that, in line with the ‘list’ of expectations of the 
individual/species towards the environment, the expectations of the envi­
ronment (in this case, of the cultural geodesic) towards the individual/species 
should also be specified. We propose the following categories of expecta­
tions from cultural geodesic part: (a) compliance; (b) participation; (c) 
commitment.
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

33
15.	 In fact, this is how we described the concept of law—when the norm con­
cerns a particular case, it becomes, instead of law, a privilege, that is, a 
private law, unacceptable in a free and democratic society.
16.	 Please note that by commensurability we mean comparability, from any 
point of view, not necessarily quantitative (Nota bene: often, even in articles 
with scientific claims, this term receives the meaning of … measurability, as 
with the term quantification or quantifiability, also credited with properties 
of … measurement/measurability).
17.	 We mention the conceptual family of which the way of life is part: (a) stan­
dard of living—the quantitative aspect (material, economic) of the fulfil­
ment of expectations; (b) quality of life—the qualitative aspect of fulfilling 
expectations; (c) way of life—the communitarian/social aspect of fulfilling 
expectations. (Nota bene: although the literature distinguishes between 
way of life and lifestyle, we consider that these distinctions are somewhat 
overly pedantic and have a relatively low added value, from a cognitive 
point of view.) (d) lifestyle—the subjective/idiosyncratic aspect (at the level 
of personal perception) of fulfilling expectations. We mention that the 
meaning of life occurs in the sphere of lifestyle, even if the causal origin of 
these meanings is in the way of life (Durant, 2005).
18.	 With a certain amount of imagination, one can obviously conceive also of 
a way of life of cultural geodesic (or even of the situational framework).
19.	 The absence of social fitness (or, equivalently, the presence of a pseudo-­
social fitness) occurs under the logical condition:
	

20.	 For example, the current migration phenomenon of labour (especially in 
the economic space of the European Union, as a direct result of one of the 
economic freedoms of this space—freedom of movement of population 
and labour—functions as a sui generis selection that it does so with regard 
to its environment, more precisely with regard to the fitness that another 
environment can offer it. As a (rule of) reaction, the original environment 
can be modified so as to acquire the characteristics of the destination envi­
ronment, in order to cause labour re-migration, so the selection made by 
the species on the environment determines (causes) the environment of 
origin to adapt to the fitness requirements of the species and, thus, to co-
evolve with it.
1  SOCIAL SELECTION IN THE FINANCIAL MARKET: PRELIMINARY ISSUES 

34
21.	 Although co-evolution involves two co-species, we have previously shown 
that, in some cases, the environment of a species can be assimilated with a 
co-species, so that co-evolution can be accepted for the species-­
environment pair.
22.	 Of course, the judiciary justice also characterizes social fitness, because it 
refers to the rule of law.
23.	
­
1.6
24.	 The selection generates, from a populational point of view, and in a trans-­
generational order, a positive feedback (self-catalyst or self-escalator).
25.	 The mixed character of the selector environment (an-anthropic and 
anthropic) in the case of the two types of selections can be controversial. 
However, we consider that there is no alternative in this matter, since the 
human (biological) individual is also the material carrier of the symbolic 
species called the financial market (and, indeed, of all other symbolic spe­
cies that exist or can exist in the society).
26.	 This is, as we have already pointed out, a conceptual issue that we need to 
pay attention to. A solution that eliminates the need for this specialized 
attention could be the following: to consider the individual transaction as 
a phenotype of the financial market species and to consider the trading 
strategy as a kind of super-individual (or aggregate individual, given that 
individual transactions are logically inferred from the trading strategy), so 
that SS at the populational level can be achieved in two steps: (a) reaching 
the critical threshold in the trading strategy by selecting the individual 
transaction; (b) selection of the trading strategy. For the time being, we 
will not apply this suggestion, but it remains in the portfolio of further 
(possible) developments of our evolutionary model of the financial market.
27.	 In a more pretentious and generalizing expression (but which is, in fact, 
the basic definition of the economy), the need for low entropy from the 
environment.
28.	 In other words, a black swan in the genome.
29.	 There is even an (intentional) bi-disciplinary branch in this field, called 
Genoeconomics, which shows, once again, how much terminological infla­
tion the economic research field is capable of.
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

35
30.	 Otherwise, we should invent all sorts of other terms or branches of eco­
nomic theory, related to all sorts of human activities: Genointernet, 
Genopolitics and so on.
31.	 We refer here to innate skills (talents) not to skills acquired through 
instruction and/or exercise. However, the innate/acquired distinction 
should not be exaggerated, as the acquisition and preservation of skills also 
depends on the dowry of innate abilities.
32.	 In the history, there are cases in which natural selection at the populational 
level is carried out, systematically, from a social perspective: in the military-
fortress state of Sparta (around 650 BC), in the Mediterranean basin 
(Laconia, in ancient Greece) children who presented, at birth, with physi­
cal malformations that would have prevented them from becoming suc­
cessful soldiers, were sacrificed.
33.	 As far as non-human plants and animals are concerned, since the invention 
of agriculture (about 11,000 years ago), more or less systematic interven­
tions have been made in natural selection but mainly from a populational 
perspective (increasing the share of individuals with the desired character­
istics in the total population concerned).
34.	 See, for example, B.F. Dowling’s work Evolutionary Finance (2005) where 
the financial behaviour is modelled based on the molecular replication—a 
summary of our position to that book is provided in authors’ book entitled 
Co-evolution of Symbolic Species in the Financial Market—A Framework for 
Economic and Political Decision-Making, Springer, 2023.
35.	 We ignore, for the time being, the genetic engineering framed, according 
to some authors, in the wider cultural-technological movement, called 
transhumanism.
36.	 The term error is, of course, a circumstantial term, because, in order to 
categorize a phenomenon or process or event as an error, there must be a 
benchmark (validation criterion) whose verification indicates the correct­
ness versus error in question. As natural evolution is not projected (but 
only directed by fitness), it cannot be determined whether an error leads to 
better fitness than the absence of that error (obviously, the ‘proof of 
truth’ is found in the factual/empirical selection which the environment 
performed on objectified fitness, i.e., actually manifested). As we will show 
later, in the social field, errors have a very different meaning from the 
natural case.
37.	 To an even greater extent, errors (of understanding, experimentation, eval­
uation, etc.) are also the basis of (saltationist) advances in knowledge, espe­
cially in scientific knowledge.
38.	 Of course, all these processes occur from a statistical perspective, so, on 
average, there are oscillations, deviations or exceptions for ‘private’ indi­
viduals, both in terms of environmental impact on them and the impact of 
individuals on the environment.
1  SOCIAL SELECTION IN THE FINANCIAL MARKET: PRELIMINARY ISSUES 

36
39.	 In fact, the state of affairs is a bit more nuanced: there is also a selection 
here (which is also social), which refers to another symbolic species, not 
discussed in our study but obviously of at least as great interest—it is about 
the symbolic species that can be called a technological market, whose con­
crete, particular hypostases are precisely the material artefacts (of the prod­
uct/service type).
40.	 It is clear that the term institution must mean any entity, as a rule, generally 
opposable to all members of the society which are eligible for that entity, in 
the broadest sense: norms (codified or not), organizations, procedures, 
mechanisms, social structures, codes, instructions and so on, that is, with a 
term that we introduced earlier, the situational framework (which gener­
ates cultural geodesic) of the society.
41.	 If we were to exaggerate the pedantry of our approach at this point, we 
would say that social selection is exerted over the institutional/cultural 
web in which all the objectifications generated by social action are ‘caught’ 
(Nota bene: a kind of inverted Husserlian hýle that interposes between sub­
jectual intentionality and objectual reality).
42.	 The fact that the spontaneous axiological matrix is ​listed before the 
Constitution (which can be considered the projected axiological matrix) is 
significant from the following perspective: the Constitution (and all subse­
quent logical and chronological norms) should, in principle, be consistent 
with the spontaneous axiological matrix, which expresses the fundamental 
historical identity of society, people, nation in question. In addition, if the 
Constitution (and the norms ‘under’ it) are inconsistent (contradictory) 
with the spontaneous axiological matrix, the real/effective behaviour of 
individuals and communities will favour the spontaneous axiological matrix 
(here we have the old wisdom of the people who says that the alley in a 
park must be built exactly on the path that people walked before the alley 
was built, which also includes the more elaborate precept of Kotarbiński’s 
praxiology, that breaking codified norms is a peremptory signal to lawmak­
ers of inadequacy of those violated norms).
43.	 So-called NGOs (non-governmental organizations).
44.	 Especially in small communities. There are opinions about the maximum 
number of individuals in a community which still allows direct and 
informed contact between individuals—it seems that there are about 150 
individuals (although there are opinions that ‘widen’ this limit). This is the 
so-called Dunbar number (Dunbar, 1992). Of course, the expansion of 
virtual space nowadays considerably expands the possibility of ‘direct’ (but 
how genuine?) inter-individual contact.
45.	 Regardless of the type of mutation—accidental/random or deliberative—it 
is always contingent. Otherwise, we should accept the laws of history (in 
the way Marx tried this—Nota bene: Romanian historian and philosopher 
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

37
of history A.D. Xenopol also tried to introduce a certain historical necessity 
through the concept of serial succession, in order to avoid effective causality 
in history).
46.	 However, the ‘truth’ of the adequacy type is more appropriate to natural 
selection, in fact. In social selection, the ‘truth’ targeted by the selection is 
of the performing type (we will emphasize this nuance when we propose 
and examine the autopoietic model of the financial market).
47.	 Elsewhere, one of the authors of this research even proposes that, in the 
economic (more general, social) field, a tetravalent logic should be con­
structed (as opposed to the now dominant bivalent logic, including in the 
case of Popperian falsifiability), which refers to adequacy, not to 
correspondence-­truth.
48.	 We specify that, as in the case of Popper’s falsifiability, this time, the cor­
roboration does not take an explicit form, in fact, only an explicit form 
takes the refutation.
49.	 The case of a conflict between formal courts of social selection is not 
unlikely, and, in this case, our position is that the credibility of a decision 
to refute social fitness is also directly proportional to the place occupied in 
the hierarchy by the selection court in question.
50.	 It is worth noting that such an eventuality is, in principle, impossible in the 
case of natural selection, because the DNA ‘program’ does not allow devia­
tions in implementation—of course, transcription or translation accidents 
are possible here, as in the case of social selection—but, as lacking free will, 
in the natural selection the ‘institutional’ adequacy is not problematic.
51.	 A functionally equivalent situation of non-rejection is that situation in 
which a social fitness is explicitly rejected but it continues to exist (or co-­
exist) fraudulently (e.g., by masking, dissimulation or other methods of 
avoiding visibility or observability).
52.	 A more striking case of beneficial inadequacy can be found in the field of 
knowledge (including scientific)—a misunderstood theory can lead to the 
opening of research or development or application directions that would 
have been impossible in a correct understanding framework (i.e., how the 
author of that theory desired). A peremptory example, in this context, is 
that of Planck: having to harmonize the theory with the experiment, 
Planck introduced a coefficient of correction (Planck’s constant) which 
later proved to be the cornerstone of the whole quantum mechanics. It 
seems that the introduction of the cosmological constant (Einstein) in his 
theoretical model of gravity (general relativity) must be interpreted in the 
same way—this constant later proved to be fundamental for explaining the 
dynamic behaviour of the Universe.
53.	 The suggestion that institutional adequacy could be categorized as an 
automatic formal stabilizer is immediate.
1  SOCIAL SELECTION IN THE FINANCIAL MARKET: PRELIMINARY ISSUES 

38
54.	 We remind you that, at the most fundamental level (constitutional norms), 
this is about the basic structure of society, as formulated by John Rawls.
55.	 The term particular can be relatively unclear, as it can be read in the con­
text of the general-particular relationship, in which the particular is an 
instantiation of the general. In the case discussed, it is a public (social)–pri­
vate relationship. Nota bene: at the limit, the public–private relationship 
could be analogous to the general–private relationship, however.
56.	 We want to use the term projected instead of the term designed, because 
the former term includes the meaning of the purpose/goal, while the latter 
does not do that (so clear). Somehow, the term projection here has similar 
connotations to the term projection used by Quine.
57.	 As we have seen before, in the case of social selection, the social environ­
ment is identical with the social genotype—which is the cultural geodesic. 
In the case of this selection, we have an overlap or indistinguishability that 
occurs between the environment and the genotype, both of which oppose 
the phenotype.
58.	 Note that this predicate of sufficiency does not ‘parasitize’ (is not redun­
dant with) the predicate of sufficiency which refers to unidirectionality: it 
is the fact, generally accepted in the macroscopic world, that the effect 
follows the cause both logically and chronologically (of course, given the 
clock time, which is a mechanical, uniform time, independent of the mea­
sured phenomenon/process).
59.	 The time arrow, which ‘distributes’ the succession of worlds and the cor­
responding causes and effects, is given by the kinematics of global entropy: 
according to the second law of thermodynamics, in a closed system (such 
as the Universe) the entropy—that is, the unavailability of bound energy—
grows spontaneously, permanently, continuously and irreversibly.
60.	 Of course, a theologian (perhaps, a fundamentalist one) will argue that 
even in the field of natural evolution we have a projected selection, namely, 
projected by God. From a technical point of view, to paraphrase Laplace, 
we do not need this hypothesis here.
61.	 In fact, if we want to save terms/concepts (generally, means of verbal 
expression), we can call the projected selection a second-order directed 
selection.
62.	 From a very broad perspective, this is the case, for example, with social 
counter-reforms or social counter-revolutions.
63.	 Historically, as we mentioned previously, the idea of the saltationist selec­
tion has been proposed to the scientific community by Stephen Jay Gould 
and Niles Eldredge since 1972. Five years after Gould’s death, in 2007, 
this idea was resumed in Punctuated Equilibrium and published by HUP.
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

39
64.	 The Pleistocene (also known as the Ice Age) is a geological period esti­
mated to have stretched from 2,588,000 years ago to 11,700 years ago, 
being the last stage of the Paleolithic.
65.	 Which thus ‘refutes’ the famous principle of natural philosophy: (lat.) 
natura non facit saltus (nature does not make jumps) which, before appear­
ing in Darwin, was mentioned by Leibniz as an axiom in connection with 
the invention of infinitesimal/differential calculus. Of course, from an 
ontological point of view, at least in one respect, this maxim proved to be 
false: it is about the fact that neither time, nor space, nor mass are indefi­
nitely decomposable—they have a lower limit and certain corresponding 
Planck values.
66.	 Here, of course, Maslow’s pyramid of needs correctly perceived the order 
of priority of their satisfaction (Marxism also noted this prioritization that 
comes from ancestral times, namely, from the days when man was an ani­
mal that technology had not yet come to place it at the top of the 
food chain).
67.	 This issue—of the innate character versus acquired character—of the ethi­
cal sense is a particularly difficult one. It will not be developed more in this 
study, as its relevance in the context of the main research interest (as we 
designed it) is relatively low.
68.	 That is, the ethical sense is of the nature of necessity (it is closely related to 
what we call, rather vaguely, the character of the person).
69.	 Both imperatives are obviously of an ex-ante nature.
70.	 We specify that the relations governed by ethics are of a practical type (sub­
ject–subject relationships), not of a praxiological type (subject–object 
relationships).
71.	 On the role of principles in action (especially the rational one), or, what is 
equivalent, on the role of symbolic utility, see the synthesis provided by 
Robert Nozick (Nozick, 1994).
72.	 However, the analogy is completely external here, because in the matter of 
ethics (i.e., principles) we cannot speak meaningfully about the concept of 
correspondence-truth.
73.	 This statement is not pejorative, but simply expresses the absence of a ref­
erential (or referent or denoted).
74.	 See the relatively extensive discussion in this book on symbolic utility.
75.	 Here, expressly in the original sense of the term, that is, of doxa (which is 
the opposite of epistemé, without being the negation of the latter. Nota 
bene: logically, therefore, the two concepts are related of contrariety, not of 
contradiction).
76.	 This is obviously about what we call positive norms or positive law—that 
is, those norms that objectify the principles established by the social 
contract.
1  SOCIAL SELECTION IN THE FINANCIAL MARKET: PRELIMINARY ISSUES 

40
77.	 On the legal–legitimate relationship in the matter of public norms, see also 
Dinga et al. (2022).
78.	 The question of a certain (possible) overlap (or non-independence) 
between purpose and value is a good question. In principle, we accept the 
non-independence between purpose and value (even a certain primitivity 
of value in relation to purpose) but we ignore, for the moment, this 
difficulty.
79.	 Not to be confused the term development, used in this context, with the 
term development used for the phenotype of natural evolution—the pro­
cess of reaching the stage of adulthood, that is, reaching the physiological 
capacity of biological reproduction. This second case is opposite, concep­
tually, to evolution, while the first case is a type of evolution.
References
Benjamin, D., Chabris, C., Glaeser, E., Gudnason, V., Harris, T., Laibson, D., 
Launer, L., & Purcell, S. (2007). Genoeconomics. Biosocial Surveys.
De Neve, J.-E., Christakis, N. A., Fowler, J. H., & Frey, B. S. (2012). Genes, 
Economics, and Happiness. Journal of Neuroscience, Psychology, and 
Economics, 5(4).
Dinga, E. (2021). Logically Living System: A Generative “Machine” for Autopoietic 
Systems (pp. 73–97). IGI Global.
Dinga, E., Oprean-Stan, C., Tănăsescu, C.-R., Brătian, V., & Ionescu, 
G.-M. (2022). Financial Market Analysis and Behaviour. The Adaptive 
Preference Hypothesis. Routledge, Francis & Taylor Group.
Dinga, E., Oprean-Stan, C., Tănăsescu, C.-R., Brătian, V., & Ionescu, 
G.-M. (2023). Co-Evolution of Symbolic Species in the Financial Market—A 
Framework for Economic and Political Decision-Making. Springer.
Dowling, B. F. (2005). Evolutionary Finance. Palgrave Macmillan.
Dunbar, R. I. M. (1992). Neocortex Size as a Constraint on Group Size in 
Primates. Journal of Human Evolution, 22(6), 469–493.
Durant, W. (2005). On the Meaning of Life. Promethean Press.
Gould, S.  J. (2007). Punctuated Equilibrium. Belknap Press of Harvard 
University Press.
Lehrer, S., & Ding, W. (2016). Are Genetic Markers of Interest for Economic 
Research? IZA Journal of Labor Policy, 6.
Lo, A. (2019). Adaptive Markets: Financial Evolution at the Speed of Thought. 
Princeton University Press.
McGene, J. (2013). Social Fitness and Resilience: A Review of Relevant Constructs, 
Measures, and Links to Well-Being. RAND Corporation.
Nozick, R. (1994). The Nature of Rationality. Princeton University Press.
Peters, E. E. (1994). Fractal Market Analysis. Applying Chaos Theory to Investments 
and Economics. John Wiley and Sons, Inc.
Welton, D. (2012). Bodily Intentionality, Affectivity, and Basic Affects. The 
Oxford Handbook of Contemporary Phenomenology.
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

41
CHAPTER 2
Social Selection in the Financial Market: 
Logical Mechanism
General Mechanism of Social Selection
Preamble
­
­
1999
1
2
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature 
Switzerland AG 2023
E. Dinga et al., Economic and Financial Market Behaviour, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-31702-6_2

42
­
3
­
­
­
­
4
Forming and Variation of the Social Fitness
We resume the conditions (predicates) of sufficiency of social selection, 
respectively of social fitness, previously introduced.
•	 Social selection:
–– (uppe
r P upper S Subscript upper S upper S Superscript bold 1 ) the phenotype subject to selection belongs to a symbolic 
(not biological) species;
–– (uppe
r P upper S Subscript upper S upper S Superscript bold 2 ) the selector (or selector environment) is the cultural 
geodesic;
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

43
–– (uppe
r P upper S Subscript upper S upper S Superscript bold 3 ) the selection criterion is the social fitness;
–– (uppe
r P upper S Subscript upper S upper S Superscript bold 4 ) the phenomenology of selection is bi-polar: directed and 
projected.
•	 Social fitness:
–– (uppe
r P upper S Subscript upper S upper F Superscript bold 1 ) mutual verification of the expectations of the 
individual/species and of the cultural geodesic;
–– (uppe
r P upper S Subscript upper S upper F Superscript bold 2 ) the expectations, both of the individual/species and of the 
cultural geodesic, must be generical;
–– (uppe
r P upper S Subscript upper S upper F Superscript bold 3 ) the measurable expression of social fitness is the way of life.
uppe
r P upper S Subscript upper S upper S Superscript bold 4
5
6
2.1
­
 Short Discussion
•	 A given individual (called focal individual, i.e., the individual on 
whom the analysis is explicitly focused)—noted in the figure above as 
‘individual 1/A’, that is, individual 1 of species A—will suffer, ­outside 
2  SOCIAL SELECTION IN THE FINANCIAL MARKET: LOGICAL MECHANISM 

44
 
the genotypic influence (which is not shown in the figure), three 
types of phenotypic influences:
–– the influence of interactions with individuals of their own species 
(individuals k/A, where k = 2, …, n); we call these interactions 
co-specific;
––
7
––
­
8
9
•	
­
10
Signification of the Sufficiency Predicates of Social Fitness
Although the issue of social fitness is addressed in the literature, as we have 
shown above, especially from the perspective of ‘societies’ of non-human 
animals, through a more or less adequate adaptation of phenotypic evolu­
tion based exclusively on genotypic mutation and environmental selection 
(the latter being different from the phenotype in question) to the case 
where other phenotypes of the same species (co-specific phenotypes) 
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

45
interact with the focal individual, the suggestions are interesting and use­
ful for examining social selection (and, consequently, evolution) in rela­
tion to human society. In this paragraph we will develop a more analytical 
discussion of the predicates of sufficiency of social fitness, for a better 
understanding of the concept of social selection in this particular frame­
work—human society.
•	 ( uppe
r P upper S Subscript upper S upper F Superscript bold 1 ) mutual verification of individual/species expectations and 
cultural geodesic.
­
2.1
•	 Temporal (or kinetic) reciprocity:
–– it refers to the fact that, as far as the projected mutation of the 
genotype of the analysed symbolic species is concerned, it will be 
carried out (at least as an attempt) within the cultural geodesic, 
from the perspective of an ex-ante–ex-post combination of influ­
ences between the two parties. This means that the change will be 
designed in such a way as to ensure a functional degree of compli­
ance with the applicable regulatory basis of the society;
–– we can highlight the following possible degrees of compliance, in 
descending order of their ‘strength’:
11
12
factually acceptable mutation (PM2): mutation that conforms 
to the spirit but not necessarily (also) to the letter of the norms 
of cultural geodesic;
­
13
2  SOCIAL SELECTION IN THE FINANCIAL MARKET: LOGICAL MECHANISM 

46
non-conforming mutation (PM4): mutation that violates cul­
tural geodesic ‘without rest’, not even justified by cost-­
benefit analysis;
–– we can speak here, from a methodological point of view, of a cer­
tain elasticity of cultural geodesic: although, ex-ante, cultural geo­
desic directs/drives/guides the implementation of the projected 
mutation, except for PM3 and PM4 mutations, its non-­conformity 
with cultural geodesic does not lead to the rejection of the muta­
tion in question (obviously, we exclude the case PM0 in which we 
have a … tautology between the ex-ante indication and the ex-post 
selection executed by the cultural geodesic);
–– if the cultural geodesic undergoes changes precisely as a result of 
the behaviour of the projected mutations (e.g., a critical mass of 
non-compliances, of different degrees, may suggest to the legisla­
tor to make changes that increase the permissiveness of the cul­
tural geodesic exactly in the direction of observations)—this could 
be called the plasticity of cultural geodesic. After all, the co-­
evolution of symbolic species represents a continuous and perma­
nent mutual adjustment of the elasticity and plasticity of cultural 
geodesic.
•	 Spatial (or topological) reciprocity:
–– it refers to the fact (mentioned above also from a temporal per­
spective, by the way) that social selection is made from both direc­
tions: from the cultural geodesic, respectively from the projected 
mutation. This means that the construction of social fitness is a 
co-construction, in which both the object of construction (the 
projected 
mutation) 
and 
its 
subject 
(cultural 
geodesic) 
participate;
–– as in the case of temporal reciprocity, spatial reciprocity in the 
formation and variation of social fitness implies the mechanism of 
fetal reaction norms previously discussed, applied, of course, to 
generic symbolic species that are created and function in human 
society.
uppe
r P upper S Subscript upper S upper F Superscript 1
2.2
•	 (uppe
r P upper S Subscript upper S upper F Superscript bold 2 ) the expectations of both the individual/species and the cul­
tural geodesic must be generical.
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

47
 
This predicate of sufficiency is claimed from two commandments that 
are valid (are applied) both in the case of the symbolic individual (sym­
bolic species), more precisely, on the genotypic mutation, and in the case 
of cultural geodesic.
•	 Perspective of mutation:
–– for a mutation, occurring for an individual of the symbolic species 
in question (e.g., in an individual financial transaction—IT in the 
notation adopted by us—within the financial individual called 
trading strategy—TS in our notation) to have an impact on the 
formation/variation of social fitness, that mutation must have the 
potential to be generalized at the level of all possible hypostases of 
the financial individual, otherwise it will be ‘extinguished’ or 
amortized in the social mechanism involved. This generalization 
is possible through the memetic mechanism, which involves the 
concept of implicit information introduced by us in FMAB-­
APH—in this case it is an implicit information at the level of the 
2  SOCIAL SELECTION IN THE FINANCIAL MARKET: LOGICAL MECHANISM 

48
human individual that implements the financial individual called 
trading strategy (this information will be used to adjust all indi­
vidual hypostases of that trading strategy, obviously, if the muta­
tion 
that 
customizes 
those 
hypostases 
brings 
financial 
success—namely, net gain).
•	 The perspective of cultural geodesic:
––
­
14
Of course, there is no infallible ‘litmus paper’ for establishing or identi­
fying the generical nature of the mutation or the norms integrated in cul­
tural geodesic, but this genericity is necessary to achieve the real interaction 
between the projected mutation and the cultural geodesic. However, this 
property of genericity will be decided by the practice/praxiology of effec­
tive actions and behaviours within society;
•	 (uppe
r P upper S Subscript upper S upper F Superscript bold 3 ) the measurable expression of social fitness is the way of life
­
­
­
15
16
­
­
17
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

49
•	
­
18
•	
19
20
•	 the solution we propose is to define the way of life from the perspec­
tive of the symbolic individual. Like any definition, it must be based 
on its own predicates of sufficiency, as follows:
––
21
––
­
­
22
­
23
2022
­
––
­
­
2  SOCIAL SELECTION IN THE FINANCIAL MARKET: LOGICAL MECHANISM 

50
 
­
24
•	 therefore, the symbolic way of life, as a sufficiency predicate of social 
fitness, is to be measured from the perspective of the three own suf­
ficiency predicates (α, β, γ), when comparative approaches are 
needed, either over time or over space.
2.3
Selection of Social Fitness
2.1 2.2
2.3
­
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

51
General Considerations
•	
25
•	
26
•	
­
27
28
•	 in a ‘curious’ way, as it has already emerged from the above, in the 
social field, the genotype coincides, from an institutional point of 
view, as well as from a logical point of view, with the selector (selec­
tor court) or the selector environment—that is, cultural geodesic, on 
the one hand, generates (to a large extent), deliberately, projected, 
programmed, the formation/variation of social fitness and, on the 
other hand, it selects what it has already ‘guided as formation/varia­
tion’ (Nota bene: this results in a certain institutional tautology or a 
tautology of the institutional logic) specific to social selection and 
evolution.
The Mechanism of Social Fitness Formation/Variation
•	
29
­
2  SOCIAL SELECTION IN THE FINANCIAL MARKET: LOGICAL MECHANISM 

52
–– the first problem: the symbolic social individual
1985
­
2012
­
2020
­
30
in this context, therefore, we must identify a generic concept 
for the symbolic social phenotype from which, through subse­
quent particularizations, we obtain phenotypes (symbolic 
social individuals) for different sub-domains of the social 
domain, that is, for different symbolic social species;
­
31
­
­
32
33
of course, in this case, we could use the term interaction 
directly. The problem that arises here, however, is this: inter-­
action does not logically imply contemporaneity, while the 
transaction does involve it; thus, there may be an interaction 
between a researcher in the matter of metaphysics and (the 
works of) Aristotle, but there can be no transaction (in this 
case, of an intellectual type) between the two parties;
­
34
­
35
36
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

53
––
37
first of all, note that the term transaction does indeed have the 
semantic potential to be so general (despite all its specificity, 
given the requirement of non-zero impact) that it ‘covers’ the 
terms used, in various particular cases already highlighted by 
the literature: thus, the term routine is obviously a kind of 
transaction, just like the term communication, both mentioned 
above. Some semantic coverage may exist in the case of the 
term norm—but given that the norm is a potential rule that, if 
applied, would necessarily lead to transactions (from the most 
concrete to the most abstract), we can conclude that we do not 
have, in this case, an exception to the general applicability of 
the transaction term;
secondly, in order to extract a (proposal for a) typology of sym­
bolic social species, we obviously need at least one classification 
criterion. From a logical point of view, the choice of a classifica­
tion criterion needs, in turn, a … criterion (of course, there is 
an ad infinitum regression here). As a result, we will consider 
that this classification criterion is the very nature of human 
activity in society—in other words, for every type of human 
activity of a social nature (e.g., personal reverie will not be con­
sidered a human social activity) it will be ‘allocated’ a symbolic 
social species;
therefore, the general list of human activities of a social nature 
is as follows:
­
38
symbolic social species
­
­
39
­
­
2  SOCIAL SELECTION IN THE FINANCIAL MARKET: LOGICAL MECHANISM 

54
Nota bene: theories can be considered, mutatis mutandis, either indi­
viduals of objective paradigms or sub-species within those paradigms. The 
rationale for this proposal is as follows: a paradigm ‘brings together’ under 
its auspices several theories which, however, have a common core (or, in 
any case, have sufficiently numerous and relevant interferences) to ensure 
the personality/uniqueness of the paradigm in question—this common 
core ensures that the theories contained in a paradigm can be considered 
as individuals of the species in question;
•	 example:
–– mechanistic/deterministic paradigm;
–– the evolutionary/institutionalist/autopoietic paradigm;
–– stochastic/random paradigm;
–– quantum/entangling paradigm and so on.
­
­
40
symbolic social species
­
41
•	 example:
––
42
–– dictatorial paradigm (which can be either liberal or non-liberal);
–– closed society paradigm;
–– open society paradigm and so on.
­
43
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

55
symbolic social species
44
­
­
45
­
•	 example:
–– paradigm of stationary action (of stationarity);
–– paradigm of optimal action (of optimality);
–– paradigm of sustainable action (of sustainability);
–– paradigm of viable action (of viability) and so on.
The Mechanism of Social Fitness Selection
The selection of social fitness depends, in its particularities, on the sym­
bolic social species involved; therefore, in the following, we will examine 
the general case of the social fitness selection mechanism. We consider that 
the main structural and functional elements of such a mechanism are the 
following:
•	 the filter through which the social environment (i.e., cultural geode­
sic) will examine the nature and degree of social fitness of the indi­
vidual of the symbolic social species in question is the way of life of 
this individual, as stated above;
•	 the fundamental element of the way of life of the symbolic social spe­
cies is, of course, the axiological compatibility of that way of life with 
the cultural geodesic concerned;
•	 in principle, the verification of this axiological compatibility is rela­
tively mechanical, because, in fact, the values that the society in ques­
tion accepts, supports, promotes and defends are already specified 
(often and for the most part, explicitly verbal and formally codified) 
by the cultural geodesic related to the examined symbolic 
social species;
•	
46
47
2  SOCIAL SELECTION IN THE FINANCIAL MARKET: LOGICAL MECHANISM 

56
•	 the selection of social fitness remains, apparently, simply directed, 
only that the direction has a teleological character, included in the 
cultural geodesic (which is an artefact product ‘endowed’ with pur­
pose or, in any case, with deliberately established values);
•	 as for the cumulative nature of social selection, it cannot be com­
pletely ruled out, because, even if the selected mutations may have a 
saltationist character, these mutations themselves can be extended 
additions over long periods of time, so, on a ‘macro’ scale, they also 
exhibit a cumulative character;
•	
­
­
­
48
­
49
•	 regarding the sufficiency predicate of the way of life of the symbolic 
individual, called replicability, it is ensured together with the selec­
tion of the predicate axiological compatibility;
•	 a particular problem is the third predicate of sufficiency of convert­
ibility: indeed, in this matter, cultural geodesic has no power, because 
the human individual, the one who designs the formation/variation 
of social fitness, presumed as rational (or, in any case, acting on the 
basis of a model of theoretical rationality, i.e., on the basis of a ratio­
nal belief) will ‘take care’ that the fitness in question has this poten­
tial for convertibility, as described above. In fact, therefore, cultural 
geodesic, as stated above, only selects the axiological compatibility of 
the social fitness in question.
­
2.4
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

57
 
Financial Market Models and Financial Fitness
Financial Market Models
The concept of the model, as it has gained ‘citizenship’ in the scientific 
community, is almost equivalent to that of theory—a set of theoretical/
conceptual, methodological and instrumental principles, regarding a field 
of knowledge (in natural sciences, in spiritual sciences or in social sci­
ences). In FMAB-APH, we presented the abstract/general aspects of the 
model and modelling of a domain of reality (Dinga et al., 2022). It is now 
useful to detail those general considerations for the particular case of the 
financial market:
	 	
­
50
­
	 	
2  SOCIAL SELECTION IN THE FINANCIAL MARKET: LOGICAL MECHANISM 

58
51
­
52
53
	3.	 from the point of view of the principles/axioms on which the financial 
market models are based, we can say the following:
•	
54
•	 a brief examination of the two categories of models currently devel­
oped leads us to identify (or formulate, if we are dealing with an 
implicit treatment) the following principles or maxims.

55
	 	
1965
­
­
56
57
	 	
1994
58
59
­
­
60
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

59
­
61
62
	 	
2005
­
63
­
•	
64
•	
­
65
­
•	
­
66
2  SOCIAL SELECTION IN THE FINANCIAL MARKET: LOGICAL MECHANISM 

60
•	 fourthly, based on the point immediately above, CMH interferes 
(but also superficially) with Andrew Lo’s proposal (see below 
AMH), as the change in cost associated with a trading strategy that 
can only get the average market return will lead to a change in that 
strategy, that is, to a negative selection by the selector (Nota bene: as 
mentioned above, Lo considers the financial market itself as a selec­
tor, which introduces some logical inaccuracies regarding the evolu­
tionary aspect);
•	
67
•	
­
­
68
Functional/Evolutionary Models
	 	
2019
­
69
­
•	 the concept of satisficing is that created by Herbert Simon from the 
combination of the terms satisfy and suffice or to a sufficient extent;
•	
70
71
72
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

61
•	
73
	2.	 APH (Adaptive Preference Hypothesis): this model is (the first of) 
the authors’ proposal of the present research on the functioning of the 
financial market, by ‘escaping’ this functioning from the constraints of 
the homo œconomicus model and placing it in an evolutionary market 
paradigm (Dinga et al., 2022). However, unlike the AMH model, we 
also propose a structural mechanism—the variation of adaptive prefer­
ence (generated by propensity in the form of proference), under the 
impact of the selection of symbolic social fitness made by cultural geo­
desic. The fundamental principle of this model can be formulated as 
follows: the distribution of the financial market return on trading strate­
gies primarily follows the distribution of the proference (Nota bene: which 
obviously leads directly to the co-evolutionary concept and process in 
the financial market—where co-evolution takes place between the 
return on a trading strategy and the propensity that generated the pref­
erence for that trading strategy). We present some clarifications regard­
ing this model:
•	
­
74
•	 therefore, far from denying the rationality of choice or, more pre­
cisely, making the choice on the basis of a model of rationality, APH 
emphasizes even more on this rationality, indicating as its ground 
the very theoretical rationality, based on belief (or, in terminology 
used by us, on propensity that turns preference into proference), not 
the practical rationality, based on cost–benefit analysis;
•	 obviously, the proposed model calls for a permanent interplay 
between theoretical rationality and practical rationality, which is, 
moreover, the essence of the hypothesis itself;
2  SOCIAL SELECTION IN THE FINANCIAL MARKET: LOGICAL MECHANISM 

62
•	 this clarification is consistent with and underpins the construction of 
the behavioural efficiency of the financial market, as opposed to the 
informational efficiency proposed by neoclassical economic theory; 
not even AMH focuses on this key issue of economic decision-­
making, but in the financial market’s choice of trading strategy.
	3.	 APMH (Autopoietic Market Hypothesis): this model is the second 
proposal that the authors make in the context of this research. The 
fundamental principle of this model could be formulated as follows: the 
distribution of the return of the financial market on the trading strategies 
primarily follows the distribution of the replicability of the fitness of those 
strategies. The following considerations develop, in a more analytical 
way, this fundamental principle:
•	 APMH does not need either EMH or CMH to explain (justify) the 
distribution of return on active trading strategies in the finan­
cial market;
•	 conceptually, APMH is part of the evolutionary model, like AMH, 
but unlike the latter, it goes beyond evolution (and even co-­
evolution), namely, it aspires to model the financial market as a self-­
evolutionary system or, using a term that appeared in biology but 
later extended to almost all fields of science that claims to be evolu­
tionary, an autopoietic system;
•	 the autopoietic model of the financial market takes over the self-­
organization, considered proper to biological systems and ‘imports’ 
it into the economy (Foster, 1997, 2021; Vromen, 2007). Nota 
bene: two crucial hypotheses are also retained for the functioning of 
economic systems/processes: the continuity hypothesis, respectively 
the autonomy hypothesis. Of course, this approach requires what 
has been called a generalized theory of Darwinism—all these ele­
ments, together with the concept of entropy and their interconnec­
tion, will be convened later;
•	 the autopoiesis of the financial market requires two interconnected 
‘circuits’ (although with a certain mutual autonomy) of 
validation/adjustment—one at the level of the phenotype–­
environment relationship, another at the level of the internal envi­
ronment–external environment relationship.
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

63
 Short Discussion
	1.	 All financial market models, discussed above, aim at or relate to the 
efficient financial market or, equivalently, to the efficiency of the finan­
cial market—of course, each model comes with its own definition or 
significance of the attribute of efficient (or of efficiency), as follows:
•	 EMH: information efficiency
•	 FMH: scale efficiency
•	 MHC: structural efficiency
•	 AMH: behavioural efficiency
•	 APH: adaptive efficiency
•	 APMH: reproductive/replicative efficiency
	2.	 With regard to testability (in the sense of factual falsification), we make 
the following statements:
•	 testability can be ensured both from the perspective of theoretical 
rationality (or rational belief or simple belief, equated by us with the 
propensity that generates the proference) and from the perspective 
of practical rationality (equated by us with the cost–benefit 
calculation);
•	 therefore, in order to be able to test, financial market models must 
provide at least a methodological anchor (either of the nature of 
theoretical rationality, or of the nature of practical rationality, or of 
both natures) that underlies the issuance/formulation of conjec­
tures—which to function as predictions or predictive statements;
•	 from this perspective of testability, the six models considered for the 
functioning of the financial market are characterized by the following:
–– EMH: this model is not testable—in its fundamental principle 
there is no reference to theoretical rationality or practical ratio­
nality. Moreover, the literature clearly notes this feature of the 
EMH model—that is, its empirical non-testability (Berk, 2008)—
the underlying explanation for this non-testability is, of course, 
the very substance of the hypothesis underlying this model: a 
hypothesis not only unrealistic but, in many respects, erroneous;
––
­
75
­
­
2  SOCIAL SELECTION IN THE FINANCIAL MARKET: LOGICAL MECHANISM 

64
––
­
­
­
76
–– AMH: this model is testable based on the arguments that any 
evolutionary model is testable. Its fundamental principle requires 
theoretical rationality, because satisficing is directly related to the 
(possibly rational) belief of the subject. Of course, from a techni­
cal point of view, designing, organizing, conducting and observ­
ing an experiment (whether in vitro or in vivo) require much 
more care for the correct capture of the co-evolutionary relation­
ships that take place in the financial market. Although, in the vast 
majority of cases, the tests performed in the literature are also 
performed from a perspective that we can call ‘objective’ (i.e., 
one that focuses on facts, not behaviours), the model allows a test 
of behaviour, namely, by capturing the aspects of choosing 
second-­best solutions;
––
2022
­
­
77
–– APMH: this model, as such, is just being developed in this book. 
However, the approach of autopoieticity in economics is quite 
rich in the literature, especially in the field of conceptual transfer 
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

65
from biology, with the founding contributions of Maturana and 
Varela (Maturana & Varela, 1980). Its fundamental principle is 
claimed both in theoretical rationality (originating in belief or 
propensity) and in practical rationality (cost–benefit analysis—
also at the level of second-best solution, as in the case of AMH or 
APH). Therefore, there is a wide possibility of formulating con­
jectures/predictions to test this model of the financial market.
Nota bene: the third model of the financial market, which will be devel­
oped by the authors of the present research (in addition to APH and 
APMH, respectively), namely, the Natural Price Hypothesis (NPH) will be 
(probably) the subject of another book.
Financial Fitness
The Concept of Financial Fitness
We have seen, previously, what social fitness essentially refers to, associated 
with the social phenotype that we have called with the general term of 
transaction. Now is the time to develop, in a more detailed way, the con­
cept of financial fitness, as a logical species (or customization/application) 
of the concept of social fitness.
First of all, it must be said that to the symbolic social individual (or the 
symbolic social phenotype), we have called as transaction, corresponds, 
from the perspective of the financial market, the financial individual (we 
can add the predicate symbolic—that is, symbolic financial individual—if 
there is a risk of confusion). I called it trading strategy. Therefore, the 
phenotype (adult individual) of the financial market (as a symbolic species) 
exactly is the trading strategy.
­
78
2  SOCIAL SELECTION IN THE FINANCIAL MARKET: LOGICAL MECHANISM 

66
The Concept of Performative Depth of Financial Fitness
By performative depth (PD) of a trading strategy (TS) we mean its follow­
ing capabilities:
•	
79
•	 (PD2) compatibility with cultural geodesic: this is a normative cor­
roboration and is defined as the formal cause of TS;
•	 (PD3) positivity of the return captured from the financial market: 
this refers to the positive difference between the effect of TS and the 
effort (cost) of TS, represents a factual/empirical corroboration and 
is defined as the final cause of TS.
As the PD needs to be measured, we believe that we need to keep the 
following in mind in this regard:
•	 given the three benchmarks to be checked simultaneously, the PD of 
a TS can only be measured positionally. This means that a state vec­
tor will have to be constructed, dated and located (to ensure compa­
rability in time, respectively comparability in space) of that 
positional vector;
	
	
where: i is a time (or moment) counter; j is a spatial (locality) counter; k is 
a distribution (assignment) counter;
•	 PD1 and PD2 are qualitative-type capabilities of TS, while PD3 is a 
quantitative (or dimensional)-type capability;
•	 the qualitative capacities are of dichotomous/dyadic type (accepted–
rejected, respectively yes–no), while the quantitative capacity is of a 
polyadic type (the positivity coefficient can take any real value);
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

67
•	 however, for computational reasons, up
pe
r P
 upper D 3 Subscript i j Superscript upper T upper S Super Subscript k
 may be subjected to a 
normalization process within the real range [0, 1], as follows:
where Mo
di
fyi
ngAbove upper P upper D Baseline 3 With bar Subscript i j Superscript upper T upper S Super Subscript k
 is the normalized value of the value up
pe
r P
 upper D 3 Subscript i j Superscript upper T upper S Super Subscript k
; up
per
 P upper D 3 Subscript min Superscript upper T upper S Super Subscript k  is the 
minimum value of the positivity coefficient; up
per
 P upper D 3 Subscript max Superscript upper T upper S Super Subscript k  is the maximum value 
of this coefficient; up
per G Subscript e Superscript upper P upper D Baseline 3  is the effective gap of up
pe
r P
 upper D 3 Subscript i j Superscript upper T upper S Super Subscript k
; upp
er 
G Subscript max Superscript upper P upper D Baseline 3  is the maxi­
mum gap of up
pe
r P
 upper D 3 Subscript i j Superscript upper T upper S Super Subscript k
.
Measuring Performative Depth: A Topological View
le
ft
 p
ar
en
th
e
s
i
s
 
u p
p
er P upper D 1 Subscript i j Superscript upper T upper S Super Subscript k Superscript Baseline right parenthesis upper Lamda left parenthesis upper P upper D 2 Subscript i j Superscript upper T upper S Super Subscript k Superscript Baseline right parenthesis
up
pe
r P
 upper D 3 Subscript i j Superscript upper T upper S Super Subscript k
­
­
­
80
If we operate with non-normalized values of performative depth, then 
we have the following possible gaps, from the perspective of PD3:
•	 non-normalized gap with the market average:
where
	
	
2  SOCIAL SELECTION IN THE FINANCIAL MARKET: LOGICAL MECHANISM 

68
•	 non-standard gap with the best competitor (champion) on 
the market:
	
	
We can also build the normalized values:
•	 normalized gap with the market average:
	
	
•	 normalized gap with the best competitor (champion) on the market:
	
	
2.5
­
 
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

69
Typology of Financial Fitness
A typology of financial fitness is of the greatest importance and relevance 
in the perspective of the following research, dedicated to the construction 
of the APMH hypothesis. In the following we make a proposal regarding 
this typology.
Financial Fitness Classification Criteria
First of all, it should be noted that all the predicates of sufficiency of sym­
bolic social fitness (hence also of financial fitness) act to establish the fit­
ness class in question. Therefore, a first classification criterion must be the 
predicates of sufficiency of financial fitness.
Secondly, if the ‘decision’ of classification is dichotomous with respect 
to the predicates of sufficiency PD1 and PD2, we will have to adopt a non-­
dichotomous impact on the classification of the predicate of suffi­
ciency PD3.
Thirdly, a second criterion for classifying financial fitness should be the 
trend. Although, prima facie, examining the trend from the perspective of 
financial fitness classification seems relatively superfluous (because static 
classification might be considered as sufficient), our view is that a kine­
matic classification is not only simply complementary to static classifica­
tion, but contains an obvious logical necessity. We put forward some 
arguments in support of this view:
•	
­
81
•	
82
•	 we have shown, above, the relevance of the kinematic parameters of 
a given fitness, from the perspective of the fitness in question (i.e., of 
the reflexive or temporal comparability). But this relevance is main­
tained also from the perspective of spatial (non-reflexive) compara­
2  SOCIAL SELECTION IN THE FINANCIAL MARKET: LOGICAL MECHANISM 

70
bility, that is, comparability with other fitness, possibly statically 
positioned at the same point. It can therefore be rightly said that two 
fitnesses, relative to two different trading strategies (or the same fit­
ness at two different times), are not equivalent (or identical) only if 
they occupy the same static position from the perspective of perfor­
mative depth, but also requires kinematic evaluations.
Based on the above, we propose the following criteria to classify the 
financial fitness:
	1.	 (PO) the criterion of propensive organicity: refers to the verification/
non-verification of the compatibility of fitness with the propensity of 
the human agent in question—that is, refers to the first compatibility 
filter (an internal compatibility filter);
	2.	 (CO) the criterion of cultural organicity: refers to the verification/non-­
verification of the compatibility of fitness with the valid/operational 
cultural geodesic at that moment—that is, refers to the second compat­
ibility filter (an external compatibility filter);
Nota bene: these first two criteria may together form the nominal eligi­
bility criterion for financial fitness, as suggested above by the logical con­
junction le
ft
 p
ar
en
th
e
s
i
s
 
u p
p
er P upper D 1 Subscript i j Superscript upper T upper S Super Subscript k Superscript Baseline right parenthesis upper Lamda left parenthesis upper P upper D 2 Subscript i j Superscript upper T upper S Super Subscript k Superscript Baseline right parenthesis
.
	3.	 (SP) the criterion of static positioning: refers to the performative depth 
of financial fitness, as this concept was introduced above. It is a dis­
tributive criterion, unlike the first two criteria which, being nominal, 
are not distributive. This criterion includes two sub-criteria:
	
3.1.	 (SPm): sub-criterion of static positioning compared to the mar­
ket average;
	
3.2.	 (SPc): sub-criterion of static positioning towards the mar­
ket champion;
	4.	 (KP) the criterion of kinematic positioning: it also refers to the perfor­
mative depth, but not from a distributive perspective, but from a vecto­
rial one. This criterion contains three sub-criteria:
	
4.1.	 (KPd) sub-criterion of the direction/direction of financial fitness 
(ascending vs. descending);
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

71
	
4.2.	 (KPs) sub-criterion of financial fitness speed (derived from the 
first order of the financial fitness function is positive/negative in 
relation to time);
	
4.3.	 (KPa) sub-criterion for accelerating financial fitness (the second-­
order derivative of the financial fitness function is positive/nega­
tive over time).
Financial Fitness Classes
­
83
•	
­
84
•	
­
­
85
86
•	 (class F3): risky financial fitness—that financial fitness which, from 
the perspective of the SPm criterion, is located in the negative zone 
of the net return in the financial market:
––
+
87
–– (subclass F3−): risky, negatively oriented financial fitness—that 
risky financial fitness that tends to move away, to left, from zero 
net return;
–– (subclass F30): risky, unfocused financial fitness—that risky finan­
cial fitness that is stationary (inertial) in the occupied risky 
position;
2  SOCIAL SELECTION IN THE FINANCIAL MARKET: LOGICAL MECHANISM 

72
•	 (class F4): indifferent to zero financial fitness—that financial fitness 
that is exactly at the point where the return of the trading strategy in 
question equals the cost incurred to form and implement that strategy:
–– (subclass F4+): financial fitness regardless of zero, positively ori­
ented—that financial fitness regardless of zero that has the ten­
dency to move to right from the position occupied;
–– (subclass F4−): financial fitness regardless of zero, negatively ori­
ented—that financial fitness regardless of zero that has a tendency 
to move to left from the position occupied;
–– (subclass F40): financial fitness regardless of zero, non-oriented—
that financial fitness regardless of zero that is stationary (inertial) 
in the zero-occupied position occupied;
•	 (class F5): underperforming financial fitness—that financial fitness 
that is in the positive net return area but does not yet get the average 
financial market:
–– (subclass F5+): underperforming, positively oriented financial fit­
ness—that underperforming financial fitness that tends to move 
to right from the underperforming position occupied;
–– (subclass F5−): underperforming, negatively oriented financial fit­
ness—that underperforming financial fitness that has a tendency 
to move to left from the underperforming position occupied;
–– (subclass F50): underperforming, non-oriented financial fitness—
that underperforming financial fitness that is stationary (inertial) 
in the occupied underperforming position;
•	 (class F6): regardless of average financial fitness—that financial fitness 
which, from the perspective of the SPm criterion, is positioned at the 
level of the market average:
–– (subclass F6+): financial fitness regardless of average, positively ori­
ented—that financial fitness regardless of average that tends to 
move to right compared to the financial market average;
–– (subclass F6−): financial fitness regardless of average, negatively 
oriented—that financial fitness regardless of average that tends to 
move to left compared to the average financial market;
–– (subclass F60): financial fitness regardless of average, non-­
oriented—that financial fitness regardless of average that is sta­
tionary (inertial) in the position indifferent to the occupied 
average;
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

73
•	 (class F7): competitive financial fitness—that financial fitness that is 
placed with a performative depth above the market average and, of 
course, below the value associated with the market champion:
–– (subclass F7+): competitive financial fitness, positively oriented—
that competitive financial fitness that tends to move to right from 
the position occupied;
–– (subclass F7−): competitive financial fitness, negatively oriented—
that competitive financial fitness that tends to move to left from 
the position occupied;
–– (subclass F70): competitive financial fitness, non-oriented—that 
competitive financial fitness that is stationary (inertial) in the 
occupied competitive position;
•	
88
–– (subclass F8+): maximal financial fitness, positively oriented—that 
maximal financial fitness that tends to move to right from the 
champion position;
–– (subclass F8−): maximal financial fitness, negatively oriented—that 
maximal financial fitness that tends to move to the left from the 
champion position;
–– (subclass F80): maximal financial fitness, non-oriented—that maxi­
mal financial fitness that is stationary (inertial) in the maximal 
position occupied.
2.6
 
2  SOCIAL SELECTION IN THE FINANCIAL MARKET: LOGICAL MECHANISM 

74
 Short Discussion
•	
89
•	 of course, a position occupied by a given (observed) financial fitness 
can show inertia, that is, it can be maintained, at least for a period of 
time—this inertia is represented in the form of ‘movements’ (up-
down) exclusively on the time axis.
‘Assigning’ Financial Fitness Classes to Financial Models
­
­
2.1
Table 2.1  Financial fitness classes and financial market models
Source: Authors
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

75
Nota bene: The compatibility between the financial fitness class and the 
financial market model is expressed by shading the intersection cell of the 
line with the corresponding column, the sign ‘?’ expresses indecision 
about this compatibility, and non-completion of the cell means incompat­
ibility between the financial fitness class and the financial market model.
Notes
1.	 The evoked authors call natural selection with the expression ecological 
selection, in order to distinguish it from social selection. They probably 
want to say what we proposed in the main text, namely, natural selection is 
‘conferred’ by the non-co-specific component of the environment and 
social selection is ‘conferred’ by the co-specific component of the environ­
ment—this because, conceptually, any selection is … ecological, that is, it 
is exerted/realized by the environment of the focal phenotype under 
analysis.
2.	 Which we also did, separating the financial market environment into two 
components: normative geodesic, respectively operational geodesic 
(see above).
3.	 Quantitative aspects are generally based on equations derived from the 
Price equation (i.e., using statistical covariances).
4.	 This means that we will not examine the force and mechanism of social 
selection that is exerted on the human (biological) individual but those 
that are exerted on the social individual—the latter can take different 
‘forms’: individual or economic phenotype, individual or political pheno­
type and so on. Given the specifics of our research, the focus of the analysis 
will be the financial individual, that is, the trading strategy, which is part of 
the symbolic species called financial market.
5.	 We mention them here: (a) deleting; (b) modifying; and (c) adding.
6.	 The problem of distinguishing between causes and conditions is still dis­
puted in the literature. In our opinion, the conditions (favourable or inhib­
iting, as the case may be—Nota bene: neutral conditions are obviously 
superfluous, here) must enter, logically, into what is called a multiple cause 
or, perhaps more properly expressed, general cause. In Annex 1.1 we pres­
ent an opinion developed in this matter by one of the authors of this study 
(Dinga, 2014).
7.	 The basic interactions with individuals of other species (called by us trans-­
specific interactions) are (a) cooperation interactions and (b) competition 
interactions. Of course, in reality, the two types of interactions are not 
‘pure’, but always represent combinations between them, sometimes dom­
inating the interactions of the type of cooperation, sometimes those of the 
2  SOCIAL SELECTION IN THE FINANCIAL MARKET: LOGICAL MECHANISM 

76
type of competition. For example, if there are enough resources (of any 
kind), then the interactions of cooperation (or sometimes mutual ‘igno­
rance’ will predominate), and, if the resources become scarce, then the 
interactions of competition will predominate. These clarifications are valid, 
mutatis mutandis, for both co-specific and trans-specific interactions (Nota 
bene: as in the case of human society, increasing the danger of cross-specific 
competition can strengthen co-specific cohesion, and vice versa, reducing 
that danger can strengthen co-specific competition—perhaps a more 
appropriate term for co-specific would be intra-specific).
8.	 From a logical point of view, the problem of tautology arises here: indeed, 
the pre-selection conditioning (e.g., some norms do not allow, from a legal 
point of view, some trading strategies, to use the field in which this study is 
made, therefore, when applying social selection to ex-ante permitted trad­
ing strategies, exactly these strategies will be found, so the social selection 
in question is superfluous or pointless). In reality, however, the ex-ante 
conditioning of the selection cannot ‘solve’ all the problems of social fit­
ness, on the one hand, and, on the other hand, there are always cases of 
ineffectiveness of the ex-ante conditioning of the selection—simply, some 
individuals of the symbolic species considered ignore that conditioning, of 
course taking the risk based on a cost–benefit analysis (in the way in which 
Gary Becker approached these issues).
9.	
­
2.1
10.	 As can be seen, most of the quantitative approaches in the literature on 
social selection use exactly algebraic additionality, without, therefore, tak­
ing into account the synergistic effects. Of course, quantitative modelling 
of synergy is particularly difficult, requiring special assumptions which, in 
turn, need to be tested—see, here, the significance of Duhem-Quine’s the­
sis on testing and empirical testability—but the results of considering the 
synergy effect can bring many scientific benefits, especially in terms of 
veracity.
11.	 We remind you that cultural geodesic contains both positive (codified) 
norms and informal norms, such as traditions, customs and morals.
12.	 For example, if the norm in cultural geodesic requires that the product 
sold be produced by the seller himself, s/he can import the subassemblies 
of the product, which s/he then assembles, gives them the certificate of 
origin on the final product and thus falls under the letter of the norm.
13.	 A particular marginal analysis can even lead to ‘maximizing’ the net gain 
from practicing this non-compliance (Gary Becker would be delighted 
with the idea!).
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

77
14.	 As we mentioned above (see note 12), a norm that is not general enough 
is called privilege—but the privilege is forbidden from the point of view of 
legitimacy.
15.	 Even if, almost always, the human individual is integrated in micro-­
communities (family, socio-professional group, locality, etc.), these inte­
grations occur on the basis of psychological and/or economic-social 
affinities, so, in the last resort to a representative (or average) individual.
16.	 Rationality models refer to belief (s) or, with a term we have adopted 
throughout the research, to the propensity of the human individual (Nota 
bene: the propensity that is shown in preference has been called, as we 
remember, proference).
17.	 We recall that our proposal in this issue was the concept of implicit infor­
mation, that is, information that is acquired not by the analyst (as in the 
case of Samuelson’s revealed preference) but by the economic agent par­
ticipating in the market (financial in our case)—way to acquisition is the 
inference of the information in question, based on its own hermeneutic 
device (which can be, e.g., a model of rationality), from the behaviour of 
other economic agents on the market.
18.	 In fact, the previous two predicates of sufficiency of social fitness refer 
more explicitly to the symbolic individual (or symbolic species).
19.	 At no moment or point in the discussion did our research refer to the social 
selection of the human individual (an extremely delicate and difficult issue 
from many perspectives), but to the social selection of the financial indi­
vidual (symbolic individual, even if it is an artefact of human individual).
20.	 The selection (evolution) of the human individual refers to fitness traits of 
biological nature, while the selection (evolution) of the symbolic individual 
refers to fitness traits of a symbolic nature.
21.	 From an abstract point of view, even if, in most cases, without explicit ver­
bal wording, expectations are focused on high layers of Maslow’s pyramid 
of needs—some (psychologists, sociologists or anthropologists) call it 
social recognition, others (political scientists or political philosophers) call 
it power.
22.	 Of course, exceptions are not ruled out (which in this case even confirm 
the rule in a genuine way): this is what is called, in slang, ‘cannons’—
actions/strategies that are operated only once, under exceptional condi­
tions, with extraordinary effects, too (see the financial operations carried 
out by George Soros or Warren Buffett).
23.	 The idea of replicability (although not using exactly this term) in the evo­
lutionary ideas ventilated in the field of economics is not new. As early as 
1985, Richard R. Nelson and Sidney G. Winter introduced, in their work 
An Evolutionary Theory of Economic Change (a somewhat … pleonastic 
title), the concept of routine, operated at the level of the organization, in 
2  SOCIAL SELECTION IN THE FINANCIAL MARKET: LOGICAL MECHANISM 

78
the sense of procedure (either technological, managerial or cultural) which 
is repeatedly applied under the rule of the selection operated by the mar­
ket on it.
24.	 With a slightly rebarbative expression, this is a connection between the 
transcendental of propensity and the transcendent of selection (of cultural 
geodesic).
25.	 The main human group that is formed in society from the perspective of 
the dynamics of cultural geodesic is of the type of political party—but, of 
course, also refers to other structures of civil society (Nota bene: political 
parties are also structures of civil society—NGOs) which have their role, 
more or less direct/explicit in this dynamic.
26.	 The (only) predominant character results from the fact that cultural geode­
sic also includes many emerging elements/components, caused by the 
‘impersonal’ functioning of society (see, e.g., the invisible hand, which acts 
not only in economics—at the suggestion of Adam Smith—but also, in 
general, in the society.
27.	 From a conceptual point of view, cultural geodesic, together with its 
basis—the Constitution—forms the situational framework of a society. 
This is the meaning in which, throughout our research, we have said that 
cultural geodesic is an ‘emanation’ of the situational framework. The situ­
ational framework, moreover, can be considered a propensity (or a profer­
ence) of substrate, that is, a fundamental base of a certain society.
28.	 In societies where the president (head of state) is one of the components 
of executive political power.
29.	 For the moment, we refer to the society as a whole, and we will later cus­
tomize the entire discussion on the case of the financial market (or the 
financial field of the society).
30.	 In the evoked paper, three other categories of symbolic social species phe­
notypes are proposed (Nota bene: the syntagm symbolic social species seems 
pleonastic because, as we said, symbolic species can only be artefacts, i.e., 
can only be generated within the social inter-action: we add, here, in our 
‘defence’, that, in reality, there may be a category of symbolic species, spe­
cific to the human individual, but which no longer has a proper social 
character, although it still contains a strong social conditioning: these are 
individual or, more specifically, personal, idiosyncratic symbolic species: 
e.g., productions specific to the individual/person and which are not yet 
shared with other members of the community; in other words, we are deal­
ing with ‘individuals’ or ‘species’ in Popper’s second world, who ‘inhabit’ 
the psychic world and who may or may not migrate to Popper’s third 
world, that is, in the world of inter-subjective objectification, from to 
which belong all of symbolic social species), namely, (1) thought, in the 
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

79
psychic field; (2) idea, in the field of theory; (3) way of doing, in the field 
of praxiology (or of the actional paradigm).
31.	 Prima facie, such a term refers to the idea of economic exchange (which is 
the common, ‘civil’ meaning of the term in question), so here we will pres­
ent a brief ‘defence’ in the matter: (a) the transaction denotes (has as refer­
ence) any inter-action between two non-solitary individuals (i.e., an 
inter-action in their quality as members of a society), which allows any 
nature of such a transaction (Nota bene: for example, there is a prestigious 
scientific publication of the British Royal Society, called … Philosophical 
Transactions—established in 1665); (b) the conversation is often consid­
ered a verbal transaction (i.e., an interaction); (c) the transaction can be 
defined, in the most general way, as a quid pro quo.
32.	 But, of course, also of any society of imaginable living beings.
33.	 Here is a kind of primacy of the relationship in relation to thing, respec­
tively in relation to property—in a way, the relationship generates both 
property and even thing (since we are talking about symbolic species, i.e., 
artefacts).
34.	 We must not particularize on this point until we assume an impact of equal 
quantity and opposite sign on those parts of the transactional event (as 
does, e.g., the theory of zero-sum games—Nota bene: the correct name is, 
in our opinion, games with zero amount of mutual impacts). We should 
probably even weaken the condition, namely, to stipulate the existence of 
a non-zero impact on at least one of the trading parties.
35.	 We mention here a problem discussed in cosmology, in connection with 
the principled upper limit of light passing through an empty space. So, the 
question is: does a thought that ‘arrives’ right now on the star Proxima 
Centauri (located about four light-years away from our planet) travel 
through that space at a super-light speed? The answer is that it must be 
shown that the thought actually reaches the star in question, and the proof 
for that is of an empirical type (in the terminology we use here, it is of 
the … transactional type): namely, it must be proved that the thought that 
reaches there produces a small disturbance of the target, that is, produces 
a non-­zero impact (in this case only to one of the ‘parties’ involved).
36.	 Recall that, for example, in the economic field, a market-type exchange 
(such as selling/buying) of a good against currency, even if we consider an 
equivalent exchange (provided that a fair or natural price works), is not 
neutral in terms of impact—the two utilities exchanged (good, respectively 
currency) produce different marginal utilities for the two parties (we leave 
the demonstration of this result to the reader).
37.	 Our opinion on solving this problem is only outlined here, and a thorough 
treatment will be done in another context.
38.	 In literature, especially in philosophy, objects are also called things.
2  SOCIAL SELECTION IN THE FINANCIAL MARKET: LOGICAL MECHANISM 

80
39.	 A modus operandi of a scientific community that acts, both in terms of 
principles and procedures/methodology, dogmatically, within normal sci­
ence (Nota bene: the property of dogmatic refers to non-critical position­
ing, from the point of view of reflective view of the paradigm in question—in 
FMAB-APH (Dinga et al., 2022), this issue is discussed in detail, in con­
nection with financial market theories/models).
40.	 We specify that by the phrase social construction we mean the generation of 
culture in the narrow sense of the term, that is, of spiritual culture, which 
does not include civilization, as the latter is understood from the perspec­
tive of a material culture. We recall that the idea of social construction, as 
a result of purely subjective inter-action, is a commonplace in social phi­
losophy and epistemology.
41.	 As this concept was built by Rawls, Nozick (1994), Sen and Nussbaum 
(following Locke, Rousseau and Kant).
42.	 Even today (including some states in the European Union) attempts are 
being made to combine iliberalism with democracy.
43.	 Of course, in relation to the object, in the first instance, the relationship 
also occurs between the subjects, but the final goal is not the relationship 
between the subjects (this is the middle, so to speak) but the acceding to 
the object, in this case, the transformation of the object. A more analytical 
examination of the three categories of relations discussed in this paragraph, 
from the perspective of a typology of science (but the analysis can be gen­
eralized for the case of a typology of paradigms), is given in Annex 1.2.
44.	 The name drásiste comes from the term (gr.) δράση (drási) which 
means action.
45.	 We do not insist here with semantic details on the concept of economic, we 
only emphasize that its essence (its eidos) is the entropic exchange with 
nature. This predicate of sufficiency (which is also a predicate of necessity) 
distinguishes the economic relationship in society from any other type of 
human relationship with nature.
46.	 Note that, also in natural selection, the selection of social fitness is also 
done in dichotomous mode, even if, in the case of this type of selection, we 
have a cumulative (i.e., gradual) selection—namely, accepting a small 
degree of variation is also done in yes versus no (or, with an economic game 
equivalent: all or nothing).
47.	 The fuzzy theory is a polyvalent logic (but with a set of truth values of the 
power of the continuum, included in the range of real numbers [0,1]—i.e., 
having the cardinal ℵ1), proposed by Lotfi A. Zadeh in 1965. On its basis 
has also developed a fuzzy algebra (which also contains the related arith­
metic), as well as other research directions: fuzzy semantics, fuzzy proba­
bility and so on.
48.	 This includes institutional reforms, either autonomous in relation to sym­
bolic species or as an effect of the latter.
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

81
49.	 For example, in the case of fiscal-budgetary geodesic, it is forbidden for the 
amendment of a norm to enter into force earlier than six months after the 
announcement of that change. Of course, other conditionalities can be 
imposed, so that the number of cases of reversibility of the selection of 
social fitness is minimized.
50.	 It should be noted that the distinction between corroboration models and 
refutation models is somewhat pedantic, because a model that has the abil­
ity to corroborate hypotheses has, eo ipso, and that of refutation. Popper’s 
falsifiability implies either one result or another (but it never implies an 
indecision—if we disregard the Duhem–Quine thesis, according to which 
we cannot, in principle, have an undoubted decision from factually testing 
a hypothesis/conjecture).
51.	 Which, in our opinion, is not completed in a ‘round’ form (Nota bene: 
based mainly on perception, we believe that the phenomenological 
approach should be the methodological basis of such a model).
52.	 All the ‘circulating’ variations in financial theory and analysis can be sub­
sumed under one of the two approaches. Thus, the so-called fractal 
approach to the financial market (Nota bene: some even call it the Fractal 
Market Hypothesis—FMH, a name we also used here), introduced by 
Edgar E. Peters in 1994 (Fractal Market Analysis: Applying Chaos Theory 
to Investment and Economics, Wiley), is an extension of EMH, trying, like 
the latter, to identify predictors in the ‘hope’ that the kinematics of the 
financial market (more precisely of the records in the time series in ques­
tion) behave fractally—it should be noted that we are dealing here, in fact, 
with a chaotic approach, in the sense of chaos theory, of the functioning of 
the financial market. It should be noted also that the fractal approach is 
maintained in the neoclassical ‘paradigm’ of economic theory. Even the 
famous Black–Scholes model is based on martingale (or fair game theory), 
that is, it proceeds similarly to EMH. In essence, all these techniques (in 
addition to CAPM—Capital Asset Pricing Model—as well as Modern 
Portfolio Theory) built under the ‘umbrella’ of neoclassical economic the­
ory are claimed from the principle of equilibrium (imported from mechan­
ics Newtonian) (Dinga, 2021) and presupposes the equivalence between 
investment and speculation, maintaining the analysis of the financial mar­
ket in the gaming area (Peters, 1994).
53.	 Our research proposes two new hypotheses (or models) of the financial 
market: (a) Adaptive Preference Hypothesis (APH)—see FMAB-APH 
(Dinga et al., 2022); (b) Autopoietic Market Hypothesis (APMH). In fact, 
as it will turn out, the second hypothesis incorporates the APH one, the 
latter becoming not a particular case, but a logical/behavioural sequence 
of the autopoietic hypothesis.
54.	 And, by the way, metaphysical.
2  SOCIAL SELECTION IN THE FINANCIAL MARKET: LOGICAL MECHANISM 

82
55.	 Some authors (Lo, 2019) consider that the theory of rational expectations 
(the concept of rational expectation was introduced by Muth in 1961) is 
part of … the paradigms of the financial market (theory). In our opinion, 
although EMH seems to verify the criteria of the model qua paradigm (see 
FMAB-APH), we consider that the theory of rational expectations which, 
like EMH, is a  necessary consequence of  neoclassical economic theory, 
based on equilibrium, has a lower scope than required by a paradigm (Nota 
bene: however, the equilibrium theory is a paradigm). As is well known, 
the theory of rational expectations (Nota bene: in our opinion, it should 
be called the theory of rational anticipations) has at least four deviations 
from  its own assumption (Lo, 2019): (a) aversion to  loss; (b) overlap 
on probability—that is, on the behaviour of the environment (see, here, 
our proposal on implicit information); (c) the law of small numbers; (d) 
heuristic representativeness (introduced by Kahneman).
56.	 As we have said before, the typology of market informational efficiency 
(weak, semi-strong, strong) is not relevant here, although, from an empiri­
cal perspective, the testability may be different in the three cases.
57.	 The logic considered here is a bivalent epistemic logic, with two values of 
truth: true and false, respectively.
58.	 The author maintains the standard deviation as a risk measurement vari­
able, although he also points out that this indicator varies faster than the 
square root of time (standard deviation is the square root of the variance, 
which is actually considered to ‘generate’ volatility). It should be noted 
that, unlike the EMH model, the FMH model is testable empirically in the 
exact way in which it formulates its guiding principle (Nota bene: logically, 
for a financial market model to be scientific—i.e., empirically testable, 
which is the same thing—the guiding principle, or, alternatively, a ‘theo­
rem’ inferred from this principle, must allow the experiencing or experi­
mentation, as the case may be, of the conjecture in question). Nota bene: 
this conjecture has, of course, the form of a prediction (predictive 
statement).
59.	 Which can therefore also be a field for issuing conjectures for factual 
testing.
60.	 Such liquidity efficiency is fractal due to the self-similarity of the frequency 
distribution of the return of the financial market to different time horizons 
(or waiting horizons) of investors.
61.	 This phenomenon is in turn based on the essential feature of the fractal 
model of the financial market, namely, that there is, at all times, a structural 
functional combination between microeconomic (local) randomness and 
macroeconomic (global) determinism. Nota bene: obviously, this idea is an 
application of the Prigoginian principle of the generation of order (macro­
scopic aspect) from fluctuations (microscopic aspect).
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

83
62.	 One of the most convenient conjectures that can be made here is to change 
the frequency distribution of the return, when the distribution of time 
horizons becomes uniform (i.e., market liquidity decreases). This does not 
mean, eo ipso, that FMH is a paradigm—in fact, verifying that it is (or is 
not) a paradigm is a next research task of authors.
63.	 In original: Investors in aggregate will earn the gross return of the total stock 
market before costs, but share only in the amount of that return that remains 
after costs.
64.	 In this context, it may be interesting to examine the issue of financial mar­
ket efficiency in terms of cost—for example, the question may be asked: 
how does the financial market trend towards its informational efficiency in 
terms of price and its informational efficiency in term of cost?
65.	 He says, expressis verbis, that in the analysis of the financial market, we do 
not need EMH but … CMH.
66.	 The superficial aspect of this consistency (or, rather, similarities of … fam­
ily) consists in the following: while, in the case of CMH, it operates with 
practical rationality, in that of APH it operates with theoretical rationality 
(Nota bene: but, as known, any practical rationality implies a theoretical 
background rationality).
67.	 As is well known, the informational efficiency of the market is ‘forbidden’ 
by the Grossman–Stiglitz paradox.
68.	 From another perspective, it can be said that the Grossman–Stiglitz argu­
ment examines the functioning of the EMH from inside, while the CMH 
argument examines the functioning of the EMH from outside.
69.	 In this regard, Lo is ambiguous: sometimes he says that AMH makes a mix 
between EMH and behaviourism, other times he states that AMH is a 
generalization of EMH. In our opinion, EMH with any theory that leaves 
the canons of neoclassical economic theory (such as behaviourism) are … 
conceptually immiscible. However, behaviourism, in itself, is compatible 
with an evolutionary approach, as AMH is trying to do.
70.	 As we will see later, the fair price can be equated with the natural price, that 
is, the price generated by economic fundamentals.
71.	 The informed reader will immediately find here Smith’s concept of natural 
price, at which we will refer in a (possible) vol. 3 of this research, focused 
on the natural economic values and their modelling.
72.	 It is obvious that, through this assertion, we have already created at least 
one extremely difficult problem (which Simon also faced in his time): how 
do we determine the level of satisficing if we do not have a benchmark? 
This benchmark could have been the optimal (i.e., a first best) level. If this 
is no longer possible (of course, from the perspective of the economic 
operator, not the financial market observer/analyst), then we need a crite­
rion external to the financial market (but one of the unintended conse­
2  SOCIAL SELECTION IN THE FINANCIAL MARKET: LOGICAL MECHANISM 

84
quences of looking for such an external benchmark is the introduction, 
almost necessary, of the elements of social justice, which, in a predomi­
nantly positivist analysis—at the stage of which we are at the moment—
introduces possible insurmountable complications). This is a fundamental 
reason why financial market ­theories (and economic theories in general) 
should be based on political economics, not positive economics.
73.	 In fact, we believe that the very replacement of informational efficiency 
with behavioural efficiency essentially expresses the basic pattern of our 
research.
74.	 We can identify, here, a very interesting aspect regarding the economic 
choice, namely, that this choice is one of the type of theoretical rationality, 
not practical. Indeed, the theory of choice shows that theoretical rational­
ity is based on belief (Nota bene: some authors consider that these are 
rational beliefs, based on justification or justifiability, while practical ratio­
nality is based on calculation) (Welton, 2012).
75.	 In vivo observation is also called a natural experiment.
76.	 Perhaps a theoretical and methodological effort to combine EMH with 
CMH would be much more productive than trying (only announced, not 
yet realized, in our opinion) to combine EMH with AMH (or, even, only 
with behaviourism).
77.	 Either the gross return or the net return, according to the most relevant 
significance in the context of the particular experiment considered.
78.	 As is well known, particularization (or speciation or individuation, as 
appropriate) is obtained by adding at least one predicate of sufficiency in 
addition to the genus (or species) against which the species (or individual) 
is particularized.
79.	 Of course, this qualitative requirement can be supplemented, on a case-­by-­
case basis (especially in conditions of … internal competition between the 
trading strategies of a given human individual), by degrees of compatibility 
which, for example, we might call degrees of propensive adherence.
80.	 It is implicit that both the financial market average and the best competitor 
in the financial market refer exclusively to the trading strategies that have 
already verified the nominal component of the performative depth.
81.	 The usefulness of assessing the dynamic position of financial fitness is 
addressed not only to the analyst, but also to the economic agent in ques­
tion, respectively to the economic agents co-participating in the transac­
tions in the financial market. We recall, for example, that our proposal on 
the concept of implicit information (information inferred by economic 
agents from observing/interpreting the behaviour—decision, respectively 
action—of other financial market participants) is based precisely on the 
possibility to identify not only the static behavioural position of these other 
participants, but also that of identifying trends in their behaviours (usually 
in the short term).
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

85
82.	 In the short term, the parameters in question are quite relevant even in the 
form of constants, but, obviously, the identification of functions of dynamics 
of the parameters in question raises the financial analysis to a higher level. The 
identification of such functions is all the more necessary (and relevant) as, for 
example, speed and acceleration can be determined using (for the continuous 
case) first-order and second-order derivatives, respectively (or, for the discrete 
case, absolute differences of order 1, respectively order 2).
83.	 Please note that all fitness is considered from the perspective of the net gain 
brought by the trading strategy whose fitness is examined (i.e., from the 
perspective that integrates CMH).
84.	 One important point to note here is that an erroneous fitness is not neces­
sarily a ‘bad’ fitness—for example, it can be in any of the positions around 
the market average (including at the level of the market champion). The 
term erroneous refers only to the fact that the fitness in question has no 
justification/‘rationality’ in the context of the proference of that economic 
agent. Consequently, all the following financial fitness classes can be both 
erroneous fitness classes and non-erroneous fitness classes.
85.	 See note immediately above, mutatis mutandis.
86.	 In a simple logical formalization, we have, for a given financial fitness, from 
the perspective of nominal eligibility, the following cases: (a) non-­compliant 
fitness: 
le
ft
 b
ra
c
k e
t
 l
ef
t
 
p
a
re
nt
h
e
sis ModifyingAbove upper O upper C With bar right parenthesis upper Lamda left parenthesis ModifyingAbove italic upper O upper P With bar right parenthesis right bracket upper V left bracket left parenthesis ModifyingAbove upper O upper C With bar right parenthesis upper Lamda left parenthesis italic upper O upper P right parenthesis right bracket
, when the OC criterion is violated; 
(b) erroneous fitness: 
le
ft
 b
ra
c
k e
t
 l
ef
t
 p
a
re
nt
h
e
sis upper O upper C right parenthesis upper Lamda left parenthesis ModifyingAbove italic upper O upper P With bar right parenthesis right bracket upper V left bracket left parenthesis ModifyingAbove upper O upper C With bar right parenthesis upper Lamda left parenthesis ModifyingAbove italic upper O upper P With bar right parenthesis right bracket
, when the OP criterion 
is violated; (c) non-compliant and erroneous fitness: 
le
ft
 
b r
a
ck
et
 left parenthesis ModifyingAbove upper O upper C With bar right parenthesis upper Lamda left parenthesis ModifyingAbove italic upper O upper P With bar right parenthesis right bracket
, when 
both criteria are violated.
87.	 In empirical analysis, this trend can be examined, of course, from the per­
spective of the speed, respectively the acceleration with which the financial 
fitness in question approaches the average of the financial market—here we 
do not develop this analysis.
88.	 Here is a problem that we will only enunciate, without making a more in-
depth examination of it: the maximum (champion) value of fitness in the 
financial market can be seen either from an empirical perspective or from a 
theoretical perspective. From an empirical perspective, it is about the maxi­
mum financial fitness actually reached by a certain trading strategy oper­
ated on the market, while, from a theoretical (or potential) perspective, it 
is about the financial fitness that can/could be achieved. Of course, given 
that our research avoids abstract evaluations of the homo œconomicus 
model, we only consider the maximum financial fitness from an empirical 
perspective.
89.	 We take into account that the dependent variable is represented on the 
abscissa, so the association of the convexity (respectively concavity) with 
the abscissa is inverse than if the dependent variable is represented on the 
ordinate (usual case).
2  SOCIAL SELECTION IN THE FINANCIAL MARKET: LOGICAL MECHANISM 

86
References
Berk, J. B. (2008). A Critique of the Efficient Market Hypothesis. University of 
California, Berkeley, and NBER.
Bogle, J.  C. (2005). The Relentless Rules of Humble Arithmetic. Financial 
Analysts Journal, 61(6), 22–35.
Dinga, E. (2014). Correlation and Causality. Revista OEconomica, 1.
Dinga, E. (2021). Institutionalism as a Species of Evolutionism. Management of 
Sustainable Development, 13(1), 49–54.
Dinga, E., Oprean-Stan, C., Tănăsescu, C. R., Brătian, V., & Ionescu, G. M. (2022). 
Financial Market Analysis and Behaviour: The Adaptive Preference Hypothesis. 
Routledge & CRC Press.
Dinga, E., Tănăsescu, C.-R., & Ionescu, G.-M. (2020). Social Entropy and 
Normative Network. Entropy, 22(9), 1051.
Fama, E.  F. (1965). The Behavior of Stock-Market Prices. The Journal of 
Business, 38(1).
Foster, J. (1997). The Analytical Foundations of Evolutionary Economics: From 
Biological Analogy to Economic Self-organization. Structural Change and 
Economic Dynamics, 8(4), 427–451.
Foster, J. (2021). In Search of a Suitable Heuristic for Evolutionary Economics: 
From Generalized Darwinism to Economic Self-organisation. Munich Personal 
RePEc Archive (MPRA), 106146, 24.
Lo, A. W. (2019). Adaptive Markets: Financial Evolution at the Speed of Thought. 
Princeton University Press.
Luhmann, N. (2012). Introduction to Systems Theory. Wiley.
Maturana, H., & Varela, F. (1980). Autopoiesis and Cognition. The Realization of 
the Living. D. Reidel Publishing Company.
Nelson, R.  R., & Winter, S.  G. (1985). An Evolutionary Theory of Economic 
Change. Harvard University Press.
Nozick, R. (1994). The Nature of Rationality. Princeton University Press.
Peters, E. (1994). Fractal Market Analysis: Applying Chaos Theory to Investment 
and Economics. Wiley.
Vromen, J. (2007). Generalized Darwinism in Evolutionary Economics: The Devil 
Is in the Details. Papers on Economics and Evolution, No. 0711, 1–27.
Welton, D. (2012). Bodily Intentionality, Affectivity, and Basic Affects. In 
D. Zahavi (Ed.), The Oxford Handbook of Contemporary Phenomenology. Oxford 
University Press.
Wolf, J. B., Brodie, E. D., III, & Moore, A. J. (1999). Interacting Phenotypes and 
the Evolutionary Process. II. Selection Resulting from Social Interactions. The 
American Naturalist, 153(3), 254–266.
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

87
CHAPTER 3
Autopoietic Market Hypothesis: 
The Concept of Autopoiesis
Autopoiesis—A Propaedeutic
The Concept of Biological/Natural Living
Basic Considerations
The elaboration of the concept of the living is a problem still quite contro­
versial in the literature. Of course, such a concept could not be developed 
except from the perspective of the perception of the human body, as it is 
possible on planet Earth, and having as prototype the biological living (BL) 
which is based, as we know, on carbon.1 Although the concept of biological 
living is not an objective of this research, we will make a small analysis of it 
to create a basis for discussing the defining of logical/symbolic living. 
Specifically, we will try to establish the predicates of sufficiency that can 
conceptually separate the living2 from the non-living, at the biological level.
In our opinion, the predicates of sufficiency (PS) of biological living 
(BL) are the following:
•	
le ft
 
p
arenthesis upper P upper S 1 Superscript upper B upper L Baseline right parenthesis  physical membrane, which separates the living entity from 
the environment
This predicate of sufficiency refers to the distinction3 to be made 
between the biological living system (hereinafter BLS) and its 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature 
Switzerland AG 2023
E. Dinga et al., Economic and Financial Market Behaviour, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-31702-6_3

88
environment. The consequence of its operation is that BLS is always ‘visi­
ble’ as being exclusively within a physical boundary. Of course, there may 
be systems of systems in the case of BLS, that is, more and more compre­
hensive membranes, in which lesser comprehensive membranes enter, 
which generates hierarchies of organisms that are increasingly complicated 
structurally and functionally, but, as we mentioned, it is always possible 
that BLS can be inventoried by tracking physical membranes.4 Although, 
in some cases, BLSs may be indistinguishable from each other, even then 
their distinct existence is (or may be) ‘proven’ by the very existence of the 
membrane.
•	
le ft
 
p
arenthesis upper P upper S 2 Superscript upper B upper L Baseline right parenthesis  functioning away from thermodynamic equilibrium
This predicate of sufficiency is the fundamental,5 crucial predicate of 
biological living. The thermodynamic equilibrium of a system refers to its 
entropic state. Specifically, the thermodynamic equilibrium is obtained 
when the entropy6 of the system in question is maximum. As is well known, 
the second law of thermodynamics ‘requires’ that, in a closed system, the 
entropy be permanently increasing (consequently, it never decreases and is 
not even invariant and, as a consequence, its increase is irreversible). 
However, there are systems (and this is obviously exactly BLS) that not 
only do not reach or remain in the thermodynamic equilibrium state, but 
even move away from it or stay away from it once they have moved away 
from it. This is achieved by the property called dissipativity,7 which ensures 
the extraction of negative (low) entropy from the environment and the 
dissipation of positive (high) entropy into the environment.8 Moreover, 
the property of self-organization (culminating in the concept of autopoi­
eticity) is, in turn, a logical consequence of this predicate of sufficiency.
•	
le ft
 
p
arenthesis upper P upper S 3 Superscript upper B upper L Baseline right parenthesis  identitary self-replicability
This predicate of sufficiency refers to the property of a system to con­
tain internal principles (devices, structures, functions, etc.) capable of rep­
licating that system in a (quasi) identitary way. In the case of BLS, it is the 
DNA–RNA structures that contain the information (chemically encoded) 
about the identity of the system and which, through a specific process,9 
replicates the system in an (almost) identical one,10 not in its final form, 
but in one which develops programmatically, necessarily, in the direction 
of reaching that final form which is identical with the form which caused 
the replication. One of the logical consequences of this predicate of suffi­
ciency is the concept of development, which means a process that the new 
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

89
individual appeared through replication goes through to reach the stage at 
which, in turn, it can replicate itself.
•	
le ft
 
p
arenthesis upper P upper S 4 Superscript upper B upper L Baseline right parenthesis  cognitive-reactive capacity in relation to the environment
In examining this predicate of sufficiency, we must first say that the 
term cognitive or cognition11 is considered here in the sense given to it by 
Humberto Maturana and Francisco Varela (Maturana & Varela, 1980), 
that is, it refers to the ability of a BLS to adapt to its environment. A logical 
consequence of this predicate of sufficiency is that of a double capacity of 
BLS: sensitive capacity, that is, perception12 of environmental 
actions/reactions, respectively reactive capacity (of any kind) through 
which BLS responds (by reaction) to environmental actions/reactions.
Therefore, the logical formalization of the definition of the concept of 
biological living is as follows:
	
	
In connection with this definition, there are at least three issues that 
will be assessed, briefly, at the end of this paragraph: (a) the issue of 
automata; (b) the problem of crystals; (c) the problem of the distinction 
between cognition in general (in the sense of the Santiago school, i.e., on 
the line established by Maturana and Varela) and the cognition of the 
human being.
	(a)	 The problem of automata
The automata check three of the four predicates of sufficiency of the 
living: le ft
 
p
arenthesis upper P upper S 1 Superscript upper B upper L Baseline right parenthesis —they are delimited by the environment through a physical 
membrane;13 le ft
 
p
arenthesis upper P upper S 3 Superscript upper B upper L Baseline right parenthesis —they can be programmed to replicate/reproduce 
themselves (there are, e.g., factories where robots/automatons work to 
produce … robots/automata); le ft
 
p
arenthesis upper P upper S 4 Superscript upper B upper L Baseline right parenthesis —automata can obviously be made 
sensitive to the environment (of course, in the sense of the concept of 
cognition proposed by the Santiago school). However, automata do not 
check the second predicate of sufficiency le ft
 
p
arenthesis upper P upper S 2 Superscript upper B upper L Baseline right parenthesis —they do not function 
far from thermodynamic equilibrium, that is, they are not dissipative sys­
tems regarding thermodynamic entropy. As the sufficiency predicates must 
be checked cumulatively, it follows that the automata are not BLSs.
3  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS: THE CONCEPT OF AUTOPOIESIS 

90
	(b)	 The problem of crystals
Crystals have been (and still are) the subject of intense scientific discus­
sion about the possibility of being considered living beings. The phenom­
enon that has generated, in particular, these debates is that of growth: put 
in the right conditions, the crystals grow like a living entity. Note, how­
ever, that among the predicates of the sufficiency of biological living, there 
is none that refers to growth.14 It can be easily shown that, as in the case 
of automata, the crystals check only three of the four predicates of suffi­
ciency—they do not check the same predicate le ft
 
p
arenthesis upper P upper S 2 Superscript upper B upper L Baseline right parenthesis .
	(c)	 The problem of human cognition
It is obvious that Maturana and Varela have proposed such a broad 
concept of cognition (or cognitive ability) that this includes any potential, 
however small, of reactivity, that is, adaptation to the environment. In the 
sense of this meaning, cognition exists everywhere in nature.15 We will 
discuss, in this context, two issues: (i) the concept of cognition and (ii) the 
specificity of human cognition (more precisely, of the cognition associated 
with representation).
	(i)	 Adjusting the concept/term of cognition
Cognition, as a term for general reactivity (or, equivalently, for general 
ability to interact16 with the environment), does not imply the meaning. 
An entity that is sensitive to the environment and has the ability to adjust 
its behaviour (or, sometimes, only its state17) in relation to (or in response 
to) what is perceived as an action/reaction of the environment does not 
make an interpretation of which is noticeable, although obviously, in 
regional cases, such an interpretation is also made. We propose to intro­
duce, at this point in the discussion, the pair of necessity-contingency con­
cepts. In our opinion, a necessary reactivity to the action/reaction coming 
from the environment is a state-modifying reactivity, while the contingent 
reactivity is a behaviour-modifying reactivity. If we agree to give the con­
cept of sensation or sensory capacity a very wide sphere of reference, then 
perhaps it would be more appropriate to replace the term cognition (in 
the sense of Santiago school) with the term cogsation.18
	(ii)	 The peculiarities of human cognition
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

91
 
­
­
3.1
Therefore, the difference between human being and the non-human 
living, from the perspective of the concept of cognition, is of degree, not 
of quality, which largely justifies the generality of the concept of cognition, 
proposed by the Santiago school and which is ‘glued’ of the concept of 
autopoiesis which we will discuss in detail in the following.
The Nature of BLS
One of the issues that is still discussed in the literature, although more 
from a philosophical perspective (more precisely ontological, so metaphys­
ical), is the nature of a BLS—is it a substance (e.g., a cell), or a state/
property (e.g., excitability), or a process (e.g., growth or replication)? Our 
position on this issue is as follows:
•	 BLS is a taxonomic species, of an ontological nature, with a real and 
objective character;19
3  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS: THE CONCEPT OF AUTOPOIESIS 

92
•	 instead, the living or, more precisely, livingness is a property, which 
is therefore assignable to different categories of systems (in the case 
discussed above, biological systems were considered);20
•	 therefore, the living is a broader logical category than BLS, that is, it 
is a property that can describe also the livingness of other types of 
systems (Nota bene: further, we will discuss such another type of 
system, namely, living systems in a logical sense or, equivalently, in 
the symbolic sense);
•	 from the way BLS was defined, it follows that it is a substantial-energy 
unit (here the term energy is used in its comprehensive sense, that is, 
associated with the concept of entropy). From this perspective, a BLS 
is consistent, albeit in a still informal way, with the suggestion of the 
theory of special relativity that mass/substance and energy are 
equivalent.21
The Concept of Logical/Symbolic Living
Basic Considerations
We will abbreviate the logical/symbolic living system by LLS (logically 
living system). As in the case of BLS, we will look for the predicates of suf­
ficiency that could define, by their conjunctive cumulation, this type of 
entities. A ‘mirror’ examination, parallel to that performed in the case of 
BLS, can only be helpful. Therefore, we consider these predicates to be the 
following:
•	
le ft
 
p
arenthesis upper P upper S 1 Superscript upper L upper L Baseline right parenthesis  membrane that separates the living entity from the 
environment
A LLS must be, like the BLS, distinct from its environment because 
otherwise it is indistinguishable from the environment and, as a result, it 
logically does not exist. Therefore, this predicate requires the existence of 
a membrane, but it no longer has to be, of exclusive necessity, of the physi­
cal type, although it can also be physical. Thus, we extend the sphere of 
possible membranes that can separate an entity (a system) from its envi­
ronment, accepting any type of membrane22 that achieves such a distinc­
tion or observability. We mention that the distinctiveness, ensured by the 
membrane, is considered from a criterial perspective, which means that 
there must be at least one operational criterion based on which to perceive 
(in the phenomenological sense or, at least, psychologically one) the dis­
tinction in question.23
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

93
•	
le ft
 
p
arenthesis upper P upper S 2 Superscript upper L upper L Baseline right parenthesis  dissipative functioning
This predicate of sufficiency is analogous to the functioning away from 
the thermodynamic equilibrium (Nota bene: see, here, the well-known 
concept of Prigogine) of BLS. It implies the following peculiarities, how­
ever, with respect to le ft
 
p
arenthesis upper P upper S 2 Superscript upper B upper L Baseline right parenthesis :
•	 it is integrated into and interacts with the environment also from an 
entropic perspective, but it is a behavioural entropy, while in the case 
of BLS we are talking about a thermodynamic entropy or an ener­
getic entropy;24
•	 the concept of behavioural entropy (hereinafter BE), which we intro­
duced (Dinga et al., 2021) regarding the functioning of the financial 
market, must now be generalized to refer to any LLS. We consider 
that a description of this concept, sufficient for its inclusion in the 
discussions that follow in this study, could have the following 
coordinates:
•	 maintaining a range of choice from the perspective of LLS on the 
interaction with its environment. This coordinate has the following 
procedural significance: a system has a certain cognitive capacity25 on 
the basis of which it perceives the action/reaction of the environ­
ment, exerted on it. Perception is then the basis of LLS action/reaction 
and this cycle resumes indefinitely as long as the system in question 
is working;26
•	 the larger this range of choice (which can also be formulated as fol­
lows: the higher the number of degrees of behavioural freedom), the 
smaller the LLS entropy and vice versa;
•	 it should be noted that this definition is perfectly compatible with 
both the definition of thermodynamic entropy (we can say: the 
higher the temperature gradient between the elements of a system, 
the lower the thermodynamic/energetic entropy and vice versa—
Nota bene: at zero gradient, entropy in question is maximum) and 
the definition of informational entropy (we can say: the more prob­
abilities in Shannon’s formula have different values, the lower the 
informational entropy—Nota bene: at equal values, the entropy in 
question is maximum);27
•	 conceptually, even in the case of behavioural entropy, it can be said 
that the entropy and homogeneity28 of the system in question are 
3  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS: THE CONCEPT OF AUTOPOIESIS 

94
directly proportional, more precisely, they have a directly propor­
tional kinematics;
•	 however, the assessment of the behavioural entropy of a given system 
only on the basis of its property (in our case: the property of having 
‘access’ to that range of choices29) seems to ignore the fact that the 
range of choice available to the system does not depend only on 
cognitive and reactive capacity of that system, but also of the general 
relationship between system and environment. At this point in the 
discussion, we will introduce the concepts of observability, accessibil­
ity and controllability,30 both from the perspective of LLS and from 
the perspective of its environment;31
•	 observability of an entity is not an absolute concept, it must always be 
related to the entity called the observer—in this case, observability is 
the property of an entity to produce sensations (sensitive variations) 
in the observer, so it is a relative concept. Of course, this implies a 
certain sensational32 compatibility between the observed and the 
observer, namely, a compatibility between the ability of the observed 
to present/suffer variations and the observer’s ability to notice these 
variations;
•	 accessibility of the variation of the observed represents a property also 
generated by the relationship between the observed and the observer, 
regarding the closing of the ‘chain’ of action/reaction. Specifically, 
from the set of sensational variations of the observed that are observ­
able from the perspective of the observer, only for a part of this set 
the observer will have reactions. The reasons for this restriction are 
very different: either the observer has no reason to react (e.g., s/he 
has no interest if it is a human individual who observes a change in 
the price in the financial market) or s/he does not have the capacity 
(resources) to react—for example, it needs a longer reaction time 
than the one required by the observed aspect—or it makes an error 
in reacting. Therefore, accessibility has a smaller choice range (at 
most equal) to the observability choice range;
•	 controllability of the observed variation represents that property 
(generated by the observed–observer synergy) that allows the kine­
matic fetality of the ‘action/reaction–reaction’ pair between the 
observed and the observer, which implies the continuation of this 
process from the perspective of a win–win33 final result. Obviously, 
the requirement of controllability restricts, in turn, the range of 
accessibility;
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

95
•	 consequently, it can be said that behavioural entropy is, in principle, 
subject to the condition of OAC (observability–accessibility–­
controllability). The ‘thread’ of a behaviour that reduces entropy can 
be ‘broken’ from the perspective of any of the three conditionalities. 
Of course, the experience gained by the human individual (which is, 
as we have shown, the ultimate/ground support of LLS34) as well as 
the existence and use of formal rationality models greatly reduces the 
risk (or likelihood) of excessive narrowing of successive ranges of 
choice we have spoken before;
•	 the dissipative phenomenon, in the context of the concept of behav­
ioural entropy, can be described as follows:
•	 first of all, we must remember that we have three types of behav­
ioural entropies: (a) at the level of observability, (b) at the level of 
accessibility and (c) at the level of controllability;35 if we denote by 
BEO: behavioural entropy related to observability, BEA: behavioural 
entropy related to accessibility, BEF: behavioural entropy related to 
controllability/fetality, then, from the perspective of set theory, we 
can write:
•	
	
from which, obviously:
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
secondly, the reduction of a type of behavioural entropy (by extending the 
range of choice) does not necessarily imply an extension of the type of 
behavioural entropy contained in the reference, although it does neither 
necessarily prevent such an extension;
thirdly, the reduction of a type of behavioural entropy necessarily implies 
the reduction of the type of behavioural entropy in which it is referen­
3  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS: THE CONCEPT OF AUTOPOIESIS 

96
tially content. Thus, if we denote by up
p
e
r  B upper E Subscript down arrow Superscript left parenthesis x right parenthesis  the decrease of the behav­
ioural entropy of type (x), respectively with up
p
e
r  B upper E Subscript up arrow Superscript left parenthesis x right parenthesis  the increase of the 
behavioural entropy of type (x), respectively with up
p
e
r  B upper E Subscript left right arrow Superscript left parenthesis x right parenthesis  the stationary 
behavioural entropy of type (x) (where x ∈ {O, A, F}), we can write the 
following formal relations:36,37
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
In connection with the predicate of sufficiency up pe
r P upper S 2 Superscript upper L upper L , the question 
arises regarding the relation between the internal behavioural entropy of 
LLS—let us denote it with upper
 B  upper E Subscript upper L upper L upper S Superscript left parenthesis x right parenthesis —and the internal behavioural entropy 
of the environment—let us denote it with upp
er  B upper E Subscript upper E Superscript left parenthesis x right parenthesis . As is well known, in the 
case of BLS’s specific thermodynamic (energetic) dissipation, maintaining 
or reducing the internal entropy of BLS is due to the faster38 increase in 
the environmental entropy of that system. Let us examine this aspect from 
the perspective of behavioural entropy:
	 (i)	 firstly, let us see what kind of entropy is the behavioural entropy. This 
issue is relevant because, depending on the qualification that could be 
made, the concerned functionality can also be designed. Thus, it can 
be said that thermodynamic/energetic entropy is transactional (BLS 
‘changes’ negative entropy, which it receives from the environment, 
with positive entropy, which it sends to the environment), while 
behavioural entropy is relational (LLS confronts his cognitive capac­
ity, on the one hand, and the choice range, conditioned by OAC, 
offered by the environment, on the other hand);39
	(ii)	 secondly, and based on the previous qualification of behavioural 
entropy, let us see if the phenomenology of behavioural entropy 
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

97
needs to involve a closed system, as it happens in the case of thermo­
dynamic/energetic entropy. Our opinion is as follows:
•	 as not involving transaction (or, more generally, transactionality), 
behavioural entropy does not ‘aspire’ to a homogenization of a 
given system (within which there may exist, of course, different 
subsystems, together with their associated environments);
•	 moreover, if, in the case of thermodynamic/energetic entropy, the 
system can exist independently of its environment—to which it is 
closed both substantially, energetically and informally—in the case 
of behavioural entropy, this entropy does not make sense, as we 
have shown, unless the system is related to its environment (which 
obviously can be considered, in turn, as a system against which the 
considered system is an environment);
•	 in conclusion, behavioural entropy necessarily presupposes, as a 
conditio sine qua non, precisely the openness of the system 
in question;
	(iii)	 thirdly, it can be shown (we will do this later in this study) that in the 
case of behavioural entropy, the system and its environment co-­
evolve. Moreover, the previous formal–logical relations regarding the 
kinematics of behavioural entropy unambiguously suggest precisely 
this co-evolutionary phenomenology.
•	
le ft
 
p
arenthesis upper P upper S 3 Superscript upper L upper L Baseline right parenthesis  identitary replicability
We believe that this predicate should be modified in the case of an LLS, 
which should be given the possibility of identitary replication, but not 
exclusively that of identitary self-replication. Therefore, in the case of an 
LLS, it can (must) be replicated (either by external principles or by internal 
principles—as in the latter case, in autopoiesis—or by a combination of the 
two categories of principles40). As in the case of the predicate up pe
r P upper S 1 Superscript upper L upper L , here 
too we are dealing with an extension of the scope of the corresponding 
predicate of BLS, because identitary self-replicability is obviously a kind of 
identitary replicability. Based on this predicate of sufficiency, the following 
conclusions can be drawn:
•	 the replication of an LLS is a decisional, that is, deliberative replica­
tion (compared to the BLS replication, in which case the replication 
is non-decisional/non-deliberative41), namely, it occurs as a result of 
a pre-existing justification for the replication itself. Usually such a 
3  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS: THE CONCEPT OF AUTOPOIESIS 

98
justification is inferred from a model of rationality, that is, based on 
a deliberative pair ‘purpose–means’;
•	 as it results from the extension/generalization of the replication con­
cept, replication can be performed both as a result of an internal 
decision (in which case we have self-replication42) and as a result of 
an external decision. The self-replication of LLS has a feature that is 
not found in BLS: the immortality of LLS. LLS self-replicates exactly 
by its operation. This type of replication is radically different from 
BLS replication, as follows:
replication of a BLS necessarily involves another membrane-­
distinct replicator entity,43 whereas in the case of LLS replication 
does not refer to another membrane-distinct replicator entity but, 
as we shall see below, to the replicator itself;
it is not useful to introduce, for the case of LLS, a concept parallel 
to the life cycle, that is specific to BLS, and which is denoted by 
the term generation—in the sense that BLS replication is of the 
type of generational replication. The reason for this uselessness is 
that, in the case of LLS, the replicability, and, therefore, the repli­
cation, is ‘distributed’ in the current functioning of that LLS: as 
long as it works according to the procedures in force (which we 
will refer to in detail later), exactly through this functioning the 
LLS in question is reproduced.44 We note, therefore, that there 
are two differences between LLS and BLS in terms of replicability 
or replication: (i) in the case of BLS, replication is of the quantity 
type, while in the case of LLS, replication is of the quality type; (ii) 
in the case of BLS, the (complete) replication requires a duration 
(reaching the replicator stage—phenotype, which is called devel­
opment), that is, it is duration-dependent, so we have to do with 
a non-reflexive replication, whereas in the case of LLS, (complete) 
replication does not need such a length, because the replicator 
and the replicate coincide, they are concomitant, thus dealing 
with reflexive replication, which excludes the development pro­
cess in this latter case;
a curious (but logically necessary) consequence is that, in the case 
of LLS, the indistinguishability between replicator and replicate, 
evoked above, makes the idea (and process) of replication some­
what vague. In other words, the performing of the LLS replica­
tion is somehow presumed until the ‘contrary evidence’, that is, 
until the moment when the LLS functioning ceases.45 We have, 
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

99
here, as it seems, a phenomenon of continuous replication (or 
continuity of replication). The idea of ​continuous replication (not 
to be confused with permanent replication, because we also have 
permanent replication in the case of BLS although, in the latter 
case, replication is obviously discontinuous or discrete) is very 
interesting and can be useful in modelling quantitative changes in 
the evolution of LLS;46
•	 LLS does not manifest the phenomenon of growth, at least not in the 
sense that this phenomenon is encountered in BLS. LLS is able, from 
the very moment of its genesis, both to function at its maximum 
parameters and to reproduce (as shown below) precisely by this func­
tioning. The non-existence of growth (as well as the non-existence of 
development) is a crucial difference from BLS, which we will take 
into account in examining the autopoieticity of LLS;47
•	 given the (observational, perceptual) indiscernibility between repli­
cator and replicate, the question arises: to what extent is this indis­
cernibility maintained? In other words, is there a threshold above 
which that replication loses its identity? Let us take an example: sup­
pose that the LLS examined is an institution, for example, ANAF.48 
The functioning of the institution in question indicates to us, as 
stated above, that the associated LLS (identitarily) replicates itself 
every time it function. Now, suppose there is a refinement of the fis­
cal control methodology (and procedures) in order to increase the 
efficiency of the institution. So, the institution is still functioning, 
that is, is it still replicating, but do we still have an identitary replica­
tion? When we move from the old methodology to the new, improved 
one, do we still have to deal with the same institution? The issue 
deserves some special comments:
the issue of identity also arises in the case of BLS, of course, not 
with regard to generational replication, but with respect to the 
development of the phenotype. Thus, it is known that all the cells 
of a biological living individual are replaced in a certain dura­
tion—is the individual resulting from this replacement still identi­
cal to the existing individual before the replacement? The question 
is relevant, first of all, from a philosophical point of view, but it is 
also significant from an anatomical-physiological point of view 
and even (in the case of BLSs endowed with psychic experience) 
from a psychological point of view;
3  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS: THE CONCEPT OF AUTOPOIESIS 

100
the solution comes from the call to the structure. Since the func­
tions are generated by the structure (a principle accepted in the 
case of BLS and which is consistent with the paradigm of natural 
evolutionism49), our opinion is as follows: as long as the structure 
remains unchanged, regardless of differences in structural compo­
nents (differences that cannot be radical, since the same func­
tions50 must be provided), replication remains identitary, so the 
loss of identitary character of replication (for both BLS and LLS) 
occurs only when the structure itself changes,51 case in which we 
have also non-identity at the functions or functioning level;
therefore, in line with the previous discussion on the non-­existence 
of growth in the case of LLS, a pseudo-growth (generated by 
structural change) that would exceed a certain threshold of sig­
nificance would, eo ipso, lead to a change of identity—we therefore 
have to deal with another LLS that, in turn, is an adult individual, 
capable of immediately replicating of the new identity.
le ft
 
p
arenthesis upper P upper S 4 Superscript upper L upper L Baseline right parenthesis  cognitive-reactive capacity in relation to the environment
For the general case, which we are discussing here, for the time being, 
the concept of cognition will retain the significance given to it by the 
Santiago School, that is, the most general significance of sensitivity of any 
kind (from purely vegetative one to ones which involve perception). 
However, for the LLS case, some clarifications are needed:
•	 both the cognitive and reactive capacity of LLS are deliberately deter­
mined by the human individual (which is a species of BLS);52
•	 as a result, these capabilities (which are themselves in a co-­
evolutionary relationship) are subject to programmatic variations, 
either of the discretionary type or of the automatic type;53
•	 the question arises whether this deliberative nature of the establish­
ment and variation of the cognitive/reactive capacity of LLS extends 
(or can be extended) also to the environment of the system in ques­
tion. In this regard, our opinion is as follows:
most of the environment of an LLS is of the LLS nature, because 
the functioning of the society is, in part (but more and more 
extensive, as the society develops more both from a cultural point 
of view and from a civilizational perspective), a functioning of the 
artefacts relationship. Consequently, the environment of an LLS 
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

101
 
will have, predominantly, cognitive-reactive capacities of a delib­
erative nature;
therefore, usually, when the cognitive-reactive capacity of an LLS 
varies, it varies, in a correlated way (more or less, depending on 
the competence of the human individual or individuals involved 
in the introduction of these variations) the cognitive capacity-­
reactive of the environment of that system as well.54
3.2
­
 Short Discussion
	(i)	 The human individual can be in three hypostases at the same time: (a) 
integrated in LLS (e.g., as an economic agent in the financial mar­
ket);55 (b) integrated in the LLS’s environment (e.g., as a regulator of 
the functioning of the financial market); (c) integrated in the social/
societal space outside the LLS’s environment (e.g., as a researcher of 
financial phenomenology);
	(ii)	 there is a co-evolution outside the LLS’s environment, that is, at the 
level of the human individual (more precisely, at the level of human 
society). The other three co-evolutions take place within the LLS’s 
environment (one outside the LLS, another even in the LLS in ques­
tion, and the third in the form of the LLS–environment relationship);
3  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS: THE CONCEPT OF AUTOPOIESIS 

102
Nota bene: of course, an appropriate formalization can take over the 
interactions between the four co-evolutions that occur in the phenome­
nology of behavioural entropy related to LLS.
•	
le ft
 
p
arenthesis upper P upper S 5 Superscript upper L upper L Baseline right parenthesis  scale distributivity56
LLSs have a feature that we do not find in BLS. It is about the possibil­
ity that a certain LLS (who, as it shown, is always ‘adult’, even from the 
moment of its appearance) to have ‘children’ or representatives. For exam­
ple, LLS such as a country’s medical system or tax system may have (geo­
graphically) local subdivisions.57 This feature raises the issue of LLS 
identity, so we will make the following considerations:
•	 conceptual considerations
if in the case of BLS, such ‘copies’ are just the own children, the 
descendants, who are in the process of development, in the case of 
LLS, the copies are fully developed as adults but differentiated 
from the original LLS by size;58
the dimensional (or scale) difference refers to the sphere, which is 
smaller than for the original LLS: the occupied social/societal 
space, the degree of structural (and, therefore, also functional or 
of role) particularization;
the copies are not ontologically59 different individuals from the 
original LLS (unlike the BLS case), so we will have to find a term 
for them: we propose to call them projections. The reason for this 
name lies in at least two characteristics: (a) a copy of LLS is actu­
ally the same as the original; (b) a copy of LLS is always obtained 
by translating (either in time or in space) of the original (see 
typology, below);
•	 typology
spatial scale distribution: there are decentralized or, as the case 
may be, deconcentrated LLSs, which are small-scale copies of the 
LLS, and which are distributed from a spatial perspective, from 
the ‘centre’. These copies work identically (i.e., have the same 
structure, of course, adapted to the scale in question) as the cen­
tral LLS functioning;
temporal scale distributivity: it is possible to have LLSs that have a 
discontinuous (albeit permanent) existence/functioning. This 
means that at certain intervals (periodically or a-periodically 
ordered) that existence or functioning manifests itself in an 
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

103
observable/perceptible way. In this case, it is also not about dif­
ferent LLSs, but about the same original LLS but which is distrib­
uted on a temporal scale.60
The Nature of LLS
From the above, it peremptorily follows that an LLS has an ontological 
character—more precisely, it is an objectification of the inter-subjectivity 
present in human society.61 In this sense, it is a completely cultural product 
(i.e., it is generated by the cultural component of human society), an arte­
fact that is ideal, although in some cases it also needs a material ‘ground’ 
(usually of organizational type), for its functioning.
Autopoiesis and Autopoieticity
The hypothesis we want to build regarding the functioning of the financial 
market is the hypothesis of autopoieticity or, in other words, the hypoth­
esis of the autopoietic market. To this end, in this paragraph, we will make 
an overview of the concept of autopoiesis which will later be customized 
to the financial market.
The concept of autopoiesis consists of the Greek terms αὐτo (self) and 
ποίησις (poiesis) and means a property of a system of self-perpetuation in 
many ways: conservation, repair, organization, reproduction and so on, all 
based on their own principles (structural and functional), although in the 
context of interactions with the environment. As we will see, the interplay 
between system and environment is seen at the most general and abstract 
level, namely, through the concept of cognition as a simple sensory-­
reactive capacity, according to the proposal of the Santiago school of this 
concept.
Short History
The theme of autopoieticity was, as is well known, triggered by the inspired 
book of Chilean biologists Humberto Maturana and Francisco Varela 
(Maturana & Varela, 1980). The new idea, which brings an ingenious 
explanation of the (functioning of the) living entities, then generated, as 
expected, many other takeovers. The concept of autopoiesis seeks to bring 
together the basic elements of continuous life ensuring, based on the 
internal principles of systems (in this case, living systems) and in the inter­
actions with the environment. All the intellectual efforts made in the 
3  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS: THE CONCEPT OF AUTOPOIESIS 

104
matter are meant to provide the foundations of the living fact. A brief 
introduction to the issue of autopoiesis is presented below:62
	 (i)	 the concept of autopoiesis has its origin in living biological entities 
(organisms), namely, at their basic level (cell). Not only did the two 
Chilean biologists not extend the concept of autopoieticity beyond 
biological life, but they rejected the very idea of ​such an extension 
(e.g., to social entities);63
	(ii)	 the concept of autopoiesis and the concept of knowledge (cognition) 
are put together and, in fact, are considered logically equivalent. But 
such an equivalence needs some clarification:
•	 knowledge is no longer attributed to consciousness, but to any 
way of perceiving/recording what needs to be done for an entity 
that, only on the basis of that knowledge (perceptions), could 
repeat the experience of knowledge (i.e., could survive as a result 
of the cognitive action in question);
•	 the very idea of ​reproducing the entity, based only on internal 
principles and mechanisms (operations), is seen as the essence of 
autopoieticity; all the sufficient conditions that ensure such repro­
duction by internal principles constitute the basis of the autopoi­
etic property;
•	 although knowledge is attributed to the observer of biological life 
as autopoieticity, such an attribution does not change anything in 
the idea that autopoieticity is conditioned by knowledge (of 
course, in the general, non-anthropomorphic sense mentioned);
•	 survival in the process of reproduction means that the interactions 
of the system involved with its environment are ‘chosen’ by that 
system so that those interactions are appropriate for survival and 
reproduction; in fact, the main body of knowledge is to ‘know’ 
which interactions are allowed and which are forbidden; it should 
be noted that Maturana calls such a set of allowed (or appropriate) 
interactions as forming a niche in the wider environment;64
•	 whereas, however, knowledge, understood as associated with con­
sciousness, is not denied, then the extension of autopoieticity to 
non-biological entities of life (as is the case with our concept of 
LLS) is open, despite the scepticism of the two creative biologists;
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

105
	(iii)	 the fundamental ideas, examined or suggested by the two scientists, 
even if they were taken up by other scientists interested in the topic 
of autopoieticity, remained quasi-invariant:
•	 the operational closure (through the membrane) of the system and 
the interactional (or relational,65 as we prefer to say) openness of 
the system to its environment (in fact, to its niche);
•	 an evolutionary behaviour of the autopoietic system, that is, a cog­
nitively based selection of appropriate interactions with the 
­environment, capable of ensuring the identitary invariance of the 
system and, at the same time, its reproduction within such 
an identity;
•	 a (somewhat) structural determinism of the autopoietic system, 
that is, the Darwinian idea that functions arise from the structure 
and never the other way around.
The generality of Maturana and Varela’s approach has encouraged 
other scientists to examine the concept of autopoieticity. One of the most 
original was the German sociologist, Niklas Luhmann. He tried to abstract 
and further extend the results obtained for living systems to apply them to 
social systems (note that those systems are human social ones). As in the 
case of Maturana, we do not examine the whole social theory of Luhmann, 
but only those elements that interfere with our intention to clarify the 
concept of autopoieticity in the financial market. Luhmann’s main 
goals were:
	(a)	 the identification and definition of the phenotype of social systems, 
that is, the entity that has three predicates of sufficiency: (a) is self-­
replicable; (b) is reflective; (c) retains its specific identity when 
reproduced;
•	 solution provided: communication (with some specifications that 
distinguish it from information or statement, or customize it for 
different subsystems in the social system—either organizations or 
interactions); it should be noted that Luhmann considers the event 
as a unit of reproduction (more precisely, he argues that a commu­
nication is an event), which eliminates the duration of the ‘equa­
tion’ of reproduction—that is, a communication is reproduced 
exactly when it is produced.66 The similarity of this treatment with 
our specification that, in the matter of LLS, we do not have growth/
development of the phenotype is obvious;
3  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS: THE CONCEPT OF AUTOPOIESIS 

106
	(b)	 identifying and defining the genotype of social systems, that is, the 
entity that can change (over time or even through its own function­
ing) and thus influence the reproduction of the phenotype;
•	 solution provided: existing social programmes that include the ‘list’ 
from which only the communications to be made must be selected; 
as programmes change, so do communications;67
	(c)	 the identification and definition of the environment, that is, the sys­
tem with which the system involved (the system of interest) interacts 
in order to reproduce/replicate;
•	 solution provided: Luhmann does not accept that the social system 
can have its (social) environment, because any environment of the 
social system is (in his conception) also of the nature of the social 
system, so it cannot be outside the social system involved, that is, it 
cannot be an environment for the social system; consequently, he is 
obliged to introduce an internal environment, which is considered 
to be, in fact, widespread within that social system.68 He called this 
medium as understanding of communication; such an understand­
ing is, of course, different for different individuals and can mean 
either accepting or rejecting a particular communication. More 
precisely, the environment of the social system is considered the 
psychic system, which belongs to individuals understood as external 
sensors of communications.69
The Conceptual Family of Autopoieticity70
Conceptually, autopoieticity is a property of systems. The concept of auto­
poieticity is integrated into a true conceptual family regarding the organi­
zation and functioning of systems (of any kind, not only of logical/symbolic 
systems, which we are mainly interested in here). In our opinion, this 
conceptual family includes the following individuals:
•	 stationarity: is the property of the system which, in terms of its state 
vector, is absolutely invariant. A stationary system therefore repli­
cates its structure, punctually71 and for an indefinite period of time. 
For example, stationary economic systems existed in the human 
communities that preceded the technological civilization—those sys­
tems did not produce more than necessary consumption (there were 
no stocks of products, no production for sale/exchange) and they 
were rather characterized through autarchy; the principle of behav­
iour in stationary systems is current survival;
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

107
•	 stability: is the property of the system which, in terms of its state vec­
tor, is relatively invariant. A stable system therefore replicates its 
structure in an interval mode72—the system remains stable if the 
variation of its state vector falls within a pre-accepted range. For 
example, stable economic systems can exist at any stage of human 
society’s development. However, the interdependencies of economic 
systems, which today have reached a global dimension (networks), 
make stability vulnerable, as we will show in the following; the prin­
ciple of behaviour in stable systems is anticipated survival;
•	 optimality: it is the property of the system that, in terms of its state 
vector, extremizes the potential of the system in question. 
Extremization that takes place under a set of restrictions/constraints 
of any kind (material, normative, behavioural, etc.) is called optimi­
zation; the principle of behaviour in optimal systems is to obtain the 
first best solution;
•	 sustainability: it is the property of the system which, in terms of its 
state vector, perpetuates the potential of the system in question, 
more precisely ensures the replication of its structure, provided that 
this replication contains sufficient attributes to continue replication 
(theoretically) indefinitely; the principle of behaviour in sustainable 
systems is continued survival;
•	 viability: can be considered as a stage that will continue that of sus­
tainability, namely, by introducing values ​​(axiological grid) in the 
design of the structure of the system involved (Nota bene: as noted 
above, sustainability is axiologically ‘blind’, if we do not consider 
survival as a value73); the principle of behaviour in viable systems, 
which can also be called logically living systems (Dinga, 2021), is 
adequate survival;
•	 autopoieticity: can be considered as a stage that will continue that of 
viability, namely, by ensuring the regulatory principles exclusively 
from within.74 The concept of autopoiesis (Maturana & Varela, 
1980) makes a sine qua non connection between the self-organizing 
capacity of a system and its cognitive capacity—cognition means, in 
the broadest sense, the perception of actions/reactions that come 
from the environment to the system in question, and on the basis of 
which the system either reacts to the environment (based on reaction 
norms) or changes its structure (and therefore its functions) in accor­
dance with those actions/reactions. Of course, self-organizing 
3  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS: THE CONCEPT OF AUTOPOIESIS 

108
actions/reactions can also come from within the system. The prin­
ciple of behaviour in autopoietic systems is self-survival.75
3.3
We mention that, from the point of view of the actional paradigms in 
the history of humanity, they have ‘settled’ quite accurately, exactly on the 
properties discussed—for example, nowadays, the capitalist paradigm 
based on the property of optimality predominates, being emerging the 
paradigm (which does not yet have a name) that will be grafted onto the 
sustainability property.76
In order to obtain a logical definition of autopoieticity, it is necessary to 
establish/choose the predicates of sufficiency which, through their con­
junction, provide the content of that definition. To do this, we will first 
identify the predicates of sufficiency of sustainability—the actional 
 
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

109
paradigm closest, in essence, to that of autopoieticity. In our opinion, a 
system is sustainable if and only if it contains the following properties/
attributes, which we call sufficiency predicates:
•	 (S1): structural replicability: identity preservation through structure 
reproduction;77
•	 (S2): operational openness: regulating of structural replicability 
involves both internal and external (environmental) principles;
•	 (S3): relational openness: the system is open in relation to its environ­
ment, that is, there is an exchange of substance, energy and informa­
tion between the system and its environment;
•	 (S4): processual closure:78 the system can ensure substantial and ener­
getic recovery of the input based on its own output.79
Therefore, as a logical formalization, the sustainable system (SS) can be 
described as follows:
	
	
While an unsustainable system can be described as follows:
	
	
We can establish some logical consequences (‘theorems’80), based on 
the definition of the sustainable system.
Every Sustainable System Contains at Least One Sustainable 
Subsystem
Proof: if the system is sustainable, then, according to (S4), at the system 
level the input (of all types) used in an operating cycle of that system will 
be reproduced (quantitatively, structurally and qualitatively) through that 
system’s output. This means that regardless of the interactions within the 
system (among which some or more will fail to reproduce the input using 
3  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS: THE CONCEPT OF AUTOPOIESIS 

110
the own output), there is at least one interaction (i.e., a subsystem) that 
succeeds to reproduce the initial input from the final output. Q.E.D.
Reciprocal: if a system contains at least one sustainable subsystem, then 
it is sustainable, is not true—it is always possible that, although at the level 
of a subsystem, the input is reproduced by the own output, other subsys­
tems fail this, so that, at the level of the system, the sustainability property 
is not registered.
A System That Contains Only Sustainable Subsystems Is 
Sustainable
Proof: if each subsystem succeeds in reproducing the input it uses through 
its own output, it is obvious that there will be no subsystem that fails to do 
so. As a result, at the system level, the global input will be reproduced/
re-constructed by the global output (because the sum of the inputs will be 
rigorously reproduced/reconstructed by the sum of the outputs) so the 
system is sustainable. Q.E.D.
Reciprocal: a sustainable system contains only sustainable subsystems, is 
not true—it is always possible for an unsustainable subsystem to be neu­
tralized by another unsustainable system in terms of the gap between the 
sum of the inputs in the two subsystems and the sum of their outputs 
(e.g., one of the subsystems produces, through its output, the exact differ­
ence, of the opposite sign, which the other subsystem fails to produce, 
from their own relative output, their own input).
A System That Contains Only Unsustainable Subsystems Can 
Be Either Sustainable Or Unsustainable
Proof: the proof (which we leave to the reader) can be constructed using 
the proofs for the two direct theorems or for their reciprocals, given above.
Reciprocal: a system that is undecidable in terms of sustainability (or 
unsustainability) contains only unsustainable subsystems is obviously false. 
We also leave the proof of the falsity of the reciprocal to the reader.
The Logical Conditions of Autopoieticity
Before we establish the logical conditions (more precisely, the predicates 
of sufficiency) of autopoiesis, we must distinguish between autopoiesis 
and autopoieticity. Autopoieticity is a property of a system, while autopoi­
esis is a process that is made possible by autopoieticity and that results in 
autopoieticity—(re)confirmation and strengthening of autopoieticity.81 
On the basis of this conceptual dissociation, it becomes obvious that, 
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

111
firstly, the predicates of sufficiency for property, that is, for autopoieticity, 
must be established.
The Predicates of Sufficiency for Autopoieticity
The sufficiency predicates of autopoieticity are a list of attributes that if a 
system has cumulatively verified, then it possesses the property of autopoi­
eticity. Some preliminaries are useful in this context:
•	 the existence of a system, either real or ideal, is presumed;
•	 the observability of that system is presumed;
Nota bene: in the case of logical/symbolic systems, the system contains, 
as an internal component, the human individual (or human group or 
human society).
In our opinion, autopoieticity is a sustainability that is operationally 
closed. Therefore, if we note an autopoietic system with APS, then the 
predicates of sufficiency for autopoieticity are as follows:
•	 (AP1): structural replicability
•	 (AP2): operational closure
•	 (AP3): relational openness
•	 (AP4): procedural closure
Consequently, compared to a sustainable system, the autopoietic sys­
tem shows a change at the level of the second predicate of sufficiency: the 
replacement of the operational opening with the operational 
closure—(AP2).
The logical construction of an autopoietic system (APS) is therefore:
	
	
While a non-autopoietic system can be described by the following con­
junction disjunction:
	
	
3  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS: THE CONCEPT OF AUTOPOIESIS 

112
Nota bene: obviously, S1 ≡ AP1, S3 ≡ AP3, S4 ≡ AP4.
We will examine in more detail the sufficiency predicates of the auto­
poietic system, given that the purpose of this study is to develop an auto­
poietic model of the financial market.
•	 (AP1): structural replicability: identitary preservation by reproduc­
ing one’s own structure
The identity of a system (more precisely, the preservation of the iden­
tity of a system, in time and space) is a rather delicate issue, as it must be 
indicated on the basis of which criterion/measure can be made the state­
ment that the structure of the system in question has been replicated in 
such a way we are dealing with the same system after the replication in 
question. In our opinion, the structural replication (and replicability) of a 
system must be aimed at its formal structure. It is therefore necessary to 
define or at least describe the meaning of the phrase formal structure. We 
consider that the formal structure of a system is replicated (or, equiva­
lently, preserved by replication) if the following two conditionalities are 
verified:
•	 (C1) preservation of the number of internal components—by repli­
cation, the system must neither lose nor gain structural components;
•	 (C2) preserving the hierarchy of internal components—by replica­
tion, command relationships versus reporting relationships (i.e., rela­
tionships between leading components vs. executing components) 
must be maintained;
Nota bene: we did not say anything about the nature of the internal 
components of the system. Is structural replicability hermeneutically indif­
ferent to the changing nature of these components? Our answer is, in this 
respect, affirmative: the change in the nature of the internal components 
following structural replication preserves the identity of the system—of 
course, if the conditionality (C2) is further verified. The justification of this 
answer is provided by the very phrase that is analysed here: formal struc­
ture—a formal structure allows ‘filling’ each structural component/form 
with any type of ‘substance’, this can be material, ideal/logical, energetic, 
equational and so on.
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

113
•	 (AP2): operational closure: the regulation of structural replicability 
involves only internal principles
This predicate of sufficiency is the one that casually distinguishes the 
autopoietic system from the sustainable one and which (as we will show 
immediately) generates the property of self-organization. It can be said 
that this predicate of sufficiency is the very mark of autopoieticity. Of 
course, the very mechanism of self-organization is to be described and 
explained (which we will do in the following). Operational closure gener­
ally means that the autopoietic process takes place without the need for 
environmental intervention (which, therefore, should pass through the 
membrane). These external interventions can refer to resources (substan­
tial, energetic, informational), principles, actions/forces and so on. Of 
course, all these potential external interventions (which are forbidden by 
the predicate of sufficiency discussed here) interact with the given system, 
but only in the form and with the finality of their own input–output rela­
tions.82 The problem of distinguishing between a simple input–output 
relationship output (I/O) and an external intervention on the kinematics 
of the system in question (K) is also difficult, because in both cases the 
transit of the system membrane is allowed, so we suggest, below, some 
criteria to help their differentiation:
•	 an I/O flow depletes its potential for influence after a single operat­
ing cycle83 of the penetrated system, while K lasts, in principle, for 
the duration of the system itself;
•	 a logical consequence of the characteristic of a K-type flow is that, 
although at one point it came from the system’s environment, the 
fact that it later remains in the system makes this flow to be consid­
ered internal84 in nature or, more precisely, internalized in nature;
•	 however, the consequence inferred above is of the nature of Achilles’ 
heel: indeed, at any moment, the membrane of a system can be pen­
etrated by a K-type flow (later it is internalized) but, given this 
repeatable possibility, can we still talk about operational closure of 
the system? In this regard, we make the following considerations:
the K-type flow must not have a causal nature/function, but only 
a conditional one. Thus, it must ‘dictate’ only the margin within 
which the action/reaction of the system must be framed to the 
action/reaction of the environment, in such a way that the 
action/reaction of the system is fetal in relation to the environment;
this restriction on K-type flow is general and permanent;
3  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS: THE CONCEPT OF AUTOPOIESIS 

114
the possibility that K-type flows (of an exclusively conditional 
nature regarding the fetality of the norms of action/reaction, as 
we mentioned) exist permanently does not violate, therefore, the 
predicate of sufficiency regarding the operational closure of the 
autopoietic system;
•	 (AP3): relational openness: the system is open in relation to its envi­
ronment, that is, there is an exchange of substance, energy and infor­
mation between the system and its environment;
there are no controversial or delicate issues regarding this predi­
cate of sufficiency, as it is required by the quality of the system to 
be dissipative;
relational openness to the environment ensures that the system 
can maintain or reduce its internal entropy (inside the membrane) 
by extracting negative entropy (neg-entropy, or low entropy) 
from the environment and spilling high entropy (or positive 
entropy) into the environment;85
•	 (AP4): processual closure: can ensure substantial and energetic recov­
ery of its input based on own output;
this predicate of sufficiency also defines sustainable systems;86
processual closure is not implied by operational closure, so the 
two predicates of sufficiency are not redundant with each other;
procedural closure is, in our view, a dimensional mark of systems, 
whether sustainable or autopoietic, in the sense that the mem­
brane of the system in question extends to cover the entire mini­
mum space in which the processual closure occurs;87
processual closure can be thought of both serially—concatenated 
subsystems in such a way that the output of the system (k) is the 
input of the subsystem (k + 1), provided (called final condition or 
closure condition) that the output of the subsystem (n) to be the 
input of the subsystem (1)—and parallel, based on the same rela­
tionship between outputs and inputs.
The most important logical consequence of the property of autopoi­
eticity is that of self-organization. It results from the predicate of suffi­
ciency (AP2)—operational closure—which prohibits processes within the 
autopoietic system from being caused/conditioned by principles external 
to that system (i.e., principles within the system’s environment), as per­
mitted, from the point of view of logical view, in the case of sustainable 
systems. For example, a tax system may be sustainable but not autopoietic, 
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

115
because it must be constantly updated from outside (by the Government, 
which is not structurally part of the tax system).
A problem that arises at this point is that of cognition associated with 
autopoietic systems. As mentioned above, Maturana and Varela build 
autopoieticity/autopoiesis bundled with the concept of cognition, under­
stood in its broadest sense (known today as the position of the Santiago 
school). But in its broadest sense, cognition includes the most mechanical 
sensitivity, that is, a property that is common to every system imaginable, 
not only autopoietic systems (and not only, even, living systems88). This is 
why, in the list of predicates of sufficiency for the conceptual ­definition/
delimitation of autopoieticity, there is no predicate that claims the cogni­
tive capacity of the system.89
At the end of this sub-paragraph, we will examine the possibility of the 
functioning of some theorems regarding autopoietic systems (from the 
perspective of the property of autopoieticity). In this sense, we propose 
the following theorems:
The Behaviour of an Autopoietic System Is a Function of Its 
Functionality
Proof: the functionality of a system consists of the relationships (either 
potential or actual) between its components. These relationships generate 
the functions (and, by their interpretation, i.e., more precisely, by giving 
them meaning, generate the roles) that the system is able to perform or 
actually perform. The behaviour of a system consists of the relationships 
(either potential or actual) between the components of that system and its 
environment. If the functionality remains inside the system membrane, 
the behaviour can only be actualized by transiting this membrane. So, of 
the functions generated by functionality, some will pass through the mem­
brane and interact with the environment (in the form of actions/reactions)—
this is the meaning in which the statement in this ‘theorem’ must be 
understood. Nota bene: of course, the entry from the environment, 
through the transit of the membrane, of some actions/reactions also 
enters the behaviour of the system, from the perspective of the fact that 
some functions ensure precisely this penetration of the actions/reactions 
from the environment. More generally, it can be said that behaviour 
should be discussed only in the plural: system behaviour is a reflective 
projection of the interference between one’s own behaviour and environ­
mental behaviour, just as environmental behaviour is a reflective projec­
tion of this interference, this time on the environment. Q.E.D.
3  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS: THE CONCEPT OF AUTOPOIESIS 

116
Reciprocal: the functionality of a system cannot be said to be an effect 
of its behaviour. However, an influence of behaviour on functionality (i.e., 
actualizing the set of functions, especially on those intended to generate 
the behaviour) must be accepted, at least from the perspective of 
adaptation.90
Any Autopoietic System Is a Sustainable System
Proof: given that the operational closure, specific to autopoietic systems, 
is of the nature of restricting the operational sphere, and not of its exten­
sion,91 it follows that sustainability is not affected (denied) by the elimina­
tion of the open operational part. Q.E.D.
Reciprocal: any sustainable system is an autopoietic system is obviously 
false, because the part of the operationality of the system that has an open 
character (as allowed by the definition of sustainability) violates the predi­
cate of sufficiency (AP2).
Lemma: any autopoietic system contains at least one sustainable subsys­
tem. The proof is immediate if we consider, for example, the subsystem as 
the system itself.92
A Set of Autopoietic Systems Always Form an Autopoietic 
Supersystem
Proof: if all systems are autopoietic, so, if each of them verifies the four 
predicates of sufficiency for autopoieticity, then the (logical) sum of those 
systems cannot violate any of these predicates, which means that they will 
form an autopoietic supersystem.
Reciprocal: an autopoietic supersystem contains only autopoietic sys­
tems, it is not true, because inside the supersystem there may be two sys­
tems that are not autopoietic, each separately, but their cooperation to 
generate, at the level of the membrane that comprises them, an autopoi­
etic system.93
Autopoiesis and Autopoieticity in the Financial Market
The Genesis of Autopoietic Systems
Membranation
The relationship between autopoiesis and autopoieticity94 is of the nature 
of the relationship between process and property. In the previous section 
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

117
we discussed in detail about the autopoietic property of a system, high­
lighting the sufficiency predicates of such a property. Following this dis­
cussion, two other issues arise: (a) how the property of autopoieticity 
arises or, in other words, the question arises whether there is a propensity 
of the system95 (or the environment of the system or both entities) in the 
direction of acquiring this property; (b) how may be lost the property of 
autopoieticity.
The Concept of Membranation
In general, the appearance of the membrane96 (of any of the three possible 
types: physical, logical, institutional) is an effect of an inherent propensity 
for autonomy or individualization (Maturana & Varela, 1980). When an 
entity, 97 of any kind, surrounds itself with a membrane, it lays the founda­
tions for a filtering of both inputs and outputs in its relationship with 
what, from the moment the membrane is formed, becomes an environ­
ment for it. This filtering or, in other words, individualization of life, is the 
decisive step in generating the conditions of autonomy.98 On the other 
hand, the appearance of the membrane creates, in the supra-system, a dif­
ferentiation, that is, a reduction of homogeneity, which is equivalent to 
saying that, in the supra-system, there is a reduction of entropy—more 
precisely, the system just ‘membranated’ becomes a dissipative system that 
will create an ontological breaking between the system and its environ­
ment: while, inside the membrane, the entropy will decrease or, at least, 
will remain constant, outside the membrane (namely, in the environment) 
entropy will increase.99 This (we could call it) entropic bubble is, in fact, 
the first sign of life which, in essence, manifests itself as an entropic indi­
vidualization100 in the environment. The explanation for this propensity 
for entropic individualization must be left to biologists or the philosophy 
of biology, we will take it here as a given. Moreover, we will leave the 
realm of biological life and species and focus, in the following, on the 
realm of logical life and species or, equivalently, of symbolic life and 
species.
In the case of logical/symbolic autopoietization, we have (of course, in 
terms of membrane), a propensity analogous to that in the case of biologi­
cal autopoietization. Since, however, the symbolic individual is an artefact, 
this propensity will have a double source: (i) a non-deliberative source and 
(ii) a deliberative source.
	(i)	 Non-deliberative membranation
3  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS: THE CONCEPT OF AUTOPOIESIS 

118
Non-deliberative membranation (which is of the nature of what has 
been called the invisible hand of the formation of the social order, espe­
cially the economic one) occurs, as the name implies, impersonally, by the 
simple interaction between social agents (individual human beings) who 
pursue exclusively101 their own objectives (interests). This non-­
deliberativeness is, of course, a macroscopic one, because, at the micro­
scopic level (i.e., at the level of each economic agent) there is the individual 
deliberativeness—purpose, rationality and so on.102 In the case of non-
deliberation, the principle of self-organization enunciated by Prigogine 
and Nicolis (1977) is maintained: order from/through fluctuations. For 
example, if we restrict the discussion to the field of the financial market (as 
a symbolic species), the trading strategy (which is the financial individual) 
becomes autonomous in relation to the financial environment (it acquires 
a membrane, logical in this case) which delimits it both from other strate­
gies of the given human individual (economic operator) involved and 
from the other trading strategies that operate throughout the aggregate 
financial market. In this way, a symbolic individuality is created, represent­
ing, in turn, an entropic bubble (this time, not of a thermodynamic or 
informational type, but of a behavioural type in relation to the environ­
ment). The standard case for non-deliberate financial market membrana­
tion could be considered the emergence of a trading strategy through the 
memetic mechanism, which produces the type of information we have 
called implicit information (Dinga et al., 2022).
	(ii)	 Deliberative membranation
Although non-deliberative membranation should not be ignored, the 
overwhelming share of membranation in society, and therefore in the 
financial market, is deliberative. The most important factor of deliberative 
membranation is, of course, the normative factor that takes over, within 
the institutional framework of society, the common (or supposedly com­
mon), social objectives of the individuals that configure the society in 
question. In this sense, most of the artefact membranes in society are of 
the institutional type.103 In the deliberative case, the principle of self-­
organization enunciated by Prigogine can no longer be applied to auto­
poiesis, tale quale, because the macroscopic order is not only the result of 
microscopic fluctuations, but also (in the majority scale, as mentioned 
above) of a directly established order at the macroscopic level. A possible 
principle of self-organization in the case of human social systems should 
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

119
 
refer to a synergy between a non-deliberative or freely fluctuating micro­
scopic, based on causa eficiens, and a deliberative or programmatic (antici­
patory) macroscopic, based on causa finalis.
3.4
Autopoiesis
Autopoiesis is the process by which, after the completion of the mem­
brane, the four predicates of sufficiency that define the property of auto­
poieticity are established. Therefore, autopoieticity is the end result of 
autopoiesis. In the following, we present, briefly, a (possible) description 
of the autopoiesis, only in the case of artefacts, namely, of the finan­
cial market.
First of all, we have to solve a very important problem, namely, the 
problem of cognition. In the above, the concept of cognition was used in 
its sense proposed by the Santiago school: that is, as a mechanical reactive 
sensitivity of the most general type.104 However, a type of non-mechanical 
cognition or reflexive cognition may also exist. A reflexive cognition is a 
cognition (or cognitive capacity) that can be exerted, as cognition, on 
itself, that is, it is a cognition of cognition,105 or, equivalently, a reflexive 
cognition. Reflexive cognition is also called awareness or, with a term that 
goes beyond both physiological and psychological, acquiring cultural con­
notations, consciousness. Nota bene: because the term consciousness has 
come into general use—especially in the field of English literature—we 
3  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS: THE CONCEPT OF AUTOPOIESIS 

120
will use, in the following, in a non-discriminatory way, the term conscious­
ness, although sometimes we will refer to, in fact, awareness.
The floor of reflexive cognition, namely, of consciousness, is, it seems, 
specific to human being,106 who, though the subject of any artefact,107 is 
not himself an artefact.108 In this context, it is probably useful to distin­
guish between three types of autopoiesis:
•	 type of alpha-autopoiesis: refers to natural systems (non-living or 
non-human-living), characterized by non-reflexive cognition (i.e., 
with a cognition within the meaning of the Santiago school);
•	 type of beta-autopoiesis: refers to living human natural systems, char­
acterized by reflexive cognition;
•	 type of gamma autopoiesis: refers to artefactual systems (non-living 
or living).109
Nota bene: we should, perhaps, also distinguish a delta autopoiesis, spe­
cific to a single system, namely, divinity (the only system characterized by 
the cause sui). Obviously, in the latter case we will also have a relational or 
inter-actional closure. As far as cognition is concerned, reactivity will prob­
ably exist only in the case of deism.110 Regarding the cognition of delta 
autopoietic systems, this should probably be called absolute, infinite and 
self-caused cognition. Alpha-autopoiesis is out of the realm of artefact, so 
it will not be examined further here.
Based on the above reasoning, for the case of beta-type autopoietic 
systems,111 we will have to introduce an additional predicate of sufficiency 
(we will note it with upp
er A upper P 0 Superscript beta ) to those already mentioned, which will con­
tain, explicitly, the cognition. Let us therefore examine systems with beta-­
autopoiesis and gamma autopoiesis, respectively.
3.5
Beta-autopoiesis
•	
lef
t
 
parenthesis upper A upper P 0 Superscript beta Baseline right parenthesis  spontaneous internal cognitive reflexivity
This cognition is generated spontaneously, as a result of natural evolu­
tion, being an effect of non-human living. It has a reflexive character 
because, as we assume, the appearance of human being, on the evolution­
ary path, is accompanied, as a conditio sine qua non, by the emergence of 
consciousness (in fact, awareness).
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

121
 
•	
lef
t
 
parenthesis upper A upper P 1 Superscript beta Baseline right parenthesis : structural replicability
Structural replicability in the case of beta-autopoiesis refers to the bio­
logical reproduction of the human phenotype, based on the morphologi­
cal construction instructions contained in DNA, which reproduce what 
we call the anatomy of the human body.
•	
lef
t
 
parenthesis upper A upper P 2 Superscript beta Baseline right parenthesis : operational closure
The operational closure of beta-autopoiesis systems refers to the fact 
that such systems (biological human individual) contain exclusively inter­
nal mechanisms of functioning (including structural replication)—what 
we call the physiology of the human body.
•	
lef
t
 
parenthesis upper A upper P 3 Superscript beta Baseline right parenthesis : relational openness
Relational openness is imposed by the dissipative nature of systems with 
beta-autopoiesis (biological human individual)—entropic exchange with 
the environment is not possible outside of relational openness. This rela­
tionship refers to all three fundamental flows that can cross the membrane 
(in one direction or another): substance, energy, information.
•	
lef
t
 
parenthesis upper A upper P 4 Superscript beta Baseline right parenthesis ): processual closure
The processual closure in the case of beta-type autopoietic systems is 
relatively ambiguous, at least in the light of the following considerations:
3  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS: THE CONCEPT OF AUTOPOIESIS 

122
–– defecation (both in terms of feeding and breathing) is not an out­
put that is (as such) an input to the next functioning cycle of the 
system in question (e.g., expired carbon dioxide can no longer 
serve as input in the next act of breathing, that is, the next inspira­
tion, because the human body needs to inhale oxygen). In this 
sense, there is no processual closure of its own or, more precisely, 
it is a processual closure that involves relational openness—which 
is the case with beta-autopoiesis systems; this processual closure 
obviously occurs in the context of dissipation;112
–– therefore, the processual closure does not imply, in any case, an 
invariance of the total entropy (internal entropy of the system plus 
the entropy of the environment), but even necessarily implies a 
non-invariance of it—but it must be ensured, at the level of the 
system–environment pair, this processual closure.113
Gamma-autopoiesis
In the case of gamma-autopoiesis we will also have to introduce an addi­
tional predicate of sufficiency (denoted by upp
er A upper P 0 Superscript gamma ) which explicitly contains 
the cognition (Nota bene: obviously, here we are dealing with an induced 
cognition or a secondary cognition—secondary cognition is induced by 
primary cognition114). This type of autopoiesis has two sub-cases: (b1) the 
gamma-1 autopoiesis of the symbolic/logical systems of institutional type 
and (b2) the gamma-2 autopoiesis of symbolic/logical systems of product 
type. Category (b1) includes the institutional artefacts which constitute, 
in fact, the structure of the societal system (of human society), of which, 
for example, the financial market is a part, and category (b2) includes the 
product-type artefacts which include, for example, products based on arti­
ficial intelligence. In the following we will discuss only the autopoiesis of 
category (b1). Therefore, gamma-1 autopoietic systems of institutional 
type must be generated by the following sufficiency predicates:
•	
lef
t
 
p
arenthesis upper A upper P 0 Superscript gamma Baseline 1 Baseline right parenthesis ): improper internalized cognitive reflexivity115
Here arises the important problem (including from a philosophical per­
spective, especially ontological one) of the existence of cognitive reflexivity 
(i.e., of consciousness) outside the human biological organism/body. Our 
position in this regard is that of the unacceptability (due to impossibility), 
as we believe, of the existence of consciousness (or awareness, as the case 
may be) at the level of an entity other than that of the human biological 
organism/body. In this context, therefore, in the case of symbolic/logical 
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

123
artefactual entities of institutional type, we will only accept cognitive 
reflexivity in the form of an external one, which can be only internalized 
and, therefore, inappropriate. This cognitive reflexivity is an internalized 
one, because such cognitive reflexivity remains localized exclusively at the 
level of human individuals involved (structurally integrated) in that insti­
tutional system, although it is considered (e.g., by organization chart) as 
internal—so it remains external but is, somehow, internalized—and inap­
propriate because even though apparently the symbolic institutional sys­
tem in question makes decisions and takes action, in fact these decisions 
and actions are made/taken exclusively by human individuals—for exam­
ple, the decision-making system of such a system simply sets out how the 
people involved in making that decision do so. Of course, through abuse 
of language and, as a rule, to shorten verbal expression, we can say ‘this 
institution has decided this and that’ but, in fact, we are always aware that 
it is just an abbreviated form of expression.
•	
lef
t
 
p
arenthesis upper A upper P 1 Superscript gamma Baseline 1 Baseline right parenthesis : structural replicability
Structural replicability must be ‘programmed’ in the functionality of 
the symbolic individual (respectively of the symbolic species) in question, 
by ensuring a continuity property—ensuring of the continuation of the 
functions involves maintaining/replicating the structure. It is true that, 
unlike in the case of beta-autopoietic systems, in the case of gamma-1 
autopoiesis the replication of the structure refers to its formal aspect, not 
to the material one (the latter happens in beta-autopoieticity). Somehow, 
the material aspect of the structure does not need to be maintained, it can 
take other substances, provided that the formal structure is preserved. For 
example, as a result of digitization (or, more broadly, digital transforma­
tion116) a structure whose function was to receive balance sheet docu­
ments from economic firms at the Ministry of Public Finance can be 
organized as an online activity (based on electronic signature): so, 
although, materially, that structure no longer exists, formally it is, in fact, 
replicated.
•	
lef
t
 
p
arenthesis upper A upper P 2 Superscript gamma Baseline 1 Baseline right parenthesis : operational closure
Operational closure retains its full significance in the case of gamma-1 
autopoiesis, in the sense that the structural replication, respectively the 
assigned cognitive reflexivity (internalized and improper, as said), must be 
achieved by its own ‘forces’, that is, based on internal principles.117 In our 
opinion (but this aspect will be discussed in detail later), in the field of 
3  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS: THE CONCEPT OF AUTOPOIESIS 

124
gamma-1 autopoietic systems, sustainability is much more widespread 
than autopoieticity, hence the emphasis that this research focuses on the 
building up of an autopoietic system (and not simply sustainable118) of the 
financial market.
•	
lef
t
 
p
arenthesis upper A upper P 3 Superscript gamma Baseline 1 Baseline right parenthesis : relational openness
The need for relational openness in the case of gamma-1 autopoiesis no 
longer needs special argumentation, given that this predicative condition 
is general as soon as we start talking about sustainability.
•	
lef
t
 
p
arenthesis upper A upper P 4 Superscript gamma Baseline 1 Baseline right parenthesis : processual closure
As in the case of beta-autopoiesis, processual closure in gamma-1 auto­
poiesis systems is correlated with relational openness, so it must be seen, 
interpreted and, of course, implemented in such a conceptual and meth­
odological horizon: processual closure depends on the horizon (spatial, 
structural and temporal) of relational openness. We specify that there is 
always such a horizon in order to processually ‘close’ a gamma-1-type 
autopoiesis system.
 Short Discussion
Before to put into evidence some conceptual correlations between auto­
poieticity and other (macro)hypotheses launched in the financial theory 
and modelling, it is useful to show the (logical) correspondence between 
the autopoiesis in the natural world (following Maturana and Varela posi­
tioning) and the cultural one (i.e., the economic field and, more specifi­
cally, the financial markets):
(a)	 in the natural world (of living entities, however) the autopoi­
eticity is programmed into the genetic code, so it is, somehow, 
automatic, although this automatism is conditioned by the 
environment (either other natural living entities or the natural 
non-living environment);
(b)	 autopoiesis implies the niching, that is, finding of the environ­
ment which is the most appropriate for the entity plenary surviv­
ing. This finding is conditioned by a species of knowledge (which 
does not presuppose consciousness or reasoning) consisting in 
identification of the best context for the evolution of the entity in 
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

125
case (Nota bene: we remind the reader that this concept of knowl­
edge is supported by the Santiago School);
(c)	 a fortiori, autopoiesis in the financial (i.e., cultural) world can be 
associated with the niching based on knowledge, this time, a con­
scious knowledge, which goes from the intuition to the most 
sophisticated models of rationality;
(d)	 consequently, there is a continuity between the autopoiesis in the 
natural living world and the cultural world, even if a jump in the 
­knowledge performance is recorded in such a ‘transition’ between 
the two worlds;
(e)	 to be mentioned that it cannot be said with certainty that the 
conscious knowledge (within the cultural world) is more efficacy 
than the unconscious knowledge (in the natural world). Many 
times, the free will, in the cultural case, can be less performative 
than the necessary automatism in the natural world—but, of 
course, in both worlds, failures are possible; 119
(f)	 in conclusion, we think it is perfectly natural to accept the auto­
poiesis in the financial field, exactly based on the definition of the 
concept as it was formulated regarding the natural living entities 
by Santiago School—searching the niche in the environment, 
based on knowledge; the difference between the knowledge effi­
cacy in the two worlds has a quantitative character, not a quali­
tative one.
Some Conceptual Correlations of Autopoieticity
Autopoieticity and Automatic Stabilizers
About Automatic Stabilizers120
Since automatic social stabilizers are designed and implemented in a nor­
mative way, that is, through public policies, it is useful to make a brief 
examination of the concept of public policy, as well as its mechanism of 
functioning.
Public policy (PP) generally means a policy that verifies the following 
sufficient attributes:
•	 it is instrumented by a public institution/organization empowered 
as such, by law (usually by the fundamental legal/positive law—the 
Constitution);
•	 pursues a public goal (or coherent set of public goals);
3  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS: THE CONCEPT OF AUTOPOIESIS 

126
•	 the public objective pursued is relevant at macroeconomic or macro­
social level;121
•	 it is permanent and continuous;
•	 it contains a computational mechanism122 (of algorithmic type) that 
describes the input–output relationship (or, more generally, the cause–
effect relationship), which accompanies its instrumentalization;
•	 there is a procedure that triggers the above-mentioned computa­
tional mechanism;
•	 there is a procedure associated with the computational mechanism 
that triggers this mechanism.
Public policy can be qualified from the perspective of two fundamental 
criteria: (a) the causal criterion and (b) the formal criterion. According to 
the causal criterion, a PP can be of two types: (a1) direct PP; (a2) indirect 
PP. According to the formal criterion, a PP can also be of two types: (b1) 
explicit PP; (b2) implicit PP. We will briefly characterize the four 
types of PP.
Direct PP is that PP that causes the variation of the target variable 
directly, without the intermediation of any control variable. For example, 
the administrative setting of a price for a particular good or service (the 
reasons for such an intervention do not matter here) simply means chang­
ing that price.123
Indirect PP is that PP which causes the variation of the target variable 
mediately, through a control variable. Of course, some methodological 
clarifications are needed here: (1) it is assumed that the theory that estab­
lishes the causal link between the variation of the command variable and 
the variation of the target variable, with a pre-accepted probability, is given 
(accepted); (2) the channel (mechanism) for transmitting the influence of 
the variation of the control variable on the target variable is known, 
observable, accessible and controllable (under all necessary aspects: ampli­
tude of shock transmission, various lags or leads, etc.). For example, 
obtaining the change in the tax base by changing the tax rate (see also the 
Laffer curve) or changing the bank interest rate by changing the monetary 
policy interest rate.
Explicit PP is that PP that obtains the variation of the target variable 
through a formal action (following a decision) of the institution/organi­
zation responsible for that PP. For example, if the central bank finds an 
excessive decrease in the exchange rate (which means an excessive appre­
ciation of the currency against the reference currency), then it may decide 
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

127
to lower the required minimum bank reserve ratio. Or, if the government 
finds an increase in the share of the underground economy, then it can 
decide to reduce the fiscal pressure (or the convenient restructuring of 
general taxation). In other words, an explicit PP involves making a formal 
decision (and, of course, implementing it) in the desired direction.
Implicit PP is the PP that obtains the variation of the target variable 
without a formal action (following a decision) of the institution/organiza­
tion responsible for that PP. How is this possible? By implementing, in the 
causal mechanism, some institutional devices that are triggered automati­
cally, when certain preconceived conditions are verified and, as a result, 
produce the variation of the target variable—such institutional devices are 
called automatic stabilizers.
Let us make a few comments on the above:
	(1)	 it should be mentioned that the listed criteria act simultaneously, 
realizing a double characterization of any concrete PP. In other 
words, a certain PP will be qualified, at the same time, according to 
both the first and the second criteria. We would thus have, in prin­
ciple, four distinct categories of PP: (a) explicit direct PP; (b) implicit 
direct PP; (c) explicit indirect PP; (d) implicit indirect PP. Note, 
however, that the implicit direct PP is an inconsistent PP. Indeed, if 
PP is direct, this means that the target variable is targeted immedi­
ately, that is, without the intermediation of any control variable. Or, 
the implicit character means the existence of such a command vari­
able that acts on the target variable. Therefore, according to the 
condition of consistency, we will have only three distinct types of PP: 
(1) explicit direct PP: PP-de; (2) explicit indirect PP: PP-ie; (3) 
implicit indirect PP: PP-ii;
	(2)	 an explicit PP is what we will call a discretionary PP because, as we 
mentioned above, it involves the ‘conscious’ intervention of the insti­
tution/organization responsible for that PP, at a time, with a range, 
and in a way which are established together with the decision to inter­
vene (usually formally); therefore, we have two types of discretionary 
PP, namely, PP-de, respectively PP-ie;
	(3)	 an implicit PP is what we will call a non-discretionary PP because, as 
we mentioned above, it does not involve the ‘conscious’ intervention 
of the institution/organization responsible for that PP. According to 
3  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS: THE CONCEPT OF AUTOPOIESIS 

128
the typology already identified, there is only one type of non-­
discretionary PP: PP-ii;
	(4)	 according to the above, both discretionary and non-discretionary PP 
imply the pre-existence of a top-down algorithm.124 Therefore, both 
deliberate intervention and automatic intervention on the target vari­
able occur in a computational way that excludes both the need for 
intuition (i.e., understanding) and the need for axiological evaluation 
(it is assumed that both were considered in the top-down algorithm 
design). We will return to the features of this algorithm in the 
following.
By public policy adjustment125 (PPA) we mean that PP in which we do 
not find the direct character of public intervention. According to the 
above, it follows that there can be only two such PPAs: PPAs, which are 
discretionary, and PPAs, which are non-discretionary. The best known 
PPAs are those available to the government (fiscal-budgetary policy) or to 
the central bank (monetary policy), respectively, with the role and func­
tions of intervening in market economic mechanisms in order to imple­
ment (induce, stimulate, maintain, correct, etc.) those economic and 
social processes and phenomena and so on, which are supposed to lead to 
the achievement of the fundamental objectives of the government, respec­
tively of the central bank. In the following we will only be interested 
in PPA.126
If, as mentioned, semantics no longer play a role in the application of a 
PPA, once the algorithm has been designed, whether it is a discretionary 
or a non-discretionary algorithm, instead the syntax of the interventions 
of PPA is of decisive importance.
From a syntactic point of view, we can have extremely different adjust­
ment ‘discourses’.
Firstly, there are simple adjustment discourses or compound adjust­
ment discourses. A simple adjustment discourse is that PPA intervention 
that is mono-typical: either an intervention of type ‘de’ (de0  - de1  - 
de2 - … - dek), or one of type ‘ie’ (ie0 - ie1 - ie2 - … - iek), or one of type 
‘ii’ (ii0 - ii1 - ii2 -… - iik). A compound adjustment discourse is that PPA 
intervention that is poly-typical: a concatenation of different mono-typical 
interventions.127
Secondly, there are atomic adjustment discourses (or singular, i.e., 
adjustment discourses that contain a single PPA intervention) and molec­
ular adjustment discourses. The latter can fall into two categories: 
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

129
periodical adjustment discourses (contain groups of PPA interventions 
that reappear, in the same configuration, periodically) and a-periodical 
adjustment discourses (contain groups of non-recurring PPA interven­
tions, such as two or more times).
Thirdly, it is important whether the initial intervention is discretionary 
or non-discretionary. In this sense, if the initial intervention is of discre­
tionary type but then involves only non-discretionary interventions, this 
initial intervention can be called discretionarily initiation of a non-discre­
tionary process.128 If the initial intervention is non-discretionary, but then 
involves only discretionary interventions, this initial intervention may be 
called a signalling message. Of course, a more meticulous analyst might 
extract from this a multitude of other classifications that may be interest­
ing from a conceptual, methodological and even instrumental129 point of 
view, but for the purposes of this paragraph, we consider that what we 
have already established is sufficient.
Fourthly, the more elaborate a PPA is (both conceptually and method­
ologically or instrumentally), the more poly-typical adjustment discourses 
predominate, and the more complicated130 they are syntactically.131
Therefore, by the structure of a PPA we will understand, in fact, the 
syntactic structure of that PPA. This is not a coincidence if we consider 
that the mechanism of transmitting the impulse of any kind in the econ­
omy is, in the last resort, a matter of syntax. Therefore, we note that we 
have a logical equivalence between the transmission mechanism of an 
impulse and the syntax of a PPA. Therefore, when we have to discuss one 
of them, we can very well discuss the other one, mutatis mutandis. This 
qualitative result is particularly important, from a methodological point of 
view, because it allows us to move the centre of our analysis from one 
aspect to another, as this choice serves better or more directly the purpose 
pursued by those analyses.
Based on public policy considerations, we can now introduce the con­
cept of automatic stabilizer (AS). An automatic stabilizer is a sequence of 
public policies that has the following properties:
•	 is initiated by a PPA-de in a single episode/stage;
•	 is followed (exclusively) by PPA-ii in an indefinite number of episodes.
From a quantitative point of view, the effectiveness of an AS is a func­
tion of two parameters: (1) the action rate—the intensity with which the 
AS actualizes its scheduled action; (2) the action basis—the economic 
3  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS: THE CONCEPT OF AUTOPOIESIS 

130
support on which the action rate is exerted. Let us examine, in turn, the 
two components and make some logical and methodological 
considerations:
•	 the rate of action (k) refers to the ‘step’ that the AS takes, once the 
‘path’ conditions that automatically trigger its action are met;132
•	 the basis of action (B) refers to the range of the ‘action cell’ for which 
a certain rate of action is given;
•	 the quantitative dimension of the efficacy of AS (E) refers to the 
product between the rate of action and the basis of action: E =  − k ∙ B. It 
is immediately noticeable that the rate of action and the basis of 
action are substitutable. In this case, a curve of indifference to the 
effectiveness of the AS can be defined, setting the differential 
condition:
•	
•	 where with Rms the marginal rate of substitution between the rate of 
action and the base of action was noted.
Nota bene: in connection with AS, we introduce its concept of granu­
larity, which is a concept regarding the fineness of the ‘grid’ related to 
both the rate of action and the basis of action. The finer the two ‘grids’, 
the lower the granularity of the AS and vice versa. The granularity of the 
AS is important from the perspective of the sensitivity with which the AS 
reacts to the change of economic conditions which is, as we said, its effi­
cient cause.133 It is understood that just as we have nominal substitutability 
between the rate of action and the basis of action of an AS, so the same can 
we speak about the substitutability between the granularity of the rate of 
action and the granularity of the basis of action.134 It is, of course, another 
matter whether the efficacy of AS depends more on one granularity or 
another.
According to the definition of a non-discretionary PPA, including the 
institutional device called AS, this is an indirect and implicit entity. From 
the point of view of the concrete action in the economy, however, AS can 
have an impact characterized by a certain economic lag.135
Based on the above, we can say, at a more analytical level, that an AS is 
a device of institutional type, of normative origin, with structural charac­
ter, with macroeconomic sphere, with anti-cyclical action and with implicit 
(automatic) triggering, with the aim of reducing the volatility of the field 
to which it is addressed.
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

131
Let us try to identify the list of sufficiency predicates of an AS.136 We 
consider these to be the following:
•	 AS is an institutional type construct, that is, it is generated norma­
tively. This is an obvious attribute of the nature of sufficiency, because 
if it is not met, we may be dealing with self-stabilizing mechanisms 
(also based on the principle of negative feedback) but generated by 
the economic process itself.137 We will note this attribute (predicate) 
of sufficiency with (SI);
•	 AS is a structural construct—a permanent construct with a discon­
tinuous action. The argument for the sufficient nature of this predi­
cate is the following: being a construct that must behave 
non-deliberatively (automatically), this non-deliberativeness can 
only be ensured if the AS is a component part of the economic pro­
cess concerned, that is, it is structurally endogenized.138 If not, then 
its activation would require an assessment of the effective cause of 
action and, following that assessment, would require a deliberative 
decision to activate its specific re-action (i.e., exactly how to activate 
a discretionary public policy measure); we will note this predicate of 
sufficiency with (SS);
•	 AS is a macroeconomic construct, that is, its action is relevant to the 
dynamics of macroeconomic variables. Although AS acts effectively 
at the microeconomic level, the relevance of this action is always 
macroeconomic (i.e., aimed at reducing the volatility of output at 
the target area—such as the financial market in the case of interest in 
this study, e.g., to reduce volatility of price or, relatively equivalent, 
of profit). This predicate has the nature of a sufficient predicate 
because if the AS construct does not verify the predicate in question, 
the purpose of the construct—that of reducing the volatility of mac­
roeconomic output—is not actualized;139 we will note this predicate 
of sufficiency with (SM);
•	 AS is anti-cyclical,140 that is, it acts in the opposite direction of the 
variation of the variable it controls. This predicate is also clearly of 
the nature of sufficiency because, if we did not impose this, any such 
institutional device could have an impact on the escalation of the 
volatility of the structurally controlled variable (i.e., being pro-­
cyclical), undermining, therefore the very concept of AS; we will 
note this predicate of sufficiency with (SA);
3  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS: THE CONCEPT OF AUTOPOIESIS 

132
•	 the action of the AS is supra-proportional in relation to the variation 
of the controlled variable. This predicate is obviously of the nature of 
sufficiency because, if the action were proportional (or, worse, sub-­
proportional), then the dynamics of the process would not be influ­
enced but only maintained, preserved or even increased in a 
pro-cyclical sense. It should be noted that the verification of the 
predicate of supra-proportionality does not depend on the direction 
in which the controlled variable varies: if it increases, then AS will 
decrease it more than it increases, and if it decreases, then AS will 
increase it more than it decreases. In other words, we are talking here 
about the supra-unitary value of the marginal variation of AS. If we 
note with dV the variation of the controlled variable generated by 
the evolution of the economic process in question, with dVAS the 
variation of the controlled variable generated by the action of the AS 
construct, and with ASm the marginal effect of AS, then we must 
have verified the algebraic condition:
•	
	
This is, in fact, what we propose to call the AS multiplier. Of course, 
the extent to which the AS multiplier is supra-unitary (in absolute value) 
even gives the very measure of its effectiveness;141 we will note this predi­
cate of sufficiency with SP.
Note that these predicates meet, taken in pairs, the conditions of inde­
pendence (neither is a logical result of the other), consistency (neither is 
contradictory to another) and completeness (simultaneous verification of 
the five predicates generates a construct that will function as an AS).
	
	
Relationship Between Autopoieticity and Automatic Stabilizers
3.6
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

133
 
­
Autopoieticity and Behavioural Entropy
A General Framework
The concept of behavioural entropy is not discussed in the literature, 
where only the concepts of thermodynamic (or energetic) entropy, respec­
tively informational entropy,142 are found. Consequently, in this subpara­
graph, we will outline this concept exclusively from the perspective of the 
financial market,143 which is of particular interest to us here. The main 
ideas are those already published by the authors (Dinga et al., 2021), so 
they will be used, according to the requirements of this study, in the 
ones below.
•	 Any type of entropy is based on the ratio between homogeneity and 
heterogeneity of the system under analysis—of course, from the per­
spective of each criterion specific to that type of entropy:
3  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS: THE CONCEPT OF AUTOPOIESIS 

134
–– the case of thermodynamic entropy: the degree of homogeneity/
heterogeneity is determined by the ratio between available (or 
bound144) energy and free energy (unavailable for use), usually in 
the form of heat dissipated in the environment of that system or 
even inside the membrane of that system; in this sense, the entro­
pic model of the economic process, proposed by the Romanian-­
American 
economist 
Nicholas 
Georgescu-Roegen 
(Georgescu-Roegen, 1971), explicitly refers to this ratio which 
aims at the availability/unavailability (or accessibility/inaccessibil­
ity) of related energy;
–– case of informational entropy: degree of homogeneity/heteroge­
neity refers to the probability distribution of the series that are 
transmitted, in a communication, through the channel linking the 
sender to the recipient—in this case, the probability of transmit­
ting a character from the language used in the communication 
depending on the previous character (or immediately preceding, 
as the case may be) already transmitted;
–– the case of social entropy: in our opinion, social entropy refers to 
the degree of normativity of the society (societal system) in ques­
tion. Since this type of entropy is relatively little discussed in the 
literature (the most present is, from this perspective, the concept 
of informational entropy—including the famous but so unrealistic 
EMH model), we will add some clarifications related to the profile 
of social entropy (Dinga et al., 2020):
must be related to the social order;
its connection with the social order must be inversely 
proportional;
must have the connotations (either quantitative or qualitative) 
of the relationship between homogeneity and heterogeneity of 
a system/process, as shown above—in this case, the relation­
ship between homogeneity and heterogeneity refers to the 
social order;
is fundamentally based on normativity;
•	 the concept of behavioural entropy
–– the authors of this study define the concept of behavioural entropy 
by referring to behavioural efficiency (Dinga et  al., 2021). 
­Behavioural efficiency, as opposed to informational efficiency 
(inherent in neoclassical financial market models such as EMH 
and, to a large extent, FMH), refers to the ability to access behav­
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

135
iours that ‘exit’ the average of financial market behaviour (or, in 
general, within the social field of interest145). In other words, the 
more similar the market behaviours are—or suggest, by interpret­
ing the implicit information,146 similar behaviours that could be 
followed by market-watching economic agents—the lower the 
behavioural efficiency. Therefore, simply, by behavioural entropy 
is meant the inverse of behavioural efficiency: the higher the 
behavioural efficiency, the lower the behavioural entropy, and vice 
versa;147
–– behavioural entropy does not yet have a specific formalization 
(Nota bene: as well as social entropy), as has thermodynamic (or 
phenomenological) entropy, respectively informational entropy, 
so one of the tasks of the authors is to develop such formalizations 
for the two concepts (but, however, in subsequent communica­
tions, namely, in another book, which is dedicated to building the 
hypothesis of the natural price of the financial market: Natural 
Price Hypothesis—NPH).
The Relationship Between Autopoieticity and Behavioural Entropy
­
­
3.7
 Short Discussion
•	 The relationship between behavioural entropy (as an exogenous vari­
able) and autopoieticity (as an endogenous variable) is of a decreas­
ing logistic curve type. The logistical allure is explained by the fact 
that the increase in behavioural entropy is expected to generate a 
strong shock, at first, on the decrease in autopoieticity, but later the 
autopoieticity will find (local or temporal) possibilities to mitigate 
the impact, so the further increase of behavioural entropy has the 
effect of decelerating the decrease in autopoieticity;148
•	 the relationship between behavioural efficiency (as an exogenous 
variable) and behavioural entropy (as an endogenous variable) is, as 
3  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS: THE CONCEPT OF AUTOPOIESIS 

136
 
shown above, a relationship of inverse proportionality. We consider 
that this relationship should also be formalized through a logistic 
curve (function), symmetrical to the second bisector, that is, while 
the curve of autopoieticity starts concave and ends convex, the 
behavioural entropy curve begins convex and ends concave;149
•	 if we denote with script upper A  the autopoieticity, with script upper B  the behavioural effi­
ciency and with script upper E  the behavioural entropy, we can write, succes­
sively: s
c
r
i p
t upper E equals f left parenthesis script upper B right parenthesis
, s
c
r i p
t upper A equals g left parenthesis script upper E right parenthesis
, s
c
r
i p
t
 
u pper A equals g left parenthesis f left parenthesis script upper B right parenthesis right parenthesis
, s
c
r i p
t upper A equals h left parenthesis script upper B right parenthesis
, where 
h = g ∘ f;
•	 as f
 
l
e
f
t
 p a
r
e
n
thesis script upper B right parenthesis equals StartFraction e Superscript negative script upper B Baseline Over 1 plus e Superscript negative script upper B Baseline EndFraction
, and g  
l
e f t  
parenthesis script upper E right parenthesis equals 1 minus script upper E
, it follows that:
	
	
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

137
Autopoieticity and Constructal Law
The Concept of Constructal Law
The concept of constructal law was introduced into the literature by a 
Romanian-American researcher—Adrian Bejan (2007). Constructal law 
aspires to be more primitive than the laws of thermodynamics150 (espe­
cially than the second law of thermodynamics—the law of entropy or the 
law of irreversibility of exergy151).
The construction law has the following wording: ‘for an open system, 
of finite dimensions, to persist over time (to survive) it must evolve in such 
a way as to provide easier and easier access to the flows that pass through 
it’.152 Nota bene: in constructal theory, any finite system is considered ther­
modynamically imperfect.
The main features of the construction law are the following:
•	 it is placed in the position of principle of evolution;153
•	 it targets both non-living and living nature;
•	 restricts its scope to systems that are characterized by flows, more 
exactly, by flows that have a physical objectification154—both within 
the membrane of the system and in relation to its environment; 
moreover, another reduction in scope refers to the fact that the sys­
tems in question must move or live generating physical/materials 
supports for flows,155 the so-called dendritic tubes;156
•	 constructal evolution involves choice (either non-deliberative or 
deliberative, as the case may be);
•	 in constructal evolution, choice involves cognition;157
•	 the application of the constructal law to evolution (at least in the case 
of living nature) provides quantitative regularities from an allometric 
perspective;158
•	 constructal law rejects optimization in systems configuration;
•	 the constructal law is considered a law of physics but as applicable 
everywhere, including in the social field, engineering, innovation or 
psychology;
•	 the constructal law acts completely holistically—the evolutionary 
solution is formed at the level of the system which, thus, may contain 
subsystems that have not been regulated by the constructal law 
(Bejan, 2007);
•	 the constructal law offers a new arrow of time, compared to that 
provided by the second law of thermodynamics: time flows in the 
3  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS: THE CONCEPT OF AUTOPOIESIS 

138
direction in which the access to their own life support flows of sys­
tems is greater.159
Relationship Between Autopoiesis and Construction Law
It is quite obvious that there may be both similarities and differences 
between the autopoieticity (A) of a system (S) and the impact of the con­
structal law (CL) on the system (or directly on the property of autopoi­
eticity and even on the process of autopoiesis— upper A overTilde —associated with the 
system), on the one hand, as well as structural–functional relationships, on 
the other hand.
(b1) Similarities
We think that there are at least the following four similarities:
•	 both upper A overTilde  and CL aspire to be principles of organization, construction 
and functioning of evolution; 160
•	 in our opinion (which differs from that of Maturana and Varela, in 
terms of autopoieticity, and that of Bejan, as well, in terms of con­
structal law), both upper A overTilde  and CL function, rather, as mechanisms than 
as principles, that is, both answer the question ‘how’ rather than the 
question ‘why’/‘which is reason’. Thus, the upper A overTilde  mechanism is the 
hypercycle,161 and the CL mechanism is the self-designing. Nota 
bene: here we may be asked the following objection: both answer, in 
fact, the question ‘why’, and the answer is the same: survival. In con­
nection with this possible objection, we make the following analyti­
cal considerations:
–– first of all, survival is an end in itself,162 so it cannot be an efficient 
cause. Nota bene: the question ‘why’ obviously refers to the effi­
cient cause. Not being an efficient cause, it cannot be of the nature 
of a principle, but of the nature of a mechanism;
–– secondly, it may seem strange, of course, to argue that finality/
purpose does not answer the ‘why’ question. Indeed, when the 
question ‘why’ is asked, most of the time, it can be reformulated 
as ‘for what purpose’, ‘for what reason’, so it is obvious that, thus 
reformulated, the question aims at the finality/purpose. However, 
the original (and rigorous) meaning of the question ‘why’ is what 
leads to the efficient cause;163
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

139
–– therefore, survival cannot be a principle of evolution, but only its 
mechanism;164
–– both upper A overTilde  and CL pursue a second best solution (or survival solution, 
as we have already shown above) rather than a first best solution (or 
optimal solution);
–– both upper A overTilde  and CL have the potential (already, partially, demon­
strated) to ‘migrate’ from the fields in which they were initiated 
(CL appears in physics, respectively upper A overTilde  appears in biology) in 
other fields, including psychology or sociology, although, as is 
well known, Maturana and Varela expressed some scepticism 
about the (scientific) legitimacy of extending the scope of 
autopoiesis.
(b2) Differences
•	 We consider that there are at least the following three differences:
–– a first difference concerns the sphere: while CL targets any evolv­
ing entity165 (living or non-living), upper A overTilde , respectively A, targets only 
living entities (from the molecular level to the human level)—this 
limits upper A overTilde  in relation to CL, that is, we can write up
pe
r A overTilde subset of upper C upper L
;
–– a second difference also refers to the sphere, but from a different 
perspective: while CL explains only the entities that, in their evo­
lution, develop the so-called dendrites—that is, a self (re)design 
generated by the flows passing through the entity in cause, upper A overTilde , 
respectively A, refers also to the entities that are not characterized 
by this configuration of ‘dendrites’, so, we can write up
pe
r A overTilde superset of upper L upper C
;166
–– while CL no longer maintains a logical connection with thermo­
dynamics (neither with the first nor with the second law), upper A overTilde  
maintains a (background) connection with these two laws (espe­
cially with the second one).
(b3) Structural–Functional Relationships
•	
upper A overTilde
3.8
3  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS: THE CONCEPT OF AUTOPOIESIS 

140
 
Autopoieticity and Minimal Entropic Interaction
The Concept of Minimal Entropic Interaction Law
Suppose that in Universe 0 (the initial Universe), several dissipative sys­
tems appear simultaneously (of course, this set of dissipative systems can 
be constituted in a successive way, as well, not necessarily in a concomitant 
one, it is important that, at some point, in Universe 1 we have several such 
dissipative systems, both of ‘1α’ rank and ‘1β’ rank).167 In this context, the 
notion of complementary environment becomes, so to speak, multi-­
relative (it was, however, relative even in the conditions of the existence of 
a single dissipative system, as is immediately observed, based on the use of 
the concept of distinction generated by membranation). This means that, 
given a certain dissipative system, say A, another dissipative system, say B, 
becomes a relatively anti-dissipative complementary environment for sys­
tem A.168 That being the case, we wonder how entropy will evolve in sys­
tem B, given its certain evolution in system A. In other words, the question 
is whether we have an entropic impact of one dissipative system on another 
dissipative system.169 As we realize, in order to formulate an answer, it is 
necessary to admit that dissipative systems ‘recognize’, at the level of the 
membrane (i.e., at the level of their border), the entropic gradient between 
them and the complementary environment.170 Assuming such a capacity, 
how do dissipative systems ‘choose’ to achieve ‘entropic exchange’ (i.e., to 
procure low entropy in exchange for high entropy, with which they ‘pay’ 
for the acquisition of low entropy)? Put another way, the question is: will 
a certain dissipative system ‘prefer’ to perform the entropic exchange with 
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

141
the complementary environment (which, as is already obvious, includes all 
other existing dissipative systems) at the maximum entropic gradient or at 
minimum level? Perhaps, a principle similar to that of the minimum path 
in physics171 will have to be postulated here, namely, that entropic exchange 
takes place at the level of the minimum entropic gradient.172 This principle, 
once accepted, generates the relativity of the complementary environment 
but, on the other hand, it also necessarily generates a matrix (here the 
term necessarily has its logical meaning) of entropic interactions. This 
means that if we had a ‘map’ of the entropic gradients in Universe 1, we 
could tell exactly173 what entropic interactions would take place.174 
Therefore, the complementary environment can only be defined in a 
multi-relative way (in fact, in a contextual way, even, as it seems to us, in a 
practical or empirical rather than theoretical way). The ‘chain’ of entropic 
interactions based on the principle of choosing the minimum entropic 
gradient indicates a necessary acceleration of the global entropy of the 
Universe, namely, an autocatalytic entropic acceleration: the more dissipa­
tive systems, the greater the rate of global entropy. Moreover, the more 
evolved the dissipative systems (in the entropic sense of the term, i.e., the 
slower the rate of local entropy), the greater the rate of global entropy. Or, 
as it has been shown in the specialized literature, dissipative systems have 
a necessary tendency of entropic evolution. We can summarize, therefore, 
the following: (a) any variation of the speed of the local entropy is equiva­
lent to an inverse and supra-proportional variation of the entropy of the 
complementary environment; (b) the principle of choosing the minimum 
entropic gradient for the entropic exchange between dissipative systems 
further accelerates the global entropy. The last assumption needs, how­
ever, a specific argument: suppose we are in a Universe 1 in which there 
are two dissipative systems, A, with the speed of the local entropy la
mda Subscript upper S Superscript upper A , and 
B, with the speed of the local entropy la
mda Subscript upper S Superscript upper B , so that l
a
m
d
a
 
Subscript upper S Superscript upper A Baseline less than lamda Subscript upper S Superscript upper B
. We will note 
the speed of entropy in the complementary environment relative to the 
two dissipative systems with la
m d
a Subscript upper C Superscript upper A comma upper B  (the notation mode means that the 
appearance of the two dissipative systems has led to an increase in the 
speed of entropy in the complementary environment—according to the 
proposed explanations in the present discussion—so that l
a
m
d a
 
S ubscript upper C Superscript upper A comma upper B Baseline greater than lamda Subscript upper E
). 
Obviously d
e
l
t
a
 S
u
p
e
r
s
c
r
i p
t
 
u
p
p
er A comma upper B Baseline equals StartAbsoluteValue lamda Subscript upper S Superscript upper A Baseline minus lamda Subscript upper S Superscript upper B Baseline EndAbsoluteValue less than StartAbsoluteValue lamda Subscript upper S Superscript upper A Baseline minus lamda Subscript upper C Superscript upper A comma upper B Baseline EndAbsoluteValue
 (where with δ the entropic gradi­
ent was denoted), so the entropic exchange for a further reduction of the 
entropy velocity in the dissipative system A will be made between the lat­
ter and the dissipative system B.175 Given the order relation between the 
speeds of the local entropies of the dissipative systems, the entropic 
3  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS: THE CONCEPT OF AUTOPOIESIS 

142
exchange will consist in the taking over by system A of a low amount of 
entropy from system B and, conversely, the taking over of a high amount 
of entropy by system B from system A. Now the basic significance of the 
selection criterion results of the minimum entropic gradient: this selection 
criterion ensures a minimum transfer of low entropy from the less evolved 
system to the system more evolved from an entropic point of view. Indeed, 
it is quite obvious that in order to achieve a certain local entropy speed 
differential, system A should consume more low entropy from the com­
plementary environment itself than it should from system B.176
Here is one last question that we would like to address: is the choice of 
the minimum entropic gradient to achieve the entropic exchange neces­
sary for a dissipative system consistent or not with the Prigoginean prin­
ciple of minimum entropy production? If we take the behaviour of natural 
systems as an argument, we should give an affirmative answer.177
3.9
­
­
Nota bene: developed to its last consequences, this propensity for mini­
mal entropic interaction can be not only an explanatory model of the 
functioning of the financial market, but could also be a sui generis predic­
tor (of behavioural type, not informational!).
Relationship Between Autopoieticity and Minimal Entropic 
Interaction
In our opinion, the law of minimum entropic gradient interaction 
(LMEGI) is more fundamental than autopoiesis ( upper A overTilde ) and autopoieticity 
(A).178 The main relationships between the two concepts are the following:
•	 the minimal entropic gradient interaction seems to be necessary, 
while the autopoiesis/autopoieticity seems to be contingent. In 
other words, it is impossible for the interaction between two systems 
to take place in violation of the principle of minimum entropic gradi­
ent interaction, although some dissipative systems may not be 
autopoietic;179
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

143
 
•	 the question arises as to whether minimal entropic gradient interac­
tion has an impact on autopoiesis/autopoieticity and vice versa. Our 
opinion on this matter is as follows:
­
3.9
autopoieticity, by its simple operation (based on the self-­
organization sustained by hypercycles) reduces the intra-­
membrane entropy, increasing (by more than this reduction) the 
entropy from the general complementary environment. This leads 
to an increase in the entropic gradient between the other dissipa­
tive systems existing in the general complementary environment 
3  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS: THE CONCEPT OF AUTOPOIESIS 

144
and the entropy of the general complementary environment, 
which strengthens the propensity of other dissipative systems to 
behave according to the ‘law’ of minimum entropic gradient 
interaction;180
therefore, a sui generis hypercycle seems to form between auto­
poieticity (or autopoiesis) and the law of minimal entropic gradi­
ent interaction;181
•	 the propensity for minimal entropic gradient interaction can, of 
course, be further examined (which will be done in a later communi­
cation, separate from this book), as it is possible to allocate probabili­
ties182 generated by this propensity, which would allow more 
analytical modelling (including predictive value) for the functioning 
of the financial market;
•	 the relationship between autopoieticity and minimal entropic gradi­
ent interaction can be developed from the perspective of the auto­
poietic market hypothesis—a hypothesis that follows and completes, 
logically and methodologically, the hypothesis of adaptive prefer­
ence, already discussed in FMAB-APH (Dinga et al., 2022).
Autopoieticity and Network
The Concept of Network
The concept of network is considered here in its well-known sense in 
geometry (or topology) as well as in algebraic formalizations in graph 
theory, that is, it represents a collection of nodes connected by arcs (which 
also implies loops, i.e., arcs at which the source node and the destination 
node coincide183), the latter constituting flows between nodes (of sub­
stance, energy, information).184 Logically, the network has a number of 
features that we will refer to below:185
•	 matrix structure (or grid structure)—the network no longer has a 
hierarchical (which is specific to systems) organization, namely, with 
a leading or ‘legislative’ subsystem and one (or more) operational (or 
‘executive’) subsystem(s);
•	 in connection with this feature, of course, the question of the logical 
relationship between the network and the system arises—our view 
on this issue is as follows:
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

145
–– the network can no longer be considered a system, as it is no lon­
ger structurally organized vertically, but exclusively horizontally;
–– however, a network has, like the system, a membrane, which dif­
ferentiates the network from its environment; in this way, the 
behaviour of the network in the environment is analogous (though 
not similar) to the behaviour of the system, based on a functional­
ity generated by the interactions between nodes;
–– therefore, we consider that the network should be considered a 
quasi-system, by which we mean a horizontal system (the ‘genu­
ine’ systems are always vertical ones);
–– of course, from a conceptual point of view, we can have systems of 
systems, network of systems, systems of networks and networks of 
networks; moreover, each of the four ‘pure’ types of structural 
organization can have a mixed structure: that is, there can exist 
systems of systems and networks, respectively networks of systems 
and networks,186 which brings the number of possible types of 
structural organization to six, including the LLSs, as the financial 
market is as well;
•	 in networks it is possible for the hub effect to occur: the hub effect is 
one generated by the positive feedback that occurs (either acciden­
tally or normatively) at a node that has (either accidentally or delib­
erately) several arcs at a time; the existence of this connection 
imbalance tends to self-catalyse (Barabási, 2002) so that, paraphras­
ing the assertion of the evangelist Mark (4; 25),187 the node with 
many arches will be granted with more arches188 while the node with 
few arches will cancel the arches it has;
•	 what can be said about the network node: is it a system? If it is not a 
system, what is it? Our position on this issue is as follows:
–– based on what has just been established regarding the possible 
(theoretically) types of structural organization, we consider that 
the node of a network can be either a system or a network;
–– however, if we continue the analytical decomposition of the node, 
regardless of the type of organization to which it is associated, we 
will eventually reach a component that will have to be considered 
as the last;
–– this last component can only be a system. To the presumptive 
question: why cannot there be a network, we answer:
a network must, by definition, comprise at least two compo­
nents (of any type), while a system may contain a single com­
3  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS: THE CONCEPT OF AUTOPOIESIS 

146
ponent (itself)—in which case the leading system and the 
operating system coincide; 189
therefore, the simplest network (consisting of exactly two com­
ponents) can be broken down into two systems, so the ‘indivis­
ible’ component (or, to use a scientific term, the atomic190 
component) is always a system and cannot be a quasi-system 
(i.e., a network);
•	 the production and consumption of entropy within the network 
(i.e., through substantial, energy or information flows between 
nodes) is free,191 in the sense that each node is free to design and 
target its own needs for such flows, either input or output or 
loop type;192
•	 of course, as in the case of systems, in that of quasi-systems (net­
works) there may be spontaneous networks, respectively deliberate 
networks (e.g., established and implemented in a normative way). 
Taking the case of the economic market again, it is always a combina­
tion of spontaneity (or automatism) and deliberation, one side domi­
 
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

147
nating the other depending on the political regime or form of 
government in the society in question.
Relationship Autopoieticity—Network
­
­
3.10
Notes
	
1.	 The scientific basis for the fact that biological life on our planet is based on 
carbon is that this chemical element—carbon—has the greatest ability to 
form combinations with other elements, which gives it the highest probabil­
ity of initiating and maintains such combinations (Nota bene: it is obvious 
that here we are dealing with a propensity type of probability, as this concept 
was previously defined in this research (Dinga et al., 2022)). From a techni­
cal point of view, carbon (located in the Mendeleev periodic table in the 
second period, the fourth group) has two layers of electrons, and the second 
layer (outer layer) has four electrons. As this layer allows eight electrons, 
carbon can form four more co-valent bonds (i.e., it is tetra-­valent) with 
other elements—four single bonds or two double bonds or a triple bond. 
However, in the second period there is another element, also tetra-valent—
silicon—which, theoretically, could be the basis of life. Moreover, the water 
molecule, used as a solvent in the case of carbon, can be replaced (with the 
same functions) by ammonia, in the case of silicon, which, like water, is a 
polar molecule. At the same time, DNA–RNA information structures could 
be replaced by other structures containing the ‘plan’ of the future living 
phenotype. Exploration of exo-planets is already bringing these ex-­carbon 
possibilities to the attention of researchers.
	
2.	 It is estimated that there are the following living components of ecosystem 
on our planet: (a) plants; (b) animals; (c) mushrooms; (d) algae; (e) bacteria 
(Nota bene: viruses, which are non-cellular entities, do not fall into the 
category of biological living).
	
3.	 The issue of distinction is much more important, relevant and significant 
than the current meaning (in common/civil language) of the term distinc­
tion indicates. We would direct the reader, in this matter, to the ingenious 
(though largely ignored, today) work of mathematics of logic (i.e., the 
opposite of what Bertrand Russell did—namely, a logic of mathematics) by 
George Spencer-Brown, Laws of Form (Spencer-Brown, 1994).
3  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS: THE CONCEPT OF AUTOPOIESIS 

148
	
4.	 To paraphrase a famous formula, to find a BLS the maxim must be applied: 
cherchez la membrane.
	
5.	 Here the term fundamental refers to the importance/relevance/signifi­
cance of the sufficiency predicate in question, and not to any logical priority 
of it in relation to the other three predicates. Specifically, the other three 
predicates cannot be inferred from it, all four predicates of sufficiency are 
independent of each other.
	
6.	 Thermodynamic entropy (a macroscopic quantity) refers to the degree of 
binding (or availability/accessibility) of energy in that system—for example, 
heat is a form of free (unbound) energy that can no longer be used to per­
form an action (a mechanical thing, in the terminology established by 
Newtonian physics). In an approximately similar sense, the concept of 
entropy is taken over in economics, through the pioneer of the entropic 
economic model, the Romanian-­American economist Nicholas Georgescu-
Roegen (Georgescu-­Roegen, 1971).
	
7.	 The concept of dissipative systems was introduced into the literature by Ilya 
Prigogine (Prigogine & Stengers, 1984).
	
8.	 It is shown that dissipative systems accelerate the production of global 
entropy, which ‘shortens’ the lifespan of the Universe.
	
9.	 Which we call reproduction, either (1) sexual, with two cases: (a) sexuated 
or ‘normal’, when the female sexual cell is fertilized by the male sexual cell; 
(b) asexuated or by parthenogenesis, when the new individual appears from 
the female sexual cell without it being fertilized, or (2) asexual, with four 
cases: (a) by spores (reproductive cells develop in new organisms without 
fertilization); (b) by binary fission (an individual reproduces and divides by 
mitosis creating two individuals); (c) by budding (an individual grows 
from/on its parent’s body); (d) by regeneration (the detached part of an 
individual forms another individual).
	 10.	 The use of the qualifier quasi is meant to take into account replication acci­
dents caused by mutations that occur at the genetic level (these issues have 
been addressed, in general, in FMAB-APH (Dinga et al., 2022)).
	 11.	 Maturana and Varela developed the concept of cognition as a conditio sine 
qua non of autopoiesis—thus, cognition is defined as the ability to adapt to 
the environment. Cognition is acquired through bilateral perturbations 
(what we have called: through mutual reaction norms) and it is present 
regardless of whether or not the entity in question has a nervous system.
	 12.	 Here the term perception refers exclusively to the physiological aspect 
(because cognition, according to the Santiago school—as Maturana and 
Varela’s theory of cognition is called—does not necessarily imply a nervous 
system, so it does not necessarily imply the psychological or phenomeno­
logical aspect of perception).
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

149
	 13.	 There are also logic automata, called cellular automata (Nota bene: discrete 
automata), but they have logical membranes, not physical ones (initially 
studied by Stanislaw Ulam and John von Neumann, they were intensely 
examined, especially in one-dimensional space, by Stephen Wolfram—see 
the latter’s work: A New Kind of Science (Wolfram, 2002); also the Darwinist 
biologist Richard Dawkins uses cellular automata in modelling the processes 
of natural evolution).
	 14.	 As is well known, bacteria (which verify the sufficiency of biological living 
sufficiency) do not grow.
	 15.	 It can be shown (we will do, to some extent, this, in what follows) that 
cognition, in the sense of the Santiago school, is proper to non-­living enti­
ties as well.
	 16.	 It should be noted that the concept of interaction is even broader than that 
of adaptation, used by Maturana and Varela. Thus, the adaptation denotes 
only the one-way action (the examined entity adapts to its environment), 
but it has been shown, and we have shown before, that the environment 
also adapts to the given entity. Somehow, the inter-action is a reciprocal 
adaptation (and perhaps of a cumulative/gradual character) (Nota bene: the 
reader who follows us closely remembers, of course, that we used the con­
cept of co-­adaptation, which we related to co-evolution).
	 17.	 For example, an iron bar that expands as a result of an increase in internal 
temperature (as in the case of keeping it in a flame) gives no significance to 
the ‘observation’ that its temperature rises, and even more so does no sig­
nificance to the cause of this increase, but it reacts, so to speak, a-noematic 
(from the Greek nόημα, nóima—which means sense, understanding). The 
iron bar does not change, in the usual sense of the term, its behaviour, 
instead changes its state (its state vector).
	 18.	 Cogsation is a morphological combination of two terms involved: cognition, 
respectively sensation.
	 19.	 We remind you that reality has three components: (a) physical or objective 
reality; (b) ideal or subjective reality; (c) hybrid or objectified reality (Nota 
bene: the content of the latter component is the following: the objectifica­
tion of inter-subjectivity). This is also the configuration of reality on 
Popper’s three worlds. Imagination/fantasies are added to reality, together 
with which they form what is called datum (see, here, the point of view of 
phenomenology, especially in Heidegger).
	 20.	 If living entities (in the sense defined here) were discovered on an exoplanet 
which is not based on carbon, but on silicon, respectively, not on water, but 
on ammonia, those entities would still have to be called biological.
	 21.	 In Physics, that is, in a discipline that studies the non-living, the factor of 
proportionality between mass and energy is represented by the square of the 
speed of light (E = m ∙ c2). Perhaps it would not be uninteresting, especially 
3  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS: THE CONCEPT OF AUTOPOIESIS 

150
from the perspective of unifying knowledge, to find, for the case of the liv­
ing, such an equivalence.
	 22.	 In principle, there can be three categories of environmentally separating 
membranes: (a) physical membranes, as discussed in the case of BLS; (b) 
logical membranes—for example, the definition of concepts by the proxi­
mate genus and the specific difference only introduces a logical membrane 
between genus and species; (c) institutional membranes—although this 
type of membrane could be considered a kind of logical membrane, we 
prefer to consider it distinct from the latter for the following reason: the 
institutional membrane is not inferred from a model of rationality, as is the 
case of the logical membrane, but it is established by decree (it is a norma­
tive decree)—for example, the establishment of an organization involves the 
establishment of its purpose, and/or the means it can legally use. These 
delimitations are not the consequence of syllogisms, but of desideratum 
whose foundational justification has no relevance.
	 23.	 Which makes there are as many distinctiveness as distinctiveness criteria can 
be operationalized. Of course, distinctiveness, in the most general sense, is 
causally dependent on the perceptual and representational ‘endowments’ of 
the observer subject.
	 24.	 Shannon’s concept of informational entropy represents an intermediate 
level between thermodynamic (or energetic) entropy and behavioural 
entropy, although it is also projected from the perspective of behaviour—in 
this case from the perspective of communication ‘behaviour’.
	 25.	 We specify that we are still in the interpretation of the Santiago School 
regarding the concept of cognition or cognitive capacity.
	 26.	 It should be noted that, in the case of BLS, this pair of ‘action/reaction–
action/reaction’ also occurs between the system and the environment, but 
in addition in the case of these systems, there is also the non-behavioural 
pair ‘action/reaction–action/reaction’, based on thermodynamic entropy.
	 27.	 At this point an interesting and (possibly) useful discussion can be devel­
oped on the allocation of Bayesian probabilities to a distribution of events 
(or hypostases of an event) under conditions of absolute uncertainty—that 
is, by allocating the same numerical value to each of the probability in ques­
tion—as required by Laplace’s principle of insufficient reason—but respect­
ing the Kolmogorov conditionalities (e.g., for a set of n events, any 
probability will have the value 1/n).
	 28.	 The criterion against which the homogeneity of a system is assessed can be 
any, depending on the research interest.
	 29.	 The set (range) of accessible choices must be imagined from a monadic 
perspective—that is, we do not differentiate between these choices, for 
example, based on the expected utility or other possible benefits—for now, 
only the number or quantity of these possible and accessible choices to the 
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

151
system in question matters, which means that the ‘individuals’ of this set of 
choices are performatively indistinguishable from each other (but this pre­
liminary hypothesis will, of course, be relaxed when finer behavioural analy­
ses are needed).
	 30.	 We remind the reader that, from an informational perspective, the three 
concepts—observability, accessibility and controllability—were also dis­
cussed in FMAB-APH (Dinga et al., 2022).
	 31.	 In principle, there is no essential difference between system and environ­
ment (whether we are talking about BLS or LLS): what is environment for 
the system, when viewed from the environment, becomes system, while 
system becomes environment. So, from a qualitative point of view, the sys­
tem and the environment are simply interchangeable.
	 32.	 Obviously, the term sensational has, here, a precise meaning, without any 
connection with its meaning in the common (civil) language—in the latter 
case it denotes an event or a property or a relationship or a thing out of 
the ordinary.
	 33.	 For example, the reaction of human society as a whole (or of individuals or 
groups of individuals) to signals received from the phenomenology of cli­
mate change (such as global warming), which should be beneficial to both 
humans and planet as a whole.
	 34.	 This aspect will become much more obvious when we discuss selection in 
the case of LLS (i.e., autopoietic selection).
	 35.	 The controllability component of behavioural entropy could also be defined, 
according to the semantic content of the concept of controllability, as a fetal 
component of behavioural entropy.
	 36.	 However, up
p
e
r  B upper E Subscript up arrow Superscript left parenthesis upper A right parenthesis  cannot occur, because the extension of the choice range 
from the point of view of observability cannot narrow the range of choice 
from the point of view of accessibility (Nota bene: as we shall see below, the 
same reasoning also applies to the case of the choice range from the perspec­
tive of fetality).
	 37.	 The case up
p
e
r  B upper E Subscript left right arrow Superscript left parenthesis upper O right parenthesis  occurs when the reduction of the choice range from the 
point of view of observability is made exclusively on account of (BEO) ∖ (BEA) 
(Nota bene: the same reasoning applies also to the case of increasing behav­
ioural entropy such as observability).
	 38.	 Faster in relation to the growth rate (inexorable, according to the second 
principle of thermodynamics) of the global entropy, that is, in principle, the 
entropy at the level of the largest closed system (logically, it can only be the 
Universe, in its entirety).
	 39.	 Note that if we want to find an analogous predicate for informational 
entropy, the most appropriate would be its positional character—which 
involves neither transaction nor relationship.
3  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS: THE CONCEPT OF AUTOPOIESIS 

152
	 40.	 For example, sustainability is replicable by principles external to the system 
in question, so, sustainability is replicable by a combination of external and 
internal principles, while autopoieticity is replicable exclusively by internal 
principles.
	 41.	 Although, of course, in the case of humans, there may be a decision (i.e., a 
deliberative choice) to reproduce (to have biological offspring), in general, 
in 
the 
case 
of 
BLS, 
the 
replicability 
and, 
consequently, 
the 
replication/reproduction of the individual is non-decisional—we could call 
it quasi-necessary, given its instinctual determinism which is very close to 
necessity, on the one hand, but also the presence of free will, on the other 
hand (Nota bene: in the case of non-human living entities we believe that it 
is not wrong to consider that we are facing necessity, not quasi-necessity, 
because, as it seems, there is no free will here, i.e., the possibility of oppos­
ing necessity).
	 42.	 We mean autopoiesis.
	 43.	 We make a certain abuse of language here, because by replicator is meant, 
in biological theory, the genome—the genome is the one that replicates and 
will form, in the process of growth/development, the phenotype in ques­
tion. Here, by referential extension, we call as replicator the very symbolic 
phenotype.
	 44.	 This is the genealogical (and, in fact, etiological) basis of bureaucracy—as is 
well known, one of the principles of bureaucracy (which should, in our view, 
be considered the fundamental principle or fundamental axiom) is: ‘any 
bureaucrat works in the purpose of producing/maintaining the work front 
of another bureaucrat’.
	 45.	 This indeterminacy or, rather, undecidability is (as can easily be seen as) 
extremely similar to that which refers to the factual falsifiability of scientific­
ity—and, in that case, the non-rejection of a prediction/conjecture, so its 
corroboration, was inconclusive, so, only rejection having the power to be 
conclusive. Therefore, if a parallel were to be drawn between the corrobora­
tion of a predictive statement and the replicability of a LLS, they are, logi­
cally, equivalent, mutatis mutandis, of course.
	 46.	 A collateral consequence of this finding is that, from the observer’s perspec­
tive, replication (and, implicitly, the replicability property) is not observable 
exactly as long as it occurs, while becomes observable exactly when it no 
longer occurs.
	 47.	 In some cases (but, in principle, in all cases), given the deliberative, artefact 
nature of the LLS, there is a substitute for growth (which consumes an 
extremely short period of time), namely, the simulation of the LLS function­
ing in question.
	 48.	 ANAF is the abbreviation for the Romanian National Agency for Fiscal 
Administration.
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

153
	 49.	 As we pointed out before, in the case of social evolutionism we will have a 
different perspective.
	 50.	 It is useful to note that the improvement of the same function does not 
generate a qualitative difference, but only a degree one. In other words, the 
variation of the degree preserves the nominal function—perhaps it would be 
of theoretical utility to further develop this idea of ​​‘nominal protection’ of 
the function in the matter of the LLS evolution.
	 51.	 The fact that the change in the structure itself can be the effect of changes 
in the degree of function should not surprise us—it is the all-pervading issue 
of the significance threshold, that is, the fact that in any quantity there is 
always a potential quality (obviously, in the most abstract way, we find, here, 
the Hegelian idea of ​​the leap in quality as a result of the accumulation, or 
dis-accumulation, of quantity).
	 52.	 We remind you that any LLS is considered an artefact (i.e., an inter-­subjective 
objectification) generated by the BLSs of the human species.
	 53.	 Logically, a decision is discretionary if and only if it is explicit (either formal 
or informal), while it is automatic if and only if it is implicit (either formal 
or informal). It is obvious that an automatic decision was, previously and 
necessarily, a discretionary decision that established precisely its automatic 
character (but, obviously, not every discretionary decision establishes a sub­
sequent automatic decision, there are discretionary decisions that subse­
quently require discretionary decisions as well). Therefore, the meaning of 
the term discretionary, as it is conveyed in the common (civil) language, 
where it often has the connotation of arbitrary, is excluded here.
	 54.	 In a sense, what is the cognitive-reactive capacity of the LLS corresponds to 
the range of choice offered by its environment and vice versa: what is the 
cognitive-reactive capacity of the environment of an LLS corresponds to the 
range of choice of this system. Of course, Maturana’s niche concept fits 
perfectly with this kind of ideas.
	 55.	 We recall that, in our opinion, the financial market is not the environment 
(as considered, e.g., in AMH) of LLS, but is the financial species (whose 
environment is cultural geodesic).
	 56.	 We recommend abstention from the (possible) tendency to qualify this dis­
tributivity as … fractal, because this is not the case at all.
	 57.	 This distributive aspect of LLS should not be confused with its event 
aspect—for example, a trading strategy (as a financial individual) manifests 
itself in concrete, particular situations called individual transactions. In the 
latter case, therefore, we do not have a distributive aspect.
	 58.	 In general, in the case of BLS, the size of the offspring is preserved (although, 
in the very long run, the environment may select individuals that differ in 
size from their ancestors).
3  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS: THE CONCEPT OF AUTOPOIESIS 

154
	 59.	 The consequence is that the ‘population’ of LLS does not increase as a result 
of replication, while in the case of BLS, we have a population increase fol­
lowing replication. Of course, from a conceptual point of view, here appears 
the important problem of populational selection in the evolutionary pro­
cess, which we will refer to in detail below.
	 60.	 Of course, a special case in this category of distributivity of LLS is the cyclic­
ity (either of existence or of operation) of that LLS. Such manifestations of 
time-scale distributivity can be observed in the case of macroeconomic 
kinematics.
	 61.	 We remember that these inter-subjectively objectified entities are part of 
Popper’s third world.
	 62.	 This paragraph represents partly a takeover and partly a development of the 
article of one of the authors (Dinga, 2021) dedicated to the abstract con­
cept of autopoiesis as a generative ‘machine’ of LLS.
	 63.	 This rejection is, of course, strange, given the intellectual and creative open­
ness shown by the two biologists. In our opinion, the form of behavioural 
entropy, which we introduced above (in order to replace thermodynamic 
entropy and, in part, informational entropy) is even more suitable for the 
use of the concept of autopoiesis—which we will continue to do, by the way.
	 64.	 As we have already shown, the interactional niche of a system with its envi­
ronment is simply formed by the totality of fetal reaction norms (which 
‘enter’, respectively ‘exit’, from the system concerned).
	 65.	 From a logical point of view, the relationship is more extensive than the 
inter-action, because it can also refer to unidirectional actions/reactions 
that are obviously not of the nature of the inter-­action (the latter implies 
bi-directionality).
	 66.	 The influence of Shannon entropy, which is of the communication type, is 
not difficult to observe here.
	 67.	 Here Luhmann makes an obvious analogy with Lakatos’ concept of research 
programmes, trying to sketch a paradigmatic version of social evolution.
	 68.	 Again, the analogy between Luhmann’s solution and our solution of the 
identity between the social genotype and the social selector (i.e., the idea 
that the environment is … inside the phenotype) is obvious.
	 69.	 The fact that the psychic environment is considered outside the social sys­
tem is somewhat curious, though not too much, because it can be corre­
lated with the distinction between Popper’s three worlds: the psychic world 
is the second world, while society, as an objectification of inter-subjectivity, 
is the third world.
	 70.	 This subparagraph is a processing of an excerpt (Chap. 5) from the book 
Economy and Society, currently in course of publishing, under the coordina­
tion of one of the authors (Dinga, 2023—manuscript).
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

155
	 71.	 Punctuality accepts accidents of non-punctuality if the system has the poten­
tial to return to the point (resilience of point or punctual resilience).
	 72.	 Stability accepts instability accidents if the system has the potential to return 
in the interval (resilience of interval).
	 73.	 We consider that survival, as a goal, is not grafted on a value, precisely due 
to the fact that survival is the existential condition of any value (Nota bene: 
this argument follows, somewhat, the way in which Kant rejected existence 
as a property/attribute, in the attempt to overturn the conclusion of Anselm 
of Canterbury’s famous argument about the existence of God—a failed 
attempt, just like Descartes’ attempt in the same matter).
	 74.	 That is, as is the case with systems known as second-order cyber systems 
(those cyber systems in which the observer/controller is itself a component 
of the system concerned, as opposed to first-­order cyber systems, where the 
observer/controller is outside the system concerned).
	 75.	 An equivalent expression, which we will use mainly in the following, is adap­
tive replicability (or replication).
	 76.	 The concepts of ‘green economy’, ‘circular economy’ and the like are, in 
fact, terms that refer to the concept of sustainability.
	 77.	 Obviously, we refer to the formal, logical structure, regardless of the sub­
stantive/material nature of the components that ‘fill’ that formal structure.
	 78.	 We did not call this predicate of sufficiency as functional replicability 
because, as we know, structure generates function. However, since the sys­
tem replicates structurally, it turns out that it also replicates its functions, 
which is why the predicate was called operational replicability.
	 79.	 Thus, a sustainable system can contain either sustainable subsystems (in the 
sense defined here), unsustainable subsystems (systems that violate at least 
one of the sufficiency predicates of sustainability) or, as the case may be, 
both sustainable subsystems and unsustainable ones.
	 80.	 The term theorems is not risky, because the four predicates of sufficiency 
can be considered axioms and a logical consequence inferred from one or 
more axioms is called, as it is known, a theorem.
	 81.	 Autopoiesis can also be understood in a different sense (analogously to the 
understanding of semiosis in relation to semiotics or, more precisely, to the 
sign): as the process that produces the property of autopoieticity.
	 82.	 It is easy to see that operational closure (AP2) is not contradictory to rela­
tional opening (AP3)—in fact, no system can be dissipative unless it is rela­
tional open (substantially, energetically, informationally) in relation to its 
environment.
	 83.	 The identification of an operating cycle is made on the basis of establishing 
the resumption of the need for input—thus, an operating cycle (which is, of 
course, different as depending on the nature of the analysed system) has a 
3  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS: THE CONCEPT OF AUTOPOIESIS 

156
duration that stretches between two consecutive inputs (immediately 
successive).
	 84.	 This external origin which is internalized will become even more evident 
when the issue of automatic stabilizer is discussed, below, in the context of 
autopoietic systems.
	 85.	 The literature shows that the balance sheet of such an entropic exchange is 
always in favour of the dissipative system: global entropy (i.e., at the level of 
the Universe, which is the only system that can be considered genuinely 
closed) is accelerated by the dissipation of component systems.
	 86.	 However, we cannot say that the autopoietic system is a self-­sustaining sys­
tem, because autopoieticity contains, in addition to the exclusivity of the 
internal principles of kinematics/dynamics, the potential for self-organiza­
tion, which cannot be imposed on simple sustainable systems.
	 87.	 Here, we have a peremptory illustration of the implicit concept of economic 
space (a concept in the mirror of economic time): the economic space of a 
system is the physical space in which that system develops interactions with 
the environment, that is, manifests itself behaviourally.
	 88.	 We will find, below, that the so-called constructal law (proposed by the 
Romanian-American researcher Adrian Bejan) also targets the whole world, 
not just living systems.
	 89.	 It is obvious that between mechanical sensitivity and more efficient types of 
cognition there is only a difference of degree, not of quality. However, a 
qualitative leap seems to occur in the case of conscious cognition or, in 
other words, in the case of the humans and, consequently, in the case of 
logical/symbolic species. We will take this matter back to the right place. 
We will perhaps have to introduce, on that occasion, the concept of reflexive 
cognition, which is not present (as far as we know, in biology studies) in the 
case of non-human living entities.
	 90.	 Moreover, it is obvious, for example, that selection is not possible without 
behaviour, that is, without an environmental reaction to the externally man­
ifestation of the functions of the system.
	 91.	 It is clear that operational opening includes operational closure, while oper­
ational closure does not include operational opening: in other words, in any 
operational opening we have operational closure, but in no operational clo­
sure do we have operational opening.
	 92.	 According to set theory, any set is a component of the set of its parts.
	 93.	 Obviously, a very important logical problem arises here, namely the prob­
lem of the degree of analyticity of a system from the perspective of its sub­
systems. A system can be made up of subsystems which, in turn, are made 
up of subsystems and so on. When judging autopoieticity (or sustainability, 
as the case may be), we need to determine the level of subsystems we go to, 
because (although not always) it is possible that by packing two non-auto­
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

157
poietic systems we obtain an autopoietic system—in this case, for example, 
we continue packing until we get the operational closure. Therefore, when 
discussing or applying this theorem it is necessary to establish in advance the 
degree of analyticity of the subsystems of a system—this degree usually 
depends on the research interest or, in some cases, on the praxiological or 
practical interest, being therefore either a methodological problem or an 
empirical one, but by no means a theoretical question.
	 94.	 Which is, for example, perfectly symmetrical with the relationship between 
semiosis and semioticity.
	 95.	 The concept of propensity considered here is the one discussed at length in 
FMAB-APH (Dinga et al., 2022), that is, the one proposed by Popper (in 
the Aristotelian tradition, by the way).
	 96.	 So, as Spencer-Brown points out, membranating means introducing a dis­
tinction, and introducing a distinction is the act of ‘creating’ two entities 
that are hanging from each other: the system and the environment, respec­
tively. More generally, a distinction generates, as companion of each other, 
an interior and an exterior.
	 97.	 This ‘inherent propensity’ is, of course, a mere label or statement, because 
the existence of such a propensity, in turn, implies a metaphysical principle 
(i.e., a principle that does not allow for a factually verifiable justification). 
We will not, however, develop this regression ad infinitum.
	 98.	 The property of autonomy is not absolute, but relative, which means: (a) it 
is dependent on the nature of the environment in question and (b) it 
involves degrees of autonomy.
	 99.	 Of course, the reasoning can continue symmetrically (some would say: in 
a … fractal way) if the environment is, in turn, a system and the environ­
ment of the latter system is a system and so on.
	100.	 In other words, the propensity of non-life to life (without entering Bergson’s 
vitalism, of course).
	101.	 We ignore, for the moment the radicalism of the term ‘exclusive’ which is 
an avatar of the insidious homo mathematicus model.
	102.	 As is well known, a logical equivalent, but applicable in non-­deliberative 
systems, is that of the order from fluctuations, which refers to the emer­
gence of the macroscopic order from the spontaneous interaction of micro­
scopic disorders (Prigogine & Stengers, 1984).
	103.	 In fact, a significant part of the normative-institutional construction of soci­
ety is nothing but the codification of implicit norms or background values ​​
that characterize the behaviour of individuals and social groups.
	104.	 It should be noted that the most natural systems (non-living or living) have 
a mechanical cognition or cognitive ability. By mechanical cognition we 
mean a pre-programmed cognition in the structure (hence, in the function­
ing) of the systems in question and which is non-reflexive; in a more … 
3  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS: THE CONCEPT OF AUTOPOIESIS 

158
‘technological’ expression, mechanical cognition is a hard-type cognition, 
while reflexive cognition is a soft-­type cognition.
	105.	 In the theory of knowledge, it has long been noted that consciousness can 
be described by the phrase know that you know, which expresses exactly the 
reflexivity of cognition.
	106.	 The dedicated research also identified, in the case of animals considered as 
superior (i.e., having a life, brain-based, relatively rich), some aspects related 
to memory/experience, ‘intentional’ cooperation, emotion/affectivity and 
other psychic feelings. Psychism is a necessary condition, but not sufficient 
for consciousness, that is, for a reflexive cognition, therefore (given that our 
study touches only tangentially and without the claim of scientificity, this 
issue) we will consider that only humans possess this type of cognition called 
reflexive cognition (or consciousness).
	107.	 The constructions that some animals make in nature (nests, dens, dams—as 
in the case of beavers—nets—as in the case of spiders) cannot be considered 
artefacts, because they are not ‘endowed’ with the final cause (purpose), 
being simple effects of instinct, on the one hand, or (most frequently) of 
memetism, on the other hand.
	108.	 Of course, transhumanism—which we have referred to on other occa­
sions—will be able to adjust this assertion.
	109.	 In our opinion, artefacts cannot have reflexive cognition although artificial 
intelligence (AI) can learn from its own functioning (from its own ‘experi­
ence’—the quotation marks used here are intended to indicate that experi­
ence requires consciousness, i.e., feelings, what AI lacks). Learning (which 
is possible and real, e.g., by updating one’s software, either biologically or 
mechanically) does not necessarily involve consciousness (here is an example 
where the appropriate term is, of course, awareness), as in the case of non-
human animals. Nota bene: the possibility of learning is contained in the 
‘software’ of the system concerned: the laws of physics in the case of non-
living and non-artificial systems, DNA in the case of living systems and com­
puter programmes (also based on the laws of physics) in the case of AI.
	110.	 In the case of theism, there is no need for reactivity, because all the interven­
tions of the Divinity are of the action type, never of the reaction type.
	111.	 For the case of the alpha-type autopoiesis, we propose to maintain the con­
cept of cognition proposed by Maturana and Varela—so, cognition in the 
sense of the Santiago school.
	112.	 It is therefore obvious that the term procedural closure is another name for 
the same concept, namely, the concept of dissipation.
	113.	 The non-invariance of total entropy (as consequence of the second law of 
thermodynamics) cannot be preserved in what we want to call (without 
developing further here), the invariance of total complicatedness: the invari­
ance of the (logical) sum between the complicatedness of a system and the 
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

159
complicatedness of its environment. The export of simplicity from the sys­
tem and the import of complicatedness from the environment make a rela­
tive parallel (because it is symmetrical) with the export of high entropy from 
the system and the import of low entropy from the environment (which is, 
as it is known, asymmetric).
	114.	 The primary cognition is the natural cognition, specific to the human 
individual.
	115.	 We specify that, for the case of gamma-2 autopoiesis (which, for obvious 
reasons, we do not treat in this study), the predicate of sufficiency upp
e
r A upper P 0 Superscript gamma Baseline 2  
must be called: induced internal cognitive reflexivity.
	116.	 As we know, in this matter, there are three ‘floors’: digitization, digitaliza­
tion and digital transformation—in an increasing order of informational, 
technological, social and general cultural scale and sophistication.
	117.	 Under the sanction (as we have shown above) that the violation of this 
predicate of sufficiency ‘degrades’ the system from the quality of autopoietic 
system to that of sustainable system, the latter being characterized by opera­
tional openness.
	118.	 We recall, at this point in the discussion, the scepticism expressed by 
Nicholas Georgescu-Roegen about the possibility of a sustainable economy 
(more precisely, sustainable economic growth) in discussing the entropic 
model of the economic process—we will return to this issue.
	119.	 As known, in general, the failures (e.g., in the reproductive process) are 
bifurcation points for evolution.
	120.	 This paragraph is a processing of some considerations from the work of one 
of the authors (Dinga, 2012).
	121.	 The macroeconomic relevance of an objective can be assessed from at least 
two points of view: (a) as significance—the objective is significant for the 
vast majority of the population; (b) as impact—the objective contains 
emerging principles of generating processes at macroeconomic level. If 
these conditions are not met, or are met without continuity or are partially 
met, then macroeconomic relevance is compromised.
	122.	 The computational feature of the mechanism means that it can be run on a 
universal Turing machine. In other words, aspects such as understanding 
(comprehension) the mechanism or framing it in some axiology are not 
relevant here, although, without a doubt, any PPA is generated by a theory 
that also contains aspects of understanding or values.
	123.	 A concrete example could be the establishment of the guaranteed minimum 
nominal monthly minimum wage in payment on the economy.
	124.	 By top-down algorithm is meant (in systems theory and especially in compu­
tational theory), an algorithm that contains the entire protocol to be fol­
lowed by a universal Turing machine, without the possibility for the Turing 
machine itself (although it may exist, obviously for the programmer but, in 
3  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS: THE CONCEPT OF AUTOPOIESIS 

160
this case, we remain within the top-­down) to modify this protocol through 
experience (or learning). On the contrary, an algorithm that allows this 
learning (i.e., modification of the protocol) through the very process of 
running the algorithm concerned, that is, by the Turing machine itself, will 
be called a bottom-up algorithm. The logical consistency between bottom-
up algorithms and emergency phenomena is immediately noticeable.
	125.	 Note that a public policy of adjustment can only be a macroeconomic policy 
(i.e., a policy with targets that are relevant to the macroeconomic level, even 
if the underlying effects most often occur—or are expected to occur—at the 
microeconomic level). Therefore, macroeconomic adjustment policies 
(especially monetary policy—available to the central bank—and fiscal pol­
icy—available to the government) must be causally, structurally and func­
tionally correlated in what is called the fiscal-monetary policy mix, so that the 
aggregation of effects at macroeconomic level leads to the convergent 
achievement of the set targets, including through the synergy effect between 
the fiscal and the monetary factors.
	126.	 Obviously, according to those mentioned, PPA ⊂ PP.
	127.	 The syntactic rules according to which the poly-typical adjustment dis­
courses are formed are, of course, incorporated in the mentioned top-down 
algorithm and depend, as we have shown, on the relevant (accepted) theory 
in the matter.
	128.	 We refer to the less improved stages of public policies of adjustment, since 
this is the typical case (we do not take into account the situation in which 
the initial discretionary intervention is followed only by interventions of 
discretionary type). However, as public policies of adjustment improve, a 
dominance of initial non-discretionary interventions is established, which 
are followed also by non-­discretionary interventions.
	129.	 For example, the case of the circular adjustment discourse, which extends 
the periodicity to the initial intervention as well.
	130.	 The presence of the human factor also introduces complexity (as shown 
above), not just complicatedness.
	131.	 We propose that the degree of complexity of a poly-typical adjustment dis­
course be determined by the number of mono-typical discourses involved. 
This obviously involves the introduction of a dedicated institutional metric.
	132.	 Let us observe, here, the necessary discrete character of the rate of action. 
Let us observe, at the same time, another property (which we will resume 
and develop further), namely, that according to which there is, on the one 
hand, an administrative constraint (administration of tax revenues) regard­
ing the number of ‘cells of action’ (income tranches in our example above), 
and, on the other hand, an economic constraint on the actual size of the 
action rate (see Laffer curve).
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

161
	133.	 Obviously, the sensitivity of an AS is directly proportional to its granularity. 
However, the effectiveness/efficacy of an automatic stabilizer is not uncon­
ditionally directly proportional to the sensitivity (or granularity) of the 
AS. Likewise, the efficiency of an automatic stabilizer depends, in a relatively 
non-intuitive way, on this sensitivity/granularity.
	134.	 The substitution effects mentioned above (both between the rate of action 
and the base of action and between the granularities of the two) can act as a 
sui generis AS.
	135.	 So, this is not a temporary lag, because any AS acts ‘instantly’, once the 
conditions that form the effective cause of that AS are met, but an economic 
lag, that is, a lag regarding the mechanism of transmission of the AS action 
on the variable of command that needs to be changed (economic lag is 
generated by economic theory accepted as governing the economic process 
concerned).
	136.	 This reversal of the order in which the definition of a concept is treated and 
its predicates of sufficiency is more rhetorical—since, in order to state the 
definition, in fact, exactly the predicates of sufficiency were taken 
into account.
	137.	 For such a case, we have given, elsewhere, the example of the free exchange 
rate, which is an automatic monetary stabilizer spontaneously generated by 
the foreign exchange market.
	138.	 Here we want to warn the reader that by this we do not mean at all that AS 
is an endogenous (resultant) variable of the logical model of the economic 
process in question. Rather, it must be considered that AS is a parameter (it 
cannot be a variable, because its fixation was made from the very beginning, 
through the predicate of being institutional, i.e., normative) of control or, 
rather, a gap analyser.
	139.	 For example, we may have institutional constructs with a stabilizing effect at 
the firm or microeconomic market level, but their final impact is not found 
in reducing GDP volatility. Although the theory of microeconomic substan­
tiation of macroeconomics may argue that, in fact, by aggregation, such 
constructs can have the expected effect on GDP, we reject these arguments 
by invoking the composition fallacy and claim that such a construct should 
aim, from the very beginning, that is, from the design phase, as a goal (final 
cause), exactly the macroeconomic impact.
	140.	 Note that the counter-cyclic predicate is ‘stronger’ than a possible predicate 
that would retain only the feedback behaviour. As is well known, feedback 
can also act pro-cyclically (positive feedback), if the analysis of the output of 
a black box indicates that achieving the finality of that black box requires a 
pro-cyclical variation of the input. By specifying a predicate of the counter-
cyclicity type, we ensure that the AS always acts in the opposite direction of 
the variation of the controlled variable, that is, in the sense of smoothing 
3  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS: THE CONCEPT OF AUTOPOIESIS 

162
volatility, which is the very raison d’être of an AS (and which obviously has 
the nature of a negative feedback).
	141.	 The extent to which the AS multiplier is supra-unitary obviously depends 
on the granularity of the action rate, respectively on the granularity of the 
action base, as well as on the admissibility range of the substitutability 
between the two quantities, respectively between the two granularities. It is 
easy to notice the logical and methodological connection between the con­
cept of granularity and the ­concept of capillarity—which we do not develop 
here yet (the common element can be, of course, the concept of institu­
tional grid).
	142.	 We mention that, in the literature, the concept of social entropy is dis­
cussed, although not very intensely but, in our opinion, through an exces­
sively mechanical analogy with the thermodynamic or informational entropy.
	143.	 Of course, it can be extended to the whole social field, under the name of 
social entropy (Dinga et al., 2020).
	144.	 The qualifier of bound refers to the fact that the energy in question is inte­
grated, naturally or artificially, into a material support that preserves it, 
while ensuring accessibility to its use—for example, coal or wood are such 
material support for ‘binding’, that is, for storing the caloric energy.
	145.	 Possibility that would materialize only if the price were still sensitive to 
information (past or present), in other words, if it did not already include 
this information available to the economic operator. Of course, lovers of 
neoclassical economic theory and frequential probabilities develop, here 
too, variants in which informational efficiency goes through values ​in the 
continuous range [0, 1].
	146.	 The concept of implicit information is a concept introduced by the authors 
and refers to information that does not exist per se but is inferred (by idio­
syncratic models of rationality and hermeneutics) by economic agents, 
based on observing the behaviours of other economic agents in the market.
	147.	 Note the reversal of the relationship between behavioural efficiency and 
behavioural entropy compared to the relationship between informational 
efficiency and informational entropy (in the case of EMH): while in the first 
case we have a relationship of inverse proportionality, in the latter case we 
have a direct proportionality relationship (the informational efficiency of 
the financial market—which means the exactly maximum informational effi­
ciency—also expresses the maximum informational entropy of the finan­
cial market).
	148.	 Of course, the inflection point of the autopoieticity curve will be determin­
able empirically in the analytical specifications and then at the level of 
parameters, as made for the function of autopoieticity in relation to the 
behavioural entropy.
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

163
	149.	 These statements are easy to prove, rotating in the plane the curve behav­
ioural efficiency– behavioural entropy, so that on the abscissa is the behav­
ioural efficiency and on the ordinate is the behavioural entropy.
	150.	 As it is known, the laws of thermodynamics (Nota bene: so far, it seems that 
four laws of thermodynamics have been formulated) do not give any answer 
about the way or the rule according to which the systems are configured 
(i.e., acquire their shape and structure).
	151.	 Exergy is the name for useful, available or bound energy.
	152.	 The original formulation is: for a finite-size open system to persist in time (to 
survive) it must evolve in such a way that it provides easier and easier access to 
the currents that flow through it) (Bejan, 2007).
	153.	 In our opinion, the constructal law is not of the power of a principle (or a … 
law of nature), as it is presented by the author, but it has the features of a 
mechanism (like the Darwinian theory of the evolution of life, which is a 
mechanism, not a principle—e.g., Darwinism cannot explain the origin of 
life, but only its evolution after it appeared; Nota bene: neither Physics can 
explain the singularity from the moment of the big bang, but only every­
thing that happened later). The difference between principle/law and 
mechanism is as follows: principle/law answers the question ‘why’, that is, 
‘based on which cause’, while the mechanism answers the question ‘how’.
	154.	 Which, obviously, detracts from the justification of its universal character.
	155.	 But there are cases in which either there are no such material support for 
configuring the shape and structure to allow flows (e.g., cactus), or the 
movement of the systems in question is very slow (e.g., turtle) (Freire & 
Andrade, 2021).
	156.	 Although the emphasis (and the examples given) refers to physical flows, it 
is obvious that, from a conceptual point of view, any type of flows can be 
accepted: informational, entropic, ideational, axiological and so on. 
However, such a generalization is not yet achieved, constituting, in our 
opinion, a challenge for researchers who consider that the constructal law is 
a productive direction in epistemology (Nota bene: we are not among these 
researchers, since we have our own fundamental ‘law’ on behaviour, i.e., in 
a more general sense, interaction, namely, the law of the minimum entropic 
gradient—which will, however, be developed later).
	157.	 It is a cognition that has an even wider scope than the one proposed by the 
Santiago School, because it also includes non-living (non-­animated) nature.
	158.	 Allometry (or allometrics) studies the relationships of determination 
between the body dimensions of living entities and the shape and dimen­
sions of their somatic organs (either internal or external), their internal 
structure, functions and behaviour.
	159.	 In addition to these two arrows of time (which are logically consistent with 
each other), there is also the psychological arrow of time: time increases 
3  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS: THE CONCEPT OF AUTOPOIESIS 

164
from the point where the feelings (or lived events) in memory are less 
numerous to the point where those feelings are more numerous.
	160.	 Although autopoieticity has been developed (and examined) for living 
nature, it is easily extensible to non-living nature, thus gaining the same 
frame of reference as constructal law.
	161.	 Recall that the concept of hypercycle was introduced by Manfred Eigen and 
Peter Schuster (1979) and means, in the most general sense, a catalytic net­
work (including self-catalysis). Although the concept was developed to 
explain the transition of molecules (more precisely, a molecular complex, 
integrated precisely by the action of the hypercycle) from the pre-biotic 
phase to the biotic phase (i.e., in order to explain the origin of life), its 
abstract meaning can be taken also by other scientific fields, including finan­
cial market issues (more generally, LLS).
	162.	 Or purpose, if we consider human individuals, knowing that the purpose is 
a conscious finality. However, both finality and purpose are of a causa fina­
lis nature.
	163.	 Some authors consider that all causality is covered by the effective/efficacy 
cause, which is a simplification but not a logical error, however.
	164.	 Regarding the principle of evolution (which will cover both the second law 
of thermodynamics and autopoieticity, respectively the constructal law), we 
will make a proposal in the following.
	165.	 In this sense, Adrian Bejan also published the work entitled The Physics of 
Life: The Evolution of Everything (Bejan, 2016).
	166.	 It 
is 
understood 
that 
the 
conclusion 
is 
not 
valid 
here: 
[(A ⊂ B) ⋀ (B ⊂ A)] → A = B, because the two inclusions refer to different 
parts of the referential sphere. Therefore, CL’s claim to be the most funda­
mental ’law’ of evolution is debatable, at least from an extensive point of view.
	167.	 Dissipative systems can be classified as follows (Dinga, 2012): (1) dissipative 
systems of rank ‘ −1 ’—in which the speed of entropy in the system (λS) is 
higher than the speed of entropy in the ­environment (λE), that is, λS > λE; (2) 
dissipative systems of rank ‘ 0 ’—where λS = λE; (3) dissipative systems of 
rank ‘ 1 ’—in which λS < λE. Dissipative systems of rank ‘ 1 ’ can, in turn, be 
of two types: (a) dissipative systems of rank ‘ 1α ’ (these are non-human 
systems), provided that 0
 
l
e
s
s
 
t
han or equals lamda Subscript upper S Superscript 1 alpha Baseline less than lamda Subscript upper E ; (b) dissipative systems of rank ‘ 1β ’ 
(these are human-type systems), provided 0
 
l
e
s
s
 
t
h
a
n
 
o
r equals lamda Subscript upper S Superscript 1 beta Baseline less than lamda Subscript upper S Superscript 1 alpha Baseline less than lamda Subscript upper M .
	168.	 Obviously, ‘A’ and ‘B’ are interchangeable without changing the reasoning, 
although, as we shall see, it may be necessary for the membranes of dissipa­
tive systems to be endowed with the ability to recognize the entropic gradi­
ent between the dissipative systems concerned and the complementary 
environment (including other dissipative systems, with different rates of 
local entropy).
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

165
	169.	 We consider only the case of ‘contemporary’ dissipative systems. The alter­
native case, in which the dissipative systems in entropic interaction are not 
contemporary, is reduced to the previous case, given that the existence of a 
dissipative system leaves an ‘entropic trace’ in the complementary environ­
ment in which it ‘lived’, a trace that will be taken into account on the occa­
sion of the appearance of a new dissipative, non-contemporary system, in 
terms of the level and speed of entropy (in other words, the Universe is 
brought to ‘zero’ every time).
	170.	 Among the ‘functions’ of the demon that replaces Maxwell’s demon will 
obviously be that of ‘calculating’ the entropic gradient between the dissipa­
tive system concerned and the genuine complementary environment (or 
between the dissipative system concerned and other dissipative systems).
	171.	 As it is known, for example, light always follows the shortest path between 
two points (in general, the shortest path is the path that follows the geode­
sic generated by the curvature of space–time, as indicated by non-Euclidean 
geometries, respectively the general theory of relativity). But, as we men­
tioned in the content of this study, the dissipative systems generate, in their 
turn, a sui-generis entropic curvature, although in a different sense than the 
one referring to the physical space–time. Specifically, dissipative systems 
generate ‘geodesics’ that indicate that the entropic interaction will occur 
between dissipative systems with the minimum entropic gradient (the prin­
ciple also works in the particular case where in Universe 1 there is only one 
dissipative system: indeed, in this last case, the minimum entropic gradient 
is just that between the dissipative system and the genuine homogeneous 
anti-dissipative complementary medium, so the principle is held).
	172.	 The principle is suggested, moreover, by the sublunary experience (and, 
until proven otherwise, we should consider it valid for the whole Universe, 
that is, to make a transition, under the sanction of Popper’s falsifiability, 
from contingent to necessary) regarding, for example, the genuine food 
(trophic) chain: carnivorous animals at the top of the food chain do not 
procure low entropy directly from the plant environment, but ‘prefer’ to do 
so indirectly by consuming herbivorous animals. But this only means 
‘choosing’ the entropic exchange based on the principle of the minimum 
entropic gradient.
	173.	 Laplaceanism in this expression is not too difficult to recognize.
	174.	 Of course, this deterministic enthusiasm should be substantially tempered 
by the fact that, instrumentally, for the moment, it is impossible for us to 
measure these entropic gradients. Note that, from an epistemological point 
of view, we have here exactly the same problem that arose in the matter of 
the theory of cardinal utility (in the latter case, however, we have the ‘solu­
tion’ of recourse to the theory of ordinal utility, generating, however, in 
turn, so many inconsistencies between predictions and their updating). Let 
3  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS: THE CONCEPT OF AUTOPOIESIS 

166
us note another important thing here: the entropic gradient has not only a 
scalar but also an algebraic sign: the entropic exchange will occur in such a 
way that the low entropy will ‘flow’ from the system that has the highest 
entropy to the one that has the lowest entropy, never the other way around. 
However, this statement must be substantiated. Here is our argument: we 
have ‘established’ that the finality of Universe 0 (and therefore of any pos­
sible Universe 1) is to reach the state of thermodynamic equilibrium. As the 
appearance of dissipative systems (systems far from equilibrium) accelerates 
this process, it ‘results’ that this appearance of dissipative systems is (from 
the ‘point of view’ of the Universe) ‘rational’. Now, if we were to assume 
that the entropic exchange, in the case of a given entropic gradient, would 
be done in such a way that high entropy would flow from the higher entropy 
system to the lower entropy system, then, as stated above, low entropy 
should be consumed from the higher entropy system to achieve this 
exchange; consequently, this would produce high entropy in the system that 
has just ‘delivered’ high entropy, which would nullify, for example (or 
decrease, in any case), the entropic ‘gain’ obtained by ‘exporting’ high 
entropy. This result does not fall within the rationality mentioned above. 
Consequently, the entropic exchange will occur exactly the opposite: the 
system with higher entropy will ‘pump’ to the system with lower entropy, 
lower entropy, which will consume additional low entropy from the system 
with higher entropy. This time, the result is consistent with the ‘rationality’ 
of the Universe in question.
	175.	 Logically, as soon as there are at least two dissipative systems in Universe 1, 
there are no direct entropic exchanges with the genuine complementary 
environment, but only between existing dissipative systems, based on the 
principle of choosing the minimum entropic gradient. It is obvious, at the 
same time, that the indirect entropic exchange will take place between the 
two dissipative systems, following that, based on the same principle of the 
minimum entropic gradient, the dissipative system with the entropy speed 
closest to that of the complementary environment will nevertheless achieve 
direct entropic exchange with this environment.
	176.	 It is as if we were dealing with a kind of entropic ‘productivity’: the amount 
of low entropy needed to increase by a given size the entropic differential 
between two dissipative systems (or between the dissipative system and the 
complementary environment, if in Universe 1 there is only one dissipative 
system). Therefore, the principle of the minimum gradient of choice of 
entropic interaction can also be expressed in the form, logically equivalent, 
of the principle of maximum productivity of variation of the entropic gradi­
ent. Here, a suggestion for economists dealing with total factors productiv­
ity might arise: perhaps, along with the Solow residue, a residue (this time 
with a negative sign) generated by entropic processes in economic activities 
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

167
should also be considered, so that we have a global factors productivity of 
the issue and not only a total one. But we consider the most important sug­
gestion at this point in the discussion to be the following: there is a natural 
tendency for low entropy to flow spontaneously in the direction of a nega­
tive entropic gradient and high entropy to flow spontaneously in the direc­
tion of a positive entropic gradient, analogous to that the heat (as a 
macroscopic quantity) flows spontaneously in the direction of the negative 
temperature gradient and ‘non-heat’ (cold) flows spontaneously in the 
direction of the positive temperature gradient.
	177.	 For example, in the case of economic systems, the emergence of specializa­
tion, based on the productive advantage (absolute or relative), which led to 
exchange, makes, in fact, trade relations to take place on specific ‘geodesics’ 
generated by the degree of economic development. In this sense, it can be 
stated (but remains, of course, to be developed in a complete and coherent 
way) that economic flows (of goods or factors of production) follow a kind 
of minimum gradient of the level of economic development (the gradient 
may refer to either competitiveness, productivity or opportunity, etc.). 
More talented analysts may find suggestions here to replace the current 
national specialization criteria (absolute advantage, relative advantage, com­
petitive advantage, endowment with factors, level of average of national 
productivity, niches, etc.) with a more general criterion: that of… economic 
geodesic. A suggestion, completely general, in this sense, is made in Emil 
Dinga, The inertial phenomenon in the economic process (Dinga, 2001).
	178.	 The authors believe that LMEGI is more fundamental than CL, but this 
assumption will be examined elsewhere.
	179.	 For example, they can be simply sustainable.
	180.	 This conjecture is one of the clearest ways of empirical testability of the 
minimum entropic interaction hypothesis, which gives scientific character to 
this hypothesis.
	181.	 This interesting result will not be further developed here, where we will 
only specify that the hypercycle can be of two types: (a) positive hypercy­
cle—based on positive feedback—and (b) negative hypercycle—based on 
negative feedback (combinations of the two categories of hypercycle being, 
of course, possible).
	182.	 It is obvious that the type of probabilities that ‘qualifies’ in this case is nei­
ther that of objective frequential probabilities nor that of subjective Bayesian 
probabilities but, most … probably, that of propensity-­type probabilities 
(Nota bene: which are, in essence, possibilities, not probabilities—except if 
we do want to call with the term probability exactly the degree of possibility).
	183.	 For example, a loop can be formalized as feedback (either positive or 
negative).
3  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS: THE CONCEPT OF AUTOPOIESIS 

168
	184.	 Of course, in the most general sense, these flows can be considered entropy 
flows, based on an appropriate formalization.
	185.	 But, for the needs of this study, we do not further develop the net­
work analysis.
	186.	 Obviously, for research on the organization and functioning of the financial 
market it is important and relevant to identify precisely the type of structural 
organization concerned.
	187.	 The assertion, also mentioned previously, is: ‘For to him who has will be given 
more, but from him who has not, even what s/he has will be taken away!’.
	188.	 It seems possible to calculate a ‘gravitational acceleration’ in this regard, by 
analogy with the gravitational acceleration generated by mass in cosmology.
	189.	 This case occurs, for example, in the LLS called family—family members are, 
at the same time, legislators and executors regarding the tasks and actions 
carried out in that LLS.
	190.	 In Lebniz’s terminology, the monadic component, although not exactly in 
the Lebnizian sense, in which monads are qualitatively indistinct/indistin­
guishable from each other.
	191.	 This is the exact meaning in which the phrase (which has the value of a 
mechanism, although not of principle as well) ‘invisible hand’, which 
appeared in connection with the functioning of the so-called free market, is 
used in reasoning and modelling (Nota bene: however, neither more fierce 
and dogmatic libertarian parents of economic theory do not support the 
existence of a (completely) free market, because this is a logical and func­
tional impossibility).
	192.	 Perhaps a criterion for segmenting the action of the constructal law could 
be extracted from this: the constructal law is proper (although, as we will 
show in another communication, currently being prepared, not necessarily) 
to quasi-systems (networks), because the networks are the ones that develop 
flows with material support, that is, they have dendritic spatio-temporal 
configurations.
References
Barabási, A.-L. (2002). Linked-the New Science of Networks. Perseus Books Group.
Bejan, A. (2007). Constructal Theory of Social Dynamics. Springer.
Bejan, A. (2016). The Physics of Life: The Evolution of Everything. St. Martin’s Press.
Dinga, E. (2001). The Inertial Phenomenon in the Economic Process. Economică 
Publishing House.
Dinga, E. (2012). Rebuilding Economics: Logical, Epistemological and 
Methodological 
Approaches. 
Lambert 
Academic 
Publishing, 
Saarbrucken, Germany.
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

169
Dinga, E. (2021). Logically Living System: A Generative “Machine” for 
Autopoietic Systems – Chapter 4. In Handbook of Research on Autopoiesis and 
Self-Sustaining Processes for Organizational Success  – Chapter 4  – Logically 
Living System – A Generative Machine for Auto-Poietic Systems (first, p. 25). 
IGI Global.
Dinga, E. (2023). Economy and Society. Theoretical, Methodological and Empirical 
Approaches – In progress. Economică Publishing House.
Dinga, E., Oprean-Stan, C., Tănăsescu, C.-R., Brătian, V., & Ionescu, 
G.-M. (2021). Entropy-Based Behavioural Efficiency of the Financial Market. 
Entropy, 23(11), 1396.
Dinga, E., Oprean-Stan, C., Tanasescu, C.-R., Brătian, V., & Ionescu, 
G.-M. (2022). Financial Market Analysis and Behaviour: The Adaptive 
Preference Hypothesis (Vol. 1). Taylor and Francis Ltd. – Routledge.
Dinga, E., Tănăsescu, C.-R., & Ionescu, G.-M. (2020). Social Entropy and 
Normative Network. Entropy, 22(9), 1051.
Eigen, M., & Schuster, P. (1979). The Hypercycle: A Principle of Natural Self-­
Organization. Springer-Verlag.
Freire, L. O., & de Andrade, D. A. (2021). Novel Aspects of Constructal Law: 
Four Distinct and Competing Goals in Flow Channels Design. Open Journal of 
Applied Sciences, 11(6), 647–664.
Georgescu-Roegen, N. (1971). The Law of Entropy and the Economic Process. 
Harvard University Press.
Maturana, H., & Varela, F. (1980). Autopoiesis and Cognition. Living. D. Reidel 
Publishing Company.
Prigogine, I., & Nicolis, G. (1977). Self-Organization in Non-Equilibrium 
Systems. Wiley.
Prigogine, I., & Stengers, I. (1984, Romanian edition). Noua alianta. Metamorfoza 
stiintei (Engl: New alliance. The metamorphosis of science). Editura Politică.
Spencer-Brown, G. (1994). The Laws of Form. Cognizer Co.
Wolfram, S. (2002). A New Kind of Science. Wolfram Media.
3  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS: THE CONCEPT OF AUTOPOIESIS 

171
CHAPTER 4
Autopoietic Market Hypothesis: 
The Financial Autopoiesis
Autopoietic Selection in the Financial Market
Autopoietic Mutation in the Financial Market
1
­
2022
­
­
2
Regarding the concept of autopoietic mutation related to the species 
called financial market, we will discuss the following issues: (a) the possibil­
ity/necessity of autopoietic mutation; (b) the mechanism of the autopoi­
etic mutation; (c) genetic autopoietic mutation versus epigenetic autopoietic 
mutation.
The Possibility/Necessity of the Autopoietic Mutation
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature 
Switzerland AG 2023
E. Dinga et al., Economic and Financial Market Behaviour, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-31702-6_4

172
3
•	
­
­
­
­
­
4
­
­
•	
­
­
­
5
­
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

173
•	 a conclusion can be drawn of the utmost importance for the construc­
tion of the autopoietic model of the financial market, namely that, in 
fact, the financial market can only function (in an) autopoietic way, 
that is, there is an intrinsic (structural) need for the autopoieticity of 
the financial market—we will call this conclusion the ontological con­
dition of the autopoieticity of the financial market (this condition will 
be used massively in the design of the APMH model of the financial 
market further).
Autopoietic Mutation Mechanism
­
­
6
•	
7
­
­
8
•	
­
9
•	
­
(1)
(2)
­
(2)
(1)
4  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS: THE FINANCIAL AUTOPOIESIS 

174
10
(1)
(2)
4.1
11
Genetic Autopoietic Mutation Versus Epigenetic Autopoietic Mutation
In connection with this problem, the possibility (or impossibility) of the 
existence of the epigenetic autopoietic mutation should be shown, given 
that the possibility of the genetic autopoietic mutation has been shown 
above. Our reasoning is this:
•	
­
12
 
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

175
•	
­
13
•	 to accept the epigenetic autopoietic mutation—and we see no deci­
sive reason for rejecting the possibility of such a mutation—at the TS 
level implies, logically, some consequences to which we will refer, 
briefly, in the following:
–– firstly, it confirms (in terms of the coherence of the discourse in 
this research) our position that individual transactions do not 
directly and necessarily lead to the adjustment of the TS and that it 
is necessary to exceed significance thresholds in this regard; as long 
as the quantitative impact is below the significance threshold, it is 
possible to adjust the TS without it going through the adjustment 
of the propensity;
––
14
­
­
Classes of Autopoietic Mutations
There are two basic criteria for classifying autopoietic mutations: (a) the 
structural criterion—refers to the foundational aspect of the mutation; (b) 
functional criterion—refers to the operational aspect of the mutation.
4  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS: THE FINANCIAL AUTOPOIESIS 

176
•	 According to the structural criterion, there can be two types of auto­
poietic mutations:
–– strategic autopoietic mutations: those autopoietic mutations that 
change the propensity of the economic agent in question (of 
course, as we have shown above, exclusively through the decision 
of that economic agent, namely on the basis of theoretical 
rationality);
––
15
•	 according to the functional criterion, there can be three types of auto­
poietic mutations:
–– autonomous autopoietic mutations: those autopoietic mutations 
that, whether they adjust the propensity or not, are decided by the 
idiosyncrasy of the economic agent, for whatever internal reason 
(i.e., not came from the environment): cost–benefit calculation, 
intuition, lottery, adventurism, chance and so on;
–– tracking autopoietic mutations: those autopoietic mutations which 
are, logically and economically, obligatory to be performed follow­
ing an autonomous mutation (or of any other type), in order to 
ensure the coherence of the general behaviour of the economic 
operator concerned;
–– induced autopoietic mutations: those autopoietic mutations which, 
although carried out by the economic operator (Nota bene: this is, 
of course, the precise meaning of the qualifier autopoietic, which 
implies the operational closure, as already shown) come, more or 
less imperatively, from environment (most often from the regula­
tory system regarding the functioning of the financial market).
Therefore, there are four types of autopoietic mutations:
––
le
f
t parenthesis script upper M 1 right parenthesis  Strategic autonomous autopoietic mutations
––
le
f
t parenthesis script upper M 2 right parenthesis  Strategically induced autopoietic mutations
––
le
f
t parenthesis script upper M 3 right parenthesis  Autopoietic tactical tracking mutations
––
le
f
t parenthesis script upper M 4 right parenthesis  Tactically induced autopoietic mutations
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

177
­
16
Theoretical Rationality and Practical Rationality 
in Autopoietic Mutation
­
17
­
­
18
­
19
Rationality can be a theoretical rationality, respectively a practical one. 
Theoretical rationality aims at the prominence of belief—more precisely, it 
aims at the interest of the individual so that his/her manifestation is con­
cordant (consistent, compatible, coherent) with his/her belief system. 
Practical rationality aims at the prominence of the manifestation as such—
more precisely, it aims at the interest of the individual for the manifestation 
to take place, that is, to make a decision, to carry out an action or to mani­
fest a certain behaviour.
Applying these conceptual delimitations to the issue of autopoietic 
mutation in the financial market, we can draw the following main 
conclusions:
•	 the autopoietic mutation is governed by both theoretical and practi­
cal rationality, because the human individual (economic agent) is 
interested both in the consistency of his/her manifestations with his/
her own belief system (theoretical rationality) and in the objectifica­
tion of these manifestations (practical rationality);
•	 of course, the dominance of one type of rationality over the other is a 
function of the specific behaviour of the economic agent in ques­
tion—for example, it is plausible to consider that the design or choice 
of a TS implies a dominance of theoretical rationality, while the design 
4  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS: THE FINANCIAL AUTOPOIESIS 

178
or choice of an individual transaction within a given TS implies a 
dominance of practical rationality;
•	 it is perhaps correct to consider, at the same time, that practical ratio­
nality lies rather in the origin of tactical autopoietic mutations, while 
theoretical rationality lies rather in the origin of strategic autopoietic 
mutations.
Autopoietic Selection
The Concept of Autopoietic Selection in the Financial Market
The concept of autopoietic selection can be understood in at least two 
ways: (a) autopoietic selection at the phenotype level and (b) autopoietic 
selection at the species level. As we are talking here about the financial 
market, we are reminded that the phenotype (the ‘adult’ financial individ­
ual) is the trading strategy (TS), and the financial species is the financial 
market (FM). Nota bene: the environment of this species is cultural geode­
sic. At the same time, the main meaning of autopoiesis (or the property of 
autopoieticity) should be (re)specified: the operational closure, as defined 
by this predicate of sufficiency. This aspect, completely unique in the auto­
poietic modelling of the financial market, will be described, in broad out­
line, below and will be developed in analytical form in the end of this 
chapter.
 Short (Preparatory) Discussion
­
20
Firstly, the non-living character of the artefacts (in our case, of social or 
institutional artefacts) is specious, because it can be imaged a genus for dif­
ferent species of living entities—for example, the concept of logically living 
systems can be such a genus, so containing at least two species: (a) BLS—
biologically living systems; (b) SLS—socially living systems or, equivalently, 
ILS—institutionally living systems. The idea here consists in finding the 
sufficient predicates which (seems to) define the property of living, no mat­
ter it is about the natural or cultural field.
Secondly, both in the case of BLS and in the case of ILS (as the financial 
market is) the systems involved have internal ‘programs’ for at least three 
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

179
fundamental functions: (1) knowledge on the environment (no matter if it 
is a conscious knowledge or not); (2) choosing of the niche (i.e., an area 
into the environment that allows the fitness maximization), according to 
the knowledge already acquired; (3) replicating by itself, that is, based on 
internal principles. It is obvious that the three functions, mutatis mutandis, 
are present at both BLS and ILS. In such a context, it is justified to accept 
a conceptual, methodological and pragmatical continuity from the auto­
poieticity in the natural world to the cultural one.
21
Autopoietic Selection at the Level of the Trading Strategy
­
2022
­
­
22
­
23
­
1978
24
4  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS: THE FINANCIAL AUTOPOIESIS 

180
Autopoietic Selection at the Level of Individual Transaction
This selection refers to the adjustment of the individual transaction, that is, 
the actual manifestation of the trading strategy, without this adjustment 
being generated by any adjustment of the trading strategy itself which, as 
we know, occurs only as a result of and after the propensity adjustment. In 
other words, it is a matter of confronting the ‘protection belt’ of the trad­
ing strategy (to use the terminology of Lakatos, mentioned above) with the 
environment (i.e., mainly with cultural geodesic) until reaching a threshold 
of significance that would suggest the agent economic to move to change 
the propensity itself, that is, to move to the first type (discussed above) of 
autopoietic selection. Noting that, as in the first case of autopoietic selec­
tion, here we make only a conceptual sketch of the problem, while it will 
be developed, in all relevant aspects, in the end of this chapter. We think the 
following considerations are useful:
•	 the autopoietic selection of the individual transaction is a selection 
based on an epigenetic mutation, as it results from the fact that it does 
not involve the adjustment of the genome, that is, the propensity;
•	 being a selection based on epigenetic autopoietic mutation, it will act 
strictly within what we can call the ‘dead zone’ (Dinga, 2012) of the 
trading strategy to which the individual transaction in question is 
associated, that is, within the variation area of the individual transac­
tion whose variation do not go beyond the basic logic of the master-­
trading strategy;
•	 from a qualitative point of view, of course, the ‘dead zone’ for adjust­
ing the individual transaction can be as extensive—for example, it can 
refer to both relatively small (though significant) changes in the indi­
vidual transaction and, in extreme cases, the complete elimination of 
an individual transaction and (possibly) its replacement with another 
individual transaction that verifies the logical anchoring to the opera­
tional trading strategy in place.
Gradualism and Saltationism in Autopoietic Selection
­
2022
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

181
­
­
25
•	 the evolution of symbolic species (in our case, of the financial market) 
is not of the gradualist type, but of the saltationist one. This means:
––
­
26
–– as long as the mutation remains in the ‘dead zone’, it is not 
selected, that is, does not contribute to the adjustment (neither in 
the case of the individual transaction nor, even more so, in the level 
of the trading strategy);
–– if the mutation leaves the ‘dead zone’ it is immediately and com­
pletely taken over in the phenotype (in our case, in the trading 
strategy);
–– obviously, as shown in the case of the adaptive preference of the 
financial market, there is a ‘dead zone’ at the level of the individual 
transaction and one at the level of the trading strategy;
•	
27
­
4  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS: THE FINANCIAL AUTOPOIESIS 

182
Autopoiesis and Self-Selection
The main predicate of the sufficiency of the autopoiesis of a system (as it 
was highlighted by Maturana and Varela) is that of the operational closure, 
provided that the relational openness of that system is maintained. Naturally, 
the question arises as to whether autopoiesis entails (i.e., necessarily claims) 
self-selection. To examine this issue, it is, of course, necessary to define the 
concept of self-selection and then to verify whether the process of autopoi­
esis (or, equivalently, the property of autopoieticity) can ‘deliver’ the char­
acteristics of this definition.
The Concept of Self-Selection
Self-selection differs from the more general concept of selection in that it is 
operated not by the environment but by the phenotype itself. Of course, 
this transfer of the operational character of the selection from the environ­
ment to the phenotype can be examined either from the perspective of the 
modality (direct transfer vs. indirect transfer) or from the perspective of the 
sphere (complete transfer vs. incomplete transfer).
•	 Modality/the way
–– We have previously shown that in the case of the symbolic species 
called the financial market, the autopoietic mutation is always per­
formed by the human agent (economic agent), regardless of the 
channel through which the pressure on that mutation comes and 
regardless of whether the mutation concerns only the individual 
transaction (i.e., contextual—space–time—hypostatising of the 
trading strategy), which represents an epigenetic mutation or 
directly targets even the trading strategy (i.e., the propensity of the 
economic agent), which represents a genetic mutation;
–– in this context, it is obvious that, for both the epigenetic and 
genetic autopoietic mutations, we are in the presence of a deci­
sional autonomy of the economic agent;
–– the new individual transaction, which occurred as a result of the 
epigenetic mutation, or, as the case may be, the new trading strat­
egy, which occurred as a result of the genetic mutation, is, how­
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

183
ever, subject to the environmental verdict—in our case (mainly) 
the cultural geodesic verdict. The problem is that, unlike the case 
of selection in the biological evolution, in our opinion, here there 
must be a ratification, by the economic agent, of the ‘decision’ of 
selection or non-selection, made by cultural geodesic, of the muta­
tion in question. In other words, as in the case of a mutation 
which, in the last resort, is a decision of the economic operator, 
that is, it is a self-mutation, and in the case of selection, the eco­
nomic agent must accept (ratify, as we said) the selection made by 
the environment;
––
­
­
­
28
­
––
29
•	 Sphere
–– The assessment of the transfer sphere of the operational nature of 
the autopoietic selection from the environment to the economic 
operator (and not directly to the phenotype) is dependent on the 
assessment already made as to how this transfer is to be made 
(see above);
–– therefore, from the fact that both the selection of the genetic 
mutation and the selection of the epigenetic mutation are carried 
out, ultimately, by the economic operator and not the environ­
4  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS: THE FINANCIAL AUTOPOIESIS 

184
ment (namely, through the ratification of the environmental ‘pro­
posal’), it follows that, from the point of view of the sphere of this 
transfer, it must be considered as complete;
–– in other words, the financial market environment (i.e., cultural 
geodesic, mainly) acts only for the formulation of a ‘draft’ of the 
selection, since the actual selection, manifested in the form of rati­
fication of the said draft, is at the discretion of the economic agent.
Nota bene: it is clear that both conclusions were reached (namely, in 
terms of modality: the indirect nature of the autopoietic selection, based on 
the pair ‘draft–ratification’, respectively, in terms of the scope: complete­
ness of the transfer of selection from the environment to the economic 
agent) are possible and justified exclusively from the perspective of accept­
ing the autopoieticity which, in turn, imposes its predicate of sufficiency 
called operational closure.
Logical Relationship Autopoiesis – Self-Selection
4.2
 
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

185
­
­
­
Designing of the Autopoietic Model al 
the Financial Market
General Framework of Research
As mentioned above, our research intends to propose three alternative 
models to the existing ones regarding the functioning of the financial mar­
ket. We consider the following five existing models (which were briefly 
examined in earlier stages of the research): (1) Efficient Market Hypothesis 
(EMH), (2) Fractal Market Hypothesis (FMH), (3) Cost Matters 
Hypothesis (CMH), (4) Behavioural Market Hypothesis (BMH) and (5) 
Adaptive Market Hypothesis (AMH).
In terms of our own proposals, they are three in number: (1) Adaptive 
Preference Hypothesis (APH), examined in FMAB-APH, (2) Autopoietic 
Market Hypothesis (APMH), which will be finalized in this chapter, (3) 
Natural Price Hypothesis (NPH), which will be the subject of further study 
(possibly a new book of this research).
Therefore, the Autopoietic Market Hypothesis (APMH) is the second 
proposal made in this research, intended to provide a logical and, as far as 
possible, quantitative model of the functioning of the financial market. We 
mention, in short, the main coordinates on which the elaboration of this 
model is inscribed:
•	
­
30
4  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS: THE FINANCIAL AUTOPOIESIS 

186
•	
­
­
31
•	
­
32
•	 reflexive cognition: from the autopoietic nature it results that the 
observer observes himself, which leads to the replacement of the con­
cept of general cognition (proposed by the Santiago school) with a 
concept of special cognition: reflexive cognition, specific to second-­
order cybernetic systems;
•	
­
­
­
33
•	
­
34
35
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

187
•	
­
­
36
­
­
­
37
4.3
 
­
4  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS: THE FINANCIAL AUTOPOIESIS 

188
The Concept of Integral Utility
Motivation
­
38
Rationality and Intelligibility, Again
­
39
40
­
­
However, (a) could the rationality of individual behaviour be replaced 
by another feature of the human being that could be the basis for model­
ling (theorizing) economic (more generally, praxiological) action? And if 
so, (b) what could be such a substitute? We will briefly consider these 
questions:
	
	
­
­
­
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

189
41
­
42
­
­
	(b)	 we now need to develop the concept of deductive intelligibility as a 
model of intuition ‘thrown’ over the real world. First, the primary (and 
incomplete) induction provided by the abduction process is arbitrarily 
generalized to deductive intelligibility, and second, such a model 
behaves further like any representational model that is subject to (fac­
tual) falsifiability.
4.4
43
­
 
4  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS: THE FINANCIAL AUTOPOIESIS 

190
44
­
­
45
Explanation, Comprehension/Understanding and Complexity
4.4
46
­
­
47
­
­
48
49
­
­
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

191
­
­
50
­
­
4.5
4.5
	(1)	 (pure) explanation: a world model based on causal anchoring;
	(2)	 plausibility: a world model based on anchoring in intelligibility;
	(3)	 belief: a world model based on anchoring in acceptability;
 
4  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS: THE FINANCIAL AUTOPOIESIS 

192
	
	
51
	
	
52
It can be seen that by gradually moving from (1) to (5) the exteriority 
of the model decreases with increasing interiority, so that the maximum 
exteriority of the world model is the explanation, and the maximum interi­
ority of the world model is the hypothesis. There is an increasingly insistent 
assessment in the literature of justification as the basis for any narrative 
(including scientific narratives) (Haack, 2009; Lo, 2019). This shift from 
exteriority to interiority is consistent with our assumption, according to 
which both the contingency area and the free will area increase as rational­
ity weakens towards intelligibility.
Symbolic Utility in Literature
The best-known concept (and, in fact, the only systematic and profound 
theorizing we know of) about symbolic utility is provided by Robert 
Nozick’s The Nature of Rationality (Nozick, 1994). The basis of Nozick’s 
position is closely linked to his conception of principles. This basis can be 
summarized as follows:
•	 the principles subsume, as a general integrator, the particularities, by 
their analogy, thus ensuring a similar justification of similar opinions 
or beliefs;
•	 in essence, a principle is a rule that regulates the rules, that is, it is a 
meta-rule;
•	 principles have four distinct functions: (a) interpersonal functions: the 
principles we rely on provide others with the best public predictors of 
our (future) actions, provided the principles are accompanied by a 
(publicly) announcement and a (publicly assumed) commitment to 
respect them; (b) personal functions: the principles define the identity 
of the individual who implemented them; (c) intrapersonal functions: 
principles allocate utilities to individual actions (either real or poten­
tial); (d) intellectual (or epistemological) functions: principles avoid 
their own preferences in judgements, that is, in deducing conclusions 
from premises;
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

193
•	
53
­
•	
54
2013
55
­
­
56
Starting from the above-mentioned theoretical basis of the concept of 
principle, the key features of Nozick’s understanding of symbolic utility can 
be summarized as follows:
•	
57
•	 the principle signifies/signals for the others—precisely this signifying 
constitutes, for Nozick, the very symbolic utility;
•	
­
58
•	 for Nozick, substantive utility (also called economic utility), as an 
expected utility, is, in fact, generated or at least dimensioned by such 
a symbolic utility. Of course, in this interpretation, any rule governing 
economic or social behaviour is a principle that plays an institutional 
or conditional role in the formation of substantive utility.
4  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS: THE FINANCIAL AUTOPOIESIS 

194
We will conclude with a few remarks on Nozick’s position on symbolic 
utility:
	(a)	 symbolic utility is, in a very deep sense, a ‘fruit’ of the principles of 
behaviour, which means that it has no autonomy in its birth and exis­
tence; for example, it cannot arise from an action (linguistic, praxiolog­
ical or practical) of others, independent of a principle (known to the 
public)—in other words, symbolic utility is non-autonomous;
	(b)	 symbolic utility is seen as generated by an individual and directed to 
others, but not to him/herself—in other words, symbolic utility is 
non-reflexive;
	
	
59
In our approach to symbolic utility, the predicates of non-autonomy and 
non-reflexivity, retained by Nozick, will be rejected, but instead the predi­
cate sign will be retained.
Utility and the Representational Models
60
61
­
­
Based on the three perspectives mentioned, three representational mod­
els of economic behaviour have been issued (or should be issued, for the 
third perspective):
•	
62
­
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

195
63
­
•	
­
­
64
­
•	 from a symbolic perspective: homo significans. Such a representational 
model generates the symbolic type of utility.
65
­
	 	
66
	 	
67
­
4  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS: THE FINANCIAL AUTOPOIESIS 

196
­
68
	 	
­
69
­
­
­
70
4.6
­
­
4.6
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

197
 
­
Conceptual Ground of Symbolic Utility
Social Capital
Capital means a real entity that verifies cumulatively two predicates of 
sufficiency:
•	
71
4  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS: THE FINANCIAL AUTOPOIESIS 

198
•	
72
There are, in principle, three categories of capital: (a) economic capital, 
(b) social capital and (c) intellectual capital. Such a typology is based on the 
three distinctive hypostases that K2 can take, as follows:
	(a)	 the general concept of economic capital can be constructed on the basis 
of the general concept of capital by adding an additional predicate of 
sufficiency (more precisely, a specification of K2, which becomes, as a 
result of this specification, E2).
73
•	 material capital—incorporated in physical (material) support: for 
example, an excavator;
•	
74
­
75
­
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

199
	(b)	 The general concept of social capital can be constructed on the basis of 
the general concept of capital by adding an additional predicate of suf­
ficiency (more precisely, a specification of K2, which becomes, as a 
result of this specification, S2):
(S2) is a practical artefact. To be social, generic capital must be a result 
of sociality. By sociality we mean the ability and desire of people to issue, 
implement and use rules (either codified or informal) for individual practi­
cal interactions. An individual interaction is of a practical nature if it 
addresses the relations that concern only the interests of the subjects in 
social cooperation, that is, the subject–subject relationships. Examples of 
practical relationships are moral, political, religious and other relationships 
of the same nature. The social capital is of two categories, according to its 
purpose:
•	 social capitalization of individualization (i.e., aiming at building the 
individual through social causation), with three sub-categories:
––
76
–– trust: the degree to which individuals freely agree to transmit, 
either to the state (Government) or to other private persons, some 
of their rights or interests;
––
77
•	 social capital of socialization (i.e., aiming at building society through 
individual causation), with three sub-categories:
––
78
­
––
79
80
81
82
4  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS: THE FINANCIAL AUTOPOIESIS 

200
––
­
83
­
	(c)	 The general concept of intellectual capital can be constructed on the 
basis of the general concept of capital by adding an additional predicate 
of sufficiency (more precisely, a specification of K2, which becomes, as 
a result of this specification, I2):
­
­
4.7
 
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

201
Symbolic Utility
­
84
­
­
85
­
­
­
4.8
 Short Discussion
•	 Symbolic utility is attributed more to ethical than moral values—the 
distinction between ethical and moral (as predicates of behaviour) is 
particularly important here, which is why we will make a few addi­
tional considerations:
•	 ethics is attributed to the idiosyncrasy of the individual, as its own 
instance (incommunicable and immeasurable) of validation/rejection 
of a behaviour, regardless of who performs that behaviour, either the 
individual himself or another individual (Foucault et al., 2005);
4  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS: THE FINANCIAL AUTOPOIESIS 

202
 
•	
86
•	
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

203
87
­
88
•	 the absolute substantive utility curve is asymptotic and concave 
increasing one, while the marginal substantive utility curve is non-­
asymptotic and convex decreasing one;
•	 there is a quantity of consumption of ‘good’ beyond which absolute 
substantive utility becomes decreasing and, accordingly, marginal 
substantive utility becomes negative (falls below the threshold of sub­
stantive disutility);
•	
­
89
•	 the marginal symbolic utility curve increases concavely from the ori­
gin to the inflection point of the absolute symbolic utility curve, then 
decreases convexly to the point where the absolute symbolic utility 
curve reaches its asymptote;
•	 symbolic utility is, in principle, immeasurable (as opposed to substan­
tive utility which is measurable); it appears in the mind of an individ­
ual through judgement; this means that symbolic utility is, much 
more than substantive one, a matter of individual belief or conviction;
•	
90
•	 as will be shown below, substantive utility and symbolic utility are not 
interchangeable;
•	 substantive and symbolic utility are causally asymmetric—while the 
variation of substantive utility (may) determine a directly propor­
tional variation of symbolic utility, the inverse causality is false: in fact, 
the variation of symbolic utility has no impact on the variation of 
substantive utility;
•	 however, symbolic utility also retains the rational determination of 
substantive utility.
Phenomenology of Praxiological Representational Models
Praxiological models or paradigms are the result of the evolution of both 
human being and his/her environment (anthropic, i.e., society and non-­
anthropic, i.e., nature). In fact, the human being and his/her environment 
4  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS: THE FINANCIAL AUTOPOIESIS 

204
have co-evolved, based on rules of mutual reaction caused to each other. 
Consequently, any praxiological paradigm was (is and will be) optimal if it 
is matched with the (ultimate) goal of survival. From the perspective of the 
observer, on the historical scale there is a logic that pushes the succession 
of praxiological paradigms over time.
We can highlight four praxiological paradigms (or representational 
models) in history:
	(a)	 the stationarity paradigm;
	(b)	 the optimality paradigm;
	(c)	 the viability paradigm;
	(d)	 the sustainability paradigm of Bonneuil and Boucekkine (2009) and 
Heal (2003).
4.1
­
­
­
4.1
Optimality Versus Sustainability in Economic Behaviour
­
91
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

205
Table 4.1  Dynamics (causal kinematics) of the praxiological paradigms in 
the history
Paradigm
Stationarity
Optimality
Viability
Sustainability
Content/
Target
Meeting 
current 
economic 
needs, outside 
any model of 
rationality
Satisfying the 
current economic 
needs, with the 
optimization of 
the result (first 
best)
Meeting current 
and future 
economic needs 
without 
optimizing the 
result (second 
best)—outside of 
morals
Meeting current 
and future 
economic needs 
without 
optimizing the 
result (second 
best)—inside of 
morals
Fetal 
vulnerability
Emergence of 
resources 
scarcity
Globalization
Lack of moral 
anchor
?
Basic impact
The 
exponential 
increase in 
human 
instrumental 
effectiveness
Re-assigning of 
the rationality 
model to genuine 
needs of human 
being
The 
subordination of 
instrumental 
efficacy to moral 
significance
?
Negative 
praxiological 
externality
Non
The threat of 
depletion of 
resources
Non-economic 
and non-moral 
constraints in 
models of 
praxiological 
rationality
Non-economic 
and moral 
constraints in 
models of 
praxiological 
rationality
Negative 
practical 
externality
Non
Moral regression 
(consumerism)
Moral 
indifference
Non
Source: Authors
2009
­
92
­
4  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS: THE FINANCIAL AUTOPOIESIS 

206
2009
93
	
	
94
­
­
95
96
	
	
­
­
­
97
Recent developments in economic theory (including, in particular, 
financial market theory) shift the discussion from the supposed full ratio­
nality of the individual to his/her heuristic behaviour, that is not about the 
optimum, but about survival.
4.9
98
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

207
 
Structure of the Integral Utility
­
­
99
100
­
­
­
­
4  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS: THE FINANCIAL AUTOPOIESIS 

208
	(a)	 As stated above, no change in symbolic utility introduces changes in 
substantive utility. However, the reverse is true: that is, it is possible 
that a change in substantive utility will cause changes in the symbolic 
one—for example, an increase in salary leads to the residential reloca­
tion of the individual to live outside the city, which is a sign of a higher 
standard of living and an improved social position or leads to the 
replacement of a modest car with a more prestigious one, which also 
sends messages, on the outside, of the new better social position 
and so on;
	(b)	 continuing with the above idea, it can be said that when there is an 
increase in substantive utility, it increases both integral utility and sym­
bolic utility, but the latter does not cause any change in ­substantive 
utility, and only (namely, directly and autonomously) does this on inte­
gral utility;
	
	
4.10
4.10
•	 when the EU increases from EU1 to EU2, if EU and SU are substitut­
able, SU1 should decrease, according to the indifference curve TU1, 
to SU2; thus, the integral utility would have remained unchanged on 
the basis of its indifference to its structural change. But such an impact 
is forbidden (EU increase also leads to SU increase), so the SU moves 
(increases) to Mo difyingAbove upper S upper U With bar Subscript 2 ;
•	 by increasing from SU1 to Mo difyingAbove upper S upper U With bar Subscript 2 , that is, to the new value EU2, a new, 
higher TU is needed, so that TU1 increases to the level TU2;
•	 in the new state of integral utility, that is, at the value of TU2, if there 
is an increase in SU, for example, from Mo difyingAbove upper S upper U With bar Subscript 2  to SU3, there is no impact 
of SU increase on the variation of EU, so the new ‘point’ (EU2, SU3) 
needs a new, even larger TU, namely, TU3.
A Transformation Operator
­
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

209
 
4.10
­
	(a)	 as has been shown, there is an asymmetry in the mutual impact of the 
EU and the SU—namely, while changes in the EU generate changes in 
the SU as well, EU is rigid about SU change;
	(b)	 on the basis of that rigidity, if there is a decrease in the SU, the EU 
remains, in principle, constant, as the ‘shock’ of such a decline is only 
taken up by a decrease in the TU;
	(c)	 but preserving the EU from SU variation means, conceptually, a kind 
of EU sustainability;
	(d)	 for this mechanism to be feasible, the inverse causal relationship must 
be examined, namely, what happens if the TU changes; more precisely, 
the issue that needs to be clarified here is: assuming that the TU 
increases (regardless of whether it is due to EU or SU enlargement), 
then there is some impact of TU on EU or SU or both?
4  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS: THE FINANCIAL AUTOPOIESIS 

210
•	 our hypothesis in this matter is as follows: symbolic utility has three 
channels of variation: (a) substantive utility (as already shown), (b) 
the symbolic utility itself (e.g., a gesture of merits recognition of the 
individual in question, made by society) and (c) integral utility;
•	 as the operation of the first two channels is beyond doubt, it remains 
to be seen whether and how the change in integral utility can have 
an impact on the change in symbolic utility. It seems that a kind of 
self-catalysis of symbolic utility acts here, namely:
–– as the TU grows, the SU sees an increase generated by its better 
framing (or better wrapper). We would like to introduce here the 
concept of contextual symbolic utility (CSU)—thus, by contex­
tual symbolic utility we must understand that marginal symbolic 
utility which is caused only by an increase in TU: upp
er
 C
 
u
p
p
e
r
 S upper U equals StartFraction upper Delta left parenthesis upper S upper U right parenthesis Over upper Delta left parenthesis upper T upper U right parenthesis EndFraction
–– thus, an effect of self-catalysis appears: when the symbolic utility 
increases, the total utility increases, so the symbolic utility 
increases and so on;
–– of course, such self-catalysis must logically decrease with increas­
ing TU. Such a decrease in the self-catalysis rate of the symbolic 
utility can be explained as follows:
­
4.8
therefore, the impact on the TU is decreasing; based on the 
linear relationship between cause (marginal symbolic utility 
variation) and effect (integral utility variation), integral utility 
variation results (which is the next cause of symbolic utility 
variation), so symbolic utility variation (as effect) decreases 
relative to integral utility variation and so on;
•	
­
101
4.11
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

211
 
Sustainability, Social Capital and Symbolic Utility
­
­
­
102
4  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS: THE FINANCIAL AUTOPOIESIS 

212
­
­
2010
­
Symbolic Utility and Adaptive Preferences
Being linked to the paradigm of sustainability (both praxiological and prac­
tical), the symbolic utility is the main filter through which individual well­
being is perceived and even evaluated and capitalized. Because wellbeing is 
strongly and inherently linked to preferences (seen as the primary crystal­
lizations of desires/motivations), one last question that addresses the issue 
of symbolic utility concerns its relationship to preferences. We will further 
develop a brief discussion of this important issue.
	
	
­
103
­
1970
­
2019
	
	
­
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

213
104
	(c)	 practically, adaptive preferences are downward adjustments of the well­
being benchmark, that is, of the quality of life and, therefore, of the 
symbolic utility of life (Elster, 2017; Sen, 2000). However, there are 
other positions in which adaptive preferences are seen not only as 
reducing the level of wellbeing, that is, implicitly the level of symbolic 
utility—these positions conceive the adaptive preferences as also hav­
ing positive (or favourable) consequences (Nussbaum, 2006), which 
represent upward adjustments to the welfare benchmark;
	
	
­
105
­
	
	
­
106
	
	
107
4  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS: THE FINANCIAL AUTOPOIESIS 

214
	(g)	 ultimately, adaptive preferences have the significance of evolution 
(either biological or cultural). Consequently, their negative connota­
tions, mentioned in particular by Elster and Sen, and balanced (to 
some extent, at least as a programmatic intention) by Nussbaum, are 
directly transformed into positive connotations by Lo, for the financial 
sphere, but also into the economic area of human action (Hodgson, 
2004; Nelson & Winter, 1985).
The Logical Model of the Autopoietic 
Financial Market
The Fundamental Principle
We will remind the fundamental principle of the autopoietic hypothesis of 
the financial market previously formulated: the distribution of the return of 
the financial market on the trading strategies follows the distribution of the 
replicability of the fitness of those strategies. We will examine the significance 
of this principle, including in relation to other financial market models.
General Meanings of the Basic Principle
•	 It targets the return, as the variable (or parameter) of last resort inter­
est for the economic agent, a common aspect with all the other mod­
els of the financial market;
•	 the targeting of the return is done not informationally (as, e.g., in the 
EMH model), but behaviourally;
•	 the behaviour, in turn, concerns not the level of return, but its 
distribution;
•	 the distribution of the return does not refer to its distribution in time 
and/or space, but to the distribution by trading strategies (which, of 
course, also involves a spatial and temporal distribution, respectively, 
but not as a first instance or distributional criterion);
•	
108
•	 the replicability of fitness has a potential character, not necessarily 
actual one: thus, if a trading strategy verifies all the predicates of suf­
ficiency to be replicable (i.e., to reproduce its own identity), then the 
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

215
return associated with it (which has potential character also, until that 
trading strategy is operated through an individual transaction inferred 
from it) follows approximately the distribution of that replicability;
Nota bene: the emphasis on replicability (and not on actual replication) 
is likely to give predictability in the APMH model, which can be used in 
empirical testability, because, as in the case of Popperian falsifiability, it 
implies potentiality, not actuality.
Comparative Meanings of the Fundamental Principle
4.2
­
 Short Discussion
•	 Direct analogies of APMH can be established with three of the five 
financial market models:
–– with AMH: both are based on behaviour, not information;
–– with FMH: both work through return distribution;
–– with APH: both involve perpetuation/replication/evolution.
•	 The APMH model is (net) distinct:
–– both from the perspective of the base and from the point of view 
of operation: of EMH, respectively by CMH;
–– from the perspective of the base: of FMH, respectively of APH;
–– from the perspective of operation: by AMH.
Table 4.2  Logical positioning of fundamental principles of financial mar­
kets models
Functioning
Through level
Through distribution
Through perpetuation
Base
Informational
EMH
FMH
Structural
CMH
APH
Behavioural
AMH
APMH
Source: Authors
4  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS: THE FINANCIAL AUTOPOIESIS 

216
•	 APMH model works both from a distribution perspective and from a 
replicative (identitary perpetuation) perspective being the only model 
of this type of financial market.
The Paradigmatic Structure
­
­
109
2022
Methodological Framework
In general, a paradigm is a model of rationality, regardless of its purpose 
(cognitive, practical or praxiological). We remind you that a paradigm, in 
the most abstract way, has a structure based on four components:
•	 value (V): the value addresses the foundation of the paradigm. For 
example, complete rationality (or hyper-rationality) in the homo œco­
nomicus model;
•	 nucleus (N): the nucleus addresses the prime (primitive, fundamental) 
principle of the paradigm. For example, selfishness;
•	 function (F): the function addresses the purpose of the paradigm (in 
fact, the purpose of the actors who use that paradigm). For example, 
minimizing opportunity cost in neoclassical economic theory;
•	 logic (L): logic addresses the principles of paradigm rationalization. 
For example, methodological individualism.
The four structural components of the paradigm must be consistent two 
by two and convergent in function (F). Therefore, for any particular logical 
model that is analysed, the two ‘Cs’ (consistency and convergence) must be 
checked to get a positive answer to the question of whether we are really 
dealing with a paradigm. There can be three distinct types of paradigms. 
This typology is based on the distinction between three fundamental types 
of human activities, as they result from the general relationship between 
subject and object: (1) theoretical activity is given by the ‘object–object’ 
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

217
relationship (e.g., physics or biology)—it generates cognitive paradigms; 
(2) the praxiological activity is given by the ‘subject–object’ relationship 
(e.g., economics)—this generates actional or praxiological paradigms; (3) 
practical activity is given by the ‘subject–subject’ relationship (e.g., politics 
or religion)—this generates practical or moral paradigms. Only the praxi­
ological paradigm has all the components mentioned above. As the APMH 
model of the financial market is of a praxiological type, the praxiological 
paradigm is applicable (or not, as the case may be) to it.
Assessment
We have previously proposed three criteria/conditions to be verified by a 
logical model, regardless of its nature, so that that model is qualified as a 
paradigm: (1) institutional/structural criterion (or condition): the model/
system in the case must verify the four structural components of a para­
digm, as mentioned above (V, N, F, L); (2) conservative/homeostatic cri­
terion (or condition): the model/system examined must maintain its 
identity (i.e., structure) in a sustainable manner under theoretical criticism 
and/or empirical tests; (3) regulatory/homeorhetic criterion (or condi­
tion): the model/system in question must have internal principles, devices 
and/or mechanisms in place to maintain its trajectory, while accepting 
dynamic adjustments.
Institutional (Structural) Criterion
The verification of the institutional criterion refers to the verification (and 
establishment of the identity) of the four structural components of the 
APMH model. Of course, the components in question are examined from 
the perspective of the economic operator, which in turn generates the 
(symbolic) financial individual called the trading strategy and, from a popu­
lation point of view, generates the financial species called the finan­
cial market.
	
	
110
­
­
­
4  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS: THE FINANCIAL AUTOPOIESIS 

218
•	
111
­
•	 loss of the current identity of the trading strategy, which is a necessary 
condition for the production of adaptability (plasticity), must be 
‘done’ but to the extent beyond which the replicability of that trading 
strategy becomes impossible. Therefore, we have, in fact, the follow­
ing behavioural thresholds, from the perspective of the value (V) (i.e., 
the foundation of finality) of the APMH model:
–– plasticity threshold (PT): the threshold of variation (adaptation) of 
the propensity of the economic agent below which the adaptation 
of the trading strategy (TS) does not occur—that is, TS is still elas­
tic, but adaptations (i.e., plasticities) of individual transactions (IT) 
which make up the TS concerned can occur; therefore, the plastic­
ity threshold refers to TS, not IT;
––
­
112
•	 the issue of replicative adaptability raises a question that directly refers 
to the very concept of replicability itself. In connection with this issue, 
we make the following considerations:
–– in general, replicativity ‘requires’ the predicate of identity, that is, 
replication is always considered to be identitary. Of course, identity 
is a non-point predicate, it is rather an interval predicate—for 
example, about the thresholds of variation of propensity, men­
tioned above, below the plasticity threshold, the trading strategy 
maintains its identity exclusively in terms of its potential to gener­
ate individual transactions that are consistent (i.e., non-­
contradictory) with it, but those individual transactions no longer 
replicate their identity. Therefore, in the case of the variation of the 
propensity below the plasticity threshold, the identity replication 
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

219
of the trading strategy is a replication of the potentiality, not of the 
actuality. In conclusion, identity replicability (or replication) refers 
only to a generative identity that, as we said, has a potential 
character;
––
­
­
­
113
–– therefore, it can be said that adaptive replicability establishes/sub­
stantiates a quasi-identitary replicability (replication) of the trad­
ing strategy; this replicability can occur exclusively in the area 
between the plasticity threshold and the replicability threshold, 
beyond which the trading strategy disappears in terms of identity 
(respectively quasi-identity)—in other words, it is rejected from 
the perspective of selection applied by the environment (namely, 
cultural geodesic) to the financial individual called trading strategy.
4.12
	
	
114
­
115
•	 the satisfaction of the human individual remains, even in the APMH 
model, its crucial goal, and represents, as in the case of other models 
of the financial market, the content of the fundamental principle of 
supporting the decision and the action;
•	
116
–– a perspective of finality: the human individual no longer pursues 
optimization (either rigid, i.e., based on an invariant preference, 
4  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS: THE FINANCIAL AUTOPOIESIS 

220
 
or plastic, based on adaptive preference), but sufficiency: a utility 
that is sufficient for the replicability of the human individual 
(both from a biological perspective and from an economic one)—
we find, here too, the idea of a second best solution, to the detri­
ment of the first best solution;
––
­
117
Nota bene: although, as we have shown, we ignore, for now the eviden­
tial utility in the structure of the integral utility, the nucleus of the APMH 
model refers to the integral utility which includes the evidential one;
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

221
•	 therefore, the nucleus of the APMH model aims at a second best 
solution that aims at a combination between the current goal and the 
future goal—a combination that forms the content of the value called 
adaptive replicativity.
4.13
	
	
­
118
­
 
4  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS: THE FINANCIAL AUTOPOIESIS 

222
119
	(4)	 L—logic: based on what has been said and argued above, we propose 
that the logic of the APMH model be formulated as methodological 
co-evolutionism. 
Of 
course, 
the 
concept 
of 
methodological 
­co-­evolutionism must be related to the other two logics presented 
above (see FMAB-APH): EMH model logic—methodological individ­
ualism (a microeconomic statics)—and AMH model logic—method­
ological holism (a macroeconomic statics). Therefore, the logic we 
propose for the APMH model is of the type of a microeconomic kine­
matics, from which it results that the logic of the APMH model has the 
following characteristics:
•	 considers the package ‘system–environment’, in our case the pack­
age ‘trading strategy (with the species that contains it: financial 
market)–cultural geodesic’ or, in abbreviated format, the package 
‘TS–CG’;
•	
120
We conclude that, from the point of view of the institutional (structural) 
criterion, the APMH model of the financial market, which we propose in 
this study, verifies the paradigm statute of the financial market.
Conservative (Homeostatic) Criterion
­
121
­
­
•	 First of all, it must be established whether the fundamental principle 
of the model allows the issuance of conjectures on the basis of which 
empirically testable predictive statements can be formulated:
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

223
–– to resume the formulation of the fundamental principle of the 
APMH model: the distribution of the financial market return on the 
trading strategies follows the distribution of the fitness replicability of 
those strategies;
––
122
–– the type of predictive statements inferred from the type of conjec­
ture mentioned above could have the following wording: ‘covaria­
tion between the kinematics of fitness of a trading strategy and the 
kinematics of the return of that trading strategy is positive’;
–– it is obvious that such a predictive statement is perfectly testable 
empirically (i.e., it is falsifiable, from the Popperian perspective) 
because:
the time series on the return can be built in association with the 
trading strategies operated in the financial market—these are in 
limited numbers (the literature often inventories them) and 
their essence can be easily extracted through qualitative analyses;
although it is less obvious how fitness could be identified from 
the perspective of adaptive replicability, as we propose in this 
research (both qualitatively and quantitatively, including kine­
matics, so, based on a cardinal measure or, in the worst case, 
ordinal one), this problem is not insurmountable, based on the 
considerations and clarifications made in connection with the 
concept of social fitness;
•	
123
­
124
–– from the perspective of value (V): as we have shown, the selective 
impact of the environment on the phenotype (trading strategy) is 
made at the level (through) the individual transaction which 
represents (as in the case of biological entities) the operational, 
manifest, concrete, particular hypostatisation of the phenotype. It 
follows that, below a certain critical mass (threshold), which was 
4  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS: THE FINANCIAL AUTOPOIESIS 

224
previously theorized, the trading strategy will be preserved even if 
certain individual transactions will be rejected, replaced or selected 
by the environment (cultural geodesic) but with mutations that do 
not lead to replacing of the trading strategy. Therefore, in the case 
of falsified factual predictions, there is a possibility that, from the 
value perspective, the trading strategy maintains its ­replicability—
the adaptability related to this replicability can refer, however, not 
only to individual transactions, but (below a certain identity 
threshold) even at the level of the trading strategy. We can consider 
that, below the two thresholds of variability, the anomalies are 
ignored or tolerated, exactly in the way that the Kuhnian theoreti­
cal paradigmatic model … predicts, regarding the behaviour of 
normal science;
––
­
125
­
­
­
­
126
­
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

225
127
­
­
128
–– from the perspective of function (F): the co-evolutionary function 
of the APMH model is related, in the most direct way, to a nega­
tive result of the empirical testing of some conjectures. Indeed, a 
refutation of a conjecture following the falsification of a prediction 
that it has generated means an impact (with the corresponding 
thresholds, of course) on the propensity of the economic agent. At 
the same time, the financial market environment may change as a 
result of these refutation, either to manage modified trading strate­
gies (or individual transactions) or to create (usually normatively) 
avenues of movement for trading strategies that have been rejected 
(negatively selected). We believe that, in this functional frame­
work, there is a certain margin (a certain dead zone) both for the 
adaptation of the trading strategy (or individual transaction) and 
for the cultural geodesic, so that the anomalies generated by the 
empirical refutation can be, at least in a certain measure and for a 
certain period, introduced ‘under the carpet’. In conclusion, the 
conservative/homeostatic criterion of the APMH model function 
is operational;
––
­
129
it focuses on the adaptive individual (whether it is the human 
individual, when the adaptation refers to the change in propen­
sity, which leads to the change or adaptation of the proference, 
or the financial individual—i.e., the trading strategy), which 
means it remains at the microeconomic level;
4  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS: THE FINANCIAL AUTOPOIESIS 

226
­
130
consequently, is not enough neither a model of (hyper) ratio­
nality of the individual nor (correlatively) a holistic model of 
rigid normativity, but an inter-active micro–macro model or, in 
other words, individual–environment inter-activity is required, 
so that the two parts to react to each other and permanently 
(through fetal reaction rules, as shown above) and necessarily 
leading to co-evolution;
in the particular case of the financial market, the co-­evolutionary 
pattern of the APMH model ensures what, in the following, will 
be examined from the perspective of self-(re)organization, that 
is, it ensures a certain behavioural inertia generated by the need 
to harmonize co-evolution-specific reaction norms. This means 
that the anomalies associated with the refutation of the tested 
conjectures can be attributed, at least in part, to imperfections/
co-evolutionary accommodation delays and, therefore, have the 
effect of preserving the statu quo, both in terms of trading strat­
egies and of individual transactions.
We conclude that, from the point of view of the conservative (homeo­
static) criterion, the APMH model of the financial market ‘qualifies’ itself 
as a paradigm of the financial market.
Regulative (Homeorhesic) Criterion
The regulative (homeorhesic) criterion aims, from a conceptual point of 
view (although not exactly as a denotative sphere), to resilience, that is, that 
property of a system (in our case, property of the APMH model of the 
financial market) to bring back the real system it ‘manages’—the trading 
strategy and, through populational cumulation, the financial market—on 
the trajectory from which, possibly, disturbances (such as the expected 
return on financial market operations or reaching a critical mass of anoma­
lies generated by empirical testing) deployed the system concerned. Of 
course, the regulative criterion governs not only, as mentioned above, the 
resilience, but also the variation of the target of this resilience. Some addi­
tional explanations may be helpful at this point:
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

227
•	
­
131
132
•	 secondly, it should be noted that the regulative procedure is applied not 
only by cultural geodesic, since, in the case of logically living systems (or, 
equivalently, symbolic species) there are two types of selection, which 
interact with each other through processes of reciprocal augmentation 
or, conversely, reciprocal inhibition, as the case may be:
	 (a)	
formal selection—applied by cultural geodesic, which is the nor­
mative component of the financial market environment;
	
	
133
4.14
 
4  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS: THE FINANCIAL AUTOPOIESIS 

228
 Short Discussion
•	 APMH model generates its fundamental principle (1), on the basis of 
which conjectures can be issued (2) which, then, form the basis for 
the formulation of factual predictions (3) in the form of predictive 
statements (usually verbal or verbalizable);
•	 starting from the predictive statement, an experiment (either artificial 
or natural) is conceived (4);
•	 following the observation of the results of the experiment, a descrip­
tive statement is formulated (5) (usually also in verbal or verbaliz­
able form);
•	 by comparing the two statements—predictive and descriptive, respec­
tively—the result of the factual test in question is determined (6):
–– corroboration of the conjecture (7) if, semantically, the two state­
ments are equivalent;
––
134
•	
135
•	
­
136
•	 the accumulation of anomalies is verified in terms of exceeding a cer­
tain threshold (10), while the TS/IT preservation is ‘returned’ to the 
APMH model, to function as a sui generis confirmation (10);
•	 if the anomaly accumulation threshold is not reached, the process 
continues, including through new anomaly accumulations (11), and 
if it is reached, the conjecture involved (11) is affected, which could 
possibly be eliminated or at least adjusted;
•	 either it is removed (and therefore replaced by another conjecture) 
or it is adjusted (which also leads to the change of identity of the 
initial conjecture), a new predictive statement is formulated, based 
on the new conjecture (12) and the process is resumed from step (4).
­
137
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

229
Functionality
The functionality of a system refers, as it is known, to the set of relation­
ships among the component elements of that system, that is, to the rela­
tionships that take place inside the membrane of the system. Therefore, in 
order to examine the functionality of the APMH model, it is necessary to 
establish its structure.
APMH Components
In fact, in this section, we will systematize the disparate elements examined 
or evoked previously, in order to identify how they relate to each other and 
support the APMH model. We consider that the list of these components 
is as follows:
•	 fundamental principle ( script upper F script upper P ): this principle represents the backbone 
of the APMH model, on which and starting from which all other 
structural components will be built. (Nota bene: we recall the formu­
lation of the fundamental principle—the distribution of financial mar­
ket return on trading strategies follows the distribution of fitness 
replicability of those strategies; the fundamental principle is invariant, 
i.e., it represents the very identity of the APMH model);
•	
script upper P
­
­
138
•	
script upper T script upper S
­
­
­
S
ubscript a Superscript i Baseline script upper S
­
139
sc
ript upper S Subscript a Superscript e
4  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS: THE FINANCIAL AUTOPOIESIS 

230
140
•	
script upper I upper T
­
­
141
•	 internal regulator ( script upper R Superscript i ): refers to the device, logical and psychologi­
cal, associated with the economic agent involved, which performs the 
function (F) of the APMH model, based on the value (V) of the 
model, as these two criteria were presented and applied above. The 
internal regulator is, of course, closely related to the propensity 
through which it acts, so it should not be considered completely 
rational (so completely predictable) but rather as a mix between the 
component of rationality and that of irrationality, a mix that works at 
the level of the human individual (economic agent). This property of 
the internal regulator (similar to the corresponding propensity prop­
erty) means that, conceptually, the APMH model can be considered 
as a sui generis integrator of the other models existing in financial 
theory and concerning the modelling of the financial market: EMH, 
FMH, CMH, BMH and APH.
APMH Functionality
4.15
 Short Discussion
•	 The fundamental principle is ‘isolated’ from the rest of the compo­
nents in terms of bearing influence (except, of course, the abandon­
ment of the APMH model, when it should be replaced by the 
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

231
 
fundamental principle associated with the new financial market 
model assumed); the fundamental principle has an output (1) that 
enters, as input, into the propensity of the economic agent which it 
adjusts both qualitatively and quantitatively (as Bayes’ a priori 
probability);
•	 the propensity directly generates the trading strategy or set of trading 
strategies (2) which the economic operator operates in the finan­
cial market;
•	 once the trading strategy has been established, the internal a priori 
selection device validates it or not, as the case may be (3); validation 
or invalidation is performed from the perspective of propensity;
•	 the validated trading strategy generates (4) the individual transaction 
(or the set of individual transactions compatible with that trading 
strategy);
•	 again, the internal a priori selection device verifies the acceptability of 
the individual transaction (or set of individual transactions) in 
question (5);
4  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS: THE FINANCIAL AUTOPOIESIS 

232
•	 if the individual transaction is validated, it is operationalized, bearing, 
through this operationalization, the selective impact of the external 
environment (which will be discussed below, and therefore not repre­
sented in the picture); more specifically, the internal regulator carries 
out an assessment, for the time being, internal, that is, only from the 
perspective of the economic operator (e.g., on the return in the finan­
cial market) (6);
•	 subsequently, the internal regulator shall forward the result of this 
assessment to the relevant trading strategy (7);
•	 as a result of the assessment by the internal regulator of the APMH 
model, the trading strategy may change, but only through pro­
pensity (8).
Behaviour
The behaviour of a system refers, as is well known, to the whole of the 
relationships between the components of that system, on the one hand, 
and the environment of the system in question, on the other hand, that is 
to say to the relationships which take place through transiting of the system 
membrane. Therefore, in order to examine the behaviour of the APMH 
model, it is necessary to determine the composition of its environment.
APMH Environment
It must firstly be said that, in the APMH model, the environment is the 
second component of the pair ‘species–environment’, the two components 
being opposable, structurally and functionally, to each other, although, as 
shown and will continue to be shown, they are in a co-­evolutionary rela­
tionship within the APMH model. The financial species is, in this case, the 
financial market that contains, as individuals (population) the trading strat­
egies, with their concrete ways of manifestation within the environment, 
called individual transactions.
The components of the environment in the APMH model of the finan­
cial market are the following:
•	 cultural geodesic ( script upper C script upper G ): cultural geodesic is a normative ‘attractor’ 
(either with formal/codified norms or informal norms, including val­
ues, historical traditions, customs, etc.) that ‘curves’ any behaviour 
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

233
(i.e., any decision that leads to an action—act or abstention). Cultural 
geodesic obviously has a strong contextual character (of space, respec­
tively time) and is adjustable, both by its own logic and as a result of 
its co-evolution with the actually influenced behaviours. Cultural 
geodesic is the main factor in the selection of trading strategy—in 
terms of force of selection;
•	
script upper R script upper T script upper S
­
142
•	 external regulator ( script upper R Superscript e ): refers to the device, normative and behav­
ioural, associated with the environment of the species called financial 
market, which ensures the co-evolutionary dynamics of the environ­
ment, in tandem with the financial species. The external regulator is 
the one that generates the mutation in the two operational compo­
nents of the environment (cultural geodesic, respectively other finan­
cial individuals, of course, closely related to propensity).
From a theoretical point of view, we therefore have the following types 
of selection that are exerted on a given trading strategy:
•	 semetic selection ( double struck upper S double struck upper S ): selection exerted/operated, directly, by cul­
tural geodesic—that is, do u
b
l
e  struck upper S double struck upper S equals f left parenthesis script upper C script upper G right parenthesis ;
•	 memetic selection ( double struck upper M double struck upper S ): the selection exerted/operated, directly, by 
the other financial individuals present (contemporary) and active in 
the financial market—i.e., do u b
l
e  struck upper M double struck upper S equals g left parenthesis script upper R script upper T script upper S right parenthesis ;
•	
double struck upper M double struck upper S double struck upper S
­
143
–– either h
 
S
u b
script double struck upper S Baseline equals f ring g
–– either h
 
S
u b
script double struck upper M Baseline equals g ring f
All three categories of the above selection form the external a posteriori 
selection module ( sc
ript upper S Subscript a Superscript e ):
4  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS: THE FINANCIAL AUTOPOIESIS 

234
	
	
­
S
ubscript a Superscript i Baseline script upper S
144
Therefore, the overall selection under the APMH model is:
	
	
APMH Behaviour
4.16
 
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

235
 Short Discussion
•	 Also, within the behaviour associated with the APMH model, the 
fundamental principle remains isolated, in the sense that it manifests 
a total invariance, precisely in order to preserve the model itself;
•	 propensity (or proference) is affected, on the part of the financial 
market environment, both by the semetic selection (i.e., through cul­
tural geodesic) and by the memetic selection (i.e., through other 
trading strategies operated on the market and contemporary with the 
trading strategy concerned);
•	 the trading strategy is affected exclusively through the individual 
transaction which, in turn, is subject to both semetic selection and 
memetic selection, as soon as the elasticity of the individual transac­
tion is exceeded, as we have already shown in FMAB-APH (Dinga 
et al., 2022);
•	 in turn, when the own pressure threshold from the individual transac­
tion is exceeded, the trading strategy can affect the propensity, lead­
ing to what we will discuss below regarding the genetic mutation 
within the APMH model;
•	 there is an inter-conditioning, often causal, between the two catego­
ries of selection (internal and external), on the one hand, and between 
the internal regulator (of functionality) and the external regulator (of 
behaviour), on the other hand.
Notes
1.	 We remind that the individual (phenotype) of this species is the trading 
strategy, whose praxiological hypostasis is the individual transaction.
2.	 The hypothesis of financial market autopoieticity is a more general hypoth­
esis than that of adaptive preference (so it encompasses the latter). 
Specifically, as we will show below, the hypothesis of autopoieticity involves 
the functioning of both adaptive preference (by adjusting propensity) and 
constructal law or, more generally, minimal entropic interaction—both 
discussed very briefly above.
3.	 Given the sufficiency predicate called relational openness, operational clo­
sure can, of course, use flows that come from the system environment 
(substance, energy, information)—it is important that decisions do not 
come directly from the environment, as can happen in the case of sustain­
able systems, where we have operational openness.
4.	 It is about the trinomial RE(1)E(2) (reason/rationality–experience–emo­
tion), which is the modal filter discussed in FMAB-APH (Dinga 
et al., 2022).
4  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS: THE FINANCIAL AUTOPOIESIS 

236
5.	 We remind that freedom means the capacity of the human individual to 
oppose social necessity (in this case, normative necessity). Nota bene: of 
course, not the natural necessity, although some nuances may exist here: 
for example, self-murderers may choose (based on free will) not to feed—
feeding is a natural necessity, generated by the principle of survival.
6.	 Of course, from a logical point of view, it is a question not of associating 
the propensity of a TS but, but conversely, of associating a TS with a pro­
pensity, since several TSs can be associated with a propensity, while several 
propensities cannot be associated with a TS (obviously related to the same 
human individual).
7.	 Although it may also be an inertia that is claimed from the archetype 
(Gustav Jung’s term for the appointment of the collective unconscious—a 
relatively common unconscious of all human individuals, on which the 
modelling, logical and, partially, quantitative, of behaviourism is based). 
The possibility that the archetype is used as a predictor of the emotional 
behaviour of human individuals is not negligible, despite the approxima­
tion it implies (an approximation that is, moreover, much reduced by the 
‘law’ of the tendency to average, also valued by behaviourism–see here, 
especially Kahneman).
8.	 As we have shown in detail above, here are a number of significance 
thresholds that must be exceeded quantitatively for the propensity adjust­
ment (which means the production of the genetic autopoietic mutation) 
to be achieved.
9.	 Obviously, the adjustment of adjustment is simply an adjustment of the 
statu quo, so it falls under the first type of propensity inertia.
10.	 That is why it was so easy for Samuelson to propose the concept of revealed 
preference—it would have been much harder to propose a measure of 
(variation of) propensity, that is, a measure to act ex-ante.
11.	 Note that the modal filter RE(1)E(2) is applied in ‘reverse’ order: E(2)E(1)R 
(see FMAB-APH (Dinga et al., 2022)).
12.	 As we have already shown, some normative constraints have to go through 
the modal filter of the economic agent in order to have an impact on the 
propensity, but this time it is about external constraints that are imposed 
without the mediation of the economic agent.
13.	 But, of course, there may be considerations that do not appeal to the loss–
gain binomial: for example, ideological considerations or those related to 
religious traditions or general cultural value and which have the same 
result as cost–benefit analyses.
14.	 Here, of course, we recognize the exercise of free will.
15.	 These mutations are mainly subject to the threshold effect, so to speak.
16.	 The fact that we do not have six (3 × 2) distinct types of autopoietic muta­
tions is explained by the fact that, logically, we have two exclusions: fol­
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

237
low-up mutations cannot be, at the same time, strategic, respectively 
induced mutations cannot be operational in nature (given the freedom of 
the financial market).
17.	 The model of rationality (i.e., justification), itself, is not acquired, selected, 
assumed and so on, necessarily, in ways that, in turn, are rational. In fact, 
most of the time, the model of rationality is a set (system) of beliefs that, 
as accepted, are (or even must be) a-rational. For example, any propensity 
(which can ‘come’ even from the oldest archetypes—in Jung’s terminol­
ogy, here) is such a model of rationality/justification. Nota bene: concep­
tually, the rationalization operation and the justification operation are 
equivalent, regardless of whether such an operation is performed ex-ante 
or ex-post.
18.	 It is simply a belief, in the sense of credence (see also David Lewis, with his 
concept of finkish, discussed in the semantic margin of the concept of 
propensity).
19.	 This is, of course, a logical consequence whose inference respects the rules 
of validity in this case (e.g., the rules of syllogistics).
20.	 Some scientists think that the institutional artefacts (as, e.g., the financial 
market) should be considered as non-living entities. Indeed, they are not 
at all biological entities, that is, they are not biologically living systems 
(BLSs). However, according to our considerations on the concept of liv­
ing entity, such artefacts could be, with sufficient entitlement, as logically 
living systems. As we speak about living systems (no matter as biological or 
logical ones), it is obvious that the passing from (natural) biologically liv­
ing world to (cultural) logically living world is a natural passing, from sci­
entific perspective.
21.	 Here, we have the very concept of social necessity, which is different from 
the natural necessity.
22.	 Threshold, accumulability, inertia aspects and so on, which have been dis­
cussed in the case of the adaptive preference of the financial market, are 
valid, mutatis mutandis, also in the case of the autopoietic market hypoth­
esis, which we discuss here (Nota bene: we believe that we can even talk 
about a paradigm, but this conjecture will be rigorously examined, based 
on the methodology proposed by the authors in this matter in FMAB-
APH (Dinga et al., 2022)).
23.	 Of course, at the right time, the quantitative measures (or metrics) needed 
to rigorously model and (as far as possible) to obtain the predictability of 
the behaviour involved will be proposed.
24.	 Lakatos’ intention was to ‘reconcile’ Thomas Kuhn’s historical vision (the 
concept of paradigm, introduced in his work, The Structure of Scientific 
Revolutions (Kuhn, 1970)), with Karl Popper’s logical vision (set out in 
The Logic of Discovery) (Popper, 2005) but, in the end, a new conceptual 
4  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS: THE FINANCIAL AUTOPOIESIS 

238
model of research and testing in science resulted. And yet, the impression 
of an ad hoc hypothesis (in Popper’s sense) is difficult to avoid in connec­
tion with Lakatos’ proposal: saving the hard core as the source of the 
refuted conjecture does not increase the probability of refuting it (as 
Popper demands in exchange for accepting ad hoc hypotheses) but, obvi­
ously, it reduces it, because it sacrifices in the ‘first line’ (the protection 
belt) pawns through which it saves the ‘king’, to make an analogy with the 
game of chess.
25.	 This argument has logical validity only when passing from genus to species.
26.	 We repeat that by the amount of mutation we mean a product between the 
size of the mutation (or its intensity) and the duration over which the 
mutation manifests (or, in almost all cases, its repetition). Somehow, it is 
about exceeding an energetic (more precisely, entropic) significance 
threshold.
27.	 Of course, selective inertia also acts in the case of selection specific to bio­
logical evolution, if the saltationist hypothesis proposed by Gould is 
accepted.
28.	 Obviously, in the case of biological selection, the two steps overlap, that is, 
the environment of the biological system performs both the factual selec­
tion and its ratification (decisional selection).
29.	 The discussion could be extended (which will not be done here, for obvi­
ous reasons), so as to highlight an even more general result than the one 
stated, namely, that any symbolic species is a quasi-autonomous exo-
somatic device, and this quasi-autonomy necessarily requires the interme­
diation of the human agent in the matter of mutation, respectively of 
evolutionary selection.
30.	 It can be shown that the APMH model could be operationally named as a 
homo socionomicus model—a sui generis combination of the homo œco­
nomicus model with the homo biologicus model (Dinga, 2017).
31.	 Sporadic references to this type of entropy, different from the thermody­
namic one, have been made before but, in the following, the concept in 
question will be developed to a sufficient extent to substantiate the auto­
poietic model of the financial market.
32.	 The careful reader has noticed, of course, the semantic equivalence 
between the autopoietic system and the second order cybernetic system.
33.	 We remind you that the proference (concept and term proposed by us) 
represents the methodological mix (pair) propensity–preference.
34.	 See, about the distinction between real economic flows–financial economic 
flows–nominal economic flows, also Emil Dinga, Rebuilding Economics. A 
Logical, Methodological, and Epistemological Approach (Dinga, 2012—
Chap. 9, Sect. 9.2). An excerpt from this chapter is presented in Annex 6.1.
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

239
35.	 The main impact of this functional restoration is the reduction of the risk 
of autonomization of nominal flows in relation to real flows—the autono­
mization in question is the origin of the so-called financial bubbles.
36.	 To some extent, the two mechanisms are also substitutable, but up to a 
threshold that will be examined in detail below—above that threshold, 
substitutability becomes inhibitory.
37.	 As we will show below, the two mechanisms are contingent, but this con­
tingency contains a certain necessity, which we can call contingency-­
generated necessity or intra-contingent necessity.
38.	 This term, respectively the concept it designates, is introduced by the 
authors of this study.
39.	 It should be noted that we are, in this respect, on nominalist ontological 
positions.
40.	 The concept of ophelimity (proposed by Vilfredo Pareto) seems to be more 
appropriate but, from the perspective of this paper, it will be considered 
substitutable with that of utility (strictly limited to economic satisfaction). 
It should be noted that both utility and ophelimity were, in turn, rejected 
and replaced by Irving Fisher with the concept of wantability.
41.	 Conceptually, a crisis (economic, social, political, cultural, etc.) is a pres­
sure of real events on the established order—this can lead either to an 
improvement of the current order or to its replacement with another 
order. An improvement/adjustment of order could be achieved through 
reform, while its replacement is the result of a revolution (either cognitive, 
social or political, as the case may be).
42.	 We remind the reader that an abduction is a prima facie explanation, or 
rather, the most plausible prima facie explanation that further enters into 
a deductive process of reasoning as incomplete primary induction.
43.	 Where and when this complete and perfect predictability does not take 
place, the cause for this is our incomplete and imperfect knowledge, that 
is, it is a temporal or local (historical) accident.
44.	 Moreover, in this field (especially in practical relationships) there is a cer­
tain indiscernibility between subject and object or, in other words, there is 
a permanent and unpredictable transition of the subject into object and 
vice versa.
45.	 Most often tacitly, such an attribution system is used when talking about 
something rational, irrational or a-rational. So, some results are rational, 
related to a certain model of rationality, but could be irrational, related to 
another model of rationality (generally contradictory to the first). Basically, 
nothing can be absolutely rational or irrational, but only relative to a 
model of rationality (similarly must be thought about a-rational).
46.	 The weakening of intelligibility related to causation occurs by replacing 
the cause (understood as a primary cause or as a cause of last resort) with 
4  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS: THE FINANCIAL AUTOPOIESIS 

240
the causal mechanism or causal device. A causal mechanism/device is a 
causal chain that does not aspire to obtain the primary cause, but only the 
proximal one. For example, most economic or social correlations are noth­
ing more than the most plausible proximal cause (Nota bene: note the 
semantic intersection of the concept of the most plausible proximal cause 
with the concept of abduction).
47.	 The difference between perception and representation (as suggested by 
cognitive psychology or phenomenology) is as follows: perception involves 
the presence hic et nunc (i.e., in person) of the perceived entity, while rep­
resentation can perform perceptions without requiring presence (in per­
son) of the entity concerned (e.g., by memory, fantasy, etc.—Nota bene: 
phenomenology refers to representation as a presentification, as opposed 
to perception which is called presentation).
48.	 Perhaps, free will should be accepted in any subject who is ‘endowed’ with 
psychism, without requiring the more restrictive condition of intellectual 
(or rational) capacity.
49.	 Logically, the explanation (as a coherent description of causality) and the 
prediction are equivalent. In other words, the prediction is a previous 
explanation, while the explanation is a future prediction. It is easy to see 
that this equivalence is true only in the natural realm (i.e., in the realm 
where necessity is sovereign).
50.	 Of course, complexity can characterize both simple and complicated sys­
tems. So, in the economic and social field we can have difficulties of under­
standing (due to complicatedness) like in the natural field, but such 
cognitive and praxiological difficulties based on complicatedness are not 
necessary but contingent.
51.	 A systematic examination of the problem of justification in epistemology 
(and, more generally, in gnoseology) is provided by the philosopher Susan 
Haack in her work Evidence and Inquiry: A Pragmatist Reconstruction of 
Epistemology (Haack, 2009).
52.	 The type of belief, rational or irrational (e.g., faith), is irrelevant.
53.	 We have here a support for justifying the phenomenological extrapolation 
of behaviour, which statistical data (in time series, e.g.) cannot do at all 
(see the risk of too much confirmation of the past, i.e., the risk of too 
much R2of the time series).
54.	 Nozick insists on the need to construct a theory of choice of principles 
analogous to the theory of choice of goods (or, we might add, to the 
theory of public choice), because it is not clear why a less powerful prin­
ciple would not be chosen so as to less penalties will be paid if it is violated.
55.	 Ramsey delimits himself from Keynes’s approach to subjective probabili­
ties (also based on beliefs), as he considers that Keynes introduces a circu­
larity in the justification of belief, namely, the circularity between two 
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

241
logical sentences. Here lies, in fact, the vast problem and the literature of 
justification.
56.	 Based on the entire discussion in this research, it follows that propensity 
cannot be a principle (although it can be a mechanism). We will return to 
this consequence.
57.	 The principle acts as a geodesic that ‘curves’ the behaviour and thus 
changes the meaning of that behaviour.
58.	 The suggestion that the symbolic utility (i.e., the usefulness of a principle) 
depends on the impact that that principle has on others has a special 
importance that deserves to be theorized, especially from a co-evolution­
ary perspective. An evolutionary (or co-evolutionary) model of principles 
could be of the greatest theoretical and, especially, praxiological interest 
(but, of course, also practical).
59.	 We strongly insist that the sign not be confused with the symbol—from 
the name of symbolic utility it does not follow at all that the principle 
(which is the institutional source of symbolic utility) is itself a symbol. It, 
the principle, acts, as we have suggested, as a sign.
60.	 The relationship between subject and object is a praxiological action (or 
activity). The symbolic utility implies, however, especially subject–subject 
relations, which constitute practical actions (activities).
61.	 The theory of expected utility, proposed by John von Neumann and Oskar 
Morgenstern (Theory of Games and Economic Behaviour) (von Neumann 
& Morgenstern, 2007).
62.	 With all the adjustments that have been made over time (starting with 
Simon’s bounded rationality) but that keep the model within the axioms 
of neoclassical economic theory.
63.	 And, in most cases, considered invariant over the time horizon of the anal­
ysis in question.
64.	 For example, even the research direction associated with behaviourism 
also uses the substantive utility for the development of individual decision 
systems.
65.	 Whether we are talking about a cardinal utility or an ordinal one—both 
offer measurements or measures, although the former is able to provide 
direct quantitative comparisons, while the latter is only able to provide 
hierarchical comparisons.
66.	 From a technical point of view, this means obtaining an extreme value 
(either maximum or minimum, as the case may be) of a function-objective 
that is subject to a set of constraints, usually expressed mathematically/
equationally.
67.	 One of the most ingenious (and already influential) proposals for financial 
market theory is made exactly from the perspective of survival, not optimi­
4  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS: THE FINANCIAL AUTOPOIESIS 

242
zation, that is, similar to the functioning of the biological world—it is 
about Adaptive Market Hypothesis (Lo, 2019).
68.	 The term satisficing is a terminological invention of Herbert Simon, 
related to his hypothesis of bounded rationality. From a technical point of 
view, it is a combination of the terms satisfying and suffice, that is, it means 
sufficient satisfaction, not optimal.
69.	 It is obvious that here we are committing a method plagiarism (from 
Simon, mentioned above) by constructing a hybrid term, symboficing from 
the terms symbolic, and suffice.
70.	 Similar to those mentioned in the previous note, we construct a hybrid 
term, mazifficing, from the Greek term μαζί, which means together, in 
one place, integral and suffice, that is, a sufficient satisfaction at the inte­
gral level, so which refers to the integral utility felt by an individual—sub­
stantive, evidential and symbolic.
71.	 Perhaps, among the well-known extreme positions on the concept of eco­
nomic value (on the one hand, the Marxist basis of socially necessary time, 
and, on the other hand, marginalism) a third could (or should) be exam­
ined as a more important anchor of the economic value, namely, the 
amount of low entropy with which a given entity is endowed. Of course, 
in such a ‘theory’, goods and services also constitute capital. By the way, a 
(considerable) part of the goods and services produced in the economy are 
intended for intermediate consumption, that is, they are considered con­
ceptually to be capital goods and services.
72.	 Of course, the question of so-called natural capital arises here: in our opin­
ion, the concept of natural capital is a contradictio in terminis if we con­
sider the two predicates of sufficiency mentioned. Nota bene: any human 
intervention on a potential natural resource transforms it into capital (pro­
vided that it does not enter into final consumption, but into intermediate 
consumption) but only with this interventionist condition (e.g., a virgin 
forest is not of the nature of natural capital, it is only a natural resource).
73.	 Consequently, the phrase ‘human capital’ (see, here, the (too) enthusiastic 
works of Gary Becker) regardless of what is meant by it—physical strength, 
intellectual education, health and so on—is, at most, a metaphor (failed, 
we believe).
74.	 It is obvious that the instruction and education of the individual (includ­
ing the qualification) cannot be of the nature of capital, because people are 
not artefacts as a result of economic action, although, in part, it is an arte­
fact as a result of cultural action.
75.	 Not to confuse the predicate substantial (regarding substance, physicality) 
with the predicate substantive (regarding palpable, fungible reward).
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

243
76.	 In short, free will means the possibility, capacity and desire of individuals 
to oppose or reject external decisions or acts (more precisely, to ignore or 
reject them directly) of social origin (generally, not of natural source).
77.	 Perhaps, a more appropriate name for this concept could be homogeneity.
78.	 The concept of communication used here has nothing to do with that of 
communication used by Niklas Luhmann in his famous theory of autopoi­
etic society—in the present discussion, this concept has its usual meaning, 
of transmitting information or data between a sender and a receiver. (Nota 
bene: this is exactly what was considered in the theory of information 
entropy proposed by Claude Shannon.)
79.	 The notions of commitment or involvement can be considered as 
equivalent.
80.	 This includes the formal construction of the institutions themselves, which 
are to facilitate the participation of individuals.
81.	 Here the notion of politics has the widest possible meaning.
82.	 What is called, in the theory of social justice, the basic structure of society.
83.	 In general, a contract is simply a free will agreement, without the obliga­
tion of any means of proof, written or otherwise (e.g., the J.J. Rousseau-ian 
social contract).
84.	 What is called ordinal utility (or, more pompously, the ordinal theory of 
utility) is just a clumsy attempt to order … the cardinality, which also 
means a cardinal approach: for example, to say that utility A is greater than 
utility B is equivalent to saying that utility A is situated, in order of prefer­
ence, to the left of utility B, on an imaginary line oriented from left to 
right, supra-­posed, for example, on the straight line of natural numbers 
(which, as a set, has, as is well known, dimension 1, so it contains elements 
with dimension 0, such as the numbers associated with cardinal utilities).
85.	 This ignoring does not detract from the generality of the discussion, 
because the evidential utility has a rather different role from both the sub­
stantive utility and the symbolic utility.
86.	 It should be noted that those moral norms that are codified (formalized) 
leave the moral territory and enter the legal one.
87.	 Of course, the fundamental character of the issue must be discussed 
separately.
88.	 Otherwise, there is a rupture between the individual and society (see, e.g., 
the historical cases of dissidents), generally for political reasons, but it 
should be noted that political precepts are, in essence, moral precepts, not 
legal/positive ones.
89.	 Most economic phenomena/processes are modelled with logistic func­
tion/curves, which means that, at the beginning, those phenomena/pro­
cesses show an accelerated ‘accumulation’, then, after a threshold 
(inflection point from a mathematical point of view) decelerates to a new 
4  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS: THE FINANCIAL AUTOPOIESIS 

244
threshold that could be of three kinds: (a) a new inflection point, (b) a 
turning point and (c) an asymptotic point (as in our case). Nota bene: the 
same seems to happen in the case of economic crises (more precisely, 
financial ones).
90.	 Unlike the absolute substantive utility which, by decreasing, generates a 
negative marginal substantive utility, the absolute symbolic utility cannot 
decrease when the ‘consumption of symbolic goods’ increases above the 
asymptotic point, it simply becomes stationary; consequently, the marginal 
symbolic utility becomes null, but not negative.
91.	 In essence, maximization/minimization, on the one hand, and optimiza­
tion, on the other hand, are much different processes: maximization/
minimization is not always subject to constraints (e.g., a mathematical 
function has a maximum/minimum point as a solution of the first deriva­
tive, when the second derivative is negative/positive, without any other 
conditioning outside its own parameters/coefficients), while optimization 
is possible only within a set of constraints (we have, here, a conditional 
closure similar to the theoretical closure of Heisenberg).
92.	 To review, here, the enthusiasm (almost impossible to discourage) with 
which many quantitative analysts of the economy ‘optimize’ a function-­
objective according to two concomitant and … contradictory criteria (the 
best-known example: maximizing the effect and minimizing the effort).
93.	 The question whether such a replication should be of the same size as in 
the previous replication episode, or should be at a larger or smaller size, is 
not relevant from a theoretical point of view, but only from an empirical 
(i.e., contingent) point of view. For example, regarding consumerism, as a 
moral, perhaps replication should occur to a lesser extent than in previous 
episodes of replication (in general, it seems that sustainability is attribut­
able, from such a perspective, to symbolic utility as well).
94.	 It should be noted that the permanent replication of optimization is (iron­
ically) a kind of sustainability of optimization, according to the definition 
provided for the concept of sustainability. Of course, some theoretical 
(somehow speculative) developments can be started from this point.
95.	 This is how the phenomenon of globalization came about.
96.	 A peremptory example here is the relocation of economic activities caused 
either by lower costs (e.g., moving companies to lower-wage countries) or 
by easier access to natural resources of raw materials and energy.
97.	 See the ‘indispensable’ (though trivial) Likert scale.
98.	 That is, as suggested above, a shift from rationality to intelligibility.
99.	 We will ignore, as we have already mentioned, the procedural/evidential 
utility, because it has justifying functions, not being additive to either the 
substantive or the symbolic utility, although it can increase the integral 
utility.
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

245
100.	 The procedural/evidential utility is less obvious (and, moreover, less used 
in the literature). We recall that it refers to that utility which has (or con­
tains or can mobilize) principles to prove or justify or test either a decision 
or a behaviour and so on.
101.	 Some elementary (defining) mathematical features of integral utility (IU) 
are the following: (1) IU = EU ⨁ SU; (2) SU = α ∙ EU; (3) CSU = β ∙ IU; 
(4) upp
er
 C
 u
pper S upper U equals StartFraction upper Delta upper S upper U Over upper Delta upper I upper U EndFraction
; (5) S
t
a
rt
F
raction partial differential upper E upper U Over partial differential q EndFraction greater than 0 ; (6) S
t
a
r
t
F
ra
ction partial differential squared upper E upper U Over partial differential q squared EndFraction less than 0
; (7) S
t
a
r
t
F
ra
ction partial differential cubed upper E upper U Over partial differential q cubed EndFraction greater than 0
; (8) S
t
a
rt
F
raction partial differential upper S upper U Over partial differential q EndFraction greater than 0 ; 
(9) S
t
a
r
t
F
ra
ction partial differential squared upper S upper U Over partial differential q squared EndFraction greater than 0
; (10) S
t
a
r
t
F
ra
ction partial differential cubed upper S upper U Over partial differential q cubed EndFraction less than 0
, where α and β are structural parameters 
(more or less empirical) and q is the ‘quantity’ of good involved.
102.	 The phrase ‘individual agency’ has, here, the meaning of individual activ­
ism (diligence).
103.	 Despite the fundamentalist belief of economists, the social game is domi­
nated by cooperation, not competition. Moreover, conceptually, competi­
tion is a kind of cooperation.
104.	 It should be mentioned that it is not only about contemporary individuals, 
with whom one actually interacts, but also about non-contemporary indi­
viduals, from whom one borrows beliefs, ideologies, principles, models, 
reasonings, arguments, evaluations and so on.
105.	 It is obvious that by so-called authentic preferences, these authors mean 
the invariant, given preferences. We do not think that anyone could prove 
that adaptive preferences are not genuine preferences—in fact, perhaps a 
solution to this problem would be to consider as genuine preference 
exactly the preference objectified by decision and action (not limited to 
what Samuelson calls revealed preference but generated, as we do in this 
research, by propensity).
106.	 The idea of the symbolic nature of revealed preferences is one that deserves 
further development, because these revealed preferences can ‘hide’ (i.e., 
contain) principles of behaviour.
107.	 We recall that the concept of adaptive preference, as a hypothesis of the 
financial market, was addressed quite analytically in FMAB-APH.
108.	 It is, of course, about social fitness, previously discussed, customized for 
the case of the trading strategy in the financial market.
109.	 We remind the reader that while EMH verified the sufficiency predicates 
of a paradigm, AMH failed in this verification (see FMAB-APH).
110.	 At this point, the following problem arises: we remember that, in the case 
of AMH, the value of that model was the heuristics, so we need to operate 
the semantic distinction between heuristics and adaptive replicativity. 
Firstly, heuristics do not logically involve either adaptation or replication 
(in their rigid sense) and, obviously, neither adaptive replicativity (i.e., the 
two phenomena taken in their synergistic interaction). Heuristics is simply 
4  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS: THE FINANCIAL AUTOPOIESIS 

246
a value that rejects rationality (and, a fortiori, hyper-rationality, as in the 
case of value in the EMH model) and can, at most, establish replicativity 
(as a singular property) or replication (as a singular process). In conclu­
sion, the value called adaptive replicativity is a conjunction between repli­
cability/replication and adaptability/adaptation, which, as we will show 
below, involves both rationality and heuristics—of course, it does not fol­
low that APMH achieves an integration of EMH and AMH, in the mirror 
with Lo’s claim to be integrated EMH and BMH. The question might 
also be asked: why we do not formulate the value of the APMH model 
simply as self-replicability, instead as adaptive replicability? Our answer is 
this: although the property of autopoiesis, essential in the APMH model, 
has the connotation of self, ­however replication of the trading strategy 
(which is the phenotype in this model) is not, in itself, a self-replication, 
because, as we have shown (and we will insist on this important aspect), 
the replication of the trading strategy is an effect of the combination of 
emergence and deliberation, sufficient to reject the wording ‘self-replica­
bility’. This ‘obstacle’ lies in the fact, already mentioned before, but to 
which we will refer further, that the financial individual is not autono­
mous—its genotype (propensity) is external to it, being a psychic (struc­
tural) property of the human individual.
111.	 As we have shown before, the variation that is preserved, from a dimen­
sional point of view, inside the ‘variation tunnel’ is subsumed to the elastic­
ity, not the plasticity of the respective system.
112.	 It is understood that the variation (adaptation, plasticity) of IT occurs 
both under PT and between PT and RT.
113.	 Incommensurability (which we can qualify as inter-strategic) not much 
different from the inter-paradigmatic incommensurability theorized by 
Kuhn (Kuhn, 2012).
114.	 We draw attention to the fact that the fundamental principle phrase of the 
APMH model refers, here, exclusively to the core of the model and there 
should be no confusion with the fundamental principle phrase used to 
describe the essence of the APMH model. Perhaps, from the perspective 
of the APMH core, we could use the phrase principle of substantiation, 
instead of fundamental principle, this being, moreover, the direct meaning 
of this expression in this use.
115.	 Regarding the term mazifficing, see also note 259.
116.	 We saw, in FMAB-APH, that, in the case of the Adaptive Preference 
Hypothesis (APH) model, the core is represented by an adjusted selfish­
ness, compared to the Efficient Market Hypothesis (EMH) model where 
selfishness was seen in its original (non-qualified) denotation.
117.	 Further developments could introduce into the ‘equation’ the evidential 
utility (procedural, behavioural).
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

247
118.	 The value of the APMH model, as formulated here, will be the conceptual 
link that will allow the APMH model to integrate the APH model (Nota 
bene: and, moreover, the NPH model—natural price hypothesis—which 
will be addressed in a subsequent study).
119.	 As we have noted before, many times, there is no evolution (neither in the 
biological case nor in the logical case), but only (and always) co-­evolution. 
Of course, in order to make a verbal saving, we can talk about evolution, 
but every time we use this term we will have to understand that it is about 
co-evolution. Note also that, logically, evolution (understood outside the 
meaning of co-evolution) is impossible: let us admit that we have a S sys­
tem that works (e.g., lives) in a ES environment. Suppose, further, that we 
accept only the evolution of S, while ES is considered invariant. Although 
it is invariant (in relation to the variation of S), however ES has a number 
of ‘degrees of freedom’ (which is rigid in relation to S) within which S can 
vary so as to ensure, at the same time, its eligibility for positive selection by 
ES—we denote the set of these ‘freedoms’ with u
p p
e
r
 
F
 
S
u
p
e
r
s
c
r
i
p
t
 upper E Super Subscript upper S Baseline equals StartSet e 1 Superscript upper S Baseline comma e 2 Superscript upper S Baseline comma ellipsis comma e Subscript n Sub Subscript e Subscript Superscript upper S Baseline EndSet
. It fol­
lows that, as long as the variation of S does not violate any of the values 
(quantitative, qualitative, rhythm, etc.) e 
Subscript i Superscript upper S
 (with i
 e
quals ModifyingAbove 1 comma n Subscript e Baseline With bar
, S) can evolve 
within ES. Since ne is a finite (natural) number, after the exhaustion of all 
‘freedoms’, S can no longer evolve, since ES no longer produces other 
‘freedoms’ as an effect of the evolution of S, because it is invariant related 
to S. Obviously, the production of new ‘freedom’ of ES is possible if and 
only if we have co-evolution, that is, if we consider the co-evolutionary 
pair (S − ES). Therefore, an environment that does not co-evolve is an 
environment that does not allow any evolution (or only a finite evolution).
120.	 The double clarification is needed here, since a number of freedoms may 
be limited, but freedoms as such may be variable. Variability within the 
same number of freedoms can increase the scope of eligibility for a positive 
selection. If, to this plasticity of freedoms is added the variability of the 
number of freedoms, then we obtain a complete picture of the evolution­
ary availability of the concept of methodological co-evolutionism.
121.	 Therefore, the conservative criterion does not refer to the actual aspect (or 
only to the actual aspect) but mainly (or also concerns) the potential 
aspect, that is, it does not refer only to replication, but also to 
replicability.
122.	 We repeat the crucial difference, which we make in this research, between 
the usual definition of fitness (including financial one, mutatis mutandis), 
as a degree of adequacy to the environment or to the interaction with the 
environment, and the definition we make: degree of adaptive replicability. 
Of course, the biggest and most relevant consequences of this distinction 
will be highlighted through the formalizations associated with the logical 
model of APMH.
4  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS: THE FINANCIAL AUTOPOIESIS 

248
123.	 For the moment, we do not discuss the problem of the two objections to 
the criterion of falsifiability proposed by Popper (but which we can resume 
later), namely, (a) Duhem-Quine thesis and (b) Lakatos thesis.
124.	 We still hold within the bivalent epistemic logic (proposed by Aristotle), in 
which the principle of the excluded third lef
t
 parenthesis upper A upper V upper A overbar right parenthesis  is valid.
125.	 In this reasoning we will also ignore the evidential utility component of 
integral utility.
126.	 Of course, another problem may arise here: perhaps the discussion should 
be deepened to the concept of the structure of preference regarding the 
utility. Thus, an individual might have a greater preference for substantive 
utility, compared to a preference for symbolic utility, within the same level 
of integral utility. Even in this case, we consider that such a possible prefer­
ence regarding the structure of integral utility will be manifested directly 
in establishing the substitutability thresholds between substantive utility 
and symbolic utility, so there is no need for separate theoretical or meth­
odological considerations. However, finer analyses of preference and, in 
particular, adaptive preference, could make interesting contributions to 
the behaviour of economic actors in the APMH model.
127.	 From an instrumental point of view, we could conceive the preference 
generated by propensity (i.e., as we called it in this research, proference) as 
a vector with two components: one on trading strategy (or a distribution 
of trading strategies), and another on the structure of integral utility. In 
this case, the proference could be analysed as a vector of position (or posi­
tional vector).
128.	 The critical mass of anomalies can be viewed from at least four significant 
perspectives: (a) the number of accumulated anomalies; (b) the gap of the 
anomalies compared to the ‘normal’ expectation; (c) frequency of occur­
rence/reporting of anomalies and (d) the sensitivity of the economic 
agents to anomalies. The most important perspective is, of course, that of 
the sensitivity of economic agents: their perception of anomalies can oper­
ate relatively independently of the integral utility of financial market opera­
tions, so a decision on the choice of trading strategy and its content from 
the point of view of individual inferable transactions can be, to some 
extent, in a position contrary to the decision based directly on return.
129.	 We present these characteristics given that it is a new concept, proposed in 
this study—by positioning in relation to both methodological individual­
ism, which is specific to neoclassical economic theory (i.e., microeconomic 
approaches), and methodological holism, which is specific to macroeco­
nomic approaches, but both with a static ‘posture’.
130.	 Of course, with the necessary precautions regarding the transition from 
microeconomic to macroeconomic, in order to avoid (or sufficiently 
reduce) the paradox/fallacy of composition.
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

249
131.	 This acceptability is judged (and judgeable), of course, from the perspec­
tive of the integral utility that the economic agent involved obtains from 
the operationalization of a trading strategy (through the set of individual 
transactions consistent with that trading strategy).
132.	 From an instrumental point of view, here appears the possibility of topo­
logical modelling and analysis, because the concept of neighbourhood 
intervenes—we can talk about a homeorhetic neighbourhood.
133.	 We have also mentioned before that the use of the phrase ‘efficient cause’ 
is inappropriate, because in the action of that cause no optimization occurs 
(Nota bene: efficiency means either maximizing the effect at a given effort 
or minimizing the effort at a given effect—i.e., involves optimization). 
The appropriate name is ‘effective cause’ or ‘efficacy cause’, which we use 
as well.
134.	 Of course, from a logical point of view, the two statements can be opposite 
without being contradictory, but we accept that refutation refers to both 
opposition and contradiction.
135.	 Here arises a debatable problem: in the theory of factual falsifiability, as 
conceived by Popper, corroboration is not only considered to be a non-­
decisive result (Nota bene: it can be defined, in fact, as a … yet non-­
refutation) but, in addition, it is considered as not modifying the credibility 
(or probability of being true of) the corroborated conjecture. In our opin­
ion, at least in the social field (i.e., in relation to individuals and symbolic/
logical species), the corroboration is likely, from a psychological point of 
view, to increase the propensity regarding the conjecture in question and, 
if the probability is inferred from conjecture, to increase the likelihood, for 
the economic operator concerned, of retaining that conjecture or to 
increase the economic agent’s affinity for that conjecture. The inferencing 
of probability from conjecture consists, as we have shown elsewhere, espe­
cially in determining the a priori Bayes’ probability.
136.	 Of course, this is a logical (and even psychological) summation, not an 
algebraic one. Behaviourism correctly observes, for example, that the indi­
vidual operates rather with a mental accounting (see, in this matter, the 
work of Richard Thaler, Misbehaving: The Making of Behavioral Economics 
(Thaler, 2016)).
137.	 The authors have, of course, to show, in accordance with Kuhn’s theory of 
the concept of paradigm, the way (mechanism) by which the AMPH para­
digm is constituted and positioned, in an incommensurable way, com­
pared to previous paradigms of the financial market. Nota bene: as we 
mentioned before, FMAB-APH shows that, while EMH is a financial mar­
ket paradigm, AMH is not such a paradigm. However, here are still to be 
analysed, from the perspective of their paradigmaticity, the models: FMH, 
CMH, BMH and APH.
4  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS: THE FINANCIAL AUTOPOIESIS 

250
138.	 According to the fundamental principle, propensity is the next most rigid 
component of the APMH model of the financial market.
139.	 The introduction of the a priori internal selection of the trading strategy 
is a necessary result of the proposal of the APMH model of the financial 
market in this research and represents, as we will see, a crucial element of 
the mechanism of functioning of that model (Nota bene: the mechanism 
integrates the functionality as well as the behaviour of a system), especially 
in the form of what is called self-organization (or autopoieticity) of 
a system.
140.	 We also referred to this aspect in detail in FMAB-APH, but, where it will 
be necessary, we will provide additional details in this regard.
141.	 We remind you that the two thresholds that condition the production of 
the mutation work here—one referring exclusively to the individual trans­
action, the other referring to the trading strategy.
142.	 We recall that this component of the environment of APMH model exerts a 
double selection which is called, in the literature, intra-specific selection, as 
opposed to the selection exercised by cultural geodesic, which is of the type of 
extra-specific selection (consistent with the idea that the relationship between 
the system and the environment is, in general, a relationship between co-spe­
cies—the environment being, logically, one of the co-species).
143.	 Of course, from an algebraic point of view, the conditions regarding the 
fields of definition, respectively the ranges of values involved in this com­
position, must be ensured.
144.	 The two selection modules will be combined in the APMH model mecha­
nism, see below.
References
Bonneuil, N., & Boucekkine, R. (2009). Sustainability, Optimality, and Viability 
in the Ramsey Model. Department of Economics, University of Glasgow, 
Working Papers.
Dinga, E. (2012). Rebuilding Economics. Logical, Methodological and Epistemological 
Approach. Lambert Academic Publishing.
Dinga, E. (2017). The Homo Socionomicus Model of Rationality. A Logical 
Analysis. Economic Growth under Globalization: Models of Sustainable 
Development, 1(12), 21–25.
Dinga, E., Oprean-Stan, C., Tănăsescu, C. R., Brătian, V., & Ionescu, G. M. (2022). 
Financial Market Analysis and Behaviour: The Adaptive Preference Hypothesis. 
Routledge & CRC Press.
Elster, J. (2017). Sour Grapes: Studies in the Subversion of Rationality. Cambridge 
University Press.
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

251
Fama, E. F. (1970). Efficient Capital Markets: A Review of Theory and Empirical 
Work. The Journal of Finance, 25(2), 383–417.
Farzin, Y. H. (2010). Sustainability, Optimality, and Development Policy. Review of 
Development Economics, 14(2), 262–281.
Foucault, M., Davidson, A. I., Ewald, F., & Fontana, A. (2005). The Hermeneutics 
of the Subject: Lectures at the Collège de France 1981–1982. Picador.
Haack, S. (2009). Evidence and Inquiry: A Pragmatist Reconstruction of 
Epistemology. Prometheus.
Heal, G. (2003). Optimality or Sustainability. American Economic Association 
Meetings, July 27–30, Montreal, Canada.
Hodgson, G. M. (2004). The Evolution of Institutional Economics. Routledge.
Kuhn, T. (1970). The Structure of Scientific Revolutions. Chicago, IL: University of 
Chicago Press.
Kuhn, T. S. (2012). By Thomas S. Kuhn – The Structure of Scientific Revolutions. 
University of Chicago Press.
Lakatos, I. (1978). The Methodology of Scientific Research Programmes. 
Cambridge Core.
Lo, A. (2019). Adaptive Markets. Financial Evolution at the Speed of Thought. 
Princeton University Press.
Nelson, R. R., & Winter, S. G. (1985). An Evolutionary Theory of Economic Change. 
Harvard University Press.
Nozick, R. (1994). The Nature of Rationality. Princeton University Press.
Nussbaum, M.  C. (2006). Frontiers of Justice. Disability, Nationality, Species 
Membership. The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.
Popper, K. (2005). The Logic of Scientific Discovery. Routledge.
Ramsey, F. P. (2013). The Foundations of Mathematics and Other Logical Essays 
(R. B. Braithwaite, Ed.). Martino Fine Books.
Sen, A. (2000). Development as Freedom. Alfred A. Knopf, Inc.
Thaler, R. H. (2016). Misbehaving: The Making of Behavioral Economics. 
W.W. Norton & Compan.
von Neumann, J., & Morgenstern, O. (2007). Theory of Games and Economic 
Behavior (60th Anniversary Commemorative Edition). Princeton Classic Editions.
4  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS: THE FINANCIAL AUTOPOIESIS 

253
CHAPTER 5
Autopoietic Market Hypothesis—The 
Mechanism
Autopoietic Mechanism
The autopoietic evolutionary mechanism represents the logical combina­
tion of the functionality and behaviour of a given system. As a result, it is 
necessary to make specific clarifications in relation to the components of 
the APMH model, as they were identified (at abstract, class level) above.
Genotype
We considered the genotype of the financial individual (i.e., the trading 
strategy) to be the propensity. There is a possible conceptual vulnerability 
here, because propensity is a property of the human (biological) individ­
ual, more precisely, of the human individual operating in the financial mar­
ket, that is, the economic agent, while the phenotype is represented by a 
symbolic/logical individual, belonging to a symbolic/logical species, 
called financial market. It is useful, therefore, to make some clarifications 
in this matter:
•	
1
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature 
Switzerland AG 2023
E. Dinga et al., Economic and Financial Market Behaviour, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-31702-6_5

254
­
­
•	
­
­
2
•	
3
•	 the functional autonomy of the financial individual (trading strategy) 
is obviously relative to propensity (i.e., to genotype) as in the case of 
any individual (biological or symbolic);
•	 it should be noted that the financial genotype is essentially of the 
type of theoretical rationality (i.e., that rationality that is claimed 
from a belief as a fundamental axiom);
•	
­
­
4
Let us now make some clarifications regarding the particularization of 
genotype (propensity) in the case of the APMH model of the finan­
cial market:
•	
5
6
7
­
––
8
­
­
9
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

255
––
­
10
­
–– in order to make a connection with the trading strategy, on the 
one hand, and with the individual transaction, on the other hand, 
we could say, here, that the basic belief is the one that generates 
the trading strategy and the secondary beliefs, located in the ‘pro­
tective belt’, are those that generate (or rather, customize) the 
individual transaction inferred from the trading strategy in 
question;
–– therefore, the elasticity of the basic belief is maintained as long as 
the plasticity of the ‘protective belt’ is not yet exceeded;
•	 the financial genotype, that is, of belief type, based on psychism, is 
much more stable (more precisely, more inertial) than the natural 
genotype, which is based on biological support. The explanation for 
this crucial difference lies in the following:
–– modification of the biological genotype (through genetic muta­
tion) changes the structure of the future phenotype (obtained by 
intergenerational replication), which makes it impossible (or 
almost impossible) to return to the previous structure—in other 
words, there is an arrow of biological time, to say so, caused by 
finality (not purpose!);
–– changing of the financial genotype (also through genetic muta­
tion, of course) does not change the structure of the biological 
individual (who is the ‘depository’ of the financial genotype, i.e., 
propensity), but only changes the configuration of the trading 
strategy; this change is the result of a free decision, based on the 
free will of the human individual, even if the pressure for change 
comes through a cost–benefit calculation. Exactly the decisional 
determinism coming from the free will (which considers the pur­
pose, not the simple finality, the last being proper to the biological 
case) ensures, so to speak, the reversibility of the decision regard­
ing the modification of the financial genotype;
5  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS—THE MECHANISM 

256
•	
­
11
­
­
Phenotype
­
12
­
•	 it is subject to adaptive replicability, as required by the value (V) of 
the APMH paradigm. This means that the identity mark of the trad­
ing strategy is not necessarily punctual, but allows a certain range 
within which the trading strategy is still assessed as preserved by 
adaptive replication, as being the same trading strategy;
–– like any other symbolic phenotype, the trading strategy is born 
directly as an adult, more precisely, its new version is obtained 
directly by operating the mutation (either genetic or epigenetic) 
on its old version. The consequence is that there is no (not neces­
sarily) required time for the phenotype to develop until it reaches 
adulthood (as is the case, however, for the biological ­phenotype/
individual);
––
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

257
13
–– there is no deterioration of the functions of the financial pheno­
type (unlike the case with the biological phenotype) as the pheno­
type in question functions—more precisely, the financial phenotype 
verifies one of the logical conditions of any theoretical model 
(which, note bene, is also an artefact, as well as the trading strat­
egy), namely, the preservation of performance in case of repeated 
use; therefore, the adjustment (including replacement) of the 
trading strategy is done exclusively for reasons related either to the 
economic agent’s free will (and which are directly related to pro­
pensity) or to the cost–benefit calculation performed by the eco­
nomic operator concerned; the lack of performance or the 
deterioration of the performance of a trading strategy are directly 
assessed in relation to the norm of the reaction of the environ­
ment to the action/reaction that the trading strategy (through 
individual transactions operated in the financial market) exerts on 
the environment (either financial geodesic or the rest of the finan­
cial individuals contemporary with the trading strategy concerned);
•	 the APMH model gives the financial phenotype a self-feeding from 
the validation perspective. As we have previously suggested, since it 
is not talking about an epistemic truth, but a praxiological ‘truth’, 
the corroboration of the trading strategy increases its credibility from 
the perspective of the economic agent and, therefore, the affinity of 
the latter for the trading strategy in question. The concept of affinity, 
which we want to use in the description of this phenomenology, 
needs some additional clarifications:
––
­
­
­
­
14
5  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS—THE MECHANISM 

258
––
script upper C
15
script upper C Subscript a
script upper C overTilde
 
script upper P
­
up
p e
r  I 0 Superscript script upper P left parenthesis script upper S right parenthesis
script upper S
d
script upper S
16
­
script upper R Superscript script upper S
script upper S
­
	
	
where
	
	
	
	
s c
r
i p
t u
ppe
r
 C
 
S
u
b
s
cript max Superscript script upper S Baseline equals d Subscript max Superscript script upper S Baseline dot alpha dot upper I 0 Superscript script upper P left parenthesis script upper S right parenthesis
 (for β = 0)
	
	
s
c
r
i
p
t u
ppe
r  
C
 
Subscript min Superscript script upper S Baseline equals d Subscript min Superscript script upper S Baseline dot beta dot script upper R Superscript script upper S
 (for α = 0)
	
	
	
	
so:
	
	
Therefore, we can state the following in connection with the concept of 
affinity of the economic agent with a given trading strategy:
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

259
•	
­
17
•	 the increase of the corroboration duration of a trading strategy 
directly affects the factor α and inversely proportional the factor β. 
The justification for this assertion is as follows:
––
18
––
19
20
•	 then, we can write: a l
p h
a  equals f left parenthesis d right parenthesis , with the proposition that f has as 
equation a logistic one: f  
l
e f
t  p
a
r
enthesis d right parenthesis equals StartFraction upper A Over 1 plus e Superscript negative d Baseline EndFraction
. Nota bene: symmetrically 
with respect to the abscissa axis, we have b e t a
 equals g left parenthesis d right parenthesis , so that 
g  
l e
f t  p a r
enthesis d right parenthesis equals 1 minus f left parenthesis d right parenthesis
g  
l
e
f
t
 
p a r
e
n
t
h
e
s
is d right parenthesis equals StartFraction 1 minus upper A plus e Superscript negative d Baseline Over 1 plus e Superscript negative d Baseline EndFraction
5.1
d overbar
21
­
­
22
•	
­
d Su
bscript min Superscript script upper S
d Su
bscript max Superscript script upper S
­
23
5  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS—THE MECHANISM 

260
 
­
Mutation
In the APMH model, too, the mutation is of two types: genetic mutation, 
respectively epigenetic mutation.
Genetic Mutation
Genetic mutation occurs at the level of propensity, which is the genotype 
in this model. Considering what has already been said in this matter, here 
we will make only a synthesis of the problem, particularizing it, however, 
to the structural, functional, behavioural and evolutionary characteristics 
of the APMH model.
•	 From the perspective of genetic mutation, the core of the model (in 
the sense of Lakatos) is represented by the trading strategy (or set of 
trading strategies) operated by the economic agent, while the pro­
tection belt is represented by individual transactions inferred from 
and associated with each such trading strategy;
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

261
•	 environmental pressure (either as cultural geodesic or as other con­
temporary trading strategies operated in the financial market) is 
exerted directly on the individual transaction, which is the contextual 
(spatial–temporal–particular) hypostasis of the trading strategy (i.e., 
the phenotype);
•	
­
24
­
•	 when the dead zone is overcome, obviously, the selection pressure 
shifts to the trading strategy and, thus, to the propensity. In other 
words, at this point, the genetic mutation occurs. We would like to 
highlight, at this point in the discussion, an extremely important 
aspect, which is a fundamental difference in relation to the phenom­
enology of genetic mutation in biological species. We will describe 
this aspect in the following:
–– in the case of the biological species, the genetic mutation occurs 
randomly, at the level of DNA (biological genotype);
–– the genetic mutation, through the transmission of altered DNA in 
the sexual reproduction of the biological individual, is transmitted 
to the next generation;
––
25
–– this phenomenology is possible because the trading strategy is a 
logical inference from propensity (in part, metaphorically, it can 
be said that propensity is the model of rationality, from which, by 
valid inference, the trading strategy is projected as a theorem);
–– being a logical inference from propensity, the trading strategy can 
only be adjusted if the propensity is adjusted (Nota bene: here we 
are dealing with similar processes in the biological case and in the 
symbolic case) but the propensity is adjusted only if the trading 
strategy is adjusted—and the adjustment of the trading strategy is 
done … without this adjustment being ‘ordered’ by the prior 
adjustment of the propensity;
5  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS—THE MECHANISM 

262
––
26
­
­
­
­
5.2
5.2
5.2
­
Epigenetic Mutation
­
27
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

263
 
­
28
­
29
5  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS—THE MECHANISM 

264
 
5.3
­
5.1
Therefore, the genetic and epigenetic mutation form, within the 
APMH model of the financial market, a sui-generis mix that ensures the 
autopoietic property of this model. Moreover, through the structure and 
kinematics of the affinity in relation to a given trading strategy, the self-­
organization that we will discuss below is ensured.
Fitness
As established previously, the APMH model has its own two classes of 
financial fitness: (i) class 6—financial fitness regardless of average; (ii) class 
7—competitive financial fitness. To refresh the memory, we resume the 
description of the two classes of financial fitness:
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

265
•	
­
30
–– (subclass F6+): financial fitness regardless of average, positively ori­
ented—that financial fitness regardless of average that tends to 
move to right compared to the financial market average;
–– (subclass F6−): financial fitness regardless of average, negatively 
oriented—that financial fitness regardless of average that tends to 
move to left compared to the average financial market;
–– (subclass F60): financial fitness regardless of average, non-­
oriented—that financial fitness regardless of average that is station­
ary (inertial) in the position indifferent to the occupied average;
•	 (class F7): competitive financial fitness—that financial fitness that is 
placed with a performative depth above the market average and, of 
course, below the value associated with the market champion;
–– (subclass F7+): competitive financial fitness, positively oriented—
that competitive financial fitness that tends to move to right from 
the position occupied;
–– (subclass F7−): competitive financial fitness, negatively oriented—
that competitive financial fitness that tends to move to left from 
the position occupied;
–– (subclass F70): competitive financial fitness, non-oriented—that 
competitive financial fitness that is stationary (inertial) in the 
occupied competitive position;
31
­
•	 class F6 of financial fitness has the highest compatibility with APMH, 
since this model has as paradigmatic value (V) the adaptive replica­
bility. Replicability requires behaviour that does not exhaust the 
reserves on which this replicability itself is based (as opposed to what 
happens, e.g., in the case of optimizing models). In this sense, obvi­
ously, the financial fitness pursued will be, especially, of the type 
F6+—which is the representative autopoietic variant of financial fit­
ness in class F6;
•	 with regard to financial fitness class F7, its adequacy with the APMH 
model requires some specific clarifications:
5  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS—THE MECHANISM 

266
––
­
32
–– unlike the F6 financial fitness class, the F7 class operates with all 
three kinematically possible versions. The updating of one or the 
other of the three versions is done from the perspective of ensur­
ing the autopoietic functioning of the related trading strategy, 
that is, still under the requirement of verifying the paradigmatic 
value called adaptive replicability.
Selection
33
­
34
Autonomous Selection
35
•	
36
­
­
•	 autonomous selection does not need any objective argument, it is 
the result of a completely subjective decision; in this context, the 
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

267
question of the rationality of this selection arises, in connection with 
which we make the following considerations:
––
37
–– as a result, any cost–benefit analysis is missing from the substantia­
tion of the selection, regardless of whether this analysis refers to 
aspects of (economic) performance, survival, social prestige 
and so on;
–– although it is a predominantly subjective decision, a memetic 
influence cannot be ruled out (as we will see below, when we 
examine the selector mix formed by the three types of selection in 
the APMH model), but this memetism is external to any calcula­
tion cost–benefit, as mentioned above;
•	 autonomous selection is, in terms of occurring frequency, of the 
‘rarest’ type, because the pressure of return associated with a trading 
strategy is high enough that other selection considerations, apart 
from return, are sent on two or three ‘positions’ of relevance;
•	
38
­
•	
­
39
­
­
•	 it should be added that the autonomous selection does not operate 
directly on the fitness of the trading strategy concerned. In our opin­
ion, the autonomous selection does not refer, in fact, to the level (or 
quality) of the fitness of the trading strategy, but to a certain eligibil­
ity of it from a non-performing perspective. However, the fitness is 
directly related, from a conceptual point of view, to the performance 
of the trading strategy, of course, through its hypostasis in the form 
of individual transactions (similarly to the case of biological species);
Normative Selection
Normative selection is that type of selection that is found only in the case 
of symbolic species. In this sense, one of the components of the environ­
ment of the financial species called financial market is a decisive formal 
5  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS—THE MECHANISM 

268
cause in the social selection of this species—as we proposed earlier, we call 
this component selectors as the cultural geodesic. The main characteristics 
of this type of selection can be systematized as follows:
•	 normative selection has the highest degree of predictability among 
all three types of selection, primarily because the selector filters that 
cultural geodesic contains are known (exist) before the design and/
or implementation of any trading strategy;
•	
­
40
­
––
­
41
­
­
42
––
­
43
–– somehow, based on the above, we can say that, in the case of sym­
bolic species (such as the financial market) the design of the phe­
notype uses feed-forward to avoid many of the possible penalizing 
feedback exerted, ex-post, by cultural geodesic;
–– somehow, the following conclusion may follow, as well, from the 
above: the deliberative nature of the symbolic species has both an 
objective component (cultural geodesic, which anticipates the 
common goals of society regarding the functioning of the finan­
cial market) and a subjective component (the interest of the eco­
nomic agent to reduce the likelihood of refuting its trading 
strategy for formal reasons);
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

269
–– in conclusion, we consider that, despite (or perhaps by virtue of) 
its mixed character, ex-ante and ex-post normative selection retains 
its quality of being a genuine selection in the case of the symbolic 
species called the financial market;
Nota bene: normative selection is therefore applied by the artefact com­
ponent of the financial market environment, because cultural geodesic is, 
obviously, an artefact (perhaps, the most representative for the mankind).
Performative Selection
­
44
­
5.4
5.5
 Short Discussion
•	 The pre-existent propensity of any manifestation of the economic 
agent in the financial market, so, step (1), means designing a trading 
strategy inferred from that propensity—we call this step as basic choice;
5  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS—THE MECHANISM 

270
 
 
•	 the design of the trading strategy is done simultaneously from the 
perspective of cultural geodesic (one of the two components of the 
financial market environment), in an attempt to avoid the costs of 
violating the rules of conduct in the operation of financial 
­transactions—so, the step (1) too; this step is what we have called 
above normative selection which acts, in particular, as a pre-selection 
or as an ex-ante selection;
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

271
•	 based on the trading strategy, individual transactions are designed by 
logical inference (step 2);
•	
45
•	 once the selection pressure threshold is exceeded at the level of the 
individual transaction, the selection pressure moves to the hard core 
(trading strategy) (step 4);
•	 exceeding the selection pressure threshold exerted on the trading 
strategy leads to changes in propensity (step 5) and the process 
described above is resumed from the new propensity configuration;
•	 the autonomous selection (originated in the free will of the economic 
agent) acts at unpredictable moments of time and without a neces­
sary causal link with the other phenomena described in chain 
(1)–(5).
Transcription and Translation
­
46
Transcription
Transcription Process
­
­
5  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS—THE MECHANISM 

272
47
Transcription Errors
­
48
•	
49
•	
50
•	 therefore, between the variation of the propensity and the variation 
of the trading strategy, a hermeneutics is interposed. This hermeneu­
tics is, in fact, the cultural device that transcribes the genetic muta­
tion in the case of symbolic species. It is problematic enough to 
require a few brief comments:
•	 first of all, it should be established what is the relationship which this 
hermeneutics has, on the one hand, with the propensity and, on the 
other hand, with the trading strategy. In our opinion, the hermeneu­
tics associated with transcription in the case discussed here must have 
a relative independence from the propensity itself, as well as from the 
trading strategy that is the subject of the transcription. We argue 
as follows:
–– a human individual has a nomenclature of activities, within soci­
ety, much wider than those of the type of economic activity or, 
even more restricted, of the type of financial transactions;
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

273
–– consequently, the total habitus of the human individual is much 
more populated with values, principles, goals, objectives, feelings, 
attitudes and evaluations, than the habitus associated with the 
action in the financial market;
–– this means that, in fact, financial hermeneutics (so to speak) repre­
sents only a part of the general hermeneutics that forms, from a 
cultural point of view, the human individual;
–– based on the above, the general hermeneutics is relatively inde­
pendent of the propensity that generates the trading strategy;
•	
51
–– in fact, it seems that there is no benchmark against which a tran­
scription error can be judged, since any financial hermeneutics 
would have an economic agent, it is a … good hermeneutics. This 
conclusion is based both on the idiosyncrasy of the economic 
agent and on his/her freedom of decision (or, equivalently, of 
choice);
–– in this sense, we propose to build such a benchmark that works on 
principles analogous to the functioning of Popper’s factual falsifi­
ability: namely, that the sign (in the semiotic sense) of a transcrip­
tion error is the very failure of the trading strategy just updated 
using financial hermeneutics;
––
52
Translation
Translation Process
5  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS—THE MECHANISM 

274
53
­
54
55
Translation Errors
Translation errors should be treated similarly to the ones in which the 
transcription errors were treated. However, this time there is no need for 
specialized hermeneutics, as was the case for the transcription, since the 
pattern of the individual transaction is logically inferred (based on a sui 
generis rationality model) directly from the trading strategy. We mention 
that a model of rationality, once adopted/assumed, the valid inferences 
made on its basis are necessary, not being able to be the object of choice 
and, therefore, even less of interpretation.
5.6
 
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

275
Evolution—General Framework
­
­
56
First of all, we specify the fact that, even within the symbolic species 
called financial market, the evolution refers to the populational aspect. 
This means that the evolution is identified by the existence, at the time of 
assessment, of a dominance of the number of adult individuals (trading 
strategies) in the total population of individuals of the species in question. 
Here we need two clarifications:
•	
57
­
•	
58
­
59
5  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS—THE MECHANISM 

276
­
60
61
62
­
­
Fifthly, the evolution of symbolic species is, with very rare exceptions, 
of the saltationist type. The saltationist nature of evolution should not be 
confused with the existence of points (thresholds) for the accumulation of 
change tensions. The difference in this matter is fundamental: the exis­
tence of accumulation thresholds is generated by the need for the exis­
tence of significance thresholds (such significance thresholds do not exist 
in biological evolution—Nota bene: however, they somehow exist, but 
only from the researcher’s perspective, not from that of the phenotypes 
actually involved), while, in the case of symbolic/logical species, no deci­
sion is taken until after reaching a certain significance threshold. Therefore, 
until the significance threshold is reached, nothing is selected (so nothing 
is selected gradually), and when this threshold is reached, the selection is 
sudden and total.
Sixthly, in the case of symbolic/logical species, the epigenetic muta­
tion is much more present than the genetic mutation—it can even be said 
that the epigenetic mutation is predominant in the whole mutational 
phenomenon. The explanation consists, of course, both in the dominance 
of Lamarckism in relation to Darwinism and in the dominance of delib­
eration in relation to emergence, in the evolutionary process of symbolic 
species.
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

277
 
­
63
5.7
Evolution—Autopoietic Individuation and Speciation
Evolution is, from a dynamic point of view, a bilateral process: the indi­
vidual creates the species, and the species, in turn, generates the individ­
ual. Of course, this bilateral process takes place in inter-action (more 
precisely, as we have shown, in co-evolution) with the environment.
­
64
5  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS—THE MECHANISM 

278
Autopoietic Individuation
The individuation will be examined by its customization to the APMH 
model of the financial market. In this context, we make the following 
considerations:
•	 individuation is a singular and complete event, based on the fact that 
the financial phenotype—the trading strategy—appears fully devel­
oped, that is, it appears directly in the adult stage, able to function 
(including to reproduce) as soon as it is ‘born’;
•	 as shown above (namely, in the section on transcription and transla­
tion of mutation), the variation of the financial phenotype occurs 
through the transcription of the variation of propensity (i.e., finan­
cial genotype) in the structure and logic of the trading strategy;
•	 therefore, financial individuation is a purely deliberative phenome­
non, including in its epigenetic aspect (as, e.g., the case of memetism 
associated with other contemporary trading strategies on the market);
•	 the very mechanism of individuation has the following basic 
components:
––
­
65
––
66
­
­
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

279
•	 the autopoietic component or ingredient of the individuation con­
sists of the following:
–– the economic operator already has an affinity for the trading strat­
egy ‘in functioning’, based on both the α factor and the β factor 
(see the discussion on affinity);
––
­
67
­
––
­
­
68
––
69
70
––
­
71
­
­
Autopoietic Speciation
Autopoietic speciation is a speciation that is characterized by the pursuit of 
autopoieticity, that is, self-organization in order to what is the paradig­
matic value (V) of the APMH model—adaptive replicability.
We will examine, from the perspective of APMH, the two categories of 
speciation (i.e., creation/generation of the financial market—the symbolic 
species of the mentioned model), which are common, moreover, to bio­
logical speciation: (a) sympatric speciation and (b) allopatric speciation. In 
5  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS—THE MECHANISM 

280
addition, we will examine a category of speciation that is specific to sym­
bolic species and which we can call (c) an induced speciation. As we will 
show, induced speciation is the result of the deliberate creation, from 
‘zero’, of a new species (i.e., a new private financial market) that did not 
exist before and which could possibly originate in a radical financial inno­
vation. (Nota bene: we should not confuse mechanism-type financial inno­
vation—e.g., the digitization of financial transactions—with product-type 
financial innovation—e.g., a new financial instrument as an object of 
financial transactions.) The fact that the introduction of a new transac­
tional financial instrument may be accompanied by the introduction of a 
particular trading mechanism is irrelevant and does not justify in any way 
the possible confusion on which we have just drawn attention. Nota bene: 
we are talking here about financial innovation of the product type.
Sympatric Speciation
The sympatric species is due to the differences that appear regarding the 
behaviours of the individuals of a species, individuals that function (or 
live—either biologically or logically) on the same area (either natural, arte­
factual or, several times, mixed one). It is therefore a matter of differences 
in the behaviour of different contemporary trading strategies on the same 
financial market (i.e., within the same species). The main ways in which 
such inter-individual differences may occur are the following:
•	
­
­
72
­
•	
­
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

281
­
­
73
­
•	 sympatric speciation is the dominant mechanism in the financial 
field, so the kinematics of particular financial markets (related to a 
certain type of financial transaction instrument) is, in most cases, 
determined by this mechanism. From a conceptual point of view, we 
must therefore make the following clarifications:
–– the financial market (in this generic formulation, similar to the 
term ‘market for goods and services’) is, in some way, the area of ​
manifestation of particular financial markets (i.e., assigned, each of 
the latter, to a product/instrument of financial transaction). 
However, from a nominalist perspective, the (integrated) financial 
market does not exist, it is a verbal (ideal) construct, since real, 
ontological existence has only particular financial markets;
–– when the term ‘financial market’ is used, with the meaning of 
financial species (as we have used it throughout the research) it is 
understood that we refer to a particular financial market, even if, 
depending on the generality of the discussion, it is not always (not 
indispensable) to specify the product/trading financial instrument 
related to that particular financial market;
Allopatric Speciation
Instead, allopatric speciation refers to the emergence of new species (in 
our case, new private financial markets) as a result not of the interaction 
between individuals of the same species on a common area, but between 
individuals of the same species which, however, are separated (to one 
degree or another, greater or lesser, in one way or another) from each 
other in the process of functioning/living, which means that this separa­
tion of areas (which may also be physical, although this is not, generally, 
the case here) must be, firstly, identified.
­
74
5  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS—THE MECHANISM 

282
•	 institutional separation: areas of a given financial market may be 
located in national economic systems (or in economically integrated 
systems at a certain level horizontally, as is the case, e.g., in the 
European Union) which are subject to different cultural geodesics. 
As a result, trading strategies concerning the same financial product 
are differently designed (we refer to the normative pre-selection), 
applied and, finally, selected. Also, within the institutional separation 
must be included the cases in which certain products/financial 
instruments have a specific treatment, temporary or under other cri­
teria of exemption from the general rules;
•	
75
­
­
•	
­
76
­
In all these cases of areal separation of a particular financial market, 
kinematics of trading strategies may differ from area to area, so that at 
some point (analogous to the way things happen in the biological case) 
allopatric speciation occurs. Nota bene: as a rule, this speciation, at least in 
the case of symbolic/logical species, stops at the level of so-called (or pos­
sibly to be called) sub-species, not even new species, but, of course, this 
issue has, more, an empirical significance.
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

283
Induced Speciation
Induced speciation is closest to what is usually called financial innovation 
(we repeat, at the level of product/financial instrument, not trading 
mechanism). Financial innovation has not only a positive but also a nega­
tive significance—thus, unsophisticated economic agents (as they are 
called in the EMH model of the financial market) can generate, through 
their decisions and/or actions, the so-called noise in the financial markets; 
this noise is of the nature of a financial innovation, with a pejorative mean­
ing this time because, in principle, it can produce, in terms of the ‘rational­
ity’ of the functioning of the financial market, effects similar to the positive 
financial innovation. Taking into account only positive financial innova­
tion, a speciation can be induced simply by introducing a completely new 
marketable financial product/instrument, which, of course, creates a new 
particular financial market.
­
77
Self-Organization
Adaptive replicability—the paradigmatic value (V) of the APMH model of 
the financial market—is objectified through the self-organization of 
this model.
The Concept of Financial Self-organization
Self-organization is a concept that has emerged in relation to living sys­
tems/entities, that is, in relation to biological individuals and species. In 
this sense, it is usually related to the dissipative property. In this paragraph, 
we will examine the two concepts, by customizing them to the 
APMH model.
Financial Self-organization
­
78
5  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS—THE MECHANISM 

284
79
­
•	
80
–– the replicability of the trading strategy is ensured, from the per­
spective of the selection pressure coming from the environment 
(i.e., through the individual transaction) by the fact that the vari­
ability (in many cases, even volatility) of the individual transaction 
configuration is allowed within the same configuration of a given 
trading strategy. The higher number of degrees of freedom of the 
individual transaction to a degree of freedom of the trading strat­
egy is a sufficient condition for the self-organization of the finan­
cial individual (Nota bene: simple replication, including in the 
form of preservation, of the trading strategy means that this self-­
organization works). In other words, the self-organization at the 
level of the financial individual consists exactly in the inertia with 
which the trading strategy resists the pressure coming through the 
selection pressure exerted on the individual transaction;
––
­
81
–– the two inertias (which have the effect of preserving the trading 
strategy as long as possible, sometimes to some extent, even 
beyond the breakeven point) ensure the phenomenon of self-­
organization at the level of the financial individual in the case of 
the APMH model of the financial market;
•	 on the financial species (financial market)
–– self-organization at the level of the financial species (which is the 
financial market) is manifested on the whole population of this 
species, that is, taking into account the multitude of contempo­
rary trading strategies operated on the market at a given time or, 
more relevantly, over a certain period;
––
­
82
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

285
–– to (adaptively) replicate the financial market admits (not of a nec­
essary nature, but of a contingent one) failures of the various trad­
ing strategies to adaptively replicate (i.e., in fact, their 
disappearance) provided that the trading of the product/financial 
instrument in cause to continue, supported by the working trad­
ing strategies—either among existing ones that have managed to 
replicate or new trading strategies generated by the selective pres­
sure of the environment or the free will of the economic agent;
–– there is, therefore, a ventilation (either competitive or coopera­
tive) of trading strategies (including, of course, the individual 
transactions associated with each trading strategy), so that, at the 
level of the financial market, the trading activity of the particular 
financial product/instrument in the case is ‘shifted’ from a trading 
strategy that is rejected by selection to one that is corroborated by 
that selection, thus maintaining the adaptive replicativity of the 
species;
Financial Dissipativity
­
­
­
83
In this conceptual context, dissipativity must acquire a particular expres­
sion in relation to what is allowed from the perspective of Thermodynamics, 
and this can be done by replacing the homogeneity of temperature in the 
natural domain with the homogeneity of behaviours in the economic/
financial environment. We briefly develop this idea in the following:
•	
5  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS—THE MECHANISM 

286
84
85
•	
­
86
­
–– extracting low behavioural entropy means to identify in the envi­
ronment (with its two components), those trading strategies that 
move away, as much as possible, from the average (in terms of net 
return) of the contemporary working trading strategies. This can 
be done either by more subtle exploitation of the normative 
framework (i.e., cultural geodesic) or by designing new trading 
strategies starting from the observation and analysis of other con­
temporary working trading strategies;
––
­
­
87
88
Self-organization and dissipativity within the APMH model are, of 
course, interdependent. Moreover, one is actually achieved through the 
other, forming a functional pair. Therefore, in describing the mechanism 
of financial self-organization, the two phenomena will be connected in a 
logical way.
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

287
 
The Mechanism of Financial Self-organization
5.8
Antifragility
The concept of antifragility is well known (Taleb, 2014), so here we will 
make brief considerations only regarding financial antifragility, as it occurs 
(or can occur) within the APMH model of the financial market. We are 
therefore interested in whether and how it is possible to gain from the 
perturbations in the autopoietic functioning of the financial market.
Financial Perturbations/Disturbances
​
89
5  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS—THE MECHANISM 

288
­
­
•	
­
90
91
­
•	 decreasing of the predictability of the financial market below the sig­
nificance threshold at which the establishment of the behavioural 
efficiency of the financial individual (trading strategy) is irreversible; 
this second ‘red line’ refers to the fact that, symmetrically with the 
irreversible increase of the predictability of the financial market, its 
irreversible decrease is also undesirable because, in the latter case, the 
economic behaviour would become purely random, not allowing the 
development of performance involved in adapting (or rather, adap­
tive replicability) the trading strategies, respectively the individual 
transactions.
92
­
­
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

289
Nota bene: an important problem concerns the non-achievement of the 
objective set for the operation of a trading strategy (more precisely, by the 
operation of the set of individual transactions associated, by inference, 
with that trading strategy). Is this a disturbance? The question is not 
superfluous, since the non-realization of the financial objective (e.g., not 
obtaining a certain net return) represents, from a logical point of view, a 
deviation of the trajectory of that trading strategy from the anticipated (or 
expected, as the case may be) trajectory. Our position in this matter is as 
follows:
•	 the non-achievement of the expected objective from a trading strat­
egy is not of the nature of disturbance, because it represents, simply, 
the result of the selection process carried out by the environment. 
The main role in this selection process is, as we have shown, the 
component called ‘other trading strategies’, which acts either coop­
eratively or competitively, on the trading strategy concerned, so we 
are not in the presence of a perturbation/disturbance that would 
possibly change the ‘decision’ of the selection;
•	 the change (more precisely, reversal) of the selective ‘decision’ as a 
result of a disturbance is, of course, possible, but this time the impact 
of the disturbance can be identified and assessed, so we still have a 
disturbance, which is distinct from the selection process.
Autopoietic Financial Antifragility
93
•	 from the perspective of the structure and functioning of the APMH 
model (paradigm), an advantage of perturbations should be such as 
to verify its paradigmatic value: adaptive replicability. Therefore, if a 
certain disturbance leads to an increase in the probability of this 
adaptive replicability (at the level of the financial individual, i.e., of 
the trading strategy), then it can be said that the system in question 
has manifested the antifragility property;
5  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS—THE MECHANISM 

290
•	
­
­
94
­
­
­
95
­
­
­
•	 consideration 1: an aggregate financial market that contains (at 
least) a particular antifragile financial market is antifragile
–– argument
­
96
­
­
­
­
97
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

291
•	 consideration 2: autopoieticity does not imply antifragility nor vice 
versa—the two properties are simply logically, structurally and func­
tionally additive
–– argument: autopoieticity requires adaptive replicability (or actual 
replication), while antifragility requires the capitalization (of the 
impact) of the disturbance in the ‘interest’ of the disturbed sys­
tem. It is obvious that we can have autopoietic systems that are 
not antifragile and vice versa, namely, to have antifragile systems 
that are not autopoietic. At the same time, the two properties are 
not incompatible with each other—they are not contradictory to 
each other and, moreover, they are not in adversarial relations 
with each other, hence their logical additivity mentioned above. 
Therefore, systems that are both autopoietic and antifragile are 
not ‘prohibited’.
Financial Autopoietic Chreode
1957
98
­
­
­
­
­
99
­
Some Conceptual Precautions
•	
­
100
5  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS—THE MECHANISM 

292
•	 the additional diminution (compared to the replacement of the natu­
ral necessity with the cultural one, generated by the presence of 
deliberation) of the degree of necessity from the FAPC formulation 
by using the qualifying prefix ‘quasi’ is justified by the presence (and 
action) of free will in modifying the trading strategy, as previ­
ously shown;
•	
­
101
The Financial Autopoietic Chreodic Process
The financial autopoietic chreodic process involves the examination of 
three issues: (1) the need for the financial chreode, (2) autopoietic causal­
ity/causation in the financial chreode and (3) the overall mechanism of 
the financial autopoietic chreodic process.
The Need for Financial Chreode
The (cultural) necessity of the financial chreode consists in the following:
•	
­
­
102
•	
103
•	 it can be said, therefore, that the source of the need for the financial 
chreode is in the implicit rationality (i.e., more or less aware) of pro­
pensity, the latter can be considered a model of ‘hard’ rationality, 
that is, established in the material structure of the economic agent;
•	 given that propensity is the very genotype of the financial individual, 
it can be said that the need for the financial chreode simply lies in its 
pre-programming (Nota bene: here appears, in fact, the formal aspect 
we discussed above) in genotype.
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

293
Autopoietic Causality/Causation in the Financial Chreode
Although, in part, the aspect of causality in the financial chreode has 
already been mentioned above, it is useful to make some additional clarifi­
cations, especially from the perspective of the autopoietic character of this 
causality. In this regard, we make the following considerations:
•	
­
­
­
­
­
104
•	
­
5.9
The Mechanism of the Chreodic Autopoietic Financial Process
In this paragraph we will describe the mechanism (from a logical perspec­
tive, especially) of generating the financial autopoietic chreode within the 
APMH model of the financial market.
General Aspects
•	 the autopoietic financial chreode is generated and maintained by 
devices of robustness, resilience (either homeostatic or homeorhetic) 
and antifragility—we will note from now on this triplet with RRA;
•	
105
•	
­
106
5  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS—THE MECHANISM 

294
 
­
107
•	 therefore, similar to the automatic stabilizers that work within RRA 
device, automatic adapters (or automatic adaptive replicators—
henceforth, noted AAR) are needed to ensure autopoieticity. An 
AAR must be characterized by the following two properties:
––
108
impact: the propensity behaves saltationistly—only when a 
sufficiently high selection pressure from the environment 
accumulates, there will be variations in propensity, and these 
variations will occur suddenly, non-gradually;
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

295
–– (PB) protection belt around the trading strategy (i.e., the set of 
individual transactions, endowed with a large number of degrees 
of freedom or adaptability, compared to the case of the trading 
strategy);
impact
­
109
­
Structural/Functional Aspects
We consider that the following three structural components of the mecha­
nism that function in the financial autopoietic chreodic process must be 
taken into account:
•	
110
­
–– role: initiating the decision to carry out transactional acts in the 
financial market. This initiation is a nominal one, without any par­
ticularization of mode, degree and the like—all these last configu­
rations of financial behaviour come only after the awareness of this 
attitude. Nota bene: this is the subjective factor of generating 
financial behaviour, a persistent factor, only partially subject to 
rational questioning;
•	 (PL) positional leverage (or net return analyser): even if APMH is an 
evolutionary and autopoietic model of the financial market, the 
objective component (which ensures the determination of the posi­
tion of the economic agent, ensured by the given trading strategy, on 
the particular financial market where the economic agent concerned 
5  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS—THE MECHANISM 

296
operates) is still the ‘old’ cost–benefit calculation. Of course, habitus, 
idiosyncrasies and contextual conditions may establish different deci­
sion points at the same result of cost–benefit calculation, but calcula­
tion as such remains an important structural component of the 
financial autopoietic chreodic mechanism;
–– role: this leverage pilots the attitudinal leverage (which, in turn, 
has, of course, a certain sensitivity of reaction to the impulses 
received from the positional leverage). In essence, the positional 
leverage decides only within the attitudinal decision, being, there­
fore, a regulatory decision-maker, while the attitudinal lever is an 
institutive (or constitutive) decision-maker;
•	
111
­
­
–– role: this component of the chreodic mechanism represents its fac­
tual operation (the two leverages mentioned above represent non-­
factual operations), that is, the objective way in which the financial 
autopoietic 
chreode 
is 
constructed 
(and 
reconstructed) 
within APMH.
5.10
5.11
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

297
 
 
5  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS—THE MECHANISM 

298Fig. 5.12
Fig. 5.12  The two meanings of the behaviour efficiency. (Source: Authors)
Notes
1.	 The phrase ‘invisible hand’, for example, expresses a very broad imper­
sonality of the functioning of the economic system as a whole, although 
at the origin of the changes in this impersonal functioning is the human 
(biological) individual.
2.	 Of course, artificial intelligence (especially in its fundamentalist version) 
can offer opposite arguments about the necessary nature of the symbolic/
logical lack of ontological autonomy of the species.
3.	 From a theoretical point of view, the APMH model (like all social sciences 
or institutions) is an exo-somatic tool of the biological individual. Society 
itself, as an institution, is such an instrument, as well.
4.	 Of course, it is not mandatory for any human individual to ‘secrete’ a 
financial genotype, but any financial phenotype is necessarily located in 
the human individual. This does not exclude more sophisticated cases 
(see, here, artificial intelligence—AI) in which the genotype of the sym­
bolic individual is transplanted into the symbolic individual in question 
(e.g., the so-­called phenomenon of self-learning) but, as we have argued 
in other places in the present research, even in this case, the ‘pips’ of last 
resort of that genotype are also in the biological individual.
5.	 Recall that in the case of the APMH paradigm, the component called the 
value of this paradigm is the adaptive replicability, which means the oper­
ation of the channel of adaptability (or adaptation, adjustment) but only 
by maintaining the replicability (replicability means identitary preserva­
tion) of the system in question.
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

299
6.	 The genotype contains, in essence, the replicator, which, in the case of the 
biological genotype, is DNA.
7.	 The financial genotype also shares with the biological genotype the irre­
versibility although, in fact, in the biological case, we have an absolute 
irreversibility (i.e., a principled impossibility of reversibility), while in the 
financial case, the irreversibility is relative (i.e., it is a ‘vulnerable’ impos­
sibility, as it is, to a large extent, contingent).
8.	 Basic belief should not be equated with belief or faith, but rather with 
David Lewis’ credence (as he himself does when discussing the concept of 
propensity).
9.	 Of course, there may be a set of basic praxiological axioms but, in prin­
ciple, it is likely that in any such system of axioms, one will be able to 
stand out as master—that is, it may represent the axiom of last resort 
(possibly the most representative or most general) of all the axioms in 
that set.
10.	 In our opinion, this model, with two ‘floors’, of the financial genotype, is 
not applicable to the biological genotype, in which we have a single 
‘floor’.
11.	 This possibility has been mentioned before, in several places, and is pecu­
liar to symbolic species, as is the case of the financial market.
12.	 We remind you that the exteriority of the symbolic individual is also 
accepted by Niklas Luhmann, the creator of the theory of autopoietic 
society, who proposes communication as a phenotype (adult individual) of 
this social model.
13.	 But, obviously, the frequency of adjustments is much higher in the case of 
individual transactions that are associated or could be associated with a 
given trading strategy.
14.	 Here is shown the correctness of the position supported by CMH, in 
relation to EMH.
15.	 The notation has its origin in one of the English terms for the concept of 
affinity, namely, congeniality. The meaning of the concept of affinity is the 
following: acceptance, support, attachment, mutual adequacy, sympathy 
and diffuse (vague) preference.
16.	 From a ‘technical’ point of view, the corroboration/confirmation of a 
trading strategy means that trading strategy is selected by its environment 
(cultural geodesic plus the other contemporary trading strategies).
17.	 Thus, for someone with analytical skills in the field of fractals, an oppor­
tunity could arise for the development of formalizations of equivalence 
between the frequencies of operating the trading strategies and their 
uninterrupted corroboration durations.
18.	 Both research in psychology (either cognitive or behavioural) and eco­
nomic behaviourism have shown, implicitly or explicitly, that there is an 
5  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS—THE MECHANISM 

300
innate inclination of the human individual to ‘see’ and consider only (or 
preponderantly) confirmations of existing belief and to ignore evidences 
that would invalidate that belief. No matter how small this asymmetry of 
‘good faith’ of the human individual, we consider it sufficient to support 
our assertion.
19.	 This assertion is immediate given that the assessment of objective reality 
is always made in the light of an already existing belief.
20.	 The explanation for this graphical form is that, depending on the domi­
nance of one or the other of the two factors at a given time, the marginal 
substitution rate may differ as the ratio of factor weights changes.
21.	 A separate direction of research, at this point, could be that which would 
study (including from a formal-quantitative point of view) the moments 
regarding the corroboration of a trading strategy, in a similar way to the 
one in which the moments regarding prices or returns (yields) are now 
studied. For example, time series could be built with these moments of 
corroboration or even refutation and so on.
22.	 The concept of mental comfort, as a criterion of sub-optimal behaviour 
(i.e., specific to the APMH model), seems to be a productive direction for 
further research, especially from a theoretical perspective but also in terms 
of quantitative formalizations and, consequently, of the formulation of 
predictive statements.
23.	 One can examine, of course, a corroboration duration at the level of a set 
of trading strategies (if an economic agent has such a thing), which would 
thus be an average corroboration duration not at the level of the trading 
strategy, but at the level of the economic agent. However, the duration of 
the corroboration has, from another perspective, the significance of a life 
of the trading strategy (respectively, if one considers a set of trading strat­
egies of an economic agent, we are speaking of an economic life of that 
economic agent). Perhaps, a similar lifespan could be determined for the 
financial species as a whole, that is, for the financial market (either par­
ticular or ‘general’).
24.	 Recall that by quantity of pressure (Qp) we mean the product between the 
intensity of pressure (kp) and the duration (tp) (measured in clock time) of 
exerting pressure: Qp = kp ∙ tp, with the associated indifference curve, obvi­
ously, which allows the substitutability, respectively the complementarity 
between the two multiplicative factors for keeping the quantity of pres­
sure as invariant.
25.	 In fact, there is a problem that needs to be clarified: free will can change 
also directly the phenotype, but here it is an epigenetic mutation, so there 
is no question that free will counts as the impact of genotype on the phe­
notype, that is, similar to the case of biological species.
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

301
26.	 Therefore, so many articles that strive (how else but by the irresistible 
econometric method?) to prove that there are genes of … economic 
behaviours are just as many clogged roads (although, of course, cannot be 
eliminated any link between natural Darwinism and social Lamarckism—
Nota bene: many, however, imported Darwinism from nature directly into 
society and generated the mule called social Darwinism. Perhaps Edward 
Wilson himself was a little too enthusiastic in this matter).
27.	 It is worth noting, here, a very important aspect, which is related to the 
structure of information in the financial market: the economic agent 
never observes a … trading strategy, but only individual transactions (i.e., 
as we said, contextual hypostases of a trading strategy). It is the role of the 
economic agent that, based on its own observational and resolutive com­
petence (Dinga et al., 2022), generates what we call implicit information, 
to infer from this implicit information the trading strategy that is likely to 
stay behind the hypostasis in question. As can be seen from the reference 
mentioned in this note, in the financial market we have a dominance of 
behaviour over information, one of the deep reasons why EMH is a sim­
ple (and simplistic) intellectual game.
28.	 The question of whether the memetic mutation affects only the individ­
ual transaction (i.e., whether the economic agent who observes an indi­
vidual transaction of other financial market participants directly imitates 
that individual transaction or strives—the famous conative test in praxiol­
ogy—to find, by modus ponens, the grounding trading strategy is not 
superfluous. We are therefore of the opinion that only a part (how big 
this part is seems to be an empirical rather than a theoretical problem) of 
the individual transactions observed by the economic agent leads to the 
modification of its own trading strategy (such a modification may involve, 
at the limit, even its replacement), otherwise a contagion occurs exclu­
sively at the level of the protection belt. In any case, the epigenetic muta­
tion cannot exist outside the variation of the phenotype (of the trading 
strategy).
29.	 Obviously, the production of an epigenetic mutation, as shown in this 
discussion, cannot remain without consequences on propensity, especially 
after a time when the epigenetically modified trading strategy is accompa­
nied by success in terms of return. It is about the fact that the weight of 
the β factor of the affinity with respect to the trading strategy increases 
significantly so that this increase will be reflected in the increase of the 
weight of the factor α, with the corresponding ‘fall’, following this trans­
fer of ‘affinity’ of the weight of the factor β (Nota bene: it seems that we 
can accept, from a theoretical point of view, a cyclical evolution of the 
ratio between the weights of the two affinity factors).
5  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS—THE MECHANISM 

302
30.	 We remind that SPm represents the sub-criterion of positioning com­
pared to the market average, within the static positioning of the perfor­
mative depth of fitness (SP criterion).
31.	 It is, obviously, about social fitness categories customized to the case of 
the financial market (i.e., the financial species). As we have shown before, 
in the case of symbolic/logical species, we speak exclusively of social fit­
ness, that is, not in the sense (dominant, unfortunately, in the dedicated 
literature) in which the social predicate is used with the meaning that the 
fitness in question is a phenomenon that occurs in social worlds (either 
human or non-human), but in the sense that it is simply not about natural 
fitness, as is the case with biological fitness.
32.	 We specify that this ‘possible’ is a relative and not an absolute one: 
depending on the set of trading strategies operated on the market, the 
‘possible’—which is, of course, contingent—varies, although accidentally, 
so it can reach the maximum under the given conditions, that is, it can 
reach an extreme value.
33.	 It should be noted that the selection in the APMH model follows the 
pattern of any selection regarding a symbolic/logical species, namely, it 
always occurs through the human individual who operates the individuals 
of that symbolic species.
34.	 It is, as we mentioned before, about the selection known, in the litera­
ture, as intra-species selection.
35.	 Here, in the broad sense of this term, accredited by Pierre Bourdieu (see 
his work, Language and Symbolic Power (Bourdieu, 1993)).
36.	 Predictability of the predictor is a concept that can lead to an interesting 
discussion (both theoretically and methodologically) about what we 
might call the predictive chain.
37.	 We recall that theoretical rationality is claimed exclusively by belief, while 
practical rationality has to do with the decision-making process within a 
given theoretical rationality (see, in this issue, Alfred R. Mele & Piers 
Rawling, The Oxford Handbook of Rationality (2004), especially Chapter 
2 (Theoretical Rationality: Its Sources, Structure, and Scope, by Robert 
Audi) and Chapter 3 (Practical Aspects of Theoretic Reasoning, by Gilbert 
Harman)).
38.	 It is about what could be called (as a psychological property of the human 
subject) the inertia of own choice.
39.	 As we have shown in several places, unlike the case of biological species 
(natural, non-symbolic), in the case of symbolic/logical/artefactual spe­
cies the selection operated by the environment is an internalized one, that 
is, it occurs through the human individual, which means that the selec­
tion in the field of symbolic species is a mediated one, as it may undergo 
alterations between the ‘proposed’ version by the environment and the 
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

303
version actually operated by the human individual. Here is, moreover, the 
problem of transcription, respectively of translation in the mutation and 
selection of symbolic species. This is also where, obviously, free will inter­
venes, which can distort the ‘suggestion’ made by the environment.
40.	 A trading strategy can violate cultural geodesic in two cases: (a) it is erro­
neously designed, due to the incompetence of the economic agent in 
question; (b) is deliberately designed against the norms contained in cul­
tural geodesic, precisely in order to exploit this normative violation to 
obtain an additional return. In both cases, the normative selection will act 
ex-post but, as we said, usually, the normative selection acts ex-ante.
41.	 The environment of a species (whether it is a biological species or a sym­
bolic/logical one) has four components that, of course, inter-act: (a) the 
non-anthropic natural environment; (b) the anthropic environment 
(artefacts); (c) the other natural species; (d) the individuals of the species 
in question (Nota bene: as shown, in the latter case we have an intra-spe­
cies selection).
42.	 The concept of adverse selection, introduced here as another term/
phrase for negative selection has the known significance of the economic 
theory of informational asymmetry (see, in particular, the works of Joseph 
Stiglitz in this matter).
43.	 Genetic engineering, respectively transhumanism, has as a potential 
result, in our opinion, a certain synthesis between the biological species 
(or the biological individual) and the symbolic species (or the symbolic 
individual). This phenomenon has, of course, its relevance in a broader 
discussion (a discussion that, however, will not be developed in this 
research).
44.	 The careful reader has already noted that free will is credited by us with a 
certain autonomy in relation to the economic agent’s own propensity, 
which means that s/he can change it without any ‘reason’.
45.	 Of course, here are applicable what discussed above about the hard core 
and the protection belt in the ‘factual falsification’ of the trading strategy.
46.	 A justification for this methodological reversal is given, in graphical form, 
in Figure 2.31.
47.	 We do not examine separately the epigenetic mutation (that mutation 
‘indicated’ by the memetic contagion exerted on the economic agent, 
which does not affect the propensity, but directly the phenotype—the 
trading strategy), since it does not pose specific problems to 
transcription.
48.	 Here, the meaning of the term mechanical refers to the fact that the sub­
jectivity (e.g., psychism) of the biological species is not involved in this 
transcription.
5  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS—THE MECHANISM 

304
49.	 Perhaps even the collective unconscious (i.e., the archetype, as Jung 
would say), since the individual’s habitus emerges from the entire (his­
torical) psychic dowry of his/her ancestors.
50.	 In an approximate formulation, from a semiotic point of view, meaning 
refers to denotation, and sense refers to connotation.
51.	 We specify that the existence of such a hermeneutics is a necessary fact, 
that is, it is impossible for an economic agent not to have the hermeneu­
tics in question (of course, the degree of sophistication of that hermeneu­
tics is irrelevant).
52.	 This clarification is not superfluous at all, since the change in propensity 
is at the discretion of the economic agent (human individual) who can be 
wrong. An important theoretical conclusion follows from this commen­
tary on clarification: in addition to transcription errors (and, as we shall 
see immediately, also translation errors), there may be a third category of 
error: the error of propensity change, which we would like to call a diag­
nostic error, that is, an error that leads to an inappropriate change in 
propensity under the selection pressure.
53.	 The analogy with translation in the case of the evolution of biological 
species is, again, obvious: in the biological case, translation means the 
conversion of m-RNA into proteins, that is, in the ‘bricks’ of the future 
biological individual.
54.	 In a firmer formulation, we can say that nominalism is also valid here, in 
the sense that only the individual transaction has symbolic reality, while 
the trading strategy is only a family name for the set of individual transac­
tions related to the trading strategy. Note that, in fact, here we have a pair 
of nominalism—realism not from an ontological point of view, but from 
a gnoseological one, since both the individual transaction and the trading 
strategy are ideal entities but, even so, only individuals exist … 
gnoseologically.
55.	 A theoretical observation here: we think that the volatility of the indi­
vidual transaction is higher than the volatility of the trading strategy asso­
ciated, so we can calculate a sui generis multiplier of volatility in the 
evolutionary process of the APMH model (but we will not further 
develop this analytical suggestion). We are not just referring to the well-
known phenomenon of error accumulation (although it can also be stud­
ied), but rather to the fact that a small variation in the trading strategy can 
result in a much larger variation in the individual transaction (something 
analogous to the sensitivity to the initial conditions considered in the case 
of modelling non-­linear dynamical systems—chaos theory).
56.	 We remember that, in the case of symbolic species, the phenotype appears 
directly in the adult stage, without undergoing growth processes.
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

305
57.	 By total mutation we mean the logical sum (including the synergy effect) 
between the genetic mutation (produced at the level of propensity) and 
the epigenetic mutation (produced at the level of the trading strategy by 
‘bypassing’ the propensity).
58.	 We remind the reader that, in evolution, the variation of fitness can never 
be qualified as being, in itself, a phenomenon such as increase/decrease 
and improvement/worsening, but only as a better fit or a weaker fit in 
relation to given environment (Nota bene: to observe an interesting paral­
lelism between the character of rationality, which is relative exclusively to 
a model of rationality, respectively the character of adequacy, which is 
relative to an environment of adequacy).
59.	 The emergent–deliberative relationship should not be confused with the 
Darwinism–Lamarckism relationship: while in the case of the first rela­
tionship, it is the relationship of dominance between finality and purpose 
(emergence favours finality, while deliberativity favours purpose), in the 
case of the second rapport, it is about the relationship of dominance 
between structure and function (Darwinism favours the dominant role of 
structure over function, while Lamarckism favours the dominant role of 
function over structure).
60.	 For example, a variation of a trading strategy can lead, through memetic 
contagion, to mutations in contemporary trading strategies.
61.	 We mention here our concept of randoberativity, introduced in 
FMAB-APH.
62.	 Of course, we are referring to reversibility over time (which, however, is 
not very relevant), because genuine reversibility must be judged in rela­
tion to the environment. But in relation to the environment, any evolu­
tion is reversible (including biological) precisely for the reason that any 
evolution is a co-evolution. Once again, it is clear that evolution has no 
axiological significance, such as the idea of ​​progress or the like.
63.	 In our research, we assumed the hypothesis (or axiom) that, in financial 
matters, there is only one financial species—the financial market, com­
posed of adult individuals called trading strategies (each trading strategy, 
or a group of such strategies, being assigned to an economic agent, or a 
group of economic agents).
64.	 For the case of biological species, where there is no deliberation in the 
selection stage, the individuation does not have the same relevance as the 
speciation.
65.	 We specify that, as previously shown, the change in propensity can take 
place in a direct way, that is, based on the autonomous action of free will, 
so unrelated to the selective pressure of the environment.
66.	 In the case discussed here, the rationality model that allows inferring of 
the variation of the trading strategy from the variation of the propensity 
5  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS—THE MECHANISM 

306
is the APMH itself. In fact, the same model of rationality—APMH—is 
the basis for inferring (as a secondary inference) the individual transaction 
(or set of individual transactions) from the trading strategy.
67.	 This kinematics is, to some extent, counter-intuitive, so we will make the 
following reasoning in this matter. Corroboration means the ‘confirma­
tion’ (of course, as in the case of the falsification of factual predictions, it 
is a question of a provisional ‘confirmation’ or, more precisely, of a 
delayed refutation, this being the exact meaning of the corroboration 
concept) of the trading strategy. It seems that in this case, since the cor­
roboration comes from the environment, the share of factor β, not factor 
α, should increase. However, the fact that the corroboration is always just 
provisional (since it does not provide the certainty of its repetition), it 
increases, in fact, the belief that the trading strategy in question is ade­
quate, that is, increases the share of the factor α. Conversely, at the first 
refutation of the trading strategy (in the whole process related to the 
protection belt provided by the set of individual transactions), instead of 
decreasing the weight of the β factor, as it seemed prima facie (since the 
refutation also comes from the environment), in fact the economic 
agent’s confidence in its own propensity decreases, that is, the share of 
the α factor decreases. Rightly, one may ask why two more affinity factors 
are needed, because it seems that one alone would be enough, since only 
this one changes its weight, both in the case of corroboration and in the 
case of refutation? The answer contains two parts: (a) in fact, when α 
changes it changes, implicitly, β (by the difference from 1); (b) β has a 
very important role (most importantly, in fact) at the level of the indi­
vidual transaction, while α has the main role at the level of the trading 
strategy.
68.	 Logically, the non-identitary adjustment, that is, the adjustment that does 
not preserve the identity (Nota bene: the identity is given by the structure 
and the logic related to that structure) is equivalent to the replacement.
69.	 Menu cost means the cost of a change (usually institutional, but not only 
of this type) in the set of conditions that accompany a certain behaviour. 
Changing these conditions may only have a tangential link to that behav­
iour, but it still generates costs—for example, if you change the name of 
an organization, you have to change the header, stamp, maybe the labels 
on the office doors and so on.
70.	 This possible alpha-attachment (or alpha-affinity) of the economic agent 
to the trading strategy in operation can be a very eloquent element of 
testability in well-designed experiments.
71.	 Following David Lewis’ line of argument, this category of individuation 
is based on (is anchored in) the credence component of propensity. 
Perhaps we should accept a bipolar structure of propensity: (a) the com­
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

307
ponent of rational belief and (b) the component of the a-rational belief 
(credence). The fact that, from this proposal, it results, implicitly, that 
trust (effect of the component called credence) has an a-rational nature is, 
of course, fully assumed by the authors.
72.	 As was the case, for example, with the introduction of financial derivatives 
or the introduction of the index of financial assets or funds—each of these 
financial innovations has generated a specific financial market, that is, a 
new kind of financial market.
73.	 We remind the reader that, even in the field of biological evolution, sym­
patric speciation also begins with the ‘rebellion’ of an individual of an 
existing species (Nota bene: there is no case of developments, at this point 
in the discussion, in this matter, but we, however, mention the fact that, 
even in the Kuhn-nian paradigm, anomalies are part of a rebellious behav­
iour of facts tested on the basis of predictions allowed by the ‘normal 
component’ of that paradigm, for example, that of dissidents in relation 
to the statu quo, and let us not forget that in the religious field (such as 
Christianity), Protestantism was initiated following a rebellion or a dissi­
dence of Martin Luther.
74.	 Please note that the expression ‘financial market’, which refers to a par­
ticular traded or tradable product or financial instrument, does not refer 
only to a national market, nor even to a regional market, but denotes the 
global market of that product or trading instrument (especially in the cur­
rent conditions of globalization of economic flows, including financial, 
labour and capital flows).
75.	 For example, China, USA, India and Russia, but also in some federal or 
confederal states, which have a certain autonomy in the internal states of 
the federal/confederal state.
76.	 There have been cases in recent history where an institutional separation 
has been accompanied (in fact, generated) by an institutional separa­
tion—for example, the case of the Berlin Wall.
77.	 This clarification has, however, almost no theoretical, methodological or 
instrumental value, in exactly the same way that the typology of market 
informational efficiency (in the EMH model) has no such value: strong, 
semi-strong and weak efficiency.
78.	 Recall that, for example, sustainability, as opposed to autopoieticity, also 
requires external principles/resources to ensure replicability.
79.	 In fact, APMH includes (even in the sense of set theory) APH or, logi­
cally, APMH is a generalization of APH.
80.	 As it has already turned out, by force of circumstances, that is, given that 
we are dealing with symbolic/logical species, which are artefacts, the 
financial individual cannot be ‘broken’ from the human individual—let us 
remember that propensity (i.e., financial genotype) is, from a structural 
5  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS—THE MECHANISM 

308
point of view, inside the entity of the human individual and not (analo­
gously with the case of the biological individual) in the entity of the finan­
cial individual. In this context, often when we talk about the financial 
individual, we refer, in fact, to the package financial individual—human 
individual (a kind of a finhuman).
81.	 Perhaps even an affinity (or part of affinity) should be accepted as irratio­
nal, more precisely, of an emotional type, which the economic agent 
manifests towards his/her own propensity, while his/her affinity for the 
trading strategy has a more pronounced character of rationality. This irra­
tional (emotional) affinity for propensity is common, moreover, to any 
type of belief of faith nature.
82.	 Obviously, as we said before, when we say financial market for an opera­
tional purpose, we always mean a particular financial market, that is, asso­
ciated with a fixed financial product/instrument.
83.	 The phenomenon of reduction to the average, which we invoke here, is 
analogous to that discussed by Kahneman and Tversky in their works of 
behavioural psychology, with the difference that the authors mentioned 
refer to a behaviour induced by human psychism (probably with reference 
to universal features or, anyway—in the Jung key—generated by the 
archetype), while we are talking about a quasi-objective behaviour (more 
precisely, about a behaviour of a symbolic or logical individual, which has 
a nature of objectified inter-subjectivity rather than an objective nature—
the finuman evoked above).
84.	 We resume the specification that the phrase behavioural efficiency (like the 
phrase informational efficiency) is counter-intuitive: thus, in the case of 
market informational efficiency, the market is all the more efficient as it 
can earn less than its average, while in the case of behavioural efficiency of 
the market, the market is all the more efficient as there are fewer trading 
strategies distinct from all other contemporary trading strategies in 
that market.
85.	 As with thermodynamic entropy (and as with many economic phenom­
ena, such as the underground economy), behavioural entropy cannot be 
measured in terms of level, but only in terms of change. Thus, there can 
never be a maximum behavioural efficiency, nor a minimum one (respec­
tively, there can never be a minimum behavioural entropy, nor a maxi­
mum one). Recall that in the case of EMH, maximum informational 
efficiency of the financial market is accepted (when no price can be pre­
dicted). The Grossman–Stiglitz critique of EMH can also be applied, 
mutatis mutandis, to behavioural efficiency, in the sense that it prohibits 
maximum behavioural efficiency (or, equivalently, minimum behavioural 
entropy).
86.	 Through implicit information (see FMAB-APH).
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

309
87.	 Demonstrating that reducing behavioural entropy within the system 
(APMH) has the (necessary) effect of increasing the behavioural entropy 
faster in the APMH environment (cultural geodesic, respectively other 
contemporary trading strategies) remains a goal that this research sets for 
a subsequent intervention and communication. As it is known, such a 
demonstration exists, however, for the case of thermodynamic/energetic 
entropy.
88.	 For obvious logical reasons, it will have to be considered that the financial 
market is, from a behavioural point of view, closed, a property that is, 
moreover, quite intuitive, because financial transactions cannot exist out­
side the financial market. To accept an environment of … the financial 
market would mean to accept the idea that a financial entity can exist 
outside the financial realm (it is as if we would say that the environment 
of the Universe is … a larger Universe). We remind the reader that the 
same problem was encountered by Niklas Luhmann, when he built the 
autopoietic model of society and when, trying to find the environment of 
the social system he could not identify it in a larger social system, and had 
to decree that it is, in fact, an environment of a psychological nature, 
separate from the social environment itself (Nota bene: the fact that 
human psychism is, at least in part, of social origin did not in any way 
disturb the remarkable sociologist).
89.	 The problem of the significance threshold is important in two respects: 
(a) not every deviation is something negative—all balances in the econ­
omy and society are dynamic, that is, it supports small oscillations (peri­
odical or not) that ensure this balance (which is also called, by the way, 
dynamic equilibrium); (b) the significance threshold does not always 
coincide with the threshold of ‘breaking’ the dynamic balance (although, 
it may coincide, of course), since the meaning differs from individual to 
individual (because individual idiosyncrasy) or from group to group. The 
issue of the significance threshold in the phenomenology of the financial 
market has been discussed, quite analytically, previously, so it will not be 
resumed here.
90.	 We need to make an important clarification here: the expression behav­
ioural efficiency within the APMH (analogous to the expression informa­
tional efficiency within the EMH) has two opposite meanings: (a) when 
it refers to the financial market, that is, when we talk about the behav­
ioural efficiency of the financial market, it means the impossibility of find­
ing a trading strategy that returns above the market average (analogous to 
the way in which the informational efficiency of the financial market gen­
erates the impossibility of finding a price that brings a return above the 
market average); b) when it refers to the behavioural efficiency of the 
economic agent (or of the trading strategy, which is equivalent), it means 
5  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS—THE MECHANISM 

310
the existence of the possibility to find trading strategies (or individual 
transactions, as the case may be) that bring back above the financial mar­
ket average. The first meaning makes the kinematics of behavioural effi­
ciency directly proportional to the dynamics of behavioural entropy, while 
the second meaning makes the kinematics of behavioural efficiency 
inversely proportional to the dynamics of behavioural entropy. In a linear 
and symmetrical manner, the two meanings can be represented as in 
Figure 5.12 (BEFM noted the behavioural efficiency of the financial mar­
ket and BEFI noted the behavioural efficiency of the financial individual, 
associated with the human individual or the corresponding eco­
nomic agent).
91.	 Using a paraphrase of a syntagm used in the field of cosmology, but which 
fits, semantically (of meaning) also in the problem discussed here, we 
could call this threshold (or this limit) as horizon of predictability (Nota 
bene: syntagm ‘plagiarized’ is the horizon of events, or the Schwarzschild 
boundary, in relation to the distance from which no real entity can escape 
the attraction of a black hole). However, this irreversibility is ‘opposable’ 
only to a particular financial market, in which, therefore, the same prod­
uct/financial instrument is traded. Financial innovation can, however, 
lead to the emergence of another particular financial markets. On the 
other hand, it is clear that increase of the predictability of the financial 
market has the effect of bringing the functioning of the financial market 
closer to the threshold of its maximum behavioural efficiency, because 
this predictability, acting relatively homogeneously for all economic 
agents (Nota bene: observational access to trading strategies operated in 
the financial market is not discriminated either normatively or objectively) 
allows precisely the homogenization of trading strategies, thus increasing 
the behavioural efficiency of the financial market.
92.	 As is the case with the two (non-economic) disruptions that are still 
ongoing (overlapping, to a large extent) at the time of this research: (1) 
the COVID-19 pandemic and (2) the war initiated by Russia against 
Ukraine. Previously, the financial (and, in part, economic) crisis that 
erupted in 2007 in the USA and in Europe in 2008 also acted as a sys­
temic disruption.
93.	 It should be noted that we are not talking neither about robustness (resis­
tance to disturbances, of course, below the significance threshold of the 
amount of disturbing action) nor about resilience—the return of the sys­
tem to the state from which it was disturbed (return by homeostasis prop­
erty) or the trajectory from which it was disturbed (return by the 
homeorhesis property), but about ‘accepting’ the disturbance (Mr. Taleb 
even speaks of a deliberate non-avoidance or, at the limit, deliberate 
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

311
search for the disturbance) and acquiring a gain, an advantage from the 
disturbance in question.
94.	 For example, in financial practice, there are cases known as ‘financial can­
nons’, which refer to obtaining a large gain at the level of the economic 
agent, including the cost of compromising (or functional exhaustion) of 
the trading strategy used to obtain that gain (as a rule, it is a gain that can 
even exceed the return of the champion of that financial market). It turns 
out that such practices are incompatible, logically and operationally, with 
the APMH model, because they make vulnerable/undermine exactly its 
paradigmatic value: adaptive replicability.
95.	 This time, it is clear that, given that each trading strategy targets a par­
ticular financial market (because it targets a particular financial product/
instrument), we need to discuss how an ‘antifragile’ aggregate financial 
market can be ‘built’ from particular antifragile financial markets.
96.	 A distributed antifragility would mean that there are distinct antifragility 
devices on various categories or classes of disturbances (or on concrete, 
particular disturbances). However, the concept of antifragility refers to a 
general property (i.e., non-distributed) to obtain gains/benefits from 
disturbances.
97.	 Obviously, real disturbances have very rarely (and this, especially in the 
case of systemic disturbances) a nature of generality, i.e., the property of 
targeting, simultaneously, several particular financial markets or, at the 
limit, all particular financial markets and, thus, the aggregate financial 
market. But even in this case, of ‘diffuse’ disturbances, a single particu­
larly antifragile financial market ensures the antifragility of the integrated 
system of particular financial markets.
98.	 We specify that the term chreode was introduced in the ‘package’ with 
the term (and the concept) of homeorhesis, mentioned by us before.
99.	 Moreover, in an implicit way (since the concept and term autopoiesis 
were introduced only in 1980, by Chilean biologists Maturana and 
Varela), autopoieticity was also considered by Waddington, at least at the 
concept level, when asserted the necessary character of the chreode.
100.	 We specify that any model of rationality introduces a logical necessity: for 
example, any inference (such as a hypothesis or a conjecture) from a 
model of rationality is completely devoid of any degree of freedom, it 
cannot be realized (validly) than in one way, pre-determined, that is, it 
can only be made necessarily—for example, the decision taken on the 
basis of the rationality model called cost-benefit analysis has a necessary 
character, devoid of any freedom of choice.
101.	 It is a sui generis time series, that is, exactly the time series of the men­
tioned state vectors. For operational reasons, the state vector can be 
replaced by a single representative variable and then the time series in 
5  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS—THE MECHANISM 

312
question is analogous to any time series that records the kinematics of a 
given variable.
102.	 The kinematic self-similarity of propensity refers to the tendency (natural, 
but also cultural—e.g., the conscious association of behavioural principles 
in the deep structure of propensity, which of course refers to the concept 
of symbolic utility discussed above, gives the propensity a strong ten­
dency to replicate, a ‘basic conservatism’) of propensity to self-replicate, 
including through resistance (known as robustness) to the pressures of 
change coming from the financial market environment in the process of 
selection of trading strategy, respectively of individual transactions. Not 
to make the simplistic transition from this property of self-similarity to 
self-similarity specific to fractal behaviours—there is no fractal behaviour 
related to propensity although, as we have shown, the fundamental prin­
ciple of the APMH model of the financial market makes a pretty transpar­
ent reference to fractality but, obviously, from another perspective.
103.	 In part, we also have a formal causality here (although, to some extent, it 
is an almost completely subconscious formal cause), but we will not fur­
ther develop this aspect in the present discussion.
104.	 We recall that freedom is defined as the absence of private external con­
straints on the choice of individual goals (i.e., the choice, made by the 
individual, about their own goals).
105.	 There has been talk of automatic stabilizers before.
106.	 The same can be said about robustness or resilience.
107.	 We mention, here, the fundamental distinction between kinematics and 
dynamics: kinematics aims at the change (of any kind) in time, without 
taking into account causality (equivalently, it can be said that the passage 
of time is, in the case of kinematics, the ‘cause’ of change), while the 
dynamic aims at the change in time taking into account the causality of 
that change.
108.	 Obviously, any authentic belief is self-sufficient, whether we are talking 
about a rational belief, an irrational belief (faith) or an a-rational belief 
(credence). This second-order belief (belief in one’s own belief) is of the 
utmost importance in the analysis, design and prediction of economic 
behaviour in the financial market, and it acts as an inertia of the statu quo.
109.	 We can introduce, here, something similar to a coefficient of friction in 
mechanics: therefore, the selective pressure on the trading strategy, 
exerted by the environment, after this strategy exhausts its degrees of 
freedom (i.e., after reconfiguring within the same propensity) is trans­
ferred to propensity. The propensity will change according to the pressure 
coming from the trading strategy and, after reaching its new state (i.e., 
after the economic agent’s basic belief is reset), this new state will lead to 
a redesign of the trading strategy (Note bene: being about the same trad­
 
E. DINGA ET AL.

313
ing strategy, it results that we consider the maintenance of the product/
financial instrument traded through that strategy). We notice, therefore, 
that we have two channels of impulse transmission: once from the trading 
strategy to propensity and, the second time, from the new propensity to 
the new trading strategy. Like any transmission channel, the two men­
tioned can generate disturbances (or ‘rubs’) of the message, both in one 
direction and in another. Appropriate analytical developments will be able 
to take these observations into account, including from the perspective of 
Shannon informational entropy.
110.	 It seems that, from an abstract point of view, the behaviour in the finan­
cial market has two basic benchmarks: (a) an attitudinal benchmark—
generated, in an overwhelming degree, by propensity and free will (Nota 
bene: the measure and the way in which propensity and free will inter-­
conditioning is an issue that should still be considered more closely), and 
which has a relatively high stability/inertia, and representing the subjec­
tive factor of behaviour; (b) a positional benchmark—generated, in an 
overwhelming degree, by the cost–benefit calculation, which represents 
the objective factor of the behaviour. We must note that what we call the 
model of rationality as a result of the inextricable combination (this rela­
tive indeterminacy must be clarified by cognitive psychology and behav­
ioural psychology) between the two benchmarks—in our opinion, the 
model of rationality emerges in a quasi-rational way, only its functioning 
(i.e., the potential set of inferences that it necessarily allows, without right 
of appeal) is completely rational.
111.	 We call it so as not to be confused with the primary (or institutional) 
replicator which is the propensity, that is, the ‘DNA’ of the financial 
individual.
References
Bourdieu, P. (1993). Language and Symbolic Power. Harvard University Press.
Dinga, E., Oprean-Stan, C., Tănăsescu, C.-R., Brătian, V., & Ionescu, 
G.-M. (2022). Financial Market Analysis and Behaviour. The Adaptive 
Preference Hypothesis. Routledge, Francis & Taylor Group.
Taleb, N.  N. (2014). Antifragile: Things That Gain from Disorder. Random 
House Trade Paperbacks.
Waddington, C. H. (1957). The Strategy of the Genes. Routledge.
5  AUTOPOIETIC MARKET HYPOTHESIS—THE MECHANISM 

315
1
1 Note: Page numbers followed by ‘n’ refer to notes.
A
Abduction, 25, 189, 239n42, 240n46
Action, 1, 9, 10, 12–14, 17, 21, 
25–27, 32n12, 36n41, 39n71, 
42, 44, 48, 52, 54, 55, 77n22, 
80n44, 84n81, 87, 89, 90, 93, 
94, 101, 104, 107, 108, 
113–115, 123, 126, 127, 
129–132, 148–150, 154, 158, 
160, 161, 164, 168, 177, 179, 
185, 186, 188, 192–196, 198, 
212–214, 219, 229, 233, 
241n60, 242n74, 245n105, 
249n133, 257, 262, 273, 276, 
283, 292, 305n65, 310n93
Action base, 162
Action rate, 129, 130, 160, 162
Adaptive Market Hypothesis (AMH), 
58, 60–65, 83n69, 84n76, 153, 
185, 196, 215, 222, 242n67, 
245n109, 245n110, 
249n137, 246n110
Adaptive preference, 61, 144, 171, 
179–181, 212–214, 219, 235n2, 
237n22, 245n105, 
245n107, 248n126
Adaptive Preference Hypothesis 
(APH), 49, 59, 61, 63–65, 
81n53, 83n66, 185, 215, 217, 
221, 230, 246n116, 247n118, 
249n137, 283, 307n79
Adaptive replicability, 49, 155, 219, 
223, 246n110, 247n122, 256, 
265, 266, 279, 283, 284, 
288–291, 298n5, 311n94
Adjustment, 46, 62, 128, 129, 160, 
172–176, 179–181, 185, 213, 
217, 229, 230, 236n8, 236n9, 
239n41, 241n62, 256, 257, 261, 
275, 279, 298n5, 
299n13, 306n68
Affinity, 77n15, 257–260, 263, 264, 
266, 279, 284, 299n15, 301n29, 
306n67, 308n81
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature 
Switzerland AG 2023
E. Dinga et al., Economic and Financial Market Behaviour, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-31702-6

316 
INDEX
Allopatric speciation, 279, 281–283
Alpha-attachment, 279, 306n70
Anomaly, 195, 196, 223–228, 
248n128, 307n73
Antifragility, 287–291, 293, 
311n96, 311n97
A-rational, 3, 14, 56, 188–190, 194, 
213, 229, 237n17, 239n45, 
307n71, 312n108
Aristotle, 52, 248n124
AS multiplier, 132, 162
Attitudinal leverage (AL), 295, 296
Automatic adaptive replicators 
(AAR), 294
Automatic stabilizers, 125–133, 156, 
161, 293, 294, 312n105
Autonomous selection, 266–267, 271
Autopoietic Financial 
Antifragility, 289–291
Autopoieticity, 18, 49, 64, 88, 99, 
103–146, 152, 155, 156, 162, 
164, 171, 173, 178, 179, 182, 
184, 196, 235n2, 250n139, 279, 
291, 293, 294, 307n78, 311n99
Autopoietic Market Hypothesis 
(APMH), 62–65, 69, 81n53, 
87–146, 171–235, 247n118, 
253–296, 307n79
Axiological arrow, 1
B
Bayes, Thomas, 231, 249n135
Behaviour, 3, 8–14, 35n34, 36n42, 
37n52, 46, 48, 52, 59, 64, 
77n17, 82n55, 84n81, 90, 95, 
105–108, 115–116, 134–135, 
142, 145, 149, 150, 156, 157, 
161–163, 173, 176, 177, 182, 
188, 193–196, 201, 202, 
204–208, 211–215, 218, 224, 
232–235, 236n7, 237n23, 
240n53, 241n57, 245n100, 
245n106, 248n126, 250n139, 
253, 256, 265, 280, 285, 288, 
292, 295, 298, 300n22, 301n26, 
301n27, 306n69, 307n73, 
308n83, 312n102, 
312n108, 313n110
Behavioural entropy (BE), 93–97, 
102, 133–136, 150, 151, 154, 
162, 163, 186, 285–287, 
308n85, 309n87, 310n90
Behavioural inertia, 226
Behavioural Market Hypothesis 
(BMH), 58, 185, 230, 
246n110, 249n137
Bejan, Adrian, 137, 138, 163, 164
Belief, 49, 56, 61, 63–65, 77n16, 
84n74, 177, 179, 191–193, 203, 
229, 237n17, 237n18, 240n52, 
240n55, 245n103, 245n104, 
254, 255, 259, 272, 294, 295, 
299n8, 300n18, 300n19, 
302n37, 306n67, 307n71, 
308n81, 312n108, 312n109
Beta-attachment, 279
Beta-autopoiesis, 120–122, 124
Biological living system (BLS), 87–89, 
91–93, 96–100, 102, 148, 
150–154, 178, 179, 237n20
Biologically living, 237n20
Bogle, John, 59
Bonneuil, N., 204, 206
C
Chreode, 277, 291–293, 
311n98, 311n99
Co-adaptation, 6, 149
Co-evolution, 2, 6, 16, 34n21, 46, 61, 
62, 101, 102, 149, 221, 222, 
226, 230, 233, 247n119, 
277, 305n62

317
  INDEX 
Complexity, 160, 190–192, 240n50
Conjecture, 11, 18, 19, 63–65, 
81n50, 82n58, 82n59, 83n62, 
152, 167, 222, 223, 225, 226, 
228, 237n22, 238n24, 
249n135, 311n100
Conservative criterion, 222, 247n121
Constructal law, 137–140, 156, 163, 
164, 168, 235n2
Contextual symbolic utility 
(CSU), 210
Corroboration, 19, 37n48, 57, 66, 67, 
81n50, 152, 228, 249n135, 257, 
259, 260, 264, 279, 299n16, 
299n17, 300n21, 
300n23, 306n67
Cost-benefit analysis, 45, 46, 59, 61, 
65, 76n8, 172, 175, 188, 
236n13, 267, 311n100
Costs Matters Hypothesis (CMH), 59, 
60, 62, 64, 83n65, 83n66, 
83n68, 84n76, 85n83, 185, 215, 
230, 249n137, 299n14
Cultural geodesic (CG), 4–7, 18, 19, 
21, 23–25, 28, 29, 32n14, 
33n18, 36n40, 38n57, 42–49, 
51, 55, 56, 61, 66, 70, 71, 
76n11, 76n12, 78n24, 78n25, 
78n26, 78n27, 153, 178, 179, 
183–186, 219, 221, 222, 224, 
225, 227, 232, 233, 235, 
250n142, 261, 266, 268–270, 
280, 282, 286, 293, 299n16, 
303n40, 309n87
Cumulative selection, 9, 14, 20, 24–25
D
Deliberative, 1, 8, 17, 24, 34n23, 
36n45, 51, 97, 98, 100, 101, 
117–119, 131, 137, 152, 187, 
204, 262, 268, 278, 288, 289
Ding, W., 10
Dinga, E., 18, 22, 49, 52, 57, 61, 64, 
75n6, 80n39, 81n52, 81n53, 93, 
107, 118, 133, 134, 144, 147, 
148, 151, 154, 157, 159, 162, 
164, 167, 171, 179, 180, 216, 
235, 235n4, 236n11, 237n22, 
238n30, 301n27
Direct PP, 126, 127
Dissipative system, 89, 117, 140–144, 
148, 156, 164–166, 186
DNA, 15, 37n50, 121, 158, 261, 271, 
299n6, 313n111
E
Economic capital, 198
Economic lag, 130, 161
Efficient Market Hypothesis 
(EMH), 3, 57–64, 81n52, 
82n55, 82n58, 83n65, 83n68, 
83n69, 84n76, 134, 162, 185, 
196, 212, 214–216, 221, 222, 
230, 245n109, 246n110, 
246n116, 249n137, 283, 285, 
288, 299n14, 301n27, 307n77, 
308n85, 309n90
Elasticity, 46, 47, 225, 235, 246n111, 
255, 296
Elster, J., 213, 214
Emergence, 118, 120, 157, 167, 
246n110, 276, 281, 
305n59, 310n91
Entropic bubble, 117, 118
Entropy, 38n59, 62, 88, 92, 93, 
95–97, 114, 117, 122, 
133–135, 137, 140–144, 
146, 148, 150, 151, 154, 
156, 158, 162, 164–166, 
168, 186, 197, 238n31, 
243n78, 285, 309n87, 
313n109

318 
INDEX
Epigenetic mutation, 175, 180–183, 
185, 256, 260, 262–264, 271, 
275–277, 300n25, 301n28, 
301n29, 303n47, 305n57
Ethical, 25–29, 39n67, 39n68, 
201, 203
Event, 35n36, 105, 150, 151, 153, 
164, 190, 239n41, 262, 
278, 310n91
Evolution, 1, 8, 12, 13, 15–18, 22, 
24, 28–31, 32n12, 34n23, 
35n36, 38n60, 40n79, 44, 45, 
49, 51, 62, 77n20, 99, 120, 124, 
132, 137–141, 149, 153, 154, 
159, 163, 164, 181, 183, 187, 
203, 212, 214, 215, 238n27, 
247n119, 275–283, 301n29, 
304n53, 305n58, 
305n62, 307n73
Evolutionary arrow, 1, 22, 23
Explicit direct PP, 127
Explicit indirect PP, 127
Explicit PP, 126, 127
F
Factual corroboration, 66
Fama, E. F., 58, 212, 262
Farzin, Y. H., 212
Feedback, 24, 34n24, 131, 145, 161, 
162, 167, 268
Feed-forward, 24, 268
Fetality, 94, 95, 114, 152n36
Financial autopoietic 
chreode, 291–296
Financial dissipativity, 285–286
Financial fitness, 57–75, 84n81, 
85n84, 85n86, 85n87, 85n88, 
264–266, 291
Financial hermeneutics, 273
Financial individual, 9, 47, 48, 65, 
75n4, 77n19, 118, 153, 172, 
178, 217–219, 221, 222, 225, 
229, 233, 246n110, 253, 254, 
257, 271, 274, 284, 288, 289, 
292, 307n80, 310n90, 
313n111, 308n80
Financial market, 1–31, 41–74, 93, 
94, 101, 103, 105, 112, 
116–146, 153, 162, 164, 168, 
171–187, 195, 206, 214–235, 
235n2, 237n16, 237n20, 
237n22, 238n31, 241n67, 
245n107, 245n108, 248n128, 
249n137, 250n138, 250n139, 
253, 254, 256, 257, 261, 262, 
264–271, 273, 275–288, 
290–293, 295, 299n11, 300n23, 
301n27, 301n28, 302n31, 
305n63, 307n72, 307n74, 
308n82, 308n85, 309n88, 
309n89, 309n90, 310n91, 
311n94, 311n95, 311n97, 
312n102, 312n108, 
313n110, 310n90
First best, 26, 83n72, 107, 139, 
205, 220
Fitness, 1, 4, 5, 8, 15, 16, 18–22, 29, 
33n20, 35n36, 43, 55–57, 62, 
69, 70, 73, 77n20, 85n83, 
85n84, 85n86, 85n88, 179, 214, 
223, 229, 247n122, 264–269, 
275, 276, 291, 302n30, 
302n31, 305n58
Formal selection, 14–21, 227
Fractal Market Hypothesis (FMH), 
58, 59, 63, 81n52, 82n58, 
83n62, 134, 185, 215, 
230, 249n137
Freedom, 33n20, 93, 199, 222, 236n5, 
237n16, 247n119, 247n120, 273, 
311n100, 312n104
Freedom degree, 247n119, 284, 295, 
296, 311n100, 312n109

319
  INDEX 
Free will, 13, 14, 16, 37n50, 125, 
152, 179, 190, 192, 199, 236n5, 
236n14, 240n48, 243n76, 
243n83, 255, 257, 262, 266, 
267, 269, 271, 272, 276, 280, 
285, 292, 293, 300n25, 303n39, 
303n44, 305n65, 313n110
Functional component, 15, 16
Functionality, 18, 96, 115–116, 123, 
145, 229–232, 235, 
250n139, 253
Functional selection, 14–21
G
Gamma-autopoiesis
Gap, 67, 68, 110, 161, 248n128
Gene, 10, 11, 14
Genotype, 1, 10, 15, 17, 18, 20, 23, 
25, 28, 38n57, 45, 51, 106, 154, 
246n110, 253–256, 260, 261, 
271, 272, 275, 278, 292, 298n4, 
299n6, 299n7, 299n10, 
300n25, 307n80
Georgescu-Roegen, N., 134, 148, 159
Gould, S. J., 25, 38n63, 238n27
Granularity, 130, 161, 162
Grossman, Sanford J., 60, 83n67, 
83n68, 308n85
H
Habitus, 266, 273, 296, 304n49
Heisenberg, Werner, 190, 244n91
Hermeneutics, 272–274, 304n51
High entropy, 88, 114, 140, 142, 159, 
166, 167
Hodgson, G. M., 214
Homo biologicus, 195, 196, 238n30
Homo œconomicus, 59, 61, 85n88, 
185, 188, 190, 194–196, 212, 
216, 238n30
Homo perennis, 196
Homo significans, 195, 196, 201, 213
Hub effect, 145
Human individual, 9, 11, 13, 16, 45, 
48–52, 56, 57, 65, 66, 77n15, 
77n16, 77n19, 77n20, 78n30, 
84n79, 94, 95, 100, 101, 111, 118, 
121, 123, 159, 164, 172–174, 177, 
200, 219, 220, 224, 225, 230, 
236n5, 236n6, 236n7, 246n110, 
253–256, 259, 266, 272, 273, 294, 
298n4, 300n18, 302n33, 302n39, 
304n52, 307n80, 310n90, 
303n39, 308n80
Husserl, Edmund, 27
Hypercycle, 138, 143, 144, 147, 
164, 167
Hypothesis, 2–3, 18, 19, 27, 31n4, 
38n60, 49, 58, 59, 61–63, 69, 
81n50, 81n53, 87–146, 
171–235, 283
I
Idiosyncrasy, 48, 176, 201, 256, 266, 
273, 278, 296, 309n89
Implicit indirect PP, 127
Implicit information, 14, 47, 77n17, 
82n55, 84n81, 118, 135, 162, 
173, 281, 301n27, 308n86
Implicit PP, 126, 127
Individual transaction (IT), 8, 34n26, 
47, 67, 153, 172, 175, 176, 
178–182, 185, 215, 218, 219, 
223–228, 230–232, 235, 235n1, 
246n112, 249n131, 250n141, 
255, 257, 260, 261, 263, 267, 
271, 272, 274, 275, 281, 284, 
285, 288–290, 293, 295, 296, 
299n13, 301n27, 301n28, 
304n54, 304n55, 306n66, 
306n67, 310n90, 312n102

320 
INDEX
Individuation, 281–283, 
309n64, 310n71
Induced speciation, 280, 283
Information, 2, 3, 11, 13, 14, 31n7, 
48, 57, 58, 63, 77n17, 84n81, 
88, 105, 109, 114, 118, 121, 
144, 146, 147, 162, 173, 215, 
225, 235n3, 243n78, 301n27
Institutional criterion, 217–223
Institutional device, 127, 130, 131
Integral utility (IU), 188–214, 219, 
220, 224, 225, 242n70, 244n99, 
245n101, 248n125, 248n126, 
248n127, 248n128, 249n131
Intellectual capital, 198, 200
Intelligibility, 188–192, 
239n46, 244n98
Invariant, 88, 106, 107, 213, 219, 
229, 241n63, 245n105, 
247n119, 254, 300n24
Irrational, 14, 190, 229, 239n45, 
240n52, 272, 308n81, 312n108
Irreversibility inertia, 173
K
Kuhn, T., 53, 237n24, 246n113, 
249n137, 307n73
L
Laffer curve, 126
Lag, 126, 130, 161, 172
Lakatos, I., 154, 179, 180, 237n24, 
248n123, 238n24, 255, 260
Law, 17, 25, 29, 33n15, 34n22, 
36n45, 38n59, 39n76, 82n55, 
88, 125, 137–142, 158, 163, 
164, 236n7
Lehrer, S., 10
Living, 1, 2, 15, 18, 31n2, 33n17, 42, 
56, 79n32, 87–105, 115, 120, 
124, 125, 137, 139, 147, 149, 
150, 152, 156–158, 163, 164, 
178, 208, 237n20, 281, 283
Lo, A., 3, 60, 82n55, 83n69, 196, 
216, 218, 246n67, 250n110
Logically living, 32n9, 241n20
Logically living system (LLS), 92–105, 
107, 145, 151n31, 152n34, 
153n45, 153n47, 154n50, 
154n52, 154n54, 154n55, 
154n57, 155n59, 155n60, 
155n62, 167n161, 172n189, 
182, 190, 231, 241n20
Low entropy, 9, 34n27, 88, 114, 140, 
142, 159, 165–167, 197, 
198, 242n71
Luhmann, N., 52, 105, 106, 154, 
243n78, 299n12, 309n88
M
Mark, 145
Maslow, 39n66, 77n21, 201
Maturana, H., 65, 89, 90, 103–105, 
107, 115, 117, 124, 138, 139, 
148, 149, 153, 158, 182, 311n99
Mazifficing, 196, 219, 224, 
242n70, 246n115
Mechanism, 8, 18, 22, 36n40, 41–74, 
104, 113, 118, 121, 125–129, 
131, 138, 139, 159, 161, 163, 
168, 171, 174, 179, 181, 187, 
208, 209, 211, 217, 239n36, 
239n37, 240n46, 241n56, 
249n137, 250n139, 
250n144, 253–296
Membrane, 87–89, 92, 105, 
113–119, 121, 134, 135, 137, 
140, 145, 149, 150, 164, 172, 
229, 232
Menu cost, 279, 306n69
Meta-principle, 193

321
  INDEX 
Moment, 1, 6, 13, 40n78, 48, 66, 70, 
77n19, 78n29, 84n72, 98, 99, 
102, 113, 117, 157, 163, 165, 
248n123, 271, 279, 300n21
Moral, 25–29, 76n11, 195, 199, 
201–203, 212, 217, 243n86, 
243n88, 244n93
N
Narrative, 190, 192
Natural selection, 2–18, 20, 25, 
35n32, 35n33, 37n46, 37n50, 
41, 56, 75n1, 80n46
Net return, 59, 60, 71, 72, 84n77, 
257, 258, 286, 289, 290, 295
Network, 25, 107, 144–147, 
167n161, 171n185, 
172n192, 203
Normative corroboration, 66
Normative selection, 
266–270, 303n40
Nozick, Robert, 39n71, 192–194, 
211, 213, 240n54
Nussbaum, M.C., 80n41, 213, 214
O
Observability–accessibility–
controllability (OAC), 95, 96
Operational closure, 105, 111, 113, 
114, 116, 121, 123, 155–157, 
171, 172, 176, 178, 182, 
184, 235n3
Ordoliberalism, 212
P
Paradigm, 3, 53–55, 61, 79n30, 
80n39, 80n43, 81n52, 82n55, 
83n62, 100, 108, 109, 195–197, 
203–206, 208, 211, 212, 216, 
217, 222, 226–228, 234, 
237n22, 237n24, 245n109, 
249n137, 256, 289, 
298n5, 307n73
Perception, 33n17, 87, 89, 
91, 93, 100, 104, 107, 
148, 190, 240n47, 
248n128, 278
Performative selection, 266, 
269–271, 273
Perturbation, 148, 287–290
Peters, E. E., 3, 58, 59, 81n52
Phenotype, 1, 3, 4, 8–10, 15, 
17, 18, 20, 22, 34n26, 
38n57, 40n79, 41–44, 52, 65, 
75n1, 75n4, 78n30, 99, 105, 
106, 121, 147, 152, 154, 174, 
178, 179, 181–183, 185, 223, 
229, 230, 235n1, 246n110, 
253–259, 261–264, 266, 268, 
275, 276, 278, 298n4, 299n12, 
300n25, 301n28, 
303n47, 304n56
Plasticity, 46, 47, 218, 230, 246n111, 
246n112, 247n120, 254, 255
Plasticity threshold (PT), 218, 
219, 246n112
Ponzi scheme, 206
Positional leverage (PL), 
295, 296
Predicate, 5, 14, 24, 32n9, 45, 
56, 65, 67, 80n45, 88, 90, 
92, 97, 115, 116, 131, 132, 
148, 151, 155, 161, 171, 
178, 186, 194, 198, 201, 
211, 218, 242n75, 290, 
291, 302n31
Price, 2, 58–60, 64, 79n36, 83n64, 
83n70, 83n71, 94, 126, 131, 
135, 162, 300n21, 
308n85, 309n90
Prigogine, I., 93, 118, 148, 157

322 
INDEX
Principle, 10, 23, 25, 27, 28, 32n8, 
36n42, 37n50, 39n65, 39n71, 
39n72, 39n76, 40n78, 55, 
57–65, 80n39, 81n50, 81n52, 
82n58, 82n61, 88, 95, 97, 100, 
103, 104, 106–109, 113, 114, 
118, 119, 123, 127, 131, 
137–139, 141, 142, 150–152, 
156, 157, 159, 163–166, 168, 
173, 179, 192–194, 198, 203, 
207, 209, 211, 213–217, 219, 
222, 223, 228, 229, 236n5, 
240n54, 241n56, 241n57, 
241n58, 241n59, 245n100, 
245n104, 245n106, 246n114, 
248n124, 268, 273, 283, 286, 
299n9, 307n78, 312n102
Processual closure, 109, 114, 121, 
122, 124
Proference, 14, 49, 51, 61, 63, 64, 71, 
77n16, 78n27, 85n84, 186, 225, 
235, 238n33, 248n127
Proferential corroboration, 66
Propensity, 10, 11, 14, 32n13, 49, 51, 
61, 63–66, 70, 71, 77n16, 
78n24, 78n27, 117, 142, 144, 
147, 157, 172–176, 179, 180, 
182, 185, 218, 219, 225, 
228–233, 235, 235n2, 236n6, 
236n8, 236n9, 236n10, 236n12, 
237n17, 237n18, 241n56, 
245n105, 246n110, 248n127, 
249n135, 250n138, 253–255, 
257, 258, 260–263, 269, 
271–273, 278–280, 284, 
292–296, 299n8, 301n29, 
303n44, 303n47, 304n52, 
305n57, 305n65, 305n66, 
306n67, 306n71, 307n80, 
308n81, 312n102, 312n109, 
313n110, 313n111, 313n109
Psychism, 158, 240n48, 255, 259, 
303n48, 308n83, 309n88
Public policy (PP), 125–129, 131
Q
Quantum of mutation, 181, 182
Quasi-system, 146
R
Random, 1, 8, 15, 21, 31n1, 36n45, 
43, 54, 262, 266, 288
Rational, 3, 14, 39n71, 56, 63, 64, 
82n55, 84n74, 166, 188, 190, 
194, 195, 201, 203, 212, 213, 
229, 230, 237n17, 239n45, 
240n48, 240n52, 272, 278, 291, 
295, 307n71, 312n108, 313n110
Rationality model, 31n7, 95, 274, 
305n66, 311n100
Reaction, 12, 33n20, 46, 60, 89, 90, 
93, 94, 101, 107, 108, 113–115, 
148, 150, 151, 154, 156, 158, 
185, 193, 204, 226, 257, 262, 296
Refutation, 19, 20, 37n48, 57, 81n50, 
223–226, 228, 249n134, 279, 
300n21, 306n67
Regulative criterion, 226, 227
Relational openness, 109, 111, 114, 
121, 122, 124, 172, 182, 235n3
Replicability threshold (RT), 218, 
219, 246n112
Replicator, 98, 99, 152, 254, 296, 
299n6, 313n111
Representational model, 188, 189, 
194–196, 203–205
Reproduction, 15, 40n79, 103–106, 
109, 121, 148, 152, 221, 261
Resilience, 24, 155, 226, 227, 293, 
310n93, 312n106

323
  INDEX 
Return, 3, 24, 58–62, 64, 66, 71, 72, 
82n60, 83n62, 83n63, 84n77, 
128, 155, 159, 214, 215, 223, 
226, 227, 229, 232, 241n56, 
248n128, 255, 257, 258, 266, 
267, 269, 276, 285, 286, 289, 
290, 295, 300n21, 301n29, 
303n40, 309n90, 310n93, 311n94
RNA, 15, 88, 147, 271
Robustness, 293, 310n93, 
312n102, 312n106
RRA, 293, 294
S
Saltationist selection, 14, 
24–25, 38n63
Samuelson, Paul A., 48, 77n17, 213, 
236n10, 245n105
Santiago school, 89–91, 100, 103, 
115, 119, 120, 125, 148–150, 
158, 163, 186
Satisficing, 60, 64, 83n72, 
200, 246n68
Second best, 26, 64, 65, 139, 205, 
220, 221
Selection gradient, 142
Selective inertia, 181, 238n27
Self-catalyse, 145
Self-organization, 62, 88, 113, 114, 
118, 119, 143, 156, 196, 
250n139, 264, 279, 283–287
Self-selection, 182–184
Sen, A., 80n41, 213, 214
Shannon, Claude, 93, 150, 154, 
243n78, 313n109
Signalling message, 129
Significance threshold, 153, 175, 185, 
236n8, 238n26, 275, 276, 287, 
288, 309n89, 310n93
Simon, Herbert, 60, 83n72, 188, 
241n62, 242n68, 242n69
Social capital, 197–200, 211–214
Social fitness (SF), 4–8, 16, 18–21, 24, 
28, 29, 31, 33n19, 34n22, 
34n23, 37n49, 37n51, 42–57, 
61, 65, 69, 76n8, 77n18, 80n46, 
81n49, 223, 245n108, 302n31
Social selection, 1–31, 41–74, 268
Speciation, 277–283, 305n64, 307n73
Species, 2–10, 13, 15–19, 30, 31, 
32n9, 32n12, 32n14, 33n20, 
34n21, 34n23, 34n25, 34n26, 
36n39, 41–47, 49–56, 65, 67, 
75n4, 75n7, 76n8, 76n9, 77n18, 
78n30, 79n33, 80n48, 84n78, 
91, 100, 117, 118, 123, 124, 
150, 153, 156, 171, 178, 
180–183, 186, 187, 200, 201, 
217, 222, 227, 232, 233, 235n1, 
238n25, 238n29, 249n135, 253, 
254, 261–263, 266–269, 271, 
272, 275–285, 290, 298n2, 
299n11, 300n23, 300n25, 
302n31, 302n33, 302n39, 
303n41, 303n43, 303n48, 
304n53, 304n56, 305n63, 
305n64, 307n73, 
307n80, 303n39
State vector, 66, 106, 107, 149, 
292, 311n101
Stiglitz, Joseph, 303n42
Structural inertia, 173
Structural replicability, 109, 111–113, 
121, 123
Substitutability, 130, 162, 224, 
239n36, 248n126, 300n24
Sufficiency, 4–7, 22, 23, 32n9, 38n58, 
42, 44–50, 56, 69, 77n18, 
80n45, 84n78, 87–90, 92, 93, 
96, 97, 105, 108, 110–116, 119, 
120, 122, 131, 132, 148, 149, 
155, 159, 161, 171, 178, 182, 
184, 197–201, 214, 220, 242n72

324 
INDEX
Sufficiency predicate, 23, 32n8, 
44–50, 56, 89, 109, 112, 117, 
122, 131, 132, 148, 155, 
235n3, 245n109
Supra-proportionality, 132
Sustainability, 49, 54, 55, 107, 108, 
110, 111, 116, 124, 152, 155, 
156, 186, 196, 204–214, 
244n93, 244n94, 293, 307n78
Symbolic, 2, 4, 6, 7, 9, 10, 16–18, 
32n9, 32n12, 42, 47–57, 61, 65, 
69, 77n18, 77n19, 77n20, 78n30, 
87, 92–103, 106, 111, 117, 118, 
122, 123, 152, 186, 192–214, 
217, 227, 242n69, 242n70, 
244n90, 245n106, 249n135, 253, 
254, 256, 261, 262, 268, 272, 
275, 276, 282, 298n2, 298n4, 
299n12, 302n31, 302n33, 
302n39, 303n41, 303n43, 
304n54, 307n80, 308n83
Symbolic species, 2–4, 6, 7, 9, 10, 
16–18, 30, 31, 32n9, 32n12, 
34n23, 34n25, 36n39, 42, 43, 
45–47, 49, 51, 65, 75n4, 76n8, 
76n9, 77n18, 78n30, 79n33, 
80n48, 118, 123, 156, 180–183, 
186, 187, 227, 238n29, 253, 254, 
261–263, 267–269, 271, 272, 
275–280, 299n11, 302n33, 
302n39, 303n43, 304n56, 303n39
Symbolic utility (SU), 28, 39n71, 188, 
192–194, 196–214, 220, 224, 
241n58, 241n59, 241n60, 
243n85, 244n90, 244n93, 
244n99, 248n126, 312n102
Sympatric speciation, 279–281, 
283, 307n73
Synergy, 44, 76n10, 94, 119, 160, 
290, 305n57
Syntax, 128, 129
System, 9, 62, 87, 171, 253
T
Temporal arrow, 23
Thermodynamic entropy, 89, 93, 134, 
148, 150, 154, 308n85
Trading strategy, 8, 47, 118, 
172, 253
Transcription, 8, 15, 16, 37n50, 
271–275, 278, 303n39, 303n47, 
303n48, 304n52
Translation, 8, 15, 16, 37n50, 
271–275, 278, 303n39, 
304n52, 304n53
Triggering, 130
U
Universe 1, 140, 141, 165, 166
Utility, 79n36, 150, 153, 165, 
188–214, 219, 220, 224, 225, 
239n40, 241n61, 241n64, 
241n65, 242n70, 243n84, 
243n85, 244n90, 244n99, 
245n100, 246n117, 248n125, 
248n126, 248n127, 
248n128, 249n131
V
Varela, Francisco, 65, 89, 90, 
103, 105, 107, 115, 117, 124, 
138, 139, 148, 149, 158, 
182, 311n99
Vromen, J., 62
W
Way of life, 5, 7, 33n17, 33n18, 43, 
48–50, 55, 56, 65
William of Ockham, 23
Winter, Sidney G., 52, 77n23, 214
Win–win, 94
Wolf, J. B., 41

