T
Time in Quantum Theory
H.D. Zeh
In quantum mechanics, time is understood as an external (‘classical’) concept. So
it is assumed, as in classical physics, to exist as a controller of all motion – either
as absolute time or in the form of proper times deﬁned by a classical spacetime
metric. In the latter case it is applicable to local quantum systems along their world
lines. According to this assumption, time can be read from appropriate classical or
quasi-classical ‘clocks’.
This conception has to be revised only when general relativity, where the spatial
metric becomes a dynamical object, is itself quantized [1] – as required for con-
sistency (see IV). The thereby achieved ‘quantization of time’ does not necessarily
lead to a discretization of time – just as the  quantization of free motion does not
require a discretization of space. On the other hand, the introduction of a funda-
mental gravitational constant in addition to  Planck’s constant and the speed of
light leads to a natural Planck time unit, corresponding to 5.40 10−44 sec. This may
signal the need for an entirely novel conceptual framework – to be based on as yet
missing empirical evidence. A formal (canonical) quantization of time would also
be required in non-relativistic Machian (‘relational’) dynamical theories [4], which
consistently replace the concept of time by some reference motion. If quantum the-
ory is universally valid, all dynamical processes (including those that may serve as
clocks or deﬁners of time) must in principle be affected by quantum theory. What
does this mean for the notion of time?
Historically, the dynamics of quantum systems seemed to consist of individually
undetermined stochastic  ‘quantum jumps’ between otherwise ‘stationary’ states
(energy eigenstates) – see [2] for an early review of the formalism and the attempt
of an interpretation. Such stochastic events are observed in quantum measurements,
in particular. For this reason, von Neumann [3] referred to the time-dependent
 Schr¨odinger equation as a ‘second intervention’, since Schr¨odinger had originally
invented it to describe consequences of time-dependent external ‘perturbations’ of a
quantum system. Note, however, that atomic clocks are not based on any stochastic
quantum events, even though they have to be designed as open systems in order to
allow their permanent reading (representing ‘measurements’ of the clock – see IV).
In a consistent  Schr¨odinger picture, all dynamics is described as a time
dependence of the quantum states, while the  observables are ﬁxed formal kine-
matical concepts (see also Sect. 2.2 of [5]). The time dependence according to
the  Schr¨odinger equation can be completely understood as an interference
phenomenon between different stationary states |m⟩, which possess individually
meaningless phase factors exp(iωmt). Their superpositions are able to describe
D. Greenberger et al. (eds.), Compendium of Quantum Physics: Concepts, Experiments,
786
History and Philosophy, c⃝Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2009

Time in Quantum Theory
787
T
time-dependent quantum states |α(t)⟩in the form
|α(t)⟩: =

dqψα(q, t)|q⟩=

m cm exp(iωmt)|m⟩.
The  wave function ψα(q, t) is here used to deﬁne the time-dependent state |α(t)⟩
in abstract  Hilbert space (cf.  rigged Hilbert spaces). The Hilbert space basis |q⟩
diagonalizes an appropriate observable Q. The time dependence of a quantum state
is in fact meaningful only relative to such a ﬁxed basis, as demonstrated by means
of the wave function in the above deﬁnition.
In non-relativistic quantum mechanics, the time parameter t that appears in the
Schr¨odinger wave function ψ(q, t) is identiﬁed with Newton’s absolute time. So
it is presumed to exist regardless of how or whether it is measured. The letter q
represents all variables qi(i = 1. . .I) that form the required conﬁguration space.
The special case of a point mass, where q ≡x, y, z corresponds to a single space
point, has often led to confusion of the wave function with a time-dependent spatial
ﬁeld (relativistically a ﬁeld on spacetime). It is essentially this misconception that
has led to the meaningless search for a time operator T in analogy to the position
operator of a particle. However, time t is here not a dynamical variable. In N-particle
mechanics, for example, the conﬁguration space variables q are equivalent to N
space points (that is, I = 3N variables). In quantum ﬁeld theory, the amplitudes of
all ﬁelds Φ(x, y, z) at all space points even form a continuum. These ﬁeld variables
are thus distinguished from one another by their spatial arguments, which thereby
assume the role of ‘indices’ to Φ, just as i for the variables qi [6]. Therefore both,
space and time, are assumed to be absolutely deﬁned classical preconditions for
kinematics and dynamics – even though they appear in the formalism in different
ways.
If the variables q are ﬁeld amplitudes, the canonical quantization of n ﬁelds leads
to a time-dependent wave functional Ψ [Φ1(x, y, z), . . ., Φn(x, y, z), t], rather than
to n ﬁeld operators on spacetime. This conclusion holds relativistically, too (see III).
The corresponding Hilbert space readily includes superpositions of different ‘par-
ticle’ numbers (‘occupation numbers’). For bosons, the latter are simply oscillator
quantum numbers for the eigenmodes (ﬁrst postulated by Planck, and later explained
by Schr¨odinger by the numbers of nodes of their wave functions). The ultimate uni-
versal local Hilbert space basis is hoped to be found in uniﬁed ﬁeld theory.
Schr¨odinger’s general wave function ψ(q, t) may be Fourier transformed with
respect to all its arguments – in spite of their different interpretations. This transfor-
mation deﬁnes wave numbers k in the conﬁguration space and frequencies ω. They
may be rescaled into canonical momenta (in general different from conventional,
that is, spatial momenta) and energies by means of Planck’s constant. The Fourier
transformation gives rise to a formal ‘time operator’, T := i∂/∂ω, that allows one
to deﬁne a continuous shift operation for frequencies: U(ω) := exp(iωT ). It
does not in general transform a solution of the Schr¨odinger equation into another
solution, since this would require a continuous and unbounded energy spectrum.
Pairs of Fourier variables are subject to the Fourier theorems,

788
Time in Quantum Theory
qk ⩾1 and tω ⩾1,
which apply to all functions ψ(q, t) – regardless of the existence of any dynamical
law or a Hamiltonian H. These  Heisenberg uncertainty relations between corre-
sponding variables must have physical consequences when applied to solutions of
the Schr¨odinger equation. Those based on the Fourier theorem relating time and fre-
quency are usually interpreted as representing a ‘time-energy uncertainty relation’
(see [7]). Well known, for example, is the spectral line width required for metastable
states. A ‘time uncertainty’ can also be deﬁned by the ﬁnite duration of a preparation
or measurement process.
II. The situation is somewhat obscured in the  Heisenberg picture. In the
algebraic Born-Heisenberg-Jordan quantization procedure, ‘observables’ were in-
troduced in formal analogy to the classical dynamical variables, such as q(t)
and p(t), while quantum states were not regarded as dynamical objects. Observ-
ables would assume deﬁnite values only in appropriate measurements or discrete
‘quantum events’ (von Neumann’s ﬁrst intervention – historically related to Bohr’s
quantum jumps between his discrete classical orbits). Time durations are then of-
ten deﬁned operationally by means of pairs of such events – not according to the
Schr¨odinger dynamics. The latter is here merely regarded as a tool for calculating
probabilities for the occurrence of events, which are then assumed to represent the
only real quantum phenomena.
Note that in the Heisenberg picture certain properties of quantum states seem to
represent some hidden time dependence. For example, the kinetic energy operator in
the Schr¨odinger picture (the Lapacean) measures the curvature of the wave function
ψ(q, t) at given time t – not any quantitiy related to motion, such as classical kinetic
energy. Its non-vanishing minimum (achieved for a wave function that does not
change sign) is in the Heisenberg picture interpreted as representing ‘zero point
ﬂuctuations’ of the corresponding variables q.
This picture has led to much confusion – including the search for a ‘time ob-
servable’ T that would depend on the speciﬁc system Hamiltonians H by obeying
commutation relations
[T, H] = iℏ,
in analogy to position and momentum observables (see the Introduction of [8] for a
review). However, since realistic Hamiltonians possess a ground state, their spectra
are bounded from below, and a time operator obeying this commutation relation can-
not possess a spectrum represented by all real numbers (as pointed out by Wolfgang
Pauli [2]). It may nonetheless be related to time intervals between certain pairs of
events that can be measured at a system characterized by the Hamiltonian H.
A formal equivalence between the Schr¨odinger and a Heisenberg picture for
the purpose of calculating expectation values of measurement results is known to
hold for isolated, unitarily evolving systems (which are exceptions in reality). For
asymptotically isolated objects participating in a scattering process one may use the
interaction picture, where part of the Hamiltonian dynamics is absorbed into the ob-
servables characterizing asymptotic states. This includes the ‘dressing’ of quantum

Time in Quantum Theory
789
T
ﬁelds. However, macroscopic systems always form open systems; they never be-
come isolated, even when dressed. Such systems may approximately obey effective
non-unitary dynamics (master equations). In principle, this dynamics has to be de-
rived from the unitary (Schr¨odinger) evolution of an entangled global quantum state,
that would have to include all ‘external interventions’. Under realistic assumptions
this leads to permanently growing  entanglement with the environment – locally
observed as  decoherence [5].
This extremely fast and in practice irreversible process describes a dislocalization
of quantum superpositions. It thereby mimics  quantum jumps (events): compo-
nents which represent different macroscopic properties (such as different pointer
positions or different registration times of a detector) are almost immediately dy-
namically decoupled from one another. None of them is selected by decoherence
as the only existing one. Pauli, when arguing in terms of the Heisenberg picture,
regarded such events as occurring ‘outside the laws of nature’, since they withstood
all attempts of a local dynamical description. In the global Schr¨odinger picture, the
time-asymmetry of this dynamical decoupling of components (‘branching’) can be
explained in terms of the time-symmetric dynamics by means of an appropriate ini-
tial condition for the wave function of the universe – the same condition that may
also explain thermodynamical and related time asymmetries (‘arrows of time’) [9].
In essence, this initial condition requires that non-local entanglement did not yet
exist just after the big bang, and therefore has to form dynamically (‘causally’). The
resulting asymmetry in time may give rise to the impression of a direction of time.
III. In  quantum ﬁeld theory, a Schr¨odinger equation that controls the dy-
namics of the ﬁeld functionals may well be relativistic – containing only local
interactions with respect to the space-dependent ﬁeld variables (in this way facil-
itating the concept of a Hamiltonian density in space). A wave function(al) obeying
a relativistic Schr¨odinger equation never propagates faster than light with respect to
the underlying presumed absolute spacetime. Recent reports of apparently observed
superluminal phenomena ( superluminal communication) were either based on
inappropriate clocks, or on questionable interpretations of the wave function. For
example, the exact energy eigenstate of a particle, bound to an attractive potential in
a state of negative energy E = −|E|, would extend to spatial inﬁnity according to
exp(−√|E|r) outside the range of the potential. It has therefore been claimed to be
able in principle to cause effects at any distance within any ﬁnite time [10]. How-
ever, if the wave function of the bound system forms dynamically (according to the
Schr¨odinger equation rather than by quantum jumps), it can only subluminally ap-
proach the exact eigenstate with its inﬁnite exponential tail. This time-dependence
requires a minimum energy spread that is in accord with the time-frequency Fourier
theorem. Similar arguments hold relativistically also for particle number eigen-
states, which cannot have sharp spatial boundaries because of Casimir-type effects
( Casimir effect) (in principle observable for moving mirrors); all bounded sys-
tems must relativistically be in superpositions of different particle numbers.
In the theory of relativity, proper times assume the role of Newton’s absolute
time for all local systems, that is, for those approximately following world lines in
spacetime. However, quantum states are generically nonlocal (entangled), and they

790
Time in Quantum Theory
do not consist of or deﬁne local subsystem states. One may then introduce auxiliary
time coordinates (arbitrary spacetime foliations) in order to deﬁne the dynamics of
global states on these artiﬁcial ‘simultaneities’. A Hamiltonian (albeit of very com-
plex form – in general including a whole ﬁeld of Coriolis-type forces with effective
‘particle’ creation and annihilation terms) would nonetheless exist in this case. As
these artiﬁcial simultaneities may be assumed to propagate just locally, one speaks
of ‘many-ﬁngered time’. Dynamical evolution in quantum theory is in general lo-
cally non-unitary (to be described by a master equation) because of the generic
nonlocal entanglement contained in the unitarily evolving global quantum state.
Unitary evolution may therefore be conﬁrmed only in exceptional, quasi-isolated
(microscopic) systems.
IV. According to Mach’s ideas, no concept of absolute time should be required
or meaningful. Any time concept could then be replaced by simultaneity relations
between trajectories of different variables (including appropriate clocks) – see [4]
and Chap. 1 of [9]. Classically, timeless trajectories qi(λ), where λ is an arbitrary
parameter, are still deﬁned. Mach’s principle requires only that the fundamental dy-
namical laws are invariant under reparametrizations of λ. In quantum theory, the
wave function cannot even depend on such a time-ordering parameter, since there
are no trajectories any more that could be parametrized. This fact excludes even
dynamical successions of spatial geometries (the dynamical states of general relativ-
ity), which would form a foliation of spacetime. On the other hand, any appropriate
variable q0 that is among the arguments of a time-less wave function ψ(q) may
be regarded as a more or less appropriate global physical clock. According to the
 superposition principle, superpositions of different values q0 – that is, of differ-
ent ‘physical times’ – would then have to exist as real physical states (just as the
superpositions of different values of any other physical variable).
In conventional quantum mechanics, superpositions of different times of an event
are well known. For example, a coherently decaying metastable state (that can be
experimentally conﬁrmed to exist by means of interference experiments in the case
of decay fragments only weakly interacting with their environment) is a superpo-
sition of different decay times. Similarly, the quantum state for a single variable
x and a clock variable u, say, would have to be described by a wave function
ψ(x, u). This means that the classical dependence of x on clock time u, deﬁned
by their time-less trajectory x(u), is replaced by the less stringent  entanglement
between x and u that is deﬁned by such a wave function [11]. The clock variable
u becomes quasi-classical only when it is pertinently decohered, such that super-
positions of different times u always remain dislocalized (locally inaccessible). The
same conclusion holds for the mentioned superposition of different decay times if its
corresponding partial waves ( wave packet forming thin spherical shells in space
unless reﬂected somewhere) are decohered from one another.
Atomic clocks, in particular, are based on the time-dependent superposition
of two close atomic energy eigenstates (deﬁning ‘beats’). These oscillating states
would immediately be destroyed by decoherence whenever they were measured
(read). Therefore, they have to be dynamically correlated with the  coherent state
of a maser ﬁeld that is in resonance with them. This time-dependent coherent state is

Time in Quantum Theory
791
T
known to be ‘robust’ against decoherence – including genuine measurements [12].
So it permits the construction of a quasi-classical atomic clock that can be read.
Exactly classical clocks would be in conﬂict with the uncertainty relations between
position and momentum of their ‘hands’.
The above-described consequences of Mach’s principle with respect to time do
indeed apply in general relativity to a closed universe. Spatial geometries on a time-
like foliation of spacetime, which would classically determine all proper times [13],
are now among the dynamical variables q (arguments of the wave function) –
similar to the mentioned clock variable u. Moreover, material clocks intended to
‘measure’ these proper times within a given precision would have to possess a min-
imum mass in order to comply with the uncertainty relations [14], while this mass
must then in turn disturb the spacetime metric.
A time coordinate t in general relativity is a physically meaningless parame-
ter (such as λ – not u – in the above examples). Invariance of the theory under
reparametrization, t →f (t), requires a ‘Hamiltonian constraint’: H = 0 [1, 15].
In its quantum mechanical form, HΨ = 0, this leads to the trivial Schr¨odinger dy-
namics ∂Ψ/∂t = 0, where Ψ is now a wave functional on a conﬁguration space
consisting of spatial geometries and matter ﬁelds. As this consequence seems to
remain valid for all uniﬁed theories that contain  quantum gravity, one has to con-
clude that there is no time on a fundamental level; all dynamics is encoded in the
static entanglement described by Ψ . Surprisingly, though, the time-less Wheeler-
DeWitt equation [1],
Hψ = 0,
(also called an Einstein-Schr¨odinger equation) becomes hyperbolic for Friedmann
type universes – similar to a relativistic wave equation on spacetime (see Sect. 2.1
of [9]). This allows one to formulate a complete boundary condition for Ψ in the
form of an ‘intrinsic initial condition’ [16]. It requires Ψ and its ﬁrst derivative to
be given on a ‘time-like’ hypersurface, deﬁned according to the hyperbolic form of
the kinetic energy operator contained in H (now a d’Alembertian), in this universal
conﬁguration space (DeWitt’s ‘superspace’). For example, such initial data can be
freely chosen at a small value of the expansion parameter a of the universe. A low-
entropy condition at a →0 then leads to an ‘intrinsic arrow of time’: total entropy
on time-like hypersurfaces must grow (for statistical reasons) as a function of the
size of the universe – regardless of any external concept of time.
Quasi-classical time can here only be recovered within the validity of a Born-
Oppenheimer approximation with respect to the square root of the inverse Planck
mass [15], while spatial geometry, which deﬁnes all fundamental physical clocks, is
strongly entangled with, and thus decohered by, matter [17]. In analogy to the co-
herent set of apparent light rays that approximately describe the propagation of one
extended light wave in space in the limit of short wave lengths (geometric optics),
quasi-classical times are deﬁned separately for all quasi-trajectories in superspace.
Each of them then deﬁnes a dynamically autonomous quasi-classical world (an
‘Everett branch’ of the global wave function in unitary description) – including
a speciﬁc quasi-classical spacetime. As  ‘Schr¨odinger cat’ states evolve abun-

792
Time in Quantum Theory
dantly out of microscopic superpositions in measurement-type interactions, there
cannot be just one quasi-classical world (analogous to just one light ray in geomet-
ric optics) according to the Schr¨odinger dynamics. Material clocks, such as atomic
clocks, require further (usually not quite as strong) decoherence to become quasi-
classical.
Primary Literature
1. B. S. DeWitt: Quantum theory of gravity, Phys. Rev. 160, 1113 (1967)
2. W. Pauli: In Handbuch der Physik, ed. by H. Geiger and K. Scheel, 2nd edn., Vol. 24 (Springer,
Berlin 1933)
3. J. von Neumann: Mathematische Grundlagen der Quantenmechanik (Springer, Berlin 1932)
Secondary Literature
4. J.B. Barbour: The End of Time (Weidenfeld & Nicolson, London 1999)
5. E. Joos, H. D. Zeh, C. Kiefer, D. Giulini, J. Kupsch, and I.-O. Stamatescu: Decoherence and the
Appearance of a Classical World in Quantum Theory, 2nd edn. (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg
2003)
6. J. Hilgevoord: The uncertainty principle for energy and time, Am. J. Phys. 64, 1451 (1996)
7. P. Busch: The time energy uncertainty relation, In [8]
8. J. G. Muga, R. Sals Mayato, and I. L. Egusquiza: Time in Quantum Mechanics (Springer, Berlin
2002)
9. H. D. Zeh: The Physical Basis of the Direction of Time, 5th edn. (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg
2007)
10. G. Hegerfeldt: Causality problems for Fermi’s two-atom system, Phys. Rev. Lett. 72, 596
(1994)
11. D. N. Page and W. K. Wootters: Evolution without evolution: Dynamics described by stationary
observables, Phys. Rev. D27, 2885 (1983)
12. O. K¨ubler and H. D. Zeh: Dynamics of quantum correlations, Ann. Phys. N.Y. 76, 405 (1973)
13. R. F. Baierlein, D. H. Sharp, and J.A. Wheeler: Three-dimensional geometry as carrier of in-
formation about time, Phys. Rev. 126, 1864 (1962)
14. H. Salecker and E.P. Wigner: Quantum limitations of the measurement of space-time distances,
Phys. Rev. 109, 571 (1958)
15. C. Kiefer: Quantum Gravity, 2nd edn. (Clarendon Press, Oxford 2007)
16. H. D. Zeh: Emergence of classical time from a universal wave function, Phys. Lett. A116, 9
(1986)
17. E. Joos: Why do we observe a classical spacetime? Phys. Lett. A116, 6 (1986)

