Regenerative Electrodes for Peripheral Nerve
Interfacing
Erik R. Zellmer and Daniel W. Moran
Contents
1
Introduction to Regenerative Peripheral Neural Interfaces. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
562
1.1
Peripheral Nerve Regeneration. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
562
1.2
RPI Implantation and Chronic Neural Integration. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
566
1.3
Early RPI Iterations and Lessons on Neural Regeneration. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
569
2
Contemporary RPI Designs and Their Applications. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
572
2.1
Micro- and Macro-Sieve Electrode. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
572
2.2
Micro-Channel Electrodes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
576
2.3
Other RPI Designs. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
578
3
Computational Modeling of RPIs. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
579
4
RPIs as Bidirectional Interfaces. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
583
5
Future Directions: Bidirectional Interface for Powered Prosthesis. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
583
6
Conclusions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
585
References. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
585
Abstract
Regenerative peripheral neural interfaces are devices which are designed to
interface peripheral nerve ﬁbers that have regenerated through or past their
geometry. Since the nerve is ﬁrst severed prior to regeneration through a device,
they constitute the most invasive type of interface – their use is predicated on the
implant being placed near the ends of stumps formed following nerve transection.
Since peripheral nerve ﬁbers regenerate vigorously following transection, these
implants become completely embedded in the regenerated nerve trunk, and ﬁbers
can be guided into conﬁgurations uniquely suitable for interfacing. Despite
the potency in near arbitrary rearrangement of nerve fasciculation, the term
E. R. Zellmer · D. W. Moran ()
Department of Biomedical Engineering, Washington University, St. Louis, MO, USA
e-mail: dmoran@wustl.edu
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2023
N. V. Thakor (ed.), Handbook of Neuroengineering,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-16-5540-1_18
561

562
E. R. Zellmer and D. W. Moran
regenerative peripheral neural interface has historically been used to denominate
a single device geometry – the sieve electrode. Over the last decade, this
has changed, and the term has come to encompass a wide variety of distinct
implementations. This chapter introduces peripheral nerve interfacing including
peripheral nerve regeneration, the unique properties of regenerated nerve ﬁbers,
and the impact of these features on the use of regenerative interfaces. It further
includes a discussion on lessons learned from early device implementations and
detailed descriptions of contemporary regenerative interfaces including micro-
channel electrodes, macro-sieve electrodes, and other notable device types.
The chapter ends with a summary of computational device assessment and
how theoretical and experimental ﬁndings both point toward the superiority of
regenerative devices in bidirectional, neural interface applications.
Keywords
Sieve electrode · Micro-sieve · Macro-sieve · Micro-channel · Nerve
regeneration
Abbreviations
BSA
Bovine serum albumin
ENG
Electroneurogram
GDNF Glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor
MSE
Macro-sieve electrode
NGF
Nerve growth factor
REMI Regenerative multielectrode interface
RES
Regenerative electrode scaffold
RPIs
Regenerative peripheral interfaces
1
Introduction to Regenerative Peripheral Neural Interfaces
1.1
Peripheral Nerve Regeneration
In stark contrast to the poor regenerative capacity found in the mature central
nervous system, peripheral nerve tissue regenerates readily following mechanical,
chemical, or thermal trauma [1]. Axonal recovery is inﬂuenced by the severity of
the trauma. Superior recovery is found following lesions where the continuity of
Schwann cell tube basal lamina remains intact (nerve crush) than in lesions where
it is interrupted (nerve transection) [2]. Only the latter of these lesion types will
be discussed since the use of regenerative peripheral interfaces (RPIs) is predicated
on its occurrence. Following a lesion, the nerve trunk is divided into two segments
called the proximal and distal stumps (Fig. 1). The proximal stump contains ﬁber
segments which remain attached to the cell body of the neuron from which the
ﬁber originated. For these ﬁbers, retrograde degradation typically only occurs up to
the ﬁrst node of Ranvier proximal to the lesion [3] leaving ﬁbers mostly intact. In
contrast, ﬁber segments found in the distal stump often remain in immediate contact

Regenerative Electrodes for Peripheral Nerve Interfacing
563
Fig. 1 Integration of RPI with regenerated peripheral nervous tissue. (a and b) The nerve is
transected forming a proximal and distal stump. (c) RPI is placed in-between the stump ends
and the orientation and position of the nerve stumps are typically ﬁxed using suture. (d) Distal
ﬁbers undergo Wallerian degradation leaving behind endoneurial tubes; sprouts originating from
the proximal stump ﬁbers regenerate across the gap through the interface passing within close
proximity of electrode sites. (e) Sprouts are pruned, and the regenerated nerve segment matures.
Short distance between electrode site and regenerated peripheral nerve ﬁbers results in high
speciﬁcity
with end effectors or sensory organs but have lost their attachment to a cell body
and are destined for Wallerian degradation [4]. During Wallerian degradation, distal
stump ﬁber axolemma and myelin sheets degenerate leaving behind endoneurial
tubes, tubes of basal lamina that become lined with columns of proliferating
Schwann cells (Büngner band). These columns provide axonal growth factors and
guide regenerating ﬁbers to the denervated end organs [5].
Within days of a lesion, growth cones form at the tip of ﬁbers in the proximal
stump [6]. A single proximal stump ﬁber will give rise to multiple axonal sprouts,
most of which will grow in the direction of the distal stump if one is present. If

564
E. R. Zellmer and D. W. Moran
a sprout bridges the gap between the proximal and distal stumps, it may enter an
endoneurial tube and grow toward the end target that was originally innervated
by the degenerated ﬁber that was originally housed in the tube. The pairing of
endoneurial tubes and sprouts is not random. Studies have shown evidence of
phenotype-speciﬁc matching where sprouts from sensory ﬁbers preferentially enter
endoneurial tubes originally housing sensory ﬁbers and motor ﬁbers preferentially
enter endoneurial tubes originally housing motor ﬁbers [7–9]. Over time, most
axonal sprouts are pruned. This process is evident during histomorphometric assess-
ment of regenerated peripheral nerves where the ﬁber count in the regenerated nerve
is initially much larger compared with control nerves and slowly declines with time
[10]. Regenerated ﬁber segments are initially unmyelinated. Myelination is gradual,
and clearly delineated nodes and internodes can be found as early as 1 month
following the lesion [11] with mature internode-node segmentation found in most
ﬁbers at 5 months [12]. Regenerated segment ﬁber diameters are initially very small
but increase gradually over time. The degree of recovery depends on the severity of
the trauma [2]. Following nerve section, studies suggest that ﬁber diameters remain
greatly and permanently diminished [12–14]. Furthermore, following this type of
lesion, regenerated ﬁber segments possess additional morphometric discrepancies
compared to undisrupted ﬁber segments in the proximal stump: Their g-ratios
are increased (thinner myelin sheaths) [14, 15]; internodal distances are greatly
diminished [11–13, 16]; the linear relationship between internodal length and
ﬁber diameter is also absent; there is no discernable dependence between the two
variables in a regenerated nerve segment [12, 16, 17]. Axon caliber histograms
and ﬁber morphometry of normal and regenerated rat sciatic nerve are found in
Fig. 2 and Table 1, respectively. In addition to morphometric discrepancies, studies
have shown that membrane composition, including ion channel densities, may be
altered in regenerated peripheral nervous tissue [12, 19–21]. Conﬂicting data has
been presented both with regard to the extent of these changes (e.g., compare data
found in [21, 22]) as well as the temporal stability of membrane changes in maturing
regenerated ﬁbers [11, 19, 23].
Fig. 2 Axon caliber histograms obtained from normal and regenerated rat sciatic nerves

Regenerative Electrodes for Peripheral Nerve Interfacing
565
Table 1 Morphometric data for axons in normal and regenerated rat sciatic nerve
Normal axons
Fiber diameter (μm)
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
Internodal distance
±SD (μm)a,b,c
300
±66
430
±81
560
±96
680
±112
790
±127
900
±143
1000
±158
1080
±173
1160
±189
1240
±204
Nr of myelin lamellaa
29
43
56
70
83
95
107
118
129
140
Axon diameter (μm)a
1.1
1.7
2.3
2.9
3.5
4.2
4.8
5.4
6.1
6.8
Regenerated axons
Fiber diameter (μm)
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
Internodal distance
±SD (μm)d
297
±77
297
±77
297
±77
297
±77
297
±77
297
±77
297
±77
297
±77
297
±77
297
±77
Nr of myelin lamellaa
29
36
41
46
51
55
59
62
65
69
Axon diameter (μm)a
1.1
1.9
2.8
3.6
4.5
5.4
6.2
7.1
8.0
8.9
aFriede [18]
bHildebrand et al. [11]
cEstimated from published data
dBeuche and Friede [16]
In concluding this brief discussion on peripheral nerve regeneration, it might
be prudent to mention the “hybrid nature” of regenerative peripheral nerve tis-
sue and its special implications in applications involving regenerative peripheral
interfaces. Consider a nerve ﬁber that has been transected and that subsequently
has successfully regenerated across a gap, terminating at a distal end point, e.g.,
a sensory organ or motor end plate. If this ﬁber is excised and studied along its
length, from the cell body to the termination point, it would be found that the
ﬁber consisted of two distinct segments: a ﬁrst segment that extends from the
cell body up until the last node of Ranvier prior to the lesion possessing axonal
characteristics indistinguishable to those found in normal nerve and a regenerated
segment extending from the last node of Ranvier proximal to the lesion until the
distal end point, exhibiting the altered regenerated axonal characteristics listed
in the previous paragraph [11, 24]. The diameter of regenerated ﬁbers found in
this distal segment is somewhat inﬂuenced by the ﬁber diameter of the proximal
segment [25, 26] but also by the size of the endoneurial tubes through which
they regenerate [27]. Notwithstanding, morphometric and caliber discrepancies
between ﬁbers in the proximal and distal segments are substantial, resulting in large
reductions in conduction velocity at the site of lesion [28] and changes in ﬁber
excitability thresholds [20, 29, 30]. These ﬁndings are expected since ﬁber diameter
and morphometry affect the excitability of a ﬁber [31] as well as its conduction
velocity [32]. Conduction velocities recorded in normal and regenerated rat sciatic
nerve is listed in Table 2.
The precise segmentation of each viable ﬁber across the lesion into distinct
segments characterized by differences in excitability and conduction velocity is
unique to regenerated nerves and is relevant to RPIs that interact with ﬁbers near this
segmentation point. Likewise, since it is nearly impossible to rotationally realign
the proximal and distal segments along the central axis of the nerve, the fascicular

566
E. R. Zellmer and D. W. Moran
Table 2 Conduction
velocity in normal and
regenerated rat sciatic nerve
Average conduction
velocity (m/s)
Normal nervea
62.7
Regenerated nerve
(47 days)a
3
Regenerated nerve
(140 days)a,b
30
Regenerated nerve
(350 days)a,b
30
aFields and Ellisman [33]
bEstimated from published data
structure of the nerve will vary across the lesion (Fig. 3). Depending on the geometry
of the interface, placement of the nerve, and mode of stimulation, action potentials
may be elicited in the proximal or distal segment of the regenerated nerve trunk and
may progress in both directions at different conduction velocities. This property is
discussed further, later in the chapter.
1.2
RPI Implantation and Chronic Neural Integration
Figure 4 shows a RPI – the macro-sieve electrode (MSE) [34] which serves as
an example to illustrate the composition of a typical RPI, how it is implanted,
and how it integrates into the regenerating peripheral nerve trunk. Like the MSE,
an exemplar RPI consists of a partially metalized geometry incorporated into a
nerve guidance channel, often an empty silicone tube (Fig. 4a). All RPIs are
implanted in-between the proximal and distal stumps of a transected peripheral
nerve trunk. During implantation, the two stumps are placed inside the opposing
sides of the nerve guidance channel, aligned so that their ends are facing each
other and anchored in place using suture (Fig. 4b). This conﬁguration ensures that
ﬁbers sprouting from the proximal stump make their way through the interface
before reaching the endoneurial tubes found in the distal stump. RPIs are typically
designed for highly speciﬁc interactions with groups of nerve ﬁbers that regenerate
through the interface passing very close to one or more metalized sites as they
make their way between the two stumps (Fig. 4c, d). Even so, depending on
the interface and the stimulus amplitude, an electrophysiological response may
sometimes still be elicited in a closely implanted proximal stump making it possible
to use the interface immediately following implantation (distal stump ﬁbers become
unresponsive quickly following transection). The RPIs typically become completely
integrated with the regenerated nerve segment with an abundance of regenerated
nerve ﬁbers and vasculature passing through the interface (Fig. 4e, f).
Nerve regeneration requires time, and since RPIs are permanent neural scaffolds
designed to interact with ﬁbers growing through them, their use in acute settings
is limited. This property is saliently disparate from other peripheral interfaces,
most of which do not require chronic implantation to be functionally assessed

Regenerative Electrodes for Peripheral Nerve Interfacing
567
Fig. 3 (a) Uninterrupted nerve with a diameter of 2 mm. (b) Illustration of the layered morphology
of uninterrupted peripheral nerves. The depicted nerve contains 7 fascicles, bundles of functionally
related ﬁbers (containing about 4000 individual ﬁbers in total). Each fascicle is enveloped by a
protective layer of perineurium. (c) The nerve is transected forming the distal stump, containing
ﬁbers still connected to end organs, and the proximal stump, containing ﬁbers still connected to
the cell bodies. (d) Fibers in the distal stump degenerate leaving behind endoneurial tubes. (e)
Axonal sprouts emanate from the severed axons in the proximal stump extending toward the distal
stump. Note that while the illustration shows all sprouts extending toward the distal stump, sprouts
often extend in many directions including back into the proximal stump itself. (f) If regeneration is
sucessful, ﬁbers originating in the proximal stump sucessfully traverse the gap between the stumps
and enter distal stump endoneurial tubes reinnervating end organs. (g) The morphometry, ratio
between afferent (shown in blue)/efferent (shown in red) ﬁbers, and degree of fasciculation may
vary greatly between nerve segments in regenerated nerves

568
E. R. Zellmer and D. W. Moran
Fig. 4 Example of a RPI – the macro-sieve electrode, its implantation, and integration into
regenerated peripheral nerve tissue. (a) The interface consists of a central portion composed of a
connector ring attached to a partially metalized polyimide barrier. The central portion is integrated
into a nerve guidance conduit (silicone tube). (b) The interface is implanted by transecting the
target nerve and placing and suturing the ends of the proximal and distal trunks into opposite sides
of the nerve guidance conduit. (c) Over time ﬁbers originating from the proximal trunk regenerate
through the interface and connect with endoneurial tubes within the distal trunk. The nerve ﬁlls out
the entirety of the guidance channel. (d) Removing the silicone tube and connector ring provides
a clearer view of the integration between the polyimide interface and the regenerated nerve. (e and
f) In addition to nerve tissue, abundant microvasculature passes through the polyimide interface

Regenerative Electrodes for Peripheral Nerve Interfacing
569
[35, 36]. Reﬂecting this, virtually all in vivo data generated using RPIs originate
from chronically implanted devices. Since the utility of RPIs is contingent on
chronic viability, even early iterations developed in the 1980s exhibited sufﬁcient
long-term viability to record single-unit activity in regenerated ﬁbers 200 days
after implantation [37]. Less than a decade later, functional assessment of another
implant iteration showed neural stimulation and recording capabilities in devices
implanted for ∼400 days [38]. A more recent study applying a contemporary RPI
in freely moving rodents provides data showing that recorded single-unit activity
during natural gait increased substantially between weeks 3–10 post-implantation
(animals were assessed at weeks 3, 6, 8, and 10) [39] suggesting increased
implant performance over time. The abovementioned studies, as well as many other
examples, strongly suggest that an adequately integrated RPI is chronically viable
within a year of implantation. Despite this abundance of encouraging evidence,
it’s still challenging to draw deﬁnitive conclusions about the viability of RPIs in
applications which require the interface to last well beyond a single year. In part, this
is due to the dearth of studies extending beyond this duration. Further confusticating
the issue is the presence of somewhat conﬂicting evidence regarding the impact of
RPIs on the long-term viability of interfaced regenerated axons. For example, one
study found that mechanical stress (in this case constriction) exerted by a RPI on
regenerated ﬁbers resulted in very limited axonopathy over a 12-month observation
period [40]. Another study partly corroborates this ﬁnding, observing a gradual
increase in axonal density and maturity at 6 months but also notes the presence
of instances of axonal loss between 6 and 12 months post-implantation [41]. Yet
another study showed that regenerated ﬁbers within the regenerative pores of a RPI
decreased between each of the three observation timepoints (3, 6, and 9 months) but
that functional stimulation of distal reinnervated musculature could still be elicited
through the interface at each timepoint [42]. As a ﬁnal note on this topic, it may be
worth pointing out that the great diversity in design among RPIs further complicates
the issue – ﬁnding chronic viability in one type of RPI does not necessitate the
transiency of this property to positively distinct relations within this broad family.
Different types of RPIs and their distinctive properties are described in detail in
Sect. 2.
1.3
Early RPI Iterations and Lessons on Neural Regeneration
The concept of placing a RPI between the proximal and distal stumps of a tran-
sected nerve to ensure that ﬁbers regenerate through and thereby achieve intimate
interfacing is about half a century old [43]. A report from Kovacs and colleagues
outlines that the ﬁrst unsuccessful attempts at developing “sieve electrodes,” thin
barriers perforated by via-holes through which nerve ﬁbers can regenerate, were
made as early as the mid to late 1960s [38]. A ﬁrst paper describing the design
(but not implementation) of a sieve electrode was published in the early 1970s
[44] followed the next year by a report detailing the use of a sieve electrode in
recording signals from single ﬁbers in unrestrained African clawed frogs [45].

570
E. R. Zellmer and D. W. Moran
Table 3 Early RPI iterations and their applications
Year
Implant
material
Animal
Summary
1969
Teﬂon
Bullfrog
First reported instance of peripheral nerve
regeneration through sieve electrode-like
structure [43]
1973
–
–
First paper describing the design of a sieve
electrode [44]
1974
Epoxy
Frog
First reported recording of sensory and motor
ﬁbers using sieve electrode. 50–150 μV
multiunit recording using silver electrodes
embedded in the epoxy. Via-holes/tubes had a
diameter of 100 μm with a length of
750 μm [45]
1977
–
–
Early description of micro-channel electrode
array signal ampliﬁcation properties and
production technique [46]
1980
Silicon
Rabbit
Recording of mammalian regenerated ﬁbers
using silicon sieve electrodes. 150 μV signal
amplitude [47]
1986
Silicon
Rabbit
Long-term (∼200 days) single-unit recordings
from mammalian regenerated ﬁbers [37]
1991
Silicon
Rodent
Stimulation and recording of mammalian
regenerated ﬁbers [48]
1992
Silicon
Rodent
Long-term (∼400 days) stimulation and
recording of mammalian regenerated ﬁbers [38]
The barriers used in this ﬁrst published recording experiment were about 750 μm
in length. The theory underpinning the signal “ampliﬁcation” effect achievable
using thicker barriers with longer via-holes (i.e., micro-channels) together with a
production technique for producing micro-channel electrode arrays was described
in 1977 [46]. The materials used to produce early RPIs varied widely, but silicon
soon became the material of choice for researchers and remained so for most of
the twentieth century [38]. See Table 3 for a list of early studies. Virtually all early
RPI implementations were variations of sieve electrodes. The designs of these early
systems were sometimes exceedingly ambitious in attempting to divide the nerve
into a large number of individually accessible and addressable subsections by using
very ﬁne via-holes. In one recorded instance, attempts were made to capture single
regenerative nerve ﬁbers within each via-hole by designing the interface such that
via-hole diameters were only large enough for a single or very small number of
ﬁbers to pass through [49]. Unsurprisingly, this experiment failed together with
other experiments of this era that were trying to use overly constrictive via-hole
dimensions due to poor regeneration through the silicone interface barriers [50].
Early investigators were also interested in the role of transparency – the ratio
between the via-hole surface area to barrier surface area. This property was typically
evaluated in conjunction with a second property – the cross-sectional area of a

Regenerative Electrodes for Peripheral Nerve Interfacing
571
Fig. 5 Example of silicon
sieve electrode
implementations with: (a)
30 × 30 μm via-holes. (b)
90 × 90 μm via-holes. (From
[51] with permission)
single via-hole. For example, in one study comparisons were made between the
regeneration achieved through sieve electrodes perforated with many smaller holes
(∼30 × 30 μm) compared to ones with virtually identical transparency but a lower
number of larger holes (∼90 × 90 μm) [51] (Fig. 5). Results from the study showed
that for a given transparency, superior regeneration was achieved using an array of
smaller via-holes. However, a similar study performed by some of the same authors
and published a few years earlier found poorer regeneration through 50 μm via-
holes compared to 100 μm via-holes [52]. Unsurprisingly, increasing the overall
transparency of a sieve electrode by increasing the total number of via-holes of a
ﬁxed size results in a higher number of ﬁbers regenerating through the interface
[53]. Despite the rigidity and stiffness of interfaces made using a silicon substrate,
silicone sieve electrodes were used in sophisticated neural recording and stimulation
experiments. Examples include the use of silicon sieve electrodes to perform long-
term chronic neurostimulation and recording mentioned in the previous subsection
[37, 38]. Other notable examples include recordings of auditory nerve ﬁbers capable

572
E. R. Zellmer and D. W. Moran
of discriminating between units tuned to different auditory frequencies [54] and
highly speciﬁc chronic recordings of glossopharyngeal nerve ﬁbers [55].
2
Contemporary RPI Designs and Their Applications
2.1
Micro- and Macro-Sieve Electrode
The sieve electrode is the exemplar RPI design – the history of regenerative periph-
eral interfacing is effectively a history describing the development and evaluation
of various sieve electrode designs. Barriers of contemporary sieve electrodes are no
longer made from perforated silicon but rather using thin and ﬂexible polyimide.
Sieve electrodes made from partially metalized polyimide were produced starting
from the mid-1990s [56]. The last decade has seen the arrival of a second type
of sieve electrode with via-hole sizes about an order of magnitude larger than
conventional sieve electrode designs [34]. To clearly separate the two types, the
term “micro-sieve electrode” is used to denominate conventional polyimide sieve
electrodes with ∼ø50 μm via-holes, while the term “macro-sieve electrode” is used
to denominate the novel sieve electrode implementation with ∼ø600 μm via-holes.
The two types are detailed separately below.
2.1.1
Micro-Sieve Electrodes
Other than the difference in the barrier substrate material, the design of contem-
porary micro-sieve electrodes largely mirrors that of earlier iterations. Micro-sieve
electrodes consist of a thin (∼10 μm thick) polyimide barrier perforated by very ﬁne
via-holes used to parcellate the regenerated nerve into microbundles (Figs. 7 and 8a).
Following regeneration, these bundles can be interfaced using ring electrodes
enveloping a portion of the via-holes. Compared to earlier silicon implementations,
micro-sieve electrodes constructed using relatively transparent polyimide barriers
show substantially better ﬁber regeneration [40, 49, 50, 52, 53]. Despite this
improvement, the polyimide barrier of the micro-sieve electrode still provides a
substantial impediment to axonal regeneration [57]. For example, one study reports
that a polyimide sieve electrode with 40 μm via-holes had completely blocked
regeneration in 3/10 rodents at 7 months post-implantation [58]. In the remaining 7
animals, the average number of myelinated ﬁbers in the nerve segment distal to the
interface was about 13,000 [58]. Another report using micro-sieve interfaces with
the same via-hole diameter found ∼4700 myelinated ﬁbers in the nerve segment
distal to the interface after 12 months [41]. Fiber regeneration through micro-sieve
electrodes can be greatly enhanced using nerve growth factors [57]. One study
reported that the number of ﬁbers found distal to a micro-sieve electrode with
60 μm via-hole 9 months post-implantation increased substantially accompanied
by an increase in mean ﬁber diameter from 3.4 μm to 4.3 μm [57].
Importantly, the impediment to regeneration created by micro-sieve electrodes
has been shown to be inﬂuenced by ﬁber phenotype and size [59]. Speciﬁcally, cell
labeling studies have shown differential regeneration through the implant barrier of

Regenerative Electrodes for Peripheral Nerve Interfacing
573
ﬁbers originating from sensory and motor neurons [59, 60]. Observations suggest
that the number of sensory ﬁbers regenerating past a micro-sieve electrode is
comparable to unimpeded regeneration in empty silicone conduits [60]. In contrast,
the number of motor ﬁbers may be reduced to one third of the number found in
nerve regenerating through an empty conduit [60]. Furthermore, ﬁbers managing to
regenerate past the interface are thinner and less often myelinated compared to those
found following unimpeded regeneration [59]. An example of a functional outcome
of this impediment is the observation that compound muscle action potentials
elicited using electrical stimulation of the rat sciatic nerve delivered through needle
electrodes were reduced to about 1/3 and 1/9 of the amplitude found in control
animals following 12 months of regeneration through a micro-sieve electrode
featuring 40 μm via-holes.
Polyimide micro-sieve electrodes have been used to record single and multiunit
activity following regeneration. One report showed that 7 months post-implantation
of polyimide micro-sieve electrodes, single-unit activity with peak-to-peak ampli-
tudes of 15–30 μV could be recorded using ring electrodes around the via-holes
[58]. A second report using a similar interface observed multiunit activity with
maximum peak-to-peak amplitudes of about 25 μV following stimulation provided
in distal nerve segment as well as following mechanical stimuli of paw pad
[61]. Micro-sieve electrodes have also been used to elicit action potentials in
ﬁbers regenerating through the interface [57]. Thresholds for initiating a neural
response were 1.5 nC following neural growth factor-enhanced regeneration and
4 nC following regeneration without enhancement [57]. Similarly, stimulation
delivered through ring electrodes on micro-sieve electrodes has been used to elicit
motor responses in reinnervated muscle [57]. Results from this experiment suggest
channel-speciﬁc motor recruitment with different motor responses depending on
channel selection [57]. Functional recovery of motor response was only observed
following nerve growth factor-enhanced regeneration [57].
2.1.2
Macro-Sieve Electrode
The macro-sieve electrode was developed to address the relatively poor regenera-
tion, particularly among motor ﬁbers, observed in micro-sieve electrodes. Instead of
being perforated by a matrix of very ﬁne via-holes, the polyimide core structure
of the macro-sieve electrode is arranged like spokes in a wagon wheel (Figs.
6b, 7, 8b). The cross-sectional area of macro-sieve via-holes is about 100–200
times larger than those found in micro-sieve electrodes. The larger via-holes of
the macro-sieve electrode result in greatly improved nerve regeneration through
the interface compared to micro-sieve electrodes [57]. A head-to-head comparison
revealed that the number of ﬁbers passing through the macro-sieve electrode was 9
times higher than that passing through a micro-electrode with 60 μm via-holes and
a 30% transparency [57]. In addition, unlike micro-sieve electrodes, motor ﬁbers
pass readily through the macro-sieve electrode. Assessment of extensor digitorum
longus maximum isometric force production following electrical stimulation of the
proximal nerve segment using hook electrodes revealed that muscle reinnervated
by ﬁbers regenerating through the macro-sieve electrode was comparable (slightly

574
E. R. Zellmer and D. W. Moran
Fig. 6 Micro- and macro-sieve electrode implementations. Both electrodes are designed with
a 2-mm-diameter porous region. (a) Polyimide micro-sieve electrode with 330 separate 60-
μm-diameter via-holes. Only 16 of the holes have metalized electrodes surrounding them. (b)
Macro-sieve electrode designed to interface regenerated nerves. Eight electrodes can interface all
of the axons. (c) Detailed view of the macro-sieve electrodes on four peripheral (P1–P4) and four
central (C1–C4) electrode sites
higher) than for ﬁbers regenerating through an empty conduit [57]. Unlike micro-
sieve electrodes, the presence of glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF)
in the nerve guidance conduit does not have a critical impact on regeneration through
the interface [34]. Since the macro-sieve electrode does not impede motor axonal
regeneration or muscle reinnervation, the interface represents a possible candidate
for applications aimed at restoring voluntary motor control through functional
neuromuscular stimulation. Preliminary results show that monopolar stimulation
delivered through individual electrode sites on the macro-sieve electrode (Fig. 6c)
can be used to elicit selective activation of extensor digitorum longus, tibialis ante-
rior, and gastrocnemius muscles. Mean threshold for muscle force activation during
stimuli delivered through the macro-sieve electrode was ∼9.8 nC [34]. Despite
the reduction in motor unit numbers sometimes observed in reinnervated muscle
[62], measured muscle force output increases gradually with stimulus amplitude
during stimulation applied using macro-sieve electrodes [30, 34]. Recruitment curve

Regenerative Electrodes for Peripheral Nerve Interfacing
575
Fig. 7 Barriers of micro-sieve electrode (left), macro-sieve electrode with connector ring (mid-
dle), and micro-channel electrode (right). (a) Barrier thickness is ∼10 μm for the two sieve
electrodes and ∼1–5 mm for the micro-channel devices. Via-hole cross-sectional area is 1250–
2900 μm2 for the micro-sieve electrode, ∼280,000 μm2 for the macro-sieve electrode, and
∼10,000 μm2 for the micro-channel device. Each device is dimensioned for a nerve with a
diameter of 2 mm. (b) Integration of each device with a nerve guidance conduit. (c) Illustration
showing how the nerve stumps are aligned on each side of the interface and sutured in place. (d)
Illustration of nerve regeneration through each device
width, a measurement of the dynamic range over which an interface can exert
gradual control over a population of axons, was 2.5 times wider using the macro-
sieve electrode compared to the Utah slanted electrode array [63] and 9.5 times
wider compared to a cuff electrode suggesting more granular control over muscle
activation [30]. While these results are promising, certain disadvantages remain in
using RPIs for functional neuromuscular stimulation since reinnervation of distal
muscle groups requires time and maximum isometric force output (but not fatigue
resistance or contractile speed) of reinnervated muscles are moderately reduced
[64, 65].

576
E. R. Zellmer and D. W. Moran
Fig. 8 Summary of notable
RPIs. Leftmost panels
provide interface
cross-sectional view. Middle
panels provide longitudinal
view. Right panels provide
detailed views of the interface
between the RPIs and their
regenerated nerve tissue.
Depicted interfaces are:
(a) Micro-sieve electrode,
(b) Macro-sieve electrode,
(c) Micro-channel electrode,
(d) REMI, (e) Regenerative
electrode scaffold,
(f) Double-aisle regenerative
electrode
2.2
Micro-Channel Electrodes
Unlike the ultrathin barrier constituting a sieve electrode, micro-channel electrodes
consist of a long cylinder perforated by an array of micropores [66] (Figs. 7, 8c).
Despite having deceptively similar cross-sectional contours, the long pores of

Regenerative Electrodes for Peripheral Nerve Interfacing
577
the micro-channel electrode serve as electrical ampliﬁers providing the interface
with unique capabilities unlike those of sieve electrodes or other peripheral nerve
interfaces [67]. The ﬁrst description of a micro-channel electrode – an array of 100-
μm-wide × 40-μm-high and 1.5-mm-long channels fabricated using a parylene
C substrate – was published by Suzuki and colleagues in 2006 [68]. This was
followed by the work of a Cambridge group detailing micro-channel manufacturing
techniques accompanied by reports providing in silico, in vitro, and in vivo device
validation [66, 67, 69, 70]. The unique beneﬁt of micro-channel electrodes is
their ability to greatly amplify the extracellular signals generated during action
potential propagation in ﬁbers regenerating through the device while simultaneously
greatly reducing the stimulus current required to elicit an action potential in
them. The device can present a substantial impediment to nerve regeneration, but
robust ﬁber regeneration is typically found in micro-channels equal to or larger
than 100 × 100 μm. For micro-channels with smaller cross-sectional dimensions,
regeneration is often poor [69]. Channel length also has a substantial impact on
regeneration. A study using 100 × 100 μm silicone channels found that the
mean number of myelinated ﬁbers in the nerve segment distal to the device at
12 weeks was ∼1400 for 1 mm channels and 15 for 5 mm compared to 7494
following unimpeded regeneration through a silicone tube at 4 weeks [69]. A later
study found more robust regeneration with an average of 2100 axons regenerating
through silicone device featuring 2.5-mm-long, 130-μm-diameter, circular channels
at 3 months and ∼6200 for an 100 × 100 μm device made using polyimide [71].
The difference in ﬁber numbers in the two device implementations was seemingly
a result of differences in device transparency (via-hole surface area/barrier surface
area; see Sect. 1.3) with the silicone and polyimide micro-channel devices featuring
transparencies of 21% and 70%, respectively [71]. Robust ﬁber regeneration was
also found using 3 mm micro-channels with almost 100% of channels larger than
100 × 100 μm containing at least 1 regenerated ﬁber, ∼70% of channels containing
at least 10 ﬁbers, and ∼30% containing more than 100 ﬁbers at 8 weeks post-
implantation [72].
The recording capability of the device was initially assessed acutely in vivo with
rodent L5 afferent nerve strands inserted into a 3.5-mm-long 100 × 70 μm channel
[73]. Tactile stimulus applied to the skin resulted in peak-to-peak single-unit ampli-
tudes of ∼85 μV under saline immersion [73]. A report released shortly thereafter
details the performance of micro-channel electrodes at 3 months post-implantation
ﬁnding peak-to-peak multiunit activity amplitudes as high as ∼350–400 μV and
single-unit amplitude as high as 170 μV [71]. Recorded single ﬁber action potentials
following stimulation of proximal segment had amplitudes between 30 and 154 μV
with an average of 84 μV. Another study using 3 mm micro-channels implanted for
5 months found a maximum peak-to-peak electrically evoked multiunit amplitude
of ∼520 μV [72]. Micro-channel electrode stimulation data is sparse; however,
it has been shown that a motor response can be elicited by stimulating motor
ﬁbers regenerating through 3 mm, 130-μm-diameter, channels using 0.095 nC at
3 months post-implantation (average motor ﬁber excitation threshold was 0.215 nC)
[71]. Micro-channel electrodes have also been used to record axonal activity during

578
E. R. Zellmer and D. W. Moran
walking in rodents with data suggesting differential single-unit activity at different
phases of the gait cycle in some animals [42].
2.3
Other RPI Designs
In all but the most distal branches, most peripheral nerves are composed of a
mixture of ﬁbers encoding sensory modalities from widely distributed sensory
organs and motor axons innervating multiple synergistic and antagonistic muscle
groups [74]. Fortunately, peripheral nerves are topographically organized which
facilitates selective interfacing [75], but they are also layered structures which
makes it challenging to address small populations of axons with speciﬁcity without
penetrating the epineurium [76]. Novel extraneural peripheral interfaces have been
developed to partially alleviate the challenge of addressing ﬁbers located in centrally
positioned fascicles by using light mechanical pressure to rearrange the nerve into
an oval structure with most fascicles lined up next to each other [77]. This light
modiﬁcation greatly improves the selectivity of the interface compared to other
extraneural electrodes [76, 78] which is suggestive of how powerful designed
reorganization of the native nerve structure can be in improving speciﬁc/selective
interfacing. One of the main beneﬁts, if not the main beneﬁt, of RPIs is that
their regenerative nature makes it possible to rearrange a nerve into almost any
conﬁguration that might be suitable for highly speciﬁc neural interfacing. This
property might be considered the raison d’être for this entire class of interfaces
considering that the ability to reform the nerve into a designed fasciculation
pattern [72] growing through a 3D shape specially designed to achieve highly
speciﬁc interfacing comes at the cost of high invasiveness. While the sieve and
micro-channel electrodes represent the most well-studied RPI device types, different
groups are continuously assessing the merit of various patterns through which to
grow nerve tissue. Some prominent examples are shown in Fig. 8 and detailed below.
2.3.1
Regenerative Multielectrode Interface (REMI)
The regenerative multielectrode interface (REMI) consists of multielectrode array(s)
[79] incorporated into a nerve guidance conduit (Fig. 8d). Initial evaluation of the
interface showed that robust single-unit activity could be recorded from rat sciatic
nerve ﬁbers regenerating past the electrode sites of an 18-channel multielectrode
array incorporated into polyurethane nerve guide tubes. Single-unit activity was
successfully recorded in 7/10 animals and found to be as high as 300–1000 μV about
8 days after implantation but decreased substantially with time [80]. A later chronic
evaluation found instances of peak-to-peak single-unit amplitudes of 850 μV with
amplitudes from multiple units reaching between 300 and 400 μV at 14–28 days
post-implantation [81]. Average single-unit amplitude ﬂuctuated around 100 μV at
days 7–120 post-implantation (observations were made at days 7, 14, 21, 28, 36, 42,
49, 120) [81]. The system was also used to record bursting activity corresponding
to toe-off and heel strike during bipedal treadmill walking at 37, 45, and 57 days
post-implantation [81].

Regenerative Electrodes for Peripheral Nerve Interfacing
579
One proposed use of the device is to integrate multielectrode arrays into Y-
shaped nerve guidance conduits ﬁlled with neurotrophins to preferentially attract
different axonal populations which would facilitate compartmentalized interfacing
[82]. Results from a study segregating nociceptive and proprioceptive sensory ﬁber
using nerve growth factor and neurotrophin-3 suggest that this approach may be
feasible [82]. A later study using nerve growth factor (NGF), glial cell line-derived
neurotrophic factor (GDNF), and bovine serum albumin (BSA) to segment ﬁbers in
the Y-shaped conduit showed that the latter increased motor ﬁber content while the
former two increased sensory ﬁber content [83].
2.3.2
Regenerative Electrode Scaffold
The regenerative electrode scaffold (RES) consists of a planar polyimide electrode
encased in a regenerative nano-scaffold [84] (Fig. 8e). The nano-scaffold consists
of layers of electrospun nanoﬁbers oriented to direct the regeneration of nerve
ﬁbers along the length of the scaffold. In vivo evaluation performed in rat sciatic
nerves revealed that ﬁber regeneration primarily localized along the two sides of
the planar nano-scaffold rather than ﬁlling the entire volume as is observed in
empty silicone [34, 84]. Potentially such nano-scaffolds might be used to segregate
regenerated ﬁbers into planar layers. Thin polyimide electrodes could be integrated
into the scaffolds to achieve selective interfacing with ﬁbers regenerated in different
layers.
2.3.3
Double-Aisle Regenerative Electrode
Like the macro-sieve electrode, the double-aisle regenerative electrode design
minimizes the impediment of the interface to ﬁber regeneration (Fig. 8f). It consists
of a polyimide sheath with electrode sites on both sides that is placed along the
length of a nerve guidance channel such that the planar sheath bisects the channel
into two isolated aisles [85]. During implantation surgery, individual fascicles can be
dissected out of the nerve trunk and placed within the two aisles to achieve selective
interfacing with ﬁbers clustered within one fascicle [85]. Assessment of the device
in acute and chronic studies in rat sciatic nerves shows the capability of the device
to selectively record and stimulate from ﬁbers within two fascicles [85]. For nerves
with higher fascicle numbers, it may be possible to use the same methodology
to divide the conduit into a larger number of aisles using polyimide sheets
placed in planar and orthogonal angles with a single fascicle implanted in each
aisle [85].
3
Computational Modeling of RPIs
Computational modeling is commonly used to study peripheral neural interfaces. In
fact, modeling has been frequently used in exploring the properties of many non-
regenerative peripheral nerve interfaces [86–88]. Computational modeling involves
ﬁnite element models used to solve for electrical ﬁelds produced in and around an
interface during stimulation. Finite element models can also be used to derive the

580
E. R. Zellmer and D. W. Moran
potential recorded on an electrode site by currents originating from propagating
action potentials. Action potential currents as well as the effect of stimulus-induced
electric ﬁelds on interfaced axons can be modeled using core-conductor models
used to simulate axon electrophysiology [31, 89, 92]. Other types of computational
models are occasionally used in conjunction with one or both of these models (e.g.,
biomechanical models [87] and/or models of neuronal ﬁring [89]). Computational
modeling can be useful in not only studying the properties of an interface but also in
optimizing the interface geometry or stimulation patters since the technique allows
for rapid and often very accurate assessment of virtually any device parameter
without resorting to in vitro or in vivo trials [90]. Modeling also facilitates studies
exploring the feasibility and reliability of a device prior to applying it in the clinic
[91]. Despite these advantages, computational modeling has been only sparsely
used in studies involving RPIs. The ﬁrst study of note to use computational
modeling in studying RPIs utilized the technique to explore how micro-channels
amplify recorded extraneural signals as action potentials propagate through a single
regenerated ﬁber [67]. The study details how the ampliﬁcation effect varies greatly
as a function of both channel length (between 2 and 10 mm, ﬁxed 1000 μm2 cross-
sectional area) and cross-sectional area (500–5000 μm2). The study also explores
the effect of myelination and axonal caliber on extracellular potentials [67]. An
example of the data presented in the study is that the extracellular potential measured
on the surface of the ﬁber during the conduction of a propagating action potential
can be as high as 20–30 mV for a 10 μm myelinated ﬁber conﬁned in a channel
with a cross-sectional area of ∼500 μm2 compared to 0.1–0.2 mV for a 2 μm
unmyelinated ﬁber in a channel with a cross-sectional area of ∼5000 μm2 [67].
These ﬁndings were expanded upon in a later study which used a model of the
motor unit pool combined with a distribution of ﬁber diameters in regenerated nerve
to simulate the ENG activity recorded in micro-channel devices of various lengths
and cross-sectional area [89]. Simulated recordings of ENG activity corresponded
well with data recorded in vivo [89]. This modeling study showed that axonal
distribution and spike timing had a signiﬁcant effect on control signal quality when
recorded using intraneural electrodes; however, the same factors did not adversely
affect signal quality recorded using micro-channels [89]. This is because within
the conﬁned channel, the effect of the distance between a ﬁber/propagating action
potential and a recording site is much smaller compared to the effect of distance in a
volume conductor not constricted by the channel geometry [89]. A companion paper
provides simulations quantifying the effect of micro-channels on the stimulation
amplitude required to elicit action potentials in ﬁbers regenerating through the
channel [92]. The ﬁdelity of this model appears robust when comparing simulated
activation thresholds with thresholds measured in vivo [92]. The study provides
a detailed description on the beneﬁt of micro-channel electrodes in achieving
robust axonal recruitment at low stimulus amplitudes. This high recruitment,
at low stimulus currents, coupled with high channel insulation, results in very
small stimulation artifacts in adjacent channels [92]. Finally, simulations are used

Regenerative Electrodes for Peripheral Nerve Interfacing
581
to illustrate how bipolar and tripolar stimulation can be used to further reduce
stimulation artifacts in adjacent micro-channels [92].
Computational modeling has also been used to explore the interaction between
the macro-sieve electrode and ﬁbers regenerating through the interface [30]. This
study focuses on the effect of regenerated ﬁber morphometry and caliber distribution
on activation thresholds of ﬁbers. Simulation results suggest that the effect of
these alterations on the threshold of regenerated ﬁber populations is a function
of distance from an active electrode site [30]. For populations of ﬁbers located
about 100 μm from an active electrode site, recruitment thresholds are comparable
to those found in normal, undisrupted nervous tissue [30]. However, at larger
distances, the stimulation threshold of ﬁbers found in regenerated tissue is much
higher than those found in undisrupted nerves [30]. This property may be the reason
for the much wider recruitment curves found during functional neuromuscular
stimulation using macro-sieve electrodes compared to those found using intraneural
and extraneural electrodes [30]. Simulation results of this study matched in vivo
macro-sieve electrode recruitment thresholds in rat sciatic nerve [30]. To achieve
this high-ﬁdelity modeling, the computational model must account for alterations in
morphometry and ﬁber distribution of regenerated nerves, but not for alterations in
ﬁber membrane composition [30].
Computational techniques can be used to explore topics that are challenging
to address using in vivo experimentation. In the context of the macro-sieve
electrode and some (but not all) RPIs, the hybrid nature of regenerated nerve ﬁbers
mentioned in the chapter introduction represents one such challenging topic. During
implantation of the device, the proximal stump can be anchored such that its end
almost touches the polyimide barrier, or it can be placed at a distance introducing a
gap. During electrical stimulation with the interface, the potential distribution along
the entire length of each ﬁber will change. However, an action potential will only be
elicited in the segment of a ﬁber where the membrane response is most vigorous. In
a uniform ﬁber, that is typically at the node of Ranvier closest to the active electrode.
In regenerated nerve, the excitability of the proximal and regenerated segments is
different, and typically the proximal segment is more excitable since its diameter
is larger and its morphometry more mature. In other words, if the node of Ranvier
that is located closest to an active electrode site is part of the regenerated segment,
the action potential might still be initiated from the proximal segment depending
on the size of gap left between proximal stump and the polyimide barrier during
implantation. Figure 9 provides an illustration of how a computational model very
similar to that described in [30] can be used to understand the conditions at which
action potentials are elicited within the proximal and distal segments of a ﬁber and
how that affects ﬁber recruitment thresholds. For instance, in Fig. 9, the axon on the
left panel (red) will ﬁrst initiate an action potential on the proximal stump where
there are large voltage differences between adjacent nodes of Ranvier (i.e., large
second spatial derivatives). The axon on the right panel (yellow) will initiate directly
below the electrode and require more current to initiate than the other two scenarios.

582
E. R. Zellmer and D. W. Moran
Fig. 9 Illustration of how lesion position and implantation gap size may affect the response of an example ﬁber to FES delivered through the MSE. Top panels:
ﬁrst, position of stumps following nerve transaction; second, position of proximal segment following Wallerian degeneration, opaque segments are degenerated
as a response to the lesion; third, the ﬁnal geometrical conﬁguration of myelinated axon. The black vertical line shows the plane of stimulation. Middle panels:
extracellular potential proﬁle along an example ﬁber overlaid with markers showing the position of the nodes of Ranvier. Bottom panels: the response of the
axon to the applied stimulus. The modeled ﬁber has a diameter of 8 μm (both distal and proximal to the lesion) and was positioned 300 μm below the top
central electrode site. The axon was stimulated using a 1 μA stimulus pulse delivered through the top central electrode site. Transmembrane potential was
sampled 150 μs following stimulus onset

Regenerative Electrodes for Peripheral Nerve Interfacing
583
4
RPIs as Bidirectional Interfaces
A bidirectional neural interface is a device capable of stimulating select axonal
populations while simultaneously recording afferent or efferent ﬁber activity. In
amputees, a bidirectional interface could be used to record motor ﬁber activity,
decoding motor intentions to drive the movement of a prosthetic limb while
simultaneously encoding tactile and proprioceptive information derived using limb
sensors through selective stimulation of sensory ﬁbers. Following spinal cord injury,
the device could also be used in selective stimulation of motor ﬁbers to drive
muscle contraction based on recordings of motor cortex. At the same time, sensory
ﬁber information could be recorded to restore tactile and proprioceptive feedback
via stimulation of the somatosensory cortex. Therefore, the implementation of a
chronically stable and selective/speciﬁc bidirectional interface is one of the prime
goals of neural interface research.
RPIs have been envisioned as a candidate for bidirectional interfacing [93]. One
unique beneﬁt provided by RPIs is the capability to segregate nerves into artiﬁcial
fascicles that can be selectively stimulated and/or recorded from [73]. A second
unique beneﬁt is the potential use of neurotrophic compounds to segregate ﬁbers
based on phenotype to entice the formation of artiﬁcial fascicles containing ﬁbers
coding for a single modality [82, 83]. In addition to these inherent beneﬁts, certain
RPIs provide additional beneﬁts since they are designed to electrically insulate
artiﬁcially segregated fascicles. For example, micro-channels greatly amplify the
signal recorded from ﬁbers within the microfascicle contained in the channel while
greatly depressing the signals of ﬁbers within other channels [67]. Micro-channels
also reduce the stimulation current required to activate ﬁbers while ensuring that
a stimulus almost exclusively impacts the electric ﬁeld within the channel with
minimal alterations in electric ﬁelds within other channels [71, 92]. This later
property also greatly reduces stimulation artifacts [92]. Stimulation artifact is the
effect of a stimulus delivered through one electrode on the neural recording carried
out by adjacent channels [94]. In other peripheral nerve interfaces, this artifact
(∼volts) can be many orders of magnitude larger than signals recorded from nerve
ﬁbers (∼μV) which can saturate recording ampliﬁers [94]. The within-channel
ampliﬁcation and between-channel isolation provided by micro-channels greatly
reduce the stimulation artifact between electrodes located in different channels
while increasing the signal-to-noise ratio between the remaining artifact and neural
recordings due to their ampliﬁcation of the latter [92]. Together, these properties
suggest that micro-channel devices and other, similar, RPIs may be prime candidates
to serve as bidirectional neural interfaces.
5
Future Directions: Bidirectional Interface for Powered
Prosthesis
One argument against deploying RPIs for peripheral neural interfaces is that their
implantation and use are predicated on a complete transection of the target nerve(s),
making them highly invasive. This disadvantage is, however, much less relevant

584
E. R. Zellmer and D. W. Moran
Fig. 10 Illustration of bone-anchored RPI. (a) Ulnar and median nerves have been resected and
sutured into the nerve guidance conduit of micro-channel electrodes inserted into holes drilled
in the ulna and radius. Micro-channel devices are connected to a PCB with ampliﬁers and
multiplexers/demultiplexers to amplify recorded signals and demultiplex them so that a single
signal connector can be used between each RPI and the prosthetic limb. Multiplexers allow
stimulus to be delivered to each channel. Bone anchors have been osseointegrated into each bone
and used to attach the prosthetic limb. Three connectors are integrated into the tip of each bone
anchor. One connector is used for signal transfer between the implanted PCBs and control circuits
within the prosthetic limb. Two connectors are used such that the battery within the limb that is
easily rechargeable can be used to power the implanted PCBs. (b) Magniﬁcation of the area marked
using pink rectangle in (a) showing the ulnar nerve, micro-channel device, PCB, and power/signal
leads with the ulna and bone anchor removed for clarity
in applications involving amputees. The nerve stumps in amputees regularly form
neuromas which are often painful and require resection surgery [95] providing an
ideal opportunity for device implantation. Furthermore, it is relatively common
for painful neuromas to reform following resection surgery [96]. Painful neuroma
formation may be reduced by drilling a hole in a bone adjacent to a transected stump
and then inserting the stump into the bone [97]. A particularly attractive proposition
is to anchor RPIs by inserting the device into such a hole and have the nerve
regenerate though it into the bone marrow (Fig. 10). Recent innovations have seen
the advent of osteo-integrated motorized prosthetic limbs [98]. These detachable
prosthetic systems could be used to directly interface and supply power to an osteo-
integrated RPI without relying on transcutaneous leads, telemetry, or wireless power
resulting in complete, inconspicuous, and reliable system integration [99].

Regenerative Electrodes for Peripheral Nerve Interfacing
585
6
Conclusions
Regenerative peripheral nerve interfaces like the micro-sieve, macro-sieve, and
micro-channel electrodes offer an elegant modality to interface with peripheral
nerves. They can record neural activity (e.g., ENG) to decipher movement intent
from motor axons or tactile and proprioceptive information from sensory axons.
Likewise, they can stimulate precise subsections of a nerve for functional neuro-
muscular stimulation of individual muscles in a paralyzed limb or to impart sensory
information into an amputee’s nerve stump for haptic feedback of a motorized
prosthetic. The downside of regenerative electrodes is they require nerve transection
which makes them highly invasive. For an amputee, this requirement is not too
concerning, but cutting a perfectly healthy nerve in a spinal cord-injured patient
is signiﬁcant and requires careful consideration. Perhaps in the future, special
neurotrophic techniques and factors could be developed that induces an intact nerve
to sprout collaterals that would allow a regenerative interface without cutting the
intact nerve. Developing an “external port” to an intact and healthy peripheral nerve
could have a number of beneﬁts to various clinical conditions and would reduce the
invasive burden of RPIs.
References
1. Mahar, M., Cavalli, V.: Intrinsic mechanisms of neuronal axon regeneration. Nat. Rev.
Neurosci. 19, 323 (2018)
2. Fugleholm, S., Krarup, C.: Post reinnervation maturation of myelinated nerve ﬁbers in the cat
tibial nerve: Chronic electrophysiological and morphometric studies. J. Peripher. Nerv. Syst. 5,
82–95 (2000)
3. McQuarrie, I.G.: Effect of conditioning lesion on axonal sprout formation at nodes of Ranvier.
J. Comp. Neurol. 231, 239–249 (1985)
4. Waller, A.: Experiments on the section of glossopharyngeal and hypoglossal nerves of the frog
and observations of the alternatives produced thereby in the structure of their primitive ﬁbres.
Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B. Biol. Sci. 140, 423–429 (1850)
5. de Lahunta, A., Eric Glass, M.S.: Veterinary Neuroanatomy and Clinical Neurology, 3rd edn.
Sanders (2009)
6. Oliveira, K.M.C., Pindur, L., Han, Z., Bhavsar, M.B., Barker, J.H., Leppik, L.: Time course of
traumatic neuroma development. PloS One. 13(7), e0200548 (2018)
7. Brushart, T.M.: Preferential reinnervation of motor nerves by regenerating motor axons.
J. Neurosci. 8, 1026–1031 (1988)
8. Brushart, T.M.: Motor axons preferentially reinnervate motor pathways. J. Neurosci. 13, 2730–
2738 (1993)
9. Höke, A., Redett, R., Hameed, H., Jari, R., Zhou, C., Li, Z.B., Grifﬁn, J.W., Brushart,
T.M.: Schwann cells express motor and sensory phenotypes that regulate axon regeneration.
J. Neurosci. 26(38), 9646–9655 (2006)
10. MacKinnon, S.E., Dellon, A.L., O’Brien, J.P.: Changes in nerve ﬁber numbers distal to a nerve
repair in the rat sciatic nerve model. Muscle Nerve. 14(11), 1116–1122 (1991)
11. Hildebrand, C., Kocsis, J.D., Berglund, S., Waxman, S.G.: Myelin sheath remodelling in
regenerated rat sciatic nerve. Brain Res. 358(1–2), 163–170 (1985)
12. Vizoso, A.D., Young, J.Z.: Internode length and ﬁbre diameter in developing and regenerating
nerves. J. Anat. 82(Pt 1–2), 110 (1948)

586
E. R. Zellmer and D. W. Moran
13. Hiscoe, H.B.: Distribution of nodes and incisures in normal and regenerated nerve ﬁbers. Anat.
Rec. 99(4), 447–475 (1947)
14. Archibald, S.J., Shefner, J., Krarup, C., Madison, R.D.: Monkey median nerve repaired by
nerve graft or collagen nerve guide tube. J. Neurosci. 15(5), 4109–4123 (1995)
15. Fields, R.D., Ellisman, M.H.: Axons regenerated through silicone tube splices: II. Functional
morphology. Exp. Neurol. 92(1), 61–74 (1986)
16. Beuche, W., Friede, R.L.: A new approach toward analyzing peripheral nerve ﬁber popula-
tions. II. Foreshortening of regenerated internodes corresponds to reduced sheath thickness.
J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol. 44(1), 73–84 (1985)
17. Querfurth, H.W., Armstrong, R., Herndon, R.M.: Sodium channels in normal and regenerated
feline ventral spinal roots. J. Neurosci. 7(6), 1705–1716 (1987)
18. Friede, R.L.: Relation between myelin sheath thickness, internode geometry, and sheath
resistance. Exp. Neurol. 92, 234–247 (1986)
19. Mert, T., Daglioglu, Y.K., Gunay, I., Gocmen, C.: Changes in electrophysiological properties
of regenerating rat peripheral nerves after crush injury. Neurosci. Lett. 363(3), 212–217 (2004)
20. Sawai, S., Kanai, K., Nakata, M., Hiraga, A., Misawa, S., Isose, S., Hattori, T., Kuwabara, S.:
Changes in excitability properties associated with axonal regeneration in human neuropathy
and mouse Wallerian degeneration. Clin. Neurophysiol. 119(5), 1097–1105 (2008). https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.clinph.2008.01.022
21. Nakata, M., Baba, H., Kanai, K., Hoshi, T., Sawai, S., Hattori, T., Kuwabara, S.: Changes
in Na(+) channel expression and nodal persistent Na(+) currents associated with peripheral
nerve regeneration in mice. Muscle Nerve. 37(6), 721–730 (2008). https://doi.org/10.1002/
mus.21031
22. Ritchie, J.M.: Sodium and potassium channels in regenerating and developing mammalian
myelinated nerves. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. Ser. B Biol. Sci. 215(1200), 273–287 (1982)
23. Kocsis, J.D., Waxman, S.G.: Long-term regenerated nerve ﬁbres retain sensitivity to potassium
channel blocking agents. Nature. 304(5927), 640 (1983)
24. Gutmann, E., Sanders, F.K.: Recovery of ﬁbre numbers and diameters in the regeneration of
peripheral nerves. J. Physiol. 101(4), 489–518 (1943)
25. Simpson, S.A., Young, J.Z.: Regeneration of ﬁbre diameter after cross-unions of visceral and
somatic nerves. J. Anat. 79(Pt 2), 48 (1945)
26. Devor, M., Govrin-Lippmann, R.: Maturation of axonal sprouts after nerve crush. Exp. Neurol.
64(2), 260–270 (1979)
27. Hammond, W.S., Hinsey, J.C.: The diameters of the nerve ﬁbers in normal and regenerating
nerves. J. Comp. Neurol. 83, 79–91 (1945). https://doi.org/10.1002/cne.900830105
28. Berry, C.M., Grundfest, H., Hinsey, J.C.: The electrical activity of regenerating nerves in the
cat. J. Neurophysiol. 7(2), 103–115 (1944)
29. Moldovan, M., Krarup, C.: Persistent abnormalities of membrane excitability in regenerated
mature motor axons in cat. J. Physiol. 560(3), 795–806 (2004)
30. Zellmer, E.R., Matthew, M.R., Moran, D.W.: Modelling the impact of altered axonal morphom-
etry on the response of regenerative nervous tissue to electrical stimulation through macro-sieve
electrodes. J. Neural Eng. 15(2), 026009 (2018)
31. McNeal, D.R.: Analysis of a model for excitation of myelinated nerve. IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng. 4, 329–337 (1976)
32. Waxman, S.G.: Determinants of conduction velocity in myelinated nerve ﬁbers. Muscle Nerve.
3(2), 141–150 (1980)
33. Fields, R.D., Ellisman, M.H.: Axons regenerated through silicone tube splices: I. Conduction
properties. Exp. Neurol. 92(1), 48–60 (1986)
34. MacEwan, M.R., Zellmer, E.R., Wheeler, J.J., Burton, H., Moran, D.W.: Regenerated sciatic
nerve axons stimulated through a chronically implanted macro-sieve electrode. Front. Neu-
rosci. 10, 557 (2016)
35. Ledbetter, N.M., Ethier, C., Oby, E.R., Hiatt, S.D., Wilder, A.M., Ko, J.H., Agnew, S.P., Miller,
L.E., Clark, G.A.: Intrafascicular stimulation of monkey arm nerves evokes coordinated grasp
and sensory responses. J. Neurophysiol. 109(2), 580–590 (2012)

Regenerative Electrodes for Peripheral Nerve Interfacing
587
36. Tarler, M.D., Mortimer, J.T.: Selective and independent activation of four motor fascicles using
a four contact nerve-cuff electrode. IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 12(2), 251–257
(2004)
37. Edell, D.J.: A peripheral nerve information transducer for amputees: Long-term multichannel
recordings from rabbit peripheral nerves. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 2, 203–214 (1986)
38. Kovacs, G.T.A., Storment, C.W., Rosen, J.M.: Regeneration microelectrode array for periph-
eral nerve recording and stimulation. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 39(9), 893–902 (1992)
39. Musick, K.M., Rigosa, J., Narasimhan, S., Wurth, S., Capogrosso, M., Chew, D.J., Fawcett,
J.W., Micera, S., Lacour, S.P.: Chronic multichannel neural recordings from soft regenerative
microchannel electrodes during gait. Sci. Rep. 5, 14363 (2015)
40. Ceballos, D., Valero-Cabré, A., Valderrama, E., Schüttler, M., Stieglitz, T., Navarro, X.: Mor-
phologic and functional evaluation of peripheral nerve ﬁbers regenerated through polyimide
sieve electrodes over long-term implantation. J. Biomed. Mater. Res. 60(4), 517–528 (2002)
41. Lago, N., Ceballos, D., Rodríguez, F.J., Stieglitz, T., Navarro, X.: Long term assessment
of axonal regeneration through polyimide regenerative electrodes to interface the peripheral
nerve. Biomaterials. 26(14), 2021–2031 (2005)
42. Musick, K.M., Chew, D.J., Fawcett, J.W., Lacour, S.P.: PDMS microchannel regenerative
peripheral nerve interface. In: 2013 6th International IEEE/EMBS Conference on Neural
Engineering (NER), pp. 649–652. IEEE (2013)
43. Marks, A.F.: Bullfrog nerve regeneration into porous implants. Anat. Rec. 163, 226 (1969)
44. Llinás, R., Nicholson, C., Johnson, K.: Implantable monolithic wafer recording electrodes for
neurophysiology. In: Phillips, M.I. (ed.) Brain Unit Activity During Behaviour, pp. 105–110.
Charles Thomas (1973)
45. Mannard, A., Stein, R.B., Charles, D.: Regeneration electrode units: Implants for recording
from single peripheral nerve ﬁbers in freely moving animals. Science. 183(4124), 547–549
(1974)
46. Loeb, G.E., Marks, W.B., Beatty, P.G.: Analysis and microelectronic design of tubular
electrode arrays intended for chronic, multiple single unit recording from captured nerve ﬁbres.
Med. Biol. Eng. Comput. 15(2), 195–201 (1977)
47. Edell, D.J.: Development of a chronic neuroelectronic interface. Doctoral dissertation, U. C.
Davis (1980)
48. Kovacs, G.T.A.: Regeneration microelectrode arrays for direct interface to nerves. In: Tech.
Dig. 6th Int. Conf. Solid-State Sensors and Actuators (Transducers’ 91), pp. 116–119. (1991)
49. Rosen, J.M., Grosser, M., Hentz, V.R.: Preliminary experiments in nerve regeneration through
laser-drilled holes in silicon chips. Restor. Neurol. Neurosci. 2(2), 89–102 (1990)
50. Navarro, X., Calvet, S., Butí, M., Gómez, N., Cabruja, E., Garrido, P., Villa, R., Valderrama,
E.: Peripheral nerve regeneration through microelectrode arrays based on silicon technology.
Restor. Neurol. Neurosci. 9(3), 151–160 (1996)
51. Wallman, L., Zhang, Y., Laurell, T., Danielsen, N.: The geometric design of micromachined
silicon sieve electrodes inﬂuences functional nerve regeneration. Biomaterials. 22(10), 1187–
1193 (2001)
52. Zhao, Q., Drott, J., Laurell, T., Wallman, L., Bjursten, L.M., Lundborg, G., Montelius,
L., Danielsen, N.: Rat sciatic nerve regeneration through a micromachined silicon chip.
Biomaterials. 18(1), 75–80 (1997)
53. Lago, N., Udina, E., Ramachandran, A., Navarro, X.: Neurobiological assessment of regener-
ative electrodes for bidirectional interfacing injured peripheral nerves. IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng. 54(6), 1129–1137 (2007)
54. Della Santina, C.C., Kovacs, G.T.A., Lewis, E.R.: Multi-unit recording from regenerated bull-
frog eighth nerve using implantable silicon-substrate microelectrodes. J. Neurosci. Methods.
72(1), 71–86 (1997)
55. Bradley, R.M., Cao, X., Akin, T., Najaﬁ, K.: Long term chronic recordings from peripheral
sensory ﬁbers using a sieve electrode array. J. Neurosci. Methods. 73(2), 177–186 (1997)
56. Stieglitz, T., Navarro, X., Calvet, S., Blau, C., Meyer, J.-U.: Interfacing regenerating peripheral
nerves with a micromachined polyimide sieve electrode. In: Proceedings of 18th Annual

588
E. R. Zellmer and D. W. Moran
International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, vol. 1,
pp. 365–366. IEEE (1996)
57. MacEwan, M.R.: Functional electrical stimulation of peripheral nerve tissue via regenerative
sieve microelectrodes. PhD dissertation, Washington University in St. Louis (2018)
58. Ramachandran, A., Schuettler, M., Lago, N., Doerge, T., Koch, K.P., Navarro, X., Hoffmann,
K.-P., Stieglitz, T.: Design, in vitro and in vivo assessment of a multi-channel sieve electrode
with integrated multiplexer. J. Neural Eng. 3(2), 114 (2006)
59. Castro, J., Negredo, P., Avendaño, C.: Fiber composition of the rat sciatic nerve and its
modiﬁcation during regeneration through a sieve electrode. Brain Res. 1190, 65–77 (2008)
60. Negredo, P., Castro, J., Lago, N., Navarro, X., Avendaño, C.: Differential growth of axons from
sensory and motor neurons through a regenerative electrode: A stereological, retrograde tracer,
and functional study in the rat. Neuroscience. 128(3), 605–615 (2004)
61. Lago, N., Udina, E., Navarro, X.: Regenerative electrodes for interfacing injured peripheral
nerves: Neurobiological assessment. In: The First IEEE/RAS-EMBS International Conference
on Biomedical Robotics and Biomechatronics, 2006. BioRob 2006, pp. 1149–1153. IEEE
(2006)
62. Valero-Cabré, A., Tsironis, K., Skouras, E., Perego, G., Navarro, X., Neiss, W.F.: Superior
muscle reinnervation after autologous nerve graft or poly-L-lactide-ϵ-caprolactone (PLC) tube
implantation in comparison to silicone tube repair. J. Neurosci. Res. 63(2), 214–223 (2001)
63. Branner, A., Stein, R.B., Normann, R.A.: Selective stimulation of cat sciatic nerve using an
array of varying-length microelectrodes. J. Neurophysiol. 85(4), 1585–1594 (2001)
64. Yoshimura, K., Asato, H., Cederna, P.S., Urbanchek, M.G., Kuzon Jr., W.M.: The effect of
reinnervation on force production and power output in skeletal muscle. J. Surg. Res. 81(2),
201–208 (1999)
65. Foehring, R.C., Sypert, G.W., Munson, J.B.: Properties of self-reinnervated motor units of
medial gastrocnemius of cat. II. Axotomized motoneurons and time course of recovery.
J. Neurophysiol. 55(5), 947–965 (1986)
66. Lacour, S.P., Atta, R., FitzGerald, J.J., Blamire, M., Tarte, E., Fawcett, J.: Polyimide micro-
channel arrays for peripheral nerve regenerative implants. Sensors Actuators A Phys. 147(2),
456–463 (2008)
67. FitzGerald, J.J., Lacour, S.P., McMahon, S.B., Fawcett, J.W.: Microchannels as axonal
ampliﬁers. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 55(3), 1136–1146 (2008)
68. Suzuki, T., Kotake, N., Mabuchi, K., Takeuchi, S.: Flexible regeneration-type nerve electrode
with integrated microﬂuidic channels. In: 2006 International Conference on Microtechnologies
in Medicine and Biology, pp. 303–305. IEEE (2006)
69. Lacour, S.P., Fitzgerald, J.J., Lago, N., Tarte, E., McMahon, S., Fawcett, J.: Long micro-
channel electrode arrays: A novel type of regenerative peripheral nerve interface. IEEE Trans.
Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 17(5), 454–460 (2009)
70. FitzGerald, J.J., Lacour, S.P., McMahon, S.B., Fawcett, J.W.: Microchannel electrodes for
recording and stimulation: In vitro evaluation. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 56(5), 1524–1534
(2009)
71. FitzGerald, J.J., Lago, N., Benmerah, S., Serra, J., Watling, C.P., Cameron, R.E., Tarte, E.,
Lacour, S.P., McMahon, S.B., Fawcett, J.W.: A regenerative microchannel neural interface for
recording from and stimulating peripheral axons in vivo. J. Neural Eng. 9(1), 016010 (2012)
72. Srinivasan, A., Tahilramani, M., Bentley, J.T., Gore, R.K., Millard, D.C., Mukhatyar, V.J.,
Joseph, A., et al.: Microchannel-based regenerative scaffold for chronic peripheral nerve
interfacing in amputees. Biomaterials. 41, 151–165 (2015)
73. Minev, I.R., Chew, D.J., Delivopoulos, E., Fawcett, J.W., Lacour, S.P.: High sensitivity
recording of afferent nerve activity using ultra-compliant microchannel electrodes: An acute in
vivo validation. J. Neural Eng. 9(2), 026005 (2012)
74. Jabaley, M.E., Wallace, W.H., Heckler, F.R.: Internal topography of major nerves of the forearm
and hand: A current view. J. Hand Surg. Am. 5(1), 1–18 (1980)
75. Brushart, T.M.E.: Central course of digital axons within the median nerve of Macaca mulatta.
J. Comp. Neurol. 311(2), 197–209 (1991)

Regenerative Electrodes for Peripheral Nerve Interfacing
589
76. Choi, A.Q., Cavanaugh, J.K., Durand, D.M.: Selectivity of multiple-contact nerve cuff
electrodes: A simulation analysis. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 48(2), 165–172 (2001)
77. Tyler, D.J., Durand, D.M.: Functionally selective peripheral nerve stimulation with a ﬂat
interface nerve electrode. IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 10(4), 294–303 (2002)
78. Leventhal, D.K., Durand, D.M.: Chronic measurement of the stimulation selectivity of the ﬂat
interface nerve electrode. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 51(9), 1649–1658 (2004)
79. Hochberg, L.R., Serruya, M.D., Friehs, G.M., Mukand, J.A., Saleh, M., Caplan, A.H., Branner,
A., Chen, D., Penn, R.D., Donoghue, J.P.: Neuronal ensemble control of prosthetic devices by
a human with tetraplegia. Nature. 442(7099), 164 (2006)
80. Garde, K., Keefer, E., Botterman, B., Galvan, P., Romero-Ortega, M.I.: Early interfaced neural
activity from chronic amputated nerves. Front. Neuroeng. 2, 5 (2009)
81. Desai, V.H., Anand, S., Tran, M., Aswini, K., Vasudevan, S., Seifert, J.L., Cheng, J.,
Keefer, E.W., Romero-Ortega, M.I.: Chronic sensory-motor activity in behaving animals using
regenerative multi-electrode interfaces. In: 2014 36th Annual International Conference of the
IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, pp. 1973–1976. IEEE (2014)
82. Lotﬁ, P., Garde, K., Chouhan, A., Bengali, E., Romero, M.I.: Modality-speciﬁc axonal
regeneration: Toward selective regenerative neural interfaces. Front. Neuroeng. 4, 11 (2011)
83. Anand, S., Desai, V., Alsmadi, N., Kanneganti, A., Nguyen, D.H.-T., Tran, M., Patil, L.,
et al.: Asymmetric sensory-motor regeneration of transected peripheral nerves using molecular
guidance cues. Sci. Rep. 7(1), 14323 (2017)
84. Clements, I.P., Mukhatyar, V.J., Srinivasan, A., Bentley, J.T., Andreasen, D.S., Bellamkonda,
R.V.: Regenerative scaffold electrodes for peripheral nerve interfacing. IEEE Trans. Neural
Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 21(4), 554–566 (2013)
85. Delgado-Martínez, I., Righi, M., Santos, D., Cutrone, A., Bossi, S., D’Amico, S., Del Valle, J.,
Micera, S., Navarro, X.: Fascicular nerve stimulation and recording using a novel double-aisle
regenerative electrode. J. Neural Eng. 14(4), 046003 (2017)
86. Raspopovic, S., Capogrosso, M., Micera, S.: A computational model for the stimulation of
rat sciatic nerve using a transverse intrafascicular multichannel electrode. IEEE Trans. Neural
Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 19(4), 333–344 (2011)
87. Schiefer, M.A., Triolo, R.J., Tyler, D.J.: A model of selective activation of the femoral nerve
with a ﬂat interface nerve electrode for a lower extremity neuroprosthesis. IEEE Trans. Neural
Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 16(2), 195–204 (2008)
88. Butson, C.R., Miller, I.O., Normann, R.A., Clark, G.A.: Selective neural activation in a
histologically derived model of peripheral nerve. J. Neural Eng. 8(3), 036009 (2011)
89. Coker, R.A., Zellmer, E.R., Moran, D.W.: Micro-channel sieve electrode for concurrent
bidirectional peripheral nerve interface. Part A: Recording. J. Neural Eng. 16, 026001 (2018)
90. Kent, A.R., Grill, W.M.: Model-based analysis and design of nerve cuff electrodes for restoring
bladder function by selective stimulation of the pudendal nerve. J. Neural Eng. 10(3), 036010
(2013)
91. Schiefer, M.A., Tyler, D.J., Triolo, R.J.: Probabilistic modeling of selective stimulation of the
human sciatic nerve with a ﬂat interface nerve electrode. J. Comput. Neurosci. 33(1), 179–190
(2012)
92. Coker, R.A., Zellmer, E.R., Moran, D.W.: Micro-channel sieve electrode for concurrent
bidirectional peripheral nerve interface. Part B: Stimulation. J. Neural Eng. 16, 026002 (2018)
93. Navarro, X., Krueger, T.B., Lago, N., Micera, S., Stieglitz, T., Dario, P.: A critical review of
interfaces with the peripheral nervous system for the control of neuroprostheses and hybrid
bionic systems. J. Peripher. Nerv. Syst. 10(3), 229–258 (2005)
94. McLean, L., Scott, R.N., Parker, P.A.: Stimulus artifact reduction in evoked potential measure-
ments. Arch. Phys. Med. Rehabil. 77(12), 1286–1292 (1996)
95. Pet, M.A., Ko, J.H., Friedly, J.L., Mourad, P.D., Smith, D.G.: Does targeted nerve implantation
reduce neuroma pain in amputees? Clin. Orthop. Relat. Res.®. 472(10), 2991–3001 (2014)
96. Laborde, K.J., Kalisman, M., Tsai, T.-M.: Results of surgical treatment of painful neuromas of
the hand. J. Hand Surg. Am. 7(2), 190–193 (1982)
97. Boldrey, E.: Amputation neuroma in nerves implanted in bone. Ann. Surg. 118(6), 1052 (1943)

590
E. R. Zellmer and D. W. Moran
98. Ortiz-Catalan, M., Håkansson, B., Brånemark, R.: An osseointegrated human-machine gate-
way for long-term sensory feedback and motor control of artiﬁcial limbs. Sci. Transl. Med.
6(257), 257re6 (2014)
99. Israel, J.S., Dingle, A.M., Sanchez, R.J., Kapur, S.K., Brodnick, S., Richner, T.J., Ness, J.P.,
Novello, J., Williams, J.C., Poore, S.O.: Neuroma implantation into long bones: Clinical
foundation for a novel osseointegrated peripheral nerve interface. Plast. Reconstr. Surg. Glob.
Open. 6(5), e1788 (2018)

