Mesoscopic Quantum Phenomena
379
M
15. Muynck, W.M. de: Foundations of Quantum Mechanics : An Empiricist Approach (Kluwer,
Dordrecht, 2002).
16. Breuer, H.-B., F. Petruccione: The Theory of Open Quantum Systems, (Oxford University Press,
Oxford 2002).
17. Paris, M.G.A., J. ˇReh´aˇcek (Eds.): Quantum State Estimation, (Springer, Berlin, 2004).
Mesoscopic Quantum Phenomena
Markus Arndt
Quantum physics was ﬁrst developed to understand the properties of small individ-
ual objects such as photons ( light quantum), atoms and molecules. And many
features of quantum physics, such as the discreteness of energy levels, the  super-
position of mutually exclusive states, quantum interference or  entanglement are
usually not directly accessible to our human senses. Colloquially we therefore often
separate between microscopic and macroscopic in the sense of ‘being observable or
unobservable by the unaided eye’ rather than in the more physical sense where mi-
croscopic would refer to objects in the micrometer size range. In physics, the notion
of mesoscopic quantum phenomena is generally used for systems with dimensions
somewhere in the middle (in Greek: meso = middle) between the microscopic and
the macroscopic world. In practice, mesoscopic systems mostly range between a
few and a few hundred nanometers. They are large enough to contain many particles
and can therefore be described by average properties, such as density or conductiv-
ity. On the other hand they are small enough for their lateral extensions to match
characteristic lengths, such as the coherence length or the mean free path. Meso-
scopic quantum systems therefore often exhibit unique physical properties such as
size-dependent electronic properties, transport phenomena and more. The following
examples select some of the most quoted mesoscopic quantum phenomena [6,9–11].
Mesoscopic Quantum Conﬁnement
Quantum dots are zero-dimensional nanostructures in the sense that they conﬁne
the quantum wave function in all three directions [1]. This has to be contrasted
with for instance one-dimensional quantum wires, two-dimensional electron gases
atomic ensembles ( ensembles in quantum mechanics) or three-dimensional bulk
solids. Quantum dots are often referred to as artiﬁcial, ultra-cold trapped atoms,
since they exhibit a size-dependent discrete energy spectrum. Optical transition lines
in small dots are blue-shifted with respect to those in larger dots. Q-dots realize
the textbook example of a particle in the box: strong conﬁnement leads to strong

380
Mesoscopic Quantum Phenomena
wavefunction curvature, high momentum and large energy splittings. Q-dots can be
realized lithographically, or with a suitable arrangement of interfaces between dif-
ferent materials. Colloidal semiconductor nanocrystals may measure up to about
10 nm. Self-assembled quantum dots on surfaces range between 10 and 50 nm.
Lithographically patterned or self-assembled semiconductor dots may extend to
100 nm. Quantum dots are for instance the basis for blue lasers, single-photon emit-
ters, ﬂuorescent markers in biology and many other applications.
Mesoscopic Quantum Conductance
Singe electron capacitors and single electron transistors When two conductors are
separated by a thin insulating barrier, current ﬂow is forbidden classically, while
 tunnelling is still allowed quantum mechanically. Mesoscopic devices with lateral
extensions around 100 nm and a barrier thickness of about 1 nm exhibit interesting
conductance properties as their electric capacity gets as small as 1 Femtofarad.
A single electron transistor can then be formed by sandwiching a conducting
island between two such junctions and by capacitively connecting it to a third gate
electrode. A positive voltage to the gate electrode will lower the energy levels of
the island and an electron can tunnel ﬁrst onto the island and then further on to
the drain electrode. The charging of the island with a single electron can already
sufﬁce to raise the voltage (U = e/C) such that a second electron cannot enter the
same transistor at the same time. In order to observe such a Coulomb blockade the
device temperatures has to be about 1 K, sufﬁcient to suppress thermal excitations.
Josephson Effects In a Josephson device two superconducting leads are separated
by a thin insulator material. The appearance of an electric DC current across the
tunnelling junction in the absence of any external electromagnetic ﬁeld is known
as the DC Josephson effect [2]. This current is a genuine quantum phenomenon,
and uniquely determined by the phase difference of the quantum  wave functions
on either side of the insulator. By adding a ﬁxed voltage, the quantum phase will
start oscillating in time and the applied DC voltage therefore induces an alternating
current (AC Josephson effect).
Mesoscopic Electron Interference
Diffraction of free  electrons has been known since the experiments by Davisson
and Germer ( Davisson–Germer experiment) in 1927. More recent experiments
have proven that  electron interferometry in mesoscopic systems is equally feasi-
ble, interesting and sometimes unavoidable. In order to maintain coherence, pertur-
bations have to be minimized and such experiments are done in low-dimensional
electron systems with semi-conductor wave guides or in strong external magnetic
ﬁelds. These demonstrations show that electron coherence can extend up to one

Mesoscopic Quantum Phenomena
381
M
micrometer in cold solids and mesoscopic electron interferometers have for in-
stance been applied to explore the  Aharonov–Bohm effect,  Berry-phase or
 decoherence. (Cf.  environmental observation of decoherence). Natural inter-
ference of electron wave functions is also at the basis of universal conductance
ﬂuctuations [9–11]: mesoscopic systems exhibit ballistic electron transport when
their impurity content is sufﬁciently low and the elastic mean free path of the charge
carriers at least comparable to the size of the system. The terminal conductance may
then exhibit reproducible ﬂuctuations on the order of the quantum of conductance
e2 h−1 when the chemical potential, magnetic ﬁeld or impurity conﬁguration is
varied. These ﬂuctuations arise from quantum-interference effects due to the phase-
coherent electron transport.
Anderson Localization was also ﬁrst established in the context of mesoscopic dis-
ordered media: it describes the observation that the diffusive spreading of waves can
be suppressed in randomly disordered media, because of interference between mul-
tiple scattering path-ways. When applied to microwaves in chaotic potentials, this is
a classical wave phenomenon. For electrons in solids this is a genuine mesoscopic
quantum phenomenon [3,9–11].
The integer and fractional  Quantum Hall effects also fall into the category of
mesoscopic quantum transport phenomena. They are observed in two-dimensional
electron systems at low temperatures and in strong magnetic ﬁelds. The Hall con-
ductance in such a conﬁguration is quantized in integer or fractional unities of
e2 h−1, with the electron charge e and the  Planck’s constant h [4].
New Directions in Mesoscopic Quantum Physics
Quantum ‘Mechanics’: With the improvements of nanotechnologies and cooling
technologies it has recently become possible to cool nanomechanical cantilevers
with masses in the nanogram regime close to their quantummechanical ground
state [5]. Cold cantilevers are also promising for new schemes heading towards
mesoscopic entanglement [13].
For a long time, mesoscopic quantum phenomena counted generally as a sub-
ﬁeld of condensed matter physics. Over recent decades, however, photonic, atomic
and molecular systems have been extended to truly mesoscopic dimensions:
Atomic Bose–Einstein condensates [6] ( Bose–Einstein condensation) can be
composed of more than one million atoms and exhibit coherence lengths well
beyond the micrometer scale. Many studies with ultra-cold degenerate atomic en-
sembles are concerned with the classiﬁcation of quantum phenomena according to
their dimensionality. Long-range order can be observed in three-dimensional sys-
tems at low temperature (BEC). In two-dimensional systems long-range order is
destroyed by thermal ﬂuctuations at any ﬁnite temperature. But superﬂuid quasi-
condensates can still be observed, which are related to a short-range topological
order. Also in one dimension, mesoscopic atom clouds exhibit a quantum phe-
nomenon: strongly interacting bosons may form a Tonks–Girardeau gas.

382
Mesoscopic Quantum Phenomena
A mesoscopic superposition of photonic ﬁeld states can be created by sending
Rydberg atoms through a coherent ﬁeld trapped in a microwave cavity. The interac-
tion between atoms and microwave photons can be designed such that the phase of
the photon ﬁeld can simultaneously point into two different directions after the inter-
action. With several dozens of photons in the cavity this is a mesoscopic realization
of a  Schr¨odinger cat. The fragility of such large superposition states can be traced
by monitoring their decay as a function of time and as a function of the ‘distance’
between the mutually exclusive states in the superposition. These experiments [7]
beautifully illustrate many aspects of decoherence theory [12].
In macromolecule interferometry, complex many-body systems can be shown to
exhibit the behaviour of delocalized matter waves with transverse coherence widths
of the order of a micrometer [8]. Massive molecules, such as the fullerenes C60
and C70 or even biomolecules still show this phenomenon. They are composed of
several dozens of atoms and exhibit quantum motion even though they may attain
internal temperatures as high as 1,000K. A major interest in such experiments is the
understanding of the transition between quantum and classical behaviour.
Fullerenes are mesoscopic quantum objects in the sense that they exhibit many
bulk properties of classical objects and still behave quantum mechanically when
appropriately prepared. The bulk behavior manifests itself in collective excitations,
such as plasmons, excitons or the large number of vibrational modes which are sta-
tistically excited according to a microcanonical temperature. But also the thermal
emission of photons, electrons and molecular fragments at elevated temperatures
have similarities with thermal radiation, glow emission and evaporation of bulk me-
dia. The  de Broglie wavelength and coherence length of fullerenes in a thermal
beam at 900 K amounts to only a few picometers, which is a few hundred times
smaller than the molecule itself. Because of all that one might be tempted to identify
a fullerene with a classical body. And yet it can be shown that C60 can delocal-
ize over several micrometers and exhibit de Broglie quantum interference when
diffracted at mechanical gratings.
It is interesting to explore how quantum coherence is destroyed on the way to-
wards complex and larger bodies. In particular the interaction between the molecules
and their environment has raised a lot of interest: Collisions with residual gas
molecules but also photons emitted by the hot fullerenes themselves can reveal
which-path information inside the interferometer. This also leads to decoherence via
entanglement between the fullerene and the colliding or emitted particles. Figure 1
shows the experimental setup of a near-ﬁeld matter wave interferometer for C70 as
recently realized in Vienna. And it demonstrates the mesoscopic quantum nature
of the experiment: Under high-vacuum conditions and at sufﬁciently low internal
temperature the visibility of the molecular interference fringes is high and demon-
strate the quantum nature of the fullerene. At increasing pressure of the residual gas
or high internal temperature, the coupling to the environment becomes so strong that
the intrinsic quantumness becomes effectively unobservable.


384
Metaphysics of Quantum Mechanics
Primary Literature
1. P.M. Petroff, A. Lorke, A. Imamoglu: Epitaxially self-assembled quantum dots. Phys. Today
54, (5), 46–52 (2001).
2. B.D. Josephson: The discovery of tunnelling supercurrents. Rev. Mod. Phys. 46, 251–54
(1974).
3. P.W. Anderson: Absence of diffusion in certain random lattices. Phys. Rev. 109, 1492 (1958).
4. K. von Klitzing: Nobel lecture: The quantized Hall effect. Rev. Mod. Phys. 58, 519–31 (1986).
5. K.C. Schwab, M.L. Roukes: Putting mechanics into quantum mechanics. Phys. Today 7, 36
(2005).
6. E. Cornell, C.E. Wieman: Nobel Lecture: Bose–Einstein condensation in a dilute gas, the ﬁrst
70 years and some recent experiments. Rev. Mod. Phys. 74, 875 (2002).
7. S. Haroche: Entanglement, decoherence and the quantum/classical boundary. Phys. Today 51,
(7), 36–42 (1998).
8. M. Arndt, K. Hornberger, A. Zeilinger: Probing the limits of the quantum world. Phys. World
18, 35 (2005).
Secondary Literature
9. J. Imry: Introduction to Mesoscopic Physics. Oxford University Press, Oxford (1997).
10. Y. Yamamoto: Mesoscopic Quantum Optics. Wiley-Interscience, New York (1999).
11. I. O. Kulik: Quantum Mesoscopic Phenomena and Mesoscopic Devices in Microelectronics.
Springer, Amsterdam (2000).
12. E. Joos, H.D. Zeh, C. Kiefer, D. Giulini, J. Kupsch, I.O. Stamatescu: Decoherence and the
Appearance of a Classical World in Quantum Theory. Springer, Berlin (2003).
13. D. Vitali, S. Gigan, A. Ferreira, H. R. B¨ohm, P. Tombesi, A. Guerreiro, V. Vedral, A. Zeilinger,
M. Aspelmeyer: Optomechanical entanglement between a movable mirror and a cavity ﬁeld.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 98, 030405 (2007).
Metaphysics of Quantum Mechanics
Craig Callender
Quantum mechanics, like any physical theory, comes equipped with many meta-
physical assumptions and implications. The line between metaphysics and physics
is often blurry, but as a rough guide, one can think of a theory’s metaphysics as
those foundational assumptions made in its interpretation that are not usually di-
rectly tested in experiment. In classical mechanics some examples of metaphysical
assumptions are the claims that forces are real, that inertial mass is primitive, and
that space is substantival. The distinctive feature of these claims is that they are all
rather far removed from ordinary tests of the theory. Newton defended all three of
the above claims at one time or other, whereas Mach attacked each one; however,
both scientists agreed on enough of the formalism and its connection to experiment

