A
1277 Condemnation in Paris
▶Parisian Condemnation of 1277
ʿAbdallat:ı¯f al-Bag˙da¯dı¯
CECILIA MARTINI BONADEO
Dipartimento di Filosoﬁa
Universita` di Padova
Padova
Italy
Abstract
Between the eighth and ninth centuries, the production of
original philosophical and scientiﬁc treatises became
dominant with respect to the study of Greek philosophical
and scientiﬁc literature in Arabic translation. This is due
to the contribution of the translators and al-Kindı¯’s
thought, as well as to the experience of the teachers in
the tenth-century Aristotelian circle of Baghdad, mostly
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯. All had the intention to classify the sciences, to
return to a literal commentary of the Aristotelian text
following the Alexandrine model, and to single out the
nature of falsafa and the Greek-Arabic sciences in their
relationship with the Qurʾa¯nic sciences – an approach that
extends from the end of the eleventh, throughout the
twelfth, and up to the beginning of the thirteenth century.
It is enough to mention Avicenna to get an idea of this
development in the Arabic–Islamic philosophy and med-
icine of these centuries. The claim has been made that this
generated a sort of ‘‘purist’’ reaction (Gutas 1998), best
exempliﬁed by Averroes and his program of going back to
Aristotle and the Greek tradition. Such a phenomenon
took place not only in al-Andalus but also in the East of
the Islamic world: Muwaffaq al-Dı¯n Muh:ammad ‘Abd al-
Lat:ı¯f ibn Yu¯suf al-Bag˙da¯dı¯would be the best representative
of this current of thought.
‘Abd al-Lat:ı¯f al-Bag˙da¯dı¯ has been considered a pedantic
scholar, whose approach to science and philosophy was
scholastic and legalistic rather than experimental and cre-
ative. Nevertheless, the labels of ‘‘purist’’ and ‘‘compiler’’
are not suitable for describing the intellectual life of this
writer. ‘Abd al-Lat:ı¯f al-Bag˙da¯dı¯ cannot be considered as
a supporter of a sort of coming back to Aristotle or Galen
sic et simpliciter. True, he claimed in his autobiography the
necessity to go back to the Greek sources. Still, the reader
must go beyond this claim and try to see what corresponds
to it in the historical reality of ‘Abd al-Lat:ı¯f al-Bag˙da¯dı¯’s
sources. In doing so, he will realize that ‘Abd al-Lat:ı¯f al-
Bag˙da¯dı¯’s sources are by no means the Greek scientiﬁc and
philosophical texts in themselves – too far from him – but
those produced by the assimilation of the Greek thought
in Islamic culture, that have been reworked by ‘Abd al-
Lat:ı¯f al-Bag˙da¯dı¯ not without originality.
We possess two coeval biographies of him. The ﬁrst is
embedded in Ibn Abı¯ Us:aybi‘a’s biographical work, the
Sources of Information on the Classes of Physicians (‘Uyu¯n
al-anba¯’ fı¯ t:abaqa¯t al-at:ibba¯’). The second is an autobiog-
raphy, survived in a manuscript of Bursa, and its title is
Book of Two Pieces of Advice (Kita¯b al-nas:ı¯h:atayn). Finally,
further information on ‘Abd al-Lat:ı¯f al-Bag˙da¯dı¯ can be
found in the report of his journey in Egypt entitled Book
of the Report and Account of the Things Which I Witnessed
and the Events Seen in the Land of Egypt (Kita¯b al-ifa¯da
wa-l-i‘tiba¯r fi-l-῾umu¯r al-musha¯hada wa-l-h:awa¯dith al-
mu‘ayana bi-‘ard˙ mis:r). From these (not wholly concor-
dant) texts, some elements emerge, that shed light on ‘Abd
al-Lat:ı¯f al-Bag˙da¯dı¯’s activity and philosophical and scien-
tiﬁc doctrines, between the Ayyu¯bids’ and Mameluks’ages.
‘Abd al-Lat:ı¯f al-Bag˙da¯dı¯’s activity was often characterized
by violent controversies, as well as by the independence of
his convictions, slowly matured but passionately put for-
ward in his writings, and, ﬁnally, by his dedication to
diverse ﬁelds of research. We can follow his purposes and
interests, the paths of his education – thanks to the names
of the schools, of his teachers, and of the travels done – the
library he had at his disposal, his encyclopedic work on
medicine and philosophy, his attitude towards both the
ancient philosophers and his contemporaries.
Henrik Lagerlund (ed.), Encyclopedia of Medieval Philosophy, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4020-9729-4,
# Springer Science+Business Media B.V., 2011

‘Abd al-Lat:ı¯f al-Bag˙da¯dı¯ was born in Baghdad in 1162
and died there in 1231, after 45 years of absence during
which he traveled all over the Islamic world looking for
a good teacher in philosophy, under whose guidance he
could resolve the problems aroused in him by his reading
of the works of Avicenna and those on alchemy. As for his
education, we know that he got a solid training in
Islamic sciences such as grammar, lexicography, and law,
and also that then he turned to natural sciences, medicine,
philosophy, and alchemy, albeit in a critical vein. His
spasmodic search for a teacher in philosophy brought
him to meet, directly or through their writings, Avicenna,
al-G˙ aza¯lı¯,
and
Suhrawardı¯.
Many
schools’
teachers
weighed heavily on his education, and many different
environments: Baghdad, Mosul, Halep, Damascus, the
centers in Anatolia, and mostly Cairo. Cairo represented
for ‘Abd al-Lat:ı¯f al-Bag˙da¯dı¯ the much-desired goal of his
pilgrimage, the place where he ﬁnally met Aristotle and his
philosophy, that of his commentators Themistius and
Alexander, and where he ﬁnally met the greatest Arabic
Aristotelian commentator of the East, al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, who was
for him the ﬁrst to be able to integrate the Islamic and
Greek knowledge and to lay the foundations of a new
system of sciences. The experience of Cairo also meant
for ‘Abd al-Lat:ı¯f al-Bag˙da¯dı¯ the progressive abandon of
Avicenna’s philosophy, which, in the years of his educa-
tion, he had held to be the only possible one and which,
after he gave allegiance to the Peripatetic tradition, he
vehemently criticized.
He had many patrons and came into contact with
many prime order men of his era: scholars, philosophers,
physicians, and leaders including Saladin and his secretary
‘Ima¯d al-Dı¯n al-Ka¯tib al-Is:faha¯nı¯, Maimonides, and Ibn
Sana¯‘ al-Mulk. He was one of the few Arab authors known
in Europe at the beginning of the nineteenth century. As
a matter of fact, the Kita¯b al-ifa¯da wa-l-i‘tiba¯r, i.e., the
description of one of his journeys to Egypt, which he
undertook after 1189, preserved in an autograph manu-
script (Oxford, Bodleian Library 1149), was translated
into various European languages.
‘Abd-al-Lat:ı¯f al-Bag˙da¯dı¯ was a versatile scholar and
a prodigious writer: he wrote several medical and philo-
sophical treatises, still little studied up to now. Many of his
works were destroyed in the wave of the religious fanati-
cism of the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries or are still
in manuscript form, and in this case, the whereabouts of
only few manuscripts in the various libraries of the Near
East, Asia, and Europe are known.
The oldest list of ‘Abd al-Lat:ı¯f al-Bag˙da¯dı¯’s works is
that given to use by Ibn Abı¯ Us:aybi‘a at the end of his
biography of our author. A later list is found in the Fawa¯t
al-Wafaya¯t by Ibn Shakir al-Kutubı¯. The list presented by
Ibn Abı¯ Us:aybi‘a numbers 173 works, including brief
essays and treatises. The subjects are extremely varied
and reﬂect the variety of the author’s interests. Thirteen
writings are listed, which deal with the Arabic language,
lexicography, and grammar, two with ﬁqh, nine with liter-
ary criticism, 53 with medicine, ten with zoology, three on
the science of tawh:ı¯d, three on history, three on mathe-
matics and related disciplines, two on magic and miner-
alogy, and 27 on other themes. There are 48 works
concerning philosophy: 19 on logic, ten on physics, eight
on metaphysics, and nine on politics. Two general works
are also mentioned, subdivided into three sections: logic,
physics, and metaphysics; one of these is in ten volumes
and was completed by the author over a span of 20 years.
Ibn Shakir al-Kutubı¯’s list numbers 15 discourses by ‘Abd
al-Lat:ı¯f al-Bag˙da¯dı¯ which are not mentioned by Ibn Abı¯
Us:aybi‘a, and 81 works, all mentioned, with one exception,
in the previous list.
Among the works that have come down to us – or at
least those contained in manuscripts so far identiﬁed – the
following are really signiﬁcant to understand ‘Abd al-Lat:ı¯f
al-Bag˙da¯dı¯’s
approach
to
medicine,
science,
and
philosophy: the Commentary on the Advantages of Knowl-
edge According to Hippocrates; the Commentary on the
Aphorisms of Hippocrates; the Commentary on the Ques-
tions of H˙ unayn, the Book of that Which is Evident in Indian
Mathematics; the Essay on the Senses, the Two Questions on
Their Function and Natural Questions; the Book on the
Science of Metaphysics.
Besides these works, other important treatises are pre-
served – among which the Kita¯b al-Nas:ı¯h:atayn already
mentioned – in the miscellaneous manuscript H˙ usayn
C¸elebi, 823, discovered in Bursa in 1959 by S. M. Stern
and described by him. These treatises are the following:
‘Abd al-Lat:ı¯f al-Bag˙da¯dı¯’s criticism of the notes written by
Fakhr al-Dı¯n al-Ra¯zı¯, the Khat:ı¯b of Rayy, on several pas-
sages from the Kulliyya¯t section of Avicenna’s Qa¯nu¯n; the
treatise On the Quiddity of Space According to Ibn al-
Haytham;
the
Dispute
Between
an
Alchemist
and
a Theoretical Philosopher; the treatise On Minerals and
the Confutation of Alchemy; the treatise On Diabetes.
From the analysis of ‘Abd al-Lat:ı¯f al-Bag˙da¯dı¯’s huge
production the conclusion can be reached that he never
held Islamic wisdom to be in contradiction with that of the
ancients; indeed he thought that the critical awareness of
the appropriate method for the science under examination
came to the scholar of the Qurʾa¯nic sciences precisely from
the wisdom of the ancients. His criticisms of Fakhr al-Dı¯n
2 A
ʿAbdallat:ı¯f al-Bag˙da¯dı¯

al-Ra¯zı¯ can be explained in this sense: the latter was not
only unable to undertake the study of the science of the
ancients, in particular medicine, because he did not have
the correct use of language and method, but, precisely
because of this lack, he should not even have set out to
approach the sacred text of the Qurʾa¯n.
‘Abd al-Lat:ı¯f al-Bag˙da¯dı¯ constantly set authors deﬁned
by him as ‘‘moderns’’ against the ancients and he did not
refrain from harsh polemic attacks against the works of the
former. His privileged targets were Avicenna and Fakhr al-
Dı¯n al-Ra¯zı¯. The writings of these authors, if compared
with those of the ancients on similar themes, reveal to his
eyes their low scientiﬁc level: they are confused, and lack
detailed analysis, as it appears in the criticisms of
Avicenna’s logical writings. ‘Abd al-Lat:ı¯f al-Bag˙da¯dı¯
maintained therefore the need to return to the books of
the ancients and in particular to those of Aristotle,
Alexander of Aphrodisias, and al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ in philosophy,
and to those of Hippocrates and Galen in medicine.
During his stay in Cairo, he acquired a profound
knowledge of the philosophy of Aristotle and his inter-
preters. From the list of his works, in fact, he seems to have
written treatises which cover the entire Aristotelian cor-
pus. There is also frequent mention of the treatises of
Alexander of Aphrodisias, who was a benchmark for
‘Abd al-Lat:ı¯f al-Bag˙da¯dı¯. The same is true for al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯,
the only philosopher of the Islamic age deemed worthy of
study by ‘Abd al-Lat:ı¯f al-Bag˙da¯dı¯. Al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s writings
were often paraphrased by ‘Abd al-Lat:ı¯f al-Bag˙da¯dı¯ and
inserted into his own. The very notion of science which
transpires from the work of ‘Abd al-Lat:ı¯f al-Bag˙da¯dı¯,
namely a systematic corpus capable of integrating Islamic
and ancient knowledge, derives from al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯.
As far as medicine is concerned, ‘Abd al-Lat:ı¯f al-
Bag˙da¯dı¯’s attitude is analogous to that he has in philoso-
phy. He criticizes Avicenna and Fakhr al-Dı¯n al-Ra¯zı¯ and
wishes for a return to Hippocrates and Galen. He was an
active promoter of this return: from the list of his works, he
seems to have commented or summarized many of Hip-
pocrates’ and Galen’s writings. Nevertheless, he was not
a sterile compiler of the medical works of the ancients, but
merged the knowledge derived frosm them into his own
talent at observation, as we can see from his treatise on
diabetes, in which he completes all that has been written by
ancient and Arabic authors on its cure by a description of
the symptomatology of the illness. Another example of this
attitude can be found in the last chapter of the Kita¯b
al-ifa¯da wa-l-i‘tiba¯r where he discusses the structure of
the lower jawbone and corrects Galen’s opinion that it was
made up of two bones instead of one, and then discusses
the sacrumcoccyx complex which, according to Galen, was
made up of six bones, while ‘Abd al-Lat:ı¯f al-Bag˙da¯dı¯held it
to be formed out of a single bone.
Finally ‘Abd al-Lat:ı¯f al-Bag˙da¯dı¯ was profoundly averse
to alchemy, which was much in vogue in his time. Alchemy
can in no way belong in the system of sciences. Alchemy
and its false presumptions must be distinguished from
scientiﬁc knowledge which possesses rational basis, such
as that of mathematics, mineralogy, chemistry, zoology,
and botany. Proof of this is that the ancients never spoke of
it. Alchemy is guilty of having led astray generations of
scholars.
See also: ▶Fakhr al-Dı¯n al-Ra¯zı¯ ▶al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, Abu¯ Nas˙r
▶al-G˙ aza¯lı¯, Abu¯ H˙ a¯mid Muh:ammad ▶Ibn Sı¯na¯, Abu¯
‘Alı¯ (Avicenna) ▶al-Kindı¯, Abu¯ Yu¯suf Ya ‘qu¯b ibn Ish˙a¯q
▶Moses Maimonides ▶al-Suhrawardı¯, Shiha¯b al-Dı¯n
Yah˙ya¯ al-Maqtu¯l
Bibliography
Primary Sources
‘Abd al-Lat:ı¯f al-Bag˙da¯dı¯ (1790) ‘Abd al-Lat:ı¯f’s eines arabischen Arztes
Denkwu¨rdigkeiten E¨gyptens, trans. Wahl SFG. Im Verlag des
Waisenhauses, Halle
‘Abd al-Lat:ı¯f al-Bag˙da¯dı¯ (1800) Abdollatiphi historiae Aegypti compen-
dium, ar. et lat. partim ipse vertit, partim a Pocockes versum
edendum curavit notisque illustravit, trans. White J. Oxford
‘Abd al-Lat:ı¯f al-Bag˙da¯dı¯ (1965) Kita¯b al-Ifa¯da wa-l-I‘tiba¯r, trans.
Zand KH, Videan JA, Videan IE. George Allen & Unwin, London
‘Abd al-Lat:ı¯f al-Bag˙da¯dı¯ (1972) Maqa¯la ﬁ’l-h:awa¯ss wa-masa¯’il t:abı¯‘iyya,
Risa¯la li-l-Iskandar, Risa¯la fı¯ l-marad˙ al-musamma¯ dia¯bı¯t˙is, ed.
Ghalioungui P, Abdou S. The Arab Heritage 18. Kuwait Government
Press, Kuwait
Badawı¯ ‘Abd al-Rah:ma¯n (1955a) Aﬂu¯t:ı¯n ‘inda l-‘Arab. Maktabat al-nahd˙a
al-mis˙riyya. Cairo, pp 199–240 (pseudo-Theology)
Badawı¯‘Abd al-Rah:ma¯n (1955b) Al-Aﬂa¯t:u¯niyya al-muh:dat¯a ‘inda l-‘Arab.
Maktabat al-nahd˙a al-mis˙riyya. Cairo, pp 248–256 (Liber de Causis)
De Sacy Silvestre (1810) Relation de l’E´gypte par Abd-Allatif, me´decin
arabe de Bagdad [1162–1231 A. D.]. Imprimerie Impe´riale, Paris;
Reprint of the Edition Paris 1810, ed. Sezgin F. Frankfurt,
1992 (Islamic Geography, vol 10)
Ibn Abı¯ Us˙aybi‘a (1882) Uyu¯n al-anba¯’ fı¯ t:abaqa¯t al-at:ibba¯, ed. Mu¨ller A.
al-Mat:ba‘a¯t al-wahbiyya, Cairo/Ko¨nigsberg
Ibn Shakir al-Kutubı¯ (1974) Fawa¯t al-wafaya¯t, ed. ‘Abba¯s I. Da¯r al-s˙a¯dir,
Beirut
Neuwirth Angelika (1976) ‘Abd al-Lat:ı¯f al-Bag˙da¯dı¯’s Bearbeitung von
Buch Lambda der aristotelischen Metaphysik. Franz Steiner Verlag
GmbH, Wiesbaden
Neuwirth Angelika (1977–1988) Neue Materialen zur Arabischen
Tradition der beiden ersten Metaphysik-Bu¨cher. Welt des Islams
18.1–2:84–100
Secondary Sources
Cahen C (1970) ‘Abdallat:ı¯f al-Bag˙da¯dı¯, portratiste et historien de son
temps, Extraits ine´dits de ses me´moires. Bulletin d’E´tudes orientales
23:101–128
ʿAbdallat:ı¯f al-Bag˙da¯dı¯ A
3
A

Degen R (1977) Zum Diabetestraktat des ‘Abd al-Lat:ı¯f al-Bag˙da¯dı¯. Ann Ist
Orient Napoli 37:455–462
Dietrich A (1964) Die arabische Version einer unbekannten Schrift des
Alexander
von
Aphrodisias
u¨ber
die
Differentia
speciﬁca.
Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, Go¨ttingen
Dietrich A (1967) Ein Arzneimittelverzeichnis des ‘Abdallat:ı¯f ibn Yu¯suf
al-Bag˙da¯dı¯. In: Hoenerbach W (ed) Der Orient in der Forschung.
Festschrift fu¨r Otto Spies zum 5. April 1966. O. Harrassowitz,
Wiesbaden, pp 42–60
El Bizri N (2007) In defence of the sovereignty of philosophy:
Al-Bag˙da¯dı¯’s critique of Ibn al-Haytham’s geometrisation of place.
Arabic Sci Philos 17(1):57–80
Gutas D (1998) Greek thought, Arabic culture. The Graeco-Arabic
translation movement in Baghdad and early ‘Abba¯sid society
(2nd–4th/8th–10th centuries). Routledge, London/New York
Gutas D (2002) The heritage of Avicenna: the golden age of Arabic
philosophy, 1000–ca.1350. In: Janssens J, De Smet D (eds) Avicenna
and his heritage. Acts of the International Colloquium, Leuven,
Louvain-La-Neuve, 8–11 September 1999. University Press, Leuven,
pp 81–97
Joosse NP (2008) ‘Unmasking the Craft’: ‘Abd al-Lat:ı¯f al-Bag˙da¯dı¯’s
view on Alchemy and Alchemists. In: Akasoy A, Raven W (eds)
Islamic thought in Middle Ages. Studies in text, transmission and
translation in honour of Hans Daiber. Brill, Leiden/Boston, pp
301–317
Kruk R (2008) ‘Abd al-Lat:ı¯f al-Bag˙da¯dı¯’s Kita¯b al-H˙ ayawa¯n: A Chimaera?
In: Akasoy A, Raven W (eds) Islamic thought in Middle Ages. Studies
in text, transmission and translation in honour of Hans Daiber. Brill,
Leiden/Boston, pp 345–362
Makdisi G (1981) The rise of colleges. Institutions of learning in Islam
and in the West. Edinburgh University Press, Edinburgh
Martini Bonadeo C (2005) Avicenna: seguaci e critici. In: D’Ancona
C (ed) Storia della ﬁlosoﬁa nell’Islam medievale, vol II. Einaudi,
Torino, pp 627–668
Toorawa S (1996) The educational background of ‘Abd al-Lat:ı¯f al-
Bag˙da¯dı¯. Muslim Educ Quart 13(3):35–53
Toorawa S (1997) Language and male homosocial desire in the autobiog-
raphy of ‘Abd al-Lat:ı¯f al-Bag˙da¯dı¯. Edebiyaˆt (special issue – Arabic
autobiography), 7(2):251–265
Toorawa S (2001) The autobiography of ‘Abd al-Lat:ı¯f al-Bag˙da¯dı¯
(1162–1231). In: Reynolds DF (ed) Interpreting the self. Autobiog-
raphy in the Arabic literary tradition. University of California Press,
Berkeley/Los Angeles/London, pp 156–164
Toorawa S (2004) A portrait of ‘Abd al-Lat:ı¯f al-Bag˙da¯dı¯’s education
and instruction. In: Lowry JE, Stewart DJ, Toorawa SM (eds)
Law and education in medieval Islam. Studies in memory of
Professor G. Makdisi. E.J.W. Gibb Memorial Trust Series, Oxford,
pp 91–109
Zimmermann FW (1986) The origins of the so-called ‘‘Theology
of Aristotle.’’ In: Kraye J, Ryan WF, Schmitt SB (eds) Pseudo-
Aristotle
in
the
Middle
Ages.
The
‘‘Theology’’
and
other
texts. The Warburg Institute/University of London, London, pp
110–239
Abelard, Peter
▶Peter Abelard
Abraham ibn Ezra
ANGELA GUIDI
ATER (Attache´ Temporaire de Recherche et
d’Enseignement)
Colle`ge de France (Paris)
Paris
France
Abstract
Abraham ben Meir ibn Ezra (c. 1093–c. 1167), a native of
Tudela, has been a key ﬁgure of medieval Jewish thought.
He has played an important role in the ﬁelds of biblical
exegesis, poetry, grammar, astronomy, astrology, mathe-
matics, and natural sciences. During his life, Ibn Ezra
traveled all around Europe, settling in France, in England,
and in Italy. He composed his works in Hebrew, in order
to reach especially those Jewish communities that did not
speak Arabic. His astrological and astronomical treatises
were translated into Latin and were also greatly appreci-
ated by medieval Christian thinkers. The popularity of his
exegetical opus throughout the Jewish medieval world is
testiﬁed by the great number of supercommentaries.
Although Ibn Ezra’s philosophical teachings are not sys-
tematically exposed and have to be reconstructed all along
his exegetical, poetical, and scientiﬁc production, his
thought is characterized by some distinctive features. In
the ﬁeld of philosophy, he was mainly interested in psy-
chological and cosmological questions. He accepted – and
often reinterpreted – some earlier Neoplatonic and proto-
cabalistic conceptions about the soul. His reﬂection
mainly deals with the nature of the human soul and
man’s destiny after death, and with the effects of celestial
bodies on the physical world. Some doctrines that he
adopted in those ﬁelds have deeply inﬂuenced the thought
of his successors.
Abraham ben Meir ibn Ezra (c. 1093–c. 1167) (known by
Latin medieval thinkers as Avenezra) is one of the prom-
inent medieval Jewish thinkers. A native of Tudela, in Al-
Andalus, he grew up in the Arabic-speaking milieu of the
sefardi Judaism. Jewish folklore reserved him a central
place, and his life has been, under more than one aspect,
a picaresque one. Ibn Ezra became a close friend, and may
be a relative, of Yehudah ha-Levi (1180–1141), with whom
he discussed exegetical and philosophical problems
concerning the election of Israel among the peoples, as
reported in his commentary on Exodus; he was also in
touch with other Jewish philosophers, like Yosef ibn
4 A
Abelard, Peter

Tsaddiq and Abraham ibn Daud, and with the poet Moshe
ibn Ezra. During this ﬁrst period of his life, Ibn Ezra
devoted himself mostly to writing religious and profane
poetry. In 1140, to escape the Almohades’ persecution,
Abraham ibn Ezra left Spain, possibly after the conversion
of his son to Islam. He spent the rest of his life in traveling
from one country to another, among the Jews of Christian
Europe: he settled for short periods in Lucca, Mantua,
Verona, and then, he moved to France’s Provence: Rouen
and Be´ziers. In the second part of his life, he composed the
main part of his astrological, astronomical, and exegetical
works. Exile and precarious conditions of life marked both
his works and his personality: his permanence in Christian
Europe forced him to choose Hebrew – instead of Arabic –
to compose his texts, whereas his autobiographical poems
relate to misadventures, difﬁculties, and misfortune, con-
sequent, to some extent, to restless moving due to uncer-
tain patronages and difﬁcult circumstances. He died,
perhaps in London, around 1167.
Abraham ibn Ezra’s productions and interests were
extremely large. In his Sefer ha-shem (The Book of the
Name [of God]), he traces an ideal portrait of the perfect
Torah scholar: in his effort to understand the true meaning
of the holy text, the Jewish exegete combines and inte-
grates many scientiﬁc disciplines: astronomy (h:okhmat
ha-mazalot), astrology (mishpet:ey ha-mazalot), arithmetic,
geometry and ratios (h:okhmat ha-heshbon, ha-midot
we ha-‘arakhim), natural science (h:okhmat ha-toledet),
psychology (h:okhmat ha-nefesh), cosmogony (h:okhmat
toledet ha-shamayim), and logic (h:okhmat ha-mivt’a).
This list represents just a part of the wide-ranging studies’
curriculum of Ibn Ezra, whose interests also embraced
grammar, poetry, and theology.
Even if it began late – that is, after his ﬂee from Spain –
Abraham ibn Ezra’s activity in the ﬁeld of exegesis was very
intense. His works are extant in a great number of both
manuscripts and ancient printed editions, and they
received an exceptional appreciation in the Middle Age.
Proof of the consent he had is the super commentaries,
which play a part in diffusing his teachings, especially
among Jewish communities. We possess Abraham ibn
Ezra’s commentaries to Torah, Isaia, the Twelve Minor
Prophets, Psalms, Job, the Five Megillot, and Daniel; we
are also informed by Ibn Ezra himself about his writing
the commentaries on Joshua, Judges, Samuel, Kings, Jere-
miah, Ezekiel, Proverbs, Ezra-Nehemiah, and Chronicles.
Both astrology and astronomy took a huge place in his
reﬂection; he wrote, inter alia a treatise on the astrolabe
(Keli ha-Neh:oshet) and a polemical work on the theoretical
fundamentals of the Jewish calendar (Sefer ha-‘Ibbur).
His astrological chef-d’œuvre is the Reshit H˙ okhmah
(Beginning of Wisdom), which was translated in French
and in Latin, and promptly became a fundamental refer-
ence in the ﬁeld. Furthermore, he makes use of many
important astrological arguments in his exegetical expli-
cations, especially in order to offer a rational interpreta-
tion of the biblical passages concerning the sacriﬁces of
the animals. His astrological works had a deep inﬂuence
on Christian medieval thinkers, and were a relevant
source of information for Petrus de Abano up to Pico
della Mirandola’s
Disputationes
adversus
astrologiam
divinatricem (1493), and for later thinkers. Ibn Ezra
devoted to mathematical speculation his Sefer ha-’Eh:ad
(The Book of the Unit), a short treatise on the attributes of
the number, and the Sefer ha-Mispar (Book of the Number),
which deals with the different mathematical operations.
His poems, both religious and profane, contain many
philosophical ideas and were an important vehicle of
transmission of psychological and cosmological doctrines’
issues from medieval Islamic and Jewish Neoplatonic tra-
dition. In addition to that, Abraham ibn Ezra translated
from Arabic to Hebrew three books of the grammarian
Judah ben David Hayyuj (c. 950–c. 1000) and composed
himself some very popular grammars of Hebrew.
Indeed, Ibn Ezra’s literary activity is particularly rich,
and perhaps even somewhat disordered. Since he was not
a systematic thinker, he did not compose speciﬁc philo-
sophical treatises; his philosophical teachings are to be
deduced from scattered material incorporated in his exe-
getical and scientiﬁc works. Moreover, his doctrines are
often concisely expounded and do not form a consistent
arrangement. Ibn Ezra’s points of view may change
according to different contests and they occasionally
reveal contradictions and lack of consistence. In spite of
his nonsystematic approach – or possibly thanks to it –
Abraham ibn Ezra has played a key role in the formation
of a standard cosmological and psychological teaching
among medieval Jewish thinkers, perhaps owing to the
popularity of his exegetical work among Hebrew readers
and to the conciseness of his account. His works have been
an important diffusion channel for some doctrines
concerning the human soul, the rule of the stars on the
sublunar word, and the salvation of individuals. It is
possible that his philosophical background was not
a really wide one, even if he was familiar with some
philosophical and mystical Jewish works. He openly cites
Sa’adiah ben Gaon’s Beliefs and Opinions, and uses
prekabbalistic treatises, such as Sefer Yetsirah or Shi’ur
Qomah’; kala¯m tradition was doubtfully one of the sources
of his thought, but he was also inﬂuenced by Ibn Gabirol’s
poetical production, though he does not seem to make
references to Gabirol’s Fountain of Life. Abraham bar
Abraham ibn Ezra A
5
A

Hiyya’s astrological and astronomical teachings also
inﬂuenced him deeply.
On the other hand, Ibn Ezra’s philosophical interests
are not homogeneous and equally distributed. He did not
produce a real metaphysical or theological teaching and
did not deal too much with the epistemological dimension
of philosophy. Despite the fact that he develops some ideal
divisiones scientiarum in his exegetical works, Ibn Ezra did
not offer a major reﬂection on the relation between the
secular sciences and the Torah. In fact, he limits himself to
observe that the Bible concealed a certain number of
secrets (sodot), whose meaning must not be revealed and
which he precisely points out in his commentaries. Psy-
chology is the only branch of philosophy to which he
deserves an almost systematic reﬂection. Ibn Ezra detailed
the doctrine of the human soul, both in his poetical and in
his exegetical production, especially in his commentary on
Ecclesiastes. His psychological system is similar to that of
Jewish philosophers belonging to a Neoplatonic tradition,
as Ibn Gabirol or Ibn Tsaddiq. He usually distinguishes
between three different souls: nefesh (the vegetative soul,
located in the liver), neshamah (the animal soul, located in
the heart), and ruah: (the rationale soul, located in the
brain). Rational soul belongs to human beings only; it is
able to discern truth from falsehood, to formulate
a correct reasoning, and to obtain an intellectual vision
of the intelligible world. This soul originates from the
supernal world and is composed of the same incorporeal
substance; after the death of the body, it is supposed to
return to its source. The soul yearns to return to its
Creator, and during his permanence in the sublunar
realm, has to oppose the violent appetites of the body,
which is described, in a genuine Neoplatonic style, as
a prison or a cage. Since man is a microcosm reﬂecting
the structure of the creation and containing a trace of the
divine substance in itself, the soul may gradually approach
God through self-knowledge. The individual soul, his
destiny, and his ultimate felicity, is one of the main con-
cerns of Ibn Ezra’s speculation, emerging also in his astro-
logical reﬂection. In his opinion, the universe is composed
of a celestial and a terrestrial realm; the stars and the
planets rule over the sublunar world and over human
beings. Nevertheless, man could escape to the astral inﬂu-
ence determining terrestrial events, doing to the nature of
his soul, which is made of the same substance of the
supernal realm.
See also: ▶Avicebron ▶Giovanni Pico della Mirandola
▶Judah
Halevi
▶Philosophical
Psychology,
Jewish
Tradition ▶Philosophy, Jewish
Bibliography
Primary Sources
H˙ ay ben Meqiz (2004) An initiatory tale by Abraham Ibn Ezra. In:
A. Hughes, The texture of the divine. Imagination in medieval and
Islamic and Jewish thought, Indiana Press, pp 189–208
Ibn Ezra Abraham (1970) Sefer ha-shem, Das Buch u¨ber den vierbuch-
stabigen Namen Gottes, ed. Lippmann GH. Jerusalem (repr.
Furst, 1824)
Ibn Ezra Abraham (1976) Perushey ha-Torah (Commentary on the
Torah), ed. Weiser A. Mossad ha-Rav Kook, Jerusalem
Ibn Ezra Abraham (1985) Sefer ha-’Eh:ad. In: Abraham ibn Ezra Reader
(annotated texts with introductions and commentaries: Levin I).
New York/Tel Aviv, pp 399–414
Levin I (1969) Abraham Ibn Ezra: His life and poetry (Heb.). Ha-kibbutz
ha-mehuchand, Tel Aviv
Meh:oqeqey Yehudah (1907–1928) Ibn Ezra’s commentaries on the Pen-
tateuch, Song of Songs, Lamentations and Esther, ed. Krinski by JL. 5
vols. Piotrkow-Vilna
Secondary Sources
Langermann T, Ibn Ezra A (2006) The Stanford encyclopedia of philos-
ophy, Winter 2006 edn, ed. Zalta EN. http://plato.stanford.edu/
archives/win2006/entries/ibn-ezra/
Sela S (2003) Abraham Ibn Ezra and the rise of medieval Hebrew science.
Brill, Leiden/Boston
Sirat C (1985) A history of Jewish philosophy in the Middle Age. Cam-
bridge University Press, Cambridge
Smithuis R (2006) Abraham ibn Ezra’s astrological works in Hebrew and
in Latin: new discoveries and exhaustive listing. Aleph 6:299–322
Tanenbaum A (2002) The contemplative soul. Hebrew poetry and philo-
sophical theory in medieval Spain. Brill, Leiden/Boston/Ko¨ln
Twersky I, Harris JM (eds) (1993) Rabbi Abraham Ibn Ezra: studies in the
writings of a twelfth-century Jewish polymath. Harvard University
Press, Cambridge
Abu¯ Bakr al-Ra¯zı¯, Muh:ammad ibn
Zakarı¯ya¯ʾ (Rhazes)
ANTONELLA STRAFACE
Facolta` di Lingue e Letterature Straniere
Universita` degli Studi di Napoli L’Orientale
Napoli
Italy
Abstract
The most famous physician of Islam after Ibn Sı¯na¯, Abu¯
Bakr Muh:ammad b. Zakarı¯ya¯’ al-Ra¯zı¯ (known in the Latin
world as Rhazes) was also a philosopher and a chemist,
and before being a physician, he is said to have been an
alchemist. Although al-Ra¯zı¯’s name is mainly related to his
medical works, his masterpieces Kita¯b al-ja¯miʿ al-kabı¯r
6 A
Abu¯ Bakr al-Ra¯zı¯, Muh:ammad ibn Zakarı¯ya¯ʾ (Rhazes)

(The Great Comprehensive Book) and Kita¯b al-h:a¯wı¯ fı¯
l-t:ibb (The Comprehensive Book on Medicine), he wrote
also on cosmology, theology, logic, mathematics, and
philosophy, as he believed, just like Galen, that an
outstanding physician must also be a philosopher.
Among his philosophical works are a commentary on
Plato’s Timaeus, a criticism of the Muʿtazilite doctrine,
and a polemical writing against the Isma¯ʿı¯lı¯s and their
idea of the infallible Imam. As he believed in indepen-
dent thinking, although he did not exclude the cumula-
tive value of knowledge, he thought that every man could
think by himself and did not need any guide teaching
him what to think or what to do. Starting from this, al-
Ra¯zı¯ carried out his criticism against religion in general,
and against prophecy (that was considered an imposture
and a trick) in particular as, according to al-Ra¯zı¯, reason
is sufﬁcient to distinguish good from evil. Although al-
Ra¯zı¯ was not imprisoned or executed because of his ideas
on religion and prophecy, he was censored for his opin-
ions, so that his philosophical and theological works
were destroyed. Anyway, thanks to some fragments that
had survived in later sources, it has been possible to
reconstruct al-Ra¯zı¯’s cosmology, which was based on
ﬁve eternal beings: Creator, Soul, Space, Time, and Mat-
ter. In this system God, considered a kind of ‘‘maker,’’
does not create from ‘‘nothingness,’’ but He molded
a preexistent matter, which was conceived of in an atom-
istic way.
Al-Ra¯zı¯ was the most liberal and independent Islamic
thinker who believed in the authority of reason, the
universal gift that God gave to all men without any
distinction.
Abu¯
Bakr
Muh:ammad
b.
Zakarı¯ya¯’
al-Ra¯zı¯
was
a philosopher and a chemist, and well versed in musical
theory and practice too (according to some traditions he
played lute very well). Born in Rayy (near the present-day
Teheran) in 850, he is said to have been an alchemist
before being a physician, as testiﬁed by his Kita¯b al-asra¯r
(The Book of Secrets), translated into Latin by Gerard of
Cremona.
Because of sighting impairment (probably due to his
alchemic practices), which gradually caused him blind-
ness, al-Ra¯zı¯ devoted himself to medicine, a ﬁeld in which
he excelled. As he believed that a physician should practice
medicine in a big city with plenty of potential patients, he
went to Baghdad, where he studied and practiced medi-
cine in its hospitals. Later on he went to Rayy, having
accepted the invitation of the Samanid governor Mans:u¯r
b. Ish:a¯q to assume the direction of the hospital of the city.
After becoming famous in Rayy, he went back to Baghdad
where he headed the hospital that had been founded by
al-Muʿtad˙id shortly before. He died in Rayy in 925 or 935.
Al-Ra¯zı¯ was a proliﬁc author (he is said to have written
some 200 works) and a versatile one indeed; Ibn al-Nadı¯m,
who attributes to him dozens of works on different ﬁelds
of knowledge, lists in his Kita¯b al-Fihrist (The Book of the
Catalogue) many of al-Ra¯zı¯’s writings on cosmology, the-
ology, logic, mathematics, and alchemy.
However, al-Ra¯zı¯’s name is mainly related to his med-
ical works: his masterpieces Kita¯b al-ja¯miʿ al-kabı¯r (The
Great Comprehensive Book) and Kita¯b al-h:a¯wı¯fı¯l-t:ibb (The
Comprehensive Book on Medicine). In addition to these
works, during his stay in Baghdad al-Ra¯zı¯ wrote two
other medical works: the Kita¯b al-Mans:u¯rı¯ (The Book of
al-Mans:u¯r) and al-t:ibb al-ru¯h:a¯nı¯(The Spiritual Medicine).
The Kita¯b al-Mans:u¯rı¯, dedicated as suggested by its title to
his patron Mans:u¯r b. Ish:a¯q, and divided into 10 volumes,
had for a very long time (from the twelfth to the sixteenth
century) a great inﬂuence on the teaching of medicine in
the Latin world, thanks to Gerard of Cremona’s Latin
translation (Liber Almansoris). As for al-t:ibb al-ru¯h:a¯nı¯,
which seems to be complementary to the Kita¯b al-
Mans:u¯rı¯, it deals with the ‘‘diseases’’ of the soul.
The Kita¯b al-h:a¯wı¯ fı¯ l-t:ibb, translated and known in
Europe under the title of Liber continens, is not a
medical encyclopedia in the usual sense, although it is
of a monumental size; it can be considered as a kind of
private medical notebook, divided in several ‘‘study-ﬁles,’’
each of them arranged according to the method of the
time, that is to say ‘‘from the head to the toes.’’ This private
record of comments and reﬂections deals not only with
case-histories of patients, but also with medical works
which marked the history of medicine, from Hippocrates
down to al-Ra¯zı¯’s times. Because of its encyclopedic size
and completeness, it was often confused with the Kita¯b al-
ja¯miʿ al-kabı¯r that can be considered the most complete
and voluminous Arabic medical text.
This work, which according to Ibn al-Nadı¯m and Ibn
Abı¯ Us:aybi‘a consists of 12 parts, is often mentioned by al-
Ra¯zı¯ himself in the Kita¯b al-h:a¯wı¯ fı¯ l-h:ibb, in the al-sı¯ra al-
falsaﬁyya (The Philosophical Life, where al-Ra¯zı¯ says that
he had spent 15 years of hard work to write the Kita¯b al-
ja¯miʿ al-kabı¯r), and in al-fus˙u¯l (Aphorisms), where he pro-
vides future physicians with a list of all the medical books
they needed to read. One of the parts of the Kita¯b al-ja¯miʿ
al-kabı¯r is a medical multilingual lexicon where al-Ra¯zı¯
quotes the deﬁnition or the translation of unfamiliar
terms, either foreign (Greek, Indian, Persian, Syriac) or
Arabic.
Abu¯ Bakr al-Ra¯zı¯, Muh:ammad ibn Zakarı¯ya¯ʾ (Rhazes) A
7
A

Al-Ra¯zı¯, who wrote on several diseases (paralysis,
arthritis, diabetes, colic, etc.) devoted a work to smallpox
and measles (Al-jadarı¯ wa-l-h:as:ba), translated into Latin
over a dozen times. For the ﬁrst time, smallpox and mea-
sles were considered two different diseases, as al-Ra¯zı¯
showed in his description of their clinical details.
Although he made continuous references to Galen,
al-Ra¯zı¯ criticized him about some theories, as shown in
his Fı¯ shuku¯k ‘ala¯ Ja¯lı¯nu¯s (Doubts About Galen). In partic-
ular, regarding the notion of humors, al-Ra¯zı¯ did not
believe that a body could be warmed or cooled only by
warmer and cooler bodies. At the same time, he criticized
Galen’s excessive conﬁdence in mathematics in explaining
the theory of vision that, according to al-Ra¯zı¯, goes
from the object to the eye and to the optic nerve. Never-
theless, al-Ra¯zı¯ acknowledged Galen’s greatness and role as
a leading master and great teacher in both philosophy and
medicine.
In fact, restoring Galen’s idea that ‘‘an outstanding
physician must also be a philosopher,’’ al-Ra¯zı¯ also wrote
on philosophy. Noteworthy is his commentary on Plato’s
Timaeus (a probable epitome of Galen’s), a criticism of the
Muʿtazilite doctrine and a polemical writing against the
Isma¯ʿı¯lı¯s and their idea of the infallible Imam. Although all
his philosophical works are lost, the very few and short
excerpts which have survived are sufﬁcient to show that al-
Ra¯zı¯ considered philosophy as a goal in itself and not
simply as a support to medicine.
In particular, in Fı¯ makha¯riq al-anbiya¯’ (On the Tricks
of the Prophets), a book of religious polemic attributed to
al-Ra¯zı¯ and which has gone lost, he said that religions are
among the main causes of enmity and wars among peo-
ples. He also believed in the cumulative value of knowl-
edge but, at the same time, in the independent thinking
too. In fact, if it is true that every man may learn from his
predecessors, it is also true that he can surpass them in
knowledge, because every man can think by himself and
does not need any guide teaching him what to think
or what to do. In the ﬁrst chapter of his al-t:ibb al-ru¯h:a¯nı¯,
al-Ra¯zı¯ exalted reason (‘aql) that according to him is the
ultimate authority and, consequently, represents the only
power capable to control, lead, and govern. Starting from
this, al-Ra¯zı¯ carried out his criticism against religion in
general and against prophecy and prophets, in particular.
In fact, he rejected the idea of prophecy as well as that
of the necessity for an Imam; the consequence of his
statements was that prophecy, as a privilege for few men,
had to be considered as a trick and an imposture because,
according to al-Ra¯zı¯, reason is sufﬁcient to distinguish
good from evil, to help man organize his life in a proper
way, and to know God. In other words, there is no need for
prophets. There are other evidences that can conﬁrm that
prophecy is not necessary; as God has given all men an
intellect, there is no reason that can justify the intellective
predominance of some men over others. God, in His great
goodness and benevolence, gave the universal gift of intel-
lect to every man so that, in accordance with His supreme
justice, no one is wiser than another. Finally, the evidence
that prophecy is a trick is based on the fact that all
the prophecies revealed during the various eras of
human history contradicted each other; starting from
this evidence, the consequence is that God’s Word is con-
tradictory (as each prophet considers himself as God’s
mouthpiece). According to al-Ra¯zı¯, this absurd conclusion
demonstrated that prophecy is a trick.
Although al-Ra¯zı¯ was not imprisoned or executed
because of his ideas on religion and prophecy, he was
censored for his opinions, so that Fı¯ makha¯riq al-anbiya¯’
was destroyed. Anyway, it is possible to recover his ideas
on religions and prophecy thanks to some polemical writ-
ings of his adversaries, such as that of his contemporary
Isma¯ʿı¯lı¯ da¯’ı¯ Abu¯ H˙ a¯tim al-Ra¯zı¯ (811–891), who wrote his
polemical answer in the Aʿla¯m al-nubuwwa (The Signs of
Prophecy).
Thanks to some fragments of his Kita¯b al-‘ilm al-ila¯hı¯
(The Book of the Divine Science), which had survived in
later sources, it has been possible to recover al-Ra¯zı¯’s
cosmology, which was based on ﬁve eternal beings (al-
qudama¯’ al-khamsa), although al-Ra¯zı¯ denied the eternity
of the world. These beings, whose interaction created
the world as we know it, are the Creator (al-Ba¯rı¯’), Soul
(al-Nafs), Time (al-Zama¯n), Space (al-Maka¯n), and
Matter (al-Hayu¯la¯). God, who is considered a kind of
‘‘maker’’ (formator mundi, demiurge), did not create
from ‘‘nothingness’’ but molded a preexistent matter,
which was conceived of in an atomistic way, that echoes
Democritus and Leucippus; in fact, the ultimate constitu-
ents of things are said to be indivisible because of their
smallness and solidity. Al-Ra¯zı¯’s atomism is quite different
from that of the mutakallimu¯n: according to them, the
existence of atoms depends exclusively on the continuous
creative will of God. In al-Ra¯zı¯’s atomism, the atoms
possess ‘‘extension’’ and the characteristics of bodies
depend on the number of atoms in proportion with the
amount of void which has the force of attraction.
The eternity of Matter requires that Space and Time in
which it is extended are eternal too. In particular, al-Ra¯zı¯
distinguishes an ‘‘absolute’’ space from a ‘‘relative’’ one:
the ﬁrst is inﬁnite and independent of the world, the
second is an empty space, or void, which is inside Matter
and which attracts bodies (a possible expedient to
explain the Epicurean clinamen). Similarly, Time is
8 A
Abu¯ Bakr al-Ra¯zı¯, Muh:ammad ibn Zakarı¯ya¯ʾ (Rhazes)

distinguished in ‘‘absolute’’ time, that is to say ‘‘duration,’’
and ‘‘limited’’ time, which is that of the spheres, the sun,
and the stars.
The cosmological process began with the fall of the
Soul, conceived of as living but not yet intelligent. Soul
desired to embody herself into Matter that was not in
motion yet. In doing so, Soul imparted a disordered and
confused motion to Matter. God, who did not hinder this
‘‘desire’’ because He knew that Soul needed experience for
learning, then sent the Intellect (‘aql) to the Soul; in this
way, the Soul became aware that this kind of matter had
nothing to do with her true nature, and she tried to get rid
of corporeal ties.
As previously said, before his formal training in med-
icine, al-Ra¯zı¯ was an alchemist. Al-Bı¯ru¯nı¯, who attributes
to him 80 works, lists 21 writings on alchemy. Although
the primary sources for Arabic alchemy go back to Her-
metism and to this corpus of traditions and writings, al-
Ra¯zı¯’s alchemy has nothing to do with mystery but with
the fundamental chemical procedures, essential for phar-
macology, which he explained in detail in alchemical
works such as the Kita¯b sirr al-asra¯r (The Book of
the Secret of the Secrets) and the previously mentioned
Kita¯b al-asra¯r. Here al-Ra¯zı¯ spells out the alchemic pro-
cedures for plating and gilding metals and makes also
a classiﬁcation of minerals, divided into six sections:
spirits, bodies, stones, vitriol, borax, and salts.
As to ethics, al-Ra¯zı¯ can be considered ‘‘Epicurean in
character’’ as he stated, especially in his al-T: ibb al-ru¯h:a¯nı¯
and al-Sı¯ra al-falsaﬁyya, that pleasure is neither positive
nor negative: it is the normal state of man when the pain
ends (so man has to avoid not the passions, but their
excesses). Besides these two works, al-Ra¯zı¯ also wrote
a work entitled Kita¯b al-ladhdha (The Book of Pleasure),
which has gone lost. Nevertheless, from the study of some
of its excerpts and reports, survived in later authors, it
seems that he believed in the replenishment theory of
pleasure that, according to some scholars, is not Epicu-
rean. In fact, ‘‘al-Ra¯zı¯ thinks not only that all pleasure will
be purchased at the price of harm, but also that the
amount of harm will be at least as great as the pleasure
that is achieved’’ (Adamson 2008:94).
Al-Ra¯zı¯ did not establish a well organized philosoph-
ical system, nevertheless he was the most liberal and inde-
pendent Islamic thinker, as testiﬁed by his ﬁght against
the idea of an absolute authority granting power to few
privileged men. The only authority in which he believed
and which he accepted was reason, the universal gift that
God gave to all men, without any distinction, and the
intellectual support that helped Soul to recognize her
origin and to return to it.
See also: ▶Alchemy in the Arab World ▶Atomism
▶Ethics ▶Form and Matter ▶Galen, Arabic ▶Medicine
and Philosophy ▶Medicine in the Arab World
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Translations
Arberry AJ (trans) (1950) The spiritual physics of Rhazes. J. Murray &
Tanner Ltd., London
Arberry AJ (trans) (1967) Apologia pro vita sua. In: Aspects of Islamic
civilization. G. Allen & Unwin, Ann Arbor, pp 120–130
Brague R (trans) (2003) La me´dicine spirituelle. Flammarion GF, Paris
Butterworth Ch (1993) The book of the philosophical life. Interpretation
20:227–236
de Koning P (trans) (1896) Traite´ sur le calcul dans les reins et dans la
vessie. P. Kraus, Leiden
Greenhill WA (trans) (1847) A treatise on the smallpox and measles.
Sydenham Society, London
Kraus P (ed) (1939) Abi Mohammadi Filii Zachariae Raghensis (Razis)
opera philosophica fragmentaque quae supersunt. Cairo (repr.
Beirut 1973)
McGinnis J, Reisman DR (eds and trans) (2007) Classical Arabic philos-
ophy: an anthology of sources. Indianapolis
Meyerhof M (1935) Thirty-three clinical observations by Rhazes [from
the Hawi]. Isis 23:321–356
Ruska J (trans) (1937) Al-Razi’s Buch Geheimnis der Geheimnisse. V. J.
Springer, Berlin
Tornero E (trans) (2004) La conducta virtuosa del ﬁlo´sofo. Saragossa
Vazquez M (ed and trans) (1979) Libro de la introduccion al arte de la
medicina. Trotta, Salamanca
Secondary Sources
Studies and Sources
Ibn Abı¯ Us:aybi’a (1882) Uyu¯n al-anba¯’, ed. Mu¨ller A. Cairo/Ko¨nigsberg,
pp 309–321
Ibn al-Nadı¯m (1871–1872) Kita¯b al-Fihrist, ed. Flu¨gel G. Leipzig, pp 299–
302, 358; (1970), trans. Dodge B. New York, pp 82, 377, 435, 599,
701–709
Ibn al-Qift:ı¯ (1903) Ta’rı¯kh al-H˙ ukama¯’, ed. Lippert J, Dieterich’sche
Verlagsbuchhandlung, Leipzig, pp 271–277
Adamson P (2008) Platonic pleasures in Epicurus and al-Ra¯zı¯. In: In the
age of al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯: Arabic philosophy in the fourth/tenth century. The
Warburg Institute-Nino Aragno Editore, pp 71–97
Bausani A (1981) Un ﬁlosofo ‘laico’ del medioevo musulmano: Abu Bakr
Muhammad Ben Zakariyya Razi. Istituto di Studi Islamici, Rome
Bernburg LR (2008) Abu¯ Bakr al-Ra¯zı¯ and al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ on medicine and
authority. The Warburg Institute-Nino Aragno Editore, London-
Turin, pp 119–130
Druart TA (1996) Al-Razi’s conception of the soul: psychological back-
ground to his ethics. Mediev Philos Theol 5:245–263
Druart TA (1997) The ethics of al-Razi. Mediev Philos Theol 6:47–71
Fakhry M (1968) A tenth-century Arabic interpretation of Plato’s cos-
mology. J Hist Philos 6:15–22
Gaudefroy-Demombynes M (1941) Er-Razi philosophe, d’apre`s des
ouvrages re´cents. RHR 124:142–190
Goodman LE (1971) The Epicurean ethic of M. b. Zakariya’ ar-Razi.
Studia Islamica 34:5–26
Goodman LE (1972) Razi’s psychology. Philos Forum 4:26–48
Abu¯ Bakr al-Ra¯zı¯, Muh:ammad ibn Zakarı¯ya¯ʾ (Rhazes) A
9
A

Goodman LE (1975) Razi’s myth of the fall of the soul: its function in his
philosophy. In: Hourani G (ed) Essays on Islamic philosophy and
science. Albany, pp 25–40
Goodman LE (1996) Muhammad ibn Zakariyya’ al-Razi. In: Nasr SH,
Leaman O (eds) History of Islamic philosophy. London, pp 198–215
Gutas D (1977) Notes and texts from Cairo mss. I. Addenda to P. Kraus’
edition of Abu Bakr al-Razi’s Tibb al-Ruhani. C. Moussa, Arabica
24:91–93
Heym G (1938) Al-Razi and alchemy. Ambix 1:184–191
Iskandar
AZ
(1975)
The
medical
bibliography
of
al-Razi.
In:
Hourani G (ed) Essays on Islamic philosophy and science. Albany,
pp 41–46
Mohaghegh M (1967) Notes on the ‘Spiritual Physic’ of al-Razi. Studia
Islamica 26:5–22
Mohaghegh M (1973) Razi’s Kita¯b al-‘ilm al-ila¯hı¯ and the ﬁve eternals.
Abr-Nahrain 13:16–23
Partington JR (1938) The chemistry of Razi. Ambix 1:192–196
Pines S (1953) Razi, critique de Galien. In: Actes du Septie`me Congre`s
International d’Histoire des Sciences. Jerusalem, Hermann, Paris,
pp 480–487
Pormann PE (2008) Medical methodology and hospital practice: the case
of fourth-/tenth-century Baghdad. The Warburg Institute-Nino
Aragno Editore, London-Turin, pp 95–118
al-Ra¯zı¯ Abu¯ H˙ a¯tim (1977) Aʿla¯m al-nubuwwa, ed. al-Sawy S (English intr.
Nasr SH). Tehran (extracts trans. Brion F (1986) Socie´ Internationale
pour l’e´tude de la Philosophie Medievale, Bull Philos Me´die´v
28:134–162)
Rosenthal F (1978) Ar-Razi on the hidden illness. Bull Hist Med L II
52:45–60
Ruska (1922) Al-Razi als Chemiker. Zeitschrift fu¨r Chemie 719–722
Said H (1976) Razi and treatment through nutritive correction. Hamdard
Islamicus 19:113–120
Sezgin F Geschichte des arabischen Schriftenthums, Brill, III (1996), IV
(1996), V (1974), VI (1978) III, pp 274–294; IV, pp 275–282; V, p 282;
VI, pp 187–188; VII, p 160, pp 271–272
Stroumsa S (1999) Freethinkers of medieval Islam, chap 3. Brill, Leiden
Timkin O (1942) A medieval translation of Rhazes’ clinical observations.
Bull Hist Med 12:102–117
Urvoy D (2008) Abu¯ Bakr al-Ra¯zı¯ and Yah:ya¯ ibn ‘Adı¯. The Warburg
Institute-Nino Aragno Editore, London-Turin, pp 63–70
Abu¯ l-Baraka¯t al-Bag˙da¯dı¯
ROXANNE D. MARCOTTE
The University of Queensland
Australia
Abstract
In Baghdad of the ﬁrst half of the twelfth century,
Abu¯ al-Baraka¯t al-Bag˙da¯dı¯ not only gained notoriety
primarily as an accomplished physician, but also as
a resolutely independent philosopher of sorts. Collected
in his philosophical summa, the Book of Evidence, incisive
criticism of a number of Avicennan Peripatetic views
provides much novel philosophical insights into concepts
of space, motion and time, self-awareness, unity of
soul
and
intellect,
the
active
intellect,
and
God’s
knowledge.
Abu¯ l-Baraka¯t al-Bag˙da¯dı¯, also known as Hibat Alla¯h or
Ibn Malka, was born near Mosul into a Jewish family
around 1077. He settled in Baghdad where he was even-
tually allowed to study medicine with Abu¯ l-Hasan Sa‘ı¯d b.
Hibat Alla¯h (d. 1101). He remained on bad terms with the
famous Christian physician Ibn al-Tilmı¯dh (d. 1164), but
did manage to attract a number of medical students. As
a physician, al-Bag˙da¯dı¯ frequented the courts of Seljuq
sultans and the caliphs of Baghdad. The reason for his
alleged conversion to Islam, late in life, remains uncertain,
as does the date of his death (most probably in Baghdad):
some believe it to be after 1164, while in his eighties (or
nineties), but, according to the date on the colophon of
his Treatise on the Intellect, it could be sometime before
1157, or even as early as 1152, according to the Tatimmat
(written after c. 1165) of Bayhaqı¯ (d. 1169) (U¨ lken 1949).
While al-Bag˙da¯dı¯ dabbled rather informally in philos-
ophy, much of what we know derives from the three
volumes of his philosophical summa, the Book of Evidence
(Kita¯b al-Mu‘tabar, 1938–1939 [henceforth: KM]). He
composed the following works: an Arabic (in Hebrew
script) Commentary on the Ecclesiastes (before his conver-
sion) of which four passages have been edited, translated
into Hebrew, and analyzed (al-Bag˙da¯dı¯ 1964); an astro-
nomical work on the appearance of stars at night;
a Treatise on the Intellect (al-Bag˙da¯dı¯ 1980; Marcotte
2004); an Epistle on the Soul which has yet to be edited;
a Treatise on Predestination; and a number of medical
works, such as his Abridgment of Anatomy based on
Galen’s work, a pharmacological work, and Glosses on
Avicenna’s Laws of Medicine, that have not survived.
In his Commentary on the Ecclesiastes (12:9) and his
Book of Evidence, al-Bag˙da¯dı¯ writes that the process of
codiﬁcation of knowledge from oral traditions to written
‘‘esoteric’’ texts, and to texts written by unknowledgeable
individuals who attempt to explain and comment upon
those esoteric texts, corrupts the ‘‘truth’’ of the original
oral teachings.
The Book of Evidence, however, contains some of his
most penetrating insights (al-T˙ayyib 2004). In this work,
al-Bag˙da¯dı¯ reexamines earlier philosophical views on
logic, physics, and metaphysics. Throughout the work,
he applies systematically a ‘‘methodological doubt’’ (an
10 A
Abu¯ l-Baraka¯t al-Bag˙da¯dı¯

early version of Descartes methodological skepticism)
with which he subjects the views of the philosophers,
only including what he is able to ascertain with his own
personal ﬁndings and conclusions. He achieves this by
relying upon self-evident and a priori truths he uncovered
via un-Aristotelian a priori intuitions which he deems
capable of establishing more reliable and certain knowl-
edge. In the Book of Evidence, the importance of a priori
knowledge provides an overall unity to this collection of
personal notes (Pines 1979:96–108).
In logic, al-Bag˙da¯dı¯ remains an important witness,
together with Boethius, to the existence of a second Arabic
version of Themistius commentary on Aristotle’s Topics
(of which no Greek text has survived) distinct from the
one available to Averroes (Hasnawi 2004, 2007).
In physics, al-Bag˙da¯dı¯ introduces novel (often more
Platonic) views on space, motion, and time, some having
been upheld by Abu¯ Bakr al-Ra¯zı¯ (d. 930). Contrary to
prevalent Aristotelian positions, he upholds the impossi-
bility of conceiving of a limited space, the existence of
a three-dimensional space, and the existence of void,
by appealing to self-evident truths. Prime matter is asso-
ciated with the corporality of bodies as an extension
susceptible of being measured; in addition, earth is the
only one of the four elements to be constituted of
indivisible corpuscles (due to their solidity). Inspired
by Avicenna (and Philoponus), al-Bag˙da¯dı¯ develops
a theory of ‘‘violent inclination’’ which came to be
known in the West as the theory of impetus (Pines
1986). He also rejects the principle of Aristotelian dynam-
ics, that a constant force produces a uniform motion,
proposing the very modern idea that the progressive accel-
eration of a falling body is the result of the continuous
action of the principle of ‘‘natural inclination’’ found in
that body.
In psychology, al-Bag˙da¯dı¯ again places a priori knowl-
edge at the heart of his philosophical enquiries into
Avicenna’s hypothetical ‘‘suspended person’’ experiment
and the associated issues of self-awareness and conscious-
ness found in the latter’s Discussions. He afﬁrms the pri-
mary certitude of one’s own self-awareness, independent
of one’s knowledge through any of the bodily faculties
traditionally associated with the external and internal
faculties. He, thus, develops a novel epistemic notion of
a priori self-awareness (tapping into Neoplatonic views)
that replaces the epistemic functions associated with
those faculties at the heart of Avicenna’s psychology. The
soul’s self-apprehension through itself-awareness pro-
vides it with ‘‘apodictic’’ certainty and access to evident
truths (Arnaldez 1987; al-Khalifı¯ 1995). The soul’s self-
awareness also provides an a priori proof of the soul’s
independence from the body and its immortality after
death.
In his (postconversion) Treatise on the Intellect,
al-Bag˙da¯dı¯ reviews a variety of philological, scriptural,
exegetical,
theological,
and
philosophical
theories
(Marcotte 2004). In his Book of Evidence, he discards in
more detail the Avicennan Peripatetic distinction between
soul and intellect and proposes a theory of the ‘‘unity’’ of
the soul (KM, 2:413–417), an idea that appealed to people
like Fakhr al-Dı¯n al-Ra¯zı¯(d. 1209) (see the De anima of his
Eastern Investigations) and Shiha¯b al-Dı¯n al-Suhrawardı¯
(d. 1191), the founder of Illuminationist Avicennism (see
his Philosophy of Illumination). Conscious of its own intel-
lectual activities, the soul is conscious of the internal
functions that procure a priori and certain knowledge.
The ensuing nominalist position does away with the
forms ‘‘cognized by the intellect,’’ now that universals
are apprehended by the soul/mind as mere mental forms
without any external reality (Pines 1936:82–83; Davidson
1992:154–161).
In the metaphysics of the Book of Evidence, again
a priori knowledge reveals itself to be pivotal. An a
priori apperception of time (not space) takes precedence
over the various Peripatetic notions of time. No longer
a measure of motion, time becomes a measure of the
soul’s own a priori cognition of time ‘‘by, and together
with’’ its original apperception of its own self. Time
is incorporated into a metaphysic of being. Sharing
much with Bergson’s concept of time, his a priori notion
of time becomes an aspect of all existents, including the
being of God (Pines 1979:289–296; Abu¯ Sa‘da 1993;
Saydabı¯ 1996).
Al-Bag˙da¯dı¯ takes up neither the dominant Peripatetic
theory of effusion or emanation (Haidar 1974) nor the
theory of one single active intellect, preferring to postulate
a theory of ‘‘successive divine volitions’’ (KM, 3:157–158,
167). This introduces a plurality, preeternal or coming
into being in time, of causes. The ﬁrst volition becomes
an attribute of the divine essence that created the ﬁrst
being, the highest of the angels upon which al-Bag˙da¯dı¯
can develop his ‘‘angelology’’: an indeterminate number of
‘‘spiritual angels’’ become active ‘‘supernal’’ beings that
now function as active principles, an idea that reoccurs
in the works of al-Suhrawardı¯ (Pines 1979:302–319;
Davidson 1992:154–161; Corbin 1971:299). Following
Avicenna, al-Bag˙da¯dı¯ provides a proof from contingency
of the existence of God, who remains the necessary exis-
tent. Essential attributes, such as wisdom, power, and
knowledge, belong to God’s essence; as for God’s
Abu¯ l-Baraka¯t al-Bag˙da¯dı¯ A
11
A

knowledge, it is manifold, the knowledge of particulars
resting on God’s own a priori knowledge of the world
(Pines 1979:310–315).
As for al-Bag˙da¯dı¯’s legacy, we know that his Commen-
tary on the Ecclesiastes continued to be copied and studied
in the Jewish circles of Baghdad, in spite of the fact that its
author was said to have converted to Islam. In his philo-
sophical and theological controversies with Maimonides
and Yosef ben Shimeon of Cairo over resurrection, Samuel
ben Eli, the Gaon of Baghdad quotes the philosophers’
view regarding the soul from al-Bag˙da¯dı¯’s Book of Evidence
(Stroumsa
1998,
1996).
Al-Bag˙da¯dı¯’s
original,
yet
unsystematic reevaluation of a number of philosophical
views did not, however, have any successor, save perhaps
Fakhr al-Dı¯n al-Ra¯zı¯, whose own critique of Avicennan
Peripateticism is said to owe much to al-Bag˙da¯dı¯’s work,
as
does
certain
views
of
the
proponents
of
the
Illuminationist tradition, such as al-Suhrawardı¯, Ibn
Kammu¯na (d. 1284), and S˙adr al-Dı¯n al-Shı¯ra¯zı¯ (d.
1640), also known as Mulla¯ S˙adra¯ (al-Khalifı¯ 2008).
Some of his views are also mentioned by Nas:ı¯r al-Dı¯n al-
T˙u¯sı¯ (d. 1274), Najm al-Dı¯n al-Qazwı¯nı¯ al-Ka¯tibı¯ (d. 1276)
and his fourteenth century commentator, and by Ibn
Taymiyya (d. 1328). From the late 1930 to the early 1960s,
Pines (1979, 1986) pioneered the study of al-Bag˙da¯dı¯’s
original critique of the philosophical tradition; from the
early 1990s onward, authors like Abu¯ Sa‘da, al-Khalifı¯,
Saydabı¯, Stroumsa, al-T˙ayyib, Hasnaoui and Marcotte
have rekindled interest in his philosophical work.
See also: ▶Arabic Philosophical Texts, Jewish Translations
of ▶Aristotelianism in the Greek, Latin, Syriac, Arabic,
and Hebrew Traditions ▶Boethius ▶Ibn Rushd, Muh˙am-
mad ibn Ah˙mad al-H˙ afı¯d (Averroes) ▶Ibn Sı¯na¯, Abu¯ ʿAlı¯
(Avicenna) ▶Natural Philosophy, Arabic ▶Philoponus,
Arabic ▶Philosophical Theology, Jewish ▶Philosophy,
Arabic ▶Plato, Arabic ▶Plotinus, Arabic ▶Porphyry,
Arabic ▶Proclus, Arabic ▶Themistius, Arabic ▶Trans-
lations from Greek into Arabic
Bibliography
Primary Sources
al-Bag˙da¯dı¯ Abu¯ l-Baraka¯t (1938–1939) Kita¯b al-Mu‘tabar, ed. Yaltkaya S¸.
3 vols. Osmania Pub., Hyderabad [see Sulayma¯n al-Nadwı¯’s study
in al-Mu‘tabar, vol 3, pp 230–252; cf. S¸erefttin’s incomplete
Turkish trans with intro of the Metaphysics of al-Mu‘tabar. Istanbul,
1932]
al-Bag˙da¯dı¯ Abu¯ l-Baraka¯t (1964) Commentaries on the Ecclesiastes, ed.
Pines S. Le-h:eqer Perusho shel Abu’l-Barakat al-Baghdadi ‘al Sefer
Qohelet.’ Tarbiz 33:198–213 [four passages of the Commentary
edited with Hebrew translation and analysis; reproduced in Bein
Makshevet Yisrael ve Makshevet Ha-‘Amim, Jerusalem, 1977, pp
68–83; cf. Poznanski S (1913) Z Hebr Bibliogr 33–36]
al-Bag˙da¯dı¯ Abu¯ l-Baraka¯t (1980) Kita¯b Sah:ı¯h: Adillat al-Naql fı¯ Ma¯hiyyat
al-‘Aql, ed. al-T˙ayyib A. Un traite´ d’al-Baghdadi sur l’intellect.
Annales islamologiques 16:127–147
Secondary Sources
Abu¯ Sa‘da MH (1993) al-Wuju¯d wa l-Khulu¯d fı¯ Falsafat Abı¯ al-Baraka¯t
al-Bag˙da¯dı¯. Faculty of Arts, Asiout University, Cairo
Arnaldez R (1987) La doctrine de l’aˆme dans la philosophie d’Abuˆ’l-
Barakaˆt al-Baghdaˆdıˆ. Studia Islamica 66:105–112
Corbin H (1971) En Islam iranien; aspects spirituels et philosophiques II.
Sohrawardıˆ et les platoniciens de Perse. Gallimard, Paris
Davidson HA (1992) Alfarabi, Avicenna, and Averroes on intellect.
Oxford University Press, Oxford
Haidar A (1974) La the´orie de l’e´manation chez Avicenne, al-Baghdadi et
Sohrawardi. PhD dissertation, Paris
Hasnawi AN (2004) Taxinomie topique: la classiﬁcation the´miste´enne des
lieux chez Boe`ce, Averroe`s et Abuˆ al-Barakaˆt al-Baghdaˆdıˆ. In:
Arnzen R, Thielmann J (eds) Words, texts and concepts cruising
the Mediterranean Sea. Peeters, Leuven, pp 245–248
Hasnawi A (2007) Boe`ce, Averroe`s et Abuˆ al-Barakaˆt al-Baghdaˆdıˆ,
te´moins des e´crits de The´mistius sur les Topiques d’Aristote. Arabic
Sci Philos 12:203–265 [excerpts translated into French]
al-Khalı¯fı¯ A (2008) Naqd Abı¯ al-Baraka¯t al-Bag˙da¯dı¯ li-Naz˙ariyyat al-S˙u¯ra
lada¯
al-Mashsha¯’iyya
al-Isla¯miyya wa
Atharuhu
fı¯ l-Madrasa
al-Ishra¯qiyya. AFKAR Journal of Aqidah and Islamic Thought
9:185–222
al-KhelaiﬁA (1995) The psychology of Abu al-Barakaˆt al-Baghdaˆdıˆ. PhD
dissertation, University of Manchester
Marcotte RD (2004) La conversion tardive d’un philosophe: Abu¯ al-
Baraka¯t al-Baghda¯dı¯ (mort vers 545/1150) sur ‘L’Intellect et sa
quiddite´.’ Documenti e Studi Sulla Tradizione Filosoﬁca Medievale
15:201–226
Pines S (1936) Beitra¨ge zur islamischen Atomenlehre. Gra¨fenhainichen,
Gedruckt bei A. Hein GmbH, Berlin
Pines S (1979) The collected works of Shlomo Pines, 5 vols, vol 1: Studies
in Abu¯ l-Baraka¯t al-Baghda¯dı¯. Physics and Metaphysics. Magnes/
Brill, Jeusalem/Leiden [contains ﬁve major studies]
Pines S (1986) The collected works of Shlomo Pines, 5 vols, vol 2: Studies
in Arabic versions of Greek texts and in mediaeval science. Magnes/
Brill, Jerusalem/Leiden [contains two major studies]
Saydabı¯ JR (1996) Abu¯ al-Baraka¯t al-Bag˙da¯dı¯ wa- Falsafatuhu al-Ila¯hiyya:
Dira¯sa li-Mawqiﬁhi al-Naqdı¯ min Falsafat Ibn Sı¯na¯. Maktabat
Wahba, Cairo
Stroumsa S (1996) Compassion for wisdom: the attitude of some medi-
eval Arab philosophers towards the codiﬁcation of philosophy.
Bochumer philosophisches Jahrbuch fu¨r Antike und Mittelalter
1:39–55
Stroumsa S (1998) Twelfth century concepts of soul and body: the
Maimonidean
controversy
in
Baghdad.
In:
Baumgarten
AI,
Assmann J, Stroumsa G (eds) Self, soul and body in religious expe-
rience. Brill, Leiden, pp 313–334 (cf. her earlier work (1993) On
the Maimonidean controversy in the East: the role of Abu
al-Barakat
al-Baghdadi.
In:
Ben-Shammai
H
(ed)
Hebrew
and Arabic studies in Honour of Joshua Blau. Tel Aviv/Jerusalem,
pp 415–422; in Hebrew)
al-T˙ayyib A (2004) al-Ja¯nib al-Naqdı¯ fı¯ Falsafat Abı¯ al-Baraka¯t al-Bag˙da¯dı¯
min al-Falsafa al-Mashsha¯’iyya. Da¯r al-Shuru¯q, Cairo
U¨ lken HZ (1949) Un philosophe de l’islam: Ebu-l-Berekat Bagdadi. In:
Beth EW, Pos HJ (eds) Proceeding of the 10th international congress
of philosophy, 1948. North-Holland, Amsterdam (cf. his Turkish
work (1949) Ebu ‘l-Bereqaˆt Bagdaˆdıˆ (1076–1166). Felsefe Arkivi 2.3)
12 A
Abu¯ l-Baraka¯t al-Bag˙da¯dı¯

Abu¯ Bishr Matta¯ ibn Yu¯nus
CECILIA MARTINI BONADEO
Dipartimento di Filosoﬁa
Universita` di Padova
Padova
Italy
Abstract
In tenth-century Baghdad, during the decline of the
ʿAbba¯sid caliphate, a circle of Christian and Muslim
physicians, philosophers, and translators grew up. They
shared a deep and genuine interest in Greek scientiﬁc and
medical knowledge and, following the tradition of the
school of Alexandria, they devoted themselves to the
study of Peripatetic philosophy through Arabic transla-
tions from Syriac. In their opinion, education should be
grounded on this philosophy. School activity consisted of
a teacher, his home, books, colleagues, pupils, and occa-
sional visitors. On special occasions, open discussions
were organized for huge crowds, often in the librarians’
quarter. The principal promoter of this circle was Abu¯
Bishr Matta¯ ibn Yu¯nus.
He was a Nestorian Christian who had been educated in
the Syriac monastic school of the convent of Ma¯r Ma¯rı¯ at
Dayr Qunna¯. Among his teachers, there were Christians
who were the last followers of the Alexandrian school of
philosophy: we know from the Kita¯b al-Fihrist by Ibn
al-Nadı¯m (written around 990) that Abu¯ Bishr Matta¯ ibn
Yu¯nus read the Posterior Analytics under the guidance of
Abu¯ Yah:ya¯ al-Marwazı¯ and that he had as a teacher Abu¯
Ish:a¯q Ibra¯hı¯m Quwayra¯, a commentator of the Aristote-
lian Organon. He studied also under the mutakallim Abu¯
Ah:mad al-H˙ usayn ibn Ish:a¯q ibn Karnı¯b; Ibn al-Nadı¯m
mentions in the Fihrist the interest for natural philosophy
of this mutakallim.
During the caliphate of al-Ra¯d˙ı¯, Abu¯ Bishr Matta¯ came
to Baghdad where he revived the Aristotelian studies
through his translations, revealing to the Arabic readers
an Aristotle much more complete than the one they had
hitherto known. In particular, he translated for the ﬁrst
time into Arabic, from Syriac, the Posterior Analytics, not
read in the Syriac monastic schools, possibly for dogmatic
reasons (the Christians stopped at Prior Analytics I, 7):
with this text, he offered to his readers the Peripatetic
tradition of logic as a methodology of rational discourse.
The Posterior Analytics or, in Arabic, Kita¯b al-Burha¯n
(Book of Demonstration) provided a paradigm for the
subsequent generations of fala¯sifa ‘‘with a coherent system
of deduction and demonstration, comprising all levels of
rational activity, and serving as a guide for the division
and hierarchical classiﬁcation of the sciences, leading up
to the First Philosophy’’ (Endress 1990).
Besides the translation of the Posterior Analytics, Ibn
al-Nadı¯m mentions, among Abu¯ Bishr Matta¯ ibn Yu¯nus’
translations, Alexander of Aphrodisias’ commentary on
the Posterior Analytics and Themistius’ commentary of
the last three books of Prior Analytics and of Posterior
Analytics, the revision of the older version of the Sophistici
elenchi, the Poetics (translated in Arabic for the ﬁrst time),
the De caelo and Themistius’ paraphrase of it, the De
generatione et corruptione with the commentaries of
Alexander and Olympiodorus, the Meteorologica with
Olympiodorus’ commentary, Book Lambda of Aristotle’s
Metaphysics with Alexander’s commentary as well as
Themistius’ paraphrase, and ﬁnally Themistius’ commen-
tary on the Physics. Only the translations of the Posterior
Analytics, Poetics, and Book Lambda of Aristotle’s Meta-
physics have survived. Besides, he wrote his own commen-
taries on Aristotelian works, for example, the Categories.
We may assume from the manuscripts – as the MSS Paris,
Bibliothe`que Nationale, ar. 2346 and Leiden, Universi-
teitsbiblioteek,
or. 583 containing, respectively,
Ibn
Suwa¯r’s ‘‘edition’’ of the Organon and Ibn al-Samh:’s ‘‘edi-
tion’’ of the Physics – that these commentaries were more
or less in the form of marginal notes or passages placed
between the lemmata of text.
Abu¯ Bishr Matta¯ won the fame of the logician of his
time, and for this reason he was involved in a dispute
against the champion of the traditional Islamic sciences
of his time, the grammarian Abu¯ Sa‘ı¯d al-Sı¯ra¯fı¯, who, on
the contrary, reacted against the claim of Greek logic to
universal truth, and defended the science of grammar
(al-nah:w), considered by the traditionalists the propae-
deutics to the religious sciences and by the same token to
the truth of Revelation. This dispute took place in Bagh-
dad in 938 in front of the vizier Ibn al-Fura¯t and is
described by Abu¯ H˙ ayya¯n al-Tawh:ı¯dı¯ (d. 1023?) in the
Kita¯b al-Imta¯‘ wa-l-mu’a¯nasa (I, 108–128) as reported to
him by Abu¯ Sa‘ı¯d al-Sı¯ra¯fı¯and the grammarian ‘Alı¯ibn ‘I¯sa¯
al-Rumma¯nı¯.
Abu¯ Bishr Matta¯ ibn Yu¯nus considers logic as the tool
to distinguish ‘‘truth from falsehood, veracity from lying,
good from bad, proof from sophism, doubt from cer-
tainty’’ (al-Imta¯‘, I, 108) and, in so far as it is the science
of demonstration, as the basis of the entire building of
learning. He assumes that logic inquires into the intelligi-
bles and considers the meanings of the things, that are
identical for all men and nations, at variance with
Abu¯ Bishr Matta¯ ibn Yu¯nus A
13
A

grammar, that considers the utterances that a natural
language uses to indicate the signiﬁcance of things.
For this reason, logic is more universal than grammar
and the Aristotelian logical texts in Arabic translation
provide the tool to know the truth about man, cosmos,
and God.
On his part, Abu¯ Sa‘ı¯d al-Sı¯ra¯fı¯ replies that no one
translation is able to transfer the meanings from a
language into another without confusing or at least chang-
ing them. For this reason, one can know the meaning of
things only remaining within the boundaries of his own
mother tongue. The logic was established according to
Greek language and its conventional usage, and it was
valid for Greek people: ‘‘Why must Turks, Indians,
Persians or Arabs take Greek as judge and arbiter?’’
(Imta¯‘, I, 112). There is no universal logic as there is no
universal grammar or language.
Abu¯ Sa‘ı¯d al-Sı¯ra¯fı¯ focuses not only on the fact that
Abu¯ Bishr Matta¯ ibn Yu¯nus does not know Greek, as he
translates from Syriac, but also on the fact that he does not
know even Arabic. Abu¯ Sa‘ı¯d al-Sı¯ra¯fı¯ asks him to explain
the use of the conjunction wa, but Abu¯ Bishr Matta¯ ibn
Yu¯nus replies:
"
This is grammar and I have not studied grammar. For the
Logician has no need for it, while the grammarian is very
much in need of logic. For logic investigates the meaning,
while grammar investigates the utterance. If, therefore,
the logician comes across the utterance, this is a mere
accident. Likewise, it is by sheer accident that the gram-
marian stumbles upon the meaning. And the meaning is
nobler than utterance, and the utterance, humbler than
the meaning (Imta¯‘, I, 114).
The debate about the merits of logic and grammar was
reopened by the two more prominent disciples of Abu¯
Bishr Matta¯ ibn Yu¯nus: Abu¯ Nas:r al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ and Yah:ya¯
ibn ‘Adı¯, who tried to eventually harmonize Greek thought
and traditional learning: they were convinced of the pos-
sibility of presenting Aristotelian logic in genuine Arabic
speech.
See also: ▶al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, Abu¯ Nas:r ▶Ibn al-Samh: ▶Ibn
Suwa¯r (Ibn al-Khamma¯r) ▶al-Tawh:ı¯dı¯, Abu¯ H˙ ayya¯n
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Badawı¯ ‘Abd al-Rah:ma¯n (1948–1952) Mant:iq Arist:u¯, I–III. Da¯r al-kutub
al-mis:riyya, Cairo (Dira¯sa¯t isla¯miyya, 7; Da¯r al-qalam, al-Kuwait,
Beirut, 19802)
Tkatsch Jaroslaus (1928–1932) Die arabische U¨ besetzung der Poetik des
Aristoteles und die Grundlage der Kritik des griechischen Textes.
Akademie der Wissenschaften in Wien, Wien/Leipzig
Biographers
Ibn Abı¯ Us:aybi‘a (1882) ‘Uyu¯n al-anba¯’ fı¯ t:abaqa¯t al-at:ibba¯’. al-Mat:ba‘a¯t
al-wahabiyya, ed. Mu¨ller A. Cairo/Ko¨nigsberg
Ibn al-Nadı¯m (1871–1872) Kita¯b al-Fihrist, ed. Flu¨gel G, Roediger J,
Mu¨ller A. Vogel, Leipzig
Ibn al-Qift:ı¯ (1903) Ta’rı¯kh al-h:ukama¯’, ed. Lippert J. Dieterich’sche
Verlagsbuchhandlung, Leipzig
al-Mas‘u¯dı¯ Abu¯ l-H˙ asan ‘Alı¯ (1893) Kita¯b al-Tanbı¯h wa-l-Isshra¯f, ed. de
Goeje MJ. Brill, Leiden
al-Tawh:ı¯dı¯ Abu¯ H˙ ayya¯n (1939–1944) Kita¯b al-Imta¯‘ wa-l-mu’a¯nasa, ed.
Amı¯n A, al-Zayn A. Cairo
Z˙ ahı¯r al-Dı¯n al-Bayhaqı¯ (1994) Tatimmat s:iwa¯n al-h:ikma, ed. Rafı¯q
al-‘Ajam D. Da¯r al-Fikr al-Lubna¯nı¯, Beirut
Secondary Sources
Elamrani-Jamal A (1983) Logique aristote´licienne et grammaire arabe.
E´tude et documents. E´tudes musulmanes, 26. Vrin, Paris
Endress G (1986) Grammatik und Logik. Arabische Philologie und
griechische Philosophie im Widerstreit. Gru¨ner, Amsterdam
Endress G (1990) The defence of reason: the plea for philosophy in the
religious community. Zeitschrift fu¨r Geschichte der Arabisch-
Islamischen Wissenschaften 6:1–49
Ga¨tje H, Schoeler G (1980) Averroes’ Schriften zur Logik. Der arabische
Text
der
zweiten
Analytiken
im
Grossen
Kommentar
des
Averroes. Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenla¨ndischen Gesellschaft
130:556–585
Hugonnard-Roche H (1993) Remarques sur la tradition arabe de l’Orga-
non, d’apre`s le manuscrit Paris, Bibliothe`que Nationale, ar. 2346. In:
Glosses and commentaries on Aristotelian logical texts. The Syriac,
Arabic and medieval Latin traditions, ed. Burnett Ch. The Warburg
Institute, London, pp 19–28
Kraemer JL (1986) Humanism in the renaissance of Islam. The cultural
revival during the Buyid Age. Brill, Leiden
Mahdi M (1970) Language and logic in classical Islam. Logic in classical
Islamic culture, ed. Grunebaum GE. Harrassowitz, Wiesbaden, pp
51–83
Margoliouth DS (1905) The discussion between Abu¯ Bisˇr Matta¯ and Abu¯
Sa‘ı¯d al-Sı¯ra¯fı¯ on the merits of logic and grammar. J R Asiat Soc G B
Irel 79–110
Peters FE (1968) Aristoteles Arabus. The Oriental translations and com-
mentaries on the Aristotelian corpus. Brill, Leiden
Abu¯ l-Faraj ibn al-ʿlbrı¯
(Barhebraeus)
SAMUEL NOBLE
Yale University
New Haven, CT
USA
Abstract
Barhebraeus was the leading Syriac philosopher and man
of letters in the thirteenth century. While not usually
14 A
Abu¯ l-Faraj ibn al-ʿlbrı¯ (Barhebraeus)

credited with being a particularly original thinker, he had
an encyclopedic command both of Arabic and Islamic
thought, especially that of Avicenna and al-G˙ aza¯lı¯, as well
as of the Greek tradition as it was preserved in Syriac.
Writing during the period of great social upheaval caused
by the Mongol invasion of the Near East, he sought to
create compendia in the Syriac language of philosophical
and scientiﬁc knowledge as it was available to him. His
most important work, the Butyrum sapientiae, was
modeled on Avicenna’s Shifa¯’, following it closely in form
and content. It is not simply a translation into Syriac of the
Shifa¯’, however, as Barhebraeus in many places synthesizes
Avicenna’s thought with the Syriac translations of Aris-
totle and other Greek philosophers. His shorter works the
Sermo sapientiae and the Mercatura mercaturarum serve
as primers to Aristotelian–Avicennan thought in Syriac. In
addition to his purely philosophical pursuits, he was also
a bishop of the Syriac Orthodox (sometimes called ‘‘Jaco-
bite’’) Church. In this capacity, he wrote extensive theo-
logical works which also discuss philosophical questions,
occasionally in ways contradictory to the positions held
in his philosophical writings. Despite this, Barhebraeus
argued that philosophy and theology were ways of
discussing the same truths using different vocabularies.
Barhebraeus (Abu¯ l-Faraj ibn al-ʿlbrı¯) was born in 1225 or
1226 in Melitene in southeastern Anatolia. His father was
a physician named Aaron; however, the belief of earlier
scholars that he was of a Jewish background is now gen-
erally considered to be unlikely. In 1243 or 1244, his family
relocated to Antioch on account of Mongol attacks. It is
possible that during his stay in Antioch, he took monastic
vows. Some time after this, he studied medicine and logic
with a Nestorian teacher in Tripoli and may have worked
in Damascus at the hospital founded there by Nu¯r al-Dı¯n
al-Zanjı¯. In 1246, he was ordained bishop of the town of
Gubros near Malatya. Shortly thereafter, he was trans-
ferred to the see of Laqabin and was subsequently made
bishop of Aleppo. He was soon ousted from his position in
Aleppo due to ecclesial politics and was only able to obtain
reinstatement in 1258. In 1260, Aleppo was taken by the
Mongols under Hu¨legu¨, and Barhebraeus went to Hu¨legu¨’s
camp to personally appeal for the safety of his ﬂock but
was brieﬂy imprisoned in Qalʿat al-Najm, east of Aleppo.
In 1263, he was again found at the Mongol court serving as
a physician to Hu¨legu¨ along with another Syriac Orthodox
cleric. In 1264, Barhebraeus was elected maphrian, the
Syriac Orthodox exarch in the territory of the former
Sasanian Empire and second highest ofﬁce in that church
after the patriarch. As maphrian, Barhebraeus had his
residence at the monastery of Mar Mattai near Mosul,
though he traveled frequently. In addition to spending
time in Mosul and Baghdad, he also went a number of
times to Tabriz and Maragha in the region of Azerbaijan,
where the Mongol court was located. He died in Maragha
on July 29 or 30, 1286, and was buried in Mar Mattai.
Barhebraeus was a proliﬁc writer on a wide variety of
subjects, including biblical exegesis, canon law, grammar,
history, medicine, mysticism, and belles lettres in addition
to his philosophical works. Especially noteworthy are his
historical works, as he provides a contemporary account
of the Mongol conquest of Iraq and Syria, and his mystical
writings, modeled on those of al-G˙ aza¯lı¯. In addition to his
original writings, he translated the Isha¯ra¯t wa-l-tanbı¯ha¯t of
Avicenna into Syriac.
The three chief philosophical works of Barhebraeus,
the Butyrum sapientiae, the Sermo sapientiae, and the
Mercatura mercaturarum (or Tractatus tractatuum) all
expound the Aristotelian–Avicennan philosophical tradi-
tion, but at different levels of detail. According to Janssens
(1937), the three works constitute a graded curriculum
progressing from a summary introduction in the Sermo to
a full exposition in the Butyrum. It is worth noting, how-
ever, that both the Sermo and the Mercatura do go into
some questions, particularly of logic, in more detail than
does the Butyrum.
The Sermo sapientiae is divided into four chapters,
each of which is divided into sections. The ﬁrst chapter,
eight sections on logic, covers the material of the Isagoge
and the six books of the Organon in various degrees of
detail. The second chapter includes thirty-two sections on
the natural sciences. The third chapter, thirty-four sec-
tions on metaphysics, deals with proofs for the existence of
a necessary being, the problem of divine attributes, the
origin of the world, and the abstract intellect. The fourth
chapter, in thirty sections, also deals with questions of
metaphysics, but from the perspective of their relationship
to theological questions. It discusses providence, evil,
punishment and reward in the afterlife, the relationship
of the rational soul to the heavenly souls, prophecy, and
the Resurrection.
The Mercatura mercaturarum is divided into three
‘‘treatises’’ on logic, natural sciences, and metaphysics.
Though it is sometimes described as an abridgment of
the Butyrum, it is in fact the ﬁrst of Barhebraeus’
three main philosophical works to have been written
(Takahashi 2006). According to Takahashi, the Mercatura
was likely modeled on the Maqa¯s:id al-fala¯sifa of al-G˙ aza¯lı¯,
which was itself based on the Da¯nesh-Na¯me-i ʿAlla¯’ı¯
of Avicenna.
The most extensive of Barhebraeus’ philosophical
works and the last of them to be written, the Butyrum
Abu¯ l-Faraj ibn al-ʿlbrı¯ (Barhebraeus) A
15
A

sapientiae was modeled on Avicenna’s Kita¯b al-Shifa¯’ and
to a large extent follows it in its content, though it also
draws on other Arabic and Syriac sources. It is made up of
four parts: logic, natural science, metaphysics, and practi-
cal philosophy, each of which is divided into ‘‘chapters,’’
‘‘sections,’’ and ‘‘theories.’’ This plan of organization
represents a signiﬁcant departure from the Shifa¯’ in that
it completely omits that work’s section on mathematics
while it adds a more detailed section on practical philos-
ophy. In this way, the Butyrum stays closer to the content
of the Aristotelian corpus.
In composing the Butyrum, Barhebraeus would gen-
erally select two sources to form the basis of each section.
He would use one main source, usually the relevant sec-
tion of the Shifa¯’, and harmonize and supplement it with
material from another source, usually from the Greco-
Syriac tradition. For example, the ﬁrst section of the
Butyrum, on logic, closely follows the Shifa¯’ in its method
of covering the material of the Isagoge and the Organon but
Barhebraeus also made use of the Aristotelian texts them-
selves from Syriac translations. In the section on natural
science, he supplements the material from the Shifa¯’ by
making much use of the Aristotelian Compendium of
Nicolaus of Damascus, which is largely lost in the original
Greek. In the section on practical philosophy, a subject
given little attention by Avicenna, Barhebraeus models his
writing on the Akhla¯q-i Nas:ı¯rı¯ of Nas:ı¯r al-Dı¯n al-T˙u¯sı¯,
a contemporary whom he likely met during his visits to
Maragha.
In addition to his purely philosophical writings, two of
Barhebraeus’ theological works contain much material of
philosophical interest. The Candelabrum sanctuarii is an
extended exposition of the Christian faith according to the
scholastic method: each problem of doctrine is stated,
a solution is provided and supported by biblical and
patristic quotations, and objections are raised and
responses given. The much shorter Liber radiorum dis-
cusses many of the same theological questions in a more
abbreviated format.
As Janssens (1937) observed, there is a noticeable lack
of
consistency
between
certain
positions
taken by
Barhebraeus in his philosophical works and those he
puts forth in his theological works. For example, in the
Sermo sapientiae, he states that the brain is the center of
the animal faculties, while in the Candelabrum he claims
that it is the heart. Likewise, he explains in the Sermo that
the celestial spheres are not composed of the elements
which form the sublunar world, while in the Candelabrum
the entire universe is composed of the same elements.
Notably, he also implies support for belief in the eternity
of the world in the Sermo despite explicitly condemning
this same theory in his theological works.
These discrepancies between different works by
Barhebraeus can likely be explained by his methodology
and
variations
in
his
audience.
In
his
writings,
Barhebraeus was not so much attempting to provide his
own doctrine as he was attempting to make available in
Syriac compendia of the knowledge available in his time.
Thus, in the Candelabrum and the Radiorum which he
called his ‘‘ecclesiastical’’ treatises, he used what was avail-
able in theological sources for a churchly audience, while
in his philosophical works he compiled and synthesized
various sources from the Aristotelian tradition as they
were available to him. On the most central points of
philosophy, however, Barhebraeus tried to demonstrate
the essential correspondence between philosophical and
theological concepts. Thus, he sees the necessary being as
equivalent to God the Father, the First Intellect to the Son,
the Active Intellect to the Holy Sprit, and the abstract
intellects to the angels.
Barhebraeus’ inﬂuence on later philosophy is rather
limited due to the sharp decline in Syriac literary activity
in the generations immediately following his life. While the
Mongol conquest had initially encouraged hope among
Syriac Christians that they would be freed from Muslim
rule, the conversion of the Ilkhanid ruler Gha¯za¯n to Islam
in 1295 led to further marginalization of Syriac language
and culture. On the other hand, Barhebraeus’ works pro-
vide a comprehensive picture of the intellectual world of
the Near East of the thirteenth century and his efforts at
providing an updated Syriac vocabulary for expressing
contemporary thought served as inspiration for literary
revivals of Syriac in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries.
See also: ▶al-G˙ aza¯lı¯, Abu¯ H˙ a¯mid Muh:ammad ▶Ibn Sı¯na¯,
Abu¯ ʿAlı¯ (Avicenna) ▶Nas:ı¯r al-Dı¯n al-T˙u¯sı¯
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Grafﬁn Franc¸ois (1957) Le Cande´labre du sanctuaire de Gre´goire
Abou’lfaradj dit Barhebraeus. Troisie`me base: de la The´ologie.
Firmin-Didot, Paris
Janssens Herman F (1937) L’Entretien de la Sagesse: Introduction aux
œuvres de Bar Hebraeus. Librairie E. Droz, Paris
Joosse N Peter (2004) A Syriac encyclopedia of Aristotelian philosophy:
Barhebraeus. Butyrum Sapientiae. Book of ethics, economy, and
politics. Brill, Leiden
Takahashi
Hidemi
(2004)
Aristotelian
meteorology
in
Syriac:
Barhebraeus. Butyrum Sapientae. Book of mineralogy and meteo-
rology. Brill, Leiden
Watt John W (2005) Aristotelian rhetoric in Syriac: Barhebraeus.
Butyrum Sapientiae. Book of rhetoric. Brill, Leiden
16 A
Abu¯ l-Faraj ibn al-ʿlbrı¯ (Barhebraeus)

Secondary Sources
Borbone PG (2004) Barhebraeus e Juwayni: un cronista siro e la sua fonte
persiana. Egitto e Vicino Oriente 27:121–144
Furlani G (1934) Di tre scritti in lingua siriaca de Barhebreo sull’ anima.
Rivista degli Studi Orientali 14:284–308
Takahashi H (2003) The reception of Ibn Sı¯na¯ in Syriac: the case of
Gregory Barhebraeus, in Reisman David (ed) Before and after Avi-
cenna. Proceedings of the ﬁrst conference of the Avicenna study
group. Brill, Leiden, pp 249–281
Takahashi H (2005) Barhebraeus: a bio-bibliography. Gorgias Press,
Piscataway
Zonta M (1992) Fonti greche e orientali dell’ Economia di Bar-Hebraeus
nell’ opera ‘‘La crema della scienza.’’ Instituto Universitario
Orientale, Naples
Abu¯ Sulayma¯n al-Sijista¯nı¯
al-Mant:iqı¯
EMILY J. COTTRELL
Department for Religious Studies
Leiden University
Leiden
The Netherlands
Abstract
Abu¯ Sulayma¯n Muh:ammad ibn T˙ a¯hir ibn Bahra¯m al-
Sijista¯nı¯ (also: al-Sijzı¯) was a philosopher and a logician
(mant:iqı¯). He is thought to have been born in Sijista¯n
during the ﬁrst quarter of the tenth century and to have
died in Baghdad during the last quarterof the tenth century.
He succeeded Yah:ya¯ ibn ‘Adı¯ as a head of the Aristotelian
School of Baghdad. Seemingly, he never engaged in system-
atic teaching, but his philosophical circle became famous
during his lifetime as it was the object of recorded sessions
by one of the most important men of letters of tenth-
century Baghdad, Abu¯ H˙ ayya¯n al-Tawh:ı¯dı¯.
Biographical data about Abu¯ Sulayma¯n al-Sijista¯nı¯’s back-
ground are scarce, but according to his name, he must
have been born in Sijista¯n (or Sı¯sta¯n), in eastern Iran, at an
unknown date (ﬁrst quarter of the tenth century ?). There,
he was close to the Saffarid king Abu¯ Ja‘far ibn Banawayh
(r. 311/923 to 352/963). J. Kraemer (following M. Qazvı¯nı¯,
who pointed at the important information preserved in
Abu¯
H˙ ayya¯n al-Tawh:ı¯dı¯’s Muqa¯basa¯t (Enlightments))
established that he must have settled in Baghdad before
327/939, when he was asked to give an horoscope for ‘Abd
al-‘Azı¯z ibn Nuba¯ta. Al-Sijista¯nı¯ was by then probably in
contact with ‘Alı¯ibn Yah:ya¯ ibn al-Munajjim – a member of
an important family of scholars of Iranian descent who
served the ʿAbba¯sid – who was also asked to give his pre-
dictions about the child.
In Baghdad, al-Sijista¯nı¯ studied with the Christians
Yah:ya¯ ibn ‘Adı¯ (d. 363/974) and maybe with Abu¯ Bishr
Matta¯ ibn Yu¯nus (d. 328/940), whom only the late bio-
bibliographer Ibn al-Qift:ı¯mentions, while his relationship
with Yah:ya¯ ibn ‘Adı¯ is documented by several extracts of
conversations between him and al-Sijista¯nı¯ recorded in
Tawhı¯dı¯’s works, as well as by references in the works of
Yah:ya¯ ibn ‘Adı¯ (see Kraemer 1986:25, 102 and Khalı¯fa¯t
1988:56). Sijista¯nı¯ was to succeed Yah:ya¯ ibn ‘Adı¯ as the
head of the ‘‘School of Baghdad’’ (see Sezgin et al. 2000)
and high-ranking personalities seem to have been visiting
him. This Aristotelian school of philosophy in Baghdad
kept alive the tradition of lectures and commentaries on the
Greek philosophical corpus, in the tradition of what had
been practiced in Athens, Alexandria, Rome, Antioch, etc.
From an unknown date, al-Sijista¯nı¯ beneﬁted from the
protection of the Buyid king and patron of scholars ‘Ad˙ud
al-Dawla (b. 324/936, d. 372/983), but it is not clear where
Abu¯ Sulayma¯n al-Sijista¯nı¯ and ‘Ad˙ud al-Dawla ﬁrst met.
‘Ad˙ud al-Dawla had succeeded his uncle ‘Ima¯d al-Dawla as
the ruler of Fa¯rs at the age of 13, with Shı¯ra¯z as his capital,
and it is only in 376/964 that he entered Baghdad, after
saving the ʿAbba¯sid caliph al-T˙ a¯’i‘ from the threat of
Bakhtiya¯r, a rival Buyid cousin. Al-Sijista¯nı¯ kept visiting
faraway Sijista¯n from time to time, as is recorded by his
friend and disciple, Abu¯ H˙ ayya¯n al-Tawh:idı¯, in chap. 89 of
the Muqa¯basa¯t. Before 360/970, al-Sijista¯nı¯ went to Rayy
on his way to Sijista¯n, and paid a visit to the mathemati-
cian Abu¯ Ja‘far al-Kha¯zin (d. between 350/961 and
360/971). Ibn al-‘Amı¯d’s court in Rayy was at the time
a place of intense philosophical activity, to such extent that
a rivalry between the intellectual circles of ‘Ad˙ud al-Dawla,
Ibn al-‘Amı¯d, and later on of Ibn al-‘Abba¯d and Ibn Sa‘da¯n
is recorded in a number of famous works of this period,
among which are Tawh:ı¯dı¯’s and Miskawayh’s, as well as the
anonymous S˙iwa¯n al-h:ikma. The philosophical corre-
spondence between ‘Ad˙ud al-Dawla and Ibn al-‘Amı¯d is
preserved (see Daiber 1993), and Sijista¯nı¯’s visit to Rayy
can be considered a friendly visit to the court of a friend
and ally of his patron.
The S˙iwa¯n al-h:ikma (Chest Box of Wisdom), attributed
to al-Sijista¯nı¯ by the historian Z˙ ahı¯r al-Dı¯n al-Bayhaqı¯
(also known in Persian under the name of Ebn Funduq),
has been the issue of a debate between scholars. Al-Qa¯d˙ı¯
(1981), noticing that Abu¯ Sulayma¯n al-Sijista¯nı¯ is men-
tioned as passed away in the S˙iwa¯n, suggested that
the book was composed from materials gathered with
the help of al-Tawh:ı¯dı¯ and Miskawayh by a disciple of
Abu¯ Sulayma¯n al-Sijista¯nı¯ al-Mant:iqı¯ A
17
A

Abu¯ al-H˙ asan al-‘Amirı¯, the little known Abu¯ l-Qa¯sim
al-Ka¯tib, to whom the book should be ascribed. On his
side, Kraemer (1986) considers the S˙iwa¯n emanated from
al-Sijista¯nı¯’s circle. The two interpretations are actually
compatible, since Abu¯
al-Qa¯sim can be considered
a remote member of al-Sijista¯nı¯’s circle. The moral author-
ity of the S˙iwa¯n remains al-Sijista¯nı¯, if we consider that the
materials that constitute its bulk are, in addition to phil-
osophical sessions held in the presence of Abu¯ Ja‘far ibn
Banawayh (d. 963) the king of Sijista¯n and a close friend of
al-Sijista¯nı¯, excerpts from the cenacles of Abu¯ l-Fad˙l ibn al-
‘Amı¯d and discussions between al-Sijista¯nı¯ and his friends.
Jaadane (1967) and Kraemer (1986) have given pene-
trating analyses of Abu¯ Sulayma¯n al-Sijista¯nı¯’s philosophy
and for the latter, two encompassing volumes on his epoch
(see Kraemer 1993, in addition to the volume devoted to
Abu¯ Sulayma¯n al-Sijista¯nı¯, published in 1986). These two
count as reference works. Classical sources such as Ibn al-
Nadı¯m, Ibn al-Qift:ı¯, Ibn Abı¯ Us:aybi‘a, and al-S˙afadı¯ men-
tion the relations between al-Sijista¯nı¯ and prominent
members of Yah:ya¯ ibn ‘Adı¯’s school, such as Abu¯ ‘Alı¯ ibn
al-Samh: (d. 418), Abu¯ l-Khayr ibn al-Khamma¯r ibn Suwa¯r
(d. 440/1048), and his disciple Ibn ‘Abba¯d, with whom
al-Sijista¯nı¯ exchanged letters.
As for al-Sijista¯nı¯’s closest disciples, they did not achieve
the fame reached by the mostly Christian members of Yah:ya¯
Ibn ‘Adı¯’s circle, and it seems that al-Tawh:ı¯dı¯, al-S˙aymarı¯,
al-Nu¯shaja¯nı¯, Abu¯ Muh:ammad al-‘Aru¯d˙ı¯, and Ghula¯m
Z˙ uh:al were Sijista¯nı¯’s friends rather than his formal disci-
ples. According to Ibn al-Qift:ı¯, commenting upon a verse
written by al-Badı¯hı¯ on al-Sijista¯nı¯, he was afﬂicted of
a skin-disease and restricted himself from visiting people.
Metaphysical and ethical matters with concrete reli-
gious echoes were discussed in the circle. The primacy of
logic or grammar was one of these. Yah:ya¯ ibn ‘Adı¯ had
devoted a treatise to this question (Demonstration of the
Distinction Between the Art of Philosophical Logic and the
Art of Arabic Grammar, Tabyı¯n al-fas:l bayna s:ina¯‘atay
al-mant:iq al-falsafı¯ wa-l-nah:wi al-‘arabı¯, ed. Khalı¯fa¯t
1988:414–424), as the gap between religious grammarians
of the Arabic language and the Aristotelian philosophers
was widening to become purely ideological (see Versteegh
1977). The dispute between Abu¯ Sa‘ı¯d al-Sı¯ra¯fı¯ and Matta¯
ibn Yunu¯s was a landmark and kept being discussed in
several of al-Tawh:ı¯dı¯’s writings. In the Muqa¯basa¯t, Chap.
22, al-Sijista¯nı¯ takes an opposite stand to his disciple’s
(who supported al-S˙ı¯ra¯fı¯), telling him that ‘‘Grammar is
an Arabic logic, and logic is an intellectual grammar,’’
afﬁrming the superiority and universality of Greek
logic. Materials on this issue have been gathered and
commented upon by Kraemer (1986:143–152).
From the same context emerged the question whether
reason and religion can be reconciliated. Abu¯ Sulayma¯n
al-Sijista¯nı¯ seems to have changed his mind regarding this
issue (see Jaadane 1971:74–80). As is well-known, the
popular Pythagorism offered by the Brethren of Purity’s
Epistles had a far-reaching inﬂuence. Al-Sijista¯nı¯ openly
criticizes the Brethren for their attempt to unite Greek
philosophy and Islamic religion into a single system.
Jaadane notes that if in al-Tawh˙ı¯dı¯’s Imta¯‘ wa- l-mu’a¯nasa
(Enjoyment and Familiarity), al-Sijista¯nı¯ underlines that
religion and philosophy have different methods and dif-
ferent goals, in the testimony of the Muqa¯basa¯t (after
391/1001) he develops a view that may be closer to the
Neoplatonist theories that one could read in Pseudo-
Aristotle’s Theology and in the tradition of the philosoph-
ical commentaries, which would lead to the Avicennian
synthesis. According to the Muqa¯basa¯t, al-Sijista¯nı¯ admits
that the prophets are, just as the philosophers, concerned
with the salvation of human souls. Nevertheless, he blames
the theologians (mutakallimu¯n, used for both Christians
and Muslims) for claiming to use a rational method of
inquiry while they fall into the trap of dialectics (jadal)
(see Jaadane 1971:78–79 and Kraemer 1986:246).
Greek theories on the soul were also extensively
discussed in the circle, as echoed from the quotations
gathered in the S˙iwa¯n al-h:ikma and in Tawh:ı¯dı¯’s works
(Imta¯‘ and Muqa¯basa¯t). As Yah:ya¯ ibn ‘Adı¯ had been study-
ing with al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, it comes as no surprise to see in the
materials discussed the overwhelming inﬂuence of the
Plotiniana Arabica. Tawh:ı¯dı¯ himself reports that he
attended al-Sijista¯nı¯ lectures on Aristotle’s De anima.
The bulk of al-Sijista¯nı¯’s cosmological system is to be
gathered from three treatises written on metaphysical
matters, for which translations and illuminating annota-
tions have been provided by Kraemer 1986:274–310.
In the Maqa¯la fı¯ l-ajra¯m al-‘ulwiyya anna t:abı¯‘ataha¯
t:abı¯‘a kha¯misa wa-annaha¯ dhawa¯t anfus wa-anna al-nafs
allatı¯ laha¯ hiya al-nafs al-na¯t:iqa (Treatise on the Celestial
Bodies, that Their Nature is a Fifth Nature and that They
Have a Rational Soul, translated by J. Kraemer as The
Supernal Bodies Possess Rational Souls), al-Sijista¯nı¯ departs
from Aristotle’s doctrine of the principle of motion to
follow Alexander of Aphrodisias. As shown by Kraemer,
al-Sijista¯nı¯ maintains that the body’s principle of motion
is an inherent motivating power, and that the heavenly
spheres are animated. For al-Sijista¯nı¯, the natural forms,
or souls, of the heavenly spheres are within the spheres as
the souls of animals reside in their bodies. What moves the
heavenly spheres is their desire to be assimilated with the
First Cause, or First Mover. Familiarity of the author with
the Pseudo-Aristotle’s Theology is noted by Kraemer in his
18 A
Abu¯ Sulayma¯n al-Sijista¯nı¯ al-Mant:iqı¯

notes to the translation (Kraemer 1986:278–285). In his Fı¯
l-muh:arrik al-awwal (On the First Mover), al-Sijista¯nı¯
departs from Alexander of Aphrodisias’ theory of the
First Mover. Probably following Themistius, he poses the
existence of a distinct Unmoved Mover, while Alexander
kept identifying the First Mover to the God of Aristotle’s
Metaphysics, book Lambda (see Kraemer 1986:285–292).
Finally, in his Fı¯ l-kama¯l al-khas:s: bi-naw‘i al-insa¯n (On the
Speciﬁc Perfection of the Human Species), al-Sijista¯nı¯
addresses the emanation of the virtues through creation.
This power, according to him, ﬂows from the Ultimate
Principle of this world to the individual who governs
through just laws and imposes order and harmony
(Kraemer 1986:293–310). This perfect individual is iden-
tiﬁed here with ‘Ad˙ud al-Dawla, to whom the treatise is
dedicated (it might not be overlooked here that ‘Ad˙ud al-
Dawla was a Shı¯ʿite, even if we have no traces of his own
understanding of the Imamate theory). Al-Sijista¯nı¯ enu-
merates the different positions held by the followers of
different sects of his times on God and the higher beings,
and mentions the views of the ‘‘Ancient believers’’; differ-
ent sects of the Christians, for whom these higher entities
are human substances (the Jacobite, Nestorian, and
Melkite views are given); groups who believe this Being
can be united with more than one person (the extremist
Shı¯ʿites, or Ghula¯t) among whom ‘‘those who speak of
incarnation (h:ulu¯l)’’; a group of the Suﬁs; the Dualists,
who hold the two roots of Light and Darkness as being
united with the supreme principle; the Muslim theolo-
gians (the mutakallimu¯n), who describe the Supreme
Being by means of Its attributes; and the ‘‘most excellent
philosophers’’, who according to al-Sijista¯nı¯, hold to neg-
ative theology. The importance of al-Sijista¯nı¯’s writings
has started to be appreciated with Kraemer’s master
study, but the full implications of his philosophical epistles
remain to be inserted within the traditional narration of
the history of medieval Arabic philosophy from al-Kindı¯
to Averroes.
See also: ▶Abu¯ Bishr Matta¯ ibn Yu¯nus ▶Ikhwa¯n al-S˙afa¯ʾ,
Encyclopedia of ▶Miskawayh, Abu¯
ʿAlı¯ ▶Plotinus,
Arabic ▶al-Tawh:ı¯dı¯, Abu¯ H˙ ayya¯n ▶Yah:ya¯ ibn ʿAdı¯
Bibliography
Primary Sources
al-Bayhaqı¯ Z˙ ah:ı¯r al-Dı¯n ‘Alı¯ (1935) Tatimmat S˙iwa¯n al-h:ikma, ed. Shafı¯‘
M. Fasc 1, Arabic text. Punjab University Oriental Publication Series
20. Lahore
Ibn Abı¯ Us:aybi‘a (1882–1884) ‘Uyu¯n al-anba¯’ fı¯ t:abaqa¯t al-at:ibba¯’, 2 vols,
ed. Mu¨ller A. al-Maktaba al-Wahbiyya, Cairo/Ko¨nigsberg. s. v. Abu¯
Sulayma¯n al-Sijista¯nı¯
Ibn al-Mat:ra¯n (1989) Busta¯n al-atibba¯’, reprod of the Tehran MS with an
introduction of Mohaghghegh (Mehdi) Markaz-i Intisha¯r-i Nusakh-i
Khatt, Tehran
Ibn al-Nadı¯m (2010) Kita¯b al-Fihrist, ed. Fu῾a¯d Sayyid Ayma¯n al-Furqa¯n,
London
Ibn al-Qift:ı¯ (1903) Ta’rı¯kh al-h:ukama¯’, ed. Lippert F, Mu¨ller A.
Dieterich’sche, Leipzig. s. v. Muh:ammad ibn T˙a¯hir ibn Bahra¯m Abu¯
Sulayma¯n al-Sijista¯nı¯
al-S˙afadı¯ (2000) al-Wa¯fı¯ fı¯ l-wafaya¯t, t 3, ed. Ah:mad al-Arna’u¯t and
Mus:t:afa¯ Turkı¯. Ih:ya¯’ al-tura¯th al-‘arabı¯, Beirut, p 138
Biographies
al-Sijista¯nı¯ Abu¯ Sulayma¯n. Fı¯ al-kama¯l al-khas:s: bi-naw‘ al-insa¯n (The
perfection peculiar to the human species), ed. Badawı¯, see below al-
Sijista¯nı¯ (1974). See Secondary Sources: Ku¨gel-Tu¨rker (1969) (ed.
and trans.); Troupeau (1969) (trans.); Kraemer (1986) (trans.)
al-Sijista¯nı¯ Abu¯ Sulayma¯n. Fı¯ maba¯di’ al-mawju¯da¯t (On the principles of
beings), ed. Badawı¯, see below al-Sijista¯nı¯ (1974). See Secondary
Sources: Ku¨gel-Tu¨rker (1969) (ed. and trans.); Troupeau (1969)
(trans.); Kraemer (1986) (trans.)
al-Sijista¯nı¯ Abu¯ Sulayma¯n. Maqa¯la fı¯ anna al-ajra¯m al-‘ulwiyya anna
t:abı¯‘ataha¯ t:abı¯‘a kha¯misa wa- annaha¯ dhawa¯t anfus wa- anna alnafs
allatı¯ laha¯ hiya al-nafs al-na¯t:iqa (Treatise on the celestial bodies, that
their nature is a ﬁfth nature and that they have a rational soul), ed.
Badawı¯, see below al-Sijista¯nı¯ (1974). See Secondary Sources:
Kraemer (1986) (trans.)
al-Sijista¯nı¯ Abu¯ Sulayma¯n (1974) S˙iwa¯n al-h:ikma wa-thalath rasa¯’il
(The chest-box of wisdom and three treatises), ed. al-Badawi ‘AR.
Bunyad Farhang, Tehran (contains the three treatises: Fı¯ maba¯di’
al-mawju¯da¯t; Fı¯ al-kama¯l al-khas:s: bi-naw‘ al-insa¯n; Maqa¯la fı¯ anna
al-ajra¯m al-‘ulwiyya anna t:abı¯‘ataha¯ t:abı¯‘a kha¯misa wa- annaha¯
dhawa¯t anfus wa-anna al-nafs allatı¯ laha¯ hiya alnafs al-na¯t:iqa, trans.
Kraemer (1986))
al-Sijista¯nı¯ Abu¯ Sulayma¯n (1979) The Muntakhab S˙iwa¯n al-h:ikma of Abu¯
Sulayma¯n al-Sijista¯nı¯, ed. Dunlop DM. Mouton, The Hague
Studies
al-Tawh:ı¯dı¯ Abu¯ H˙ ayya¯n (1953) al-Imta¯‘ wa-l-mu’a¯nasa, 2nd edn, ed.
Amin A, al-Zayn A. al-Maktabat al-‘Asriyya, Beirut
al-Tawh:ı¯dı¯ Abu¯ H˙ ayya¯n (1970) al-Muqa¯basa¯t, ed. Husayn T. Mat:ba‘at
al-Irsha¯d, Baghdad; (1929) ed. al-Sandu¯bı¯H˙ . al-Maktabat al-tija¯riyya
al-kubra¯ ﬁawwal sha¯ri‘ Muh:ammad ‘Alı¯, Cairo (latest repr Kuwait
1992)
Secondary Sources
Bibliographies
Bu¨rgel C, Mottahedeh R (1988) ῾Az˙od al-Dawla. In: Encyclopaedia Iranica
Online, ed. Yarshater E et al. www.iranica.com
Daiber H (1999) Bibliography of Islamic philosophy, vol I, nn 8217–8220;
vol II, 11–12. Leiden, Brill
Stern SM (1960–2005) Abu¯ Sulayma¯n al-Sidjista¯nı¯. In: Encyclopaedia of
Islam, vol I, 2nd edn, ed. Bearman P, Bianquis Th, Bosworth CE,
van Donzel E, Heinrichs WP. Brill, Leiden, p 156
Useful bio-bibliographical survey in Kraemer (1986:80–135)
Studies
Daiber H (1993) Naturwissenschaft bei den Arabern im 10. Jahrhundert
n. Chr: Briefe des Abu¯ l-Fad˙l ibn al-‘Amı¯d (gest. 360/970) an
‘Ad˙udaddaula. Mit Einleitung, kommentierter U¨ bersetzung und
Glossar. Islamic philosophy, theology and science. Texts and studies,
13. Leiden, Brill
Endress G (1977) The works of Yah:ya¯ b. ‘Adı¯. Reichert, Wiesbaden, pp 87–96
Abu¯ Sulayma¯n al-Sijista¯nı¯ al-Mant:iqı¯ A
19
A

Endress G (1977–1978) Yah:ya¯ ibn ‘Adı¯, Fı¯ tabyı¯n al-fas:l bayna s:ina¯‘atay
al-mant:iq al-falsafı¯ wa al-nah:w al-‘arabı¯. J Hist Arabic Sci (Aleppo)
1 (1977):320–323, 339–351; 2 (1978):38–50, 181–193
Gardet L (1976) La Socie´te´ musulmane lettre´e des 9e-10e sie`cles et les
‘cercles’ humanistes (maja¯lis). In: Studia Gerardo Verbeke ab amicis
et collegis dicata, ed. Bossier F, de Wachter F, Ijsewijn J, Maertens G.
Leuven University Press, Louvain
Jadaane F (1967) L’Inﬂuence du stoı¨cisme sur la pense´e musulmane. Vrin,
Paris
Jadaane F (1971) La philosophie de Sijista¯nı¯. Stud Islam 33:67–95
Khalı¯fa¯t S (1988) Yah:ya¯ ibn ‘Adı¯, the philosophical treatises. University
Press
of
the
University
of
Jordan
(Manshu¯ra¯t
al-Ja¯mi‘a
al-Urduniyya), ‘Amma¯n
Kraemer JL (1986) Philosophy in the renaissance of Islam: Abu¯ Sulayma¯n
al-Sijista¯nı¯ and his circle. Brill, Leiden
Kraemer JL (1993) Humanism in the renaissance of Islam: the cultural
revival during the Buyid Age. Brill, Leiden
Ku¨gel-Tu¨rker M (1969) Le Traite´ ine´dit de Sijista¯nı¯ sur la perfection
humaine (on the Fı¯ l-kama¯l al-khas:s: bi-naw‘ al-insa¯n = the perfection
peculiar to the human species). Pensamiento 25:207–224, 259–267
al-Qa¯d˙ı¯ W (1981) Kita¯b S˙iwa¯n al-H˙ ikma: structure, composition, author-
ship and sources. Der Islam 58:87–124
Sezgin F et al (2000) The School of Baghdad (10th–11th c.) and its
achievements. Matta¯ ibn Yu¯nus, Yah:ya¯ ibn ‘Adı¯, Ibn Zur‘a, Ibn
Suwa¯r, Ibn al-Samh:. Texts and studies. Islamic philosophy, vol 83.
Institut fu¨r Geschichte der Arabisch-Islamischen Wissenschaften,
Frankfurt-on-Main
Troupeau G (1969) Un Traite´ sur le principe des eˆtres attribue´ a` Abu¯
Sulayma¯n al-Sijista¯nı¯ (on the Fı¯ maba¯di’ al-mawju¯da¯t = On the
principles of beings). Pensamiento 25:259–270
Versteegh CHM (1977) Greek elements in Arabic linguistic thinking. Brill,
Leiden
al-Zaynı¯ M‘A-R (2007) Abu¯ Sulayma¯n al-Sijista¯nı¯: Sı¯ratuhu al-‘ilmiyya
wa- ara¯’uhu al-falsaﬁyya. Madı¯nat Dabı¯ (Emirates), Da¯r al-qalam
Abubacer
▶Ibn T˙ufayl, Abu¯ Bakr (Abubacer)
Adam Wodeham
STEPHEN E. LAHEY
Department of Classics and Religious Studies
University of Nebraska
Lincoln, NE
USA
Abstract
Adam Wodeham (d. 1358), Oxford Franciscan prote´ge´
of
Ockham
and
inﬂuential
adherent
of
Ockham’s
philosophical approach in the years of Oxford’s ‘‘Golden
Age’’ of theology. Wodeham’s most important philosoph-
ical innovation was the ‘‘complex signiﬁcable,’’ akin to the
contemporary idea of States of Affairs. He developed this
in his epistemological project of ascertaining what we
understand when we claim knowledge of things in the
world. Ockham had held that the objects of scientiﬁc
knowledge are mental propositions in which the concept
naturally signiﬁes the perceived objects, which led to
questions about whether we make judgments about men-
tal propositions or things. Wodeham’s innovation was to
argue that we formulate judgments about things in the
world when things conform to the way the mind formu-
lates propositions about them. While this does not
introduce a new layer of ontological complexity to the
extramental world, it does focus attention on the natural
method by which we propositionalize what we perceive.
Wodeham’s doctrine of complex signiﬁcables was to be
inﬂuential in later scholastic epistemological discourse,
and it contributed importantly to the logico-semantic
approach of Oxford theology. Wodeham was also an
important opponent of spatiotemporal atomism, a view
that arose within the philosophical speculation about
how to mathematize our understanding of the physical
world that characterizes the thought of the Mertonian
‘‘Calculators.’’
Biography
Adam Wodeham (c. 1295–1358) Franciscan theologian
and associate of William Ockham at Oxford where he is
known to have been studying by 1320, and where he likely
remained at least through the 1330s, and possibly until his
death. He began as a student of Walter Chatton, with
whom he famously disagreed throughout his philosophi-
cal career. While Wodeham was known as the foremost
expositor of Ockham’s thought following the latter’s
departure from Oxford in 1324, he disagreed with his
master on several critical points, particularly in epistemic
questions and in matters regarding the Trinity and Eucha-
rist. Wodeham lectured on the Sentences in Norwich, in
London, (scholars continue to disagree regarding the dat-
ing of these two sets of lectures) and ﬁnally in Oxford in
1334. The set known as the Norwich lectures, entitled
Lectura secunda, are the only widely available Sentence
commentaries, having been published in 1990. The
Oxford lectures, which contain references to many of the
views of his contemporaries, as well as a rich offering of his
philosophical theology, remain unpublished. In addition,
Wodeham’s Tractatus de indivisibilibus, a compendium of
arguments against spatiotemporal atomism then at issue
20 A
Abubacer

in Oxford, remains, while his commentaries on the
Cantica canticorum and Ecclesiasticus, Postilla de sacra-
mento eucharistiae, and several other works appear to have
been lost. Wodeham’s reputation as a philosophical theo-
logian remained considerable into the sixteenth century,
when John Mair published Henry Totting of Oyta’s
abbreviated account of Wodeham’s Oxford lectures. His
postulation of the complex signiﬁcable as the object of
knowledge remains an important philosophical innova-
tion, arguably prescient of contemporary understanding
of States of Affairs.
Epistemology in the Norwich Lectures
The Norwich lectures begin with a 250-page analysis of
the epistemological problems associated with scientiﬁc
knowledge, a necessary preamble to understanding the
possibilities open to theology as a science. How is scientiﬁc
knowledge of the world possible, and how do we glean
understanding from what we perceive? Ockham and
Scotus had argued that there is a difference of kind between
intuitive and abstractive cognition correspondent to the
sensitive and intellective souls that compose the knowing
self. While Scotus understood the two kinds of souls to be
formally distinct, for Ockham, the distinction was real,
making a uniﬁed, composite perceiving and understanding
self, which Wodeham felt to be philosophically untenable,
better explained by one soul capable of both perceiving and
understanding. This forced him to admit that perceiving
a red apple counts as an intellective act, which ﬁts uncom-
fortably into the Aristotelian epistemic scheme. Wodeham
maintained the distinction between intuitive and abstrac-
tive cognition, in which our cognition of this individual
apple is distinct from the more general cognition of redness
or apples as such, which we abstract from perception
experiences, but in rejecting a corresponding distinction
between kinds of souls to which these differing kinds of
cognitive acts are suited, Wodeham stands out among
fourteenth-century philosophers. His articulation of the
relation between intuitive and abstractive cognition owes
more to Scotus than to Ockham, who had posited an
intermediate, imperfect intuitive cognition to account for
objects once, but not now presently, perceived. Our pres-
ence to memory of a once-perceived object, Wodeham
argues, is an abstractive cognition correspondent to an
act of memory, and we need not posit an intermediate
species of cognition to account for it.
Ockham had famously argued for the possibility of an
intuitive cognition of nonexistent objects, provided that
God brought about such cognition through potentia
absoluta. A lively philosophical dialogue ensued regarding
cases in which we seem to have intuitive cognition of
nonexistent beings without direct divine intervention,
which contributed signiﬁcantly to Wodeham’s epistemol-
ogy. Peter Auriol had dominated the argument by describ-
ing our intuitive cognition’s reliance intentional beings,
created as direct result of our raw sense perceptions. The
force of this argument had been powerful, likely contrib-
uting to Ockham’s earlier theory of concepts as ‘‘thought
objects,’’ esse obiectivum. Auriol had noticed that our raw
sensations can produce illusions, as when someone whirls
a torch quickly in the night, creating an afterimage of
a circle immediately present to our eyes. The afterimage
is, in reality, not there, not outside our eyes, but it has
a presence that suggests a regular tendency in our percep-
tion to create intentional beings for our intuitive cognition
of external objects. Chatton had interpreted Auriol’s
account as being a good argument in favor of skepticism,
the thin edge of the wedge that might lead to doubting the
veridicality of all intuitive cognition. Wodeham was deter-
mined to oppose this, arguing that Auriol’s illusions aris-
ing from raw sensations did not necessitate recognition of
an intuitive cognition of non-existents; reason and expe-
rience both help us to recognize illusions that arise from
our perception, and they rein in tendencies to imagine
these illusions as having sufﬁcient force as to threaten our
knowledge of the perceptible world. The real problem here
is Auriol’s interposition of an intentional being arising
from raw sensation that serves as the object of our intuitive
cognition. Wodeham argues vigorously against these
phantom intermediaries, recognizing that Auriol’s argu-
ments rely heavily on the illusion problems that can be laid
to rest by relying on reason’s mediating role in intuitive
cognition. In opposing Auriol, however, Wodeham is not
ignoring the possibility that God could be causing our
intuitive cognition of something that appears present to
us, but is not. Ockham had argued that such a divinely
caused
apparent
presence
would
become
rapidly
apparent to us as illusory, which position Wodeham
regarded as untenable. Wodeham was more willing to
face skepticism than was Ockham, recognizing the possi-
bility of divinely caused intuitive cognition of nonexistent
entities as leading to the impossibility of certain empirical
knowledge of perceived objects. This impossibility is
ultimately not deleterious to scientiﬁc knowledge, though;
provided that God is not actively deceiving us, our
perceptions may function as direct evidence of objects in
the world.
The focus of theological knowledge is, of course, God.
Intuitive cognition of God would be beatiﬁc vision, avail-
able only to the blessed in heaven. When Wodeham was
Adam Wodeham A
21
A

lecturing, John XXII was arguing against the beatiﬁc vision
prior to Judgment Day, throwing the theological world
into a furor; Adam makes no mention of this in the
Norwich lectures. So the question is about the possibility
of abstractive cognition of God, and here need arises to
distinguish between three kinds of abstractive cognition.
The ﬁrst arises from reasoned argument grounded in
concepts themselves abstracted from experiences in the
world, as with the proofs for God’s existence common in
the schools. The second is a more speciﬁc, simple concept
not dependent on other abstracted cognitions, but speciﬁc
to its object alone. The third abstractive cognition arises
from intuitive cognition immediately, prior to rational
analysis, as when we focus our attention to the red of an
apple without yet forming assertions or denials in com-
parison to other reds we may have experienced. This kind
of abstractive cognition is certainly possible in mystic
vision, Adam argues, which fall short of the beatiﬁc
vision, but only just. Short of such mystic vision, though,
will abstractive cognition arising from reason provide
a simple concept proper to God alone? This ‘‘God-
shaped’’ concept would be speciﬁc to divinity, in the
way that ‘‘apple’’ is speciﬁc to apples only, and not any
other kind of fruit, but the ‘‘God-shaped’’ concept would
be different in that it would have only one correlate in
reality, an ontological being so unlike any created being
as to stretch the referential functioning of a concept
beyond breaking. Scotus, for whom the univocity of
being came closest to creating such a concept, did not
recognize such a simple God concept, and neither did
Wodeham. Walter Chatton did, providing Wodeham
opportunity to pour scorn on his predecessor, an
opportunity he rarely denied himself when it arose.
Here Wodeham introduces the innovation for which
he is perhaps best known, the complex signiﬁcable. After
having surveyed the fundamental questions of epistemol-
ogy in the Prologue to the Norwich lectures, he ﬁxed his
attention on ascertaining what it is we understand when
we claim knowledge of things in the world sufﬁcient to
undergird the concepts we use in theological argument. To
do this, he triangulated between the views of Ockham and
Chatton. Chatton had argued that the objects of scientiﬁc
knowledge are extramental objects that we translate into
the terms populating mental propositions. Ockham held
that the objects of scientiﬁc knowledge are the mental
propositions themselves. Both contain elements of the
truth, Wodeham argued. Ockham had argued for a more
instantaneous natural translation of perceptions into
terms than Chatton had admitted, but both believed that
our
understanding
grasps
extramental
reality
and
naturally arranges it into the subjects and predicates that
make up our propositionally structured understanding.
Chatton’s disagreement with Ockham lie in the mediation
of mental propositions, which he felt were unnecessary
mediaries. Wodeham agreed with Chatton that when we
make judgments about things in the world, it is about the
things, not mental propositions we construct about them.
But the judgments we make frequently rely on temporal
qualiﬁcation; it would be folly to assume that ‘‘there was
an elephant in the room’’ and ‘‘there will be an elephant in
the room’’ are functionally equivalent. Hence, we make
judgments not just about the bare particulars, in this case,
elephants and rooms, but about how things are in the
world. This is what Wodeham refers to as a complex
signiﬁcable, a thing known through having been signiﬁed
through a complex proposition. We understand and make
judgments about how things are in the world when the
world conforms to the mode of signifying characteristic of
the proposition formed in the mind. In effect, Wodeham’s
complex signiﬁcable ‘‘propositionalizes’’ the world. This is
not to say that Wodeham has thereby added a rich onto-
logical layer of qualiﬁers onto reality that correspond to
the symbols, terms, and concepts we use to understand the
natural world. There is no additional complexity to being
beyond the things that exist in the way they exist in the
world, but our propositionalizing what we perceive must
be seen as taking into account both the existing and the
mode of existing. Take the knowledge you now (presum-
ably) have of there not being an elephant in the room. The
object of this proposition, ‘‘There is no elephant in the
room’’ is elephant-not-being-in-the-room. This is not
a proposition enriching the being of some elephant some-
where, or of the room, nor is it wholly the product of the
proposition-constructing mind intuitively cognizing the
room. It is a truth about the room that corresponds to
the proposition-constructing mind’s abstractive intuition.
Another example will show the constructive steps that go
into our use of complex signiﬁcables. Take the proposi-
tion, ‘‘Brontops nursed its young.’’ On the assumption
that you do not know what Brontops is, you cannot say
whether the proposition is true or false, and the complex
signiﬁcable to which it may or may not correspond
remains hidden. Upon learning that Brontops is an extinct
mammal, the general proposition ‘‘Brontops nursed
its young’’ becomes evidently so. There is a complex
signiﬁcable to which this proposition refers, even though
there are no Brontops now to which it refers. Contempo-
rary philosophers are likely to recognize some similarity in
Wodeham’s complex signiﬁcable to States of Affairs, but
this similarity depends very much upon the semantics
22 A
Adam Wodeham

and ontology to which one is willing to commit. Recent
interpretations of Wodeham, particularly that of Susan
Brower-Toland, argue in favor of this similarity, hold-
ing that Wodeham recognized that his theory of judg-
ment committed him to complex signiﬁcables having
factual reality. In any case, Alexius Meinong and Adolf
Harnack can certainly be counted as heirs of Wodeham’s
approach; their conception of Sachverhalte suggests
a sufﬁciently rich ontology as to admit of elephants-not-
being-in-the-room being a real object of a proposition.
Wodeham’s approach was inﬂuential on Wyclif, who
developed it in his propositional realism, and on Gregory
Rimini, who made use of the idea in his Sentence com-
mentary as well.
Consequent to the complex signiﬁcable account must
be the knowledge or belief to which recognition of
a complex leads. When one gives mental assent to
a proposition like ‘‘Socrates is seated,’’ is the object of
assent Socrates himself, the mental proposition ‘‘Socrates
is seated,’’ or the complex Socrates-being-seated? Chatton
had limited the object under consideration to Socrates and
the mental proposition about him, but Wodeham insists
that these two alone lead only to a partial object of assent;
the complex is necessary for recognition as there being
consistency between Socrates and the mental proposition.
This further enhances the correspondent ontological com-
mitment accompanying complex signiﬁcables by making
them not only correspondent to propositions we form
about the world, but also the truth-makers behind the
acts of assent we give or withhold to these mental propo-
sitions. This seems to require that they be more than
nothing, but Wodeham hesitates. He denies that the com-
plex is but a nothing, but stopped short at naming them
‘‘somethings.’’ Gregory of Rimini felt that Wodeham’s
understanding of what entails a ‘‘something’’ was at
fault, and his account is notable largely for giving a
broader deﬁnition of ‘‘something’’ than Wodeham’s. As
mentioned, it can be argued that Wodeham in fact viewed
the complex signiﬁcable as a functioning something, real
constituents of extramental reality, on a par with States
of Affairs.
Indivisibilism
Fourteenth-century Oxford was famous for its attention
to the relation of semantics and logic to the natural sci-
ences, particularly Aristotelian physics. The Mertonian
‘‘Calculators’’ were especially concerned to explore the
relation of mathematical analysis to questions about
movement through media like time and space. A natural
result of this was the philosophical investigation into the
ultimate structure of spatiotemporal reality. The common
view had long been that space and time are both inﬁnitely
divisible, but by the 1320s, sufﬁcient disagreement had
arisen to lead to three classes of ‘‘atomists.’’ The ﬁrst, of
whom Chatton was most prominent, held that any con-
tinuum, whether spatial distance or temporal duration,
was made up of a ﬁnite number of indivisible points, or
atoms. The second group, of whom Henry Harclay was
best known, held that a continuum was composed of an
inﬁnite number of indivisible points, each conjoined to
the other without space in between. The third, associated
with Grosseteste, argued that the inﬁnite number of atoms
making up the continuum were mediately conjoined.
Divisibilists rejected indivisibles in physical reality, while
admitting immaterial indivisibles such as the intellectual
soul. Ockham and Wodeham were among the most
thoroughgoing of the indivisibilists, holding that an indi-
visible particle of spatiotemporal reality was simply
a contradiction, a term we can imagine, like ‘‘square cir-
cle,’’ without possible referent. Others, the majority, were
willing to countenance indivisibles as real, but unwilling
to assert their uniform presence as the sole constituents of
spatiotemporal continua. Wodeham’s position is notewor-
thy for two reasons. First, his Tractatus de indivisibilibus
serves as a guidebook to almost all the major positions and
arguments in play in Oxford, and second, because his
vigorous attack on atomists seems to have effectively
ended the matter, at least until the 1360s. Wodeham col-
lected a mass of arguments against indivisibles, cataloging
every possible philosophical problem that can arise from
supporting the inﬁnite divisibility of space and time.
Indeed, Wodeham eagerly wades into the Zeno paradoxes
familiar to philosophy students today, exploring the
soundness of Aristotle’s resolutions of these classic prob-
lems. An earlier Quaestio de divisione et compositione
continui exists as evidence for the evolution of Wodeham’s
thought; in it, he articulates the idea that all inﬁnite series
must be equal, when considered as inﬁnite. Imagining one
inﬁnite series beginning early in the day, and another
beginning at the end of the day, we are constrained to
admit that the former has more constituents than the
latter, but as inﬁnites, the two are equal. In the later
Tractatus, though, Wodeham shifts, arguing in Q.5 that
one inﬁnity can be greater than another, a position that
had earlier been argued by Grosseteste.
See also: ▶Atomism ▶Gregory of Rimini ▶Henry
Harclay ▶John Duns Scotus ▶John Wyclif ▶Peter Auriol
▶Robert Grosseteste ▶Walter Chatton ▶William of
Ockham
Adam Wodeham A
23
A

Bibliography
Primary Sources
Mair John (1512) Super Quattuor libros sententiarum: Abbrevatio Henrici
Totting de Oyta (Abbreviated Oxford lectures), ed. Mair J. Paris
Mair John (1966) Quaestio de divisione et compositione continui. In:
Murdoch J, Two questions on the continuum. Francisc Stud
26:212–288
Mair John (1988) Tratatus de indivisibilibus, ed. Wood R. Kluwer,
Dordrecht
Wood Rega, Ga´l Gideon (eds) (1990) Lectura secunda, 3 vols (Norwich
lectures). Franciscan Institute, St. Bonaventure
Secondary Sources
Brower-Toland S (2006) Facts vs. things: Adam Wodeham and the later
medieval debate about objects of knowledge. Rev Metaphys 60:597–
642
Courtenay W (1978) Adam Wodeham. Brill, Leiden
Ga´l G (1977) Adam of Wodeham’s question on the ‘Complexe
Signiﬁcabile’ as the immediate object of scientiﬁc knowledge.
Francisc Stud 73:66–102
Gelber H (1974) Logic and the trinity: a clash of values in scholastic
thought, 1300–1335. PhD dissertation, University of Wisconsin
Grassi O (1986) Intuizione e signiﬁcato: Adam Wodeham ed il problema
della conoscenza nel XIV secolo. Editoriale Jaco, Milan
Karger E (1995) William of Ockham, Walter Chatton, and Adam
Wodeham on the objects of knowledge and belief. Vivarium
33(2):171–196
Karger E (2004) Ockham and Wodeham on divine deception as a skeptical
hypothesis. Vivarium 42(2):225–236
Kretzman N (1984) Adam Wodeham’s anti-Aristotelian anti-atomism.
Hist Philos Quart 4:381–398
Nuchelmans G (1980) Adam Wodeham on the meaning of declarative
sentences. Historiogr Linguist 7(1/2):177–187
Reina ME (1986) Cognizione intuitiva ed esperienza interiore in Adamo
Wodeham. Rivista di Storia della Filosoﬁa 41:19–49; 211–244
Schabel C (2002) Oxford Franciscans after Ockham: Walter Chatton and
Adam Wodeham. In: Evans GR (ed) Medieval commentaries on the
‘Sentences’ of Peter Lombard. Current research, vol I. Brill, Leiden/
Boston/Ko¨ln, pp 359–377
Spade PV (1988) Anselm and the background to Adam Wodeham’s
theory of abstract and concrete terms. Rivista di Storia della Filosoﬁa
2:261–271
Sylla ED (1998) God, indivisibles, and logic in the later Middle Ages:
Adam Wodeham’s response to Henry Harclay. Mediev Philos Theol
7:69–87
Tachau K (1988) Vision and certitude in the age of Ockham. Brill, Leiden
Wood R (1982) Adam Wodeham on sensory illusions. Traditio
38:214–252
Wood R (1989) Epistemology and omnipotence. In: Chodorow S,
Sweeney J (eds) Popes, teachers and canon law in the Middle Ages.
Cornell University Press, Ithaca, pp 160–178
Wood R (2003) Adam of Wodeham. In: Gracia JJE, Noone TB (eds)
A companion to philosophy in the Middle Ages. Blackwell compan-
ions to philosophy, vol 24. Blackwell, Oxford, pp 77–85
Zupko J (1994) Nominalism meets indivisiblism. Mediev Philos Theol
3:158–185
Zupko J (1994–1997) How it played in the rue de Fouarre: the reception of
Adam Wodeham’s theory of the complexe signiﬁcable in the arts
faculty at Paris in the mid-fourteenth century. Francisc Stud
54:211–225
Adelard of Bath
CHARLES BURNETT
The Warburg Institute
London
UK
Abstract
Adelard was a Latin scholar and teacher of the liberal arts.
He was a pioneer in writing about ‘‘natura’’ as natural
science, and was also responsible for making the ﬁrst trans-
lations from Arabic into Latin of works on geometry and
astronomy. Several generations of students used his Latin
adaptation of Euclid’s Elements, and his Questions on Nat-
ural Science remained a popular text into the Renaissance.
Adelard of Bath (c. 1080–1150), scientist and translator, is
the most eminent among several of scholars in the West
Country of England who involved themselves in mathe-
matics and astronomy in the early twelfth century. He was
proud to call himself ‘‘a man of Bath,’’ and it is likely that
he spent most of his career in this city, which had been
restored as a spa in the early twelfth century, and attracted
people from far and wide for the curative powers of its
waters. Adelard uses Bath in examples in astronomical and
magical texts, whilst his name is attested in documents
from Bath Priory in 1100, 1106 and 1120, as a steward and
knight of the bishop, John de Villula of Tours. As was
customary, he went abroad to study, and refers to sojourns
both in Tours (where a famous, but unnamed, wise man,
taught him astronomy) and in Laon. It is at Laon that he
made a pact with his ‘‘nephew’’ – that he would devote
himself to the ‘‘studies of the Arabs’’ whilst his nephew
would pursue French studies. These studies took him to
Salerno, ‘‘Magna Graecia’’ (southern Italy), Syracuse in
Sicily, and Mamistra and Tarsus in the Norman Principal-
ity of Antioch. He may well have travelled to the Middle
East in the wake of the First Crusade, which led to the
capture of Antioch in 1099; a later scholar appears to call
Adelard an ‘‘Antiochene.’’ In these journeys, he mentions
meeting a Greek expert in medicine and the nature of
things in Magna Graecia, attending an anatomical dem-
onstration in Tarsus, and experiencing the volcanic erup-
tion of Mount Etna and an earthquake at Mamistra
(Misis). There is no evidence that he visited Spain, though
the transcriptions of Arabic terms, which he liberally uses
in his translations, reﬂect Spanish pronunciation; this may
reﬂect collaboration with Arabic speakers of Hispanic
origin in England. It seems that, on his return from his
24 A
Adelard of Bath

seven-year trip, he spent the rest of his life in England and
Normandy where he wrote most of his works. His human-
istic works, De eodem et diverso (On the Same and the
Different) and Quaestiones naturales (Questions on Natural
Science) were dedicated respectively to William, bishop of
Syracuse
and
Richard,
bishop
of
Bayeux
(either
FitzSamson, bishop 1107–1133, or of Kent, 1135–1142).
In early 1150, in Normandy, he dedicated his De opere
astrolapsus (On the Function of the Astrolabe) to the young
Henry Plantagenet, who was to become Henry II in 1154.
This is the latest of the sparse dates that we have for
Adelard’s life.
Adelard wrote two kinds of works: original texts writ-
ten in a polished and elegant Latin, intended for enter-
tainment as much as education; and mathematical works
translated or adapted from Arabic texts, written for stu-
dents and professionals. The earliest of the ﬁrst group is
probably the De eodem et diverso, which is an exhortation
to the study of philosophy, following the model of
Boethius’ De consolatione philosophiae. His aim is to
show how the epistemology of Plato and Aristotle can be
reconciled in a theory of universals which is very similar to
what was later called the indifference theory. Its protago-
nists are two allegorical ﬁgures, Philocosmia, the lover of
worldly pleasures, and Philosophia, the lover of wisdom.
Philocosmia criticizes philosophers for being inconsistent,
useless and poor, but rather promotes her attendants,
Riches, Power, Honour, Fame, and Pleasure. Philosophia,
however, wins the debate and the second half of the text is
devoted to the description of her own handmaidens, the
seven liberal arts. Philocosmia epitomizes preoccupation
with ‘‘things’’ (res), whilst Philosophia gives priority to
‘‘words’’ or ‘‘terms’’ (voces): that is, the names of the genus,
species, and individuals, which can each be applied to the
same actual substance, and the words of the books of the
seven liberal arts, which prevent the human soul from
lapsing into corruption.
The Quaestiones naturales was the most popular of his
literary works, and often accompanies Seneca’s Natural
Questions in the manuscripts. It takes the form of a lively
dialogue between Adelard and his nephew. The dialogue is
built on a framework of pre-existing ‘‘questions on
nature,’’ which evidently formed the basis of debate in
the medical school of Salerno, which Adelard had visited.
As such, the topics are on natural science, arranged from
the lowest parts of the universe (the roots of plants) to
the highest (the stars and unmoving sphere). Although
Adelard claims that he is drawing from his ‘‘Arabic stud-
ies,’’ no direct Arabic sources can be recognized; literal
quotations rather come from Plato’s Timaeus and Cicero’s
On the Nature of the Gods. Nevertheless, the tenor of the
discussions could reﬂect the conversations that he engaged
in, on his sojourn in Sicily and the Middle East. The aim of
the Quaestiones naturales is to show how one should work
out problems rationally, on the basis of observation, rather
than depend on the writings of authorities. Well known is
his comparison of the letter of authority with a prostitute
who makes herself available to the affections of all-comers.
Reason is to be preferred. Why else did God give each man
a brain, unless it was so that he could work things out
rationally himself and not rely on what an ‘‘authority’’ had
said? (Quaestiones naturales, 6, p. 105). One should push
rational arguments as far as they can go, and only when
human knowledge completely fails, should one refer to the
agency of God (Quaestiones naturales, p. 97).
An example of an argument based on reason is his
discussion of whether brute animals have souls. Adelard
claims that they do. For every animal makes a judgement
(iudicium) as a result of a sensation, so that it seeks out
something and avoids something else. More than that,
one can observe that dogs react to words spoken to them,
so they
must
have
understanding
(intellectus). In
a human body, judgment and understanding can only
take place if the soul is present. Since human bodies are
more perfect than the bodies of brute animals, it is
irrational to believe that animal bodies can perform
judgement and understanding without a soul. Nor can
one argue that animals’ souls perish with their bodies, for
if, as has been shown earlier in the Quaestiones naturales,
the elements that make up bodies never perish, but con-
tinuously reform to produce new bodies, how can the
soul, which is a superior entity, perish completely? Con-
clusions such as this may have prompted Adelard to say in
his preface that his readers cannot accept anything ‘‘new,’’
so that, when he wishes to put forward his own discovery
he must say: ‘‘Someone else said, not I’’ (Quaestiones
naturales, p. 83).
This argument also shows a preoccupation of the
Quaestiones naturales with psychology, and with the
senses, which is absent from earlier sets of natural ques-
tions. In general, while most of the questions themselves
are found elsewhere, Adelard’s solutions are his own. He
sometimes appears to use a pre-existent question simply
as a convenient starting point to investigate a topic that
concerns him more deeply: for example, the question
‘‘Why does fanning generate coldness, if movement gen-
erates heat?’’ prompts him to consider essential and acci-
dental qualities, while the question ‘‘Where do winds arise
from?’’ leads him to discuss the problem of inﬁnite move-
ment. While one cannot describe the Quaestiones naturales
as a systematic work on physics, several topics relevant to
physics are dealt with.
Adelard of Bath A
25
A

Adelard’s translations from Arabic are literal and tech-
nical in nature: they teach one how to compute on the
abacus, to solve geometrical theorems, to chart the course
of the stars, to draw up horoscopes and to make talismans
for effecting magic. Adelard, however, was keen to provide
more than literal translations. In the case of Euclid’s Ele-
ments, in addition to his literal rendering, either he or
members of his school recast the work in the form of
a ‘‘commentum’’ in order to show how theorems followed
on from one another by a process of deductive reasoning
(this is the so-called ‘‘Adelard II’’ version of the Elements).
In a work on how to use an astrolabe, based on Arabic texts
on the subject, he includes a summary of cosmology
according to the Ptolemaic system.
Adelard contributed signiﬁcantly to establishing of the
teaching of the quadrivium in the Middle Ages. The
‘‘Adelard II’’ version of the Elements was included in
Thierry of Chartres’ two-volume collection of texts on
the seven liberal arts (the Heptateuchon), and was copied
in more than 70 manuscripts. His translation of the tables
of al-Khwarizmi was also copied into the Heptateuchon,
but was soon superseded by the Toledan Tables. His abid-
ing reputation, however, was due to the Quaestiones
naturales, which were printed three times in the Renais-
sance and quoted by scholars such as Giovanni Pico della
Mirandola.
See also: ▶Natural Philosophy ▶Tha¯bit ibn Qurra
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Adelard of Bath (1988) Adelard of Bath: conversations with his nephew,
ed. and trans. Burnett Ch et al. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge (includes De eodem et diverso, Quaestiones naturales
and De avibus)
Busard
Hubertus
Lambertus
Ludovicus
(1983)
The
ﬁrst
Latin
translation of Euclid’s ‘‘Elements’’ commonly ascribed to Adelard
of Bath (Adelard I). Pontiﬁcal Institute of Medieval Studies,
Toronto; Folkerts Menso (1992) Robert of Chester’s (?) redaction
of Euclid’s ‘‘Elements,’’ the so-called Adelard II version. Birkha¨user,
Basel
Suter
Heinrich,
Bjørnbo
Axel,
Besthorn
Rasmus
(1914)
Die
astronomischen Tafeln des Muhammad ibn Mu¯sa¯ al-Khwa¯rizmı¯ in
der Bearbeitung des Maslama ibn Ahmed al-Madjrı¯tı¯ und der latein.
U¨ bersetzung des Athelhard von Bath.
Royal Danish Academy,
Copenhagen
Secondary Sources
Burnett C (ed) (1987) Adelard of Bath: an English scientist and Arabist of
the early twelfth century. Warburg Institute, London; Haskins CH
(1927) Studies in the history of mediaeval science, 2nd edn. Harvard
University Press, Cambridge, pp 20–42
Burnett C (1995) Adelard of Bath’s doctrine on universals and the
Consolatio Philosophiae of Boethius. Didascalia (Sendai) 1:1–13
Burnett C (1997) The Latin and Arabic inﬂuences on the vocabulary
concerning demonstrative argument in the versions of Euclid’s ‘‘-
Elements’’ associated with Adelard of Bath. In: Hamesse J (ed)
Aux
origines
du
lexique
philosophique
europe´en.
Socie´te´
internationale pour l’e´tude de philosophie me´die´vale. Louvain-la-
Neuve, pp 117–135
Cochrane L (1994) Adelard of Bath: the ﬁrst English scientist. British
Museum, London
Speer A (1995) Die entdeckte Natur. Brill, Leiden, 18–75 (on the
Quaestiones naturales)
Aesthetics
JOHN MARENBON
Trinity College
University of Cambridge
Cambridge
UK
Abstract
According to a ‘‘Traditional’’ view, there was a medieval
aesthetics, which centered around the theories of beauty
developed by theologians like Albert the Great, Ulrich of
Strasbourg, and Thomas Aquinas. They argued that
beauty lies in the relation between the form and matter
of a hylomorphic concrete whole. Although they were
writing in the context of beauty as a property of all things
that exist, some of them allowed for different degrees of
beauty in different things. Traditionalist theorists put
these ideas together with material from technical treatises
on individual arts (such as poetry, music, and architec-
ture) and ideas implied by medieval artifacts in order to
construct a medieval aesthetic theory. Recently, however,
strong arguments have been brought to suggest that there
was no such thing as medieval aesthetics, given that the
connection between beauty and human-made artifacts,
central to many modern aesthetic theories, was not made.
Encyclopedia entries are not, usually, a suitable place for
discussions of methodology, and least of all survey articles,
to which readers look for a clear and balanced introduc-
tion to a ﬁeld. Yet, a survey of what is called medieval
aesthetics cannot avoid questions of method, because it is
a matter of dispute whether medieval aesthetics is a subject
at all. While there are a number of modern studies of
medieval aesthetics, written by expert historians and
philosophers, there are other recent historians and
philosophers who put forward powerful reasons for think-
ing that there was no aesthetics in the Middle Ages. Given
26 A
Aesthetics

that encyclopedias are designed to celebrate the quarter-
truth that there exists a stock of methodologically
uncontroversial, ﬁxed knowledge, which gives answers
rather than poses fresh questions, most of this entry is
devoted to explaining the ‘‘Traditional View,’’ according to
which there is medieval aesthetics. At the end of my
discussion, however, I brieﬂy explain the powerful argu-
ments put by the Revisionists that medieval aesthetics is
as much a nonsubject as medieval molecular biology
or medieval nanotechnology. I do not discuss a recent
revision of the Revisionist view (Marenbon 2009). Despite
that difference, for some of my discussion here I draw on
this earlier piece of mine.
The Traditional View
The traditional view is based on a certain conception of
the subject matter of aesthetics (in general), which lies
behind most aesthetic philosophy from the later eigh-
teenth to the later twentieth century. Aesthetics, they con-
sider, is about beauty, but beauty especially (though not
exclusively) as manifested in works of art (by which are
meant literary, pictorial, sculptural, architectural, and
musical artifacts). The traditionalists acknowledge that
there was no single branch of study in the Middle Ages
devoted to this subject matter. But they believe that
there was an underlying medieval aesthetics that can be
extracted from a variety sources: theoretical discussions
(often theological), technical manuals of the different arts,
and medieval artifacts themselves. Many of them make use
of the thirteenth-century discussions of beauty. Since
these theories are quite intricate and seem prima facie to
be the medieval material nearest to the concerns of aes-
thetic philosophy, I shall look at the most important of
these, before considering more brieﬂy the medieval trea-
tises on individual arts – separately. Then, I shall consider
how the traditionalists put together their views of
a medieval aesthetics.
Theories of Beauty
Explicit and developed medieval discussions of beauty are
not found until the early thirteenth century. In the back-
ground lie two different types of theory, which they could
read in the ancient sources. On the one hand, there was the
conception of beauty as a special sort of composite quality,
which they read in Cicero and Augustine. For these
authors, an object is beautiful in virtue of the arrangement
of its parts in a congruent way, and the delightfulness of its
color (a formula that would leave it open for a thing’s
beauty not to be a quality it has in itself, but in virtue of its
effect on human observers). Some things, therefore, are
(more or less) beautiful, and many things not at all
beautiful. On the other hand, medieval authors read
about beauty in chap. 4 of On the Divine Names, written
in the ﬁfth century by Pseudo-Dionysius and available in
Latin from the ninth century. He presents beauty as
a transcendental attribute, along with goodness (with
which, he says, it is identical): all things have it by virtue
of existing, since God is beautiful and he transmits beauty
to all things.
It was in the early thirteenth century that the theory of
the transcendentals was ﬁrst carefully developed, and there
are discussions of beauty in this context by writers such as
William of Auvergne and the followers of Alexander of
Hales who compiled the Summa Alexandri (cf. Pouillon
1946). At the same period, Robert Grosseteste was able, as
a result of his general cosmological theory, to reconcile the
idea that everything is beautiful with the Ciceronian–
Augustinian deﬁnition in terms of color and proportion.
Grosseteste conceived the entire universe as an irradiation
of light from its ultimate source, God, and, on the medi-
eval view, color is an effect of light. He also thought that
the universe is constructed in accord with the laws of
geometry, and so everything is proportioned as well as
colored.
The three most important discussions of beauty by
medieval theologians are those by Albert the Great and
two of his pupils, Ulrich of Strasbourg and Thomas
Aquinas. The theories are, on examination, very different
from one another, but they are alike in attempting to bring
together the Ciceronian–Augustinian view of beauty as
a composite quality with Pseudo-Dionysius’ transcenden-
tal conception of it. Albert treats the subject most fully in
his commentary on On the Divine Names (Aquinas
1927:417–443 – it is wrongly attributed to Aquinas in
this edition), and so it is not surprising that he identiﬁes
beauty with goodness, though he allows that it differs from
it ‘‘by reason’’ in certain ways. The identiﬁcation is deeper
than extensional equivalence ((x) (x is good) <-> (x is
beautiful)), since all the transcendental attributes have by
deﬁnition a universal extension and so are extensionally
equivalent, and yet neither Albert nor anyone thinks that,
for instance, truth (another transcendental) is identical to
goodness. It is a moot point, therefore, whether Albert is
thinking of beauty as anything more than a way of being
good. He helps us to understand what is involved in being
beautiful through an analogy with more tangible beauty of
the Ciceronian–Augustinian sort. Just as a body is said to
be beautiful ‘‘from the resplendence of color over propor-
tioned limbs,’’ so all things are beautiful by the ‘‘resplen-
dence
of
the
substantial
or
accidental
form
over
proportioned and bounded parts of matter.’’ What does
Albert mean by this comparison? According to the
Aesthetics A
27
A

Aristotelian metaphysics that Albert and his contempo-
raries accepted, all natural things (except, in the view of
some, angels and separated souls) besides God are com-
posites of matter and their substantial form, which makes
them the sort of thing they are – a human, or a dog, or
a ﬂower. They also are the subjects for accidental forms,
such as having certain quantities and qualities and rela-
tions. For most thinkers of this period, it is matter which
individuates forms, and so it makes sense to think of it
as being ‘‘proportioned and bounded.’’ And so Albert’s
comparison is not far-fetched. But there is the important
difference that, whereas a person’s limbs may fail to be
proportioned and, in the dark, may not have color resplen-
dent over them, any matter-form composite will, on
Albert’s theory, have the beauty of form resplendent over
proportioned matter. Moreover, while in principle, a thing
may have more or less even of a transcendental attribute, it
is hard to see how any one matter-form composite is more
or less beautiful than another in Albert’s sense. For this
reason, Albert’s conception of metaphysical beauty is rather
distant from what ‘‘beauty’’ normally means.
By contrast, Ulrich of Strasbourg (De summo bono (On
the Highest Good) 1987–1989, II.4) does manage to ﬁnd
a way of admitting degrees of beauty into a theory which,
like Albert’s, is based on the way in which forms inform
matter. Not every bodily individual perfectly exempliﬁes
the species of which it is a member. In order to be perfectly
beautiful, the thing must satisfy the four criteria of quan-
tity, number of parts, relation between the size of the parts
and the whole, and disposition. The ﬁrst two of these
requirements are fairly straightforward and rule out cer-
tain sorts of abnormalities: for its quantity to be correct,
something must be of the appropriate size for its species;
neither a dwarf, nor a giant, for instance; a human fails to
have the correct number of parts if he or she is one-legged
or one-eyed. The third requirement is stricter, since a dog
with an unusually long tail or a person with too large
a bottom would fail it (in line with a certain widespread
intuitive notion of beauty). For the fourth requirement,
disposition, Ulrich gives the example of the balance of
humors in a human. Many people, according to the medi-
eval theory of humors, do not have their humors in bal-
ance, but have, for instance, a choleric temperament or
a melancholic one: they would therefore fail to be perfectly
beautiful according to Ulrich. These criteria, therefore,
would permit quite a ﬁne ranking of beauty, based not
just on the external characteristics of things, but on their
internal bodily constitutions.
This sort of beauty is, however, just one of four general
types distinguished by Ulrich. It is essential corporeal
beauty. There is also accidental corporeal beauty. Ulrich
separates the relationships between substantial form and
its matter, and the matter-form composite and its acci-
dents, which Albert considers together when analysing
beauty. Essential beauty is the result of the correct rela-
tionship between the former pair, so that the bodily thing
is a perfect example of its species, and accidental beauty
results from the characteristics of symmetry and color that
it has from accidents of quantity and quality. Rather than,
like Albert, allude to the Ciceronian–Augustinian deﬁni-
tion of beauty as an analogy, Ulrich thus incorporates it
into his theory, as a different sort of non-species-based
beauty. Ulrich also considers that non-corporeal things,
such as angels and separated souls, can be beautiful, essen-
tially or accidentally; for instance, a soul is accidentally
beautiful through having knowledge. He does not, how-
ever, go into much detail over this side of this theory.
Despite the number of books that have been written on
Thomas Aquinas’ theory of beauty (or even more ambi-
tiously, his ‘‘aesthetics’’), he writes about beauty only very
rarely and always in passing, in his commentary on
Pseudo-Dionysius’ On Divine Names and in the Summa
theologiae. There are four passages that are frequently
quoted. In chap. 4, Lectio 5 of the Commentary,
Aquinas identiﬁes brightness (claritas) and consonance
(consonantia) as characteristics of beauty, and he remarks
that ‘‘although the beautiful and the good are the same in
subject, because both brightness and consonance are
contained in the deﬁnition of the good, yet they differ by
reason, because the beautiful adds beyond the good an
ordering to the cognitive power that it is thus.’’ In the
Summa theologiae (I, q. 5, a. 4 ad 1), Aquinas remarks that
‘‘in the subject the good and the beautiful are the same,
because they are both based on the same thing, that is, on
the form.’’ But the good is in respect of the appetite: good
is what all things seek after. The beautiful, however, is in
respect of the ‘‘cognitive power’’ (vis cognoscitiva), he says,
‘‘for things are called beautiful which please when they are
seen.’’ And so, he argues, the beautiful consists in due
proportion, because sense is ‘‘a certain ratio’’ and it
delights in things that are similar to it. The idea of sense
as a ratio is taken from Aristotle’s De anima 424a, where he
sees the senses as means or ratios, which can be destroyed
by sensations so strong that they lose their balance. In
a later quaestio in the Summa theologiae (I, q. 39, a. 8),
he explains – while talking about the beauty of the Son of
God – that beauty consists, not just in due proportion, but
also in wholeness or perfection (a thing must not be
missing a part) and brightness (claritas), as exempliﬁed
by having a shining color. And in IaIIe, q. 27, a. 1, ad 3,
Aquinas says again that the beautiful is the same as the
good, but differs ‘‘by reason alone.’’ Then he goes on to
28 A
Aesthetics

explain that, whereas the good is that in which the appetite
comes to rest, ‘‘it pertains to the deﬁnition of the beautiful
that the appetite comes to rest in the sight or knowledge of
it.’’ He adds that, for this reason, those senses are chieﬂy
concerned with beauty which are most cognitive – sight
and hearing (on which see McQueen 1993). Finally, he
summarizes his point by saying that ‘‘the beautiful adds to
the good a certain ordering to the cognitive power, so that
the good may be said to be that which without qualiﬁca-
tion pleases the appetite, but the beautiful may be said to
be that the apprehension of which pleases.’’
Interpretations of these remarks center on two prob-
lems. The ﬁrst is how to reconcile the side of the theory
which identiﬁes proportion/consonance, brightness, and
wholeness as features in a thing which make it beautiful,
with the side of the theory which emphasizes the role of
the cognizer with regard to the beauty of a thing (by
contrast with its goodness, for instance). Most interpreters
insist that Aquinas has an objective conception of beauty –
that is to say, things are beautiful in virtue of attributes
that they really have, but that we have to make a special use
of our intellectual faculties in order to grasp this beauty.
Writing originally in 1920, Jacques Maritain (1965) iden-
tiﬁed a special power of intellectual intuition by which we
grasp the beauty of things. More recent analysts (especially
Eco 1988:60–63; 2007:281–317) have shown clearly that
Aquinas does not suggest or have room for a notion of
intellectual intuition, and they have elaborated their
own accounts of how we cognize beauty (cf. Mothersill
1984:323–366; Eco 1988; Jordan 1989).
The second problem of interpretation is whether
beauty is in fact a transcendental for Aquinas. Most inter-
preters believe that it is: their strongest argument for this
view is that Aquinas identiﬁes the beautiful with the good,
and good is certainly a transcendental for him. But
Aquinas never explicitly lists beauty as a transcendental,
and in his presentation of the transcendentals in De
veritate 1.1 beauty is not included. Kovach (1961) – the
most thorough collection and analysis of texts on Aquinas
and beauty – suggests that Aquinas came to include beauty
among the transcendentals only after he had written De
veritate. He proposes that for Aquinas beauty was a sort of
super-transcendental, which brings the other transcen-
dental attributes together. But Aertsen (1991) has argued
powerfully that beauty is not an independent transcen-
dental in Aquinas (nor in general in the thirteenth-century
tradition). In his view, Aquinas thought that being beau-
tiful is just a way of being good.
An even more radically minimalist interpretation of
Aquinas’ remarks on beauty is possible. All things are
good in respect of their forms, Aquinas believes (and he
explains why – to be good is to be sought as an end; things
are sought as ends because they are perfect, and by being in
act, they are in some way perfect; and it is the form which
makes a thing be in act (Summa theologiae, I, q. 5, a.3)).
Things are beautiful, too, in respect of their forms and the
fact that – as perfections – these forms are objectively ends
to be sought. There is nothing else in the nature of things
on which beauty is based and so, in subject, beauty and
goodness are identical. But a thing is called ‘‘beautiful’’
only when simply seeing or knowing its form is pleasing,
and that happens when the object has, by virtue of its
form, certain qualities (proportion, brightness, whole-
ness) that delight the cognizer. There is no reason at all
to think that all things have these qualities. In the case of
proportion, Aquinas says that it delights cognizers because
the cognizing senses are themselves proportions. This
would suggest that ﬁnding something beautiful depends
on its having attributes that accord with those of the
cognitive powers – not those of this or that cognizer,
however, but rather those which cognitive powers must
have if they are to cognize. And so on this interpretation,
judgments of beauty are for Aquinas, just as they would be
for Kant, subjectively universal.
However he is interpreted, Aquinas, like Albert,
Ulrich, and the earlier thirteenth-century theologians,
developed his ideas about beauty within the context set
by Pseudo-Dionysius’ view that beauty is an attribute of
God transmitted to all creation, and the Ciceronian–
Augustinian view of beauty as a complex quality in the
background. One contemporary author, who is not
a theologian, had an entirely different source and so
a completely different approach. Witelo’s treatise on per-
spective is an adapted translation from an eleventh-
century Arabic author, al-Haytham. For al-Haytham
(II.3), an object is beautiful just in case it has properties
which affect viewers (he is concerned just with visual
beauty, given that he is writing about optics) in such
a way that they describe them as beautiful. What are
these properties? They include color, but, in the main,
they are grouped in antithetical pairs. For example, al-
Haytham gives the pair discrete/continuous: separate
stars, he believes, are more beautiful than nebulae, but
a meadow is more beautiful when its vegetation is contin-
uous than when it is broken up into discrete patches and
so is sparse. Clearly, al-Haytham does not believe that his
paired characteristics provide a formula for showing what
is or is not beautiful. Rather, things are beautiful because
they affect us in a certain sort of way, and his antitheses
provide a framework for recording some of the different
characteristics of different things which have this effect.
Witelo makes one important change to al-Hazen’s theory
Aesthetics A
29
A

of beauty. Al-Hazen shows no awareness that what is con-
sidered beautiful may vary from culture to culture. Witelo
(Baeumker 1908:IV.148) recognizes that many types of
beauty are based on custom, and that each race will con-
sider that the characteristics of its own members are beau-
tiful. An Arab like al-Hazen will, therefore, judge different
colors and proportions beautiful in a human being than
a Dane, Witelo explains, perhaps with it in mind that al-
Hazen condemns blond hair and blue eyes as ugly.
Treatises on the Arts
Many treatises in the various areas now classiﬁed as art or
the ﬁne arts were written in the Middle Ages. They are, with
a few exceptions, technical treatises and handbooks for
practitioners, rather than second-order discussions of the
issues considered by aestheticians today in connection with
these arts – for instance, the nature of musical expression,
or pictorial representation, or the relationship between
authorial intention and the meaning of a text. In music,
there was a highly theoretical approach, based upon
Augustine’s and Boethius’ musical treatises, which made
music into a branch of mathematics; and then there were
a host of more practical handbooks. The De diversis artibus
(On Different Arts) by Theophilus, probably from the
twelfth century, is a treatise on how to use various types
of materials (pigments, glues, varnishes) and how to work
on various sorts of objects – walls, books, panels, glass,
metal. Even the series of Arts of Poetry, such as Geoffrey of
Vinsauf’s Poetria nova, written in Latin at the end of the
twelfth and the beginning of the thirteenth century and
based partly on Horace and partly on rhetorical manuals,
are mainly devoted to giving practical advice to the would-
be poet. Dante’s De vulgari eloquentia (On Eloquence in the
Vernacular) is an innovative and reﬂective discussion
about language, but contains little in the way of philo-
sophical reﬂection about poetry itself.
A Medieval Aesthetic: The Traditional
Approach
Recent proponents of the traditional approach have
included Edgar de Bruyne (author of a three-volume His-
tory of medieval aesthetics), the wide-ranging historian of
aesthetics Władysław Tatarkiewickz, the renowned art his-
torians Erwin Panofsky, Rosario Assunto, and Umberto
Eco, as well as Neoscholastics such as Czapiewski and
Kovach. The best of these studies are those by Panofsky
and Eco: looking at them brings out the methodology
shared by all these writers.
Although Panofsky concentrates on architecture and
looks to general features of medieval thought rather than
the more detailed theories of beauty and technical
manuals discussed
above, his
way of
constructing
a medieval aesthetics shows very clearly the underlying
methodology of the traditional approach. Panofsky was
very impressed by the treatise written in the 1140s by
Abbot Suger of St Denis, De rebus in sua administratione
gestis (On the Things Done Under His Direction). Panofsky
(Introduction to Suger 1946) argues that the treatise
expresses ideas about aesthetics, inspired by Neoplatonism
and the metaphysics of light, and that Suger was inspired
by these theories in the way in which he had the cathedral
built. Later, Panofsky generalized this way of seeing phil-
osophical tendencies reﬂected in architectural design in
his Gothic Architecture and Scholasticism (1957). The
development of church architecture which led to the
Gothic cathedral, uniﬁed in its space, and with its elements
clearly differentiated, is seen as parallel to the path of
scholastic thought towards the highly articulated clarity
and the comprehensiveness of the synthesis of philosophy
and religion which attributes to Aquinas.
There are two elements of soft Hegelianism underlying
Panofsky’s approach. The ﬁrst is the assumption that there
is a certain spirit of a period, which can be found in works
so different as a cathedral and a theological treatise. The
second is the idea that discerning this spirit in its different
manifestations and variations is the main task for the
historian of philosophy. Medieval aesthetics will therefore
be, not a collection of different and often opposed argu-
ments, but a rather a uniﬁed (if varying and developing)
outlook. These two soft Hegelian tendencies permeate the
monumental work of de Bruyne, and they provide the
unstated rationale for Eco’s studies of medieval aesthetics.
Eco, however, is much more self-conscious than de Bruyne
about his enterprise and the difﬁculties which it faces. He
accepts that aesthetics did not exist as a recognized branch
of philosophy, in the manner of, for instance, metaphysics
or ethics, until Baumgarten’s Aesthetica (1750–1758).
Moreover, if aesthetics is to be centered, in the eigh-
teenth-century manner, on beauty as something perceived
by the senses, then, he admits, there was little aesthetic
reﬂection in the Middle Ages. But ‘‘if we mean by ‘Aes-
thetics’ a ﬁeld of interests around the value ‘beauty,’ its
deﬁnition, its function, and the ways of producing and
enjoying it – then the Middle Ages spoke of aesthetics.’’
Particularly in his work on Aquinas’ aesthetics, Eco
shows great ingenuity in extending various hints found
in his writings into a complete theory about beauty.
He recognizes that Aquinas does not have a philosophy
of art, in today’s sense of the word, but, like de Bruyne and
most of the other theorists, he makes the link between art
and medieval theories of beauty by looking at technical
treatises on individual arts.
30 A
Aesthetics

The Revisionist’s Objections: Arguments
Against the Idea of Medieval Aesthetics
In the period from c. 1980 to present, various Revisionist
arguments against the traditional approach have been
made, especially by Paul Oskar Kristeller, Jan Aertsen,
Andreas Speer, and Olivier Boulnois (2008). Putting
together the various critics, the following counter-
argument can be constructed.
There were indeed some scholastic discussions about
beauty, but (Aertsen 1991) it is misleading to think that
beauty was considered a transcendental attribute in its
own right, like unity or truth. Rather, it is just envisaged
as an aspect of goodness. Aquinas, who has been regarded
as the central medieval aesthetic philosopher, had very
little indeed to say about beauty (Speer 1990). Moreover,
most of the theories of beauty were proposed in
a theological context. Even where they concern a notion
like that of beauty in its normal sense – an attribute that
different things possess to different degrees, their subject is
the beauty of natural things, not that of artifacts. The link
between beauty and art, which characterizes modern aes-
thetics, is missing – and so, given medieval assumptions it
must be. Human-made things were judged as being lower
than natural – that is, created – ones. And there was no
system of ﬁne arts, distinguishing the subject matter of
what is now aesthetics (centrally: literature, painting,
sculpture, architecture, music) from other pursuits
(Kristeller 1980). The ‘‘arts’’ were the liberal arts of lan-
guage (grammar, logic, and rhetoric) and mathematics
(arithmetic, geometry, music – studied theoretically –
and astronomy). Even when, in his Didascalicon, Hugh
of St Victor (1961:II.21–8) takes the unusual step of listing
seven mechanical arts along with the seven liberal ones, he
just shows how distant medieval thinking was from the
concept of the ﬁne arts or art, as it is now understood. The
mechanical arts are mostly practical crafts, such as agri-
culture, sailing, and weaving; ‘‘theatrical knowledge’’ turns
out to include gymnastics and athletics, and painting
and sculpture are included merely as subdivisions of
arms-making.
Investigations by revisionist critics into individual
works that had been used as sources for medieval aes-
thetics support this powerful line of counter-argument.
For example, a recent study of Suger’s De consecratione
(Suger 1995) makes the case that, contrary to Panofsky’s
reading, Suger’s treatise puts forward his views on the
liturgy, ecclesiology, and history, in line with his political
aims, and does not present St Denis as a work of art.
There is, besides, another type of criticism that can be
made of the traditional approach, related to the second
element of soft Hegelianism mentioned above. Even if
the traditionalists’ conclusions are accepted, they merely
establish that there was a certain, characteristically medi-
eval way of thinking about aesthetics, but not that there
was the rational debate about aesthetic positions that
would make the period one in which the subject ﬂourished
as a ﬁeld of philosophy. It is true that Eco (1970, 1956)
presents a philosophically interesting theory as Aquinas’
aesthetics. But, as he makes clear, this theory is his own
construction; Eco is informed by Aquinas’ overall thinking
informs, but it is he who is responsible for this supposedly
thirteenth-century aesthetic theory.
See also: ▶Aesthetics, Byzantine ▶Albert the Great
▶Robert Grosseteste ▶Thomas Aquinas ▶William of
Auvergne
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Albert the Great (1972) Super Dionysium de divinis nominibus (c. 1250),
ed. Simon P. Aschendorff, Mu¨nster
Aquinas Thomas (1927) Opuscula omnia, V, ed. Mandonnet P.
Lethielleux, Paris
Baeumker C (1908) Witelo: Ein Philosoph und Naturforscher des XIII.
Jahrhunderts. Aschendorff, Mu¨nster (Beitra¨ge zur Geschichte der
Philosophie des Mittelalters III, 2)
Hugh of St Victor (1961) The didascalicon of Hugh of St. Victor:
a medieval guide to the arts, trans. Taylor J. Columbia University
Press, New York (Records of civilization, sources and studies 64)
Ibn al-Haytham (1989) The optics of Ibn al-Haytham. Books I–III On
direct vision, trans. with commentary Sabra AI. Studies of the War-
burg Institute 40. Warburg Institute, London
Ibn al-Haytham (2001) Alhacen’s theory of visual perception. A critical
edition, with English translation and commentary, of the ﬁrst three
books of Alhacen’s ‘De aspectibus’, the Medieval Latin version of Ibn
al-Haytham’s Kitaˆb al-Manaˆzir by Mark Smith A. Trans Am Philos
Soc 91:4, 5
Suger A (1946) Abbot suger on the Abbey Church of St.-Denis and its arts
treasures, ed. Panofksy E. Princeton University Press, Princeton
Suger A (1995) De consecratione, ed. Binding G, Speer A. Vertrieb Abt.
Architekturgeschichte, Cologne
Ulrich of Strasbourg (1987) De summo bono, II.1–4, ed. de Libera A.
Hamburg, Meiner
Secondary Sources
Aertsen JA (1991) Beauty in the Middle Ages: a forgotten transcendental?
Mediev Philos Theol 1:68–97
Assunto R (1961) La Critica d’Arte nel pensiero medievale. Il Saggiatore,
Milan
Boulnois O (2008) Au-dela` de l’image. Une arche´ologie du visuel au
Moyen Aˆ ge, Ve – XVIe sie`cle. Seuil, Paris
De Bruyne E (1998) E´tudes d’esthe´tique me´die´vale. Albin Michel, Paris
(repr. with new introduction and afterword, both the E´tudes of 1946,
and L’Esthe´tique du moyen aˆge 1947, translated as The esthetics of
the Middle Ages by Hennessy EB, Ungar, New York 1969)
Eco U (1970) Il Problema estetico in Tommaso d’Aquino. Bompiani,
Milan (2nd edn, with new concluding chapter, of a book ﬁrst
Aesthetics A
31
A

published 1956); English trans. The aesthetics of Thomas Aquinas,
trans. Bredin H. Radius, London, 1988
Eco U (1986) Art and beauty in the Middle Ages, trans. Bredin H. Yale
University
Press,
New
Haven/London
(a
translation
of
a section, ‘Sviluppo dell’estetica medievale’ in Momenti e problemi
dell’estetica, published 1959; Eco has published an updating:
Arte e bellezza nell’estetica medievale. Bompiani, Milan, 1987)
Eco
U
(2007)
Dall’albero
al
labirinto:
studi
storici
sul
segno
e l’interpretazione. Bompiani, Milan
Jordan MD (1989) The evidence of the transcendental and the
place of beauty in Thomas Aquinas. Int Philos Quart 29:393–407
Kovach FJ (1961) Die A¨sthetik des Thomas von Aquin. Eine genetische
und systematische Analyse. De Gruyter, Berlin
Kristeller PO (1980) The modern system of the arts’ in his Renaissance
thought and the arts. Princeton University Press, Princeton, pp 163–
227
Marenbon J (2009) Medieval and renaissance aesthetics. A companion to
aesthetics, ed. Davies et al. Wiley-Blackwell, Malden/Oxford, pp
22–32
Maritain J (1965) Art et scolastique, 4th edn. Descle´e de Brower, Paris
McQueen D (1993) Aquinas on the aesthetic relevance of tastes and
smells. Br J Aesthet 33:346–356
Mothersill M (1984) Beauty restored. Oxford University Press, Oxford
Panfosky E (1957) Gothic architecture and scholasticism. Thames &
Hudson, London
Pouillon H (1946) La Beaute´, proprie´te´ transcendentale chez les
scolastiques (1220–1270). Archives d’histoire doctrinale et litte´raire
du moyen aˆge 15:263–329
Speer A (1990) Thomas Aquin und die Kunst. Eine hermeneutische
Anfrage zur mittelalterlichen A¨sthetik. Archiv fu¨r Kulturgeschichte
72:323–345
Speer A (1993) Vom Verstehen mittelalterlicher Kunst. Mittelalterliches
Kunsterleben nach Quellen des 11. Bis 13. Jahrhunderts, ed. Binding
G, Speer A. Fromman and Holzboog, Stuttgart/Bad Cannstatt, pp
13–52
Speer A (1994) Kunst und Scho¨nheit. Kritische U¨ berlegungen zur
mittelalterlichen A¨sthetik. ‘Scientia’ und ‘ars’ in Hoch- und
Spa¨tmittelalter, ed. Craemer-Ruegenberg I, Speer A. De Gruyter,
Berlin/New York, pp 946–966 (Miscellanea Mediaevalia 22, 2)
Tatarkiewicz W (1970) History of aesthetics II. Mouton, The Hague/Paris
(translation of Historia Estetyki. II. Estetyka Sredniowieczna by
A and A Czerniawki)
Aesthetics, Byzantine
GEORGE ZOGRAFIDIS
Department of Philosophy
Aristotle University of Thessaloniki
Thessaloniki
Greece
Abstract
Byzantine aesthetics comprises views on traditional aes-
thetic concepts (beauty, light) and problems (values and
properties) as well as discussions relevant to art theory
(the status of the work of art, the functions of art, the
beholder). It does not form a coherent system and it has to
be reconstructed through numerous texts of different
genres (philosophical, theological, rhetorical, etc.). The
sources of Byzantine aesthetics, concerning mainly the
visual arts, are ancient Greek aesthetics (late Platonic
tradition on and rhetorical descriptions of works of art)
and early Patristic thought (presenting the Christian atti-
tude toward art and an elaborated theory of beauty). Art is
appreciated, but in so far as it is a human creation that
appeals to the senses it could be justiﬁed only on meta-
physical grounds. The Byzantines’ major contribution was
the theory of image that was elaborated during Icono-
clasm (eighth to ninth century) and legitimated in theo-
logical and philosophical terms orthodox religious art.
The Nature of Byzantine Aesthetics
Modern discussions about the distinction between art and
non-art or about the status of the work of art make us
hesitant to apply unqualiﬁedly modern concepts (art,
aesthetics) to the pre-modern era of Byzantium. The
very existence of aesthetics in the Middle Ages is question-
able and the medieval concept of art differs from that of
antiquity and, even more, from that of the Renaissance.
We cannot expect Byzantium aesthetics to be an autono-
mous branch of philosophy. On the other hand, the Byz-
antine writers often discussed aesthetic concepts (beauty,
image, light) and problems (aesthetic values and proper-
ties, the function of the work of art, the role of the
beholder). But in most cases this discussion was made in
the context of wider theological and philosophical issues
that mostly attracted the Byzantines’ interest.
What we can call ‘‘Byzantine aesthetics’’ has certain
main characteristics: (a) It neither has a systematic nature
nor does form a coherent whole. It emerged as a response
to speciﬁc problems that were occasionally aroused; so, in
regard to its major issues (theory of image, attitude to
Greek art) it is mostly polemic. (b) There is almost no
particular thinker who treated traditional aesthetic issues
per se, analyzing the concepts he used or concluding
his discussion without reference to the spiritual domain.
(c) The Greek and Patristic heritage was always present in
the manner the Byzantines speculated about art and it
must be considered as the major source for the formation
of Byzantine aesthetics. (d) Byzantine aesthetics referred
not only to Byzantine art but also to ancient Greek art.
Hence, Byzantine aesthetics unlike traditional aes-
thetics does not deal primarily with the categories of
beauty and taste, aesthetic experience or pleasure, critical
32 A
Aesthetics, Byzantine

examination and evaluation of beauty. More than a theory
of beauty Byzantine aesthetics must be considered as
a theory of art, that is, about the status of the work of
art, its functions, its reception, its beholder, etc.
The Sources of Byzantine Aesthetics
Twofold is the background of the Byzantines’ views on art,
mainly the visual arts: (a) the aesthetic ideas of Greek
antiquity, namely the late Platonic tradition (where the
role of art is to lead the way toward spiritual beauty), and
the analysis of works of art in the rhetorical texts of Late
Antiquity. The Byzantines imitated the ancient Greek aes-
thetic vocabulary (especially in the description of works of
art) and when needed they transformed it (especially in
the theory of image). (b) The early Patristic thought,
particularly the Cappadocians and Pseudo-Dionysius, in
which the Byzantines found a warranted Christian attitude
toward art and an elaborated theory of beauty.
One of the problems about studying Byzantine aes-
thetic views is the absence of speciﬁc treatises and the need
to reconstruct it using texts of different genres and, more
precariously, from the works of art. There are numerous
Byzantine texts whose signiﬁcance for aesthetics is indis-
cernible because of their titles. They are (a) texts that deal
(exclusively or not) with art, like for instance (1) the
apologetic texts against ancient Greek art, (2) texts on
the theory of image and (3) descriptions of works of art
(ekphraseis); and (b) texts with occasional references to
issues of art and art theory with variant content (theolog-
ical, historical, philosophical, rhetorical, literal) and writ-
ten for various purposes and for different audiences
during a period of ten centuries.
Beauty and Other Aesthetic Concepts
In the Byzantine writings, many aesthetic concepts are
used: beauty, resemblance, similarity, imitation, harmony,
symmetry, image, prototype, imagination, symbol, color,
form, light, place, time, artist, creation/creativity, life-like,
etc. The vocabulary can sometimes be misleading since the
language of Byzantine art criticism is completely different
from the modern, and thus easily misunderstood. For
instance, it is difﬁcult to see why an icon was considered
as a naturalistic copy of the original, if we do not take into
account the beholder’s reaction to the representation.
The Byzantines’ language has a philosophical background
and was derived from late antique ekphraseis, rhetorical
texts that were formulated to describe an art quite differ-
ent from the Byzantine. Eusebius, Procopius, Paul
Silentiarios, Photios, Psellos, and many others wrote
numerous ekphraseis that help us to understand the
parallel function of text and art, and discourse and
image in Byzantium. These descriptions try to express
something of the art’s spirituality; the text shares
a common end with the image described: they point to
the truth that supersedes both.
The classical concept of beauty was used in the
descriptions but it played no role for the iconoclastic
controversy. The visible beauty, be it symmetry or appro-
priateness, is in earthly things and reﬂects the spiritual
beauty of God (a theme common to the Platonic tradi-
tion). So beauty has aesthetic but more importantly
ontological connotations. God is the beauty itself that
surpasses and causes all created beautiful things.
The Negation and the Acceptance of an Art
That Appeals to the Senses
Throughout the Byzantine period existed, but not domi-
nated, a rigoristic attitude to art, that was inherited from
Early Christianity. Pagan (religious) works of art were
condemned
as
material,
immoral,
and
dangerous
(inhabited
by
demons)
while
the
possibility
of
a Christian art was questioned on the basis of the Old
Testament’s prohibition against graven images and the fear
of idolatry. The hostility toward art, in general, was also
justiﬁed by the illusionary and seductive character of the
sensible art-objects and by the total rejection of sensual
pleasures in favor of spirituality that demands the
formation of the inner image (in the soul) and not the
worship of material representations that are incapable of
circumscribing God.
The emergence of Christian art (third century) helped
to overcome the earlier aniconism and gradually (from the
fourth century onward) the Byzantines made a distinction
between the ancient works of art that can be appreciated as
such and their deplorable religious meaning that must be
rejected and condemned. The transfer to Constantinople
of ancient masterpieces to adorn the new Christian capital
is indicative. But in general, the Byzantine beholder (if
there can be a single category that comprises the emperor,
the clergy, high ofﬁcials and scholars, philosophers and
theologians, illiterates, etc.) was embarrassed by what can
be labeled as ‘‘aesthetic pleasure.’’
It was later, probably from the eleventh century
onward, that things changed. For instance, Psellos has
written descriptions where he analyses the ancient work
of art aesthetically, commenting on many of its aesthetic
qualities and using Platonic and Aristotelian terminology.
Detailed descriptions, evaluation of certain material fea-
tures, the choice of the form, the connection between the
sensible form and the theoretical content of the work
Aesthetics, Byzantine A
33
A

testify to the aesthetic interests of the Byzantines. After all,
the primacy of the visual was a commonplace in
Byzantium.
The Theory of Image (Icon)
The development of Christian art and the cult of the
images led to the need for the justiﬁcation of religious
imagery and to Iconoclasm (eighth to ninth century). The
main problem was not the representation of natural
objects (that was only a problem of craftsmanship and of
style) or the artistic treatment of religious themes and
personages.
Thinkers
like
John
of
Damascus
and
Nikephoros of Constantinople, and the Seventh Ecumen-
ical Council argued for the possibility and the legitimacy
of the representation of the transcendence, that is, of the
incarnated God.
In this perspective, the image was considered primarily
as a liturgical object and secondarily as a work of art. The
image represents its prototype (art as mimesis).Their rela-
tion is based on resemblance, which at ﬁrst is an external
one but it becomes internal, due to the anthropological
premises of Byzantine thought and to a peculiar partici-
pation of the image in the prototype. Aesthetic qualities
cannot play the ﬁrst role; the artistic language is not
irrelevant but its criterion is its functionality (it is ques-
tionable whether a more beautiful icon can serve better its
purposes). As the art had to reﬂect the absolute beauty of
God and testify to its immanence, likeness is not enough.
What is needed is a symbolic language to convey the
theoretical message. The image is a sign of the presence
of an absence, an immanent trace of the transcendentality.
It does not express the artist’s personal emotion but
manifests a reality.
The truth of the image is not its appearance nor its
beauty but its reference and its proper use. A functionalist
approach is appropriate for understanding that the mean-
ing of the image is its use. The image has many functions:
didactic (not only for those who were illiterate), allegori-
cal, mystical-anagogical, liturgical (in the process of lit-
urgy), artistic. As Photios stated, the opposition between
the external immobility of the image and the internal
mobility of the spectator produces the artistic effect. The
effect on the beholder is also psychological and moral as
the image reminds him/her of events of the holy history
and arouses many emotions: compassion, pity, affection
and desire to emulate those who are represented. The
response of the beholder is ﬁnally his/her spiritual ascent.
It is not just the aesthetic pleasure that is produced by
gazing the images. Beyond beauty and harmony what
counts is the crossing of the gazes, of the holy person
depicted and the faithful beholder. This is the ultimate
function of a work of sacred art and, at the same time, it is
overcoming.
Influence
The Byzantine theory of image offered legitimacy to
religious art as it is practiced until today among the
Orthodox
Christians.
The
distorted
reception
of
Byzantine iconophilia by Charlemagne scholars led to
a divergence between the East and the West on the use
of sacred art. The outcome of Byzantine Iconoclasm was
signiﬁcant not only for the development of Byzantine art
but for European civilization in general and showed
how important is the dominion over the production of
the symbolic and the imaginary within theoretical and
social contexts. The issues at stake were the power of
images and the place of the holy in the society and who
controls them.
See also: ▶Aesthetics ▶Philosophy, Byzantine
Bibliography
Primary Sources
(1960) Acts of the seventh Ecumenical council: Sacrorum Conciliorum
nova et amplissima collectio, ed. Mansi JD, vols 12, 13. Akademische
Druck- u. Verlagsanstalt, Graz, pp 951–1154, 1–758
Brubaker Leslie, Haldon John (2001) Byzantium in the iconoclastic era
(ca. 680–850): the sources. Ashgate, Aldershot
Damascene John (1975) Apologetic orations against the calumniators of
the Holy Icons, ed. Kotter B. Die Schriften des Johannes von
Damaskos, vol 3 (Patristiche Texte und Studien 17). Gruyter, Berlin.
English edition: Damascene John (2003) Three treatises on the divine
images, trans. Louth A. St. Vladimir’s Seminary Press, Crestwood
Mango Cyril (1986) The art of the Byzantine empire, 312–1453: sources
and documents. Medieval Academy of America, Toronto
Nikephoros (1989) Refutation and rejection of the nonsense against the
redemptive incarnation of God the word: Patrologia Graeca. In:
Nice´phore, Discours contre les iconoclasts, trans. Mondzain-
Baudinet M-J, vol 100. Klincksieck, Paris, pp 205–533
Nikephoros (1997) Critical examination and rejection of the false deﬁni-
tion of the Apostates who refuse the redemptive economy of the
divine word. In: Featherstone JM (ed) Nicephori Patriarchae
Constantinopolitani Refutatio et Eversio Deﬁnitionis Synodalis
Anni 815 [CCSG 33]. Brepols, Turnhout
Photius (1959) Homilies: Photiou Homiliai. Thessaloniki, ed. Laourdas
B. English edition: Photius (1958) The homilies of Photius, Patriarch
of Constantinople, trans. Mango C. Dumbarton Oaks, Cambridge
Procopius of Gaza (1939) Description of an image, ed. and trans.
Friedla¨nder P. Spa¨tantiker Gema¨ldezyklus in Gaza: Des Prokopios
von Gaza’0kfrasiς Ε᾿ikόnος. Biblioteca Apostolica Vaticana, City of
Vatican
Theodore of Stoudite (1981) Refuting discourses against iconoclasts (PG
99), trans. Roth C. St Theodore the Stoudite on the Holy Icons. St.
Vladimir’s Seminary, Crestwood, pp 327–436
Thu¨mmel Hans Georg (1992) Die Fru¨hgeschichte der Ostkirchlichen
Bilderlehre: Texte und Untersuchungen zur Zeit vor dem Bilderstreit.
Akademie, Berlin
34 A
Aesthetics, Byzantine

Secondary Sources
Bycˇkov V (1983) L’estetica bizantina. Congedo, Bari
Hunger H (1978) Die hochsprachliche profane Literatur der Byzantiner,
vol 1. Beck, Mu¨nchen, pp 170–188
James L (1996) Light and colour in Byzantine art. Oxford University
Press, Oxford
Kitzinger E (1954) The cult of images in the age before iconoclasm.
Dumbart. Oaks Papers 8:83–150.
Maguire H (1981) Art and eloquence in Byzantium. Princeton University
Press, Princeton
Maguire H (1999) The profane aesthetic in Byzantine art and literature.
Dumbart. Oaks Papers 53:189–205.
Maguire ED, Maguire H (2007) Other icons: art and power in Byzantine
secular culture. Princeton University Press, Princeton
Mathew G (1963) Byzantine aesthetics. Murray, London
Michelis P (1955) An aesthetic approach to Byzantine art. Batsford,
London
Ouspensky L (1992) Theology of the icon. St. Vladimir’s Seminary Press,
Crestwood
Pelikan J (1989) Imago Dei: the Byzantine apologia for icons. Yale
University Press, Yale
Akindynos, Gregory
▶Gregory Akindynos
Alan of Lille
CHRISTOPHE ERISMANN
Helsinki Collegium for Advanced Studies
University of Helsinki
Helsinki
Finland
Abstract
Alan of Lille is a philosopher, theologian and poet of the
twelfth century. He is the author of a twofold work: the
transposition in poetical form of the major themes of
Platonism on the one hand and treatises of theology that
include many aspects of the logic and ontology of Gilbert
of Poitiers on the other. He was the last representative of
the ﬁrst age of medieval speculation based on Boethius
and on the logica vetus, which preceded the rediscovery of
Aristotle’s physics, metaphysics, and psychology, and the
discovery of Arabic philosophy.
As a scholar, Alan of Lille (Alanus ab Insulis, c.
1120/1128–1203, sometimes called the Doctor universalis)
was inﬂuenced by two major currents of twelfth-century
thought: the so-called School of Chartres, which inspired
several of his research themes and the philosophical move-
ment initiated by Gilbert Porreta (or of Poitiers). He was
interested both in the philosophy of nature in a Platonic
perspective grounded in the Timaeus, as was traditional
among the scholars associated with Chartres, and in the
philosophy of language, logic, and ontology in a Porretan
perspective. In this, he synthesized the two major centers
of interest of the twelfth century. He is said to have taught
in Paris between the years 1170–1180, probably at Mont
Sainte-Genevie`ve, at the same time as Simon of Tournai,
before leaving for Montpellier; like Thierry of Chartres, he
became a convert in Cıˆteaux. Alan had great familiarity
with the liberal arts, in particular the trivium – grammar,
logic, rhetoric – and excellent knowledge of some Platonic
authors of Late Antiquity (Chalcidius, Martianus Capella,
Macrobius, and Boethius in the Consolatio). Despite living
at the time of the beginning of the western reception
of Arabic and Muslim texts (Avicenna), his thought
remained within the framework of twelfth-century Latin
culture (with the noticeable exception of his knowledge of
the Liber de causis). In contrast with his contemporary
Adelard of Bath, he demonstrated little interest in the
‘‘Arabic innovation’’; his intellectual world was that of
the Aetas Boethiana, the ﬁrst age of medieval metaphysics
dominated by Boethius and the logica vetus, of which he
was the last representative.
His works belong to various literary genres and
to different ﬁelds of knowledge. He wrote allegorical
poems, in which he considered issues of natural philoso-
phy: the De planctu naturae, the Anticlaudianus, and the
Rythmus de incarnatione et de septem artibus (a text in
which the Liberal Arts admit their incapacity to under-
stand the Incarnation). His other works pertained to the-
ology (Summa Quoniam homines and Regulae caelestis
iuris) and to preaching (Ars predicandi and Sermones);
they also included an apologetic treatise, the De ﬁde
catholica, which was aimed against Cathars and Walden-
sians as much as against Pagans or Jews, and one more
philosophical text, the Sermo de sphera intelligibili.
Through his poetical and allegorical writings, he con-
tributed to the development, peculiar to the twelfth cen-
tury, of a new philosophical conception of nature, thus
testifying to the tradition of reading and glossing of the
Timaeus, characteristic of the School of Chartres. Alan’s
work is in great part the poetical transposition of the
major themes of Platonism.
The Lament of Nature (De planctu naturae) –
a prosimetrum (a work comprising alternating verse and
prose sections) written between 1160 and 1170 – is
Alan of Lille A
35
A

a poetical allegory intended for philosophical and moral
meditation. Nature, the vicaria Dei, whose task is to make
harmony reign on Earth, descends to the poet in order to
condemn the vices of humanity, ﬁrst and foremost
homosexuality.
The Anticlaudianus, a long epic of 6,000 verses com-
posed in 1182–1183, describes an allegorical voyage of
Prudentia to visit God so as to receive the soul of
a perfect man. In this work, Alan gives an encyclopedic
overview of human knowledge (grammar, dialectic, ora-
tory art, mathematics, geometry, and astronomy) and
a descriptive praise of moral and intellectual virtues. He
meditates on the perfect man, whom nature alone cannot
produce.
The summa Quoniam homines, like the Rules of
Theology, is a text that shows Alain of Lille concluding
century-long thought and opening new perspectives,
among other things, on terminism. The Summa belongs
to the Porretan–Boethian theological tradition. It deals
with the Boethian issue of the transfer of categorical lan-
guage to predication in divinis and the possibility of using
categorical discourse in order to speak about God. In
a reasoning inspired by the Pseudo-Dionysius on the
ineffable aspect of celestial science, Alan speaks of the
translation of the categories when they are predicated of
God. In contrast with Boethius who used the term
mutatio, Alan’s source here is Eriugena, whose arguments
he uses. According to Eriugena, none of the ten categories,
not even substance, is predicable of God in the proper
sense (nulla categoria proprie Deum signiﬁcare potest).
A category can only be predicated of him in a ﬁgurative
(translative) or metaphorical sense (per metaphoram),
by transfer from the creature to the Creator (per
translationem a creatura ad creatorem). Alan’s debt to
Gilbert appears in these texts mainly in the ﬁeld of the
semantics of terms and of ontology (see last section). Alan
grounds his theory of signiﬁcation on the distinction
between suppositio and signiﬁcatio, which occurs in the
wider framework of the opposition between the ‘‘proper
use’’ and the ‘‘improper use’’ of a term.
The Regulae caelestis iuris circulated under several
different titles: Theologicae regulae, Regulae Alani de sacra
theologia,
Maximae
theologiae,
Liber
de
maximis
theologiae, De maximis theologicis, Axiomata theologica.
Beginning with the postulate that ‘‘each science is
grounded in foundations which are proper to it,’’ this
writing is an attempt at stating systematically the rules of
theology. This organized set of 134 propositions, which
are analyzed, commented upon or demonstrated, offers an
axiomatization of theology, that is, the deﬁnition of the set
of principles that theology needs in order to be constituted
as a rigorous science, reminiscent of Boethius’ treatise De
hebdomadibus. This is the ﬁrst attempt to provide theol-
ogy with a scientiﬁc character, by presenting it according
to a geometrical organization, and by applying logic and
grammar to it. This work is inspired by Boethius, the
Chartrians, and the Liber XXIV philosophorum – an anon-
ymous text of supposed ‘‘hermetical’’ origin – and is
pervaded by Neoplatonic henology. The starting point is
not, as it was for Boethius, esse, being, but the One in the
form of the monad. The ﬁrst rule is ‘‘the monad is that
which makes any reality one.’’ God is ﬁrst considered as
One or unity (monas) before being considered according
to the metaphysical categories of esse, simplicity, and
form. This monad is God-One, through which all unities
and pluralities and, therefore, beings come into existence.
Henology reacquires a form of primacy, but is now
represented as acting on the order of nature, and not any
more as the presence in all things of the transcendental
One. According to Alan, God is really One, but does not
have being: ‘‘of that which is being (esse), there is no being.
Of God, who is the being of all things, there is no being,
because in order to be he does not participate in anything.’’
A ‘‘form without a form’’ or ‘‘form of forms,’’ God is ‘‘the
ﬁrst substance [. . .] called ousia’’ – in the words of the
Liber XXIV philosophorum, ‘‘an intelligible sphere whose
centre is everywhere and whose circumference nowhere.’’
Alan’s axiomatization of theology contributed, more than
any other work, to the evolution of the old sacra pagina
into a proper ‘‘theological science,’’ which took place at the
beginning of the thirteenth century. Alan’s text inspired
Meister Eckhart’s idea of an Opus propositionum, the set of
the 1,000 theses necessary to an axiomatization of theo-
logical knowledge.
The Sermon on the Intelligible Sphere is a treatise of
Neoplatonic metaphysics, inspired among others by
Boethius, and also by Bernard of Chartres and Gilbert
Porreta for the theory of ‘‘native forms.’’ The universe
consists in four spheres with four modes of being and
four modes of knowledge. The ﬁrst sphere is that of reality,
dominated by nature, in which ‘‘the marriage of forms
and their subjects is celebrated.’’ The second is that of
primordial matter around which the forms revolve in
a continuous movement. The palace of the World-Soul
that illuminates the universe is the third sphere, in which
the pure form returns to its origin. The fourth is the
perfect sphere of intelligibles, of eternal ideas.
One of the salient traits of the philosophy of Alan of
Lille is its Porretan character. Alan is one of the thinkers
who echoes most strongly the thought of Gilbert. A large
part of Alan’s philosophy of language, his theory of refer-
ence (in particular, the theory of the nomen appellativum),
36 A
Alan of Lille

and, most of all, his ontology consist in the intelligent use,
systematization, and rethinking of Gilbert’s doctrines.
Here Alan does not use allegory or poetry, but dry and
technical reasoning. Although Platonism pervades part of
his thought, one must not expect to ﬁnd him defending
a realist ontology. On the contrary, his ontology is
grounded in strict particularism (and in this, Alan’s
thought constitutes yet another example that realism and
Platonism must not be considered as necessarily related).
Alan’s position is nominalistic, and can be described more
precisely as a trope theory. He does not accept universal
entities, in the sense of entities that are common to several
spatiotemporally distinct individuals. All properties, both
essential and accidental, are particular. A man is man
through his own humanity, this apple is red through its
own redness, and Socrates is wise through his own
wisdom. Complementary to this particularism, Alan also
borrows from Gilbert his theory of exact resemblance or
conformitas. Two individuals that belong to the same spe-
cies or exemplify the same property are considered to be
conform in this respect. Although they are both particular,
the humanity of Socrates and that of Plato are exactly
resemblant and therefore conform (Regulae, CXXX:
‘‘CONFORMITAS EST SINGULARIUM NATURARUM PLENA SIMILITUDO.
Vt Socrates et Plato dicuntur naturaliter conformes suis
singularibus humanitatibus eos similiter conformantibus’’).
This form that makes Socrates a man causes him to belong
to a group of individuals which have the same speciﬁc
characteristic; it makes him resemble other men. Men do
not resemble each other through a common form, but
through the conformity of their own form.
On the basis of this exact resemblance, one can,
through abstraction, obtain universal concepts that are
ontologically grounded. The speciﬁc or generic universal
is the reunion or collection of all the individuals which
present the same speciﬁc or generic character; however,
this universal is not a res.
See also: ▶Gilbert of Poitiers ▶Schools in the Twelfth
Century
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Alan of Lille (1954) Summa Quoniam Homines, ed. Glorieux P. Arch Hist
Doct Litt M-Age 20:113–364
Alan of Lille (1955) Anticlaudianus, ed. Bossuat R. Vrin (Textes
philosophiques du Moyen-aˆge 1), Paris
Alan of Lille (1965) Sermo de sphera intelligibili. In: D’Alverny M-T (ed)
Alain de Lille. Textes ine´dits. Vrin (Etudes de philosophie me´die´vale
52), Paris
Alan of Lille (1978) De planctu naturae, ed. Ha¨ring NM. Stud Mediev
19:797–879
Alan of Lille (1981) Regulae theologiae, ed. Ha¨ring NM. Arch Hist Doct
Litt M-Age 48:97–226
Alanus de Insulis (1855) Opera omnia, ed. Migne JP. PL CCX. Paris
Secondary Sources
Chaˆtillon J (1985) D’Isidore de Se´ville a` Saint Thomas d’Aquin: e´tudes
d’histoire et de the´ologie. Ashgate, Aldershot
De Libera A (1987) Logique et the´ologie dans la Summa Quoniam
homines d’Alain de Lille. In: Jolivet J, de Libera A (eds) Gilbert de
Poitiers
et
ses
contemporains.
Aux
origines
de
la
Logica
Modernorum. Bibliopolis, Naples, pp 437–469
Roussel H, Suard F (1980) Alain de Lille, Gautier de Chaˆtillon, Jakemart
Gie´le´e et leur temps. Presses Universitaires de Lille, Lille
Sole`re J-L, Vasiliu A, Galonnier A (2005) Alain de Lille, le Docteur
universel. Philosophie, the´ologie et litte´rature au XIIe sie`cle. Brepols,
Turnhout
Valente L (2008) Logique et the´ologie. Les e´coles parisiennes entre 1150 et
1220. Vrin, Paris
Albert of Saxony
SANDER DE BOER
Center for the History of Philosophy and Science
Radboud University Nijmegen
Nijmegen
The Netherlands
Abstract
Albert of Saxony (early 1320s – July 8, 1390) was born in or
near Helmstedt in the early 1320s. He studied at the
University of Paris, and became the ﬁrst rector of the
University of Vienna. Albert was very inﬂuential in
both natural philosophy and logic, and many of his
works were already printed several times by the early
sixteenth century. He was thoroughly familiar with the
works of many of his contemporaries at Paris (John
Buridan and Nicholas Oresme), as well as with important
works from Oxford philosophers (Thomas Bradwardine,
William of Ockham, William of Heytesbury). He drew
extensively on these sources, but made important innova-
tions in both logic and natural philosophy. Among
other things, Albert was one of the defenders of the so-
called impetus theory for projectile motion. This theory
claimed that the proximate cause of the motion of
a projectile was a force inherent in the projectile itself, in
contrast to the more traditional (Aristotelian) view that
the proximate cause was inherent in the part of the air that
was adjacent to the projectile. Albert died in Halberstadt
on July 8, 1390, where he had been the bishop from 1366
onward.
Albert of Saxony A
37
A

Lemma
Little is known for certain about Albert of Saxony’s (also
known as Albert of Rickmersdorf or as Albertutius) early
life. Traditionally, c. 1316 has often been suggested as his
date of birth, but it has been shown that this date is merely
the result of a misinterpretation of an early eighteenth-
century source. Instead, he was more likely born in the
early 1320s. This uncertainty concerning Albert’s birth
date is a result from the fact that the ﬁrst dated record
we have of his life is that in 1351 he determined as a master
of arts in Paris.
Albert’s place of birth was Helmstedt, or otherwise the
region around Helmstedt, which lay in lower Saxony. Prior
to studying at the University of Paris, he would have
attended one of the schools in his diocese, at Halberstadt
or at Magdeburg. In addition, he may have also studied for
some time at the studium generale at Erfurt. There is, in
fact, a reference to a stay in Erfurt in what might be the only
work we have of Albert written before his stay at Paris, the
Philosophia pauperum, but its authenticity is still uncer-
tain. After becoming a master of arts, Albert began study-
ing theology but he apparently never incepted in it.
During his stay in Paris, Albert fulﬁlled different
administrative functions in the university. For some time
he was proctor and receptor of the English-German
nation, and in 1353 he was appointed rector of the entire
arts faculty. Albert probably left the University of Paris in
1361/1362 and little is known of his activities in the 2 years
following his departure, apart from the fact that he was
involved in some diplomatic transactions between Pope
Urban Vand the Duke Rudolph IVof Austria. In 1365, he
became the ﬁrst rector of the newly founded University of
Vienna; in fact, Albert had played an important role in
obtaining papal support for its founding. His rectorship in
Vienna lasted only 1 year, because he was appointed
bishop of Halberstadt in 1366, a position which he held
until his death there on July 8, 1390.
Thought
Albert is well known both for his works in logic as well as
for those in natural philosophy. His most important works
in logic are the Perutilis logica (Very Useful Logic), the
Quaestiones circa logicam (Questions on Logic), and his
Sophismata. In addition, he wrote commentaries on the
Ars vetus (Isagoge, Categories and On Interpretation) and
on the Posterior Analytics. Albert’s works in natural phi-
losophy include commentaries on the Physics, On the Soul,
On the Heavens, On Generation and Corruption, On Sense
and What is Sensed, and on the Meteorology. He also
wrote commentaries on the Ethics and on the Economics.
In addition, he commented on John of Holywood’s
(Johannes de Sacrobosco) astronomical work De sphera
(On the Sphere) and wrote some (short) mathematical
treatises including the Tractatus proportionum (Treatise
on
Proportions),
which
was
modeled
on
Thomas
Bradwardine’s treatise De proportionibus velocitatum in
motibus (On the Proportions of Velocities in Movements).
None of Albert’s theological writings – if he wrote any –
survive.
A long-standing characterization of Albert was that he
was only a transmitter and not an original thinker. This
characterization, however, now seems no longer tenable.
It is certainly true that he often relied heavily on others.
For example, his commentary on the Ethics is strongly
inﬂuenced by Walter Burley’s commentary. But in natural
philosophy as well as in logic, Albert made important
contributions of his own.
The most important and inﬂuential of Albert’s
logical works is his Perutilis logica. This work is not
a commentary, but an independent treatise consisting of
six related tracts on various topics in logic. The ﬁrst tract
deﬁnes the basic terminology to be used in the rest of the
tracts, such as sign and intention, and also discusses the
basic structure of propositions. It is followed by tracts on
the properties of terms, on propositions, on inferences
and topics, on fallacies and, lastly, on obligations and
insolubles. An important source of inspiration for the
Perutilis logica was Ockham’s Summa logicae, both for its
structure and for part of its doctrinal contents, but Albert’s
work is considered to be both more systematic and more
comprehensive than Ockham’s and contains much that is
not found in Ockham. Also closely related to the Perutilis
logica is Buridan’s Summa logicae, but since the relative
priority between Albert’s and Buridan’s work is still unclear,
it is difﬁcult to answer questions on inﬂuence and original-
ity. It is still possible, however, to point out some interesting
differences between Albert’s and Buridan’s views.
One of the key differences that have been noted is the
different ways in which Albert and Buridan understand
how the copula ‘‘is’’ (est) functions in a proposition.
Buridan interprets it in a manner that makes it atemporal,
in the sense that in a proposition such as ‘‘man is an
animal’’ the copula ‘‘is’’ not only applies to all men that
exist presently, but to all men in the past and in the future
as well. Albert, on the other hand, strongly emphasizes
that ‘‘is’’ always and only signiﬁes the present tense,
which implies that in the proposition ‘‘man is an animal,’’
the term ‘‘man’’ only stands for (in fourteenth-century
terminology: supposits for) all men presently existing. As
a consequence, Albert and Buridan give a rather different
explanation for the reasons why scientiﬁc propositions
are eternally true. Since the subject term of a scientiﬁc
38 A
Albert of Saxony

proposition in Albert’s view only stands for presently
existing things, he cannot just claim that the eternal, or
universal truth of such a proposition is accounted for by
the fact that it is true of all of the particulars that the
subject term stands for. For, in order to claim universal
truth, all the particulars in the past and in the future would
have to be taken into account as well. Albert quite ele-
gantly evades this apparent problem by saying that in
order for a scientiﬁc proposition to be eternally true, all
that is required is that each and every time the proposition
is thought of, or uttered, or written, it is true of all the
particulars existing at that moment.
Just like his Perutilis logica, Albert’s Sophismata also
shows an Oxford inﬂuence. Sophismata (sophisms) are
sentences that give rise to difﬁculties in their interpreta-
tion, because of certain ambiguities or other characteris-
tics. One of the tools Albert relies heavily on to solve such
sophismata is a distinction between compounded and
divided senses (sensus divisus and sensus compositus), in
the sophisticated form into which it was developed by
William of Heytesbury. This distinction enables one to
take the scope of modal operators into account when
analyzing the truth value of a proposition.
Albert’s works in natural philosophy are closely related
to the works of John Buridan and Nicholas Oresme. This
has led scholars to believe that there was a so-called
Buridan school in Paris, of which Buridan was the teacher
and Albert of Saxony, Nicholas Oresme, Marsilius of
Inghen, and Themon Judaeus were the students. This,
however, was not the case. The fact that Buridan belonged
to the Picard nation of the university, whereas Albert
belonged to the English-German nation, more or less
rules out the possibility of a teacher – student relation in
the strict sense, and the fact that it is known that Albert
incepted under Albert of Bohemia (from his own nation)
does the rest. The doctrinal interconnections, however,
between these philosophers are many and undeniable,
even if the precise relations between them are unknown.
The recently suggested description of this group as ‘‘a small
intellectual network of nearly contemporary masters of
arts, who were familiar with each others’ work and at
times responded to each other’’seems much more accurate.
One of the interesting themes in Albert’s important
commentary on the Physics is his analysis of projectile
motion. This type of motion was problematic to analyze
within an Aristotelian framework, because Aristotle had
insisted that all local motion occurs by contact between
a mover and the thing moved. What then, in the case of
projectile motion, is the mover that remains in contact with
the projectile? A traditional (Aristotelian) answer – though
certainly not the only one – had been that the motive force
is transferred by the original mover to the air, after which
one part of air would pass on this force – with diminishing
intensity – to the next part, so that there is always contact
between the projectile and that part of the air which cur-
rently has the motive force. This solution, however, has
a number of difﬁculties, not the least of which is that it is
hard to see how motion can be a continuous process when
the motive force is transferred from one (seemingly dis-
crete) part of the air to the next. Albert gives a different
explanation for this phenomenon, one that was also given
by Buridan. According to Albert, the original mover (for
instance the person throwing the projectile) transfers the
motive force to the projectile itself. Because the moving
force becomes a quality of the projectile, there is no longer
any need for any other direct contact between a mover and
the projectile. The name under which this moving force in
the projectile became known and famous was impetus, but
Albert still used the term virtus motiva.
The topic of impetus also sheds some more light on the
relation between Albert’s and Buridan’s commentaries on
the Physics. It has now been shown that Albert’s commen-
tary was composed somewhere between Buridan’s third
redaction and his ﬁnal redaction of his commentary on the
Physics. Part of the evidence for this is that the term
impetus, which was not used by Albert, is only used in
Buridan’s ﬁnal redaction of his commentary. But more
importantly, in his ﬁnal redaction Buridan, at times,
responds to Albert or takes over elements from his
discussions.
There is more disagreement between Albert and
Buridan on the ontological status of quantity. Albert
sides with Ockham when he reduces the ontological cate-
gory of quantity to the categories of substance and quality
whereas Buridan had defended that quantity must be
a distinct ontological category besides substance and qual-
ity. As a consequence, Albert considers condensation and
rarefaction – the phenomena that had occasioned Buridan
to assign a separate status to quantity – as merely forms of
local motion of the parts of a given substance. Albert did
not, however, always take Buridan’s Physics commentary as
his starting point. On the questions of the possibility of the
existence of a void, for example, he models his discussions
on Oresme’s commentary instead.
Oresme’s works have also, again together with
Buridan’s, inﬂuenced Albert’s commentary on Aristotle’s
On the Heavens. But apart from the fact that Albert dis-
cusses many questions not found in either Buridan or
Oresme, he also surprisingly and very interestingly orga-
nizes the material in a novel way. Instead of following the
traditional division of On the Heavens into four books, he
chooses to arrange the work according to the three major
Albert of Saxony A
39
A

topics he distinguishes in Aristotle’s work: the world as
a whole, its noble parts, namely heaven and earth, and its
less noble parts, namely the elements, especially insofar as
they exhibit the qualities of being either heavy or light. As
a consequence, Albert treats the traditional books three
and four as a thematic unity and writes a commentary that
is divided in only three parts.
To sum up, not only was Albert thoroughly familiar
with a wide range of philosophical views in his time, but
he was also responsible for introducing several new ideas
into the philosophical discussions. Albert was very inﬂu-
ential and remained so for a long time, which can be
demonstrated not only by the number of surviving man-
uscripts, but also by the number of times his works were
printed. His commentaries on the Physics, On the Heavens,
and On Generation and Corruption, as well as many of his
logical works were all printed multiple times in the late
ﬁfteenth and early sixteenth centuries. His Tractatus
proportionum was even printed at least 15 times. Albert
thereby became one of the most important ﬁgures in the
transmission of fourteenth-century philosophy.
See
also:
▶John
Buridan
▶Marsilius
of
Inghen
▶Nicholas Oresme ▶Thomas Bradwardine ▶William
Heytesbury ▶William of Ockham
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Albert of Saxony (1971) Tractatus proportionum, ed. Busard HLL. Der
Tractatus proportionum von Albert von Sachsen. O¨ sterreichische
Akademie der Wissenschaften, math.-nat. Klasse, Denkschriften
116(2):44–72. Springer, Vienna
Albert of Saxony (1988) Perutilis logica. O Lo´gica Muyu´til, ed. with
Spanish trans. Mun˜oz-Garcia A. Universidad Nacional Auto´noma
de Me´xico, Me´xico (this is a transcription of the 1522 Venice edition
and includes a Spanish translation)
Albert of Saxony (1988) Quaestiones in Artem Veterem, ed. Mun˜oz-
Garcia A. Edicio´n critica, ed. with Spanish trans. Mun˜oz-Garcia A.
Universidad del Zulia, Maracaibo
Albert of Saxony (1993) De proprietates terminorum, ed. Kann C. Die
Eigenschaften der Termini. Brill, Leiden (this is the second tract of
the Perutilis logica)
Albert of Saxony (1999) Quaestiones super libros Physicorum, ed. Patar B.
Expositio et Quaestiones in Aristotelis Physicam ad Albertum de
Saxonia attributae, 3 vols. Editions Peeters, Louvain
Albert of Saxony (2002) Questiones circa logicam. In: Fitzgerald MJ (ed)
Albert of Saxony’s twenty-ﬁve disputed questions on logic. A critical
edition of his Quaestiones circa logicam. Brill, Leiden (Studien und
Texte zur Geistesgeschichte des Mittelalters, 79). (For a list of
corrections to this edition, see the review by H. Weidemann in
History and Philosophy of Logic 25:235–244)
For a list of all the manuscripts and early printed editions of Albert of
Saxony, see: Mun˜oz-Garcia A (1990) Albert of Saxony. Bibliographie,
Bulletin de Philosophie Me´die´vale 32:161–190; also, see the appendix
in Sarnowsky (1989)
Secondary Sources
Berger H (1994) Albert von Sachsen (1316[?]–1390). Bibliographie der
Sekunda¨rliteratur. Bulletin de Philosophie Me´die´vale 36:148–185
(updated in issues (1995), 37:175–186; (1996), 38:143–152; (1998),
40:103–116; and in Acta Mediaevalia (2004), 17:253–279)
Biard J (1989) Les sophismes du savior: Albert de Saxe entre Jean Buridan
et Guillaume Heytesbury. Vivarium 27:36–50
Biard J (ed) (1991) Itine´raires d’Albert de Saxe Paris- Vienne Au XIVe
Sie`cle. Actes du colloque organise´ le 19–22 juin 1990 dans le cadre des
activite´s de l’URA 1085 du CNRS a` l’occasion du 600e anniversaire de
la mort d’Albert de Saxe. Vrin, Paris
Biard J (1992) Conception se´miologique de la science et statut
ontologique de la quantite´ dans le nominalisme parisien du XIVe
sie`cle. In: Vescovini GF, Barocelli F (eds) Filosoﬁa scienza e astrologia
nel Trecento europeo: Biagio Pelacani Parmense. Atti del Ciclo di
lezioni Astrologia, scienza, ﬁlosoﬁa e societa` nel Trecento europeo,
Parma, 5–6 ottobre 1990, pp 135–154
Biard J (1993) Albert de Saxe et les Sophismes de l’Inﬁni. In Read S (ed)
Sophisms in medieval logic and grammar. Acts of the ninth European
symposium for medieval logic and semantics, held at St Andrew,
June 1990. Kluwer, Dordrecht, pp 288–303
Braakhuis HAG (1993) Albert of Saxony’s De obligationibus. Its place in
the development of fourteenth century obligational theory. In: Jacobi
K (ed) Argumentationstheorie. Scholastische Forschungen zu den
logischen und semantischen Regeln korrekten Folgerns. Brill, Leiden,
pp 323–341
Celeyrette J, Mazet E (2003) Le mouvement du point de vue de la cause et
le mouvement du point de vue de l’effet dans le Traite´ des rapports
d’Albert de Saxe. Rev. d’hist. des sci. 56(2):419–437
Fitzgerald MJ (2003) The medieval roots of reliabilist epistemology:
Albert of Saxony’s view of immediate apprehension. Synthese
136:409–434
Fitzgerald MJ (2006) Problems with temporality and scientiﬁc prop-
ositions
in
John Buridan
and
Albert
of
Saxony.
Vivarium
44 (2–3):305–337
Gonza´lez A (1958) The theory of assertoric consequences in Albert of
Saxony [to be continued]. Franc. Stud 18(3–4):290–354. (continued
in Franc. Stud 19(1–2):13–114)
Grant E (1991) The unusual structure and organization of Albert of
Saxony’s Questions on De caelo. In: Biard J (ed) Itine´raires d’Albert
de Saxe Paris- Vienne Au XIVe Sie`cle. Actes du colloque organise´ le
19–22 juin 1990 dans le cadre des activite´s de l’URA 1085 du CNRS a`
l’occasion du 600e anniversaire de la mort d’Albert de Saxe. Vrin,
Paris, pp 191–217
Grass R (2003) Schlubfolgerungslehre in Erfurter Schulen des 14.
Jahrhunderts. Eine Untersuchung der Konsequentientraktate von
Thomas Maulfelt und Albert von Sachsen in Gegenu¨berstellung mit
einer
zeitgeno¨ssischen
Position,
In:
Bochumer
Studien
zur
Philosophie, 37, Gru¨ner, Amsterdam
Heidingsfelder G (1927) Albert von Sachsen. Sein Lebensgang und
sein
Kommentar
zur
Nikomachischen
Ethik
des
Aristoteles.
Aschendorff, Mu¨nster (Beitra¨ge zur Geschichte der Philosophie des
Mittelalters 22)
Kann C (1993) Zur Behandlung der dialektischen O¨ rter bei Albert von
Sachsen. In: Jacobi K (ed) Argumentationstheorie. Scholastische
Forschungen zu den logischen und semantischen Regeln korrekten
Folgerns. Brill, Leiden, pp 59–80
Kann C (1994) Die Eigenschaften der Termini. Eine Untersuchung zur
Perutilis logica Alberts von Sachsen. Brill, Leiden
Sarnowsky J (1989) Die aristotelisch-scholastische Theorie der Bewegung.
Studien zum Kommentar Alberts von Sachsen zur Physik des
40 A
Albert of Saxony

Aristoteles, Aschendorff Mu¨nster (Beitra¨ge zur Geschichte der
Philosophie und Theologie des Mittelalters, Neue Folge 32)
Sarnowsky J (1999) Place and space in Albert of Saxony’s commentaries
on the physics. Arabic Sci Phil 9(1):25–45
Sarnowsky J (2004) Nicole Oresme and Albert of Saxony’s commentary
on the physics: the problems of vacuum and motion in a void. In:
Caroti S, Celeyrette J (eds) Quia inter doctores est magna dissensio.
Les de´bats de philosophie naturelle a` Paris au XIVe sie`cle, Leo S.
Olschki, Firenze, pp 161–174
Thijssen JMMH (2004) The Buridan school reassessed. John Buridan and
Albert of Saxony. Vivarium 42(1):18–42
Albert the Great
JULIE BRUMBERG-CHAUMONT
Laboratoire d’E´tudes sur les Monothe´ismes
CNRS
Paris
France
Abstract
Albert the Great (c. 1200–1280) was a master in theology
(Paris, 1245), a member of the Dominican order (he
entered in 1223), a bishop (1260–1262) and he was
declared a Saint, then a Doctor of the Church in 1931.
His philosophical investigation reaches all the ﬁelds of
knowledge, from mineralogy to theology; the spread of
his readings is overwhelming, covering Ancient Greek,
Latin, Byzantine, Arabic, and Jewish authors. His ambi-
tion was to deliver to his contemporaries a deep under-
standing of the newly available Aristotelian philosophy
(metaphysics, psychology, natural science, and ‘‘theol-
ogy’’ through the Liber de causis) founded on a synthesis
of the teaching of peripatetism and of that of Christian
faith.
Life, Work, Influence
Albert the Great was probably born around 1200 in
Lauigen
in
Germany
and
died
in
1280.
He
was
canonized and declared a Doctor of the Church in 1931.
During his long and eventful life he has often been bur-
dened with institutional and religious duties linked to his
role within the Dominican order (where he entered in
1223), alternating with periods of intellectual and aca-
demic achievements, on which we will focus here. He
was educated in Padua, then taught as a lector in various
places in Germany within the Dominican order. He stud-
ied theology in Paris from 1241 on and became Master in
1245, the year Thomas Aquinas became his student. He
taught in Paris until 1248. He was then sent in Cologne as
the regent of the Studium generale, which he run until
1254. Thomas Aquinas followed his master to Cologne
where he served as magister studium until 1252; Ulrich of
Strasbourg was also his student there. Albert was
appointed prior provincial of Teutonia from 1254 to
1257. The same year he was asked by Pope Alexander IV
to discuss the separation of the intellect (the famous
‘‘Agnani dispute’, which led to the De unitate intellectu
and to the chapters of his Summa theologiae, directed
against Averroes, but only after the crisis of the 1270s
about monopsychist theses and Averroism generally). He
returned to Cologne from 1257 to 1259. He became
bishop of Ratisbon from 1260 to 1263, then traveled in
Germany many years after a stay in Wu¨rzburg. He was
in Strasbourg from 1267 to 1270. He was in Paris in 1277
in order to defend his student Thomas Aquinas. He died in
1280 in Cologne.
The chronology of his philosophical works remains
uncertain especially for the commentaries on Aristotle,
which were written between 1250 and 1270. The ﬁrst
work was the De natura boni (around 1223), then he
wrote the commentary on the Sentences and the Summa
de creaturis (around 1243 during his stay in Paris), the
commentaries on Pseudo-Dionysus’ De divinis nominibus
and De ecclesiastica hierarchia, the Super ethicam between
1248 and 1252 in Cologne. He composed the commentar-
ies on the Posterior Analytics and the Politics during his
bishopate (around 1262–1263), as well as his second com-
mentary on the Ethics (Ethica) and the De unitate
intellectus contra Averroem. The paraphrases on the Topica
and the Sophistici elenchi were ﬁnished around 1269. The
commentary on the Liber de causis was written between
1264 and 1267. A reconstitution of the order of the
paraphrases on Aristotelian natural philosophy (which
included some pseudepigraphs) has been proposed. We
quote some major works (see Weisheipl 1980:565–577):
Physica (1251), De caelo et mundo, De generatione and
corruptione, Meteora, De minerabilibus, De anima, De
intellectu, De vegetalibus (=De plantis), and De animalibus
(1258 for the ﬁrst version). The logical commentaries that
have not been already mentioned were probably written
during the second part the 1250s, but there is no certitude.
The Isagoge was for instance composed after 1251 (the
commentary on the Physics) and before 1263–1264 (the
Metaphysica). Most of Albert’s exegesis on ancient works is
written in the style of the ‘‘avicennian’’ paraphrase, and
not of the literal commentary, a choice in accordance with
Albert’s philosophical style.
Albert’s work is generally acknowledged as a very
important moment in the history of the transmission of
Albert the Great A
41
A

ancient Greek and Arabic philosophy in the Middle Ages.
He read and commentated on the vast collection of phil-
osophical texts newly available, together with works the
tradition had already transmitted: Pseudo-Dionysus, all
the Aristotelian works (including all the books of logic,
natural philosophy, the Ethics, the Politics, the Metaphysics,
and the Liber de causis), Avicenna, Averroes, and Maimon-
ides, as well as Porphyry, Boethius, Augustine, and Euclid,
mentioning only some of the most famous authorities he
used and collected in philosophy, science, and theology.
He was accordingly called the Doctor Universalis. His
encyclopedic approach led him to complete Aristotelian
philosophy when some books were missing, as, for
instance, for those treatises of the Parva naturalia that
were known at that period, but not yet transmitted. His
ambition was to bring a deep and complete understanding
of Aristotelian philosophy to his contemporaries (who he
called the ‘‘Latins’’) and to show that there was no contra-
diction between the philosopher as interpreted through
a well-ordered peripatetism and Christian teaching. He
has also been praised and systematically seen as being
essentially the master of Thomas Aquinas. But his
thoughts have been subjected to various readings, very
often quite critical. He was criticized for a gratuitous
accumulation and curiosity, without being able to
elaborate a coherent theory of his own. This unworthy
reading of Albert is being revised (see de Libera
2005:11 sq).
Albert’s reception in the Middle Ages and beyond is
a complex matter. Many apocryphs have been attributed
to him such as the Small and the Great Albert (a treatise on
the virtues of minerals, plants, and animals), and the
Women’s Secret; he long enjoyed a strong reputation as
an expert in magic. His sharp distinction between the
objects and goals of philosophy led by reason and of
theology where revelation prevails (though it has to be
constituted as a science) has been often viewed as an
ambiguous defense of the autonomy philosophy, danger-
ously near to the Latin Averroists and the ‘‘two-fold theory
of truth.’’
The very important number of manuscripts preserved
speaks by itself for a great inﬂuence of Albert during the
Middle Ages, but this impression is to be qualiﬁed: his
writings have often been used as a mine of informations
about ancient philosophers, new concepts, and interesting
distinctions without his personal theory being adopted as
such (see Ebbesen, ‘‘Albert (the Great ?)’s companion to
the Organon,’’ in Zimmerman and Villemain-Diem
(1981), for this phenomenon in logic).
As A. de Libera has argued (de Libera 2005:40 sq.)
Albert’s thought has led to different trends in medieval
philosophy: the German Dominican school anchored in
the Studium Generale of Cologne, which major ﬁgures are
Ulrich of Strasbourg (dead before his master in 1277),
Dietrich of Freiberg (d. 1318–1320), and Bertoold of
Moosburg (d. 1361), even though Eckart can be seen as
part of this school; Latin Averroism especially in Italy;
and Albertism proper, a movement best illustrated by
Heymeric de Campo’s (1395–1440) work, but spread all
over Europe in the ﬁfteenth century. Albertists adopted
the Dominican’s realistic position on the problem of the
universals against the Occamist nominalistic theses, and
developed it as a philosophical path distinct from Thomas
Aquinas’ realism.
Thought
Logic
The critical judgment to which Albert has often been
subjected as a philosopher has been seen as especially
justiﬁed in the case of his logic, so that S. Ebbesen
(Zimmerman
and
Villemain-Diem
1981),
following
Prantl’s critique, goes as far as asking whether Albert
‘‘the Great’’ received this appellation according to the
greatness of his thought, or, more probably, because of
a labeling (‘‘Great’’) which was supposed to distinguish
members of the Dominican order from those of the Fran-
ciscan one (minor friars). Albert’s dependence toward
Kilwardby’s commentaries on logic is beyond question,
long extracts of his paraphrases being almost copied from
Kilwardby’s questions. This is true in particular for the
Analytics, the Peri hermeneias and the Sophistici elenchi.
But in others works, such as the commentaries on
Porphyry’s Isagoge and on Categories, Albert’s writings
are much less dependent, and represent a novelty in medi-
eval Latin logic, because of their intensive use of Arabic
texts, especially Avicenna’s Logica, together with al-G˙ aza¯lı¯,
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, and Averroes (for his commentary on meta-
physics) – the question of Albert’s knowledge of Averroes’
middle commentaries on logic remains unsettled. Despite
Avicenna’s overall inﬂuence, the Dominican master pro-
duced a personal synthesis for important questions such as
the division of philosophy and the place of logic, the
division of logic (he adopts the Arabic ‘‘long Organon,’’
which includes rhetorics and poetics), the object of logic
(syllogism?,
language?,
reasoning?,
secondary
inten-
tions?), the universals, etc. He does maintain those general
theoretical choices within the commentaries marked by
Kilwardby’s inﬂuence so that he is led also in those texts to
personal reformulations. One can say, in general, that
Albert is much more interested in the ontological and
noetical
questions
underlying
semantic
and
logical
42 A
Albert the Great

problems, as it can be seen in the way he deals with the
problem of the universals (see the section on metaphys-
ics). His logic has been widely read, but has had no great
inﬂuence on a philosophical point of view during the
thirteenth century. His work encounters nonetheless
some important echoes during the early fourteenth cen-
tury, as shown by the sharp debate over the secondary
intentions as the subject of logic where his position (and
his ambiguities) is an obvious starting point.
Metaphysics
Albert sees the human intellect as a similitude of the
separate intellect, extrinsic to matter and body. With
Albert’s refutation of the theory of the unity of the intellect
we reach the core of the difﬁcult question of his relation-
ship to Averroes. Albert rejects clearly the monopsychist
idea of the unity of the possible intellect he attributes to
different philosophers (and not to Averroes proper) and
advocates for a plurality of intellects. But the agent intel-
lect as a part of human soul is itself an emanation of the
separated agent intellect, extrinsic to the body and inde-
pendent from him, so it is not essentially the substantial
form of it. This theory leads to his adoption of the peri-
patetic theory of the conjunction of human soul to sepa-
rate inteect, itself linked to his conception of human
felicity.
Albert’s metaphysical thought is clearly determined by
his conception of the relationships between Metaphysics
and what he considers as Aristotle’s theology (the ‘‘philo-
sophical’’ theology, the eminent part of metaphysics, to be
distinguished from the Christian theology founded in
revelation). It is not contained in book Lambda of the
Metaphysics, but in the Liber de causis. This text, a Latin
translation of an Arabic adaptation (realized in the circle
of al-Kindı¯) of a collection of propositions taken from
Proclus’ Elements of Theology is considered by Albert as
an Aristotelian synthesis, which contains the authentic
peripatetic teaching on the subject of the ﬁrst cause and
primary causes. He develops what we would today call
a Christian version of the neoplatonic theory of emana-
tion, clearly distinguished from the Latin Avicennian the-
ory of the Dator formarum (which Albert considered as
Plato’s position). His theory of the inﬂux incorporates the
Aristotelian hylemorphism, through the famous theory of
the education (eductio) of forms. It leads to a reconstruc-
tion of the Arabic and Greek peripatetism he ﬁnds in
Alexander, Avicenna, Averroes, al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, al-Kindı¯, and
others authors (some of them Jewish, as ‘‘David,’’ the
author of the collection which constitutes the Liber de
causis according to Albert) and corrects through his read-
ing of Pseudo-Dionysius.
His position on the problem of universals is to be
considered as a part of his metaphysics, much more than
logic, both because of his avicennian position on the ‘‘acci-
dental’’ role of signiﬁcant expressions in logic – the univer-
sality of the logical predicate being systematically based
upon the communicability of a real nature – and because
his solution is mainly rooted on a Avicennian theory of
essence combined with his conception of a Christianized
version of the ‘‘neo-platonic’’ theory of the three states of
the universal (ante rem = form pre-contained in the ﬁrst
cause, in re = immanent universals, post rem = abstracted
concepts). This synthesis is itself founded on a conception
of the causality (the essence being an ideal cause which
pre-contains things) Albert has conceived with the Liber de
causis and Pseudo-Dionysius.
Ethics
During the ﬁrst part of the thirteenth century several
anonymous commentaries on a partial version of the
Ethics (called Ethica vetus = Nicomachean Ethics II–III,
completed by Ethica nova = Nicomachean Ethics I) were
produced, but Albert is probably the ﬁrst Latin commen-
tator of the complete version of the Ethics (known as
Ethica Lincolniensis, a new translation of Robert Grosseste
around 1246–1247). He was also the ﬁrst to make a great
use of the collection of Byzantine commentaries (espe-
cially Eustratus’ called ‘‘the Commentator’’ by Albert) also
translated by Grosseste. He commented Ethics twice, ﬁrst
around 1250 in Cologne, a literal commentary with ques-
tions reported by Thomas Aquinas (=Super ethica, Alberti
Magni Opera omnia IV/1–2, Mu¨nster, e´d. W. Ku¨bel), then
he wrote another commentary around 1262 (=Ethica, ed.
Jammy t. 4a, Borgnet t. 7). His commentaries had a great
inﬂuence during the Middle Ages. He contrasts the theo-
retical and practical aspects of Aristotle’s teaching through
the distinction of ethica utens (ethics as a rule for life) and
ethica docens (ethics as a subject-matter for teaching). He
tried to clarify the relationships between human felicity
and Christian happiness in God, a reﬂection linked to his
complex theory of the human intellect, its place within the
soul, its relationship to the body, and to man himself.
Human felicity is described, in accordance with the second
part of book X of the Ethics, as the form of pleasure
attached to the activity of the best part of man’s soul, the
intellect, which is extrinsic to the body, and whose perfec-
tion is to be found in the conjunction with the separate
agent Intellect.
Sciences
Albert is known for his great interest in all the sciences
available at the time. He has commented on all the books
Albert the Great A
43
A

of natural philosophy written by Aristotle, which was at
the time complemented with pseudepigraphs (De plantis,
De mineralibus, De caelo et mundo etc.), and by Albert
himself through works of his own. As other masters of
mid-thirteenth century (for instance Adam of Buckﬁeld
and Peter of Spain) he proposed a division of natural
philosophy based upon the different aspects of its object
(the mobile body), where each part corresponds to
a precise treatise of the Aristotelian corpus. This includes
the Physics (its object being the mobile body in general),
the De generatione et corruptione, the De caelo et mundo,
etc. The De mineralibus deals with the inanimate body, the
De anima with the animated body according to the soul,
its powers and parts, the Parva naturalia describe the
operations of the soul, Albert’s De intellectu et intelligibili
deals with the intellectual part of the soul, the De plantis
describes the body as animated by a vegetative soul, the De
animalibus as animated by a sensitive soul. But Albert’s
curiosity and competence extended beyond the sole Aris-
totelian corpus, and included the arts of the Quadrivium
as he for instance commented on Euclid’s Elements.
See also: ▶Aristotelianism in the Greek, Latin, Syriac,
Arabic, and Hebrew Traditions ▶Philosophy, Arabic
▶Thomas Aquinas
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Albert the Great (1651) Opera omnia, 21 vols, ed. Jammy P. C. Prost, Lyon
Albert the Great (1890–1899) Opera omnia, 38 vols, ed. Borgnet E. Vives,
Paris
Albert the Great (1951–) Alberti Magni Opera omnia edenda curavit
Institutum Alberti Magni Coloniense Bernhardo Geyer praeside.
Aschendorff, Mu¨nster. See the website of the Albertus Magnus
Institute for the on-going editions (http://www.albertus-magnus-
institute.de)
An actualized and commented list of the published works and translations
has been recently proposed by de Libera A (2005, pp 407–408)
Albert’s texts in ancient editions can be read on line thanks to B. Tremblay:
http://albertusmagnus.uwaterloo.ca
Secondary Sources
Most relevant articles are to be found in the few collective books dedicated
to Albert and in the bibliography of Alain de Libera’s two mono-
graphs on the subject
de Libera A (1990) Albert le Grand et la Philosophie. Vrin, Paris
de Libera A (2005) Me´taphysique et noe´tique. Albert le Grand. Vrin,
Paris
Hoenen M, de Libera A (eds) (1995) Albertus Magnus und der
Albertismus. Deutsche philosophische Kultur des Mittelalters. Brill,
Leiden/New York/Cologne
Imbach R, Chenaval F, Ricklin T (eds) (1998) Albert le grand et sa
re´ception au Moyen Aˆ ge. Separatum Freibg Z Philos Theol 45
Kovach F, Shahan R (eds) (1980) Albert the Great: commemorative essays.
Norman University of Oklahoma Press, Norman (Oklahoma)
Meyer G, Zimmermann A (eds) (1980) Albertus Magnus – Doctor
Universalis. Matthias-Gru¨newald-Verl, Mainz
Senner OP, Anzulewicz W, Burger H et al (eds) (2001) Albertus Magnus
Zum Gedenken nach 800 Jahren: Neue Zuga¨nge, Aspekte und
Perspektiven. Akademie Verl, Berlin
Weisheipl J (1980) Albertus Magnus and the sciences: commemorative
essays. Pontiﬁcal institute of mediaeval studies, Toronto
Wood R, Honnefelder L et al (eds) (2005) Albertus Magnus and the
beginnings of the medieval reception of Aristotle in the Latin West,
from Richardus Rufus to Franciscus de Mayronis. Aschendorff,
Mu¨nster
Zimmermann A, Villemain-Diem G (eds) (1981) Albert der Grosse.
Miscellanea Mediaevalia 14. W. De Gruyter, Berlin/New York
Albertism
MAARTEN J. F. M. HOENEN
Philosophisches Seminar
Universita¨t Freiburg
Freiburg im Breisgau
Germany
Abstract
Albertism is a movement within late-medieval Aristote-
lianism that distinguished itself from other contemporary
philosophical schools by taking Albert the Great as
the most reliable interpreter of Aristotle. Its main repre-
sentatives were Johannes de Nova Domo (Paris) and
Heymericus de Campo (Cologne). Albertism was very
critical of Nominalism and challenged Thomism and Sco-
tism on a number of issues in the ﬁeld of logic, natural
philosophy, and metaphysics. Its main centre throughout
the ﬁfteenth century was the Bursa Laurentiana at the
University of Cologne, which housed Johannes Hulshout
of Mechelen, Gerardus de Harderwijck, and Arnoldus
Luyde de Tongeris. They were active in the writing of
Albertist manuals and commentaries on Aristotle, most
of which were printed in large numbers and distributed
at many different universities. In these writings, the
Albertists took a well-deﬁned stand on a number of issues
without,
however,
developing
an
independent,
all-
embracing philosophical system – an observation that
also applies to the other schools of thought. In the
modern period, it lost much of its attraction because
of its critical attitude towards Nominalism and due to
the fact that, unlike Thomism and Scotism, it lacked
support from the religious orders. Some of its ideas nev-
ertheless survived within different Thomistic and Scotistic
schools.
44 A
Albertism

What is Albertism?
Albertism is a philosophical and theological movement
that was primarily active in the ﬁfteenth century and
which, in sources of the period, was called the via alberti
or via albertistarum. Its adherents were labeled albertistae.
For the most part, these terms appear in commentaries on
Aristotle or in independent works dealing with issues
related to the reading of Aristotle as this was practised in
the arts faculties of the various universities. Occasionally,
references to the via alberti or to the albertistae can also be
found in theological treatises.
Most
characteristically,
the
Albertists
defended
a reading of Aristotle, which was drawn from the writings
of Albert the Great and which they themselves distin-
guished from those of other late-medieval schools of
thought, such as Thomism, Scotism, and Nominalism.
This Albertist reading of Aristotle is documented in
a great number of treatises written secundum viam alberti
or secundum processum albertistarum, most of which were
printed in Cologne in the 1480s and 1490s, but also in the
writings of numerous other authors who refer to the views
of the Albertists in their writings, such as the Parisian
philosopher Johannes Versor and the theologian Denys
the Carthusian.
Prior to the ﬁfteenth century, thinkers also frequently
referred to the writings of Albert the Great and used them
as a starting point for their philosophical and theological
reﬂections. A good example is Ulrich of Strasbourg, who
in contemporary sources was referred to as discipulus
alberti. The inﬂuence of Albert the Great is also visible in
the works of other thirteenth- and fourteenth-century
philosophers and theologians, such as Dietrich of Freiberg
and Meister Eckhart, sometimes even very prominently,
not least because contemporaries considered Albert to be
one of the main expositores of Aristotle. However, in none
of these cases is there mention of albertistae, in terms of
members of a school of thought with a self-proclaimed
identity, nor in terms of a speciﬁc reading of Aristotle that
was programmatically applied in all main parts of the arts
curriculum, as was the case with Albertism in the ﬁfteenth
century.
Johannes De Nova Domo and Heymericus
De Campo
The precise circumstances under which the via alberti
came into existence and established itself are still obscure.
In any case, the role of Johannes de Nova Domo, a master
of arts, active at the University of Paris at the beginning of
the ﬁfteenth century, was crucial. He quoted Albert exten-
sively in his works, calling him doctor meus, and compared
Albert’s teachings with those of Thomas Aquinas. Most
importantly, he considered Albert the most thorough and
faithful interpreter of ancient Aristotelianism, that is, the
philosophical movement represented according to him
not only by Aristotle, but also by Boethius, Avicenna,
and Averroes. In ﬁfteenth-century sources, as in the
works of Johannes de Nova Domo himself, this movement
was also called the ‘‘peripatetic tradition’’ and as such
carefully distinguished from other ancient schools, like
those of the Platonists, Stoics, and Epicureans. According
to Johannes de Nova Domo, the sententia peripateticorum
is best found in the works of Albert, much more so than in
those of Thomas Aquinas, who in several places had not
considered decisive issues as carefully as had his teacher.
Also of crucial signiﬁcance was the relationship of
Albertism to the Christian Faith. As Johannes de Nova
Domo makes clear at the outset of his De esse et essentia,
the Aristotelian tradition as documented in the writings of
Albert was especially well suited to explaining and corrob-
orating matters of Faith, much more so than any other
philosophical tradition, even the Platonist, all of which
encountered serious conﬂicts with Revelation. Remark-
ably, it is in Johannes de Nova Domo that one ﬁnds the
notion of the harmony between Aristotle and Faith most
strongly expressed, a feature which later in the century
became the hallmark of Thomism.
Johannes de Nova Domo taught in Paris. It was how-
ever through the activities of his pupil Heymericus de
Campo at Cologne that Albertism developed into
a school of thought with an institutional framework that
secured its survival for many years to come. For
Heymericus, as for Johannes de Nova Domo, Albert the
Great was the best reader of Aristotle. In his Tractatus
problematicus, written in 1423 in Cologne, Heymericus
demonstrated that on many occasions the interpretations
of Albert the Great and Thomas Aquinas were different
and sometimes even radically opposed. However, before
he entered into a discussion of the views of what he
considered to be the main representatives of philosophical
thought in his time principales huius temporis philosophiae
defensores, namely, the Albertists and Thomists, he ﬁrst
critically examined and then rejected the views of the
Nominalists in the opening parts of his Tractatus
problematicus, which, for that reason, he entitled Contra
Modernos.
Criticism of Nominalism
Nominalism does not deserve to be reckoned as part of the
Aristotelian tradition, Heymeric argued, because its
defenders deny the existence of real universals outside
the human mind. According to Aristotle, the objects of
scientiﬁc
knowledge
are
necessary
and
universal.
Albertism A
45
A

Therefore, if universals had only a mental existence, then
the sciences would not deal with reality but only with
human thought, which would be absurd. For this reason,
Heymeric concluded, Nominalists can only do logic,
which is indeed concerned with human concepts, but
none of the sciences dealing with things outside the
human mind, such as physics and metaphysics. As the
main representatives of Nominalism, he mentioned Wil-
liam of Ockham, John Buridan, and Marsilius of Inghen,
and considered the ﬁrst to be the inaugurator of Nomi-
nalism, who out of jealousy had distorted Aristotelianism
and invented an opposing school of his own.
This criticism of Nominalism, which in a less vigorous
way was also present in the writings of Johannes de Nova
Domo, had enormous impact. Both the argument that
Nominalists are unable to engage in physics and meta-
physics, as well as the verdict that Nominalism does not
belong to the Aristotelian tradition, were repeated time
and again until well into the sixteenth century. As
a consequence, Nominalist authors were excluded from
academic debates, which had an immediate practical
effect. As a rule, in the commentaries on Aristotle written
by Albertists, Nominalist authors were not mentioned and
their positions not discussed. The most important con-
versants in their debates were the Thomists and, to a lesser
extent, the Scotists. At Cologne, the Nominalists were also
ignored by the Thomists, who, as far as this matter was
concerned, shared the critical view of the Albertists.
From treatises produced within the faculties of theol-
ogy, a more or less similar picture emerges. Here Albertists
and Thomists also made a common stand against Nomi-
nalism. Exemplary is a disputation held at the Theological
Faculty, at the University of Cologne in 1480. Here the
Nominalist Johannes Rype de Alen was attacked by repre-
sentatives of both schools, but most powerfully by the
Albertist Gerardus de Harderwijck, who accused him of
not following the teachings of Aristotle when discussing
the relations between the three divine persons. Johannes
Rype de Alen identiﬁed these relations with the divine
persons themselves, as had Ockham before him, and to
whom he also openly referred. This caused Gerardus to
object that Johannes denied any real distinction between
the categories of substance and relation and that he thus
ignored the principles of Aristotle. Signiﬁcantly, for
Albertists, the principles of Aristotelian philosophy also
count when discussing the mysteries of Christian Faith,
such as the Trinity and the Incarnation.
Not only in Cologne but also elsewhere the relation-
ship between Aristotelian philosophy and Christian
Faith was a matter of much debate. For many Albertists,
Nominalism posed a serious danger to the adequate
understanding of Christian Faith. They were supported
in this perception by a large number of Thomists and
Scotists. For this and other reasons, at the Universities of
Heidelberg, Tu¨bingen, Freiburg, and Ingolstadt, the arts
faculties became divided into two different camps: that of
the via moderna, defended by Nominalists, and that of the
via antiqua, supported by Albertists, Thomists and Sco-
tists, each with their own reading of Aristotle and their
own exams. In this way, the supporters of the via antiqua
tried to avoid that students with a mistaken understanding
of Aristotle would cause troubles in theology. As a result,
Albertism, together with Thomism and Scotism, became
one of the principal movements within the via antiqua.
The consequences of this development, which took
place in the second half of the ﬁfteenth century, cannot
be underestimated. At one and the same university in the
same year, the same texts of Aristotle were read by two
different masters from two different perspectives, that of
the via antiqua and that of the via moderna. In the case of
the via antiqua, the works of Albert the Great, Thomas
Aquinas and John Duns Scotus were used, and in that of
the via moderna, those of William of Ockham, John
Buridan and Marsilius of Inghen. Against the background
of this institutional separation it becomes clear why, in
actual fact, the doctrinal proﬁle of Albertism established
itself largely through debates with Thomism and Scotism
and not so much with Nominalism.
Albertism and Thomism
As Heymericus reports in a 1458 letter to the University of
Cologne (the so-called Invectiva), when he ﬁrst arrived in
the city in 1422 he encountered the same philosophical
schools he knew from Paris, including the Albertists and
Thomists. When then asked to list the agreements and
disagreements between these two schools in an academic
dispute, the Thomist Gerardus de Monte reacted fero-
ciously, claiming that it was impossible to ﬁnd any agree-
ment between Albertism and Thomism or to harmonize
their methodologies in any coherent way. The Thomists
obviously felt compelled to draw a clear line of demarca-
tion between themselves and Albertism, although the rea-
sons for this attitude remain uncertain. In all probability,
however, they were dissatisﬁed with the way Albert the
Great had proceeded in his commentaries on Aristotle.
For, as Albert repeatedly stated, he tried to understand
Aristotle solely on the basis of the natural principles of
Aristotle himself without any reference to miracles or
Faith, even if this would lead to conﬂicts with Revelation –
an approach clearly differing from that of Thomas Aquinas.
That Albertists, like Johannes de Nova Domo, claimed
philosophy should be in harmony with the Christian Faith
46 A
Albertism

was for the Thomists in Cologne void and not in accord
with the approach taken in Albert’s own commentaries.
Heymericus was not taken aback by Gerardus de Monte,
however, and in his account of the dispute (the Tractatus
problematicus) he described not only the differences
between the two schools, but also those points where
they were, to his mind, in agreement. Where he observed
a disagreement, he added a so-called concordantia in
which he tried to bring the two schools together, showing,
for example, that a conceptual ambiguity was involved or
that the texts of Aristotle were unclear. Obviously he
viewed the opposition between the two schools from the
perspective to which his training in Paris had accustomed
him, one more moderate than that current in Cologne, as
manifested by Gerardus de Monte’s uncompromising
reaction. From this, an initial conclusion may be drawn –
one of paramount importance for an adequate under-
standing of the early years of Albertism – namely, that its
image as a movement fundamentally distinct from Tho-
mism, and not merely on individual points but taken as
a whole, had its origin in Cologne. It was a product of
Thomism and imposed upon the followers of Albert the
Great, who were themselves far less radical, even if they also
observed a number of clear disagreements.
However the situation changed towards 1456, when
Gerardus, by then one of the most important Thomists at
Cologne, in his Concordantiae dictorum Thomae Aquinatis
et Alberti Magni once again attacked Heymericus, but this
time from entirely the opposite angle. Gerardus now
claimed that, in the Tractatus problematicus, Heymericus
had opposed the views of Albert and Thomas where in fact
there is no conﬂict between their views at all. Gerardus
came to this conclusion, according to his own account,
after a renewed study of the writings of the two Domini-
cans. This rereading made it evident to him that both
authors operated from exactly the same premises and
that
Heymericus
had
fundamentally
misunderstood
Albert’s and, above all, Thomas’ positions. Heymericus,
at that time no longer active in Cologne but teaching in
Leuven as professor of theology, reacted immediately and
with great ire. He defended his original views, arguing that
there are points of both agreement and disagreement in
Albert’s and Thomas’ reading of Aristotle, and that while
some of these disagreements can be resolved, others deﬁn-
itively cannot. This clash marked the beginning of the
second phase of Albertism, which is characterized by the
fact that its representatives, much more clearly than
before, present the image of a school of thought opposed
to Thomism, to the extent that it was now the Albertists
themselves who, against the conviction of the Thomists,
stressed
the
opposition
of
Albert’s
and
Thomas’
interpretations of Aristotle. This is also the period in
which the majority of commentaries secundum viam
alberti were composed, and in which new points of doc-
trinal difference were noted and discussed. Remarkably,
the treatises secundum viam thomae much less frequently
entered into debate with their Albertist antagonists.
The Institutional Factor
Throughout the century, Cologne was the main centre of
Albertism,
with important
representatives in
Paris,
Krakow, and Uppsala. The special position of Cologne
was closely linked to an institutional peculiarity. As was
the general trend at late-medieval universities, courses
were held increasingly in the colleges and bursae, where
students lived together with one or more masters. This
meant that not only daily disputations and exercises, but
also the regular curricular courses were stamped with the
personality of a speciﬁc group of masters, namely, those
who had their home in the bursa. In Cologne, several
bursae of this type existed, one of which bore a clear
Albertist
signature,
namely
the
Bursa
Laurentiana,
named after Laurentius Berungen de Groningen, who in
1439 or 1440 became its regent master, in the legacy of
such famous Albertists as Heymericus de Campo and
Johannes Hulshout of Mechelen. In its later years, the
bursa housed masters like Gerardus de Harderwijck and
Arnoldus Luyde de Tongeris, who were active in the writ-
ing of Albertist manuals and commentaries on Aristotle.
These manuals, some of which survived in manu-
scripts, others in printed editions, document the daily
practice of reading Aristotle according to the processus
albertistarum. The text was divided into small sections
introduced by a division of the text and elucidation of its
content. A number of short questions followed, in which
speciﬁc problems linked to the text were discussed. It is
especially in these questions that the doctrinal views of the
Albertists came to the fore, and the arguments of Thomists
and Scotists were refuted. The Thomists and Scotists
employed largely the same arrangement in their own
commentaries, the most important distinction being the
sources they used in dividing and explaining the text of
Aristotle. As a rule, in separating the different sections of
the text, the Albertist used the commentaries of Albert the
Great as a model, not those of Thomas Aquinas. Most
of the distinctions introduced to clarify the meaning of
Aristotle, as well as the solutions to the questions, also had
their origin in the works of Albert.
The Question of Doctrinal Unity
It is hardly possible to construe from the writings
secundum
processum
albertistarum
a
comprehensive
Albertism A
47
A

doctrinal unity with a clear foundation in the works of
Albert the Great. Although in general the same texts of
Albert were employed, and the same texts of Aristotle
commented upon, the focus of the various commentaries
differed. In addition, sometimes works were attributed to
Albert, which were as a matter of fact not his, but were
considered to be so in the ﬁfteenth century. A telling
example is the reference to magister Albertus in libro De
ortu et progressu scientiarum, which appeared in an
Albertist commentary on the Isagoge of Porphyry. In
actuality the work quoted was not by Albert, but by
Robert Kilwardby. However, in Cologne, there existed
a manuscript in which the treatise was attributed to
Albert the Great, carrying the same title of Super ortu et
scientiarum progressu, and which was used by some
Albertists. This means that for the Albertists the most
important factor was not doctrinal unity and coherence,
but the fact that the sources used stemmed from their
professed master. The same can also be observed amongst
the Thomists. To be sure, with the Thomists, the matter
was even more complicated, as in the ﬁfteenth century it
was an open secret that the works of Thomas Aquinas
contained many apparently contradictory statements,
which made the construction of a coherent theory shared
by all Thomists almost impossible. This ambiguity in the
works of Thomas was readily exploited by the Albertists, as
proof that his commentaries were not a secure guide when
reading Aristotle.
It is important to recognize precisely how the
Albertists (as well as the Thomists) proceeded in their
commentaries, as the impossibility of ﬁnding a single,
comprehensive doctrinal system based upon the works of
Albert the Great himself led some earlier researchers to
question the existence of an Albertist school of thought.
However, the sources show that the via alberti was char-
acterized not by internal coherence and unity, but rather
by the shared use of a number of distinct doctrines when
explaining Aristotle, which were taken from works attrib-
uted to Albert the Great. These were highlighted in indi-
vidual questions in which these beliefs were defended
against the views of other schools, primarily against
those of the Thomists. Other works were entirely devoted
to this purpose, such as the Promptuarium argumentorum,
a manual designed to help students of the one school to
ﬁnd arguments against the beliefs of the other.
A study of these doctrines reveals that the majority
were concerned with difﬁcult passages or items within the
texts of Aristotle that had already been discussed by the
Greek and Arabic commentators, and remained bones of
contention within the Aristotelian tradition, such as the
principle of individuation, or the question of whether
humans can have direct knowledge of separate substances.
As far as these points were concerned, all those authors
representing the via alberti shared the same views. Con-
versely, on derivative and less crucial items there were
differences amongst the Albertists. These latter issues,
however, were never labeled as being illustrative of the
via alberti.
The main focus of those works labeled secundum
processum albertistarum is always Aristotle and Albert the
Great. Signiﬁcant in this connection, is that the indepen-
dent works of Heymericus de Campo, such as the De sigillo
aeternitatis and the Ars demonstrativa, which were clearly
designed as coherent philosophical systems, were not
labeled by him as Albertist. In the same way, contempo-
rary historiography did not consider these works to be
examples of the via alberti. Johannes Trithemius, for
example, in his De scriptoribus ecclesiaticis, quoted these
works without any references to the Albertist tradition.
Moreover, he underlined their connection with Cusanus,
an author who, like Heymericus in the above-mentioned
works, did not consider himself to be commenting on the
works of Aristotle, even when Aristotle was occasionally
discussed. Therefore, at least from a historical point of
view, Albertism is to be regarded solely as a movement
within the Aristotelian tradition at late-medieval and
early-modern universities.
Doctrinal Issues
Notwithstanding the fact that in his independent writings
Heymericus does not present himself as an Albertist, it was
he who in his Tractatus problematicus listed the doctrines
of the via alberti and commented upon them for the ﬁrst
time. His treatise was crucial, as in the period to come
most authors followed his views on the matter. A number
of doctrines were added to the initial catalogue of 18
items, reaching a total of approximately 30 towards the
end of the century, but it remained principally the same
list, as the items he had mentioned were the most essential.
The following sections list a number of doctrinal
points which were characteristic of Albertism and in
which Albertism distinguished itself from other late-
medieval schools of thought, such as Thomism, Scotism,
and Nominalism. These points were argued for in com-
mentaries secundum viam alberti and were also attributed
to the Albertists in writings by members of the other
schools of thought.
Logic
Against the conviction of a number of Thomists and
Nominalists, the Albertist claimed that logic in itself is
a purely theoretical science. The fact that logic directs the
48 A
Albertism

mind to argue correctly does not mean that it is in itself
practical or even partially practical, as some Thomists and
Nominalists had argued. Logic is solely an activity of the
intellect and not of the will, being a science that has as its
goal to produce true statements. To make their claim,
Albertists referred to the distinction made by Aristotle
between practical and theoretical sciences, whereby, the
former produce something outside the human mind and
involve the activity of the will, while the latter remain
within the mind. In this sense, logic is not practical.
Only in a derivative sense, can it possibly be labeled
practical, namely when logic is used as a tool in other
sciences. But this does not concern the nature of logic
per se. To distinguish between these two senses, Albertists
discriminated between logica docens which is the theoret-
ical science of logic in itself, as laid down, for example, in
the Tractatus of Peter of Spain, and logica utens, which is
the practical use of logic in physics, metaphysics and any
other science or art.
Individuation
For the Albertists, matter is the sole cause of individua-
tion. In this regard, Albertism was opposed to Scotism and
Thomism, as both of these schools tried to found individ-
uality in a formal principle: the Scotists in the so-called
differentia individualis, the Thomists in matter as deter-
mined by quantity. The Albertists, however, argued that
according to Aristotle, form is always universal. Principles
that are based on the form of a thing can, therefore, never
account for the individuality of the thing, as individuation
means to be distinct from others. The only possible can-
didate is that which is opposed to the form, namely mat-
ter. Being last in the order of being, matter is in itself
undivided and incommunicable. Hence, it is both the
root of numerical distinction from others and the root of
incommunicability. Particularly against the Thomists,
Albertists claimed that quantity by nature is communica-
ble and therefore cannot be the primary source of indi-
viduation, even if directly linked to matter, since it is
shared by different individuals. Matter therefore remains
the single most important and complete source of
individuation.
Human Knowledge
It was the ﬁrm belief of Albertists that humans can have
direct knowledge of separate substances already in their
earthly life. On this point, Albertism distinguished itself
from Thomism and Nominalism. For representatives of
both these schools argued that, according to Aristotle, all
human knowledge begins with the senses. Therefore sub-
stances that are not perceived by the senses, such as
separate substances, cannot be known directly, but only
indirectly through the sensible effects they produce.
The Albertist, however, maintained that this reading of
Aristotle is too narrow. When dealing with the knowledge
and being of separate substances in his Metaphysics, Aris-
totle had remarked that separate substances know them-
selves and that human beings sometimes, for a very brief
moment, possess the same knowledge as separate sub-
stances. For the Albertist, this passage clearly conﬁrmed
that Aristotle was of the opinion that humans sometimes
know separate substances directly, as they do themselves,
even if this is the exception rather than the rule. To further
corroborate their reading of Aristotle, Albertists referred
to the theory of the intellectus adeptus as put forward in the
writings of Avicenna and Averroes. If humans have col-
lected sufﬁcient sense data, they are able to turn their
intellect immediately to the source of the intelligibility
of that sense data, namely the agent intellect, which is
itself either a separate substance or a direct emanation of
a separate substance. In both cases, humans can know
separate substances without ﬁrst turning to the senses. It
is in the immediate knowledge of separate substances that
humans grasp the ﬁrst principles of both theoretical and
practical knowledge, such as the principle of non-
contradiction or the rule that the good is be striven for
and the bad avoided.
Being and Essence
Albertists strongly opposed the claim of Thomists that
there is a real distinction between being (ens or esse) and
essence (essentia). As Denys the Carthusian reported in his
commentary on the Sentences, it was the depth of the
Albertist’s response to the Thomists on this issue which
caused him to switch from the Thomistic to the Albertist
side. According to the Albertists, it is fundamental to the
sententia of Aristotle that the substantial form and nothing
else conveys being to the thing determined by this form.
This being is not attributed to the thing from the outside,
but ﬂows from the substantial form, which is itself
a substantial part of the thing. The essence and the being
of the thing are no more distinct than the signiﬁcates of
a respective noun and verb: the former highlighting the
thing of the act and the latter the act of the thing, as for
example the noun ‘‘walk’’ signiﬁes a distance walked or to
be walked, and the verb ‘‘walk’’ the moving or traveling
this distance. A similar point had already been made by
Dietrich of Freiberg against Thomas Aquinas. According
to the Albertists, it was Averroes who, against Avicenna,
made clear that this was how Aristotle needed to be
understood. That being is given by the substantial form
does not mean that the form is a completely independent
Albertism A
49
A

source of being. The substantial form is only the princi-
ple of the formal being. Besides this form there is the
agent, which acts from without as an efﬁcient cause and
produces the thing, thus bringing it from non-being into
being. According to Aristotle, the agent is really distinct
from the thing produced, as the efﬁcient cause is not part
of the thing in the way that the formal cause is. In this
sense, and only in this sense, the Albertists maintained,
can one speak of a real distinction between the thing and
the being of the thing caused from without. If that is what
the Thomists intend, then there is no real opposition
between the two schools. If however the Thomists speak
of the being as conveyed by the form, then they truly
depart from the Aristotelian tradition, according to the
Albertists.
The Proper Object of Logic
Several items that in contemporary sources were labeled
characteristic of the via alberti were not mentioned by
Heymericus in his Tractatus problematicus, but appear
only later, in the second half of the ﬁfteenth century. The
most signiﬁcant of these is the view that logic is primarily
concerned with second-order rather than with ﬁrst-order
concepts. First-order concepts are concepts of things in
reality, such as men and living beings. Second-order con-
cepts, on the other hand, are concepts attributed to these
ﬁrst-order concepts, such as ‘‘species’’ and ‘‘genus,’’ in
propositions like ‘‘man is a species’’ and ‘‘living being is
a genus.’’ In maintaining that logic primarily deals with
second-order concepts, the Albertist was in full agreement
with the Scotist, against the Thomists and Nominalists.
Although the debate concerned the genuine nature of logic
according to Aristotle, its immediate source was a remark
made by Avicenna in his Metaphysics, which stated that the
subject of logic is second-order concepts added to ﬁrst-
order ones. Albertists thus saw themselves as the true
followers of Avicenna’s reading of Aristotle on this point;
a reading which, according to them, was imperative,
because otherwise the distinction made in the Aristotelian
tradition between logic on the one hand and physics
and metaphysics on the other, would collapse. Logic is
a rational science, whereas physics and metaphysics are
real ones. Although all these sciences can talk about man,
logic is not interested in man as a real man, nor in the
concept of man, but rather in the concepts that can be
predicated of the concept used in the real sciences to refer
to real men. Because, the Albertists argued, the concept of
man is predicated of numerically distinct men in reality,
this concept has the nature of a species, and thus the
second-order term ‘‘species’’ can be predicated of it. The
Albertists admitted that there is a certain relationship
between ﬁrst and second order concepts, inasmuch as
the latter, say ‘‘species,’’ are attributed to the former, say
‘‘man,’’ dependent on the fact that the ﬁrst-order concept
‘‘man’’ refers to different individuals in reality. However,
and this is crucial, they did not consider second-order
concepts to be a natural property of ﬁrst-order concepts,
as the Thomists claimed, nor to be a natural sign of them,
as the Nominalists maintained. Logic, for the Albertists,
was a science concerned with second-order concepts onto-
logically independent of ﬁrst-order concepts. In short:
Logic is a true science in its own right.
Conclusion
As said above, the majority of texts secundum viam alberti
were written in the second half of the ﬁfteenth century. In
the century to come their number declined, and the
Albertists gradually disappeared as signiﬁcant contributors
to philosophical and theological debates, as was the case
with other medieval schools of thought. To be sure, this
does not mean that the reading of Aristotle put forth in the
writings of Albert the Great was no longer of interest. On
the contrary, his works continued to be published and
read. However, his reading was no longer supported by
institutions especially devoted to this task, as had previ-
ously been the case, and became henceforth the matter of
a few dedicated individuals. The institutional death of
Albertism was largely the result of shifting doctrinal inter-
ests. Its opposition to Nominalism was critically regarded
by Cartesians and its proximity to Thomism, despite all
controversies, made it difﬁcult for Protestant authors to
accept. That despite the same pressures Thomism was able
to persist, was largely due to the establishment of chairs
devoted to the reading of Thomas and especially to
the enormous efforts of both the Dominican and Jesuit
orders – an institutional support system which was not
granted to Albertism, consequently leaving the tradition
to be divided and absorbed into the various Thomistic
and Scotistic schools of the sixteenth and seventeenth
centuries.
See also: ▶Albert the Great ▶Aristotelianism in the
Greek, Latin, Syriac, Arabic, and Hebrew Traditions
▶Denys the Carthusian ▶Dietrich of Freiberg ▶Essence
and Existence ▶Heymeric of Camp ▶Liberal Arts
▶Realism ▶Thomism
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Anonymus (1492, 1496) Promptuarium. Henricus Quentell, Cologne
(The edition of 1492 is reprinted and mistakenly attributed to
Heymericus de Campo, Frankfurt am Main 1992)
50 A
Albertism

Anonymus (1494) Reparationes librorum totius naturalis philosophiae
secundum processum Albertistarum et Thomistarum. Ulricus Zell,
Cologne
Arnoldus Luyde de Tongeris (1496) Epitomata sive Reparationes
logicae veteris et novae Aristotelis iuxta viam et expositionem
venerabilis domini Alberti doctoris Magni. Henricus Quentell,
Cologne
Gerardus de Harderwijck (1486) Commentum supra veterem artem
Aristotelis secundum viam Albertistarum. Henricus Quentell,
Cologne
Gerardus de Harderwijck (1488) Copulata super omnes tractatus
parvorum logicalium Petri Hispani et nonnullos modernorum
secundum viam Albertistarum. Henricus Quentell, Cologne
Gerardus de Harderwijck (1496) Epitomata seu reparationes totius
philosophiae naturalis Aristotelis. Henricus Quentell, Cologne
Gerardus de Monte (1497a) Concordantiae dictorum Thomae Aquinatis
et Alberti Magni. Henricus Quentell, Cologne
Gerardus de Monte (1497b) Apologia. Henricus Quentell, Cologne (Parts
are published in Meersseman (1935), pp 122–128)
Heymericus de Campo (1496) Tractatus problematicus. Johannes
Landen, Cologne
Heymericus de Campo (1497) Invectica. Henricus Quentell, Cologne
(Parts are published in Meersseman (1935), pp 112–121)
Heymericus de Campo (2001) De Sigillo aeternitatis (Imbach R,
Ladner P (eds)) and Ars demonstratina (Cavigioli JP (ed)) In:
Imbach R, Ladnen P (eds) Opera selecta, vol 1. Universita¨tsverlag,
Freiburg Schweiz, pp 93–167
Johannes de Nova Domo (1933) Tractatus de esse et essentia In:
Meersseman G (ed) Geschichte des Albertismus, Helt I: Die Pariser
anfa¨nge des Ko¨lner Albertismus. Halova, Paris, pp 91–200
(Pseudo-) Johannes de Nova Domo (1968) De universali reali. In:
Weiler AG, Un traite´ de Jean de Nova Domo sur les universaux.
Vivarium 6:108–154 (the attribution of this treatise to Johannes de
Nova Domo has been challenged by Kaluza (1986) and Rutten
(2003))
Piltz Anders (ed) (1977) Studium Upsalense. Specimens of the oldest
lecture notes taken in the mediaeval University of Uppsale. Uppsala
Universitet, Uppsala
Secondary Sources
Hamann F (2006) Das Siegel der Ewigkeit. Universalwissenschaft
und Konziliarismus bei Heymericus de Campo. Aschendorff,
Mu¨nster
Hoenen MJFM (1992) The Thomistic principle of individuation in ﬁf-
teenth-century Thomistic and Albertist sources. Medioevo Rivista di
storia della ﬁlosoﬁa medievale 18:327–357
Hoenen MJFM (1993) The Reparationes librorum totius naturalis
philosophiae (Cologne 1494) as a source for the late medieval debates
between Albertistae and Thomistae. Documenti e studi sulla
tradizione ﬁlosoﬁca medievale 4:307–344
Hoenen MJFM (1995a) Late medieval schools of thought in the mirror of
university textbooks. The Promptuarium argumentorum (Cologne
1492). In: Hoenen MJFM, Schneider JHJ, Wieland G (eds) Philoso-
phy and learning. Universities in the middle ages. Brill, Leiden,
329–369
Hoenen MJFM (1995b) Heymeric van de Velde ({1460) und die
Geschichte des Albertismus. Auf der Suche nach den Quellen der
albertistischen
Intellektlehre
des
Tractatus
problematicus.
In:
Hoenen MJFM, de Libera A (eds) Albertus Magnus und der
Albertismus. Deutsche philosophische Kultur des Mittelalters. Brill,
Leiden, pp 303–331
Hoenen MJFM (2008) Comment lire les grands maıˆtres? Ge´rard de
Monte, Heymeric de Campo et la question de l’accord entre Albert
le Grand et Thomas d’Aquin (1456), Revue Thomiste 108:105–130
Kaluza Z (1986) Le De universali reali de Jean de Maisonneuve et les
epicuri
litterales.
Freiburger
Zeitschrift
fu¨r
Philosophie
und
Theologie 33:469–516
Kaluza Z (1988) Les querelles doctrinales a` Paris. Nominalistes et realistes
aux conﬁns du XIVe et XVe sie`cles. Pierluigi Lubrina Editore,
Bergamo
Kaluza Z (1995) Les de´buts de l’Albertisme tardif (Paris et Cologne). In:
Hoenen MJFM, de Libera A (eds) Albertus Magnus und der
Albertismus. Deutsche philosophische Kultur des Mittelalters. Brill,
Leiden, pp 207–295
Kneepkens CHJM (2003) Nam defectum vas quandoque servat amatum.
Elementary aids-to-study. An unconventional access to late-medieval
university philosophy. Bulletin de philosophie me´die´vale 45:105–129
Lo¨hr GM (1926) Die theologischen Disputationen an der Universita¨t
Ko¨ln im ausgehenden 15. Jahrhundert nach den Angaben des P.
Servatius Fanckel OP. Harrassowitz, Leipzig
Meersseman G (1933) Geschichte des Albertismus, Heft I: Die Pariser
Anfa¨nge des Ko¨lner Albertismus. Haloua, Paris
Meersseman G (1935) Geschichte des Albertismus, Heft II: Die ersten
Ko¨lner Kontroversen. Sabinae, Rome
Palazzo A (2004) Ulrich of Strasbourg and Denys the Carthusian: textual
analysis and doctrinal comments. Bulletin de Philosophie Me´die´vale
46:61–113
Palazzo A (2006) Ulrich of Strasbourg and Denys the Carthusian (II):
doctrinal inﬂuence and implicit quotations. Bulletin de Philosophie
Me´die´vale 48:163–208
Rutten P (2003) Contra occanicam discoliam modernorum. The so-called
De universali reali and the dissemination of Albertist polemics againt
the viam modernam. Bulletin de Philosophie Me´die´vale 45:131–165
Rutten P (2005) Secundum processum et mentem Versoris. John Versor
and his relation to the schools of thought reconsidered. Vivarium
43:292–336
Rutten P (2007) Duae opiniones probabiles. Der Ko¨lner Wegestreit und
seine Verbreitung an den Universita¨ten des 15. Jahrhunderts. In:
Cesalli L, Germann N, Hoenen MJFM (eds) University, council,
city. Intellectual culture on the Rhine (1300–1550), Brepols,
Turnhout, pp 113–134
Senger HG (1981) Albertismus? U¨ berlegungen zur via Alberti im 15.
Jahrhundert. In: Zimmermann A (ed) Albert der Große. Seine Zeit,
sein Werk, seine Wirkung. Gruyter, Berlin, pp 217–236
Tewes G-R (1993) Die Bursen der Ko¨lner Artisten-Fakulta¨t bis zur Mitte
des 16. Jahrhunderts. Bo¨hlau, Ko¨ln
Wels H (2004) Aristotelisches Wissen und Glauben im 15. Jahrhundert.
Ein anonymer Kommentar zum Pariser Verurteilungsdekret von
1277 aus dem Umfeld des Johannes de Nova Domo. Studie und
Text. Gru¨ner, Amsterdam
Wels H (2007) Einige Speziﬁka des albertistischen Universalienrealismus
bei Johannes de Nova Domo und in einem anonymen Tractatus de
univeralis natura. In: Cesalli L, Germann N, Hoenen MJFM (eds)
University,
council,
city.
Intellectual
culture
on
the
Rhine
(1300–1550), Brepols, Turnhout, pp 97–111
Albertus Magnus
▶Albert the Great
Albertus Magnus A
51
A

Alchemy in the Arab World
PAOLA CARUSI
Dipartimento di Studi Orientali,
Facolta` di Studi Orientali
Universita` La Sapienza
Rome
Italy
Abstract
Between the eighth and ninth centuries, Islamic civiliza-
tion inherited from Greece, Persia, India, and ancient
Mesopotamia the body of knowledge known as alchemy:
a school of learning dealing with the ancient arts of ﬁre (in
particular: working metals, precious metals, manufactur-
ing glass, and glazing and fake precious stones). After
a ﬁrst short period in which the body of their knowledge
was acquired and translated, Muslims started putting
forth their own works, and Arab-Islamic alchemy took
shape in its contents and literary genres; although docu-
ments, philosophical and allegorical texts, technical texts,
and recipes sometimes seem muddled and disjointed, as
a whole they formed a complex discipline. Many discus-
sions have taken place and are still taking place regarding
the real meaning of alchemy and its effective role within
Islamic society: on its philosophy and cosmology, on its
techniques and materials, on its goal, on preparing the
elixir, a single procedure and a single purpose; beyond the
veils of the tradition of secrecy, which by deﬁnition
‘‘hides,’’ alchemy has still clearly shown a close connection
with other natural sciences, from medicine to physics,
from botany to zoology. Gloriﬁed as a science, reviled as
deception or illusion, worshipped and despised by many
but still studied, quoted and passed on constantly up to
our modern age, alchemy, through the Islamic tradition,
acquired the semblance that it would continue to bear for
a very long time, throughout the Muslim world at ﬁrst,
and from the twelfth century onwards, up to the Latin
Middle Ages.
Ar. kı¯miya¯’, from the Greek wυmeı´a or wmeı´a (wέo, to
smelt, wύma, molten matter); during the twelfth century,
when alchemy came to the western Latin world, the
Arabic word kı¯miya¯’ (al-kı¯miya¯’) became the Latin
alchemia/alchimia.
The History
According to various authors, alchemy ﬁrst appeared in
the Islamic world during the Umayyad era (Damascus,
ﬁrst half of the eighth century): interested in science, and
particularly in alchemy, the Umayyad prince Kha¯lid b.
Yazı¯d – grandson of Mu‘a¯wiya, the founder of the
dynasty – is said to have summoned Greek philosophers
from Egypt and ordered them to translate alchemical
texts from Greek and Coptic into Arabic. Although to
date there is no evidence to support these stories, they
are still quite plausible and likely: during the ﬁrst
centuries of Islam, a fervent desire to obtain knowledge
and translations often caused messengers being sent in
search of books, or foreign scholars being invited into
schools to train local pupils.
Regardless of the true nature of the knowledge
obtained during the Umayyad era, it was in the second
half of the eighth century and throughout the ﬁrst half of
the ninth, during the ‘Abba¯sid era in Iraq that alchemy was
ﬁrst studied systematically. The wealth of knowledge that
Islam inherited from more ancient traditions and which
can be described as alchemy is, essentially, the heritage that
one of its ﬁrst authors, Pseudo-Democritus (Bolus of
Mendes? Second century BCE) already considered as a
part of his school of learning. In his book Physika` kaı`
mystika` he divided matter into four large groups: gold,
silver, stones, and purple. Except for the latter, ‘‘purple’’ –
if ‘‘purple’’ here really means a dye for textiles – alchemy
would therefore be a school of learning involving the most
noble parts of the arts of ﬁre: working precious metals and
certainly imitating them and making colored glass (imi-
tating precious stones and various kinds of glazing). The
secrecy enshrouding all these techniques (the theory that
probably laid behind these techniques remains unknown)
would seem, on one hand, to be the legacy of very ancient
times when techniques were considered sacred; on the
other, it would seem to relate to the ‘‘operational’’ need
to protect certain production secrets.
Between the eighth and ninth centuries there was
a rapid increase in translations into Arabic: certainly, the
whole corpus of work attributed to Balı¯na¯s (Apollonius of
Tyana), a corpus that seems to be the origin of alchemical
cosmology (see below); a large group of works attributed
to Hermes Trismegistus, an author that, according to
a particular interpretation, was translated into Arabic as
Hermes of the Hermeses (Harmis al-Hara¯misa), ‘‘triple’’
(one name, three persons), or bearer of three sciences, as
well as a great number of essays and comments attributed
to more or less known real or pseudoepigraphical authors
such as Cleopatra, Mary the Copt, Ostanes, Zosimus,
Stephanus, Olympiodorus, etc.
After incorporating Greek alchemical traditions, most
likely along with traditions from Ancient Mesopotamia,
Persia, and India, the Muslim world soon started
52 A
Alchemy in the Arab World

producing its own works. Amongst its ﬁrst authors there is
Ja¯bir b. H˙ ayya¯n (eighth-ninth century), credited by tradi-
tion with approximately 3,000 titles, which obviously were
not all his own work, but came from his school of learning.
Even the above mentioned Kha¯lid b. Yazı¯d is credited with
certain works, and many other later authors who, as time
went by, gave birth to the three fundamental genres within
Arab alchemical literature: technical and philosophical
alchemical texts, like those of al-Ra¯zı¯ and Maslama al-
Majrı¯t:ı¯ (tenth century, Iran, and Spain); allegorical texts,
like those of Ibn Umayl al-Tamı¯mı¯ (tenth century,
Egypt) – and later (thirteenth and fourteenth centuries),
those of al-‘Ira¯qı¯ and al-Jildakı¯ – which were at once
celebrations of their ancient legacy while at the same time
a continuation of the tradition of secrecy; ﬁnally, there are
the recipes, often included in many alchemical texts. Found
as beautiful calligraphy within the works, or as mere scrib-
bles in their margins or on white spaces and ﬂyleaves,
recipes complete a picture that becomes to be increasingly
deﬁned as a single ‘‘object’’ with inﬁnite facets.
Since the middle of the twelfth century, all these works,
which were known and translated in Muslim Spain, were
transferred into medieval Latin: with Robert of Chester’s
translation of the Morienus in 1144, Arab alchemy entered
the Christian world: a different adventure, a different
story, that we shall not deal with here.
The Texts and Their Contents
Since its ﬁrst appearance in the Islamic world, alchemy
was a school of learning that converged with various other
natural sciences: as a testimony to an almost invisible and
ambiguous dividing line, cosmological theories are appro-
priated from philosophy, embryological theories from
philosophy and medicine, and the description and treat-
ment of minerals, animals, and plants from natural sciences
and pharmacology. Following a path probably already con-
solidated since ancient times, the scholarly alchemist was
a man of great knowledge, yet not necessarily a philosopher,
who
absorbed
everything,
gathered
all
information
adapting it to his science; while the fac¸ade of original
theories faded away, it breathed new life into its subject;
that which likely was not alchemical initially, or was
expressed in a different manner, acquired, during the course
of this process, the characteristics of Islamic alchemy.
The settlement process resulted in a proteiform and
controversial school of learning: amongst its followers,
some (al-Majrı¯t:ı¯) paired it with magic, while others,
more daring (Ibn Umayl), paired it with Prophecy; others
yet, realists, tried to lead it back to dealing with nature: an
operational science for experts dealing with the arts of
ﬁre in the footsteps of the ancient masters. Between the
ninth and eleventh centuries, philosophers and scholars
debated: al-Kindı¯ was against it, while al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ was favor-
able to it; Abu¯ Bakr al-Ra¯zı¯, philosopher and physician,
was also an alchemist, and Avicenna, another philosopher
and physician, considered transmutation (see below)
impossible; al-Bı¯ru¯nı¯ (d. 1048) accepts only its technical
role. Approaching the modern age, Ibn Khaldu¯n (d. 1406),
who was well versed in it and wrote of it in detail, tried to
destroy it once and for all, but his attempts were in vain.
Philosophical Texts
A cosmology is undoubtedly at the root of the theory of
transmutation; this is what needs to be studied if certain
aspects of this elusive theory are to be understood. What
we brieﬂy describe here is the cosmology found in the ﬁrst
book of the Mifta¯h: al-h:ikma (The Key of Wisdom, or
Philosophy), the work of a self-styled pupil of Apollonius
of Tyana; this cosmology has slightly different character-
istics in the works of Ja¯bir b. H˙ ayya¯n and other authors,
but the theory of transformation resulting from it is not
substantially different.
At the origin of the creation of the universe, God, in his
eternal solitude, expressed a desire to create; the result of
this desire, which God expressed without further deﬁni-
tion, is a substance bearing the characteristics of absolute
potentiality; since opposites had yet to be deﬁned, this
matter is at once everything and nothing. Then (a ‘‘then’’
that is beyond time), God uttered the word kun (‘‘let there
be,’’ cf. the ﬁat of the Genesis). This word, which is light,
deﬁned its opposite, darkness; and with the creation of
these opposites, light and darkness, which carried with
them heat and cold and all other ‘‘physical’’ opposites
associated with them (movement/stillness, hot/cold,
light/heavy, rareﬁed/dense, etc.), the whole universe was
produced through a series of opposites and intermediates.
In the beginning, ﬁve ‘‘natures’’ (hot/dry, cold/dry, hot/
damp, cold/damp, and balanced, or damp, intermediate)
were formed as four concentric spheres of decreasing
luminosity and mobility, gathered around a still and
dark core. This ﬁrst stratiﬁcation was deﬁned by three
concentric regions: the higher realm (spiritual), the inter-
mediate (planetary), and the sublunar; within the sublu-
nar world, the natures produce the four elements, which
then produce the three composite bodies: minerals, vege-
tables, and animals.
If we were to compare the vast body of the universe
with the bodies of the sublunar world, we would immedi-
ately notice a characteristic that makes them opposite:
while the body of the universe presents itself as
a creature of light with a dark inner core (where the
darkest point is the Earth at its center), each body
Alchemy in the Arab World A
53
A

contained within it has a dark and passive exterior, which
is matter, and a more ‘‘luminous’’ core where operational
capacities reside: this is true for creatures at all levels,
including
the
most
noble,
mankind,
which
hosts
a rational soul within its body’s matter.
Still, aside from this inversion of conformation, there
are two fundamental characteristics shared by the universe
and each creature: (a) the recurrent stratiﬁcation in oppo-
sites and intermediates, and (b) the shared substratum
formed by the natures.
(a) Just like in the universe, between the higher and
sublunar realms lies the intermediate planetary
realm, joining the other two, while in the sublunar
realm, between animals and minerals, there are
plants: in each subject, be it mineral, plant, or ani-
mal, there is an intermediate state between two com-
plementary compositions, exterior and interior.
(b) Beyond and below the ‘‘actual’’ conﬁguration that
each formed creature manifests, in the innermost
core of its being there is a substratum made up by
the natures. The different arrangement of these
natures, meaning the different relations in their
composition, results in different creatures; yet the
substratum itself, meaning the natures, is shared by
each form.
This type of cosmology, which has been expressed with
slight differences by different authors, still leads to very
similar conclusions in what concerns the theory of trans-
mutation – directly generating the theory of alchemical
transmutation. In alchemy, transforming
something
(transmutation) means correcting the relation between
the natures: an extremely difﬁcult process of immersion
in the structure of matter itself, moving gradually from the
composite body to the elements and then to the natures;
operating then on the natures themselves, where the trans-
formation will occur. If we view the body as composed of
three levels: exterior, interior, and intermediate, we see
that correcting relations between the natures is especially
achievable at the intermediate level, since, due to its posi-
tion, it involves the other two adjacent levels; in any event,
each body can be transformed into another simply by
‘‘correcting’’ its natures, and transformation will occur
via the careful and experienced application of ﬁre, since
applying or subtracting its warm nature will result in the
desired corrections. The highest and most noble of all
transformation procedures within the alchemical tradi-
tion is the Great Work, which results in the obtainment
of the ‘‘object of desire,’’ the iksı¯r (elixir): its nature, the
most balanced, the nature of gold, can ‘‘tint with its color’’
(transform into itself) each inferior nature.
Ja¯bir b. H˙ ayya¯n’s work (corpus giabirianum, Kita¯b al-
ah:ja¯r) describes the theory of the composition of the
bodies and transmutation and also deﬁnes what we might
call quantitative aspects. The text states that each body, in
the form in which it appears to our eyes, has an exterior
‘‘actual’’ composition and an interior ‘‘potential’’ composi-
tion; these two compositions, exterior and interior,
together, form a total composition (where the relation
between natures is 1:3:5:8). Operating a transformation
means modifying the exterior ‘‘actual’’ composition by
accessing the interior ‘‘potential’’ composition: at the end
of this procedure, the total composition will remain
unchanged, but the exterior (or ‘‘actual’’) composition
will have changed because actual natures will have trans-
ferred, in a certain percentage, to a condition of potentiality,
while interior natures will have become exterior.
This Jabirian theory, although interesting because it
attempts to mathematize the composition of matter, high-
lights a weakness of the alchemical theory: the impossibil-
ity of determining the two initial and ﬁnal compositions
between which the transformation is realized leads the
author to rely on improbable numerological theories
(relations between names and compositions in natures).
Unable to rely on a strong and solid theory, degenerating
into the most pure forms of empeiria, alchemy often ended
up attempting to simply repeat the procedures of its
predecessors.
Allegorical Texts and Recipes
Since the beginning, alchemical literature of a more or less
openly ‘‘scientiﬁc’’ nature was accompanied by transla-
tions of a great deal of allegorical literature. It is worth
mentioning that this genre is not original to the Muslim
world; already Greek alchemy had Zosimus, or Hermetical
texts, or the vast body of works attributed to various
authors of Alexandria during the early centuries: this
literature, which originated to protect and expand on
very ancient techne, reached Islam along with the other
translations, and was studied and commented upon by
a number of authors. The mystery grew with the inevitable
fracture between the polytheistic rebirths and Islamic
monotheism and with the spread of quotes out of context;
on the contrary, when characters were known and
cherished, the various stories were expanded upon and
details were added to them. A well-known case, for exam-
ple, is that of Alexander the Great, who in Arabic became
Dhu¯ l-Qarnayn (the two-horned one); the Alexander
Romance, attributed to Callisthenes, was the origin for
the creation of an alchemical heroic ﬁgure, which com-
bined the wisdom of the Greeks, the Persian tradition, and
Indian
science.
Along
with
Alexander,
there
are
54 A
Alchemy in the Arab World

many other revered characters that were adopted and are
often mentioned in alchemical allegory: philosophers like
Democritus, Aristotle, and Socrates; physicians like Galen;
and also prophets, like Mu¯sa¯ (Moses), ‘Isa¯ (Jesus), and even
Adam, father of the humankind, to whom God transferred,
along with other knowledge, a few pages of alchemy.
In allegorical texts, the Great Work takes on various
different forms. In its different stages, in the retort and
alembic, it often became an event: a journey, an ascent, an
access to the temple, an exile in a palace or chamber,
a siege, the destruction of a city and a paciﬁcation amongst
its ruins, the hunt and cooking of prey, a gathering of rain
and dew, the gestation of an embryo in the uterus, and an
inﬁnite number of other events that are vivid images of
the procedure. In its condition of completeness, taken as a
single entity somewhere between action and result, the
event is replaced by an object: like the egg, be it a hen’s
egg or the cosmic egg, which contains within itself each
element and nature; or like the hermetic tree, ﬁrmly
planted and motionless, but ‘‘readable’’ even in its becom-
ing, from its roots to its leaves. At the core of all this
proliferation there was a unique reality: as the alchemists
themselves wrote, the endless number of alchemical alle-
gories are nothing but the descriptions of a single proce-
dure and a single object.
At the root of this vast body of allegorical work there is
not only a religious or initiatic literature, or that of writers
and poets: a large part of Arab alchemy is in fact based
on philosophical texts, often Aristotelian: a great deal of
imagery and names of minerals, plants, and animals,
descriptions of man and other creatures, depictions of the
skies, the heavenly bodies, etc. are ‘‘alchemized’’ borrowings
from various sciences, from which alchemy borrowed more
or less faithfully. And not all of it came from Alexandria and
from the Greeks: as mentioned previously, Persia, India,
and ancient Mesopotamia also had a strong inﬂuence.
Alchemical allegory had a strong impact on its readers,
from East to Spain. Alchemical allegory appears sporadi-
cally throughout literary texts, poetry, and prose and, as
time went by, even in the musings of mystics, with inter-
ventions that are often as brief yet effective as lightning: in
the East, alchemical allegory is quoted by al-Bı¯ru¯nı¯, the
scientist, who in one of his works even mocked the alche-
mists, and by al-G˙ aza¯lı¯ (d. 1111), the theologian; between
the two worlds, it is mentioned by Ibn ‘Arabı¯ (d. 1240) the
mystic; in the West, Ibn T˙ufayl (d. 1185) the philosopher,
in his work H˙ ayy b. Yaqz˙a¯n mentions the unobtainable red
sulphur, one of the names for the elixir.
In closing, a brief note on recipes: unlike the descrip-
tions of equipment occasionally
found throughout
alchemical texts, sometimes detailed in drawings and
which can be reproduced, recipes are often difﬁcult to
decipher: although a few are quite clear, such as the recipes
for purifying the la¯zaward (lapis lazuli ! natural ultra-
marine), or the instructions for coloring different mate-
rials (papers, precious woods, etc.), most of the recipes
concerning the Great Work use terms and expressions
drawn from allegory; the difﬁculty in interpreting them
joins the already hard task set by other scientiﬁc texts,
non-encrypted recipes, and pharmacopoeias, due to the
difﬁculty in identifying minerals, plants, and various sub-
stances. Prudence in interpreting them is required, as
hurried interpretations have often been detrimental; the
challenge, however, is irresistible.
See also: ▶Abu¯ Bakr al-Ra¯zı¯, Muh:ammad ibn Zakarı¯ya¯ʾ
(Rhazes) ▶Alchemy in the Latin World ▶Alexandrian
Tradition into Arabic: Medicine ▶Alexandrian Tradition
into Arabic: Philosophy ▶Apollonius of Tyana ▶al-
Bı¯ru¯nı¯, Abu¯ Rayh:a¯n ▶al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, Abu¯ Nas˙r ▶al-G˙ aza¯lı¯,
Abu¯ H˙ a¯mid Muh:ammad ▶Hermes Trismegistus ▶Ibn
ʿArabı¯, Abu¯ Bakr Muh:ammad Muh:yiddı¯n ▶Ibn Khaldu¯n,
Abu¯ Zayd ʿAbdarrah˙ma¯n ▶Ibn Sı¯na¯, Abu¯ ʿAlı¯ (Avicenna)
▶Ibn T˙ufayl, Abu¯ Bakr (Abubacer) ▶al-Kindı¯, Abu¯ Yu¯suf
Yaʿqu¯b ibn Ish:a¯q ▶Translations from Greek into Arabic
▶Translations from Greek into Syriac
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Berthelot M (1893) La chimie au moyen aˆge, vol 3. Imprimerie nationale,
Paris (repr. Zeller, Osnabruck, Philo Press, Amsterdam, 1967)
Haq SN (1994) Names, natures and things. Kluwer Academic, Dordrecht/
Boston/London (Ja¯bir ibn H˙ ayya¯n, Kita¯b al-ah:ja¯r, critical edition of
select text and English translation)
Ibn H˙ ayya¯n Ja¯bir (1935) Essai sur l’histoire des ide´es scientiﬁques dans
l’Islam, vol. 1, textes choisis, ed. Kraus P. G.-P. Maisonneuve, Paris,
El-Khandgi, Le Caire
Ibn H˙ ayya¯n Ja¯bir (1983) Dix traite´s d’alchimie. Les dix premiers traite´s du
Livre des Soixante-dix, French trans. Lory P. Sindbad, Paris
Tura¯b ‘Alı¯ M (ed) (1933) Three Arabic treatises on alchemy by
Muh:ammad bin Umail (10th century A.D.). Memoirs of the
Asiatic Society of Bengal 12 1–213 (anast. repr. Ibn Umayl
(2002) Texts and studies, collected and reprinted, ed. Sezgin F.
Natural sciences in Islam, 75. Institute for the History of Arabic-
Islamic Science at the Johann Wolfgang Goethe University, Frankfurt
am Main)
Secondary Sources
Anawati GC (1996) Arabic alchemy. In: Rashed R (ed) Encyclopedia of the
history of Arabic science, vol 3. III: Technology, alchemy and life
sciences. Routledge, London/New York, pp 853–885
Carusi P (2002) Il trattato di ﬁlosoﬁa alchemica Mifta¯h: al-h:ikma, ed
i suoi testimoni presso la Biblioteca Apostolica. In: Miscellanea
Bibliothecae Apostolicae Vaticanae IX. Studi e Testi, 409. Citta` del
Vaticano, pp 35–84
Carusi P (2005) Ge´ne´ration, corruption et transmutation. Embryologie et
cosmologie dans l’alchimie islamique au Xe sie`cle. In: Viano C (dir)
Alchemy in the Arab World A
55
A

L’alchimie et ses racines philosophiques. La tradition grecque et la
tradition arabe. J. Vrin, Paris, pp 171–187
Halleux R (1996) The reception of Arabic alchemy in the West.
In: Encyclopedia of the history of Arabic science, vol 3. III: Technol-
ogy, alchemy and life sciences. Routledge, London/New York, pp
886–902
Kraus P (1942) Ja¯bir ibn H˙ ayya¯n. Contribution a` l’histoire des ide´es
scientiﬁques dans l’Isla¯m. Ja¯bir et la science grecque. Imprimerie de
l’Institut franc¸ais d’arche´ologie orientale, Le Caire (repr. Les Belles
Lettres, Paris, 1986)
Marquet Y (1988) La philosophie des alchimistes et l’alchimie des philo-
sophes. Ja¯bir ibn H˙ ayya¯n et les ‘‘Fre`res de la Purete´.’’ Maisonneuve &
Larose, Paris
Ullmann M (1986) v. kı¯miya¯’. The encyclopaedia of Islam, new edition,
vol. 5. E.J. Brill, Leiden, pp 110–115
Alchemy in the Latin World
SE´BASTIEN MOUREAU
Institut Orientaliste
Universite´ Catholique de Louvain
Louvain-la-Neuve
Belgium
Abstract
Alchemy, originally an attempt to ﬁnd a process to trans-
mute base metals (such as lead and copper) into gold or
silver, may be considered a metallurgical science mixed up
with considerations of theoretical philosophy. Medieval
alchemy in the West may be divided into two main stages:
from the middle of the twelfth century to the end of the
thirteenth century, the Arabic material was assimilated
and Latin treatises were composed on the basis of this
material, but with an increasing level of distinctive fea-
tures; during the fourteenth and ﬁfteenth centuries,
alchemy developed from the Latin texts of the thirteenth
and fourteenth centuries rather than from Arabic sources.
Alchemy never came into universities; it was a knowl-
edge on the fringe. However, it had a very close link with
natural philosophy and medicine. The authoritative texts
in alchemy are few in number: some Arabic translations
(especially those attributed to al-Ra¯zı¯ and Avicenna), the
Summa perfectionis, and some texts attributed to Arnald of
Villanova, Ramon Llull, and Johannes de Rupescissa.
Authors used to compile ideas from previous major
alchemists.
The Latin word alchimia is a transcription of the
Arabic al-kı¯miya¯, which is itself a transcription of the
Greek word wυmEı´a (fusion).
Before the Latin Translations of
Arabic Texts
The early Middle Ages in the West did not know of
alchemy. The only traces observed are some technical
recipes translated from Greek alchemical compendia, but
completely divorced from the context. For instance the
original kernel of the Mappae clavicula (before the begin-
ning of the twelfth century) is a translation of alchemical
recipes, but the treatise itself is a metallurgical text about
working with gold and gemstones.
The ﬁrst circulation of Arabic alchemical materials
dates from the beginning of the twelfth century, but they
were designed for a very practical use. The Diversarum
artium schedula of the monk Theophilus (pseudonym of
the Saxon Roger of Helmarshausen, who lived between
1106 and 1140) contains one alchemical recipe which
comes probably from Arabic sources. Some additions
to the Mappae clavicula attributed to Adelard of Bath
(ﬂ. 1140) also betray an Arabic origin. These observations
allow us to conclude that some Arabic recipes were already
circulating in the West from the beginning of the twelfth
century, but on a very small scale.
The Latin Translations of Arabic Alchemical
Treatises
During the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, a wide move-
ment of Latin translations from Arabic texts developed in
Spain and Italy. Since various Islamic classiﬁcations of
science did regard alchemy as a discipline in its own
right, many treatises were translated.
The Liber de compositione alchimiae of ‘‘Morienus,’’
translated by Robert of Chester in 1144, is generally con-
sidered to be the ﬁrst alchemical treatise known in the
Latin West. This text reports a dialogue between the caliph
Kha¯lid b. Yazı¯d (c. 668–704/709), known as the ﬁrst
Arabic alchemist in the Islamic tradition, and the monk
Marya¯nu¯s, a legendary disciple of the Greek alchemist
Stephanos of Alexandria; the authenticity is very doubtful,
this work is pseudonymous. Translations of many classical
works of alchemy were made in the subsequent period.
Gerard of Cremona (1141–1187) translated three treatises,
one from the corpus attributed to Ja¯bir b. H˙ ayya¯n (a very
large corpus of texts probably written during the end of
the eighth century and the ninth century), the Liber
divinitatis de septuaginta (the Book of Divinity, a part of
the Kita¯b al-sab‘ı¯n, the Book of Seventy), and two works
assigned to Pseudo-Ra¯zı¯, including the De aluminibus et
salibus (on alums and salts), a technical text which gained
a wide diffusion (it was a major source to Vincent of
Beauvais for alchemy). Other works of the two main
Arabic alchemists were translated, such as the Liber
56 A
Alchemy in the Latin World

misericordiae (Kita¯b al-rah:ma, the Book of Forgiveness) of
Ja¯bir b. H˙ ayya¯n and the Secretum secretorum (Kita¯b al-
asra¯r, the Book of the Secrets) of Abu¯ Bakr al-Ra¯zı¯
(854–925/935), along with pseudepigraphical texts. Some
alchemical treatises attributed to Avicenna were also trans-
lated, such as the Ad Hasen regem epistola de re tecta
(Risa¯lat al-iksı¯r, Epistle on the Elixir), which might be
genuine, and the De anima in arte alchemiae (The Soul in
the Art of Alchemy), which is spurious and exerted a
great inﬂuence. In a more allegorical vein, the Turba
philosophorum (Mus:h:af al-jama¯‘a, Book of the Commu-
nity), a discussion between legendary Greek alchemists,
and the Tabula chemica (al-Ma¯’ al-waraqı¯ wa-l-ard˙ al-
najmiyya, The Silvery Water and Starry Earth) by ‘‘Senior
Zadith’’ (Muh:ammad ibn Umayl, ﬁrst half of the tenth
century) were translated. Among these translations we
also ﬁnd some treatises less imbued with alchemy, as for
instance the De secretis naturae (Kita¯b sirr al-khalı¯qa, Book
of the Secret of Creation) of Balı¯na¯s (Pseudo-Apollonius of
Tyana): translated by Hugo of Santalla before 1151, it
contains the Emerald Tablet, a very short and enigmatic
alchemical text attributed to Hermes, which gained cur-
rency in the West.
From Arabic alchemy major theoretical concepts were
imported, such as the theory of mercury and sulphur as
the two principles of metals. All metals are made by the
mixture and cooking of mercury and sulphur in the
depths of the earth during a period of hundreds of years.
Modern appellations are misleading: mercury in that time
was considered to be a cold and moist principle, whereas
sulphur was regarded as a hot and dry principle. The
differences between metals depended on the purity of
these principles and on the place and the duration of the
cooking. The theory of elixirs is also typical of Arabic
alchemy: in order to transmute base metals into gold,
the alchemist has to balance the properties of a body
(coldness, heat, moisture, and dryness). He will achieve
this by using a preparation called ‘‘elixir.’’ This preparation
is made from the distillation of materials (generally
organic substances such as hair, eggs, blood, etc., but
these substances are technically called ‘‘stones’’).
Both trends of Arabic alchemy, the technical and the
allegorical, found their way into the West, but the distinc-
tion is less clear. The reception of Arabic alchemy was
a complex movement. Scholars believed that alchemy
could offer a major technological contribution to the
knowledge of minerals. Alchemy never penetrated durably
the academic world, however, in spite of several attempts.
One of the major reasons for this is to be found in
a translation made by Alfred of Sareshel about 1200 of
a section of Avicenna’s Kita¯b al-Shifa¯’, in which the
possibility of transmuting species is denied (in a well-
known passage called the Sciant Artiﬁces). The translator
added this section at the end of Aristotle’s Meteora
(under the title of De mineralibus, more generally known
today, although erroneously, as the De congelatione et
conglutinatione lapidum) and it was therefore regarded as
one of Aristotle’s genuine works. This wrong assumption
was largely responsible for the development of what we
commonly call the alchemical debate, in reference to the
ﬁerce discussion among the thirteenth and fourteenth-
century scholars about the possibility of transmutation.
One of the major problems met with by the translators
of alchemical works was that a large part of the recipes that
formed the basis of the practicae was transmitted orally.
Reading these recipes was very difﬁcult and many words
were coded (generally to hide production secrets). Some
of these Arabic codes are found in Latin alchemy, as trans-
lations or transcriptions. Moreover, the method called
verbum de verbo (translation word for word) of many
translators made texts quite difﬁcult to understand.
The Thirteenth Century
From the beginning of the thirteenth century, the assim-
ilation of Arabic alchemy went further. Treatises started
being written directly in Latin in the style of the Arabic
translations, and attributed to renowned authorities. The
De perfecto magisterio of Pseudo-Aristotle, for instance,
contains many Arabic words in transcription, but it is not
a translation. The authenticity of these ﬁrst Latin alchemic
works is subject to various discussions.
The translator Michael Scot (d. 1235) probably wrote
an Ars alchemiae. His alchemy is entirely based on Arabic
elements. It contains very scanty theoretical information
and is mostly concerned with recipes. The main scope of
this author was to solve obscurities and contradictions of
Arabic texts in order to provide a more intelligible
alchemy to the Latin world.
Albert the Great (1193–1280) wrote a De mineralibus,
in which he assumed the possibility of transmutation
(even though he asserted that he never met an alchemist
succeeding in his work, his philosophical principles did
not allow him to deny this possibility). This work is the
most accomplished attempt to develop a proper mineral-
ogy in the Latin West. It is based on Greek and Arabic
materials, which were assimilated and adapted. In addi-
tion to this, some thirty alchemical treatises are attributed
to him, probably wrongly.
The Franciscan Roger Bacon (1214–1293), in his Opus
maius, regarded alchemy as an important ﬁeld of knowl-
edge. Assuming that the alchemical work was a sort of
medicine for metals, he was the ﬁrst in the West to assume
Alchemy in the Latin World A
57
A

that it could be applied to the human body and, hence,
that it could be used to remove its corruptions and pro-
long a man’s life (the so-called prolongatio vitae). Alchemy
was therefore to his eyes one of the foundations of med-
icine. Many apocryphal alchemical treatises are attributed
to Roger Bacon, too.
At the end of the thirteenth century, in addition to the
translations of Ja¯bir b. H˙ ayya¯n’s texts mentioned above,
a corpus of Latin texts began to circulate under the name
of ‘‘Geber’’ (the Latin name of Ja¯bir b. H˙ ayya¯n), the
Summa perfectionis being the most successful. Recent
research tentatively attributes the authorship of this
work to the Franciscan Paul of Taranto, without any cer-
tainty. The alchemy of the Summa perfectionis had a very
large diffusion, and was regarded as a major source for
centuries. The theory of ‘‘mercury alone’’ is one of its
typical features: mercury is the unique principle of all
metals; it contains its own sulphur. The alchemical work
is no longer made on the basis of organic matters (as it was
said in the De anima in arte alchemiae of Pseudo-
Avicenna, the main text of this trend in the Latin West),
but on the basis of various mercurial compositions made
from minerals (mercury, ammoniac salt, sulphur, and
arsenic).
The technological and economical rise of the thir-
teenth century led scholars of this time to be signiﬁcantly
interested in alchemy. During this century, alchemy was
not mixed up with allegorical considerations. Neither was
it more practical, however, as is often assumed, ﬁrst
because alchemy had always had a practical side, and
then because its development during this century was
theoretical as well. However, from the end of the thir-
teenth century, the increase in the number of alchemical
frauds aroused suspicion about alchemy’s validity.
Scholastics (such as Vincent de Beauvais, Robert of
Kildwarby, and Thomas Aquinas) never ranged alchemy
among the artes liberales. They rather considered it as
a mechanical art, a tool used for the sake of other disci-
plines (such as medicine and metallurgy). The theoretical
side of alchemy was explained by physics, by natural
philosophy. As an art basing its operations on philosoph-
ical principles, alchemy was linked with medicine and
agriculture (which were also considered as secondary
ﬁelds of physics).
The Fourteenth Century
During the fourteenth century, the main sources of
alchemical authors were not directly the Arabic texts
translated, but the Latin treatises composed during the
thirteenth century: the Summa perfectionis became one of
the main authoritative texts. Moreover, the allegorical
trend of alchemy began to expand in the Latin West, the
Turba philosophorum and the Emerald Tablet came to be
used more widely. We also observe a Christianization of
alchemy, the appearance of a more religious alchemy
(as was already the case in Arabic alchemy). The pharma-
ceutical side of alchemy was particularly well developed
(especially the distillation of alcohol). The attempt to ﬁnd
the elixir of life and the medical topic of body restoration
became a core issue.
The alchemical debate remained intense in the four-
teenth century. The opponents of alchemy, in addition to
the Sciant artiﬁces, asserted that the transformation of
species was against nature; in reaction to this assertion,
alchemists invoked the fact that they were doing what
nature itself was doing (the creation of metals), the only
difference being that they did it more quickly. A decree
entitled Spondent quas non exhibent is said to have been
promulgated (in 1316?) by pope John XXII against false
coiners (although this decree does not appear before the
end of the fourteenth century). Although it did not con-
demn alchemy as such, this decree encouraged suspicion
against alchemists (in addition to the increase in the
number of frauds). However, no juridical condemnation
of alchemists took place. One of the major opponents to
alchemy was Nicolas Eymerich (1320–1399), who asserted
in his Contra alchymistas that alchemists, once they had
been disappointed with their art, were turning into
demons or into the devil.
Some alchemical treatises are attributed to Arnold of
Villanova (1240–1311), the famous Catalan doctor. These
texts are probably not genuine, but the question is not
solved yet. In the Rosarius philosophorum, the most wide-
spread of these works, we ﬁnd an alchemy based on the
theory of the ‘‘mercury alone’’ (like in the Summa
perfectionis). The alchemist has to reduce a metal to its
prima materia (mercury containing sulphur), and project
this mercury on a vile metal in order to transmute it. He
rejected the use of organic matter. He also mentioned,
following Roger Bacon, the possibility of healing the
human body thanks to alchemy. Other treatises attributed
to Arnold of Villanova are characterized by a more reli-
gious doctrine, as the De secretis naturae and the Tractatus
parabolicus, in which the alchemist established a link
between the philosophical stone and Christ.
This allegorical and religious kind of alchemy is also
found in the alchemical treatises wrongly attributed to
Thomas Aquinas (such as the De multiplicatione, c. 1320).
Towards the middle of the fourteenth century,
a commentary on the Emerald Tablet was written under
the name of a certain Hortulanus, in which the alchemical
Work is meant to be a reproduction of God’s creation.
58 A
Alchemy in the Latin World

In his Pretiosa margarita novella (written between
1330 and 1350), Petrus Bonus of Ferrara synthesized the
main alchemical ideas of his time, mainly from the Summa
perfectionis. He was more a philosopher than an alchemist,
and considered alchemy as a divine art, introducing the-
ology into the debate.
Ramon Llull (c. 1233–c. 1316), the Catalan philoso-
pher, opposed alchemy. However, at the beginning of the
fourteenth century, a corpus of apocryphal alchemical
texts began to circulate under his name. This corpus
gained a wide diffusion (until the seventeenth century),
and many different ideas and trends are found in it. The
most important one (and probably the ﬁrst) is the
Testamentum: the alchemical doctrine of this work shows
close resemblance to the doctrine expounded in the works
attributed to Arnold of Villanova (but, as the dates of
those texts are not clearly settled, it is impossible to assert
which way the inﬂuence spreads). One of the speciﬁcities
of the Testamentum lies in that it mentions for the ﬁrst
time in the West, in addition to the transmutation of metal
and healing of the human body, the creation of gemstones
through the alchemical work. The Arabic concept of elixir
also occupies a very important place in this book. The
observation of colors as signs of different stages in the
alchemical work became central in the pseudo-Llullian
corpus. This work was raising alchemy to the status of
natural philosophy, which contributed to giving it a very
long-lasting success (until the seventeenth century).
In the Liber de consideratione quintae essentiae omnium
rerum (c. 1351–1352), Johannes de Rupescissa (d. after
1365) introduced into alchemy the use of the concept of
the quintessence to designate the result of repeated distil-
lations. In the trend of the prolongatio vitae of Roger
Bacon, he asserted that the quintessence provides incor-
ruptibility for corruptible things (in the sublunary world),
considering it as a terrestrial corollary to the celestial ether.
He also showed a very religious fervor in his writings in
defense of the Franciscan order. His ideas were followed by
many alchemists: for instance, one of the pseudo-Llullian
treatises, the De secretis naturae, is clearly indebted to his
work.
The book of Guillaume Sedacer (d. 1382), the
Sedacina, is an original work. Beside the list of major
alchemical authorities of this period, he created a proper
alchemical vocabulary (mainly from Arabic words).
The Fifteenth Century
To date, the alchemy of the ﬁfteenth century has not
received much attention. The main alchemical doctrines
of this century are those of Arnold of Villanova, Johannes
de Rupescissa, and especially Pseudo-Ramon Llull. This
was the time of an enormous production of alchemical
manuscripts. Among alchemists of this century, George
Ripley (ﬂ. 1470) should be mentioned as a very original
author. He composed an alchemical poem in English
entitled The Compound of Alchymie [. . .] Conteining
Twelve Gates, mainly inspired by pseudo-Llullian theories
and by the work of a mysterious alchemist, Guido de
Montanor. This poem quickly became a classic of medie-
val alchemy.
Conclusion
Medieval alchemy was at ﬁrst based on Arabic texts, then
speciﬁcally on Latin compositions. It remained a marginal
knowledge, and never came into universities, but had
a very close link with natural philosophy and medicine.
Treatises were generally compilations of ideas of previous
renowned alchemists, and the great authorities were just
a few: some Arabic translations (especially those attrib-
uted to al-Ra¯zı¯ and Avicenna), the Summa perfectionis,
and some texts attributed to Arnald of Villanova, Ramon
Llull, and Johannes de Rupescissa.
See also: ▶Abu¯ Bakr al-Ra¯zı¯, Muh:ammad ibn Zakarı¯ya¯ʾ
(Rhazes) ▶Adelard of Bath ▶Albert the Great ▶Alchemy
in the Arab World ▶Alfred of Sareshel ▶Apollonius of
Tyana ▶Arabic Texts: Natural Philosophy, Latin Trans-
lations
of
▶Arnaldus
de
Villanova
▶Hermes
Trismegistus ▶Ibn Sı¯na¯, Abu¯ ʿAlı¯ (Avicenna) ▶Ibn Sı¯na¯
(Avicenna), Latin Translations of ▶Natural Philosophy,
Arabic ▶Natural Philosophy ▶Ramon Llull ▶Roger
Bacon ▶Thomas Aquinas
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Barthe´le´my P (2002) La Sedacina ou l’Œuvre au crible: l’alchimie de
Guillaume Sedacer, carme catalan de la ﬁn du XIVe sie`cle. SE´HA,
Paris
Crisciani C (1976) Preziosa Margarita Novella/Pietro Bono da Ferrara;
Edizione del volgarizzamento con introduzione e note. La Nuova
Italia Editrice, Firenze
Holmyard E J, Mandeville D C (1927) Avicennae de congelatione et
conglutinatione lapidum being a section of the Kitaˆb al-Shifaˆ’
(Latin and Arabic texts, English trans). Paul Geuthner, Paris.
Kraus P (1942–1943) Ja¯bir ibn H˙ ayya¯n, contribution a` l’histoire des ide´es
scientiﬁques dans l’Islam. Institut franc¸ais d’arche´ologie orientale,
Cairo
Newman W (1991) The Summa Perfectionis of pseudo-Geber, a critical
edition, translation and study. E. J. Brill, Leiden
Pereira M (1999) Il ‘Testamentum’ alchemico attribuito a Raimundo
Lullo. SISMEL, Firenze
Stavenhagen L (1974) A testament of alchemy, being the revelations of
Morienus to Khalid ibn Yazid ibn Mu‘amiyya. (Latin ed and English
trans). The Brandeis University Press, Hanover
Alchemy in the Latin World A
59
A

Secondary Sources
General Works
Calvet A (1998) Alchimie – Occident me´die´val. In: Servier J (ed)
Dictionnaire critique de l’e´sote´risme. Presses Universitaires de
France, Paris, pp 31–38
Ganzenmu¨ller W (1936) Die Alchemie im Mittelalter. Bonifacius,
Paderborn
Halleux R (1979) Les textes alchimiques. Typologie des sources du Moyen
Aˆ ge occidental, 32. Brepols, Turnhout
Halleux R (1996) The reception of Arabic alchemy in the West. In:
Rashed R (ed) Encyclopedia of the history of Arabic science, vol 3.
Technology, alchemy and life sciences. Routledge, London, pp 886–902
Mandosio J-M (1993) L’alchimie dans les classiﬁcations des sciences et des
arts a` la Renaissance. In: Margolin J-C, Matton S (eds) Alchimie et
philosophie a` la Renaissance. Vrin, Paris, pp 11–41
Obrist B (1995) Vers une histoire de l’alchimie me´die´vale. In: Micrologus
3, The crisis of alchemy. Brepols, Turnhout, pp 3–43
Obrist B (1996) Art et nature dans l’alchimie me´die´vale. Rev Hist Sci
49:215–286
Other Sources
Calvet A (2005) Qu’est-ce-que le corpus alchimique attribue´ a` maıˆtre
Arnaud de Villeneuve. In: Arxiu de Textos Catalans Antics, 23/24:435–
456 (this article can be found on the Internet: http://www.iec.cat/
pperiodiques/BV_pub_periodiques2.asp?CollectionID={ABC8AF63-
CB4A-4C03-9021-32F3217AD197}&Mode=Search&PublicationID=
{60DE99A4–10C8-43B1-B7B0-997D2CB38EC6})
Halleux R (1981) Les ouvrages alchimiques de Jean de Rupescissa. In:
Histoire litte´raire de la France, 41. Imprimerie Nationale, Paris, pp
241–284
Magnus Albertus (1967) Book of minerals, trans. Wyckoff D. Clarendon
Press, Oxford
Newman W (1994) The alchemy of Roger Bacon and the Tres epistolae
attributed to him. In: Comprendre et maıˆtriser la nature au moyen
aˆge: Me´langes d’histoire des sciences offerts a` Guy Beaujouan. Droz,
Geneva, pp 461–479
Pereira M (1989) The alchemical corpus attributed to Raymond Lull. The
Warburg Institute, London
Rampling J (2008) Establishing the canon: George Ripley and his Alchem-
ical sources. Ambix 55:189–208
Alexander of Aphrodisias and
Arabic Aristotelianism
CHARLES GENEQUAND
Faculte´ des Lettres
Universite de Gene`ve
Gene`ve
Switzerland
Abstract
Alexander of Aphrodisias, commentator par excellence of
Aristotle, lived about 200 CE. A fairly important part of
his works was translated into Arabic during the ninth
century and greatly inﬂuenced the reception and interpre-
tation of the Stagirite’s thought in the East. Important
fragments of his commentary on the Metaphysics have
been preserved in Ibn Rushd’s own Great Commentary
on that work. Among the independent treatises preserved
in Arabic, the most important are On the Principles of the
Universe, On Providence, and On the Intellect.
The longest (about 25 pages) of Alexander of Aphrodisias’
works preserved in Arabic is the treatise known as On the
Principles of the Universe. As it happens, it is also a text that
is totally unknown in the Greek sources, although its main
theses can be found in other works by Alexander, the
commentaries and above all the collection of short disser-
tations transmitted under the general name of Questions.
It lays down that the heavenly bodies are moved by souls
and that their motions arise in consequence of the desire
that they feel for the First Cause of the universe (God).
Their circular motion expresses their desire or their will
(the two notions are not always clearly distinguished) to
imitate or to become similar to the immutability of the
self-thinking divine mind, which moves them as the object
of thought and love. As the motions of the ﬁxed stars and
of the different planets are diverse, they are the cause of the
diversity and variety of the physical phenomena, which
they originate in the world of generation and decay, situ-
ated below the sphere of the moon. This inﬂuence occurs
through a ‘‘spiritual power,’’ identiﬁed with nature, which
penetrates all parts of the world, thus ensuring its cohesion
and permanence. The condition of the universe is thus
similar to that of the city or the household in which the
authority of the leader is the cause of order at all levels.
Although these theses have their origin in Aristotle, in
particular in the twelfth book (∧) of the Metaphysics,
they are developed by Alexander in the sense of working
out the connection between the heavenly and terrestrial
realms and laying much more emphasis on it.
The treatise On Providence begins in truly Aristotelian
fashion with a doxographical introduction, which sets out
brieﬂy and rejects two antagonistic conceptions of divine
providence. The ﬁrst is that of Epicurus and his school,
building on the old atomistic doctrine of Leucippus and
Democritus, according to which the gods do not play any
role in the governance of the universe, which is the prod-
uct of pure chance and of the haphazard collision of atoms
in the void. The second is that of the Stoics (Zeno of
Citium is cited by name). For them providence rules all
worldly processes and nothing escapes the benevolent care
of the gods. According to Alexander, both positions are
unacceptable. The harmony of the cosmos and the
60 A
Alexander of Aphrodisias and Arabic Aristotelianism

regularity of the natural processes make it totally unlikely
that they should be entirely devoid of design. On the other
hand, it would be unworthy of the gods’ majesty to care for
every individual being in itself. Such a conduct would
degrade them to a position inferior to that of the creatures
since the end, in any natural or moral process, is always
above the entity acting toward it. Alexander’s aim is to
develop a theory of providence, which should avoid the
opposite excesses of the other schools while conforming to
the principles of the Aristotelian system. His solution is
based for the most part on astronomical considerations
deriving from the Metaphysics and the treatises On the
Heavens and On Generation and Corruption. The physical
processes taking place in the world of generation and
decay depend on the regular motions of the heavenly
bodies and are themselves subject to unchanging laws.
Just as the king does not personally look after each and
every one of his subjects, but establishes general rules and
ensures that they are observed and followed, in the same
way God or the gods provide for the general welfare of the
world as a whole, but it would be absurd to assume that
they know each individual being as such. The annual
motion of the sun causes the alternation of the seasons
and thus creates the conditions appropriate for human
life. As the annual motions of the stars are themselves
dependent on the gods, that is on the heavenly intellects,
which move them as objects of love, the beings of the
physical world and man himself depend on them. Alexan-
der however goes one step further by explaining that the
gods have knowledge of what happens in the natural
world, a thesis that is surely difﬁcult to reconcile with
the Aristotelian notion of the self-thinking divine intellect.
His doctrine is summed up in the idea that providence is
not exerted by the gods ‘‘according to the ﬁrst intention,’’
but is the secondary and concomitant effect of their
existence.
These two treatises, then, cover in part the same
ground. They sketch a grand cosmological and metaphys-
ical scheme in which the heavenly bodies constitute a level
of reality intermediate between the purely immaterial
intellects, which govern them as ﬁnal causes, and the
world of generation and decay situated below the sphere
of the moon. The connection between the opposite realms
of immutability, regular motion, and change is twofold: by
desiring and imitating their immaterial and unmoved
movers, the stars regulate the seasonal and regular alter-
nation of physical conditions down on earth. The eternity
of the species, contrasting with the constant coming-to-be
and disappearing of individuals, reﬂects in its way this
celestial unchangeability. The particular appeal of this
system resided for the Arab philosophers in that it
allowed to establish, between God and the world, the close
and logical link that was missing in the original Aristotelian
texts. By restricting God’s knowledge of the particulars
to the species, however, it paved the way for the anti-
philosophical controversies of al-G˙ aza¯lı¯ and others.
These two concepts, the downward inﬂuence of the
heavens on the world of nature through the divine power
emanating from them and the upward motion of assim-
ilation form the basic components of the ‘‘cosmo-
metaphysics,’’ as it has sometimes been dubbed, of the
great Arab philosophers. These elements are found more
or less scattered in the main works of al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, the
Maba¯di’ Ara¯’ Ahl al-Madı¯na al-Fa¯d˙ila, and Al-Siya¯sa
al-Madaniyya, also known under the title of Maba¯di’ al-
Mawju¯da¯t. The parallelism between the structure of the
universe and that of the state, which governs the plan of
these two treatises also derives from the analogical concep-
tion that is particularly evident in Alexander’s work. But it
is Ibn Sı¯na¯ (Avicenna) who ﬁrst built up these elements
into a coherent and systematic whole. To be sure, he went
beyond the Alexandrian scheme, particularly in the
distinction he established between the souls and the
intellects of the heavenly spheres, as well as between
necessary and contingent being. The fact remains that
Alexander’s exegesis provided the general framework and
the main components of his theory as expounded in
greatest detail in the ninth book of al-Shifa¯’, the sixth
chapter of which is devoted to the question of providence.
Although he opposed Ibn Sı¯na¯’s views on many
topics, Ibn Rushd (Averroes) is equally under the sway of
Alexander with regard to the problems sketched above.
The impact of the latter’s interpretation of Aristotle is
apparent in the Paraphrase of the Metaphysics as well as
in the Great Commentary (tafsı¯r) on the same, although
the source in that case is Alexander’s own commentary
rather than the short epistles. Other works of Ibn Rushd’s
are also indebted to the Principles of the Universe, notably
the De substantia orbis preserved in Hebrew and the
Taha¯fut al-Taha¯fut for the conception of nature as
a divine power emanating from the heavenly bodies.
Many lesser works bear witness to the deep and lasting
inﬂuence of Alexander in the Ιslamic world, though in
many cases it may derive from the two great philosophers
just mentioned rather than from the direct use of his
epistles. Sufﬁce it to name here the Jewish Arab philoso-
pher of Spain Maimonides and the late compiler ‘Abd
al-Lat:ı¯f al-Bag˙da¯dı¯.
In the ﬁeld of psychology, and more speciﬁcally
with regard to the theory of intellect, the inﬂuence of
Alexander of Aphrodisias and Arabic Aristotelianism A
61
A

Alexander’s exegesis of Aristotle was also decisive through
the Arabic translation of his short epistle On the Intellect.
The reinterpretation of the Active Intellect postulated by
Aristotle in the third book of the De anima as an entity
completely separate from matter and situated outside the
human soul is the most outstanding feature of this short
but hugely inﬂuential work. It is on this basis that the Arab
philosophers, particularly al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ and Ibn Sı¯na¯, evolved
their own view of the Active Intellect as the last of the
celestial intellects emanated from the First Cause and
governing not only human intellection but the natural
phenomena and the generation of forms in their entirety.
The translator of this text misunderstood it on several
important points and thus unwittingly gave rise to new
entities, in particular the so-called acquired intellect.
These were then taken up by the Arab philosophers as
genuine elements of Aristotle’s system and incorporated in
their increasingly complicated attempts at explaining the
modus operandi of the human intellect and the way in
which it abstracts intelligible forms from the sensibles.
Al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ thus wrote a short Epistle on the Intellect,
which is heavily indebted to Alexander’s noetics and
exerted in turn a profound inﬂuence on his successors,
culminating in Ibn Rushd’s Great Commentary on the De
anima and initiating through it endless debates among the
western schoolmen.
See also: ▶Aristotelianism in the Greek, Latin, Syriac,
Arabic, and Hebrew Traditions ▶al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, Abu¯ Nas˙r
▶al-G˙ aza¯lı¯, Abu¯
H˙ a¯mid Muh:ammad ▶Ibn Rushd,
Muh˙ammad ibn Ah˙mad al-H˙ afı¯d (Averroes) ▶Ibn Sı¯na¯,
Abu¯ ʿAlı¯ (Avicenna)
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Alexander of Aphrodisias (2001) On the principles of the universe. In:
Genequand Ch, Alexander of Aphrodisias on the cosmos. Brill,
Leiden
Alexander of Aphrodisias (2003) On providence. In: Thillet P, Traite´ de la
Providence. Verdier, Paris
Secondary Sources
Endress G (2002) Alexander Arabus on the ﬁrst cause. Aristotle’s ﬁrst
mover in an Arabic treatise attributed to Alexander of Aphrodisias.
In: D’Ancona C, Serra G (eds) Aristotele e Alessandro di Afrodisia
nella tradizione araba. Padova, pp 19–74
Fazzo S, Wiesner H (1993) Alexander of Aphrodisias in the Kindı¯-circle
and in al-Kindı¯’s cosmology. Arabic Sci Philos 3:119–153
Geoffroy M (2002) La tradition arabe du Perιr d’Alexandre
d’Aphrodise et les origines de la doctrine farabienne des quatre
degre´s de l’intellect. In: D’Ancona C, Serra G (eds) Aristotele
e Alessandro di Afrodisia nella tradizione araba. Padova, pp
191–231
Alexander of Hales
CHRISTOPHER CULLEN
Department of Philosophy
Fordham University
New York, NY
USA
Abstract
Alexander of Hales (c. 1185–1245) is a thirteenth-century
scholastic, important for his investigations of the newly
translated works of Aristotle and for contributing to the
development of the rigorously systematic and philosoph-
ical method for theology, distinctive of Scholasticism.
Alexander exercised considerable inﬂuence among the
Franciscans in various ways: through his being the ﬁrst
Franciscan to hold a chair of theology at the University of
Paris, through his leadership of the Franciscan studium at
Paris, through his most famous pupil, Bonaventure, and
through a summa of theology that was attributed to him
and widely used within the order. Alexander retains
a fundamental, doctrinal loyalty to Augustine, while try-
ing to incorporate various doctrines of Aristotle. It is this
intellectual trajectory that has led some scholars to regard
him as the founder of the early Franciscan school (prior to
Duns Scotus).
Alexander was probably born in Hales Owen, Shropshire
between 1180 and 1186. He went on to study at Paris and
there became a master of arts sometime before 1210. He
began his teaching career as regent master of theology
around 1220 or 1221. In 1236, he entered the Franciscans
while retaining his university chair. He attended the First
Council of Lyon (1244–45) but died shortly after
returning from it.
Until developments in recent scholarship, Alexander
was most famous for a summa of theology attributed to
him, long referred to as the Summa fratris Alexandri. Work
on the production of modern critical editions led scholars
to question his sole authorship of the summa, and it is now
clear that this work is not exclusively by Alexander. Rather,
it is an edited work by one or more compilers who
borrowed from many sources. For example, the entire
fourth volume is not by Alexander and was compiled
after his death by followers, such as Jean de la Rochelle
(c. 1190/1200–1245). Nevertheless, even if Alexander is
not the sole author, he supervised the editing of the text
up until his death in 1245. The ﬁnal edited version of this
summa, completed by 1257, is sometimes referred to as the
62 A
Alexander of Hales

Summa Halesiana. Given the complicated authorship of
the Summa Halesiana, the deﬁnitive sources for Alexan-
der’s teachings are found in his earlier works.
The most important of these earlier works is the Glossa
in quatuor libros sententiarum, a commentary on Peter the
Lombard’s Sentences. This work is dated to between 1220
and 1227. We also have a number of disputations from his
teaching career, from both before and after he became
a friar, though only those from before have been edited
(Quaestiones disputatae ‘‘antequam esset frater’’). Both
the Glossa and the Disputed Questions are students’
reportations.
Alexander’s Glossa on Peter the Lombard’s Sentences
is fascinating for many reasons, three to be considered
here: its methodology, its sources, and its aim. It is based
on the structure of the Sentences, and so, is divided
into four parts: God, creation, the incarnation, and the
sacraments.
In his commentary Alexander adopts a dialectical
method that becomes typical of scholastic methodology;
this method allows him to treat questions one-by-one,
presenting arguments on various sides of a question before
responding to opinions contrary to his own position. This
methodology did not go without criticism: Alexander’s
contemporary, Roger Bacon (c. 1214–94), for example,
faults him for his role in directing theology away from its
biblical focus by his decision to teach by commenting on
the Sentences of Peter the Lombard.
The range of sources that Alexander brings together in
the Glossa is impressive, but reﬂects the range also being
consulted by his contemporaries at Paris, such as William
of Auxerre (1140/50–1231) and William of Auvergne (d.
1249). His cautious eclecticism is worthy of considerable
note for anyone surveying the development of thirteenth-
century thought, for, although he is often hesitant to
follow Aristotle, he is, by no means, hostile. On the con-
trary, he draws on all the major writings of Aristotle and is
clearly working to take considerable account of various
teachings of Aristotle as he constructs his theological syn-
thesis. But he also incorporates various writings from the
Christian tradition, including Pseudo-Dionysius, John
Damascene, Bernard of Clairvaux, Anselm of Canterbury,
and the Victorines.
Even in these early glosses on the Lombard, Alexander
is attempting a theological synthesis that takes account of
both the intellectual heritage of Christendom and Greek
philosophical thought, while also covering the entire
range of theology, from God to creatures to their return
to their creator. Alexander seems to be striving for an all-
encompassing synthesis, which attempts to harmonize
discordant authorities.
Alexander writes as a theologian who regards faith and
reason as distinct in various ways even if they are ulti-
mately harmonious. Although he has not worked out the
nuances of this distinction, Alexander thinks that we can
know that God exists by use of reason alone, despite the
fact that we have no direct knowledge of the divine
essence. Alexander presents a sort of anthology of proofs
for God’s existence, including a brief version of Aristotle’s
argument from the Physics for a ﬁrst, unmoved mover.
Alexander also thinks that we can accurately arrive at
certain conclusions about the divine nature by negation
and by analogy, that is, by denying what is unworthy of
God or by coming to recognize how certain perfections
can be predicated analogously of God. So, based on this
intellectual foundation, Alexander works at length to
articulate an understanding of God as simple, inﬁnite,
omnipotent, omniscient, and immutable.
Among these divine attributes Alexander gives consid-
erable attention to God’s knowledge. He takes his starting
point from Augustine who posited the Platonic forms as
ideas in the divine mind. He tries to work out the difﬁcul-
ties of claiming a plurality of ideas in the simplicity of the
divine being. Given this divine simplicity, whatever is in
God must, in fact, be God. And so, he concludes that the
divine ideas only differ in a manner of speaking. In this
way Alexander comes to hold that God himself is the
exemplar of creatures. Alexander thus vouchsafes the
unity of God while also establishing ‘‘exemplarism’’ at
the center of scholastic reﬂection on the relation of crea-
tures to their creator.
In contrast to God’s simplicity, creatures are distin-
guished by various levels of composition. Alexander
adopts a version of Aristotle’s theory of hylomorphism,
which holds that corporeal beings are composed of matter
and form. The distinguishing principle of a human being
is a rational soul, which then enters into union with
matter. The rational soul is the principle of life, sensation,
knowing, and willing. The complicated interaction of both
the intellect and will makes possible freedom of choice.
A focus on the will and freedom is found in the
Alexander’s ethical teachings, which clearly reﬂect his
strong allegiance to Augustine. Morality is a matter of
loving rightly and requires due respect for the hierarchy
of goods. Alexander attempts to synthesize a charity-based
ethics with a theory of divine and natural law. Many of his
ethical teachings are developed at greater length in his
disputed questions.
Alexander, inﬂuential among the early Franciscans,
represents a trajectory of scholastic thought that adheres
closely to Augustine while attempting to synthesize a wide
range of sources.
Alexander of Hales A
63
A

See also: ▶Augustine ▶Bonaventure ▶Peter Lombard
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Alexander of Hales (1924–1948) Doctoris Irrefragabilis Alexandri de
Hales Summa theologica, 4 vols. Collegium S. Bonaventurae,
Quarracchi
Alexander of Hales (1951–1957) Glossa in quatuor libros sententiarum
Petri Lombardi, 4 vols. Collegium S. Bonaventurae, Florence
[Quarracchi]
Alexander of Hales (1960) Quaestiones disputatae ‘antequam esset frater’,
3 vols. Collegium S. Bonaventurae, Florence [Quarracchi]
Secondary Sources
Bougerol JG (1963) Introduction to the works of Bonaventure. St.
Anthony Guild Press, Patterson
Brady I (1967) Alexander of Hales. In: Edwards P (ed) Encyclopedia of
philosophy. Macmillan, New York
Brady I (1977) The Summa theologica of Alexander of Hales. Archivum
Franciscanum historicum 70
Cullen C (2003) Alexander of Hales. In: Gracia JJE, Noone T (eds)
Blackwell companion to philosophy in the Middle Ages. Blackwell,
New York
Doucet V (1946) A new source of the Summa fratris Alexandri. Francisc
Stud 6:403–417
Doucet V (1947) The history of the problem of the authenticity of the
Summa. Francisc Stud 7:26–41
Ga´l G (1998) Alexander of Hales. In Craig E (ed) The Routledge encyclo-
pedia of philosophy, vol 1. Routledge, New York, pp 176–178
Principe W (1967) Alexander of Hales’ theology of the hypostatic union.
Pontiﬁcal Institute of Mediaeval Studies, Toronto
Prolegomena (1948). Doctoris Irrefragabilis Alexandri de Hales Summa
theological, vol 4. Collegium S. Bonaventurae, Quarracchi
Wood R (1993) Distinct ideas and perfect solicitude: Alexander of Hales,
Richard Rufus, and Odo Rigaldus. Francisc Stud 53:7–31
Alexandrian Tradition into
Arabic: Medicine
HANS HINRICH BIESTERFELDT
Seminar fu¨r Orientalistik
Bochum University
Bochum
Germany
Abstract
Alexandria was the centre of Hellenistic scholarship. It is
here that the works of the classical physicians Hippocrates
and Galen (d. CE 216) were collected and commented
upon, that the canon of (mostly) 16 books by Galen,
meant for medical instruction, was established and
abridged to the Summaria Alexandrinorum, that the
scholarly genres of (medical) encyclopedia and commen-
tary were cultivated, and that ‘‘Galenism,’’ primarily
Galen’s system of humoral pathology and his teleological
interpretation of anatomy began to ﬂourish.
All these texts and many more by authors other than
Hippocrates and Galen, all the genres of medical writing
and ways of medical instruction, not least a close relation
between Galenism and Alexandrian Aristotelianism found
their way into, and were to dominate, Arabic medicine.
The principal vehicle for this complex transmission was
the translation campaign, Greek into Arabic, of scholars,
active under early ʿAbba¯sid rule (ninth century CE) in
Baghdad, and led by the Nestorian master translator,
H˙ unayn b. Ish:a¯q. This campaign not only laid the foun-
dation for a consistent medical and pharmaceutical ter-
minology in Arabic but also paved the way for a more
ﬂexible postclassical Arabic. The creative appropriation of
Hellenistic scholarship in general, and medicine in partic-
ular, as collected and canonized in Alexandria, constituted
a deﬁning political and cultural feature of early ʿAbba¯sid
society. However, it remains a matter of dispute how direct
and continuous that tradition ‘‘from Alexandria to
Baghdad’’ was.
Alexandria, on the western corner of the Nile Delta, had
become, soon after its foundation by Alexander the Great
in 332 BCE, the centre of medical scholarship, represented
mainly by the works of the early third century anatomists
Herophilus and Erasistratus. Supported by the tolerant
reign of the Ptolemies, Hellenistic literature and scholar-
ship generally ﬂourished. Although under Roman and
Byzantine rule the institutional focus and symbol of this
scholarship, the famous Library of Alexandria, and its
successors, was destroyed on several occasions, and
although some Christian thinkers tended to denounce
Greek philosophy as ‘‘pagan,’’ the Hellenistic syllabus of
learning as cultivated in Alexandria maintained its exem-
plary function. Particularly after Justinian’s closing of the
Athenian Academy in CE 529, Alexandria became the
principal heir to a long tradition of Hellenistic philosophy
and the sciences; its numerous medico-philosophical
schools, called academia or museion, offered library ser-
vices and instruction. It is in these schools that medical
authors like John Philoponus (d. c. 570), Stephanus of
Alexandria (middle of the sixth century), Palladius
(second half of the sixth century), and John of Alexandria
(early seventh century) taught, mainly writing commen-
taries on works by the classical authors Hippocrates and,
foremost, Galen (d. CE 216), and it is the curriculum of
these schools that was to dominate the academic teaching
of late Antiquity and early Islam.
64 A
Alexandrian Tradition into Arabic: Medicine

The core of the medical curriculum consisted of
a number of Hippocratic works, mainly those commented
upon by Galen, and a standardized set of, mostly, 16 works
by Galen meant by himself to serve as an introduction for
beginners, starting with De sectis (in Arabic K. al-Firaq)
and comprising, among others and in varying order,
De pulsibus ad tirones (K. al-Nabd˙ al-s:ag˙ı¯r), Ars parva
(K. al-S˙ina¯ʿa al-s:ag˙ı¯ra), and Ad Glauconem de medendi
methodo (K. ila¯ Ig˙lawqun fı¯ l-ta’attı¯ li-shifa¯’ al-amra¯d˙).
For school instruction, these 16 books were abridged and
partially commented upon, around 500 (or perhaps only
after the Arabic conquest of Egypt in 640), in compendia,
called
Summaria
Alexandrinorum,
and
subsequently
translated into Arabic (Jawa¯mi‘ al-Iskandara¯niyyı¯n). No
Greek bibliographer lists this corpus; it is only extant in
Arabic versions, followed by Hebrew and Latin transla-
tions. Apart from establishing the syllabus of medical
textbooks, the Alexandrian scholarly tradition was also
to shape Islamic medical literature by developing the
genre of the encyclopedia, or compilation (e.g., that of
Oribasius, who died after 395, and of Paul of Aegina,
writing around 640), on the one hand, and of that of the
commentary on the other, starting with Galen’s extensive
commenting on the Hippocratic writings and culminating
in the almost boundless Arabic, Persian, and Turkish
commentaries spreading from Avicenna’s medical ency-
clopedia, the Canon of Medicine. A further feature of
medical theory that originated in Alexandrian scholarship
and was destined to pervade adjacent cultures, that is, the
Persian and the Syriac ones, and subsequent traditions,
that is, the Islamic and the Latin West, was what has been
called Galenism, that is, the system of humoral pathology
and the teleological orientation of anatomy (as displayed
in De usu partium) shaped by Galen.
The translators from Greek into Arabic, working
under the ﬁrst ‘Abba¯sids, did not, however, stop at this
core of medical texts, but undertook to make available the
integral texts contained in the Summaria, the whole volu-
minous Corpus Galenianum, more Hippocratic works,
numerous works by the important author Rufus of Eph-
esus (around CE 100), Philagrius (ﬁrst half of the fourth
century), Alexander of Tralleis (d. 605, his Therapeutica,
Arabic al-Kunna¯sh), and others, to medical theory and
practice as cultivated in Baghdad, the new capital of the
Islamic empire, and other urban centers. A priceless doc-
ument of (a) the interplay between the political and
administrative authorities active in ninth-century Bagh-
dad and the translators, in a very broad sense the inter-
mediaries between Alexandria and Baghdad, and of
(b) their professional skill, reaching a remarkably high
level within decades, is a letter of the master translator,
H˙ unayn b. Ish:a¯q (died in the seventies of the ninth cen-
tury), to a patron on What Was Translated of Galen’s
Works. From H˙ unayn’s inventory, we learn that he himself
was engaged in the search for Greek medical manuscripts,
beyond the canon of ‘‘works that were read in the school
(kutta¯b) of Alexandria,’’ trying to secure more than one
copy of a given work in order to collate the texts and arrive
at their ‘‘original’’ reading. In revising previous transla-
tions and providing new ones, many of them via Syriac
versions, often in cooperation with colleagues, notably his
son, Ish:a¯q b. H˙ unayn, and his nephew, H˙ ubaysh al-H˙ asan
al-Aʿsam, and in composing original works following the
models of Alexandrian medical writing, H˙ unayn created
a broad basis for all medical scholarship in classical Islam.
Moreover, he and his collaborators established a fairly
consistent medical terminology and, challenged by the
syntax of Greek technical texts and exploiting the inherent
potential of classical Arabic, contributed to the emergence
of a more ﬂexible ‘‘Middle’’ Arabic suitable for scientiﬁc
and philosophical writing.
The immediate need for medicine in the Hellenized
centers of the Islamic Near East is demonstrated by the fact
that the Hippocratic and Galenic writings, as channeled
through the Alexandrian syllabus, belong to the earliest
texts that were translated from Greek into Arabic, as well
as by the highly visible prominence enjoyed by physicians
serving the ‘Abba¯sid rulers in Baghdad. The most inﬂuen-
tial group of physicians is that of the Nestorian family
Bukht¯ı¯shu¯ʿ whose member Jurjı¯s b. Jibrı¯l (d. after 787) is
reported to have been called from the Iranian city of
Gonde¯sha¯pu¯r to Baghdad to treat the caliph al-Mans:u¯r
(r. 754–775) and whose long line of successors represents
the transition of Alexandrian medicine in Syriac language
to that in Arabic and exempliﬁes the close cooperation
between patrons and sponsors of the translation move-
ment: caliphs, courtiers, administrative and military func-
tionaries, and experts: physicians, directors of hospitals,
translators, medical authors, a number of them in per-
sonal union. From the biographies of the Bukhtı¯shu¯ʿ fam-
ily as well as from many different sources it becomes clear
that the creative appropriation of Hellenistic scholarship
in general, and medicine in particular, as collected and
canonized in Alexandria, constituted a deﬁning political
and cultural feature of early ‘Abba¯sid society.
It is a matter of dispute how direct and continuous the
tradition ‘‘from Alexandria to Baghdad’’ was and what
role Christian scholars played in this tradition. Previous
scholarship relies on the accounts of philosophers such as
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ who constructs an uninterrupted teaching tradi-
tion of Aristotle’s works from Alexandria to Baghdad with
Antioch and H˙ arra¯n as intermediary stations and with
Alexandrian Tradition into Arabic: Medicine A
65
A

Christian scholars as exclusive carriers of this tradition,
and, on the other hand, of physicians such as Ibn Rid˙wa¯n
(d. 1068) and Ibn Jumay‘ (d. 1198). These attribute
a general decay of the medical art after Galen to the
Christian authorities who, they write, had no interest in
intellectual matters and were content to work with
abridged and popularized compendia by, for example,
Oribasius and Paul of Aegina and with digests in the
form of the Summaria Alexandrinorum. After the Muslim
conquest of the Near East, speciﬁcally of Alexandria, the
new rulers transferred the medical instruction to Antioch
and H˙ arra¯n, and it is only with the ‘Abba¯sid ruler al-
Ma’mu¯n (r. 813–833) that scholarly medicine was revived
and saved from oblivion. The anti-Christian sentiment of
these authors, absent from earlier accounts, but highly
inﬂuential down to Ibn Khaldu¯n’s Muqaddima (end of
the fourteenth century, and beyond), and the purported
‘‘humanist’’ role of the ‘Abba¯sid sovereigns as true heirs to
Greek scholarship are due to a conscious anti-Byzantine
policy initiated by these themselves. In fact, the tradition
from Alexandria to Baghdad was carried to a considerable
extent, but not exclusively, by Christian teachers and
writers, and more importantly, the chain of that tradition
was by no means a single, continuous one; rather one has
to assume a simultaneous existence of philosophical and
medical schools in the Hellenized cities of the Near East.
At any rate, the consistency of the medical canon, of the
ways of instruction, not least the close relationship
between Galenic medicine and the Alexandrian Aristote-
lianism during the centuries between Alexandria and
Baghdad remain remarkable.
See also: ▶Alexandrian Tradition into Arabic: Philosophy
▶al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, Abu¯ Nas˙r ▶Galen, Arabic ▶Ibn Khaldu¯n,
Abu¯ Zayd ʿAbdarrah˙ma¯n ▶John Philoponus ▶Transla-
tions from Greek into Arabic
Bibliography
Secondary Sources
Gutas D (1998) Greek thought, Arabic culture. The Graeco-Arabic trans-
lation movement in Baghdad and early ʿAbba¯sid society (2nd to 4th/
8th–10th centuries). Routledge, London/New York
Littman RJ (1996) Medicine in Alexandria. In: Haase W, Temporini,
H (eds) Aufstieg und Niedergang der ro¨mischen Welt [. . .], Teil 2,
Band 37, Teilband 3: Wissenschaften (Medizin und Biologie
[Forts.]). Walter de Gruyter, Berlin/New York, pp 2678–2708
Meyerhof M (1930) Von Alexandrien nach Bagdad. Ein Beitrag zur
Geschichte des philosophischen und medizinischen Unterrichts bei
den Arabern. Sitzungsberichte der Preußischen Akademie der
Wissenschaften. Phil.-hist. Kl., Band 23. Berlin, pp 389–429
Pormann PE (2003) Jean le grammarien et le De sectis dans la litte´rature
me´dicale
d’Alexandrie.
In:
Garofalo
I,
Roselli
A
(eds)
Galenismo e medicina tardoantica: fonti greche, latine e arabe.
Istituto Universitario Orientale, Napoli, pp 233–263
Savage-Smith E (2002) Galen’s lost ophthalmology and the Summaria
Alexandrinorum. In: Nutton V (ed) The unknown Galen. Bull Inst
Classical Stud Suppl 77:121–138. Institute of Classical Studies, Uni-
versity of London, London
Sezgin F (1970) Geschichte des arabischen Schrifttums, vol III. Medizin –
Pharmazie – Zoologie – Tierheilkunde. Brill, Leiden, pp 20–171
Strohmaier G (1987) ‘‘Von Alexandrien nach Bagdad’’– eine ﬁktive
Schultradition. In: Wiesner J (ed) Aristoteles. Werk und Wirkung,
Paul Moraux gewidmet, Band 2: Kommentierung, U¨ berlieferung,
Nachleben, Berlin. Walter de Gruyter, Berlin/New York, pp 381–389
Strohmaier G (1994) Der syrische und der arabische Galen. In: Haase W,
Temporini H (eds) Aufstieg und Niedergang der ro¨mischen Welt
[. . .], Teil 2, Band 37, Teilband 2: Wissenschaften (Medizin und
Biologie
[Forts.]).
Walter
de
Gruyter,
Berlin/New
York,
pp
1987–2017
Ullmann M (1970) Die Medizin im Islam. Handbuch der Orientalistik.
Erste Abteilung, Erga¨nzungsband 6, Erster Abschnitt. Brill, Leiden/
Ko¨ln, pp 25–100
Alexandrian Tradition into Arabic:
Philosophy
PHILIPPE VALLAT
IFPO-Damascus
IFPO Abu Rumaneh
Damascus
Syria
Abstract
The doctrinal impact of the School of Alexandria on
Arabic philosophy becomes increasingly clear, thanks to
a deeper knowledge of the textual tradition of Arabic and
Syriac philosophy. One may go as far as to see in al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯
(d. 950), Avicenna (c. 980–1037), and the respective tra-
ditions they initiated, the culmination of the scholarly
endeavor of Ammonius and his successors. But at
ﬁrst glance, this Arabic synthesis left no room for Plato
and the Chaldean Oracles. In fact, the articulation of
Aristotelian logical and physical inquiries with Plato’s
theological insights, which had prevailed in Alexandria,
gave way to a system wherein the rational sciences reached
their highest point in a nondiscursive contact with an
Eternal entity, whether God or a lower principle. The
process of reception of the Alexandrian tradition into
Arabic began in the eighth century and ended in the
eleventh century. Alexandrian philosophy continued to
nurture Arabic thought up to Averroes’ time (1126–
1198) and beyond.
66 A
Alexandrian Tradition into Arabic: Philosophy

In what follows, the expressions ‘‘Alexandrian philos-
ophy’’ and ‘‘Alexandrian philosophers’’ will refer to the
School of Ammonius son of Hermias (around 470 to after
517), his students and their students, and Simplicius
(c. 490–560), who was also known to the Arabic authors.
Introduction
The political, social, and economic reasons why Greek
science was translated and adapted in Arabic have been
examined and documented by D. Gutas in his Greek
Thought, Arabic Culture. On one hand, the Islamic Empire
was in need of science and techniques to assure its power
and to subsequently overthrow the Byzantine Empire’s
claim to incarnating the Greek legacy. On the other
hand, it was in the political and economic interest of all
ancient, more learned, denominational elites living within
the new Islamic Empire’s frontiers to provide these sci-
ences. They thus hoped to keep their previous inﬂuential
positions. And since philosophy was conceived of as ‘‘the
science of sciences,’’ this may explain the efforts exerted to
make it available in Arabic. The fact that ultimately the
interests of Pagans and Christians involved in this
endeavor socially converged is undeniable. This conver-
gence is exemplarily embodied in the collaboration
between the two most skillful and proliﬁc scientists and
translators of the ninth century, namely the Christian
H˙ unayn b. Ish:a¯q (809 to c. 873) and the Pagan Tha¯bit b.
Qurra (836–901). But from this undeniable convergence
of interests, one ought not to infer that their motivations
were even remotely identical. Tha¯bit wrote he yearned for
the triumph of intellectual Syriac Hellenic Paganism over
Christianity – thanks to or through Islam, one cannot be
sure – while H˙ unayn wished to create the conditions for
a modus vivendi founded on rational, Aristotelian
grounds. Whatever their motivation, Greek philosophy
found its way into Arabic–Islamic civilization and con-
tributed to shaping Islamic theology, especially in the
post-Avicennian tradition (Wisnovsky 2004).
General Appraisals
Unlike the term ‘‘Neoplatonist,’’ which is commonly
received among Hellenists to refer to the Alexandrian
School, Arabic philosophy scholars have till recently
debated whether we should refer to the latter and its
members as Aristotelian, Neo-Aristotelian, Neoplatonizing
Aristotelian, or representing Neoplatonized Aristotelian-
ism. As for the latter two denominations, possibly coined
by McGinnis and Reisman (2005), they seem a ﬁtting
description of the reception of the Alexandrian commen-
tary tradition on Aristotle into Arabic. But none of these
terms would beﬁt qua qualiﬁcations of the Alexandrian
School itself, unless one ignored that Alexandrian philoso-
phers also wrote commentaries on Plato and almost cer-
tainly acknowledged the authority of the Chaldean Oracles.
What thus possibly characterizes Arabic philosophy in its
ﬁrst stage does not apply to its Alexandrian sources. His-
torically speaking, the main question to address is what
happened between the departure to Constantinople of
Stephanus, the probable last headmaster of the School, at
the beginning of the seventh century (about 610), and the
very beginnings of philosophy in Arabic, which can ten-
tatively be traced back to the time of Ibn al-Muqaffaʿ
(c. 720–756). Doctrinally speaking, a related issue
to address is how Neoplatonism became Neoplatonized
Aristotelianism. Both questions have received various and
sometimes contradictory answers.
This problem of appellation not only reﬂects the
debate among specialists of Greek philosophy about the
comparative assessment of the doctrinal trend within each
one of the Neoplatonist Schools of Athens and Alexandria,
but also reﬂects the lack of agreement on the nature and
proportion of Neoplatonism which entered the ﬁrst doc-
trinal elaborations by Arab or Arabic-speaking philoso-
phers during the ninth and tenth centuries. Among the
global appraisals which currently prevail in Arabic schol-
arship, I will content myself with sketching out those that
have something to do with Alexandria and its inﬂuence.
As far as I know, there are two.
The
ﬁrst
signiﬁcant
global
assessment
was
documented by Endress in some of his studies. Endress
considers that the Arabic philosophers’ progressive reali-
zation of the autonomy of philosophy vis-a`-vis the only
other, religious, form of knowledge, viewed at that time as
the knowledge par excellence, occurred alongside a grow-
ing emphasis on philosophy’s rigorously rational and
demonstrative nature. In other words, as Greek philoso-
phy was being translated, Arabic philosophers became
increasingly aware of what might separate them and
their discipline from the religious sciences practiced by
clerics. That all Arabic Peripatetic philosophers consid-
ered religion a lower rhetorical or dialectical form of
knowledge also originated in this conception of philoso-
phy as a demonstrative science.
The second assessment was by Wisnovsky (2004:151)
who helpfully described it as follows: ‘‘In one sense Avi-
cenna stands as the culmination of the ‘Ammonian syn-
thesis,’ which I take to be the attempt by Ammonius son of
Hermeias, and his successors such as Asclepius (ﬂ. 525),
John Philoponus (d. c. 570), and al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯(d. 950), to fold
the broader, Neoplatonic project of reconciling Aristotle
with Plato, into the narrower, Peripatetic project of rec-
onciling Aristotle with himself.’’ Wisnovsky’s studies on
Alexandrian Tradition into Arabic: Philosophy A
67
A

Avicenna show ﬁrstly how a wide range of Neoplatonic
texts, many of which belong to the Alexandrian tradition,
inﬂuenced Avicenna’s interpretation of Aristotle; and sec-
ondly, why a correct assessment of Avicenna’s achieve-
ments in metaphysical inquiries can only be accounted
for if one assumes that he in some way knew Ammonius’
interpretation of the Metaphysics, as reported in Asclepius’
and Philoponus’ respective commentaries on Metaphysics
and Physics. Recently, Bertolacci (2006) also drew atten-
tion to the inﬂuence of Ammonius’ metaphysics on al-
Fa¯ra¯bı¯. And Vallat’s study (2004) is entirely devoted to the
impact of the School of Alexandria on al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s under-
standing of philosophy as pedagogy.
In order to further characterize the Alexandrian tradi-
tion and the way Arabic philosophy inherited from it
a part of its salient trends, one must not only take into
account the tenet of the concordant reading of Plato and
Aristotle, but also the role ascribed ﬁrstly to Aristotle and
then to Plato within the Alexandrian curriculum of stud-
ies. Roughly speaking, one may state that Aristotle stands
here for the logical and physical method of inquiry, and
Plato for the dialectical and theological approach (see, e.g.,
Elias, In Cat., p. 124, 17–23: sentence known in Arabic) as
well as for all the doctrinal elements related to the salva-
tion of the human soul. Thus, although Plato as an author
disappeared from the very conception of the Arabic cur-
riculum of studies for lack of translations, this articulation
between rational physical science and theological knowl-
edge lived on in the form of the connection between
discursive or dianoetic understanding and an intuitive
kind of knowledge. In other terms, even though the junc-
ture between these two kinds of perceptual activities no
longer applied to Aristotle and Plato but to Aristotle and
his Neoplatonizing interpretation, the fact remains that
a great deal of Arabic philosophers, and especially all
Peripatetic philosophers, whatever their religion, admitted
the need for articulating science with theology and, ulti-
mately, for ordaining both of them to the eudemonic state
attained through the conjunction of the perfected human
intellect with a metaphysical entity, whether God, the
Agent Intellect or a Celestial Intellect. Albeit schematic,
this survey shows how Alexandrian Platonism mainly
survived in Arabic philosophy through the Aristotelian
texts and therefore beyond. In one unique case Platonism
also meant politics (on this, see the entry on al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ in
this volume).
Textual Evidence
From a literary point of view, the two main features of
the Arabic reception of the Alexandrian tradition that
I will retain are the following: (1) the almost complete
disappearance of Plato’s works and the irrelevant
inﬂuence, if any, of the commentaries on Plato’s works;
(2) the fact that, although extensively used, the commen-
taries on Aristotle are almost never or only very rarely
referred to explicitly, which makes their inﬂuence difﬁcult
to assess.
This stands out clearly when compared with the cases
of Alexander of Aphrodisias and Themistius, whose names
are well known in Arabic literature. Some of Alexander’s
and Themistius’ Aristotelian commentaries and treatises
were translated retaining their author’s name, subse-
quently copied and hence preserved as independent
works. Between them and the Pagan philosophers from
Alexandria whose commentaries circulated anonymously,
Philoponus offers a middle ground: his opposition to the
doctrine of the eternity of the world earned him fame
among Muslim and Christian philosophers who often
relied on his arguments; nevertheless, his works were
apparently not valued as much as those of Alexander or
Themistius, since they were preserved only through
excerpts and adaptations. I do not share Lettinck’s conﬁ-
dence regarding Philoponus’ authorship of the partial
commentary On Physics preserved in Arabic. Some ideas
from Simplicius’ On Physics apparently also found their
way in this commentary, but under another name. The
possible inﬂuence of Simplicius’ commentary on al-Kindı¯
has been noticed by Jolivet (1993) and al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s allusions
to the Poem of Parmenides might also stem from it (see
Vallat 2004).
Thus, with the exceptions of Olympiodorus’ On Mete-
orology (different from the one preserved in Greek), the
Alexandrian material preserved in the School of Baghdad’s
commentary on Physics, a few scraps of Simplicius’ and
Ammonius’ On Cat., fragments of some length of
Simplicius’ on Euclid’s Elements (unknown in Greek),
fragments of Philoponus’ Contra Aristotelem and Contra
Proclum, and a few quotations of Ammonius on music
preserved by Ish:a¯q b. H˙ unayn and al-Kindı¯, all the Alex-
andrian commentary tradition known at some point in
Arabic has disappeared as independent works. This means
that the manuscripts of these commentaries were never
copied or ceased to be very early. Once used by Arabic
scholars, these works were apparently unworthy of being
copied and therefore for the most part fell into oblivion.
As a result, one comes across only anonymous and
indirect references, which, in order to be seen and identi-
ﬁed, require that we know the underlying Greek or at least
that the comparison between the meaning of the Arabic
and the generally well-known Greek doctrines can be
made with sufﬁcient accuracy. In this respect, al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s
(d. 950) and ʿAbd al-Lat:ı¯f al-Bag˙da¯dı¯’s (d. 1231) respective
68 A
Alexandrian Tradition into Arabic: Philosophy

Fus:u¯l muntazaʿa (Excerpts from the Ancients’ Works) are
representative cases. The former contains, for instance,
anonymous quotations drawn from one of Proclus’ work
known both in Greek and Arabic (almost entirely pre-
served in Greek but only partially in Arabic) and echoes
of Porphyry’s On Nicomachean Ethics, which is sometimes
referred to in Arabic works, but is no more preserved in
Arabic (except for a few passages) than in Greek. Although
Dunlop suggests it, it seems rather daring to ascribe to
Porphyry the ‘‘Seventh Book’’ inserted in the Arabic tex-
tual tradition of the Nicomachean Ethics called in Latin
Summa Alexandrinorum. As for ʿAbd al-Lat:ı¯f al-Bag˙da¯dı¯,
Rashed (2004) has shown that his work contains anony-
mous quotations unknown in Greek but whose content is
familiar enough to be safely attributed to Alexander of
Aphrodisias.
Another hindrance further complicates the inquiry
into sources. We possess Arabic anonymous Alexandrian
commentaries or fragments, which testify to a posterior
stage of the Alexandrian tradition to the one known in
Greek, that is, apparently posterior to Stephanus. The best
known example of this is Ibn al-Bit:rı¯q’s Arabic summary
of a work entitled Talkhı¯s: k. al-nafs li-l-Iskandariyyı¯n,
the Alexandrians’ Epitome of Aristotle’s De anima, which
has been masterfully edited by Ru¨diger Arnzen. In all
likelihood, Ibn al-Bit:rı¯q (ﬁrst half of the ninth century)
worked on an Alexandrian paraphrase, mainly composed
of excerpts from Philoponus’ In De an., and whose Greek
original is unknown. The Alexandrian sources that Ibn
al-T˙ayyib (c. 980–1043) referred to in his On Eisagoge
and On Categories also remain partly nameless, although
both commentaries have been edited. The content of his
On Isagoge, from which he failed to withdraw explicit
Pagan allusions – a peculiar omission on the part of
a Bible commentator – points to a translation of epito-
mized Alexandrian sources. As shown by C. Ferrari in her
edition of Ibn al-T˙ayyib’s On Cat., this work displays
countless similarities with all the known Alexandrian
treatises from Ammonius to David. If ever rediscovered,
his other commentaries on Aristotle’s Organon would
surely conﬁrm this observation. Furthermore, Rashed
(2005) has established that On Cat. is somehow connected
with the Marginalia of Arethas of Caeserea (c. 850–944) to
the Isagoge and Categories. An in-depth study of the
sources remains to be done in the case of another member
of the School of Baghdad, Ibn Zurʿa (942–1008). His
published epitome of De interpretatione, Prior, and Poste-
rior Analytics has not yet been studied.
For all these Aristotelian works, Arabic philosophers
made use of translated Greek commentaries without
actually naming them most of the time.
The commentator called ‘‘Allı¯nus’’ or ‘‘Ilinus’’ in Ara-
bic sources deserves a special mention. Ibn al-T˙ayyib and
his teacher Ibn Suwa¯r frequently quoted him, the latter
having even allegedly translated his On Cat. Apart from
Olympiodorus and Stephanus, ‘‘Allı¯nus’’ is the sole name
quoted by Ibn al-T˙ayyib in On Isag. Among the various
attempts to identify the Alexandrian commentator behind
the name, Rashed (2005) put forward David, whom
Hugonnard-Roche (2009) has since shown not to be
a possible option.
A newly discovered complete version of what is still
erroneously called Ibn al-Muqaffaʿ-’s Logic might provide
useful additional information about the Alexandrian phil-
osophical tradition in Arabic. This handbook on logic,
which clearly can neither be ascribed to Ibn al-Muqaffaʿ
nor to his son Muh:ammad, constitutes in fact an epitome
of the whole Alexandrian Organon including Rhetorics and
Poetics. The only version described in ancient sources,
which is now published (Danish-Pazuh 1978), includes
the
epitome
of
Porphyry’s
Isagoge,
Categories,
De
intepretatione, and Prior Analytics. To the best of my
knowledge, the comparison with known Alexandrian
commentaries has not been made yet.
Equally intriguing are the fragments of Paul the
Persian’s Syriac work preserved in Arabic thanks to
Miskawayh’s
Tartı¯b
al-saʿa¯da¯t.
According
to
Gutas
(1983), Paul relies on some Alexandrian prolegomena to
Aristotle’s logic whose degree of scholarly reﬁnement
would suggest they are posterior to David’s. This case is
puzzling because Paul’s ﬂoruit approximately tallies with
Khosrow Anushirvan’s reign (531–579), whereas the prob-
able date of writing of David’s prolegomena coincides with
the end of this reign at the earliest.
How then could David or any later author have
inﬂuenced Paul? Moreover, could the composition, the
transmission, and the translation of the aforementioned
work into Syriac have occurred simultaneously with the
composition of Paul’s treatise? No attempt has yet been
made to solve this apparent chronological and geograph-
ical conundrum. In fact, it might be that Simplicius’ On
Categories, or another similar commentary, is the treatise
used by Paul in one form or another. For that matter,
Gutas, who examined Paul’s fragments, envisages the pos-
sibility of Simplicius’ inﬂuence. A new edition and study
of Miskawayh’s Tartı¯b al-saʿa¯da¯t might bring further light
on this issue.
Ways of Transmission
More likely from a chronological and geographical point
of view, Simplicius’ inﬂuence on Paul would reinforce
a hypothesis which has not met much favor either
Alexandrian Tradition into Arabic: Philosophy A
69
A

among Greek or Arabic scholars, that is to say, the settling
of Simplicius in a Graeco-Syriac speaking region after he
and/or some of his colleagues from Athens returned from
Khosrow Anushirwan’s court in 532. The city of H˙ arra¯n
(Carrhae), where intellectual Syriac Hellenism remained
alive till the end of the tenth century, has been proposed
by Tardieu as the place where Simplicius might have
stayed. C. Luna has challenged the part of Tardieu’s
hypothesis, which deals with evidence contained in
Simplicius’ On Physics, regarding the place where he com-
posed this commentary. Nonetheless, the case has been
bolstered by further elements brought forward and
documented by I. Hadot. So far, the entire issue remains
to be addressed comprehensively or disproved by any
Greek or Arabic scholar, especially when it comes to the
issue of Simplicius’school of mathematics, the existence of
which has been recorded only by Arabic sources. This issue
makes Simplicius’ return to Athens problematic.
In addition to I. Hadot’s most recent study on this
issue (2007), it may be added that: (1) from the report of
the tenth century bio-bibliographer Ibn al-Nadı¯m, it
appears that the Arabic translation of Simplicius’ On
Cat. and its chapter on relatives in particular may at
some point have been studied by readers of the Euclidean
commentator and mathematician Theon of Alexandria.
This constitutes indirect supplementary evidence for
Simplicius’ teaching activities, both mathematical and
philosophical. (2) Al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s Book of Particles (see Vallat
2004:373–375; 2011a) also points to the fact that the
gathering of logical and mathematical interests in rela-
tion to the question of Aristotle’s treatment of relatives
remained a well-established tradition among the Arabic
philosophers after Simplicius’ time. The possible inﬂuence
of Simplicius on al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s On Elements can now
be assessed on the basis of Arnzen’s recent edition of
al-Nayrizı¯’s ‘‘Sammelkommentar’’ on Euclid’s Elements,
which includes 24 quotations by Simplicius. Apparently
(see Hogendijk 2008), Qust:a¯ b. Lu¯qa¯ (d. c. 912) made use
of Simplicius’ On Elements in his Introduction to Geometry.
(3) The Graeco-Aramaic name of the dedicatee of
Simplicius’ On De anima mentioned by Ibn al-Nadı¯m is
in all likelihood a H˙ arranian name; (4) the historian
Agathias is not the only surviving source for the exile of
Simplicius and his colleagues. Ibn al-Nadı¯m’s Fihrist not
only bears witness to both of the philosophers’ journey to
Khosrow’s court and of their departure, but notes at the
same time that Priscianus’ Solutiones ad Chosroem was
sent to Khrosow. Since Ibn al-Nadı¯m did not rely on any
Greek source, it means that this treatise was somehow
translated either into Pahlavi or into Syriac. Moreover,
the second discussion between Khosrow Anushirwan and
the philosophers reported in H˙ unayn b. Ish:a¯q’s A¯da¯b
al-fala¯sifa (p. 60) might well bring together distinctive
features of Damascius’ metaphysical agnosticism.
From I. Hadot’s study, one may also retain that a Pagan
genealogy might explain more satisfactorily the origin
of the typically harsh Neoplatonic anti-Christian polemic
echoed in various texts by Arabic scientists and philoso-
phers (whether heathen or Muslim) than the ʿAbba¯sid’s
philhellenism alleged by Gutas. A thorough examination
of Tha¯bit b. Qurra’s praise of the triumph of the
Graeco-Syriac heathenism over Christianity along with
the consideration of the speciﬁcity of the H˙ arranian milieu
studied by Pingree might justiﬁably lead to a reappraisal
of the primary ideological context of the Graeco-Syriac–
Arabic translation movement.
The other, much better known, means of transmission
from Alexandria to the Syriac and Arabic-speaking world
is exemplarily represented by a former Christian student
of Ammonius in Alexandria called Sergius of Reshʿayna¯
(d. 536). Plato’s disappearance from the philosophical
curriculum might be attributable, to begin with, to
Sergius’ decision to replace him with Christian theological
works, such as those of Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite.
Be that as it may, as Hugonnard-Roche and Watt have
shown, from the sixth to the tenth century Christian
Syriac scholars proﬁcient in Greek and, later on, in Arabic,
represent not only the best known channel through which
Greek philosophy was subsequently transmitted to the
Arab world, but also the other, monotheistic, matrix of
Arabic philosophy. Whether clerics, monks or appointed
translators, and scholars, their role should not be
underestimated. Arabic–Islamic philosophy most proba-
bly owes to them not only its monotheistic form of Neo-
platonism, which originated under the supervision of the
Muslim philosopher al-Kindı¯ within the ‘‘Kindı¯ Circle’’ of
appointed translators (Endress 1997b), but also its speciﬁc
Peripatetic anatomy, shaped within the School of Baghdad
to which al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ belonged. The tenth century Arabic
translation of Aristotle’s whole Organon can thus be seen
as the achievement of their four-centuries-long work.
Through them, the Alexandrian conception of philosophy
as an Aristotelian curriculum of studies passed on not only
to al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, Avicenna, and Averroes, but also, thanks to
these three authors, to the Latin world where it contrib-
uted in some way to the elaboration of the Gradus
Philosophicus in the Faculties of Arts.
See also: ▶ʿAbdallat:ı¯f al-Bag˙da¯dı¯ ▶Arethas of Caesarea
▶Aristotle, Arabic ▶Barhebraeus ▶Ibn Sı¯na¯, Abu¯ ʿAlı¯
(Avicenna) ▶Ibn Suwa¯r (Ibn al-Khamma¯r) ▶Ibn al-
T˙ayyib ▶Ibn Zurʿa, ʿI¯sa¯ ibn Ish:a¯q ▶al-Kindı¯, Abu¯ Yu¯suf
70 A
Alexandrian Tradition into Arabic: Philosophy

Yaʿqu¯b ibn Ish:a¯q ▶Logic in the Arab and Islamic World
▶Philoponus, Arabic ▶Plato, Arabic ▶Plotinus, Arabic
▶Porphyry, Arabic ▶Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite
▶Sergius of Reshʿayna¯ ▶Tha¯bit ibn Qurra ▶Themistius,
Arabic ▶Translations from Greek into Arabic ▶Yah:ya¯ ibn
ʿAdı¯
Bibliography
Primary Sources
‘Abd al-Lat˙ı¯f b. Yu¯suf b. Muh:ammad al-Bag˙da¯dı¯, Fus˙u¯l Muntaza‘a, ed. and
trans. by M. Rashed (2004) Priorite´ du ΓΕΝΟS ou de l’ΕΙDΟS entre
Andronicos et Alexandre. Vestiges arabes et grecs ine´dits, Arabic Sci
Philos 14:9–63
H˙ unayn b. Is:h:a¯q, al-‘Iba¯dı¯ (1985) A¯da¯b al-fala¯sifa (Sentences of the
philosophers),
ed.
Badawı¯ ‘A.
Publications
de
l’Institut
des
Manuscrits Arabes, Koweit
Ibn al-Muqaffaʿ, ‘Abd Alla¯h: Danish-Pazuh M (1978) Mant:iq Ibn al-
Muqaffa‘. Anjuman-i Shahanshahi Falsafah-i Tihran, Tehran
Ibn al-Nadı¯m, Abu¯ l-Faraj Muh:ammad b. Abı¯ Ya‘qu¯b (s.d.). Kita¯b al-
Fihrist, mit Anmerkungen herausgegeben von Flu¨gel G; erster Band:
den Text enthaltend. von Dr. Johannes Roediger. Maktabat H˘ ayya¯t:,
Beirut (repr F.C.W. Vogel, Leipzig, 1871)
Ibn al-T˙ayyib, Abu¯ l-Faraj ‘Abd Alla¯h: Gyekye K (1986) Ibn al-T˙ayyib’s
Commentary on Porphyry’s Eisagoge. Dar El-Machreq Editeurs,
Librairie Orientale, Beyrouth
Ibn al-T˙ayyib, Abu¯ l-Faraj ‘Abd Alla¯h: Ferrari C (2006) Der Kategorien-
kommentar von Abu¯ l-Farag˙ ‘Abdallah ibn at˙-T˙ayyib. Text und
Untersuchungen. Brill, Leiden
Ibn Suwa¯r, Abu¯ l-Khayr al-H˙ asan (Ibn S.) b. Ba¯ba¯ b. al-Khamma¯r:
Khalı¯l Georr (1948) Les Cate´gories d’Aristote dans leurs versions
syro-arabes. Institut Franc¸ais de Damas, Beyrouth, pp 361–388
Ibn Zurʿa, Abu¯ ‘Alı¯ ‘I¯sa¨ b. Ish:a¯q (1994) Mant:iq Ibn Zurʿa, ed. Jı¯ha¯mı¯ J. Dar
al-ﬁkr al-lubnani, Beirut
Najjar FM (ed) (1971) Alfarabi’s Fus:u¯l Muntazaʿa. Dar El-Mashreq, Beirut
Tha¯bit b. Qurra, Abu¯ l-H˙ asan, ap. Barhebraeus. Abbeloos B, Lamy ThI
(eds) (1872/1877) Gregorii Bar Hebraei Chronicon Ecclesiasticum, 3
vols. Louvain; English translation: (1932/1976) Bar Hebraeus, The
chronology, trans. Budge EW. Oxford University Press, London,
1932; APA Philo Press, Amsterdam, 1976
Yah:ya¯ b. ʿAdı¯, Abu¯ Zakariya¯: Khalifat S (1988) Yah:ya¨ b. ʿAdı¯. The philo-
sophical treatises. A critical edition with an introduction and a study.
University of Jordan, Amman
Secondary Sources
Arnzen R (1998) Aristoteles’ De Anima. Eine verlorene spa¨tantike Para-
phrase in arabischer und persischer U¨ berlieferung. Arabischer Text
nebst Kommentar. quellengeschichtichen Studien und Glossaren.
Brill, Leiden
Arnzen R (2002) Abu¯ l-ʿAbba¯s an-Nayrı¯zı¯, Exzerpte aus (Ps.-?) Simplicius’
Kommentar zu den Deﬁnitionen, Postulaten und Axiomen in
Euclids Elementa I. Eingeleitet, ediert und mit arabischen und
lateinischen Glossaren versehen. Essen, Ko¨ln
Bertolacci A (2006) The reception of Aristotle’s metaphysics in Avicenna’s
Kita¯b al-Shifa¯’. A milestone of western metaphysical thought. Brill,
Leiden
D’Ancona C (2001) Review: ‘‘Aristoteles’ ‘‘De Anima’’. Eine verlorene
spa¨tantike Paraphrase in arabischer und persischer U¨ berlieferung
by Ru¨diger Arnzen’’. Oriens 36:340–351
D’Ancona C (2002) Commenting on Aristotle: from late antiquity to the
Arab Aristotelianism. In: Geerlings W, Schulze C (eds) Der
Kommentar in Antike und Mittelalter. Brill, Leiden, pp 201–251
D’Ancona C (2006) The topic of the ‘Harmony between Plato and
Aristotle’: some examples in early Arabic philosophy. In: Speer A,
Wegener L (eds) Wissen u¨ber Grenzen. Arabische Philosophie und
lateinische Mittelalter. De Gruyter, Berlin, pp 379–405
D’Ancona C (2009) Greek sources in Arabic and Islamic philosophy.
http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/arabic-islamic-greek/
Endress G (1977) The works of Yah:ya¯ ibn ʿAdı¯. An analytical inventory.
Dr. Ludwig Reichert, Wiesbaden
Endress G (1990) The defence of reason: the plea for philosophy in the
religious community. Z Gesch Arab-Islam Wiss 6:1–49
Endress G (1991a) Der Erste Lehrer: der arabische Aristoteles und das
Konzept der Philosophie im Islam. In: Tworuschka U (ed) Gottes ist
der Orient – Gottes ist der Okzident. Festschrift fu¨r Falaturi A.
Bo¨hlau, Wien - Ko¨ln, pp 151–181
Endress G (1991b) La ‘Concordance entre Platon et Aristote’, l’Aristote
arabe et l’e´mancipation de la philosophie en Islam me´die´val. In:
Mojsisch B, Pluta O (eds) Historia Philosophiae Medii Aevi. Studien
zur Geschichte der Philosophie des Mittelalters (Festschrift K.
Flasch). Gru¨ner, Amsterdam/Philadelphia, pp 237–257
Endress G (1994) Al-Kindı¯ u¨ber die Wiedererinnerung der Seele:
arabischer Platonismus und die Legitimation der Wissenschaften
im Islam. Oriens 34:174–221
Endress G (1997a) L’Aristote arabe. Re´ception, autorite´ et transformation
du Premier Maıˆtre. Medioevo 23:1–42
Endress G (1997b) ‘The circle of al-Kindı¯’. Early Arabic translations from
the Greek and the rise of Islamic philosophy. In: Endress G, Kruk R
(eds) The ancient tradition in Christian and Islamic Hellenism.
Studies on the transmission of Greek philosophy and sciences ded-
icated to H. J. Drossaart Lulofs on his ninetienth birthday. Research
School CNWS, Leiden, pp 43–76
Endress G (2003) Athen – Alexandria – Bagdad – Samarkand.
U¨ bersetzung,
U¨ berlieferung
und
Integration
der
griechischen
Philosophie im Islam. In: Bruns P (ed) Von Athen nach Bagdad zur
Rezeption griechischer Philosophie von der Spa¨tantike bis zum
Islam. Borenga¨sser, Bonn, pp 42–62
Endress
G
(2007)
Building
the
library
of
Arabic
philosophy.
Platonism and Aristotelianism in the sources of al-Kindı¯. In:
D’Ancona C (ed) The libraries of the Neoplatonists. Brill, Leiden,
pp 319–350
Frank R (1958–1959) Some fragments of the translation of the De Anima.
Cah Byrsa 8:231–251
Freudenthal G (1988) La philosophie de la ge´ome´trie d’al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯.
Son commentaire sur le de´but du Ier livre et le de´but du Ve
livre des Ele´ments d’Euclide. Jerus Stud Arabic Islam 11:104–219
Ga¨tje H (1971) Studien zur U¨ berlieferung der aristotelischen Psychologie
im Islam. Annales Universitatis Saraviensis. Reihe: Philosophische
Fakulta¨t, vol XI, ed. Langen A. C. Winter, Heidelberg
Ga¨tje H (1982) Simplicius in der arabischen U¨ berlieferung. Der Islam
59:6–31
Ghorab A (1972) The Greek commentators on Aristotle quoted in
al-ʿA¯mirı¯’s Al-Saʿa¯da wa-l-isʿa¯d. In: Stern SM, Hourani A, Brown V
(eds) Islamic philosophy and the classical tradition. Bruno Cassirer,
Oxford, pp 77–88
Giannakis E (1998) Yahya¯ ibn ‘Adıˆ against John Philiponus on place and
void. Z Gesch Arab Islam Wiss 12:245–302
Giannakis E (2002/2003) The quotations from John Philoponus’ De
aeternitate mundi contra Proclum in al-Biruni’s India. Z Gesch
Arab-Islam Wiss 15:185–195
Alexandrian Tradition into Arabic: Philosophy A
71
A

Gutas D (1983) Paul the Persian on the classiﬁcation of the parts of
Aristotle’s philosophy: a milestone between Alexandria and Bagdad.
Der Islam 60(2):231–267
Gutas D (1985) The starting point of philosophical studies in Alexandrian
and Arabic Aristotelianism. In: Fortenbaugh WW et al (eds) Theo-
phrastus of Eresus. On his life and work. Rutgers University studies
in classical humanities, vol 2. Transaction Books, New Brunswick/
Oxford, pp 115–123
Gutas D (1986) Philoponus and Avicenna on the separability of the
intellect: a case of orthodox Christian–Muslim agreement. Greek
Orthodox Theol Rev 31:121–129
Gutas D (1999a) The ‘Alexandria to Baghdad’ complex of narratives.
A contribution of the study of philosophical and medical historiog-
raphy among the Arabs. Documenti e Studi sulla Tradizione
Filosoﬁca Medievale 10:155–193
Gutas D (1999b) Greek thought, Arabic culture. The Graeco-Arabic
translation movement in Baghdad and early ‘Abba¯sid society (2nd–
4th/8th–10th centuries). Routledge, New York
Hadot I (1987) La vie et l’œuvre de Simplicius d’apre`s des sources
grecques et arabes. In: Hadot I (ed) Simplicius, sa vie, son œuvre,
sa survie. De Gruyter, Berlin/New York, pp 3–39
Hadot I (1990) The life and work of Simplicius in Greek and Arabic
sources. In: Sorabji R (ed) Aristotle transformed, the ancient com-
mentators and their inﬂuence. Cornell University Press, Ithaca,
pp 275–304
Hadot I (2007a) Dans quel lieu le ne´oplatonicien Simplicius a-t-il fonde´
son e´cole de mathe´matiques, et ou` a pu avoir lieu son entretien avec
un maniche´en? Int J Platonic Tradit 1:42–107
Hadot I (2007b) Remarque comple´mentaire. Int J Platonic Tradit 1(2):1–7
Hogendijk JP (2008) The Introduction to Geometry by Qust˙a¯ ibn Lu¯qa¯:
Translation and Commentary, Suhayl 8:163–221
Hugonnard-Roche H (1990) Les traductions du grec au syriaque et du
syriaque a` l’arabe. In: Hamesse J, Fattori M (eds), Rencontres de
cultures dans la philosophie me´die´vale. Traductions et traducteurs
de l’Antiquite´ tardive au XIVe sie`cle. Louvain-la-Neuve/Universita`
degli Studi, Louvain-la-Neuve/Cassino, pp 131–147
Hugonnard-Roche H (2004) La logique d’Aristote du grec au syriaque.
Vrin, Paris
Hugonnard-Roche
H
(2009)
La
tradition
gre´co-syriaque
des
commentaires d’Aristote. In: Calzolari V, Barnes J (eds) L’œuvre de
David l’Invincible et la transmission de la pense´e grecque dans la
tradition arme´nienne et syriaque. Commentaria in Aristotelem
Armeniaca – Davidis Opera, vol 1. Brill, Leiden
Hugonnard-Roche H (2011) Du commentaire a` la reconstruction: Paul le
Perse interpre`te d’Aristote. Interpreting the Bible and Aristotle – the
Alexandrian commentary tradition between Rome and Baghdad.
Ashgate Press, Aldershot
Jolivet J (1993) Al-Kindı¯. Vues sur le temps. Arabic Sci Philos 3:55–75
Kraemer JL (1965) A lost passage from Philoponus’ Contra Aristotelem in
Arabic translation. J Am Orient Soc 85:318–327
Kraemer JL (1986) Philosophy in the renaissance of Islam, Abu¯ Sulayma¯n
al-Sijista¯nı¯ and his circle. Brill, Leiden
Lettinck P (1994) Aristotle’s Physics and its reception in the Arab world.
Brill, Leiden
Lettinck P (1999) Aristotle’s Meteorology and its reception in the Arab
world. Brill, Leiden
Luna C (1990) Review ‘‘R. Thiel, Simplikios und das Ende der
neuplatonischen Schule in Athen, Stuttgart, 1999’’. Mnemosyne
54:482–504
McGinnis J, Reisman D (2005) Classical Arabic philosophy: an anthology
of sources. Indianapolis/Cambridge, Hackett
Peters FE (1968) Aristoteles Arabus. The oriental translations and com-
mentaries on the Aristotelian corpus. Brill, Leiden
Pines S (1972) An Arabic summary of a lost work of John Philoponus.
Israel Orient Stud 2:294–326 (repr (1986) The collected works of
Shlomo Pines, II, Studies in Arabic versions of Greek texts and in
medieval science. Magnes Press/Brill, Jerusalem/Leiden, pp 320–352)
Pingree D (1980) Some of the sources of the Gha¯yat al-hakı¯m. J Warbg
Court Inst 43:1–15
Pingree D (1989) Indian planetary images and the tradition of astral
magic. J Warbg Court Inst 52:1–13
Pingree D (1993) Plato’s Hermetic Book of the Cow. In: Prini P (ed) Il
Neoplatonismo
nel
Rinascimento.
Istituto
della
Enciclopedia
Italiana, Rome, pp 133–145
Pingree D (1997) Masˇa¯’alla¯h: Greek, Pahlavı¯, Arabic and Latin astrology.
In: Hasnawi A, Elamrani-Jamal A, Aouad M (eds) Perspectives arabes
et me´die´vales sur la tradition scientiﬁque et philosophique grecque.
Peeters/Institut du Monde Arabe, Leuven/Paris, pp 123–136
Pingree D (2001) Artiﬁcial demons and miracles. Res Orientales
13:109–122
Pingree D (2002) The Sabians of Harran and the classical tradition. Int
J Class Tradit 9(1):8–35
Pingree D (2006) From Hermes to Ja¯bir and the Book of the Cow. Magic
and the classical tradition. Warburg Institute Colloquia 7. Warburg
Institute/Nino Aragno, London/Turin
Rashed M (2004) Priorite´ du GΕΝΟS ou de l’ΕΙDΟS entre Andronicos
et Alexandre. Vestiges arabes et grecs ine´dits. Arabic Sci Philos
14:9–63
Rashed M (2005) Les marginalia d’Are´thas, Ibn al-T˙ayyib et les
dernie`res
gloses
alexandrines
a`
l’Organon.
In:
Jacquart
D,
Burnett Ch (eds)
Scientia in margine. E´tudes sur les marginalia
dans les manuscrits scientiﬁques du Moyen Age a` la Renaissance.
Droz, Gene`ve, pp 57–73
Rosenthal F (1940) On the knowledge of Plato’s Philosophy in the Islamic
World. Islam Culture 14:387–422 (Variorum: chap. II)
Rosenthal F (1966) Two Graeco-Arabic works on music. Proc Am Philos
Soc 110(4):261–268
Rosenthal F (1972) A commentator of Aristotle. In: Stern SM, Hourani A,
Brown V (eds) Islamic philosophy and the classical tradition. Essays
presented by his friends and pupils to Richard Walzer on his seven-
tieth birthday. Bruno Cassirer, Oxford, pp 337–349 (Variorum:
chap. V)
Rosenthal F (1990) Greek philosophy in the Arab world. A collection of
essays. Variorum collected studies series CS 322. Ashgate Press,
Aldershot
Sabra AI (1969) Simplicius’s Proof of Euclid’s Parallels Postulate. J Warbg
Court Inst 32:1–24
Troupeau G (1984) Un e´pitome´ arabe du De contingentia mundi de Jean
Philopon. In: Lucchesi E, Saffrey HD (eds) Me´morial Andre´-Jean
Festugie`re. Antiquite´ paı¨enne et chre´tienne. P. Cramer, Gene`ve, pp
77–88
Vallat Ph (2004) Farabi et l’E´cole d’Alexandrie. Des pre´misses de la
connaissance a` la philosophie politique. Vrin, Paris
Vallat Ph (2011a) Simplicius a-t-il de´die´ l’un de ses commentaries sur
Aristote a` un H˙ arra¯nien? In: Vallat Ph (ed) Le parcours syrien du
ne´oplatonisme. IFPO/Geuthner, Damas/Paris
Vallat Ph (2011b) Al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s arguments for the eternity of the world. In:
Watt J, Lo¨ssl J (eds) Interpreting the Bible and Aristotle – the
Alexandrian commentary tradition between Rome and Baghdad.
Ashgate Press, Aldershot
Watt J (2009) Al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ and the history of the Syriac Organon. Analecta
Gorgiana 129
72 A
Alexandrian Tradition into Arabic: Philosophy

Watts E (2005) Where to live the philosophical life in the sixth century?
Damascius, Simplicius, and the Return from Persia. Greek Roman
Byz Stud 45:285–315
Wisnovsky R (2002) Final and efﬁcient causality in Avicenna’s Cosmology
and Theology. Quaestio 2:97–123
Wisnovsky R (2003) Avicenna’s Metaphysics in context. Duckworth,
London
Wisnovsky R (2004) The nature and scope of Arabic philosophical com-
mentary in post-classical (ca. 1100–1900 AD) Islamic intellectual
history: some preliminary observations. In: Adamson P, Baltussen H,
Stone MWF (eds) Philosophy, science and exegesis in Greek, Arabic
and Latin commentaries, vol 2. Bull Inst Class Stud 83(1–2) (Suppl).
Institute of Classical Studies, London, pp 149–191
Alfred of Sareshel
▶Arabic Texts: Natural Philosophy, Latin Translation of
▶Arabic Texts: Philosophy, Latin Translations of
▶Ibn Sı¯na¯, Abu¯ ʿAlı¯ (Avicenna)
▶Ibn Sı¯na¯ (Avicenna), Latin Translations of
Algazel
▶al-G˙ aza¯lı¯, Abu¯ H˙ a¯mid Muh:ammad
Almain, Jacques
▶Jacques Almain
al-ʿA¯ mirı¯, Abu¯ l-H˙ asan
ELVIRA WAKELNIG
Department of Classics and Ancient History
Warwick University
Coventry
UK
Abstract
The tenth century Khurasani philosopher Abu¯ l-H˙ asan
Muh:ammad b. Yu¯suf al-ʿA¯mirı¯ was one of the last repre-
sentatives of the philosophical tradition initiated by
al-Kindı¯. His works show a strong inﬂuence of Greek
philosophy, for example, the Book on the Afterlife
(K. al-Amad ʿala¯ l-abad) draws heavily on Plato’s Phaedo
and the Chapters on Metaphysical Topics (K. al-Fus:u¯l
al-Maʿa¯lim al-ila¯hiya) are, in fact, a paraphrase of parts
of the Elements of Theology by the late Neoplatonist
Proclus.
About al-ʿA¯mirı¯’s life not much information is pre-
served. Although he is said to have lived under the patron-
age of certain rulers at given times, he is also pictured as an
itinerant Suﬁin one of al-Tawh:ı¯dı¯’s accounts. At the
beginning of his On the Afterlife, al-ʿA¯mirı¯ listed the
titles of his 17 major works, four of which are known to
be extant today. This list provides a good picture of the
topics he wrote on, namely, logic, physics, psychology,
metaphysics, ethics, biology and medicine, different reli-
gions, Suﬁsm and interpretation of the Qurʾa¯n, as well as
of dreams. However, it seems that he was primarily known
as a metaphysician.
Biographical Information
Whereas al-ʿA¯mirı¯’s date and place of birth are not known,
the exact day of his death occurring in Nishapur was
apparently January 6, 992. The reason why this date has
been preserved is that on the very same day, the religious
scholar Abu¯
Bakr Ah:mad b. al-H˙ usayn b. Mihra¯n
al-Muqrı¯’ passed away and al-ʿA¯mirı¯ was said to have
saved him from hell by being his ransom.
In his early years, al-ʿA¯mirı¯ studied with Abu¯ Zayd
al-Balkhı¯ (d. 934), a student of al-Kindı¯, then spent some
time at the courts of various rulers and visited Baghdad
twice. In the sixties and seventies of the tenth century, he
was in Rayy under the patronage of Abu¯ l-Fad˙l b. al-ʿAmı¯d
and his son Abu¯ l-Fath: b. al-ʿAmı¯d Dhu¯ l-Kifa¯yatayn. In
the entourage of the latter, al-ʿA¯mirı¯ came to Baghdad and
attended the scholarly gatherings which Abu¯ l-Fath: orga-
nized there. al-Tawh:ı¯dı¯ reports the course of many such
sessions in his various works, among them an encounter
between al-ʿA¯mirı¯ and the famous grammarian Abu¯ Saʿı¯d
al-Sı¯ra¯fı¯. The latter answered the former’s question on the
nature of the Arabic particle bi- in the basmala keeping
silent.
al-ʿA¯mirı¯spent the last years of his life in Nishapur and
Bukhara, where he was, at least temporarily, at the court of
the Samanid vizier Abu¯ l-H˙ usayn ʿUbaydalla¯h b. Ah:mad
al-ʿUtbı¯, most probably beneﬁting from the ruler’s mag-
niﬁcent library.
Thought/Philosophy
al-ʿA¯mirı¯’s concept of knowledge comprises traditional
religious and philosophical sciences. The importance of
the religious sciences lies in their being based on divine
al-ʿA¯ mirı¯, Abu¯ l-H˙ asan A
73
A

revelation. Thus, they are able to provide answers to ques-
tions which intellect alone cannot solve, for example, what
kind of acts of devotions and religious observances should
be performed. As to religious sciences, al-ʿA¯mirı¯ distin-
guishes kala¯m which is attained by intellect, ﬁqh (law)
which is perceived by intellect and sense perception, the
science of hadı¯th which is grasped by sense perception
alone and linguistics, which functions as a tool to the
former three. Correspondingly, philosophy is divided
into metaphysics, mathematics, natural sciences, and
logic. Only a person who has mastered the latter three
sciences and proceeded to metaphysical matters can be
truly called a philosopher. The history and development
of Greek philosophy as such, and metaphysics in particu-
lar, are closely tied to the Qurʾa¯nic revelation received
by Luqma¯n and Solomon. The former is taken to be
the ﬁrst sage who taught Empedocles his knowledge
and the companions of the latter are said to have
instructed Pythagoras in physical and metaphysical mat-
ters. al-ʿA¯mirı¯’s own metaphysics is founded on the Neo-
platonic hierarchy of being, which he either uses in its
basic form (God – Universal Intellect – Universal Soul –
Nature) or in a more detailed elaboration (God – Univer-
sal Forms and Intellect – Universal Soul and Sphere of the
Sphere, which may correspond to Universal Nature –
Spheres and Heavenly Bodies – Beings composed of the
four elements). However, it is the dichotomy between the
spiritual and the bodily world which is of crucial interest
to al-ʿA¯mirı¯’s thought. Man is understood as forming a
link between these two worlds as he consists of a spiritual
soul and a body which is composed of the four elements.
In this world, man acts as God’s representative, and in the
next one he may become an eternal adornment, if he
succeeds in likening his soul to the divine by grasping
the eternal intellectual forms. The human soul and body
are understood as two separate substances, which are
independent of each other. Therefore, each of them may
overcome the other, and as well as the soul is able to
prevent the body from giving in to its desires, the body
can lead the soul astray and distract it from its ultimate
goal, that is, its ascent to the spiritual world. Whereas the
soul provides life to the body, the body enables the soul to
experience good and evil and thus to discriminate between
them by its own personal trial. This distinguishes men
from the angels who have knowledge of the evil, but no
experience of it. However, as the human body constitutes
a liability to the soul, God has set up the religious law by
which man is guided from the lower to the upper world.
Therefore, al-ʿA¯mirı¯ describes man as being religious by
nature. Religious belief may be caused by one of two
different powers or faculties of the human soul, either
the intellective or the imaginative one. If it is by the
former, true belief results, and if it is by the latter, either
true or false belief may result.
Within the scope of religious belief, the problem of
predestination and free will falls, which was prominent in
the kala¯m discussions of his time and which al-ʿA¯mirı¯
tackled in two of his extant writings, the Deliverance of
Mankind from the Problem of Predestination and Free Will
(Inqa¯dh al-bashar min al-jabr wa-l-qadar) and the later
Determination of the Various Aspects of Predestination (al-
Taqrı¯r li-awjuh al-taqdı¯r). His approach is to determine
four essential causes of any given existence, namely, the
four Aristotelian causes (matter, agent, form, and end)
and countless accidental causes. Furthermore, matter,
agent, and form are distinguished into a proximate and
a remote matter, agent, and form and are, thus, twofold
causes. Hence, God may always be understood as the
remote agent of any human action, whereas man is the
proximate cause of his actions. Thus, al-ʿA¯mirı¯’s position
turns out to be a middle one between believing in predes-
tination, which he explains as resulting from taking into
consideration only the accidental causes and human deﬁ-
ciency and between believing in free will, which results
from focusing solely on the essential causes and the gen-
erosity of God. As to heavenly inﬂuence, which is the mean
by which divine predestination is communicated to the
lower world, al-ʿA¯mirı¯ explains that man is subject to this
inﬂuence due to his corporeal form, but may escape it with
the help of his puriﬁed soul.
In addition to the conﬁguration of the celestial spheres
and bodies, magic, witchcraft, spells, talismans, and the
evil eye may also have an impact on man, although they
are rarely able to affect his rational soul. Contrarily, prayer
may grant further reaching power over other bodies to
saints and prophets, because prayer strengthens the soul’s
spirituality, provides the help of the angels, and is only
granted by God as a honor.
al-ʿA¯mirı¯’s philosophical thought does not seem to
have had a strong impact on later generations. Therefore,
it comes as no surprise that only six of his writings
are known to be extant today: The Book on the Afterlife
(K. al-Amad ʿala¯ l-abad) which is inﬂuenced by Plato’s
Phaedo, the Chapters on Metaphysical Topics (K. al-Fus:u¯l
al-Maʿa¯lim al-ila¯hiya) which are, in fact, a paraphrase of
parts of Proclus’ Elements of Theology, the Deliverance of
Mankind from the Problem of Predestination and Free Will
(Inqa¯dh al-bashar min al-jabr wa-l-qadar) which also
discusses several kala¯m positions on the topic, the Deter-
mination of the Various Aspects of Predestination (al-Taqrı¯r
li-awjuh al-taqdı¯r) which draws on the Aristotelian model
of the sublunar world, the Vision and the Visible (al-Ibs:a¯r
74 A
al-ʿA¯ mirı¯, Abu¯ l-H˙ asan

wa-l-mubs:a¯r) on sense perception in the tradition of
Aristotle’s De anima and An Exposition on the Merits of
Islam (al-Iʿla¯m bi-mana¯qib al-isla¯m). Al-ʿA¯mirı¯’s author-
ship of the Book on Happiness and its Creation in Human
Life (K. al-Saʿa¯da wa-l-isʿa¯d fı¯ l-sı¯ra al-insa¯nı¯ya), although
often upheld, is far from being established for certain.
See also: ▶al-Balkhı¯, Abu¯ Zayd ▶al-Kindı¯, Abu¯ Yu¯suf
Yaʿqu¯b ibn Ish˙a¯q ▶Plato, Arabic ▶Proclus, Arabic
▶al-Tawh:ı¯dı¯, Abu¯ H˙ ayya¯n
Bibliography
Primary Sources
(1988) Rasa¯’il Abı¯ l-H˙ asan al-ʿA¯ mirı¯ wa-shadhara¯tuhu¯ al-falsafı¯ya, ed.
Khalı¯fa¯t S. Manshu¯ra¯t al-ja¯miʿa al-urdunnı¯ya, ʿAmma¯n (contains
Inqa¯dh al-bashar min al-jabr wa-l-qadar (249–271), al-Taqrı¯r
li-awjuh al-taqdı¯r (303–341), K. al-Fus:u¯l fı¯ l-maʿa¯lim al-ila¯hiya
(363–379), al-Ibs:a¯r wa-l-mubs:ar (411–437), fragments of the com-
mentary on the Categories (442–467) and fragments preserved in the
works of al-Tawh:ı¯dı¯, Miskawayh, the Muntakhab and Mukhtas:ar
S˙iwa¯n al-h:ikma (473–524))
Al-ʿA¯mirı¯ (1967) Ah:mad ‘Abd al-Hamı¯d, Kita¯b al-Iʿla¯m bi-mana¯qib al-
isla¯m, ed. Ghura¯b A. Da¯r al-Ka¯tib al-ʿArabı¯, al-Qa¯hira
Rowson Everett K (1988) A Muslim philosopher on the soul and its fate:
al-ʿA¯mirı¯’s Kita¯b al-Amad ʿala¯ l-abad. American Oriental Society,
New Haven (with English trans)
Wakelnig Elvira (2006) Feder, Tafel, Mensch: Al-ʿA¯mirı¯s Kita¯b al-Fus:u¯l fı¯
l-Maʿa¯lim al-ila¯hiya und die arabische Proklos-Rezeption im 10. Jh.
Brill, Leiden/Boston (with German trans)
Secondary Sources
Biesterfeldt H (1977) Abu¯ l-H˙ asan al-ʿA¯mirı¯ und die Wissenschaften.
ZDMG III Suppl 1:335–341
D’Ancona C (2006) The topic of the ‘Harmony between Plato and
Aristotle’: some examples in early Arabic philosophy. In: Speer A,
Wegener L (eds) Wissen u¨ber Grenzen. Arabisches Wissen und
lateinisches Mittelalter. Walter de Gruyter, Berlin/New York,
pp 382–399 (379–405)
Heck P (2006) The crisis of knowledge in Islam (I): the case of al-ʿA¯mirı¯.
Philos East West 56(1):106–135
Kraemer J (21992) Humanism in the renaissance of Islam. The cul-
tural revival during the Buyid Age. Brill, Leiden/New York/Ko¨ln,
pp 233–241
Rowson E (1984) An unpublished work by al-ʿA¯mirı¯ and the date of the
Arabic De Causis. J Am Orient Soc 104:193–199
Rowson E (1990) The philosopher as Litte´rateur: Al-Tawh:ı¯dı¯ and his
predecessors. ZGAIW 6:50–92
Wakelnig E (2007a) Al-ʿA¯mirı¯’s paraphrase of the Proclean elements of
theology. A search for possible sources and parallel texts. In:
D’Ancona C (ed) The libraries of the Neoplatonists. Brill, Leiden/
Boston, pp 457–469
Wakelnig E (2007b) Metaphysics in al-ʿA¯mirı¯. The hierarchy of being and
the concept of creation. Medioevo 32:39–59
Wakelnig E (2008a) Al-ʿA¯mirı¯ on vision and the visible. Variations
on traditional visual theories. In: Akasoy A, Raven W (eds)
Islamic thought in the Middle Ages. Studies in text, transmission
and translation, in honour of Hans Daiber. Brill, Leiden, pp
413–430
Wakelnig E (2008b) Philosophical fragments of al-ʿA¯mirı¯ preserved
mainly in al-Tawh:ı¯dı¯, Miskawayh and the texts of the S˙iwa¯n al-h:ikma
tradition. In: Adamson P (ed) In the age of al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯: Arabic philos-
ophy in the 4th/10th century (Warburg Institute Colloquia).
Warburg Institute, London
Anselm of Canterbury
TOIVO J. HOLOPAINEN
Faculty of Theology
University of Helsinki
Helsinki
Finland
Abstract
Anselm of Canterbury (1033–1109), also known as
Anselm of Aosta, Anselm of Bec and Saint Anselm, was
one of the most important thinkers of the early Middle
Ages. He was thoroughly familiar with the Boethian logic
of his time and he contributed to some themes within the
art of logic. His main contribution, however, was in the
area of philosophical theology. Following the examples set
by Augustine and Boethius, Anselm developed the idea of
‘‘faith seeking understanding’’ (ﬁdes quaerens intellectum),
which aims at elucidating the content of the Christian
faith through rational analysis and by providing rational
arguments for the central Christian claims. Anselm’s
method has been seen as paradigmatic for medieval the-
ology, and he has been called the ‘‘Father of Scholasti-
cism.’’ In addition to his methodological ideas, Anselm’s
best-known contributions are the argument for God’s
existence based on the notion ‘‘that than which a greater
cannot be thought’’ in the treatise Proslogion, taken to be
the earliest formulation of the ontological argument, and
the satisfaction theory of atonement in the treatise Cur
Deus homo. Other important themes in his philosophical
theology include the concepts of will and free choice and
the questions about the relation of free choice to sin, grace,
predestination, and foreknowledge.
Biographical Information
Anselm was born in the year 1033 to a family with a partly
noble background in or near Aosta, a town situated in an
Alpine valley in northwestern Italy, which at the time
belonged to the kingdom of Burgundy. His father was
Gundulf, his mother, Ermenberga, and he had one sister,
Richeza. One of our main sources for Anselm’s life, Vita
Anselmi by Eadmer (an English monk who was Anselm’s
Anselm of Canterbury A
75
A

associate after 1093), discloses that the study of the liberal
arts was Anselm’s chief occupation some time in his
youth, but Eadmer fails to give any details of Anselm’s
studies. He also tells us that Anselm later started giving
himself to ‘‘youthful amusements,’’ which has led some
commentators to infer, unnecessarily, that Anselm’s youth
was a misspent one. At some point Anselm’s mother
died, and after that Anselm’s relation to his father grew
difﬁcult. At the age of 23, after a clash with his father,
Anselm decided to leave his home country, and he crossed
the Alps. Of the following three years, Eadmer only says
that Anselm spent them ‘‘partly in Burgundy, partly
in France.’’
The year 1059 is a turning point in Anselm’s life. At the
age of 26, he arrived at the Benedictine monastery of Bec
in Normandy. At Bec, there was a school run by the prior
of the monastery, Lanfranc, who was of Italian origin and
had made a career as a teacher of the liberal arts in his
youth. Anselm became Lanfranc’s associate in the school
at Bec, and a little later (1060) he decided to become
a monk. In 1063, Lanfranc left Bec to become the abbot
of a new monastery in Caen. Anselm was elected prior of
Bec and he served in this position for 15 years. In 1078, the
founding abbot of the Bec monastery, Herluin, died.
Anselm succeeded him and served as abbot for another
15 years, until 1093. Altogether, Anselm was ‘‘Anselm of
Bec’’ for more than three decades.
In 1066, the Normans had conquered England. Lan-
franc became the ﬁrst Norman Archbishop of Canterbury.
After Lanfranc’s death, in 1089, King William II held the
seat of archbishop vacant for several years to be able to
expropriate ecclesiastical revenue. In the end, Anselm
was nominated as archbishop. Anselm’s tenure as Arch-
bishop of Canterbury (1093–1109) was rife with heavy
conﬂicts with the kings of England (William II and after
him Henry I) about the relation of ecclesiastical and sec-
ular power (the investiture controversy). Because of the
conﬂicts, Anselm was twice in exile: 1097–1100 and
1103–1107. During the ﬁrst exile, Anselm went to meet
the Pope in Rome and stayed in Italy for more than a year.
Anselm died at Canterbury on April 21, 1109.
Influences
Many commentators have emphasized Lanfranc’s role in
Anselm’s
intellectual
development,
suggesting
that
Anselm had received little training before he came to the
school at Bec (see esp. Southern 1963, 1990). This view is
to be rejected. As previously mentioned, Anselm was
engaged in studies in his youth, and it is probable that he
received thorough training in the liberal arts and at least
some training in theology already in Italy. Some features of
Anselm’s philosophical and theological thinking are rem-
iniscent of the Italian school discussions as attested by
Anselm’s elder contemporary Peter Damian. As for the
three years that Anselm spent in Burgundy and France,
the most plausible scenario is that he was studying and
teaching, as Lanfranc had done in the corresponding
phase of his career. There are explicit references to con-
temporary academic discussions in Anselm’s writings, and
they assume familiarity with a more developed scholarly
environment than the one existing in Normandy. Anselm
already was a competent scholar when he arrived at the
little school at Bec. Lanfranc hardly had any notable role in
Anselm’s intellectual education, but he perhaps inﬂuenced
Anselm’s decision to pursue a monastic career.
In Southern’s construal (see Southern 1963, 1990),
Lanfranc was an eminent dialectician who offered to
Anselm a model of how dialectic can be applied to theol-
ogy. Southern’s evidence for this claim cannot withstand
scrutiny (see Holopainen 1996), but it is important to
accentuate the role of dialectic in Anselm’s development.
Dialectic was a central part of the academic culture at the
closing period of the early Middle Ages. Some of the best
minds of the eleventh century, from Gerbert to Peter
Abelard, spent major parts of their lives studying dialectic.
It appears that Anselm was familiar with the same set of
sources that served as the starting point for Abelard’s
philosophy: the Boethian corpus of early medieval ‘‘old
logic.’’ It included Boethius’ translations of Aristotle’s
Categoriae and De interpretatione as well as Porphyry’s
Isagoge, commentaries on them (one on Categoriae, two
on De interpretatione, two on Isagoge), a commentary on
Cicero’s Topica, and textbooks on different areas of logic
(categorical syllogistics, hypothetical syllogistics, topics,
division). The Boethian corpus of dialectic was the most
important part of the philosophical library at the time. It
offered an array of tools, techniques, and principles that,
apparently, could be used for discussing any topic from
a rational point of view. Many of Anselm’s contemporaries
saw dialectic as the representative of reason.
Another group of texts that highly inﬂuenced Anselm
are the writings on philosophical theology by Augustine
and Boethius. The only one of Augustine’s works that
Anselm mentions by title is De trinitate, but he was famil-
iar with a large number of his works. In particular, he had
studied carefully some of the ‘‘philosophical dialogues’’
that Augustine had composed early in his career, including
Soliloquia, De magistro, and De libero arbitrio. Boethius’
work on philosophical theology includes Philosophiae
consolatio and the group of ﬁve short treatises known as
Opuscula sacra. The works by Augustine and Boethius
offered to Anselm a model of theology in which rational
76 A
Anselm of Canterbury

analysis is a central ingredient, and it was rational analysis
based on dialectical insight. Like Boethius, Augustine was
thoroughly familiar with the art of dialectic and frequently
made use of it in the context of philosophical theology.
Anselm had ﬁrst-hand experience of the ancient
sources mentioned. He was also familiar with contempo-
rary academic discussions about the same texts and
the questions raised by them, but it is difﬁcult to ascertain
to what extent he is indebted to his contemporaries
because the evidence for the school discussions is frag-
mentary. Above all, Anselm is an independent thinker who
worked out his own uniﬁed approach within a broadly
Augustinian framework.
Works
The main part of Anselm’s production consists of
11 densely written works (volumes I and II of Opera
omnia, ed. Schmitt). Of them, all except one deal with
topics pertaining to philosophical theology; the one
exception, De grammatico, pertains to dialectic. Philo-
sophically relevant is also a group of fragments known
as the Unﬁnished Work or Fragmenta philosophica. In
addition, Anselm left a collection of 21 prayers and 3 med-
itations, as well as a large collection of letters. Finally, there
are collections of material based on Anselm’s oral teaching
(edited in the Memorials of St Anselm, 1969).
Six of Anselm’s works derive from the period when he
was ﬁrst prior and then abbot of Bec. The ﬁrst two, the
Monologion (A Soliloquy, c. 1076) and the Proslogion (An
Address, 1077/1078), form a pair. Their main theme is the
doctrine of God, but other important topics are also
involved. The four other works that Anselm wrote at Bec
are often referred to as his ‘‘philosophical dialogues.’’ In
the 1080s, he wrote a series of three connected dialogues:
De veritate (On Truth), De libertate arbitrii (On Freedom of
Choice), and De casu diaboli (On the Fall of the Devil). The
fourth ‘‘philosophical dialogue,’’ the dialectical treatise De
grammatico, derives roughly from the same period. In
recent years, an early dating for De grammatico has been
spreading: it is alleged that Anselm composed it c. 1060
when he was Lanfranc’s associate. The dating is based on
Southern’s (1990) speculation about Lanfranc being an
expert dialectician and Anselm not having any genuine
interest in the study of dialectic. Neither of these claims
is true.
Around the time he moved from Bec to Canterbury,
Anselm was involved in polemics against the Trinitarian
teaching of Roscelin of Compie`gne. Anselm’s contribution
is a treatise called Epistola de incarnatione verbi (Letter on
the Incarnation of the Word). An early version of it was
published when Anselm still was at Bec, in 1092; the ﬁnal
version was completed in 1094. In 1095, Anselm started
working on a treatise in dialogue form that is commonly
perceived as his theological main work, Cur Deus homo
(Why God Became Man, or, Why a God-man). He ﬁnished
it in 1098 in Italy during his ﬁrst exile. Within the next
years, he also composed the works De conceptu virginali et
de originali peccato (On the Virgin Conception and Original
Sin, 1099) and De processione spiritus sancti (On the Pro-
cession of the Holy Spirit, 1101). Anselm’s last work is De
concordia praescientiae et praedestinationis et gratiae dei
cum libero arbitrio (On the Harmony of the Foreknowledge,
the Predestination and the Grace of God with Free Choice,
1107–1108), referred to in abbreviated form as De
concordia.
Anselm’s works display a remarkable unity of thought.
He had already consolidated the main features of his
thinking before he published his ﬁrst treatise at the mature
age of 43.
Dialectic
Anselm’s only dialectical treatise, De grammatico, deals
with the semantics of terms of a type called ‘‘denomina-
tives’’ (sometimes also ‘‘paronyms’’). In the Latin transla-
tion of Aristotle’s Categoriae, the term grammaticus served
as an example of a denominative. As the term grammaticus
can function both as a noun (‘‘a grammarian’’) and as an
adjective (‘‘grammatical’’), the title of Anselm’s treatise
cannot
be
translated
directly.
Anselm
says
of
De
grammatico that it is ‘‘not without use to those who need
to be introduced to dialectic,’’ but the treatise is far
from being an elementary textbook. A solid working
knowledge of the different areas of Boethian logic is
assumed throughout, and Anselm indicates at the end
(De grammatico 21) that the treatise is related to contem-
porary academic debates. De grammatico is a contribution
to the advanced study of dialectic, but the treatise has
pedagogical objectives as well. Anselm takes pains to
make the treatment as accessible as possible, and he pur-
posely includes passages that serve to rehearse the tech-
niques of logical concept analysis, sentence analysis, and
argument analysis.
De grammatico reveals Anselm as a highly competent
dialectician. Anselm makes constant but inconspicuous
use of dialectical insights in other works as well, and his
dialectically molded habits of thought give a philosophical
tone to almost everything that he writes. One dialectical
theme that particularly interests Anselm is modalities and
the interpretation of modal expressions. He presents
remarks about possibility, necessity, and so on, in many
of his works. In this and other contexts, Anselm often
points out that linguistic usage can be misleading and
Anselm of Canterbury A
77
A

appeals to a distinction between ‘‘proper’’ and ‘‘improper’’
usage.
Faith Seeking Understanding
The works by Augustine and Boethius offered to Anselm
a model of philosophical theology in which dialectically
based rational analysis is a central ingredient. From the
same sources he inherited a ﬁrm conﬁdence in the har-
mony of faith and reason. The Christian teaching and the
human reason testify to the same truth. The truth that
faith proclaims has an intelligible structure (ratio ﬁdei,
‘‘reason of faith’’), and believers can and ought to use
their reason to explore and uncover that structure as far
as possible. To express this idea, Anselm coined the dictum
‘‘faith seeking understanding’’ (ﬁdes quaerens intellectum –
this was the original title of the treatise better known as the
Proslogion).
Anselm was convinced that it is possible to reconstruct
important parts of the Christian view of reality from
a purely rational starting point. In his ﬁrst treatise, the
Monologion, he works to show how this can be done (see
below). Anselm later states that he composed his ﬁrst two
treatises, the Monologion and Proslogion, to show that
‘‘what we hold by faith regarding the divine nature and
its persons – excluding the topic of incarnation – can be
proven by compelling reasons without the authority of
Scripture’’ (De incarnatione verbi 6). However, Anselm
did not allege that the whole content of faith could be
established in this way. In his later treatises, he typically
takes some of his assumptions or premises from authority.
For example, in Cur Deus homo he seeks to establish that it
was necessary that God becomes man, given some general
points about the background situation. Even so, rational
analysis and rational arguments have a central role in all of
Anselm’s works. He was dedicated to using reason under
the guidance of faith: the content of faith provides ﬁxed
points that direct rational reﬂection. In the process, both
reason and faith are transformed. On one hand, reason is
led to scrutinize the validity of its own principles and at
some points to qualify them. On the other hand, the items
of faith that were formerly merely believed receive
a rational grounding or at least become embedded in
a network of rational connections that gives them
intelligibility.
Anselm’s idea of faith seeking understanding is related
to a Christian view of the human destiny. Man’s end is the
vision of God in the life to come in heaven. In that vision,
the chosen ones will see the truth (about all intellectual
things) to the extent that God chooses to disclose it.
Anselm characterizes understanding (intellectus) as ‘‘a
middle-way between faith (ﬁdes) and sight (species)’’;
‘‘the more anyone advances to understanding, the closer
he comes to the actual seeing for which we all long’’ (Cur
Deus homo, Commendatio operis). In this overall frame-
work, there is no fear that rational insight might make
faith redundant. It is for their faith and not for their
insight that the believers will get their reward in the life
to come. What is more, the relevant kind of faith is not
a mere holding true (‘‘dead faith’’) but an active striving
(‘‘living faith’’): loving God and striving toward Him;
loving the good and just and striving to put it into practice
(Monologion 78). Faith’s quest for understanding is part of
that striving.
Anselm’s methodological ideas have been seen as par-
adigmatic for medieval academic theology, and he has
been called the ‘‘Father of Scholasticism.’’ On the other
hand, Anselm was more conﬁdent about what reason can
establish than the majority of his scholastic successors.
The Monologion
The rational aspect of Anselm’s theology gets its most
pronounced
expression
in
his
ﬁrst
treatise,
the
Monologion. Anselm there offers a bold attempt at
reconstructing the basic tenets in the Christian idea of
God, and of the creation in relation to God, on a purely
rational basis. The Prologue and the ﬁrst chapter contain
explicit and emphatic remarks about the rational method
to be used. Anselm’s intention is to proceed ‘‘by reason
alone’’ (sola ratione) and ‘‘nothing at all in the meditation
would be argued on Scriptural authority’’ (even though
the content of it is consistent, Anselm contends, with the
teaching of the authorities). Anselm claims that even
a person who has not heard Christian preaching can
infer many of the central tenets in it by reason alone if he
is of at least average talent. He writes the treatise from the
viewpoint of a person who investigates things that he does
not yet know, disputing with himself in a silent ‘‘medita-
tion.’’ The original title of the treatise was Exemplum
meditandi de ratione ﬁdei (An Example of Meditating
about the Reason of Faith); the title Monologion was
introduced some years later. As the treatise markedly dif-
fers from Anselm’s three meditations properly so called,
one may ask whether the characterization of the treatise as
a ‘‘meditation’’ is Anselm’s attempt to appoint a legitimate
place for his boldly rational endeavor in the monastic
context.
The Monologion includes 80 tightly argued chapters.
Anselm builds his argument on notions that any rational
person in his view ought to accept, on one hand, and on
claims that he has already established in the course of the
treatment, on the other. Ch. 1–4 offer a series of arguments
for the existence of a Supreme Being. For example, Anselm
78 A
Anselm of Canterbury

argues in Ch. 1 that all the things that are good are good
through one thing which is good through itself, and this
one thing is supremely good and the supreme of all
existing things. Contrary to what is often alleged, Anselm
did not see Ch. 1–4 as Four Ways of proving God’s exis-
tence. Instead, they are an initial phase in an extensive
argument for the Christian understanding of God. It is
only in the last chapter, Ch. 80, that Anselm considers
God’s existence as proven. Before he arrives at this con-
clusion, he establishes to his satisfaction that the Supreme
Being whose existence is proved in Ch. 1–4 has created
everything else from nothing (Ch. 5–14). Further, it is
established that the Supreme Being has properties of the
kind that the Christian reader will recognize as the prop-
erties of the Divine Essence (Ch. 15–28). What is more, it
proves to be the case that there is a Trinitarian structure in
the Supreme Being, consisting of a ‘‘Father,’’ a ‘‘Son,’’ and
their ‘‘Spirit’’ (Ch. 29–63, 79). Toward the end of the
treatise (Ch. 68–78), the treatment is focused on the rela-
tion between the Supreme Being and creatures of
a rational nature, i.e., humans and angels. Among other
things, it is established that the Supreme Being is the
proper object of human love, hope, and faith and that
the ﬁnal destiny of a human being depends on his or her
relation to the Supreme Being. At the end (Ch. 80), the
Supreme Being is identiﬁed as God. Even here, Anselm
does not give up the rational point of view. He does not
appeal to the Christian teaching about God but instead
makes a claim about what people who postulate god or
gods mean by the word ‘‘god’’ and then argues that the
Supreme Being is the only being that can adequately meet
this description.
The Proslogion and Anselm’s Argument
In the Preface to the Proslogion Anselm describes the
treatise in relation to his ﬁrst treatise, pointing out two
important differences between them. First, there is
a difference in the complexity of argumentation: the
Monologion includes ‘‘a chain of many arguments,’’
whereas the Proslogion will introduce ‘‘a single argument’’
(unum
argumentum).
Second,
Anselm
points
out
a difference in the mode of presentation: the Monologion
was composed from the point of view of a person who
investigates things that he does not yet know, whereas the
Proslogion is composed from the viewpoint of a person
who strives to elevate his mind to the contemplation of
God and seeks to understand what he believes. The orig-
inal title of the treatise, Fides quaerens intellectum, osten-
sibly refers to the last-mentioned aspect of the perspective
chosen. The title that Anselm invented some years later,
Proslogion or Alloquium (An Address), is related to the
circumstance that the person who speaks in the treatise
addresses God and his own soul in turn.
In the Proslogion, Anselm discusses God’s existence
(Ch. 2–4) and the properties of the Divine Essence
(Ch. 5–23) within a devotional exercise. (Altogether
there are 26 chapters.) Philosophical commentators have
largely concentrated on the part on God’s existence
(Ch. 2–4) and especially on Ch. 2. This chapter counts
among the most famous pieces of philosophical text
written in the Middle Ages: it includes the inference
known as ‘‘Anselm’s ontological argument’’ or simply
‘‘Anselm’s argument.’’ It is taken to be the earliest
formulation of the ontological argument for God’s
existence.
Anselm’s argument is based on the characterization of
God as ‘‘something than which a greater cannot be
thought’’ (aliquid quo nihil maius cogitari possit). Anselm
uses various slightly differing formulations of this expres-
sion; we shall abbreviate it X. Basically, the argument runs
as follows. We believe that God is X. One can doubt
whether there is any such being, because the Fool of the
Psalms (Ps. 14: 1, 53: 1) denies God’s existence. But when
the same Fool hears the expression X being used, he
understands what he hears, and whatever is understood
is in the understanding (in intellectu). Therefore, X exists
at least in the understanding. However, it cannot be the
case that X exists only in the understanding. For if it
existed only in the understanding, it could be thought to
exist also in reality (in re), which is greater. Therefore, if
X existed only in the understanding, it would not be
something than which a greater cannot be thought, that
is, X would not be X. This is impossible. Therefore, X exists
not only in the understanding but also in reality.
The name ‘‘ontological argument’’ goes back to
Immanuel Kant. He was not familiar with Anselm and
thought of some later thinkers instead. Some commenta-
tors insist that the name ‘‘ontological argument’’ should
not be used of Anselm’s inference because it is different
from, say, Descartes’ argument. This depends on what is
taken to be essential to the ontological argument. Anselm’s
inference is different from some later versions in that
it does not appeal to the ‘‘concept’’ or ‘‘deﬁnition’’ or
‘‘essence’’ of God. However, it is an a priori argument
that seeks to deduce the existence of a being starting
from an expression signifying that kind of being, and it
derives the force it has from the meaning of the expression
that is used.
Soon after the publication of the Proslogion someone,
traditionally
identiﬁed
as
the
monk
Gaunilo
of
Marmoutier, wrote a short text Pro insipiente (On Behalf
of the Fool) criticizing Anselm’s argument. Anselm
Anselm of Canterbury A
79
A

appended the critique and his rejoinder, often called
Responsio (Reply), to the end of the Proslogion. The
considerations that Anselm presents in the Responsio elu-
cidate his argument in many ways. A well-known part of
Gaunilo’s critique is the Lost Island counterexample: it is
possible to use Anselm’s strategy to argue for the existence
of an island that is in every way excellent. Anselm rejects
the counterexample as inappropriate and lets us under-
stand that his argument does not apply to anything other
than X, but he fails to offer any extended analysis of the
matter.
There has been extensive dispute about the correct
interpretation of the argument in the Proslogion. The
traditional reading maintains that Anselm meant to intro-
duce a strictly rational proof for God’s existence. This view
has been challenged by ﬁdeistic and mystical interpreta-
tions of the treatise (see Hick and McGill 1967). The pro-
ponents of these interpretations can appeal to the fact that
the Proslogion is a devotional exercise in which a believer
strives to elevate his mind to the contemplation of God in
prayer. Related to this, Anselm introduces the idea that
God is X as a thing that ‘‘we believe’’ (credimus). The
ﬁdeistic interpretation claims that Anselm’s aim in the
Proslogion was to show the internal consistency of
the Christian view by deducing articles of faith from
other articles of faith, and this is said to be what the
dictum ‘‘faith seeking understanding’’ actually means
(Barth 1960).
Any adequate interpretation of the Proslogion needs to
take the devotional character of the treatise seriously.
From this it follows, among other things, that the com-
mon supposition that Anselm wrote the Proslogion in view
of the Fool needs to be forsaken as absurd. Nevertheless,
the traditional idea about the rational nature of Anselm’s
proof can be shown to be correct.
Anselm makes it clear in the Preface that the argument
that he will introduce in the treatise, the ‘‘single argu-
ment,’’ serves to prove God’s existence and ‘‘whatever we
believe about the Divine Essence.’’ It is the single argu-
ment, and not the inference in Proslogion 2, that really
deserves to be called Anselm’s argument. There is no schol-
arly consensus about what exactly Anselm refers to by
the phrase ‘‘single argument.’’ It is clear, though, that
a strategy of deriving divine attributes from the notion
X is centrally related to it. Namely, Anselm believes that
God’s attributes are of a kind that makes their bearer
greater or more excellent: the Divine Essence is good,
eternal, just, and ‘‘whatever it is better to be than not to
be’’ (see Monologion 15; Proslogion 5; Responsio 10).
Because of this, X can be proved to have any of the divine
attributes, for if it lacks any such attribute, then it will not
be X. Further, Anselm asserts that the ability to make
correct value judgments belongs to the essence of
rationality (Monologion 68). Consequently, on Anselm’s
assumptions it should be possible to present, starting from
the notion X, a strictly rational demonstration for the
existence of a being that has all the attributes that the
Divine Essence is believed to have.
Anselm does not explain why he chose to introduce the
single argument by using it in a devotional exercise. One
possible explanation is that his aim was to mold the
attitudes of a conservative monastic audience toward the
rational analysis of faith. In the Proslogion, Anselm
does not yet say that understanding is ‘‘a middle-way
between faith and sight’’ (cf. above), but the devotional
exercise in the Proslogion in effect puts the search for
rational arguments in this kind of framework (see
Holopainen 2009).
Will, Choice, and Freedom
In many of his later works, Anselm deals with issues
related to will, choice, and freedom. The discussions are
intricate and aim at solving philosophical problems
related to the Christian doctrine. In De libertate arbitrii,
Anselm seeks to establish that human beings always have
a freedom, namely, ‘‘freedom of choice,’’ which makes
them accountable for their good and evil deeds, even
though it is the case that a sinner cannot turn away from
sin without the help of the divine grace. The main task in
De casu diaboli is to explain the fall of the angel that was
the ﬁrst creature to sin, and to explain it in such a way that
God will not in the least be responsible for his fall. An
analysis of the functioning of the will is a central ingredi-
ent in the explanation. In De concordia, Anselm works to
show that free choice is compatible with divine foreknowl-
edge, predestination, and grace.
Freedom of choice is a freedom that belongs to all
beings that have will and reason: to human beings, to
angels, and to God. Anselm deﬁnes freedom of choice as
‘‘the ability to keep the uprightness of will for the sake of
uprightness itself.’’ The ground for this deﬁnition has been
laid in De veritate, where justice (or righteousness) is
deﬁned as ‘‘uprightness of will kept for its own sake.’’
A will is just (or righteous) if it always wills what it
ought to will and it wills it for the very reason that it
ought to will it. Freedom of choice is, hence, the ability
of rational creatures to keep justice, that is, to continue
willing what they ought to will for the reason that it is what
they ought to will. Anselm, thus, did not conceive freedom
in terms of choosing between different alternatives. He
explicitly rejects the suggestion that freedom of choice
80 A
Anselm of Canterbury

could be deﬁned as ‘‘the ability to sin and not to sin,’’ and
he claims that a being who is not able to sin is freer than
a being who is able to sin.
Both human beings and angels always have freedom of
choice. They always have the ability to keep the upright-
ness of will because nothing in the world, not even God,
can prevent the will from willing what it ought to will; the
will wills only what it wills to will. However, it is not always
the case that rational creatures can use their freedom of
choice. A will can keep uprightness only if it has upright-
ness, and this is not always factual. Nothing can take
uprightness from a will, but the will itself can desert it by
willing what it ought not, and any slightest breach will
have this consequence. Once the uprightness is lost, the
will needs the assistance of the divine grace to recover it
(and the grace also constantly assists the will when it has
uprightness).
Regarding divine foreknowledge, Anselm argues, fol-
lowing Augustine, that it actually guarantees human free-
dom: it is part of God’s foreknowledge that some of the
things that he foreknows to occur will occur for the reason
that human beings will freely choose them. Further,
Anselm appeals to the nontemporal character of divine
existence and claims, as Boethius had done in Philosophiae
consolatio, that God’s knowledge is not really foreknowl-
edge but knowledge of what is present.
Atonement
Anselm’s best-known theological contribution is the sat-
isfaction theory of atonement that he presents in Cur Deus
homo. Anselm lays out a grand scheme of history directed
toward the realization of a heavenly city in which
a predetermined number of good angels and elect men
will enjoy the presence of God. Sin threatened to destroy
God’s plan. Adam and Eve fell into sin, and thereby the
whole human race was tainted by sin. Even the smallest
disobedience by a creature is an inﬁnite offense against
God. In order that reconciliation between men and God is
possible, a compensation for the offense is needed. It
should be an inﬁnite compensation, and it should be
offered by a representative of the human race. Anselm
argues that such a compensation is possible only if the
second person of the Trinity becomes incarnated as
a God-man: by his death, the God-man can offer satisfac-
tion on behalf of the human race.
See also: ▶Augustine ▶Boethius ▶Liberal Arts ▶Logic
▶Modal Theories and Modal Logic ▶Peter Abelard
▶Peter Damian ▶Proofs of the Existence of God
▶Realism ▶Roscelin of Compie`gne ▶Trinity ▶Will
Bibliography
Primary Sources
(1969) Memorials of St. Anselm, ed. Southern RW, Schmitt FS. Auctores
Britannici Medii Aevi 1. British Academy, Oxford
Anselm of Canterbury (1946–1961) Opera omnia, 6 vols, ed. Schmitt FS.
Nelson, Edinburgh (repr Frommann, Stuttgart, 1968)
Anselm of Canterbury (1973) The prayers and meditations of St Anselm,
trans. Ward B. Penguin, Harmondsworth
Anselm of Canterbury (1998) The major works, ed. Davies B, Evans GR.
Oxford University Press, Oxford
Anselm of Canterbury (2000) Complete philosophical and theological
treatises, trans. Hopkins J, Richardson H. Banning, Minneapolis
Anselm of Canterbury (2007) Basic writings, trans. Williams T. Hackett,
Indianapolis
Schmitt FS (1936) Ein neues unvollendetes Werk des hl. Anselm von
Canterbury. Beitra¨ge zur Geschichte der Philosophie und Theologie
des Mittelalters, Band 33, Heft 3. Aschendorff, Mu¨nster (edition of
Anselm’s unﬁnished work, which is not included in Opera omnia)
Secondary Sources
Barth K (1960) Anselm: Fides Quaerens Intellectum, trans. Robertson I.
John Knox, Richmond (Original in German: 1st edn 1931, 2nd edn
1958)
Boschung P (2006) From a topical point of view: dialectic in Anselm of
Canterbury’s De Grammatico. Brill, Leiden
Charlesworth MJ (1965) St. Anselm’s Proslogion with a reply on behalf of
the fool by Gaunilo and the author’s reply to Gaunilo. Translated with
an introduction and philosophical commentary. Clarendon, Oxford
Davies B, Leftow B (eds) (2004) The Cambridge companion to Anselm.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Eadmer (1962) The life of St. Anselm, archbishop of Canterbury (Vita
Anselmi), ed. and trans. Southern RW. Nelson, London
Ekenberg T (2005) Falling freely: Anselm of Canterbury on the will.
Uppsala University, Uppsala
Evans GR (1989) Anselm. Chapman, London
Henry DP (1967) The logic of Saint Anselm. Clarendon, Oxford
Henry DP (1974) Commentary on De Grammatico: the historical–logical
dimensions of a dialogue of St. Anselm’s. Reidel, Dordrecht
Hick J, McGill AC (eds) (1967) The many-faced argument: recent studies
on the ontological argument for the existence of God. Macmillan,
New York
Holopainen TJ (1996) Dialectic and theology in the eleventh century.
Brill, Leiden
Holopainen TJ (2009) The Proslogion in relation to the Monologion.
Heythrop J 50:590–602
Hopkins J (1972) A companion to the study of St. Anselm. University of
Minnesota Press, Minneapolis
Kapriev G (1998) Ipsa Vita et Veritas. Der ‘Ontologische Gottesbeweis’
und die Ideenwelt Anselms von Canterbury. Brill, Leiden
Logan I (2009) Reading Anselm’s Proslogion: the history of Anselm’s
argument and its signiﬁcance today. Ashgate, Farnham
Rogers K (2008) Anselm on freedom. Oxford University Press, Oxford
Schufreider G (1994) Confessions of a rational mystic: Anselm’s early
writings. Purdue University Press, West Lafayette
Southern RW (1963) Saint Anselm and his biographer. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge
Southern RW (1990) Saint Anselm: a portrait in a landscape. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge
Visser S, Williams T (2009) Anselm. Oxford University Press, New York/
Oxford
Anselm of Canterbury A
81
A

Websites
Jasper Hopkins’ homepage: http://jasper-hopkins.info/. Includes links to
the translations of Anselm’s works by Hopkins and Richardson
(2000), essays on Anselm by Hopkins as well as a bibliography of
recent work
Saint
Anselm
J:
http://www.anselm.edu/Institutes-Centers-and-the-
Arts/Institute-for-Saint-Anselm-Studies/Saint-Anselm-Journal.htm.
A refereed e-journal
Apollonius of Tyana
CHARLES BURNETT
The Warburg Institute
London
UK
Abstract
Apollonius of Tyana was a charismatic personality who
lived in the second half of the ﬁrst century CE. He achieved
legendary status as a spiritual leader to whom works of
magic and natural philosophy were attributed, and his
works were known in Greek, Sanskrit, Arabic, and Latin.
Apollonius of Tyana’s fame as a wise man, magician, and
spiritual leader was such that he became a legendary
personality from the early second century onward, with
the result that it is difﬁcult to piece together the facts of his
life and writings. It is reasonably certain that he was active
in Syria and the neighboring countries in the late ﬁrst
century CE, espoused a kind of Pythagorean philosophy,
and, as a self-confessed ‘‘magician,’’ cured people of vari-
ous illnesses. He is probably the author of books On
Astrology and On Sacriﬁces, to which references are made
by later writers, but which have not survived. The details
given in the early third-century Life of Apollonius by
Philostratus, can sometimes be corroborated by indepen-
dent evidence, but are embellished by rhetorical ﬂourishes
and colored by Philostratus’ evident bias against magic
and astrology. The particular mix of divination by the
stars, sacriﬁce to several gods, and magical cures that
forms the core of his attested interests suggests that he is
a late representative of the Babylonian tradition of omen-
reading, of which a branch survived in Emesa, a Syriac city
with which Apollonius is associated. This may also explain
how his brand of Pythagoreanism included the worship of
the Sun. Less certain are the accounts of journeys to Spain
and India, but a ﬁfth-century CE Sanskrit text refers to
him as a sage. A corpus of letters in Greek endorsing his
magical powers and promoting pagan Greek culture was
written in his name, and he became a cult ﬁgure in several
cities in Syria, and was worshipped by the Roman
Emperor Severus Alexander. He became known as
a spokesman for the wisdom of Hermes Trismegistus, in
particular in the ﬁeld of talisman making.
In this last capacity, Apollonius (usually in the form
Balı¯nu¯s) became a prominent ﬁgure in Arabic literature,
probably as a result of his veneration in Syria. A Greek text
(the ‘‘Book of Wisdom addressed to his pupil Soustoumos
Thalassos,’’ on talismans of the hours of the day and the
night) was translated into Arabic as The Greater Book on
Talismans, Balı¯nu¯s acquired the sobriquet s:a¯h:ib al–
t:ilasma¯t (Master of Talismans), and texts on this subject
were attributed to him. Among these was a tablet made of
emerald (al-lauh: al-zumurrudı¯, Tabula Smaragdina) that
purports to have been found by Apollonius in the hands of
Hermes in an underground cave, and which gives, in
enigmatic language, the creed of the ‘‘masters of talis-
mans.’’ It was, however, adopted by alchemists as
a mystical conﬁrmation of their art, and was allegedly
accompanied (in the same cave) by a book, which gives
the cosmological basis for the practice of alchemy. This
text, called the Sirr al-khalı¯qa (The Secret of Creation) is
a kind of popular encyclopedia on natural philosophy,
arranged according to the four Aristotelian causes (hence
its subtitle: kita¯b al-‘ilal, The Book of Causes). The ﬁrst
book, entitled On the Creator and the Created, deals with
the material and formal causes. This is followed by books
dealing with the ﬁnal and efﬁcient causes: book two on the
effects of the higher beings, book three on the causes of
metals, book four on the causes of plants, book ﬁve
on animals, and book six on the creation of man. Included
in the Sirr al-khalı¯qa are questions about nature that
continue the ancient Greek genre of problemata, and
Nemesius
of
Emesa’s
On
the
Nature
of
Man
is
a signiﬁcant source for the book on man (a re´sume´ of
the work is included in an expanded version of the text).
Throughout the book there is a concern to point out the
underlying unity in all nature and the bonds connecting
all things. The approach to nature is biological: the ele-
ments are alternately masculine and feminine, and from
the mating of the masculine elements, ﬁre and air, with the
feminine ones, earth and water, everything generated in
the universe is born. The description of the production of
all metals from sulfur and mercury and the division
between the ‘‘bodies’’ and the ‘‘spirits’’ of the metals are
distinctly alchemical, and serve to introduce the alchem-
ical recipes in other texts attributed to Apollonius or his
pupils, such as the Mifta¯h: al-h:ikma (Key of Wisdom).
82 A
Apollonius of Tyana

Apollonius’ reputation as a magician and philosopher
was known in the West (St. Jerome refers to ‘‘Apollonius,
sive ille magus, ut vulgus loquitur, sive philosophus, ut
Pythagorici tradunt’’), which probably encouraged Latin
scholars to seek out texts attributed to him (or to invent
such texts). The Sirr al-khalı¯qa was translated under the
title De secretis naturae by Hugo of Santalla in Tarazona in
the mid-twelfth century (he correctly recognized the name
‘‘Apollonius,’’ though his place of origin, ‘‘Tyana,’’ became
distorted into ‘‘Athawaca’’), but the Latin diffusion of this
work was limited. The texts on alchemy and talismans,
however, had a better fortune. The Key of Wisdom was
translated as the Clavis Sapientie, but attributed to
‘‘Arteﬁus.’’ Other translations included The Greater Book
on Talismans and books on talismans of the planets and
the 28 lunar mansions, and corroborated Apollonius’
reputation (often under the name Belenus, Plinus, or
even Plinius) as a Hermetic philosopher in the West.
Additionally, Apollonius became the authority on a new
kind of magic: that of acquiring mastery of the arts and
sciences in a miraculously short time, which was popular
in university circles, under the title ‘‘ars notoria.’’ The
talismanic texts were in turn translated into European
vernaculars (the book on the lunar mansions can be
found in English in a sixteenth-century manuscript, Lon-
don, British Library, Sloane 3846). Philostratus’ image of
Apollonius was restored to the West through a Latin trans-
lation of Alamanno Rinuccini in 1473 and the Greek-Latin
edition of Aldus Manutius of 1501–1504 (followed by
a succession of further translations and adaptations), and
from then on the ﬁgure of Apollonius became well
established in western culture, and emblematic as the
obverse to Jesus Christ in an increasingly secular society.
See also: ▶Alchemy in the Arab World ▶Hermes
Trismegistos
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Hudry Franc¸oise (ed) (2000) Le De secretis nature du ps.-Apollonius de
Tyane, traduction latine par Hugues de Santalla du Kita¯b sirr al-
h˘alı¯qa. In: Chrysopœia, 6, 1997–1999. Socie´te´ d’Etude de l’Histoire
de l’Alchimie and Arche`, Paris/Milan, pp 1–154
Jerome (col. 541) Letter 53 (To Paulinus), Patrologia Latina, 22. J. P.
Migne, Paris
Philostratus (1970) The life of Apollonius of Tyana, trans. Jones CP.
Penguin Books, Harmondsworth
Pseudo-Apollonius (1979) Kita¯b sirr al-khalı¯qa, ed. Weisser U. Institute
for the History of Arabic Science, University of Aleppo, Aleppo
Weisser Ursula (1980) Das ‘‘Buch u¨ber das Geheimnis der Scho¨pfung’’
von Pseudo-Apollonios von Tyana (includes a German summary).
W. de Gruyter, Berlin/New York
Secondary Sources
Dall’Asta M (2008) Philosoph, Magier, Scharlatan und Antichrist: zur
Rezeption von Philostrats Vita Apollonii in der Renaissance. Winter,
Heidelberg
Lendering J. http://www.livius.org/ap-ark/apollonius/apollonius08.html
Lucentini P, Compagni VP (2001) I testi e I codici di Ermete nel
Medioevo. Edizioni polistampa, Florence
Sezgin F (1971) Geschichte des arabischen Schrifttums, IV: Alchimie,
Chemie, Botanik, Agrikultur bis ca. 430 H. E. J. Brill, Leiden,
pp 77–91
Seznec J (1943) Le Christ du paganisme. In: Peyre HM (ed) Essays in
honour of Albert Feuillerat. Yale University Press, New Haven, pp
231–247
Travaglia P (2001) Une cosmologia ermetica, Il Kita¯b sirr al-h˘alı¯qa/De
secretis naturae. Liguori, Naples
Ullmann M (1972) Die Natur- und Geheimwissenschaften im Islam. Brill,
Leiden, pp 378–381
Ve´rone`se J (2007) L’Ars notoria au Moyen Age. SISMEL, Edizioni del
Galluzzo, Florence
Aquinas, Thomas
▶Thomas Aquinas
Arabic Aristotle
▶Aristotle, Arabic
Arabic Galen
▶Galen, Arabic
Arabic Logic in the Latin Middle
Ages
▶Logic, Arabic, in the Latin Middle Ages
Arabic Natural Philosophy
▶Natural Philosophy, Arabic
Arabic Natural Philosophy A
83
A

Arabic Philoponus
▶Philoponus, Arabic
Arabic Philosophical Texts, Jewish
Translations of
MAURO ZONTA
Dipartimento di Studi Filosoﬁci ed Epistemologici
Universita` di Roma
Rome
Italy
Abstract
Many philosophical texts written in Arabic or Judeo-
Arabic by Islamic, Jewish, and Christian authors were
partially or totally translated into Hebrew during the
Middle Ages. The translation movement began around
1150 and ended in 1400 circa; it involved several geo-
graphical areas and a number of translators. Some trans-
lations were made in Spain, by local Jewish scholars such
as Judah ibn Cardinal and Solomon ibn Daud in the
second half of the twelfth century; by Abraham ibn
Hasdai, Shem Tov ben Isaac, and Shem Tov ibn Falaquera
during the thirteenth century; by Joseph ben Joshua of
Lorca, Hayyim ibn Vivas, Isaac ben Solomon Israeli, and
Isaac Natan in the ﬁrst half of the fourteenth century; by
Solomon ibn Labi, Samuel ibn Motot, and Zerahyah ha-
Levi Saladin in the second half of the fourteenth century.
A number of translations were made in Provence in the
period 1160–1300 c.; they involved a school of profes-
sional Arabic-into-Hebrew translators, the Ibn Tibbons,
as well as some minor authors (Judah al-Harizi, Solomon
ibn Ayyub, Isaac Albalag). Other translators worked in
Provence in the ﬁrst half of the fourteenth century:
Qalonymos ben Qalonymos, Samuel of Marseilles, Todros
Todrosi, Solomon of Melgueil, Qalonymos Todrosi, and
possibly
Moses
Narboni.
Three
Arabic-into-Hebrew
translators worked in central and southern Italy during
the thirteenth century: Jacob Anatoli, Zerahyah Hen, and
Ahituv of Palermo. Some Arabic philosophical works were
translated into Hebrew from their medieval Latin ver-
sions, especially in the ﬁfteenth century.
In southwestern Europe, during the last centuries of the
Middle Ages, many Jewish thinkers were interested in
medieval Arabic philosophical texts. Since many of them
could not read these texts in their original language, they
had to read them in Arabic-into-Hebrew translations. For
this purpose, in the period 1150–1400 c. a number of
Jewish scholars engaged in translations, which included
not only many philosophical texts written in Arabic by
medieval Islamic philosophers, but also the key-texts of
medieval Jewish philosophy in Judeo-Arabic (Middle Ara-
bic written by Jews), and even some philosophical texts by
medieval Arabic Christian authors. After 1400, since Ara-
bic was apparently no longer known by European Jews,
some Arabic philosophical texts were translated into
Hebrew not directly, but from their medieval Latin ver-
sions. A very rich and informative inventory of almost all
these translations has been made by Moritz Steinschneider
(Steinschneider 1893:42–460), but some new texts have
been found or identiﬁed later on. A general sketch of
medieval
Arabic-into-Hebrew
translations
appeared
(Halkin 1971), as well as an historical study of the medi-
eval Hebrew translation movement of philosophical works
(Zonta 1996). Medieval Arabic-into-Hebrew translations
of philosophical texts include works about physics, natural
sciences, metaphysics, and ethics; however, also many
non-philosophical, mostly religious works, as well as sci-
entiﬁc works about astronomy and astrology, medicine,
and other sciences were translated from Arabic into
Hebrew. Finally, a great amount of Hebrew quotations of
Arabic philosophical texts are found in the medieval
Hebrew encyclopedias (Harvey 2000) and elsewhere, for
example in Shem Tov ibn Falaquera’s works (Zonta 2004).
The ﬁrst period of translations covers the second half
of the twelfth century, in two areas: Spain and Provence. It
almost exclusively involves Judeo-Arabic philosophical
and philosophic–theological texts. Two translators were
active in Spain: Judah ibn Cardinal and Solomon ibn
Daud. The former translated into Hebrew, before 1167,
Judah ha-Levi’s Book of the Khazar; only a fragment
of this translation is extant (Cassel 1853:344–361). The
latter, probably the son of the well-known medieval Jewish
philosopher Abraham ibn Daud, was active in Toledo
between 1180 and 1200; he translated Ibn al-Sı¯d al-
Bat:alyu¯sı¯’s Book of Circles, a work including a number of
doctrines of the Epistles of the Brethren of Purity (Richler
1978). Other translators of Judeo-Arabic philosophical
texts worked in Provence. Probably in Narbonne, before
1170, Joseph Qimhi translated Bahya ibn Paqudah’s The
Duties of the Hearts; only a short fragment of this transla-
tion, including part of chapter 7 of the work, is extant
(Bahyah ibn Paqudah 1846:xx). Possibly in Lunel, around
1170, Judah al-Harizi translated part 1 at least of Moses
ibn Ezra’s The Treatise of the Garden, under the title
84 A
Arabic Philoponus

Garden of Perfume (Dukes 1842); probably in the same
period, al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s treatise On the Intellect was reworked by
an anonymous Provenc¸al Jew (Freudenthal 2002). Still in
Provence, a family of Jewish scholars from Andalusia, the
Ibn Tibbons, began to operate as professional Arabic-into-
Hebrew translators of philosophical texts. In 1160–1186
the ﬁrst of them, Judah ibn Tibbon, wrote in Lunel his
translations of The Duties of the Hearts, the Book of the
Khazar, and Saadia Gaon’s Book of the Beliefs and Opinions:
all these translations were copied and published many
times, and replaced the previous ones. Apparently, Judah
also translated al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s Compendium of Aristotle’s
Sophistici elenchi.
The thirteenth-century period of translations still
covers both Spain and Provence, but two important exam-
ples of Arabic-into-Hebrew translators appear in central
and southern Italy. In Spain, a number of Judeo-Arabic
philosophical works were translated into Hebrew by anon-
ymous scholars during this century. These translations
include Isaac Israeli’s Book of Deﬁnitions (if Moses ibn
Tibbon was not the translator of this version), his Book
of Spirit and Soul, and an otherwise unknown short trea-
tise On the Elements by Israeli (Steinschneider 1871–1872;
Altmann 1956, 1957). Another Spanish scholar (Nahum
ha-Ma‘aravi?) translated Joseph ibn Zaddiq’s Book of
Microcosm, whose original Arabic text is now lost
(Horovitz 1903). Other Spanish Jewish translators were
active in this period. In the period 1210–1230, Abraham
ibn Hasdai of Barcelona translated Pseudo-Aristotle’s
Book of the Apple (Liber de pomo) and Israeli’s Book of the
Elements (Fried 1900). Maybe in the same area Shem Tov
ben Isaac translated, around 1260, Averroes’ Middle
Commentary on Aristotle’s De anima; Shem Tov ibn
Falaquera summarized in Hebrew, around 1270, Solomon
ibn Gabirol’s The Source of Life (Munk 1859; Shelomoh
ibn Gabirol 2001), and Pseudo-Empedocles’ Book of
the Five Substances (Kaufmann 1899); Isaac Albalag trans-
lated in 1292 al-G˙ aza¯lı¯’s Intentions of the Philosophers.
During the thirteenth century, another minor Spanish
author, a certain Moses ibn Lajis, translated one or more
of al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s short logical works. Probably during this
century some other Arabic philosophical works were
translated into Hebrew: the ‘‘shorter version’’ of the
Secretum secretorum (Gaster 1907, 1908), and Moses ha-
Levi’s Metaphysical Treatise. Finally, in thirteenth century
Spain Qu¯st:a¯ ibn Lu¯qa¯’s treatise On the Difference between
Spirit and Soul might have been translated into Hebrew
not from the original text, but from its medieval Latin
version.
At the beginning of the thirteenth century, in
Provence, the main Judeo-Arabic philosophical work,
Maimonides’ Guide of the Perplexed, was translated
twice: in 1204 by Samuel ibn Tibbon, and before 1213 by
Judah al-Harizi; the latter translation was much lesser
known and was ﬁrst published in the nineteenth century
only. Around 1215, al-Harizi translated another Arabic
philosophical work, H˙ unayn b. Ish:a¯q’s Sayings of the Phi-
losophers (Loewenthal 1896); in 1259, Solomon ibn Ayyub
translated, in Be´ziers, Averroes’ Middle Commentary on
Aristotle’s De caelo. However, the most proliﬁc translator
of that period was Moses ibn Tibbon, working in Provence
(Montpellier) between 1240 and 1283. Moses rendered
from Arabic into Hebrew Averroes’ Summaries of
Aristotle’s Physics, De generatione, Meteorologica, De
anima, De sensu, and Metaphysics: three of these trans-
lations, made in the period 1244–1258, are available
in critical editions (Averrois Cordubensis 1954, 1958;
Ivry 2003). Moses also translated al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s On the Polit-
ical Regime (Filipowski 1849:1–64) and, in 1255, his Short
Treatise on the Syllogism; the Book of Circles by Ibn al-Sı¯d
al-Bat:alyu¯sı¯ (Kaufmann 1880), and Maimonides’ Treatise
on the Art of Logic (Efros 1938:21–64). His work was
completed by a relative of him, Jacob ben Makhir ibn
Tibbon, who translated in 1289 Averroes’ Summaries of
Porphyry’s Isagoge and Aristotle’s logical works, and in
1302 his Summaries of Aristotle’s De partibus and De
generatione animalium. Other translations, made in
Provence in the thirteenth century, are still anonymous,
such as that of the short treatise On Whether the
Active Intellect Unites with the Material Intellect by
Averroes Junior, son of Averroes (Burnett and Zonta
2000), that of al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s treatise On the Intellect, and
those of most of al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s short logical works. In Pro-
vence too, there was a case of an Arabic philosophical text
translated, or better reworked into Hebrew via a Latin
version: this is the Hebrew version of Pseudo-Avicenna
(H˙ unayn b. Ish:a¯q?)’s De caelo, by Solomon of Melgueil
(Glasner 1996).
At least two non-Italian professional translators of
philosophical texts from Arabic into Hebrew were active
in Italy during the thirteenth century. Jacob Anatoli,
a relative of Samuel ibn Tibbon working in Naples in
1231–1235, rendered into Hebrew Averroes’ Middle Com-
mentaries on Porphyry’s Isagoge and Aristotle’s Categories
(Averrois Cordubensis 1969), as well as those on the De
interpretatione and Prior and Posterior Analytics. Zerahyah
Hen, a Catalan Jew working in Rome in 1277–1290, ren-
dered into Hebrew the Arabic Book of the Causes (Liber de
causis) falsely ascribed to a number of authors (Rothschild
1994), a Treatise on the Quiddity of the Soul falsely ascribed
to al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ (Freudenthal 2003), and Averroes’ Middle
Commentaries on Aristotle’s Physics and Metaphysics. In
Arabic Philosophical Texts, Jewish Translations of A
85
A

Sicily, where Arabic was well-known among Jews, a minor
author, Ahituv ben Isaac, translated Maimonides’ Treatise
on the Art of Logic in Palermo, around 1280 (Efros
1938:65–100). In northern Italy, where Jews did not
know Arabic, a renowned philosopher, Hillel ben Samuel
of Verona, translated the Book of the Causes around 1260
from Gerard of Cremona’s medieval Latin version
(Halberstam 1874:41–42).
The third period of translations covered the ﬁrst half of
the fourteenth century; some of these translations were
made in various Spanish places, but most of them were
made in Provence. As for the Spanish translations, there is
reliable information about three of them: between 1320
and 1340, Hayyim ibn Vivas translated Ibn Ba¯jja’s Epistle of
Farewell for the Portuguese Jewish scholar David ibn Bilia
(Hayoun 1990); around 1347, in Mayorca, Isaac Natan
translated Abu¯ ‘Abdalla¯h al-Tabrı¯zı¯’s Commentary on the
Twenty-Five Propositions of Maimonides’ Guide; probably
during the fourteenth century, Joseph ben Joshua Vives of
Lorca translated Maimonides’ Treatise on the Art of Logic
(Efros 1938:101–129). The places where other fourteenth-
century translators worked are still uncertain. In Spain or
in Provence, Nissim ben Solomon translated Isaac Israeli’s
Book of Deﬁnitions (Hirschfeld 1896), and an anonymous
author translated al-Tabrı¯zı¯’s work mentioned above
(Hayoun 1996). A number of Arabic-into-Hebrew trans-
lators were active in Provence, in the period 1310–1350 c.
At least one of them was a sort of professional translator,
in the style of the Ibn Tibbons: Qalonymos ben
Qalonymos of Arles. In 1314, he rendered into Hebrew
some of al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s philosophical works: the Enumeration
of Sciences and the Propadeutic to the Study of Philosophy
(Zonta 1992), as well as his treatise On the Intellect. Many
of his translations involve Averroes’ commentaries on
Aristotle: Qalonymos translated, in 1313, Averroes’
Summaries of the Topics and the Sophistici elenchi; in
1314, his Long Commentary on the Posterior Analytics; in
1315 circa, his Long Commentary on the Physics and that
on the Metaphysics (the latter being ‘‘edited’’ by Moses
of Beaucaire), as well as some of his Questions on Logic;
in 1316, his Middle Commentaries on the Physics,
the De generatione (Averrois Cordubensis 1958), and the
Meteorology; in 1317, his Middle Commentary on the
Metaphysics – a translation revised by Qalonymos himself
some years later. Most of Qalonymos’ translations might
have been made on behalf of a famous Provenc¸al Jewish
philosopher, Levi ben Gershom (Gersonides), who made
use of them in his works. In the same period, other
professional translators were active in Provence: Samuel
ben Judah of Marseilles, and Todros Todrosi of Arles. In
1320–1322, Samuel translated Averroes’ Logical Questions,
including works by three of Averroes’ followers (Abu¯
l-Qa¯sim ibn Idris, H˙ ajja¯j ibn T˙umlus, Abu¯ ‘Abd al-Rah˙ma¯n
ibn T˙a¯hir); he rendered into Hebrew also Averroes’ Middle
Commentary on Aristotle’s Nicomachean Ethics (Averroes
1999), and his Paraphrase of Plato’s Republic (Rosenthal
1956). In the period 1330–1340, Todros translated al-
Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s The Sources of Questions, parts two and three of
Avicenna’s philosophical encyclopedia, The Salvation, and
three of Averroes’ questions on metaphysical subjects; he
also rendered into Hebrew two series of Arabic commen-
taries on Aristotle’s Rhetoric and Poetics: al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s Sum-
maries and, in Trinquetaille in 1337, Averroes’ Middle
Commentaries (Averroes 1842; Lasinio 1872). Other trans-
lators were active in Provence in this period: around 1320–
1325, Moses of Beaucaire revised Qalonymos’ version of
Averroes’ Long Commentary on the Metaphysics (Zonta
2001); before 1328 or 1330, Judah ben Solomon Todros
translated al-G˙ aza¯lı¯’s Intentions of the Philosophers, and
Qalonymos Todrosi translated Averroes’ Refutation of the
Refutation of the Philosophers. Some other works are still in
need of identiﬁcation: the anonymous translations of
Averroes’ On the Substance of the Earth (De substantia
orbis) (Averroes 1986) and of his Physical Questions, as
well as those of al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s Compendium of Aristotle’s
Metaphysics and Exhortation to the Way of Happiness,
might have been made in fourteenth century Provence,
but it is not clear by whom. The same is true for some
anonymous Arabic-into-Hebrew translations, commented
on by the Provenc¸al Jewish thinker Moses Narboni,
who might have even written them by himself. They
include those of Averroes’ Commentary on Alexander of
Aphrodisias’ De intellectu (Davidson 1988) and of his
Epistle on the Possibility of the Conjunction with the Active
Intellect (Ibn Rushd 1982), probably written before 1340;
that of al-G˙ aza¯lı¯’s Intentions of the Philosophers, probably
written before 1344; that of Averroes’ Confutation of the
Confutation, written in 1347 or before; that of Ibn T˙ufayl’s
philosophical tale The Alive Son of Awake, written in 1349
or before (Hayoun 2002). In the same period, in Rome, at
least two Arabic philosophical texts were translated into
Hebrew
from
their
medieval
Latin
versions
and
commented on by the Italian Jewish philosopher Giuda
Romano:
Pseudo-Aristotle’s
Book
of
the
Causes
(Rothschild 1994), and Averroes’ On the Substance of the
Earth.
The Jewish communities in Provence, where most of
the translations had been made, were partially dispersed
by the 1348 plague. Only few Arabic-into-Hebrew trans-
lations of philosophical works were apparently made in
the second half of the fourteenth century, and all of
them were probably written in Spain. They include the
86 A
Arabic Philosophical Texts, Jewish Translations of

anonymous version of Joseph ibn Waqqar’s Treatise
Reconciling Philosophy and Religion (Vajda 1962:119);
Solomon ibn Labi’s ﬁrst Hebrew translation of Abraham
ibn Daud’s The Exalted Faith, made around 1370
(Abraham ibn Daud 1986); Samuel ibn Motot’s versions
of chapters 1–4 of Ibn al-Sı¯d al-Bat:alyu¯sı¯’s Book of Circles,
made in 1370 in Guadalajara (Kaufmann 1880), and of Ibn
Daud’s The Exalted Faith, made in 1391 and partially
based upon Ibn Labi’s one; Zerahyah ha-Levi Saladin’s
translation of al-G˙ aza¯lı¯’s Incoherence of the Philosophers,
made around 1400.
In the ﬁfteenth century, the knowledge of Arabic as the
language of science and philosophy seems to have been
almost disappeared among Jewish scholars, even in Spain.
As a matter of fact, only three Arabic philosophical works
were translated into Hebrew in this period, and all these
translations were apparently based upon medieval Latin
versions. A Hebrew translation of al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s Summary
of the Nicomachean Ethics was probably based upon
a lost Latin version; it is found in an anonymous
supercommentary on Averroes’ Middle Commentary on
Aristotle’s work (Berman 1978:302–311) dating back to
the ﬁrst half of the ﬁfteenth century. Before 1470, in
Castilia or in southern Italy, an anonymous author
(Baruch ibn Ya‘ish?) rendered into Hebrew Averroes’
Long Commentary on Aristotle’s De anima from the Latin
translation of Michael Scot (Zonta 1994). In 1471 or 1477
Eli Habillo, an Aragonese Latin-into-Hebrew translator of
philosophical works, translated Pseudo-Aristotle’s Book of
the Causes from Gerard of Cremona’s Latin version
(Rothschild 1994).
See also: ▶Aristotelianism in the Greek, Latin, Syriac,
Arabic, and Hebrew Traditions ▶al-Bat:alyu¯sı¯, Abu¯
Muh:ammad ibn al-Sı¯d ▶Ethics, Jewish ▶Greek Texts
Translated into Hebrew ▶Logic, Jewish ▶Moses Mai-
monides ▶Natural Philosophy, Jewish ▶Philosophical
Theology, Jewish ▶Philosophy, Jewish ▶Political Philos-
ophy, Jewish
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Altmann Alexander (1956–1957) Isaac Israeli’s chapter on the elements
(MS. Mantua). J Jew Stud 7:31–57
Altmann Alexander (1957) Isaac Israeli’s book of deﬁnitions: some frag-
ments of a second Hebrew translation. J Semit Stud 2:232–242
Averroes (1842) Be’ur Even Roshd le-Sefer ha-halas˙ah le-Arist˙o. H.
Franke, Leipzig
Averroes (1986) De Substantia Orbis: critical edition of the Hebrew text,
with English translation and commentary, ed. Hyman A. The Medi-
eval Academy of America/Israel Academy of Arts and Sciences,
Cambridge/Jerusalem
Averroes (1999) Middle commentary on Aristotle’s Nicomachean Ethics
in the Hebrew version of Samuel ben Judah, ed. Berman LV. Israel
Academy of Arts and Sciences, Jerusalem
Averrois Cordubensis (1954) Compendia librorum Aristotelis qui Parva
naturalia vocantur, ed. Blumberg H. The Medieval Academy of
America, Cambridge
Averrois Cordubensis (1958) Commentarium medium et Epitome in
Aristotelis De generatione et corruptione libros, ed. Kurland S. The
Medieval Academy of America, Cambridge
Averrois Cordubensis (1969) Commentarium medium in Porphyrii
Isagogen et Aristotelis Categorias, ed. Davidson H. The Medieval
Academy of America, Cambridge/Los Angeles
Cassel David (1853) Das Buch Kusari des Jehuda ha-Levi. A.M. Colditz,
Leipzig
Davidson Hayyim (Herbert A) (1988) Averroes’ commentary on Alexan-
der of Aphrodisias’ De intellectu (in Hebrew). Jerus Stud Jew
Thought 7:205–217
Dukes Leopold (1842) Passages from the book ‘Arugat ha-bosem (Bed of
Perfume) by Rabbi Moses ben Ezra (in Hebrew). Ziyyon 2:117–123,
134–137, 157–160, 175
Efros Israel (1938) Maimonides’ Treatise on Logic. The original Arabic
and three Hebrew translations. Proc Am Acad Jew Res 8:Hebrew
section
Filipowski ZH (1849) Sefer he-asif. H. Filipowski, Leipzig
Freudenthal
Gad
(2002)
Ketav
ha-da‘at
or
Sefer
ha-Sekhel
we-ha-muskalot: the medieval Hebrew translations of al-Farabi’s
Risalah ﬁ’l-‘aql. A study in text history and in the evolution of
medieval Hebrew philosophical terminology. Jew Q Rev n.s.
93:29–115
Freudenthal Gad (2003) La quiddite´
de l’aˆme, traite´
populaire
ne´oplatonisant faussement attribue´ a` al-Farabi: traduction annote´e
et commente´e. Arabic Sci Philos 13:173–237
Fried Salomon (1900) Sefer ha-yesodot. Das Buch u¨ber die Elemente. . .
von Isaak b. Salomon Israeli. A.H. Zupnik, Frankfurt am Main
Gaster Moses (1907/1908) The Hebrew version of the Secretum
Secretorum. J R Asiatic Soc 1907, 871–912; 1908, 111–162,
1065–1084
Halberstam Shelomoh (1874) Sefer tagmule ha-nefesh le-ha-h˙akam. . .
rav Hillel. . . mi-Verona. Meqitsey Nirdamim, Lyck
Hayoun Maurice-Ruben (1990) Moses of Narbonne and Ibn Bajja (II): the
Hebrew version of the Epistle of Farewell (in Hebrew). Daat 25:
93–125
Hayoun Maurice-Ruben (1996) Moses Maimonides und Muhammad al-
Tabrisi; Ausgabe der hebraeischen [anonymen] Uebersetzung des
Kommentars al-Tabrisis zu den XXV Leitsaetzen des Maimonides
im II. Teil des Moreh Nebuchim (Fuehrer der Verwirrten). Trumah
5:201–245
Hayoun Maurice-Ruben (2002) Moses Narbonis Kommentar zum
Hayy ibn Yaqzan des Ibn Tufayl. Trumah 12:199–204, Hebrew
section
Hirschfeld Hartwig (1896) A work by Isaac ha-Rofe´ Israeli (in Hebrew).
In: Tehillah le-Mosheh. O. Harrassowitz, Leipzig, pp 131–141
Horovitz Samuel (1903) Der Mikrokosmos der Josef Ibn Saddik.
Schatzky, Breslau
Ibn Daud Abraham (1986) The exalted faith, ed. Weiss G, Samuelson NM.
Fairleigh Dickinson University Press/Associate University Presses,
Cranbury/London
Ibn Gabirol Shelomoh (2001) Fons Vitae, Meqor h˙ayyim, ed. Gatti R. Il
melangolo, Genoa
Ibn Paqudah Bahyah (1846) Sefer h˙ovot ha-levavot, ed. Benjacob I, intr.
Jellinek A. Fritzsche, Leipzig
Arabic Philosophical Texts, Jewish Translations of A
87
A

Ibn Rushd (1982) The epistle on the possibility of conjunction with the
active intellect, with the commentary of Moses Narboni, ed. Bland
KP. Ktav, New York
Ivry Abraham A (Alfred L) (2003) The commentary of Averroes on
Aristotle’s De Anima in the Hebrew translation of Moses b. Samuel
Ibn Tibbon. Israel Academy of Arts and Sciences, Jerusalem
Kaufmann David (1880) Die Spuren al-Batlajusi’s in der ju¨dischen
Religionsphilosophie. Jahresbericht des Landes-Rabbinerschule in
Budapest, Budapest, Hebrew section
Kaufmann
David
(1899)
Studien
u¨ber
Salomon
Ibn
Gabirol.
Jahresbericht des Landes-Rabbinerschule in Budapest, Budapest,
pp 17–51
Lasinio Fausto (1872) Il commento medio di Averroe` alla Poetica di
Aristotele, part 2. Annali delle Universita` Toscane, Pisa
Loewenthal Abraham (1896) Sefer Musre Haphilosophim (‘Sinnspru¨che
der Philosophen’) [by H˙ unayn b. Ish:a¯q]. Y. Kaufmann, Frankfurt am
Main
Munk Solomon (1859) Me´langes de philosophie juive et arabe. A. Franck,
Paris, Hebrew section
Rosenthal Erwin IJ (1956) Averroes’ commentary on Plato’s Republic.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (second revised edition:
1966)
Steinschneider Moritz (1871–1872) The Hebrew translation of Isaac
Israeli’s Book on spirit and soul (in Hebrew). Ha-Karmel 1:400–405
Zonta Mauro (1992) La ‘‘Classiﬁcazione delle Scienze’’ di al-Farabi nella
tradizione ebraica. Silvio Zamorani, Turin
Secondary Sources
Berman LV (1978) Ibn Rushd’s middle commentary on the Nicomachean
Ethics in medieval Hebrew literature. Multiple Averroe`s, ed. Jolivet J.
Les Belles Lettres, Paris, pp 287–321
Burnett C and Zonta M (2000) Abu¯ Muh˙ammad ‘Abdalla¯h Ibn Rusˇd
(Averroes Junior), On Whether the Active Intellect Unites with the
Material Intellect Whilst it is Clothed with the Body. Arch Hist
Doctrin Litt M-Age 67:295–335
Glasner R (1996) The Hebrew version of De celo et mundo attributed to
Ibn Sina. Arabic Sci Philos 6:89–112
Halkin AS (1971) Translation and translators. In: Encyclopedia Judaica,
vol 15. Keter, New York/Jerusalem, pp 318–329
Harvey S (ed) (2000) The medieval Hebrew encyclopedias of science and
philosophy. Kluwer, Dordrecht/Boston/London
Richler B (1978) Identiﬁcation of the anonymous translation of the Book
of the Intellectual Spheres (in Hebrew). Kiryath Sepher 53:578
Rothschild J-P (1994) Les traductions du Livre des causes et leurs copies.
Revue d’histoire des textes 24:393–484
Steinschneider
M
(1893)
Die
hebraeischen
U¨ bersetzungen
des
Mittelalters und die Juden als Dolmetscher. Kommissionsverlag des
Bibliographischen Bureaus, Berlin
Vajda G (1962) Recherches sur la philosophie et la kabbale dans la pense´e
juive du Moyen Age. Mouton, Paris
Zonta M (1994) Osservazioni sulla tradizione ebraica del Commento
grande di Averroe` al De anima di Aristotele. Annali di Ca’ Foscari
33(s.or. 25):15–28
Zonta M (1996) La ﬁlosoﬁa antica nel Medioevo ebraico. Paideia, Brescia
Zonta M (2001) Sulla tradizione ebraica di alcuni commenti arabi alla
Metaﬁsica (Abu¯ l-Faraj ibn al-T˙ayyib e Averroe`). Documenti e studi
sulla tradizione ﬁlosoﬁca medievale 12:155–177
Zonta M (2004) Hebrew transmission of Arabic philosophy and science:
a reconstruction of Shem T˙ov Ibn Falaquera’s Arabic Library.
L’interculturalita` dell’ebraismo, ed. Perani M. Longo, Ravenna,
pp 121–137
Arabic Philosophy
▶Philosophy, Arabic
Arabic Plato
▶Plato, Arabic
Arabic Plotinus
▶Plotinus, Arabic
Arabic Political Philosophy
▶Political Philosophy, Arabic
Arabic Porphyry
▶Porphyry, Arabic
Arabic Proclus
▶Proclus, Arabic
Arabic Texts: Natural Philosophy,
Latin Translations of
CHARLES BURNETT
The Warburg Institute
London
UK
Abstract
Natural philosophy, as one of the major divisions of medi-
eval learning, consists of texts by both Aristotle and his
88 A
Arabic Philosophy

commentators (in Greek and Arabic), and a large number
of practical divisions. Arabic authors contributed consid-
erably to both branches.
Philosophy in the Late Antique Greek schools consisted of
three divisions, mathematics, natural philosophy and
metaphysics, of which the second and third divisions
were based on the works of Aristotle. These divisions
(with logic regarded as a fourth, introductory division, or
a tool to be used for the other divisions), had formed the
structure of teaching that passed into Syriac and Arabic,
but was largely lost to the Latin West. Latin scholars were
well aware of some of Aristotle’s works on logic (the logica
vetus) from the translations from Greek made by Boethius
in the early sixth century, but it was not until the early
twelfth century that the remaining works on logic, and the
texts on natural science (the ‘‘libri naturales’’) and meta-
physics began to be translated, by James of Venice,
Burgundio of Pisa, Henricus Aristippus, and others; the
process was completed in the late thirteenth century by
William of Moerbeke. In the Arabic world, however,
thanks to the translations made (often via Syriac) in
the ninth century of the whole of the Aristotelian
corpus, together with a mingling of Neoplatonic works,
a philosophical tradition developed based on an intelligent
critique of Aristotle. The leading exponents of this Arabic
tradition were al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, Ibn Sı¯na¯, and Ibn Rushd.
When Latin translators wished to ﬁll the perceived
gaps in their knowledge of philosophy, they turned to
the Classiﬁcation of the Sciences of al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ (d. c. 950),
which detailed each of the divisions of grammar and logic,
mathematics, natural philosophy, metaphysics, politics,
jurisprudence, and theology. In the section on natural
philosophy are listed in order ‘‘eight enquiries’’ (fuh:u¯s:),
together with the books of Aristotle that deal with them:
1. The principles shared by all bodies, corresponding to
Aristotle’s Physics
2. The simple bodies out of which the universe is com-
posed; On the Heavens
3. The processes of coming-into-being and passing away;
Generation and Corruption
4. The
accidents
and
affects
of
simple
elements;
Meteorologica, bks 1–3
5. The accidents and affects of elements in combination;
Meteorologica bk 4
6. Stones and minerals; the Liber mineralium
7. Plants; On Plants (a work by Nicholas of Damascus
drawing on Aristotle’s doctrines)
8. On what species of animals share and what is proper to
each species; On Animals and On the Soul.
Gerard of Cremona (1114–1187), who made a translation
of this work of al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, inaugurated the program of
natural philosophy in Toledo by translating Physics, On
the Heavens, On Generation and Corruption, and the ﬁrst
three books of the Meteorologica from Arabic. Alfred of
Shareshill (who lived into the early years of the thirteenth
century) completed the Meteorologica by adding Henricus
Aristippus’ Greek–Latin translation of the fourth book,
and his own translation of chapters from Ibn Sı¯na¯’s Shifa¯’
(see below) on stones and minerals; he also translated the
De plantis (or De vegetabilibus) of Nicholas of Damascus,
which was based on Aristotelian material. Michael Scot
completed the series by translating, in Toledo before 1220,
the book on Animals. Alongside these texts of Aristotle
were translated works of Arabic scholars. Gerard of
Cremona himself translated al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s Commentary (or
Introduction) to Physics (the work is not extant), several
treatises by al-Kindı¯ concerning topics in Physics and in
Parva naturalia, and a whole text, De causis proprietatum
elementorum quatuor (On the Causes of the Properties of the
Four Elements), written by an anonymous Arabic author,
which deals primarily with questions of physical geogra-
phy; this text was inserted into the Libri naturales, between
On the Heavens and On Generation and Corruption. But
the most signiﬁcant Arabic text belonging to the Peripa-
tetic tradition that aroused the interest of Latin scholars
was Ibn Sı¯na¯’s Shifa¯’ (‘‘The Cure’’ scil. from ignorance).
This text became known in Toledo at the height of
Gerard’s career there. It is a large compendium of philos-
ophy belonging to the Peripatetic tradition, in which Ibn
Sı¯na¯ (d. 1037) carefully analyzes, emends, and develops
Aristotle’s doctrines in the light of the Greek and Arabic
commentators, and the Neoplatonic works that he knew,
and through his original insights. It is divided into four
large units, each called a jumla or ‘‘collection,’’ on logic,
natural philosophy, mathematics, and on metaphysics.
Natural science is divided into eight sections, each called
a fann (or ‘‘subject’’), and very similar to the divisions
described by al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯: (1) on principles, movement, place
and time, the inﬁnite and the ﬁnite (i.e., physics); (2) on
the heavens; (3) on generation and corruption; (4) on
actions and passions; (5) on minerals and meteorology;
(6) on the soul; (7) on plants; and (8) on animals. The
Shifa¯’ was apparently brought to Toledo by the Jewish
scholar Abraham Daud who collaborated with an archdea-
con there, Dominicus Gundissalinus (ﬂ. 1161–1190), on the
translation of the section on the soul (‘‘Liber sextus de
naturalibus’’). An unknown twelfth-century translator, in
turn, translated the ﬁrst two treatises (together with the
opening of the third) under the title Sufﬁcientia. Alfred of
Shareshill translated two chapters on mineralogy and
Arabic Texts: Natural Philosophy, Latin Translations of A
89
A

possibly the chapter on ﬂoods from section 5, while
another
Jew
and
Christian
(‘‘Salomon’’
and
Juan
Gonsalvez de Burgos) collaborated in the 1270s on trans-
lations of treatise 3 of section 1, and sections 2, 3, and 4 of
the collection on natural science. The last section, on
animals, was translated apparently from an abbreviated
Arabic version, by Michael Scot (d. before 1236) for Fred-
erick II Hohenstaufen. The translations of Salomon and
Gonzalves had little impact, surviving in only one manu-
script, but the other translations were widely copied, and
read in conjunction with the Libri naturales. Albert the
Great followed the model of Ibn Sı¯na¯ in writing his own
works on the different divisions of natural philosophy.
Roger Bacon’s estimation of Ibn Sı¯na¯ as the praecipuus
imitator et expositor Aristotelis (‘‘the eminent imitator
and elucidator of Aristotle’’), shows the respect he was
held in.
Dominicus Gundissalinus, aside from embarking on
the translation of Ibn Sı¯na¯’s Shifa¯’, translated, with
a certain ‘‘magister Iohannes,’’ The Aims of the Philosophers
of al-G˙ aza¯lı¯. This was a summary of the doctrines of
Peripatetic philosophy based very largely on the compen-
dium of philosophy written by Ibn Sı¯na¯ in Persian for his
secular patron, the Da¯nesh-Na¯meh. Ramon Llull was later
to paraphrase the opening section on logic in his own
‘‘Compendium Logicae Algazelis.’’
The culmination of the Greek and Arabic tradition of
commenting on the works of Aristotle is found in the
œuvre of Ibn Rushd of Co´rdoba (Averroes, 1126–1198).
He wrote his commentaries on Aristotle’s works in the
forms of Long Commentaries, Middle Commentaries
and Epitomes, and his writings became well known to
Jewish and Latin scholars soon after his death. In the
ﬁeld of natural philosophy, the Long Commentaries
on Physics, On the Heavens, and On the Soul, and the
Middle Commentaries on On Generation and Corruption,
Meteorologica, bk IV, and On Animals were translated
from Arabic in the early thirteenth century. Common
terminology and style between all these translations except
that of the Meteorologica, and the explicit attribution of
On the Heavens to Michael Scot, suggest that he was
responsible for the translations. Ibn Rushd’s original
work, On the Substance of the Orb, which explores the
differences between the substances of the heavens, the
sublunar world, and the soul, belongs to the same context.
Thus far, Arabic works on natural science have
followed the Aristotelian tradition, and they appealed to
the Latin West because they supported and enhanced this
tradition. Dominicus Gundissalinus, aside from translat-
ing some of these works, wrote his own text On the
Division of Philosophy. In this, he sought to bring together
deﬁnitions of the different sciences that he found in his
Latin sources (especially the Etymologies of Isidore of
Seville) with deﬁnitions from Arabic sources, among
which al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s Classiﬁcation of the Sciences is the most
important. Thus we see, in the chapter devoted to ‘‘scientia
naturalis,’’ a section beginning ‘‘Partes huius sciencie
naturalis sunt octo’’ (‘‘the parts of this natural science
are eight’’), which is simply a transcription of the rele-
vant part of the Classiﬁcation. Gundissalinus describes
natural philosophy in his own words as ‘‘the science that
considers only things which cannot be abstracted from
matter, and which are in movement. . .it considers matter
with the form which cannot be abstracted from matter. . .
Its matter is body, not as being, but as substance, not in
that it is composed of two principles, form and matter, but
in that it is subject to movement, rest and change’’ etc.
This Peripatetic natural science is theoretical. But this is
not the only kind of natural science that we ﬁnd among
Arabic writers, and the Latin scholars who depend on
them.
In
the
same
chapter
on
natural
science
in
Gundissalinus’ De divisione philosophiae, immediately
preceding the eight ‘‘parts’’, as listed by al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, is another
classiﬁcation of the ‘‘sciences’’ or ‘‘species of natural
science’’, this time into (1) medicine, (2) astrological judg-
ments, (3) nigromancy according to physics, (4) talismans,
(5) agriculture, (6) navigation, (7) optics, and (8) alchemy.
This division comes from an Arabic work known only in its
Latin translation under the title De ortu scientiarum (On
the Rise of the Sciences), and attributed variously to
Aristotle, al-Farabi and Avicenna. Having stated that
there is nothing aside from substance, accident, and the
Creator of both, and that accidents are apprehended
through
the
ﬁve
senses,
while
substance
is
only
apprehended through reason, with the mediation of acci-
dents, the author explains how the four mathematical arts
arose. He then turns to the ‘‘natural art’’ (ars naturalis)
whose origin he explains as arising from the need to
explain why substances change color, last for different
lengths of time, and are healthy or ill. He goes on to say
that the parts of the natural art
"
according to what the first wise men said, are eight:
namely the science of judgements (astrology), the science
of medicine, the science of nigromancy according to phys-
ics, the science of talismans, the science of agriculture, the
science of the sea, the science of alchemy, which is the
science concerning the conversion of things into other
species, and the science of mirrors.
He states that astrology and medicine are the most
important parts of this natural art.
90 A
Arabic Texts: Natural Philosophy, Latin Translations of

That he uses ‘‘ars’’ instead of ‘‘scientia’’ in the heading
is immediately signiﬁcant; what we are dealing with is
clearly the practical side of natural philosophy, an art or
craft (probably s:ina¯‘a in Arabic). These sciences concern
how to effect change in nature. By this art, one can
‘‘remove those causes (or ‘‘illnesses’’; the word which is
presumable in the Arabic original is ‘ilal which means
both ‘‘causes’’ and ‘‘illnesses’’) which are harmful and
increase those that are beneﬁcial.’’
This applies most of all to medicine, but also to
katarchic astrology in which the best times are chosen
for embarking on an activity, to avoid misfortune and
gain success. The early translators of Arabic texts on med-
icine and astrology were keen to emphasize that medicine
belonged to ‘‘physics’’ (Gerard of Cremona’s medical
translations were called by his students ‘‘De phisica’’),
and that the study of the effects of the stars on sublunar
beings belonged to ‘‘natural speculation’’ (Hermann of
Carinthia describing the subject matter of Abu¯ Ma‘shar’s
Great Introduction to Astrology).
Arabic texts on the other subjects mentioned in On the
Rise of Sciences can also be recognized. ‘‘The science of
nigromancy according to physics’’ would be ‘‘natural
magic,’’ rather than the invocation of spirits or daimons
(ru¯h:a¯niyya¯t). Among the Arabic texts on this subject
translated into Latin was the Kita¯b al-nawa¯mı¯s, translated
as the Liber vaccae (Book of the Cow of ‘‘Plato’’), which
operates only with animals (whether natural or artiﬁcial)
and not with talismans or spirits. This is, rather, the
subject of the next division: the ‘‘science of talismans
(imaginibus).’’ Two Arabic texts on this subject were trans-
lated into Latin: one by Tha¯bit ibn Qurra (836–901), in
which the positions of planets in the signs of the zodiac are
observed; the other attributed to Ptolemy, which is based
on the rising of third parts (decans) of signs of the zodiac.
Under the titles Liber imaginum Thebit ben Cora and Opus
imaginum Ptholomei, they were frequently copied in the
Middle Ages.
The next two practical sciences, agriculture and the
science of the sea, are also found listed, alongside medi-
cine, among the seven ‘‘mechanical arts’’ in the Latin
tradition. However, when we consider the possible Arabic
original terms, their identiﬁcation as natural sciences
becomes more reasonable. The ﬁrst is probably ﬁla¯h:a.
This involves man participating with nature in producing
crops out of seeds, grapes out of vines, etc., but one should
also consider the wider meaning of ﬁla¯h:a in the title of Ibn
Wah:shiya’s Kita¯b al-ﬁla¯h:a al-nabat:ı¯ya (Nabataean Agri-
culture) that included all kinds of magical recipes.
Although it was not translated directly from Arabic into
Latin, passages were known through being quoted in the
magical compendium, G˙aya¯t al-H˙ akı¯m, translated in the
mid-thirteenth century as ‘‘Picatrix.’’
‘‘Scientia de navigando’’ is presumably mila¯h:a, which
would mean not only the knowledge of navigating, using
a quadrant or ship’s astrolabe and a chart, but also the
prediction of good and bad weather to ensure the success
of the voyage. Weather forecasting, the practical aspect of
meteorology, is a separate genre within Arabic astrology,
and two treatises on the subject by al-Kindı¯ were com-
bined into a single text in Latin under the title De
mutatione temporum (On the Change of Times).
In alchemy, man imitates and speeds up the processes
of change that naturally occur in natural substances. The
Latin alchemical corpus depended entirely on that of the
Arabs, among whom the names of Kha¯lid ibn al-Walı¯d,
Ja¯bir b. H˙ ayya¯n, and Abu¯ Bakr al-Ra¯zı¯ ﬁgure as authori-
ties. Alchemy, too, is concerned with substances coming
into being and passing away, and changing color, while it
can prolong life – all subjects of the natural art as deﬁned
in On the Rise of the Sciences.
The last science listed – optics, De speculis, could be
regarded as natural philosophy in that it deals with the
physiology of the eye, the nature of color, and the behavior
of rays of light in a medium, all topics occurring in Ibn al-
Haytham’s Optics, which was rendered into Latin by two
unknown translators before the late thirteenth century.
But in another list of the eight branches of physics,
found in Daniel of Morley’s Philosophia (written between
1175 and 1187), the science is described as being about
burning mirrors, a subject which Ibn al-Haytham also had
dealt with in an Arabic text possibly translated by Gerard
of Cremona. Thus, ‘‘optics’’ again is about the knowledge
of how to effect change in nature – in this case by reﬂecting
the light of the sun to cause something to burn.
Thus, we see how the Arabs contributed both to the
theoretical natural philosophy in the West and to what
were regarded as the practical branches of natural science.
The former became ﬁrmly embedded in the curricula of
western universities and the paths of their dissemination
can be followed in detail. The latter (with the exception of
certain branches of medicine and occasionally astrology)
were not included in the teaching of the universities, and
their diffusion is more difﬁcult to trace.
See also: ▶Alchemy in the Arab World ▶Aristotle, Arabic
▶al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯,
Abu¯
Nas˙r
▶al-G˙ aza¯lı¯,
Abu¯
H˙ a¯mid
Muh:ammad ▶Ibn Sı¯na¯, Abu¯ ʿAlı¯ (Avicenna)
Bibliography
Primary Sources
(1918) De ortu scientiarum, ed. Baeumker C. Beitra¨ge zur Geschichte der
Philosophie des Mittelalters 19. Aschendorff, Mu¨nster-i.-W
Arabic Texts: Natural Philosophy, Latin Translations of A
91
A

Averroes Cordubensis (2003) Commentum magnum super libros De celo
et mundo Aristotelis, ed. Carmody FJ, Arnzen R. Peeters, Leuven
Avicenna Latinus (1968–2006) Liber primus naturalium, 2 vols. Liber
tertius naturalium, Liber quartus naturalium, Liber de anima seu
sextus de naturalibus, 2 vols, ed. Van Riet S et al. Peeters/Brill,
Louvain/Leiden
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ (1953) Cata´logo de las ciencias, ed. Gonza´lez Palencia A.
Consejo
Superior
de
Investigaciones
Cientı´ﬁcas,
Patronato
Mene´ndez y Pelayo, Instituto Miguel Ası´n, Madrid
al-G˙ hazali (1933) Algazel’s Metaphysics. A mediaeval translation, ed.
Muckle JT. St. Michael’s College, Toronto
al-G˙ hazali (1965) Logica Algazelis, ed. Lohr CH. Traditio 21:223–290
Gundissalinus Dominicus (1903) De divisione philosophiae, ed. Baur L.
Beitra¨ge zur Geschichte der Philosophie des Mittelalters, IV, 2.
Aschendorff, Mu¨nster-i.-W
Secondary Sources
Bertolacci A (2010) A community of translators: the Latin medieval
versions of Avicenna’s Kita¯b al-Shifa¯’ (Book of the Cure). Commu-
nities of learning. In: Mews C, Crossley JN, Brepols, Turnhout,
Networks and the Shaping of Intellectual Identity in Europe,
1100–1500
Burnett Ch (2005) Arabic into Latin: the reception of Arabic philosophy
into western Europe. In: Adamson P, Taylor RC (eds) The Cambridge
companion to Arabic philosophy. Cambridge University Press, Cam-
bridge, pp 370–404
d’Alverny M-Th (1993) Avicenne en Occident. Recueil d’articles. Vrin,
Paris
Endress G, Aertsen J (eds) (1999) Averroes and the Aristotelian tradition:
sources, constitution, and reception of the philosophy of Ibn Rushd
(1126–1198). Brill, Leiden
Hasse DN (2000) Avicenna’s De anima in the Latin West. The Warburg
Institute/Nino Aragno Editore, London/Turin
Hasse DN (2010) Latin Averroes Translations of the First Half of the
Thirteenth Century. Olms, Hildesheim
Janssens J (2006) Ibn Sıˆnaˆ and his inﬂuence on the Arabic and Latin
World. Ashgate/Variorum, Aldershot
Arabic Texts: Philosophy,
Latin Translations of
ANNA AKASOY
Oriental Institute
Oxford
UK
Abstract
In the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, a vast body of
philosophical and scientiﬁc literature by Greek and Arabic
authors was translated from Arabic into Latin. The trans-
lation movement peaked with the School of Toledo and
the translators Gundissalinus and Gerard of Cremona in
the twelfth century and with the court of Frederick II and
the translator Michael Scot in the thirteenth century. It
was in the frontier regions between the Muslim and Chris-
tian realms, where learned individuals with the necessary
linguistic skills were present, that the translations took
place. In the area of philosophy, the impact of the trans-
lations can be seen in a renewed interest in the interpre-
tation of the works of Aristotle and other Greek authors,
shaped by their Arabic translators and interpreters, and in
a transformation of the curriculum of philosophical learn-
ing as expressed in the teaching of the subject as well as in
its conceptual shape. While it was mainly courts with their
high-ranking patrons and rich resources that offered
a social, intellectual, and institutional context for the
translations, the later reception of the translated works
took also place at universities. While some translators
embarked on political careers or left, like Gundissalinus,
their own, sometimes highly signiﬁcant marks in the phil-
osophical tradition of the West, other translators survive
only with their names. Jews played a particularly impor-
tant role in these transmissions. Several philosophical
works originally written in Arabic, in particular, by
Averroes, have not been preserved in their original form
but survive only in Latin translations. Even though
religious texts were translated for polemical purposes,
anti-Islamic motives did not affect attitudes to Arabic
philosophy in the Latin West.
Introduction
In the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, a vast body of
philosophical and scientiﬁc literature by Greek and Arabic
authors was translated from Arabic into Latin. The trans-
lation movement peaked with the School of Toledo in the
twelfth and the court of Frederick II in the thirteenth
century. In the area of philosophy, categories of texts
translated include (1) Greek works (mostly by Aristotle
and his commentators) previously translated into Arabic,
(2) summaries and quaestios by Greek and Arabic authors
which deal with questions arising from Aristotle’s works,
(3) systematic treatises on falsafa (most importantly
Avicenna’s Shifa¯’ (Cure) and al-G˙ aza¯lı¯’s Maqa¯s:id al-fala¯sifa
(Intentions of the Philosophers)), (4) commentaries (most
importantly,
Averroes’
commentaries
on
Aristotle),
(5) doxography (Burnett 2005:370–371). The recovery of
Aristotle’s books via Arabic happened at about the same
time as the Latin translation of his works from Greek by
James of Venice (ﬂ. 1125–1150) and Burgundio of Pisa
(d. 1193). The Arabic versions had the advantage of bring-
ing with them a much longer tradition of interpretations,
that is, in addition to the late antique works mainly of
92 A
Arabic Texts: Philosophy, Latin Translations of

Alexander of Aphrodisias and Themistius, those by the
Arabic authorities. Sometimes it was through the lemmata
in Averroes’ Long Commentaries that a work by Aristotle
became widely available to the Latin readers, as was the
case with the Physics, De anima, and the Metaphysics,
whose Graeco-Latin ‘vetus’ translation was in a sense
superseded by Michael Scot’s translations of Averroes’
commentaries. On the other hand, the De caelo became
available for the ﬁrst time through the translation of
Averroes’ commentary.
Not unlike the Greco-Arabic translation movement in
‘Abba¯sid Baghdad in the eighth–tenth centuries, the ori-
gins of the Arabo-Latin translation movement lay in an
interest in science and medicine. The geographical center
was in the north-western Mediterranean where, in the late
tenth century, Latin texts about astrology including
excerpts from Arabic works circulated in Catalonia. The
ﬁrst well-known translator was Constantine the African
(d. before 1098–1099), who brought books about medi-
cine from Kairouan to the medical school in Salerno and
then to the Benedictine monastery of Montecassino where
he translated them. This project was continued in the ﬁrst
half of the twelfth century by Stephen of Antioch in Pisa.
In addition to texts by Isaac Israeli (ninth–tenth centuries)
and his disciple Ibn al-Jazza¯r, the most important of these
works was the Pantegni by ʿAlı¯b. al-ʿAbba¯s al-Maju¯sı¯(Haly
Abbas). The translators went beyond the area of medicine
with their interest in texts about natural science and
established thereby a new ﬁeld of learning which
supplemented the seven liberal arts of the traditional cur-
riculum. Alongside philosophy which gained importance
in subsequent years, medicine and science, in particular
astronomy and astrology, remained important areas of
translation.
It was in the second quarter of the twelfth century that
the interest in philosophy increased due to the attention
devoted to it at the School of Chartres which already
aimed at a combination of Plato’s and Aristotle’s doc-
trines, a tendency which was later supported by the phil-
osophical literature translated from Arabic. Apart from
northern Italy, the translators were active in modern-day
Spain and France. The most famous among them were
Hermann of Carinthia (ﬂ. 1138–1143), Robert of Ketton
(ﬂ. 1141–1156), Rudolph of Bruges (ﬂ. 1144), Hugo of
Santalla (ﬂ. 1151), and Raymond of Marseilles (ﬂ. 1141).
Hermann’s own De essentiis (1143) was inspired by Arabic
sources; his ﬁve essences (cause, movement, place, time,
and habitudo) have parallels in works by Abu¯ Bakr al-Ra¯zı¯,
Pseudo-Apollonius, and al-Kindı¯. Furthermore, Hermann
cites Abu¯ Maʿshar’s Great Introduction to Astrology which
he had translated three years before composing De
essentiis.
Another trend that can be identiﬁed in this context is
the signiﬁcance of anti-Islamic polemics. In 1141,
Robert of Ketton translated for Peter the Venerable of
Cluny various Islamic texts, among them the Qurʾa¯n
and the Apologia of al-Kindı¯ (a tenth-century Christian,
not to be confused with the Muslim philosopher of the
ninth century mentioned above). The more literal trans-
lation of the Qurʾa¯n that Mark of Toledo completed in
around 1210 had far less inﬂuence; it was Robert’s
translation that was printed for the ﬁrst time in 1543.
Even though the polemical tradition thus persisted, the
Muslim identity of most Arabic philosophers did not
constitute a problem for Christian translators and inter-
preters who challenged their views on purely philosophi-
cal grounds. Furthermore, works which Arabic authors
had written on genuinely Islamic matters were not trans-
lated into Latin, which explains why, for example,
Averroes as the author of the philosophical and medical
texts translated into Latin is somewhat different from
Ibn Rushd as the author of a much larger corpus of texts
in Arabic.
The School of Toledo and Gundissalinus
In the middle of the twelfth century, the geographical
center of the translations from Arabic into Latin was
established in Toledo which became home to a more pro-
fessional enterprise. The city, conquered in 1085 by
the Christian armies, offered a number of advantages:
the availability of Arabic books, the predominance of the
Arabic language, the presence of learned Latin clergy and
of Jewish scholars who had escaped from the persecutions
in Almohad al-Andalus. The ‘‘School of Toledo’’ produced
translations of works of Aristotle and his Greek commen-
tators from their Arabic versions as well as of later com-
mentaries and more independent works originally written
in
Arabic.
Its
two
protagonists
were
Dominicus
Gundissalinus (or Gundisalvi) (c. 1110–1190), Archdea-
con of Cue´llar (in the Diocese of Segovia), and Gerard of
Cremona (1114–1187). Both of them were assisted by
native speakers of Arabic, among them Abraham b.
Daud (Avendauth), a Jewish philosopher who had left
Almohad
Cordoba
and
who
cooperated
with
Gundissalinus. While Gerard’s translations reﬂect the
interest in Aristotle himself and the ‘‘second teacher’’,
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, which was predominant among Muslim philos-
ophers of Spain, the texts translated in Gundissalinus’
circle, most notably parts of Avicenna’s Shifa¯’, al-G˙ aza¯lı¯’s
Maqa¯s:id al-fala¯sifa, and Ibn Gabirol’s Fons vitae, mirror
Arabic Texts: Philosophy, Latin Translations of A
93
A

philosophical tendencies among the Jews of the Iberian
Peninsula.
Al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s Enumeration of the Sciences (Ih:s:a¯’ al-ʿulu¯m)
had an important impact on Gundissalinus as well as on
Gerard. While the former based his own De scientiis on it,
the latter used it as a program for his translation activities.
As is obvious from a list of his translations posthumously
compiled by his students, Gerard followed al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s cat-
alog, which offers short descriptions of Aristotle’s works
on logic and natural sciences, by translating the Posterior
Analytics ﬁrst and then proceeding with the Physics, De
caelo, De generatione et corruptione, and Meteora, books
I–III (Burnett 2001). Of particular signiﬁcance is the fact
that the place of Aristotle’s Metaphysics among Gerard’s
translations was occupied by the Liber de causis, an anon-
ymous treatise that circulated in Arabic under the title
Kita¯b fı¯ khayr al-mah:d˙ (Book of the Pure Goodness). The
Latin version became enormously popular and, since
1255, part of the curriculum at the Faculty of Arts in
Paris (Fidora and Niederberger 2001:226). Based on Pro-
clus’ Elements of Theology, it presented a Neoplatonic
cosmology and metaphysics. It is here that the Arabic
contribution to the transmission of Greek philosophy
becomes visible, since the Neoplatonic interpretation of
Aristotle’s philosophy and the assumption that Aristotle
and Plato agreed on key philosophical matters were –
although not unprecedented in the Latin West – part of
the Arabic legacy. Thomas Aquinas, however, identiﬁed
the author correctly with Proclus. Aristotle’s Metaphysics
only became prominent in the Latin West in the thirteenth
century after the translation of Averroes’ Long Commen-
tary which included the complete text in the form of
lemmata, and later through William of Moerbeke’s trans-
lation. The term ‘‘metaphysics’’, which had already
appeared
in
manuscripts
of
Boethius’
works,
was
established as a term for a philosophical discipline in the
Latin West only through Gundissalinus’ On the Division of
Philosophy which was informed by various Latin and Ara-
bic texts translated in Toledo. The impact of this text was
even greater – Gundissalinus introduced here basic prin-
ciples such as the division of disciplines according to their
subject matter or that a science cannot demonstrate the
existence of its own subject matter (Fidora 2003). While
the sciences remain independent, they are also interrelated
since they can be considered subordinate to one another.
This principle had further implications for metaphysics.
Gundissalinus endorsed Avicenna’s argument presented in
the Metaphysics (Ila¯hiyya¯t) of his Shifa¯’, that since meta-
physics is concerned with proving the existence of God, its
subject matter cannot be God, but rather being as being.
Averroes was to disagree with Avicenna, assign the proof of
the existence of God to the area of physics, and include
God among separable beings as the subject matter of
metaphysics (Bertolacci 2006, 2007). Later Latin authors
continued to disagree about the subject. The distinction
between essence and existence is another important con-
cept derived from Avicenna’s Metaphysics. His inﬂuence is
obvious too in Gundissalinus’ De processione mundi,
which is also informed by Ibn Gabirol, Hugh of Saint
Victor, Abraham b. Daud, and Hermann of Carinthia.
Following Avicenna, Gundissalinus describes the ﬁrst
cause as necessary being from which all created beings,
which have only possible existence, emanate. Another
Farabian legacy mediated by Gundissalinus is the division
of logic into eight parts including the Rhetoric and Poetic,
and the distinction of ﬁve kinds of syllogisms.
The translations made in Gundissalinus’ circle reﬂect
his personal philosophical interests, in addition to the
issues mentioned above, most notably, in the subject of
soul and intellect. The Latin interest in these matters may
have been inspired by Qust:a¯ b. Lu¯qa¯’s On the Difference
Between the Spirit and the Soul, translated by John of
Seville for Raymond, the archbishop of Toledo (1125–
1152) (Burnett 2005:376). While the text itself enjoyed
great popularity, further texts were added from the
Gundissalinus circle, among them the part on the soul
from Avicenna’s Shifa¯’ and texts on the intellect by
Alexander of Aphrodisias, al-Kindı¯, and al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯. The
great importance of Arabic works suggests that Aristote-
lian philosophy may have been found wanting in this
respect. An inﬂuential concept included in the Shifa¯’ was
the fourfold division of the states of the human intellect:
the material, in habitu, in effectu, and the acquired intel-
lect. While the ﬁrst three stages are characterized by dif-
ferent degrees of potentiality, the acquired intellect is in
actuality when it connects with the active intellect and
considers the middle terms of the syllogism (Hasse 1999).
Related to this area was another original import from
Arabic philosophy, namely, the notion of happiness
involving divine knowledge as the conjunction of the
individual human intellect with the active intellect as
conveyed by Averroes and his son Abu¯ Muh:ammad
ʿAbdalla¯h in two texts translated in the thirteenth century
(Burnett 1999a). The very concept of the active intellect as
a separate entity is prominent among Arabic authors such
as al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, Avicenna, and Averroes, and following Avi-
cenna, this active intellect has been identiﬁed with God by
authors such as Vincent of Beauvais and Roger Bacon
(Gilson’s Augustinisme avicennisant), a theory rejected by
others including Thomas Aquinas (Hasse 2000:200–221).
94 A
Arabic Texts: Philosophy, Latin Translations of

Among Avicenna’s contributions to Latin philosophy,
the ﬁve ‘‘inner senses’’ (common sense, imagination,
cogitative faculty, estimation, and memory) which are
not present in Aristotle’s works and are closer to Galen
also deserve mentioning. Another import was the deﬁni-
tion of the subject matter of logic as presented in the Shifa¯’,
that is, as dealing with second-order concepts (‘‘second
intentions’’), which made logic an independent discipline
and not merely a tool. Post-Avicennian developments in
Arabic logic, however, were largely ignored by the Latin
recipients (Street 2005:248). Likewise, philosophical con-
cepts of prophecy which are prominent in al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s
works remained unknown in the Latin West.
The program of the ‘‘School of Toledo’’ was continued
by Alfred of Shareshill (late twelfth century), Michael Scot
(left Toledo after 1217, d. before 1236), and Hermann the
German (mid-thirteenth century). They merged the two
traditions of Gundissalinus and Gerard and tried to
complete the program extracted from al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s list of
philosophical disciplines. Hermann is credited with the
translation
of
Averroes’
Middle
Commentaries
on
the Poetics (the only text relating to Aristotle’s Poetics
available in the Middle Ages), on the Nicomachean Ethics,
and on the Rhetoric as well as Aristotle’s Rhetoric proper,
which Hermann supplemented with passages from
the corresponding works by al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, Avicenna, and
Averroes. These translations reached Paris within a short
period and some of them became very inﬂuential.
Frederick II and Michael Scot
The milieu of Latin translations of Arabic philosophical
texts changed considerably in the thirteenth century
with secular rulers, most notably Frederick II Hohenstau-
fen (reg. until 1250) and Alfonso X of Castile and
Leon (reg. 1256–1284), providing patronage and taking
a personal interest. This was crucial for the transmission of
Arabic philosophical and scientiﬁc ideas into western
Europe.
Frederick hosted at his court Michael Scot, Theodore
of Antioch (who translated the Moamin from Arabic for
Frederick, arguably the most inﬂuential medieval text on
falconry), and Jacob Anatoli who translated Averroes’
Middle Commentaries on the Isagoge, the Categories, De
interpretatione, and the Prior and Posterior Analytics from
Arabic into Hebrew. Subject of the debates at court was
also the Guide of the Perplexed which Maimonides had
written in Arabic and of which Frederick may have
commissioned a Latin translation. With the University of
Naples, founded by Frederick in 1224, the emperor con-
tributed to the creation of the intellectual context in which
the ideas included in the Arabic texts were most vividly
received, debated, and adapted.
Michael Scot was probably the most important trans-
lator of the thirteenth century. Having started his career in
Toledo, where he translated Aristotle’s books on animals,
he spent time in Rome and Bologna and established
himself at Frederick’s court in Sicily in the 1230s. In his
Italian phase, Michael translated Avicenna’s Abbreviatio de
animalibus, Averroes’ Long Commentaries on the Physics,
De caelo, De anima, and the Metaphysics, the Middle
Commentaries on De generatione et corruptione and parts
of De animalibus, the Epitome of De caelo, De animalibus,
and Parva naturalia, Averroes’ De substantia orbis, and
the treatise on the intellect by Averroes’ son mentioned
above. Because of their less literal style, these translations
were more intelligible than earlier ones and became very
popular. The books on animals, for example, were impor-
tant sources for Albert the Great’s works on the subject
who based his Quaestiones super libris de animalibus on
these translations. In addition to the translations, Michael
left his own trace as the author of the Liber introductorius
consisting of the Liber quatuor distinctionum (an intro-
ductory compendium of natural sciences), the Liber
particularis which includes questions from Frederick,
and the Liber Physiognomie. Preliminary studies of the
text suggest that it is informed by Arabic sources.
Michael’s translations of Averroes’ Long Commentaries
are particularly important since they provided new
translations
of
the
complete
texts
of
Aristotle’s
corresponding works.
Another key text for questions relating to soul and
intellect possibly translated by Michael was Averroes’
Long Commentary on De anima which is not preserved
in the Arabic original. Averroes’ commentary contained
crucial material for later debates about Averroism and the
Parisian condemnations of 1270 and 1277, in particular
what is usually interpreted as the denial of the immortality
of the individual soul in favor of an intellect common to
all humanity and the resulting conﬂict with revealed reli-
gion. Another doctrine associated with Averroism is the
eternity of the world that had already been the matter of
great debate in Arabic sources. Texts such as al-G˙ aza¯lı¯’s
Maqa¯s:id al-fala¯sifa or Maimonides’ Guide for the Perplexed
offered Latin authors a variety of arguments for and
against this theory (Davidson 1987).
The project was continued under Frederick’s son
Manfred and Charles of Anjou. William of Luna translated
at Manfred’s court Averroes’ Middle Commentaries
on
the
Isagoge,
the
Categories,
and
probably
De
interpretatione, possibly also the Prior and Posterior
Arabic Texts: Philosophy, Latin Translations of A
95
A

Analytics, even though these texts did not exercise a great
inﬂuence. Manfred himself is mentioned in the prologue
to the text as having translated the pseudo-Aristotelian
Liber de pomo, but he was probably only the patron. An
enormously inﬂuential pseudo-Aristotelian text is the
‘‘Fu¨rstenspiegel’’ Secretum secretorum, translated from
Arabic into Latin by Philipp of Tripoli, a high-ranking
man of the church. Philosophy was less important
among the texts translated at Alfonso’s court where the
interest in astrology and astronomy dominated. In addi-
tion to this patronage, the exchanges between Latin
scholars and Arabic native speakers became more frequent
and vivid, and Latin scholars developed a more indepen-
dent attitude to Arabic philosophy.
Translations mostly stopped at the end of the thirteenth
century. A notable exception is the translation of Averroes’
Taha¯fut al-Taha¯fut (The Incoherence of the Incoherence) in
1328 for Robert of Anjou, King of Naples. Until then, only
Averroes’ more strictly philosophical texts had been
translated. Arabic philosophical texts were also used
and translated among Catalan missionaries of the period.
Ramon Llull (1232–1315) who campaigned successfully
for the foundation of schools to teach Arabic to future
missionaries composed a Latin prose and a Catalan
verse version of the logic of al-G˙ aza¯lı¯’s Maqa¯s:id al-fala¯sifa.
In his Pugio ﬁdei, the Dominican Ramo´n Martı´ (c. 1220–
1285) used a variety of Arabic texts not available in Latin at
that point, among them Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s commentary on the Phys-
ics, Avicenna’s Pointers and Reminders and Kita¯b al-naja¯t,
various texts by al-G˙ aza¯lı¯ (Taha¯fut al-fala¯sifa, al-Munqidh
min al-d˙ala¯l, Mı¯za¯n al-ʿamal, Mishka¯t al-anwa¯r, Ih:ya¯’
ʿulu¯m
al-dı¯n, Kita¯b al-tawba and al-Maqs:ad), and
Averroes’ Taha¯fut al-Taha¯fut and Damı¯ma. The writings
of Albert the Great too show evidence of the knowledge of
Arabic works which had not been translated completely
into Latin.
The translations were resumed in the Renaissance
due to the perceived necessity to revise the poor Latin
style of the medieval versions. As in earlier centuries,
Jewish translators and scholars were of great signiﬁcance
for the further transmission. At least 38 of Averroes’
commentaries had been translated into Hebrew from
the early thirteenth century onward, and scholars like
Gersonides had written super-commentaries on them.
In the Renaissance, Latin translations of philosophical
texts originally written in Arabic were often based on
Hebrew intermediary versions.
See also: ▶Albert the Great ▶Alexander of Aphrodisias
and Arabic Aristotelianism ▶Alexandrian Tradition into
Arabic: Philosophy ▶Arabic Texts, Jewish Translations of
▶Arabic Texts: Natural Philosophy, Latin Translations
of ▶Aristotelianism in the Greek, Latin, Syriac, Arabic,
and Hebrew Traditions ▶Aristotle, Arabic ▶Aristotle,
Arabic: Physics ▶Aristotle, Arabic: Poetics ▶Astronomy
and Astrology in the Arab World ▶Avicebron ▶Being
▶Boethius ▶De caelo, Commentaries on Aristotle’s
▶Dominicus Gundissalinus ▶Essence and Existence
▶Ethics ▶al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, Abu¯ Nas˙r ▶al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, Latin Trans-
lations
of
▶al-G˙ aza¯lı¯,
Abu¯
H˙ a¯mid
Muh:ammad
▶al-G˙ aza¯lı¯ʾs Maqa¯s:id al-Fala¯sifa, Latin Translation of
▶Gerard of Cremona ▶Ibn Rushd (Averroes), Latin
Translations of ▶Ibn Rushd, Muh˙ammad ibn Ah˙mad al-
H˙ afı¯d (Averroes) ▶Ibn Sı¯na¯, Abu¯ ʿAlı¯ (Avicenna) ▶Ibn
Sı¯na¯ (Avicenna), Latin Translations of ▶Isaac Israeli
▶al-Kindı¯, Abu¯ Yu¯suf Yaʿqu¯b ibn Ish:a¯q ▶al-Kindı¯, Latin
Translations of ▶Liberal Arts ▶Logic, Arabic, in the Latin
Middle Ages ▶Logic in the Arab and Islamic World
▶Metaphysics ▶Mirrors for Princes ▶Moses Maimoni-
des ▶Natural Philosophy ▶Natural Philosophy, Arabic
▶Nicomachean
Ethics,
Commentaries
on
Aristotle’s
▶Parisian Condemnation of 1277 ▶Philosophical Psy-
chology
▶Philosophy,
Arabic
▶Philosophy,
Jewish
▶Posterior
Analytics,
Commentaries
on
Aristotle’s
▶Prior Analytics, Commentaries on Aristotle’s ▶Proclus,
Arabic ▶Ramon Llull ▶Roger Bacon ▶Schools in the
Twelfth Century ▶Themistius, Arabic ▶Thomas Aquinas
▶Translations from Greek into Arabic ▶Universities and
Philosophy
Bibliography
Primary Sources
For a list of editions of Latin translations of Arabic philosophical texts see
Burnett (2005)
Secondary Sources
Bertolacci A (2006) The reception of Aristotle’s metaphysics in Avicenna’s
Kita¯b al-Sˇifa¯’. A milestone of western metaphysical thought. Brill,
Leiden
Bertolacci A (2007) Avicenna and Averroes on the proof of God’s existence
and the subject-matter of metaphysics. Medioevo 32:61–97
Burnett C (1999a) The ‘Sons of Averroes with the Emperor Frederick’ and
the transmission of the philosophical works by Ibn Rushd. In:
Endress G, Aertsen JA (eds) Averroes and the Aristotelian tradition.
Sources, constitution and reception of the philosophy of Ibn Rushd
(1126–1198). Brill, Leiden, pp 259–299
Burnett C (1999b) The second revelation of Arabic philosophy and
science: 1492–1575. In: Burnett C, Contadini A (eds) Islam and the
Italian Renaissance. Warburg Institute, London, pp 185–198
Burnett C (2001) The coherence of the Arabic-Latin translation program
in Toledo in the twelfth century. Sci Context 14:249–288
Burnett C (2005) Arabic into Latin: the reception of Arabic philosophy
into western Europe. In: Adamson P, Taylor R (eds) The Cambridge
companion to Arabic philosophy. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, pp 370–404
96 A
Arabic Texts: Philosophy, Latin Translations of

Burnett C, Jacquart D (eds) (1994) Constantine the African and ʿAlı¯ ibn
al-ʿAbba¯s al-Magˇu¯sı¯: the Pantegni and related texts. Brill, Leiden
Daiber H (1990) Lateinische U¨ bersetzungen arabischer Texte zur
Philosophie und ihre Bedeutung fu¨r die Scholastik des Mittelalters.
In: Hamesse J, Fattori M (eds) Rencontres de cultures dans la
philosophie me´die´vale. Traductions et traducteurs de l’antiquite´
tardive au XVIe sie`cle. Universite´ catholique de Louvain, Louvain-
la-Neuve, pp 203–250
Davidson HA (1987) Proofs for eternity, creation and the existence of God
in medieval Islamic and Jewish philosophy. Oxford University Press,
New York
De la Cruz O´ , Romano MMM (2008) The human realm. In: Fidora A,
Rubio JE (eds) Raimundus Lullus. An introduction to his life, works
and thought. Brepols, Turnhout, pp 363–459
Fidora A (2003) Die Wissenschaftstheorie des Dominicus Gundissalinus.
Voraussetzungen und Konsequenzen des zweiten Anfangs der
aristotelischen Philosophie im 12. Jahrhundert. Akademie, Berlin
Fidora A, Niederberger A (2001) Von Bagdad nach Toledo. Das ‘‘Buch der
Ursachen’’ und seine Rezeption im Mittelalter. Lateinisch-deutscher
Text, Kommentar und Wirkungsgeschichte des Liber de causis.
Dieterich’sche Verlagsbuchhandlung, Mainz
Hasse DN (1999) Das Lehrstu¨ck von den vier Intellekten in der Scholastik:
von den arabischen Quellen bis zu Albertus Magnus. Rech The´ol
Philos Me´die´v 66:21–77
Hasse DN (2000) Avicenna’s De Anima in the Latin West. The formation
of a Peripatetic philosophy of the soul, 1160–1300. Warburg Insti-
tute/Nino Aragno Editore, London/Turin
Hasse DN (2006) The social conditions of the Arabic-(Hebrew-) Latin
translation movements in medieval Spain and in the Renaissance. In:
Speer A, Wegener L (eds) Wissen u¨ber Grenzen. Arabisches Wissen
und lateinisches Mittelalter. Gruyter, Berlin, pp 68–86, 806
Hasse DN (2008) Inﬂuence of Arabic and Islamic philosophy on the Latin
West. In: Stanford encyclopedia of philosophy. http://plato.stanford.
edu/
Jolivet J (1988) The Arabic inheritance. In: Dronke P (ed) A history of
twelfth-century western philosophy. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, pp 113–148
Kischlat H (2000) Studien zur Verbreitung von U¨ bersetzungen arabischer
philosophischer Werke in Westeuropa 1150–1400. Das Zeugnis der
Bibliotheken. Aschendorff, Mu¨nster
Lemay RJ (1962) Abu Ma’shar and Latin Aristotelianism in the twelfth
century. The recovery of Aristotle’s natural philosophy through
Arabic astrology. Catholic Press, Beirut
Street T (2005) Logic. In: Adamson P, Taylor R (eds) The Cambridge
companion to Arabic philosophy. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, pp 247–265
Arabic Themistius
▶Themistius, Arabic
Arabic Theophrastus
▶Theophrastus, Arabic
Arethas of Caesarea
JOZEF MATULA
Department of Philosophy, Center for Medieval and
Renaissance Philosophy
Palacky University
Olomouc
Czech Republic
Abstract
Arethas is a representative of ‘‘the ﬁrst Byzantine Renais-
sance’’ and a major ﬁgure in the transitional period of
Byzantine intellectual history in the ninth and tenth cen-
turies. He commented on ancient philosophical works and
recognized the importance of philosophical learning. He
provided a transcription of a complete copy of Plato’s
works to which he added marginal notes. He is the author
of a collection of scholia on Aristotle’s texts. His impor-
tance as a student of Aristotle’s works consists in his
adoption of late Alexandrian Neoplatonism and his
dependence on Porphyry’s ontology. Arethas promoted
encyclopedic curiosity and encouraged the copying of
ancient manuscripts. Much of our knowledge of Greek
antiquity is the direct result of his work.
Biographical Information
Arethas of Caesarea, scholar and politician, archbishop of
Caesarea (from 902), born in Patras in the middle of the
ninth century, died between 932 and 944. Together with
Photios and Leo the Mathematician he represents what
would later be called the ‘‘ﬁrst Byzantine Renaissance’’
(Lemerle 1971). Arethas was preoccupied with the com-
pilation of lexicons and the preservation of classical works.
He copied, commented, and lectured on the texts of
ancient philosophers (Aristotle, Porphyry) and played an
important role in the transmission of the philosophical
traditions of antiquity into Byzantium. He annotated the
margins of classical texts with numerous scholia (many of
which are preserved), and copied and commented on
several other texts (the nearly complete surviving manu-
scripts
of
Euclid’s
Elements,
Pollux,
Clement
of
Alexandria, Aelius Aristides, Athenaeus, Athenagoras,
Dio Chrysostom, Epictetus, Hesychius, Julian, Marcus
Aurelius, Pausanias, Strabo). He played an important
role as a commissioner of philosophical manuscripts of
Plato (Oxon. Bodl. Clarke ms.39, Vatic. gr. 1, Paris. gr.
1807) and Aristotle (Vatic. Urb. 35), which are among the
most valuable testimonies to Plato’s and Aristotle’s texts
(Wilson 1983). Arethas commented on works by Aristotle
Arethas of Caesarea A
97
A

(Categories) and Porphyry (Isagoge), and he wrote critical
notes on logic, ontology, and psychology. Arethas is also
thought as one of the most scholarly theologians of the
Church and an important compiler of the oldest extant
Greek commentary on the Apocalypse (based primarily on
that of Andrew of Caesarea). After 902, he turned toward
various theological topics (his defense against the accusa-
tions of paganism). He wrote exegetical works, letters,
homilies, and pamphlets. Arethas paved the way for the
revival of Byzantine rhetoric, he rejected the ideal of plain
speech, and followed Hermogenes of Tarsus in the belief
that obscurity can at times be a virtue. Thus, his language
is adorned with proverbs, quotations, allusions, and poetic
lines. Among the ancient authors, Plato, Aristotle, and
Homer are most often mentioned in Arethas’ works.
Thought
Apart from the preservation of the ancient texts, Arethas
deals with various philosophical issues (metaphysics,
anthropology). He is usually viewed as a Platonizing
thinker, mainly because of the considerable editing and
his extensive scholia on the Platonic dialogues (Westerink
and Laourdas 1962; Brumbaugh 1961). The proof of his
scholarly concern for Plato’s texts are the marginal notes to
Plato’s works (Oxon. Bodl. Clarke ms.39). He has a certain
ambivalence toward Plato, expressing sometimes criticism
(Charmides 155D) and sometimes positive appreciation
(Phaedo 114C). It is not sure whether he wrote
a systematic explanation of Plato’s treatises or whether
these are only personal notes to certain issues or subject
notes made in connection with sources that were available
at that moment.
From the philosophical point of view, Arethas revived
interest in Aristotle in Byzantine thought (Oehler 1964).
He is the author of detailed comments on the ﬁrst ﬁve
chapters of Aristotle’s Categories (up to 4b15) and on
Porphyry’s Isagoge (entire text). Arethas’ text demon-
strates dependence on earlier commentaries, though it
became a supplement to the extant Neoplatonic commen-
taries (Kotzia-Panteli 1996). He wrote marginal notes
in his text, which is the oldest surviving manuscript
of Porphyry’s Isagoge (Vatic. Urb. 35). He opposes
Porphyry’s critics and praises his clarity. Commenting on
Porphyry, he identiﬁes universals with genera and species,
supposing that every difference, property, and accident is
also a genus or a species (wisdom is an accident of Socrates
but it is also a species of virtue). The commentary on the
Categories shows that Arethas was using Aristotle’s text
primarily to expound within its framework the Neopla-
tonic ontology. In general, Arethas’ scholia to Aristotle
express ambiguities in his attitude toward the ancient
philosopher; although in his Letter to Stephanus written
about 907 (Westerink 1968, vol. 1, p. 325, line 15–27) he
gives the impression of being close to Aristotle, his com-
mentaries and some other letters (e.g. Letter to Niketas,
written after 907) demonstrate Arethas’ criticism of
Aristotle.
Arethas frequently involved scribes who excerpted and
adapted material from earlier commentaries, particularly
in the case of the logical treatises that were widely used in
higher education in Byzantium. Although Arethas’ atti-
tude to Aristotle and his logic is not very clear, he is a critic
of Aristotle on doctrinal issues that are considered funda-
mental to Christian thought (the theory of soul, sub-
stance). On the other hand with the help of Porphyry
and the Neoplatonic commentators, he understands the
importance of Aristotle’s doctrine of categories.
Arethas’ Christian thought and his distance from
Aristotle can be seen in his treatment of the notion of
the rational soul. Arethas rejects the doctrine of rational
soul, which he considers to be Aristotle’s, but which is
actually never used by Aristotle himself. Arethas does
not realize this mistake, which resulted from a misreading
of The Nicomachean Ethics (Letter to Niketas). The expres-
sion logike psyche comes from Neoplatonic thought
(Plotinus, Proclus) and was discussed by Arethas and
other Christian thinkers. Arethas’ teaching on the rational
soul is in agreement with the teachings of the Greek
Fathers (Gregory of Nyssa) that the soul and the body
are created simultaneously and their coexistence is deﬁnite
from the very beginning. The rational soul does not have
the attributes of the sperm or of the father of the rational
being, but of God, because it is produced by God (Benakis
1972).
Arethas, just like many other Byzantine commentators
after
him
(Psellos,
Blemmydes,
Sophonias,
George
Scholarios), raises the issue of the number of Aristotle’s
categories. According to Arethas, the category of substance
should be placed ﬁrst, because substance is by nature prior
to the other categories. The priority of substance is char-
acterized by indestructibility (substance is not destroyed
when other categories are, but with the destruction of
substance all categories are destroyed), self-existence (sub-
stance is prior to what exists depending on other things),
and singleness (substance is single, the accidents are many,
and one always precedes many). Arethas analyzes, too, the
order of the categories and he reverses Aristotle’s order to
introduce the category of quality before the category of
pros ti, which indicates the inﬂuence of Neoplatonic com-
mentators (Ierodiakonou 2005).
Moreover, Arethas’ scholium on Categories 2a11–19
provides him with the grounds to replace Aristotle’s
98 A
Arethas of Caesarea

distinction between the ﬁrst and second substance with
the Neoplatonic sixfold variety of the meanings of the
notion of substance (Anton 1997). Arethas redeﬁnes sub-
stance in a theological way and he endeavors to incorpo-
rate the Plotinian theory of hypostatic beings. He thus
moved away from his earlier Aristotelianizing Neoplatonic
treatment of the Categories and tried to deﬁne substance as
a genus of being in order to accommodate the divine
being. He classiﬁed substances into simple substances,
that is, soul, intellect, and God, and complex substances,
that is, matter and species.
See also: ▶Aristotelianism in the Greek, Latin, Syriac,
Arabic, and Hebrew Traditions ▶Philosophy, Byzantine
▶Photius of Constantinople ▶Platonism
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Arethas (1968/1972) Arethae archiepiscopi Caesariensis scripta minora,
vols 1–2, ed. Westerink LG. Teubner, Leipzig, vol 1, pp 1–183, 186–
294, 296–340, 342–362; vol 2, pp 1–139
Arethas (1994a) Scholia in Aristotelis categorias, Arethas of Caesarea’s
Scholia on Porphyry’s Isagoge and Aristotle’s Categories (Codex
Vaticanus Urbinas Graecus 35). Corpus philosophorum Medii
Aevi. Commentaria in Aristotelem Byzantina 1, ed. Share M. The
Academy of Science/J. Vrin/E´ditions Ousia, Athens/Paris/ Bruxelles,
pp 131–229
Arethas (1994b) Scholia in Porphyrii eisagogen, Arethas of Caesarea´s
Scholia on Porphyry´s Isagoge and Aristotle’s Categories (Codex
Vaticanus Urbinas Graecus 35). Corpus philosophorum Medii
Aevi. Commentaria in Aristotelem Byzantina 1, ed. Share M. The
Academy of Science/J. Vrin/E´ditions Ousia, Athens/Paris/Bruxelles,
pp 1–130
Secondary Sources
Anton JP (1997) Neoplatonic elements in Arethas´ Scholia on Aristotle
and Porphyry. In: Benakis LG (ed) Ne´oplatonisme et Philosophie
Me´die´val. Actes du Colloque international, Socie´te´ International
pour l’ E´tude de la Philosophie Me´die´val (Octobre 1995). Brepols,
Turnhout pp 291–306
Benakis LG (1972) Ή gέnEsZ tZς lοgikής cυwής stοn ‘ΑristοtέlZ
kai stZ wristianikή skέcZ. ΜE ajοrmή Ena nέο kEίmEnο tο. . ..
Άrέya (Scripta minora I, 343, 1–17 Westerink). Filοsοjίa
2:327–336
Brumbaugh R (1961) Logical and mathematical symbolism in the Pla-
tonic scholars. J Warburg Courtauld Inst 24:45–58
Ierodiakonou K (2005) The Byzantine reception of Aristotle´s categories.
Synthesis Philosophica 39:7–31
Kotzia-Panteli P (1996) On Arethas of Caesarea’s Scholia on Porphyry’s
Isagoge and Aristotle’s Categories. ῾ΕllZnikά 46:396–410
Lemerle P (1971) Le premier humanisme byzantin. Presses Universitaires
de France, Paris
Oehler K (1964) Aristotle in Byzantium. Greek, Roman and Byzantine
Studies 5:133–146
Tatakis B (1949) La philosophie byzantine. Presses Universitaires de
France, Paris
Westerink LG, Laourdas B (1962) Scholia by Arethas in Vindob. Phil. Gr.
314. ῾ΕllZnikά 17:105–131
Whittaker J (1991) Arethas and the ‘Collection philosophique.’ In:
Harlﬁnger D, Prato G (eds) Paleograﬁa e codicologia greca. Atti del
II Colloquio internazionale (Berlino-Wolfenbu¨ttel, 17–21 ottobre
1983). Edizioni dell´Orso, Allesandria, pp 513–521
Wilson NG (1983) Scholars of Byzantium. Duckworth, London, pp
120–135
Aristotelianism in the Greek,
Latin, Syriac, Arabic, and Hebrew
Traditions
JOHN MARENBON
Trinity College
University of Cambridge
Cambridge
UK
Abstract
Aristotle was the most important ancient philosopher for
all four main traditions of medieval philosophy: Greek
philosophy from Byzantium; Latin philosophy; philoso-
phy in Arabic (the work mainly of Muslims, but also Jews
and Christians) and, from the thirteenth century, philos-
ophy written by Jews in Hebrew. All these traditions drew,
directly, or indirectly, on Aristotle as transmitted by the
Neoplatonic schools of late antiquity. But the way in which
the Aristotelian texts were disseminated (in translation,
except in Byzantium) and studied varied in each of these
traditions. And, although all the medieval philosophers
had it in common that they lived in cultures dominated by
a monotheistic religion, the range of attitudes to Aristotle
varied from one to another. This article has the strictly
limited aim of giving enough basic information about
each of these circumstances to enable comparisons to be
made. Fuller treatment of each of the areas it covers will be
found elsewhere in the Encyclopedia. Readers will also
ﬁnd a fuller exposition of most of the particular view
suggested here in Marenbon (2007).
Translations, Availability, and Methods of
Study
Aristotle had his own school of followers in antiquity –
Alexander of Aphrodisias (c. CE 200) was the most famous
and talented of them, Themistius (c. 317–388) probably
the last. But the transmission of Aristotle’s work to medi-
eval philosophers was the result of his inclusion in the
Aristotelianism in the Greek, Latin, Syriac, Arabic, and Hebrew Traditions A
99
A

curriculum of the Neoplatonic schools, since Neoplato-
nism was the dominant school of philosophy in the
ancient world from the third century onwards. The
Neoplatonists believed that Aristotle and Plato did not
disagree. Their apparent differences were the result of
different subject matter: Aristotle concentrated on the
world as it appears to the senses, Plato on supra-sensible
reality. The study of Aristotle, especially his logic, was thus
considered indispensable as a preparation for work on
Plato, and it produced a large number of Aristotelian
commentaries, a number of which survive. Porphyry
(c. 232–305), the ﬁrst of the commentators, was especially
keen to read Aristotelian works in an Aristotelian way;
some of his successors tended, rather, to let their underly-
ing Platonism tinge their reading even of his logical works.
The fullest, though not the most direct, medieval heirs
of this tradition of Aristotelianism were the Arabic philos-
ophers. The Platonic school at Athens had been closed by
Justinian in 529 because it preserved pagan philosophy in
an Empire by now strictly Christian. But the other great
Platonic school, at Alexandria, remained open until the
Islamic conquest in 641: ﬁrst, its pagan teachers had been
willing to compromise with the Christian authorities; then
it came to be staffed by Christians. In the eighth and ninth
centuries, there was a movement, encouraged by the
‘Abba¯sid caliphs, to take over into Arabic as much as
possible of the Greek texts and learning that survived in
Alexandria. The Arabs were helped in this enterprise by
Syriac-speaking Christians, who had already translated
some of Aristotle’s logic into Syriac, a Semitic language
like Arabic (Hugonnard-Roche 2004). The Syriac scholars
themselves concentrated on logic and, perhaps as a result
of ecclesiastical pressure, favored a shortened logical cur-
riculum, consisting of Porphyry’s Isagoge, the Categories,
On Interpretation, and the Prior Analytics up to the end of
I.7 (avoiding, therefore, modal syllogistic) (Gutas 1999).
But the translation movement into Arabic was not
restrained by such boundaries, encouraged by such men
as al-Kindı¯(c. 801–866), the ﬁrst of the Arab philosophers.
Al-Kindı¯, as a result of translations he had commissioned
and other ones, was thereby able to read considerable
amounts of Aristotle, including his Metaphysics, although
he was more deeply inﬂuenced by the Plotinian material
transmitted under the misleading title of The Theology
of Aristotle. The Baghdad Peripatetics, such as al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯
(c. 870–950/951) and his pupil, the Christian Yah˙ya¯ ibn
‘Adı¯, studied almost the whole Aristotelian corpus in
detail, and produced both short, epitome-type commen-
taries and longer ones (e.g., al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ on On Interpreta-
tion), which comment on the text section by section,
looking in detail at the philosophical difﬁculties it raises,
in the manner of the late ancient commentators (Gutas
1988; Pasnau 2010, Appendix B.3).
The way in which Aristotle was studied changed for
ever in the mainstream Arabic tradition with Avicenna
(before 980–1037). Although Avicenna did write a
section-by-section commentary on Aristotle, which has
been lost, his main works are all philosophical encyclope-
dias, longer or shorter, complex or more simple, in which
he puts forward his own understanding of Aristotle.
Although he usually follows the divisions of Aristotle’s
work (dedicating separate books, or chapters, to physics,
metaphysics, and the soul, e.g.), what he provides, by
conscious contrast with the Baghdad Peripateticians, is
not Aristotle’s doctrine, understood with the help of the
late ancient commentary tradition, but a coherent philo-
sophical system, with many original elements, strongly
inﬂuenced by Aristotle. For most Islamic writers, Avicenna
replaced Aristotle as the primary philosophical authority
(although in logic there was a further move, in which
Avicenna was left behind too, and the subject was taught
through independent text-books) (Street 2004, 2008,
Sect. 1). The main, and as yet little investigated, philo-
sophical tradition everywhere except in the Islamic West
sought to combine Avicennian philosophy with kala¯m, the
Islamic tradition of theological speculation. Independent
study of Aristotle ceased and translations of his works did
not circulate (Gutas 2002). In the West (Islamic Spain and
the Maghreb), an interest in Aristotle’s texts, in the line of
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, grew up in the twelfth century. Its greatest
exponent was Averroes (c. 1126–1198). Averroes made
a series of paraphrase commentaries and short compendia
of almost all Aristotle’s works, and he wrote detailed,
section by section commentaries on ﬁve works, including
On the Soul and the Metaphysics. Averroes’ lifetime’s work
of commentary is the last ﬂourish of any but very indirect
Aristotelianism in the Islamic Arabic tradition. It was
almost totally forgotten in Islam until modern times, but
it had a profound effect on Jewish philosophy and Chris-
tian Latin philosophy.
Until the end of the twelfth century, medieval Jewish
philosophy was written in Arabic and its exponents
worked within a broadly Arabic (as well as Jewish) culture.
Although earlier Jewish philosophers had been inﬂuenced
by Neoplatonism, it was not until Abraham b. Daud
(c. 1160) and Maimonides (d. 1204), both of whom were
educated in Muslim Spain, that Jewish thinkers began to
look at Aristotelianism as the major philosophical system,
to be reconciled or distinguished from their own views. In
the thirteenth, fourteenth, and ﬁfteenth centuries, Jewish
philosophy was carried on most vigorously in Hebrew,
especially among the communities in southern France.
100 A
Aristotelianism in the Greek, Latin, Syriac, Arabic, and Hebrew Traditions

There was an Aristotelian translation movement among
these Jewish scholars, from the Arabic into Hebrew, but
the texts they translated were not (with two exceptions: the
Meteorologica and On the Soul) Aristotle’s own, but
Averroes’ commentaries, all of which (except perhaps
for the long commentary on On the Heavens) were put
into Hebrew; also translated were some of al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s
short expositions of Aristotle (Zonta 1996; Pasnau 2010).
This preference for an indirect approach to Aristotle has
been attributed to the inﬂuence of a letter from Maimon-
ides to Samuel ibn Tibbon, in which he describes
Aristotle’s works as ‘‘the roots and foundations of all the
sciences,’’ but also remarks that they cannot be understood
with
the
help
of
commentaries,
by
Alexander
of
Aphrodisias, Themistius, or Averroes (Harvey 1992). But
Maimonides did not say that they should neglect the texts
themselves altogether in favor of the commentaries:
maybe there were no Arabic versions of Aristotle’s texts
themselves available to them to translate. In any case,
the Jewish writers made the shorter texts of Averroes
and
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ themselves
the
subjects
of
‘‘super-
commentaries.’’
By contrast with Arabic-speakers, the Greeks were the
direct inheritors of the tradition of the late ancient
schools, and there was no problem of translation for
them. The basic course of Aristotelian studies was, how-
ever, quite restricted, including just Porphyry’s Isagoge, the
Categories, On Interpretation, and the Prior Analytics 1.1–7
(as in the Syriac schools) and the Sophistical Refutations
1–7, and extracts from the Meteorology and On Generation
and Corruption. In logic, the tradition of ancient com-
mentary was continued by scholars like Photios in the
ninth century and Michael Psellos and John Italos in the
eleventh century. In the twelfth century, Eustratios and
Michael of Ephesus expanded the range of Aristotelian
commentary. Michael wrote commentaries on parts of
the Ethics and Metaphysics, on various of Aristotle’s
books on natural philosophy and on the Politics;
Eustratios wrote on parts of the Posterior Analytics and of
the Ethics. All these commentaries reuse a great deal of old
material – just as had been done in the ancient schools.
Indeed, one form of Byzantine commentary consists sim-
ply of marginalia collected from a variety of sources, with
an introduction added. But twelfth-century writers like
Eustratios and Michael drew this type of material to make
an integral running commentary on the text. The ten-
dency of the Byzantine commentators to base themselves
on earlier writers, and ultimately the ancient tradition,
makes it a difﬁcult matter to work out the respects in
which they contributed their own thoughts (Ierodiakonou
and Bo¨rje 2008).
Medieval Latin philosophers had two strands of access
to Aristotle independent of Arabic philosophy. The ﬁrst
strand was due to the work of one man, Boethius
(d. 524/526), a philosopher who lived in Ostrogothic
Italy but, thanks to his aristocratic background, knew
Greek ﬂuently. He translated all of Aristotle’s logical
works (except the Posterior Analytics – or, at least, his
translation does not survive) into Latin. These translations
came only gradually into circulation in the Middle Ages:
the Categories, De interpretatione, and Porphyry’s Isagoge
by the ninth century; the Sophistical Refutations, Prior
Analytics, and Topics during the twelfth century. Boethius’
translations of these works remained standard until the
end of the Middle Ages. Boethius also wrote widely-read
commentaries on the logical texts, which drew on the
tradition of interpretation in the late ancient Platonic
schools, especially on Porphyry (see Marenbon 2009).
The second strand was due to the work of various trans-
lators, working in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries.
Through the work of the twelfth-century translators (the
best known was James of Venice), some of Aristotle’s
nonlogical works became available, in translations direct
from the Greek, whole or part, by the early thirteenth
century. The most important thirteenth-century transla-
tor, William of Moerbeke (d. 1286), produced new or
revised translations, from the Greek, of the whole Aristo-
telian corpus, and his versions became standard, except in
the case of the logical works translated by Boethius. Before
William’s work, however, Latin thinkers had beneﬁted
from the third, Arabic-dependent strand of access to Aris-
totle. In the later twelfth and early thirteenth centuries,
various nonlogical works of Aristotle’s were put into Latin,
in whole or part, from their Arabic versions. These trans-
lations would all be superseded by Moerbeke’s ones from
the Greek, and so this side of the Arabic strand was of
limited importance. By contrast, the translation into Latin
in the same period of parts (principally, the Metaphysics
and On the Soul) of Avicenna’s largest encyclopedia com-
mentary, the Shifa¯’, and of many of Averroes’ com-
mentaries, including the long commentaries on the
Metaphysics and On the Soul, had an enormous inﬂuence
on Aristotelianism in the later Middle Ages. Although –
mostly thanks again to William of Moerbeke – a selection
of ancient commentaries on Aristotle became available in
Latin, Boethius’ role in introducing, explaining, and plac-
ing Aristotle’s logic in context was played, for the
nonlogical works, by Averroes (who was called, simply,
the ‘‘Commentator’’) and, in a more general way, by
Avicenna (see Pasnau 2010, Appendix B.1 and B.4).
Despite this debt to the Arabic world, the development
of the Aristotelian tradition there could hardly differ more
Aristotelianism in the Greek, Latin, Syriac, Arabic, and Hebrew Traditions A
101
A

sharply from the ways in which Aristotle was studied in the
Latin West. From the beginning, Aristotle’s texts were
central to the school curriculum, and they were
commented on closely. Before c. 1200, when only
Aristotle’s logic was known, the study of logic – the central
subject of the school curriculum – was based around these
works (along with some by his translator, Boethius). From
about 1250, the Arts Faculties of the universities adopted
an Aristotelian curriculum, in which knowledge was
divided according to his different works, and the study
of each subject was the study of Aristotle’s text. This
intensive study of the Aristotelian texts is witnessed by
an enormous number of medieval Latin commentaries on
Aristotle, usually designed for, or the products of, class-
room teaching. From the ninth to the eleventh centuries,
this commentary material usually took the form of mar-
ginal and interlinear glosses in manuscripts of the texts.
From the twelfth century a large number of independent
commentaries are found on the Categories, On Interpreta-
tion, and Sophistical Refutations. Normally they are anon-
ymous, and very often survive in just one manuscript – the
record of a particular teacher or student’s work, rather
than a text disseminated in written form. In the case of the
Categories and On Interpretation (and also Porphyry’s
Isagoge), Boethius had written commentaries which drew
on the ancient Neoplatonic tradition of commentary.
These were, initially, very important sources for the
twelfth-century
commentators,
although
they
soon
started to develop ideas and discuss problems unthought
of by Boethius (Marenbon 1993/2000). There was an
important change in the most common form of Aristote-
lian commentary in the early thirteenth century – the
period when the complete Aristotelian corpus was begin-
ning to be studied and then became the basis of the Arts
curriculum. Aristotelian commentaries began to be writ-
ten in the form of quaestiones. These quaestiones would
very often keep close to the text, and the solutions repre-
sent the Master in question’s view of Aristotle’s meaning,
but they also gave the opportunity for ideas and problems
to be raised which reﬂected current debates but were
linked only loosely to the ancient text. There were, how-
ever, some important thirteenth-century commentaries in
other forms. Albert the Great followed Avicenna in pro-
ducing his own, discursive reconstructions of Aristotelian
doctrine. Aquinas followed Averroes (and Boethius) in
writing a series of detailed, sentence by sentence commen-
taries on Aristotle.
Aristotle formed the basis of the Arts curriculum up to
and beyond the Middle Ages in Latin Europe. Even among
those who consciously opposed scholastic modes of
thought, there was a lively Aristotelian tradition, and
a number of Averroes’ commentaries were translated
for the ﬁrst time (from the Hebrew) in that monument
to Renaissance Aristotelianism, the Juncta(s) edition
of
1550–1552
on
Aristotle’s
works
with
Averroes’
commentaries.
Attitudes to Aristotle
In the early Islamic world (from the eighth to the eleventh
centuries) there were two different methods of thinking
about ultimate questions such as the constitution of the
world, freedom and necessity, justice, and merit. One was
kala¯m, a sort of philosophizing closely attached to prob-
lems raised by the Qurʾa¯n and conducted in terms partly
borrowed indirectly from the Greek tradition, partly
invented by the Islamic thinkers themselves. Exponents
of kala¯m divided themselves into many different schools,
of which the most adventurous philosophically, and the
most inﬂuential at the start, was that of the Muʿtazilites.
The other method of thinking about these questions was
that of Greek philosophy, introduced by al-Kindı¯ in the
eighth century. Al-Kindı¯ was a Muslim and belonged to
an important Arab family. He seems to have intro-
duced Greek philosophy consciously as an alternative to
Muʿtazilite kala¯m: it was a foreign importation, but one
which, he tried to show, could be adapted to ﬁt Islam.
Although there were some thinkers in the tenth and elev-
enth centuries – particularly the Isma¯ʿı¯lı¯s – who also
followed a conciliatory approach, mainstream philosophy
took a different direction. It centered increasingly on
whose work was commented on in detail by Baghdad
peripatetics, many of them Christian. The outstanding
member of this school was al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, a Muslim but one
who, to judge by his work, accepted Islam because he saw
in it a symbolic way, suitable for assimilation by the
masses, of stating the truths which were demonstrated in
their full and clear form by Aristotelian science.
The most inﬂuential of all the Arabic philosophers,
Avicenna, seems to have developed his rethinking of Aris-
totelian philosophy mainly in isolation from religious
considerations, although he may have been inﬂuenced by
some of the questions raised by the Muʿtazilites. He was
willing, in line with his understanding of Aristotle, to deny
the fundamental Islamic doctrines of the resurrection of
the dead and the non-eternity of the world. For these
views, Avicenna was ﬁercely attacked by al-G˙ aza¯lı¯ (1058–
1111), whose writings had, and continue to have, enor-
mous inﬂuence among Muslims. But, at the same time,
al-G˙ aza¯lı¯ was himself deeply inﬂuenced by Avicenna, and
he played the pivotal role in infusing kala¯m with
Avicennian philosophy. Although, then, Avicenna is the
last major ﬁgure in the eastern Islamic tradition of
102 A
Aristotelianism in the Greek, Latin, Syriac, Arabic, and Hebrew Traditions

Aristotelian philosophers, there continued into the late
Middle Ages and beyond a stream of indirectly Aristote-
lian speculation – some of it conducted in commentaries
on Avicenna – which now was part of, rather than a rival
to, Islamic theology (Griffel 2009).
In Muslim Spain and North Africa, as explained above,
the tradition of direct study of Aristotle continued. Its
outstanding representative, Averroes, was a dedicated
Aristotelian who thought that the fundamental truth
about the universe could be found just by the most careful
scrutiny of Aristotle’s meaning. But Averroes was not
a covert freethinker, doing his day job as an Islamic
judge just to keep up appearances. There is every indica-
tion that he agreed fundamentally with al-G˙ aza¯lı¯ over
when a Qurʾa¯nic text should be ‘‘interpreted’’ and its
literal meaning rejected – when it was contradicted by
a demonstration. He held, however, that a wider range of
truths than al-G˙ aza¯lı¯ accepted are demonstrable through
Aristotelian science (Griffel 2000).
The ﬁrst Jewish Aristotelian, Abraham b. Daud,
believed that Aristotelian science and orthodox Jewish
doctrine were compatible, and in his rabbinic works Mai-
monides professed the same view. There he argued that the
rabbis of old had honored philosophy and arrived at the
same truths as were professed by the philosophers of
the Arabic Aristotelian tradition, but they had kept them
secret so as not to reveal them to the mass of the people.
Maimonides’ most famous work – indeed, the most cele-
brated text in the whole tradition of Jewish medieval
philosophy – the Guide of the Perplexed is, however, mainly
directed toward the perplexities faced by the ﬁrm believer
in the Jewish law who has also studied Arabic–Aristotelian
philosophy and science. It is hard to be completely certain
of how Maimonides resolves these perplexities: whether he
has really retrenched from his earlier acceptance of almost
everything in Aristotelianism, or whether he continues in
and even extends his earlier position, though in a covert
manner, hidden from those who read too straightfor-
wardly. Such was Maimonides’ inﬂuence on subsequent
Jewish thinkers, that the dispute over Aristotelianism in
Jewish philosophy became in large part a dispute about
whether or not to follow Maimonides. Since Maimonides
himself was, from the beginning, interpreted in a more
radical and a less radical way, the contours of the debate
are hard to follow; some Jews criticized even Maimonides
under a moderate interpretation for conceding too much
to Aristotle, while for some of the most enthusiastic Jewish
Aristotelians, he had not – even under a radical
interpretation – gone far enough. But even a thinker like
Moses of Narbonne (d. after 1362), who followed
Averroes’ Aristotelianism closely, shared with Averroes
the feeling that Aristotelianism did not in fact contradict
the fundamental principles of his own religion. There was,
then, a ﬂourishing thirteenth- and fourteenth-century
tradition
of
Jewish
Aristotelianism,
learned
mainly
through Averroes. But, at the same time, there was con-
sistent opposition to this whole philosophical tradition,
which resulted, for example, in an unsuccessful attempt of
banning Maimonides’ works in the 1230s and, in 1305, the
banning of Arabo-Greek learning to Jews aged under 25 in
Catalonia. The greatest of all these Hebrew-language phi-
losophers, Gersonides (1288–1344), took an independent
stance and rethought philosophical problems, using Aris-
totelian positions and tools, but not feeling bound to
them, in a way which eliminated most of the obvious
clashes between religious orthodoxy and the results of
philosophy. But the mood among Jews in the following
century and a half became more generally and resolutely
set against Aristotelianism, and against philosophy in
general.
Suspicion of Aristotelianism – which was put under
the general banner of ‘‘Hellenism,’’ that is to say, sympathy
for the pagan thought of Greece – was a constant feature of
the Byzantine tradition. It did not prevent scholars from
maintaining a tradition of Aristotelian exegesis, but it
could make life difﬁcult or worse for individual scholars.
Whereas, for instance, Michael Psellos, though accused of
heresy, managed to escape condemnation, his student,
John Italos, was not so fortunate. After a series of
trials, he was condemned and his books burned. The
charges against him were related to his use of Aristotelian
logic in theology, and he was said, probably unjustly,
not merely to have enquired into the doctrines of the
ancients but to have accepted them as truths (cf. Clucas
1981).
As explained above, scholars in the medieval Latin
West knew only a few Aristotelian logical texts until the
mid-twelfth century. For this reason, questions about the
compatibility between religious teaching and Aristotelian-
ism, like those faced by Byzantine Christians, Muslims and
Jews, were not posed in the early Middle Ages. Although
from time to time a religious thinker would cast doubt on
the study of logic, or at least on its appropriateness as for
monks, it was generally accepted that logic was valuable,
or indeed essential, as a tool for presenting and defending
Christian doctrine. It was only when it was misused that it
became dangerous. And the tradition of logic, they recog-
nized, was Aristotelian. But it was not just Aristotelian.
A paraphrase of Aristotle’s Categories, widely read from
the ninth to eleventh centuries, was attributed to
Augustine (helping, incidentally, to ensure the Christian
respectability of the subject). The curriculum usual in the
Aristotelianism in the Greek, Latin, Syriac, Arabic, and Hebrew Traditions A
103
A

early twelfth century included two Aristotelian texts, and
ﬁve others, four by Boethius and one by Porphyry.
Although the best logicians, like Abelard, seem to have
shown a special respect for Abelard and to have had
suspicions, rightly, about Boethius’ logical acumen, all
three ﬁgures were generally treated on the same level as
authorities. Questions about the relationship between
Christian doctrine and pagan philosophy were indeed
posed in this period, but in connection with Plato and
writings in the Platonic tradition.
Once translations of his non-logical works began to be
disseminated, this easy acceptance of Aristotle as a logical
authority was no longer possible. Some of the earliest
evidence for the study of Aristotle’s natural philosophy
and his Metaphysics are the prohibitions issued in 1210
and 1215 against the study of this material in the Arts
Faculty of Paris. But the authorities did not do much to
enforce these prohibitions by the 1240s, and – as noted
above – by the 1250s the curriculum of the Arts Faculties
in Paris and Oxford was based around Aristotle. In a way
that contrasts sharply with the Islamic, Jewish, and Byz-
antine traditions, Aristotelianism was thus incorporated
openly and institutionally into the scheme of education
approved by the religious authorities and which also was
responsible for the formation of theologians and Church
leaders. Although this theological formation took place in
the Theology Faculty, students had either to have taken the
Arts course, or, if they belonged to the mendicant orders,
its equivalent in their own schools: theologians were
thoroughly
trained
in
Aristotelian
philosophy,
and
their approach to theological problems was deeply affected
by it.
This institutional adoption of Aristotelianism did not,
however, prevent there from being tensions between
Aristotle’s views and Christian doctrine, in two areas in
particular, one of which related primarily to the Arts
Masters, the other to the theologians. Granted that the
Arts Faculty was ofﬁcially dedicated to the study of Aris-
totelian science, and that it was not its business to deal
with matters of Christian doctrine, to what extent should
Arts Masters be permitted to develop views which actually
contradicted Christian doctrine? Two positions were espe-
cially at issue: the Aristotelian principle that the world – in
the sense of the whole universe – is eternal (which clashes
with the Christian doctrine that the world had a temporal
beginning), and Averroes’ reading of On the Soul in his
long commentary, according to which there is just one
Intellect for all humans (which contradicts the idea of
individual immortality and so the whole Christian teach-
ing about heavenly reward and punishment). Although
none of the Arts Masters seems to have proposed that
either of these positions was true without qualiﬁcation,
there was some in the 1260s – such as Siger of Brabant and
Boethius of Dacia – who tried to ﬁnd some way in which,
in their capacity as Arts Masters and so teachers of Aris-
totle, they could develop these and any other arguably
Aristotelian views in their own terms, even if they
acknowledged that, as a Christian, one must hold
a different, incompatible view. Although this movement
in the thirteenth century was crushed by ecclesiastical
opposition, there remained until the end of the Middle
Ages an important strain of ‘‘Radical Aristotelianism’’ or
‘‘Latin Averroism’’ in the Arts Faculties – of thinkers who,
while acknowledging, at least verbally, the truth of Chris-
tian doctrine, looked to Averroes as the most reliable
interpreter of Aristotle, even where his interpretations
made his thought clearly unacceptable to Christians
(Hayoun and De Libera, 1991). In order to prevent such
speculations, the authorities obliged fourteenth-century
Paris Arts Masters to swear that, if they touched in their
philosophy on any subjects that also concerned the faith,
they would give the answers demanded by faith and pro-
vide refutations of the arguments against the answer con-
sistent with Christian teaching. Yet, even the cautious John
Buridan, who taught for about 40 years in the Arts Faculty
at Paris from c. 1320, makes clear that, for instance, the
Christian teaching on the immortality of the soul does not
follow from Aristotle’s position and must be accepted as
a matter of faith (Sylla 2001).
For the theologians, the problem was, rather, the
extent to which Aristotle’s God, as interpreted by the
Arabic Aristotelians, was their God, at least in philosoph-
ical guise. By and large, Aquinas believed that he was.
But in 1277, shortly after Aquinas’ death, a long list of
propositions, many of them reﬂecting positions held
by
Arabic
Aristotelians
and
their
followers,
were
condemned in Paris. Although largely directed against
Arts Masters, the condemnations indicate a growing
awareness that Aristotle’s God, and the physical and
metaphysical context in which the Arabic Aristotelian
placed him, did not ﬁt well with Christian belief.
Late thirteenth- and fourteenth-century theologians,
stimulated by their doctrinal requirements, although
deeply learned in Aristotelian science and indebted to it
for much of their thinking, rethought many aspects of
Aristotelianism: consider, for instance, Duns Scotus’
account of God’s contingent causality or Ockham’s
nominalism.
See also: ▶Arabic Philosophical Texts, Jewish Translations
of ▶Arabic Texts: Philosophy, Latin Translations of
▶Aristotle,
Arabic
▶Ibn
Rushd
(Averroes),
Latin
104 A
Aristotelianism in the Greek, Latin, Syriac, Arabic, and Hebrew Traditions

Translations of ▶Logic, Arabic, in the Latin Middle
Ages
Bibliography
Secondary Sources
Clucas L (1981) The trial of John Italos and the crisis of intellectual values
in Byzantium in the eleventh century. Miscellanea Byzantina
Monacensia 26. Institut fu¨r Byzantinistik, Neugriechische Philologie,
und Byzantinische Kunstgeschichte der Universita¨t Mu¨nchen
Griffel F (2000) Apostasie und Toleranz im Islam. Die Entwicklung zu al-
Gazalis Urteil gegen die Philosophie und die Reaktionen der
Philosophen. Islamic philosophy, theology and science. Texts and
studies 40. Brill, Leiden
Griffel F (2009) Al-Ghaza¯lı¯’s philosophical theology. Oxford University
Press, New York
Gutas D (1988) Greek thought, Arabic culture. The Eraeco-Arabic trans-
lation movement in Baghdad and early ‘Abba¯sid society (2nd/4th,
8th/10th centuries). Routledge, London/New York
Gutas D (1999) The ‘‘Alexandria to Baghdad’’ complex of narratives.
A contribution to the study of philosophical and medical historiog-
raphy among the Arabs. Documenti e studi sulla tradizione ﬁlosoﬁca
medievale 10:155–193
Gutas D (2002) The heritage of Avicenna: the golden age of Arabic
philosophy,
1000–ca.
1350.
Avicenna
and
his
heritage,
ed.
Janssens J, De Smet D. Ancient and medieval philosophy, Series I,
28. Leuven University Press, Leuven
Harvey S (1992) Did Maimonides’ letter to Samuel Ibn Tibbon determine
which philosophers would be studied by later Jewish thinkers. Jewish
Quart Rev New Series 83(1/2):51–70
Hayoun M-R, De Libera A (1991) Averroes and I’averroisme, Que Sais-Je?
PUF, Paris
Hugonnard-Roche H (2004) La logique d’Aristote du grec au syriaque.
E´tudes sur la transmission de l’Organon et leur interpre´tation
philosophique. Textes et traditions 9. Vrin, Paris
Ierodiakonou K, Bo¨rje B (2008) Byzantine philosophy. The Stanford ency-
clopedia of philosophy (Winter 2008 edition), ed. Zalta EN. http://
plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2008/entries/byzantine-philosophy/
Marenbon J (1993/2000) Medieval Latin commentaries and glosses on
Aristotelian logical texts, before c. 1150 A.D. as republished and
revised in Aristotelian logic, Platonism, and the context of early
medieval philosophy. Collected studies series 696. Ashgate, Alder-
shot/Burlington/Vermont
Marenbon J (2007) Medieval philosophy; an historical and philosophical
introduction. Routledge, London/New York
Pasnau R (2010) The Cambridge history of medieval philosophy. Cam-
bridge University Press, Cambridge
Street T (2004) Arabic logic. Handbook of the history of logic I, ed.
Gabbay D, Woods J. Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp 523–596
Street T (2008) Arabic and Islamic philosophy of language and logic. In:
Zalta EN (ed) The Stanford encyclopedia of philosophy (Fall 2008
edition). http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2008/entries/arabic-
islamic-language/
Sylla E (2001) Ideo quasi mendicare oportet intellectum humanum: the
role of theology in John Buridan’s natural philosophy. The meta-
physics and natural philosophy of John Buridan, ed. Thijssen JMMH,
Zupko J. Medieval and early modern science 2. Brill, Leiden/Boston/
Cologne
Zonta M (1996) La ﬁlosoﬁa antica nel Medioevo ebraico: le traduzioni
ebraiche medievali dei testi ﬁlosoﬁci antichi. Philosophica 2. Paideia,
Brescia
Aristotle, Arabic
MARC GEOFFROY
Laboratoire d’E´tudes sur les Monothe´ismes
Centre National de la Recherche Scientiﬁque
Villejuif
France
Abstract
The Arabic translations of Aristotle, taken from the Greek
or Syriac, ﬁt into the framework of the assimilation of the
Greek scientiﬁc and philosophical knowledge of late
Antiquity in the urban Arabic–Muslim civilization of the
ʿAbba¯sid East. According to some, they responded to
a project of vast scale, whose social and political implica-
tions have been highlighted by D. Gutas. In the vast enter-
prise of reconstructing a philosophical corpus from which
the birth and development of Arabic philosophy gets its
substance, Aristotle would assume the title of ‘‘First
Teacher,’’ vouching for all the intellectual heritage of the
Greeks, viewed as a systematic knowledge compatible with
the Muslim worldview. Together with Aristotle’s own
works, the Arabs translated an equally great amount of
commentaries tracing back to late Antiquity, particularly
to the School of Alexandria.
Schematically, the constitution of the corpus of the
Aristoteles arabus accompanies three distinct moments in
the Arabic–Muslim falsafa: (1) The era of the Baghdad
philosopher al-Kindı¯ (d. between 860 and 870) and his
circle. This early falsafa is deliberately syncretical: it inte-
grates
Aristotle’s
cosmology
and
metaphysics
to
a creationist and emanationist worldview adaptable to
Islamic religion, and the role of Aristotelian logic is still
modest. (2) The translation school whose prominent ﬁg-
ures were H˙ unayn b. Ish:a¯q (d. 873) and his son Ish:a¯q b.
H˙ unayn (d. 910), between the end of the ninth and the
beginning of the tenth century. Very much connected to
medical knowledge, this school completed the translation
of almost the whole of the Aristotelian corpus. (3) The
Peripatetic School of Baghdad (mid-tenth to beginning of
the eleventh century), characterized by a predominant
interest in logic. The so-called Baghdad Aristotelians
focused mostly on the re-elaboration and correction of
previous translations, as well as on philological work on
them, with the notable exception of the Posterior Analytics
(called in Arabic the Book of Demonstration), only then
introduced into the corpus. The learned of this time give
themselves up to an organization of the Organon using the
Aristotle, Arabic A
105
A

Syriac versions and the Arabic versions of H˙ unayn and his
school: an outstanding example is the MS Paris, BnF ar.
2346.
Knowledge of the stages of the translation movement
and their key ﬁgures comes mostly from the biobiblio-
graphical works, a literary genre cultivated in the classical
age of the Arabic–Muslim civilization. The earliest are the
Kita¯b al-Fihrist (Book of the Catalogue) by Ibn al-Nadı¯m
(ﬁnished in 987) and, in Islamic Spain, the T˙abaqa¯t al-
At:ibba¯’ by Ibn Juljul (d. 1009).
Organon
The circulation of the Organon in Arabic was preceded by
the Syriac assimilation of it, especially at the School of
Edessa. The focus of this work was only on one section of
the Aristotelian Organon: Cat., De int., An. Pr. (up to the
end of chapter 7). Very early the Arabs had at their dis-
posal a compendium to Porphyry’s Isagoge, Cat., De int.,
and An. Pr., perhaps translated from the Pehlevi (Middle
Persian) by the courtier and secretary Ibn al-Muqaffa‘
(d. 760). This period (end of the eighth century) corre-
sponds to a rebirth of the translations of logic into Syriac.
To the six works of the Organon are added the Rhetoric and
the Poetics, following the Alexandrian scholarly tradition.
The work of the School of H˙ unayn counts as a direct
extension of that of the Syriac circles.
Categories
Coming after three earlier versions, the Syriac translation
of the Categories by H˙ unayn b. Ish:a¯q served as a model for
the Arabic one, done by his son Ish:a¯q and preserved in the
Paris MS just mentioned. The many glosses contained in
this manuscript (probably by the hand of the Baghdad
logician Ibn Suwa¯r ibn al-Khamma¯r, d. 1020) mention
some ancient commentators of Aristotle not without
giving quotations also from their works. Many others are
mentioned in the bibliographical sources: Ammonius,
Philoponus,
Porphyry,
Stephanus
of
Alexandria,
Themistius, Theophrastus, Iamblichus, Simplicius, and
a certain ‘‘Alı¯nu¯s’’ whose identity is dubious. None of
these commentaries on the Categories are extant in Arabic.
Instead, a direct prolongment of the ancient commentary
tradition in Arabic is represented by the Nestorian doctor
Abu¯ l-Faraj ibn al-T˙ayyib (d. 1043; see the entry), who was
a follower of the masters of the Baghdad school Ibn al-
Samh: et Ibn Suwa¯r. This school perpetuated the tradition
established in late Antiquity of having an introduction to
philosophy placed before the Categories, in line with
Olympiodorus (whose commentary, however, did not
exist in Arabic) and Elias (David).
Muslim thinkers like al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, Avicenna, and Averroes
did not maintain these introductory treatises at the begin-
ning of their writings on the Categories, although they did
not ignore them. Al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ provides an example of this: in
an epistle on What must precede the learning of philosophy
(Fı¯ ma¯ yanbag˙ı¯ an yuqaddama qabla ta‘allum al-falsafa),
he offers a general introduction to philosophy in nine
points (instead of ten, as in the Greek writings of this
kind) akin to those of the Greek commentaries on the
Categories.
Ancient discussions on the nature and number of
the categories were taken up by Arab philosophers. In
the K. al-Maqu¯la¯t of the Shifa¯’, Avicenna holds that the
study of the categories is not a part of logic but rather of
metaphysics, a position that becomes the rule in the sub-
sequent tradition. According to Avicenna, the curriculum
of logic proceeds from the study of simple expressions
(alfa¯z˙) to that of propositions, but knowledge of the ten
categories plays only a marginal role in logic, that is,
insofar as it applies to the theory of deﬁnition. This doc-
trine is followed by later thinkers, notably al-G˙ aza¯lı¯, who
omits the study of the categories in all his works in logic.
De interpretatione
The De int. was translated by Ish:a¯q b. H˙ unayn, probably
from an earlier Syriac version by his father H˙ unayn. The
Fihrist names the Greek commentaries of Alexander,
Philoponus, Iamblichus, Porphyry, Galen, and Theo-
phrastus, specifying that those of Alexander and Galen
are lost, a remark that obviously does not imply that the
others were accessible. We have, nonetheless, a fragment
from Alexander’s commentary (on De int. 16 a 27), edited
by Badawı¯. It is possible to get an idea of the Greek sources
available in the tenth century, thanks to the analysis
devoted by F. Zimmermann to al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s Long Commen-
tary on the De int. This work can be traced back to
a double set of sources, which could also have existed in
the form of a unique piece, a kind of exegetical record
compiled out of different texts: ﬁrst, of glosses inspired to
Porphyry, that we can identify from parallels between al-
Fa¯ra¯bı¯ and Boethius; and second, of extracts from other
commentaries later than Porphyry’s one(s), that could
have been inserted between the Porphyrian glosses in the
model. In fact, al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s work reveals many parallels,
both structural (division of the text) and doctrinal, with
Ammonius and especially with Stephanus of Alexandria.
A lost commentary by Abu¯ Bishr Matta¯ is mentioned,
and Ibn Zur‘a too is credited with a commentary. As for
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, in addition to the Long Commentary, which has
come down to us, he made also an abridgment, which is
106 A
Aristotle, Arabic

lost. The Long Commentary, because of the sources it uses,
was particularly important for the Arab philosophers of
later centuries, notably Avicenna: the part of the K.
al-Shifa¯’ devoted to the De int. owes much to al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯,
whose exegesis also inspires greatly the section of G˙ aza¯lı¯’s
logical treatise Mi‘ya¯r al-‘ilm. Averroes too, in his Short
Commentaries
on
Logic
(al-D˙ aru¯rı¯ fı¯ l-mant:iq:
ed.
Butterworth 1977), draws from Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s abridgment men-
tioned above; Averroes also wrote a paraphrase (Middle
Commentary) on the De int.
Prior Analytics
In the Paris MS mentioned above, the translation of the
Prior Analytics is attributed to Tadha¯rı¯, a name pointing
perhaps to the Melkite bishop of H˙ arra¯n, Theodore Abu¯
Qurra (d. 826), but more probably to Tadha¯rı¯ ibn Bası¯l
Akhı¯ Is:t:ifa¯n, a translator of the circle of H˙ unayn b. Ish:a¯q.
The notes in the Paris MS attest to fragments of four
earlier versions, one of which is attributed to Yah:ya¯ ibn
al-Bit:rı¯q, a translator of the Kindı¯’s circle. The Fihrist also
mentions two different commentaries of Alexander of
Aphrodisias, and one of Philoponus. These would not
have been complete and would end with the commentary
of An. Pr. I, 7. The Fihrist mentions Themistius’ complete
commentary as well. In the glosses of the Paris MS, only
the citations and mentionings of Themistius, as well as
those ascribed to ‘‘Alı¯nu¯s’’ are presented. One Quaestio by
Alexander on the conversion of propositions, and
a treatise of Themistius can complete the picture of the
exegetical material on An. Pr. at the disposal of the Arab
readers.
The biographical sources mention several lost Arabic
commentaries, such as al-Kindı¯’s. Beginning in the tenth
century, a renewal in the study of logic gave rise to the
study of the Prior Analytics in their entirety, whereas the
earlier tradition – as we saw before – read only as far as
chapter 7 of book I. We know that Abu¯ Bishr Matta¯
commented on the work in its entirety, and so did
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, following in his footsteps. The former is lost,
but references subsist in the margins of the Paris MS, while
of the latter what remains is only an important fragment
of the ﬁnal part, in a MS housed in Tehran.
Several works on the ‘‘syllogism’’ remain in the Arabic
literature, such as those of Ibn Zur‘a and Avicenna: the
latter constitutes one part of the Logic of the Shifa¯’. To the
‘‘syllogism’’ is also devoted one section, modeled on
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s abridgment, of the treatise on logic by the
Cairene philosopher, astronomer, and doctor ‘Alı¯ ibn
Rid˙wa¯n (d. 1061 or 1068), the Book on the Application of
Logic in the Sciences and Arts (Kita¯b al-musta‘mal min
al-mant:iq fı¯ l-‘ulu¯m wa-l-s:ana¯’i‘). Averroes, in addition
to a section inspired by al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯of his Short Commentaries
on Logic (al-D˙ aru¯rı¯ fı¯ l-mant:iq), devotes to the An. Pr.
a paraphrase (talkhı¯s:), as well as several questions
(masa¯’il) to issues pertaining to this part of the Organon.
Finally, Averroes’ disciple Ibn T˙umlu¯s (d. 1223) in his
Introduction to the Art of Logic follows the path laid out
by al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯.
Posterior Analytics
We must wait for H˙ unayn’s school for the theory of
demonstration (burha¯n) to be introduced, thanks to
Ish:a¯q’s Syriac version of the Posterior Analytics. Later on,
this Syriac version was translated into Arabic by Abu¯ Bishr
Matta¯, the head of the Baghdad school: it is Abu¯ Bishr’s
version that is reproduced in the Paris MS. Some elements
of Aristotle’s doctrine of demonstration that feature in
al-Kindı¯’s writings could have been transmitted to him
through a preexistent Syriac translation unknown to us.
A paraphrased anonymous Arabic translation, echoing
here and there Philoponus’ commentary, peeps out in
Averroes’ commentary on the An. Po.: Averroes made use
of the two versions, Abu¯ Bishr’s and the anonymous one.
The latter also appears in the marginalia of the Paris MS,
where it is attributed to a certain Mara¯ya¯. Ibn al-Nadı¯m’s
Fihrist mentions several commentaries, among which
Themistius’ paraphrase, translated by Abu¯ Bishr Matta¯.
This one was then translated into Latin in Toledo, by
Gerard of Cremona; it is much used by Averroes in his
Long Commentary on the An. Po. Averroes mentions also
a commentary by Alexander and one by Philoponus,
whose fragments appear in the marginal glosses of the
Paris MS; Alexander’s commentary, cited only once by
Averroes, could only have been known indirectly, through
Philoponus’.
Many of al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s writings are devoted to the An. Po.;
as for Avicenna, the ﬁfth part of the logic of the Shifa¯’
focused on it. In this work, Avicenna stays the closer to
Aristotle’s text than in the other sections of his logic.
Averroes’ all three commentaries (the Short Commentary
of the D˙ aru¯rı¯, the Middle, and the Long Commentary) are
extant in Arabic, the last being incomplete. The editions of
Aristotle’s Opera omnia, along with Averroes’ commentar-
ies (Giunta 1562) include three Latin versions of the same
text: that of Abraham de Balmes, of Francesco Burana, and
of Jacob Mantino, respectively (the last is incomplete),
taken from the Hebrew. Also, Averroes devoted several
Quaestiones to doctrinal issues of the An. Po., which
abide partly in Arabic, partly in Hebrew, and partly in
the Latin translations of the Renaissance.
Aristotle, Arabic A
107
A

Topics
The Topics were known in a Syriac–Arabic version from
the times of the caliph Haru¯n al-Rashı¯d (d. 809). Subse-
quently, a Syriac translation was made by H˙ unayn, and the
Arabic version by Yah:ya¯ ibn ‘Adı¯ (d. 974) was based on it,
as well as that of Abu¯ ‘Uthma¯n al-Dimashqı¯, carried
forward by Ibra¯hı¯m ibn ‘Abdalla¯h, and conserved in the
Paris MS.
According to Ibn al-Nadı¯m, there must have existed in
his time a work containing at least some passages of
Alexander’s commentary on the Topics, namely part of
book I and books V–VIII of the commentary, as well as
Ammonius’ commentary on books I–IV. This work would
have been translated into Syriac by Ish:a¯q b. H˙ unayn and,
on the basis of this version, into Arabic by Abu¯ ‘Uthma¯n
al-Dimashqı¯. The Kita¯b al-bah:th (Book of Research) attrib-
uted to Ja¯bir b. H˙ ayya¯n also contains a reference to Alex-
ander’s commentary. In addition, Ibn al-Nadı¯m is aware of
a commentary by Themistius on the ‘‘topics’’ (mawa¯d˙i‘),
which likely corresponds to books II–VII of Aristotle’s
work.
According to
the
Fihrist, Abu¯
Bishr
Matta¯
commented upon the ﬁrst book; there was as well a Long
Commentary by al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, which is now lost, whereas the
abridgment is conserved. As for Avicenna, he devoted the
sixth part of the logic of the Shifa¯’ to the Topics. Averroes’
Middle Commentary makes use of the works of his pre-
decessors; its main source is Themistius’ commentary.
Sophistical Refutations
In addition to several lost translations of the Sophistical
Refutations, we know of three different Arabic versions
extant in the Paris MS, whose attribution is discussed.
The oldest in all likelihood traces back to al-Kindı¯’s era,
and it could be the work of Ibn Na¯‘ima al-Hims:ı¯, the
translator of the pseudo-Theology of Aristotle, while the
most recent is attributable to Ibn Zur‘a (d. 1008).
Ibn al-Nadı¯m’s Fihrist makes no mention of extant
Greek works other than a commentary by Alexander of
Aphrodisias, which however seems not to have been used
by the Arab commentators on the Soph. El. An abridgment
by al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ is extant; the part of Avicenna’s Shifa¯’ dealing
with this Aristotelian work is particularly brief, just as
Averroes’ Middle Commentary.
Rhetoric
According to the Arabic bibliographical sources, there
were three different versions of the Rhetoric, one being
ancient and anonymous, and likely made from a Syriac
text. The obscurities and errors of this translation lie in the
background of several particularities of the exegeses of the
Arabic authors. Another version is attributed to Ish:a¯q b.
H˙ unayn, and a third one to Ibra¯hı¯m ibn ‘Abdalla¯h al-
Na¯qid (d. about 940). The only version conserved in the
Paris MS is the ancient translation, which is reproduced in
the ‘‘edition’’ made by Ibn al-Samh:, who collated among
them and with a Syriac version several different copies of
the Arabic text. An abridged version of the same transla-
tion, excluding chapters 15–17 from book II, did equally
circulate. The long version was read and used in the
commentaries by al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ and Avicenna, while Averroes’
Middle Commentary relies on the short version. This one
evidently represents an Occidental branch in the tradition
of the text, since the Latin translation (the Rhetorica) made
by Hermann the German in Toledo in the thirteenth
century depends on it.
Aristotle’s Rhetoric had no commentaries in antiquity.
There is thus no direct contribution of the Greek com-
mentary tradition to the Arabic exegeses of the Rhetoric,
but many themes which would be elaborated by the
Arabic exegetical tradition were foreshadowed, albeit
unsystematically, in the ancient exegeses of other Aristo-
telian logical texts, notably Elias’ commentaries. This is
the case, for example, for the characterization of rhetoric
as a kind of expression that deals with statements equally
possible; the idea that the suppression of a premise in the
enthymeme (i.e., the rhetorical syllogism), serves hide
falsity; the characterization of the rhetorical argument as
resting on an ‘‘immediate point of view’’ (ba¯di’ al-ra’y) not
subject to scrutiny; and, even more important, the
enlarged conception of the Organon, extended to the Rhe-
toric and Poetics, and viewing these two as branches of
logic properly speaking.
In the tenth century, al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ commented on the
Rhetoric at least twice: in the Long Commentary and in
an abridgment. The ﬁrst, Kita¯b al-Khat:a¯ba, is an exposi-
tion following chapter 2 of book I of Aristotle’s work, and
it explains how the object of rhetoric is articulated around
the concept of the ‘‘immediate point of view.’’ The begin-
ning of al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s Long Commentary (Sharh: kita¯b al-
Khat:a¯ba) is preserved in Herman the German’s Didascalia
in Rhetoricam Aristotelis ex glosa Alpharabii, which con-
serves the prologue, written in the style of the Alexandrian
introductory schema, and the commentary of the ﬁrst
lemma. Other more or less sequential fragments of
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s text are found in ‘Alı¯ ibn Rid˙wa¯n’s Book on the
Application of Logic in the Sciences and Arts mentioned
above (see ‘‘Prior Analytics’’). In the eleventh century as
well, Abu¯ l-Faraj ibn al-T˙ayyib (d. 1043), the Nestorian
philosopher known for his commentaries on Porphyry’s
Isagoge and on the Categories in the style of the Alexan-
drian introductions, composed a commentary on the
108 A
Aristotle, Arabic

Rhetoric, according to the bibliographer Ibn Abı¯ Us:aybi‘a
(d. 1270). Ibn al-T˙ayyib is the target of the criticisms of his
contemporary Avicenna. The latter is the author of
a commentary On the Signiﬁcations of the Book of the
Rhetoric (Fı¯ ma‘a¯nı¯ kita¯b Rit:u¯rı¯qa¯) in his early work
al-H˙ ikma al-‘aru¯d˙ı¯yya; later on, he devoted to the Rhetoric
a section of the logic of his K. al-Shifa¯’, more paraphrastic
in style.
Averroes’ writings – an abridgment included in the
D˙ aru¯rı¯ fı¯ l-mant:iq, depending on al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s abridgment,
and the Middle Commentary, written in 1175 – are depen-
dent on the Arabic exegetical tradition of the Rhetoric,
which has little or no Greek antecedents, as we saw before.
The logician and doctor of the Almohad court Ibn T˙umlu¯s
(d. 1223), author of Introduction to the Art of Logic (al-
Madkhal ila¯ s:ina¯‘at al-Mant:iq), quite dependent on
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s abridgments, makes use also of Averroes’
Middle Commentary, who according to some sources
was his teacher.
Poetics and Physics
See Carmela Bafﬁoni’s articles in this volume.
De caelo
For this work, called in the Arabic tradition On the
Heavens and the World (al-Sama¯ʾ wa-l-‘a¯lam), the Fihrist
of Ibn al-Nadı¯m mentions Yah:ya¯ ibn al-Bit:rı¯q’s transla-
tion, which would have then been revised by H˙ unayn b.
Ish:a¯q. Another translation of part of book I would have
been done by Abu¯ Bishr Matta¯. These data partially agree
with the information given by the manuscript tradition.
The De caelo was thus translated into Arabic for the ﬁrst
time within the Kindı¯’s circle, to which belonged Yah:ya¯ ibn
al-Bit:rı¯q. This is the most widespread version. We can
distinguish between an Occidental tradition and an Ori-
ental tradition. The Occidental tradition is represented by
the text commented upon by Averroes, and reproduced in
full in the lemmas of his Long Commentary on the De
caelo; this text exists only partially in Arabic, since the
original of Averroes’ Commentary is extant only for the
part of Aristotle’s text running from I 7 to II 7; however,
the Latin translation by Michael Scot has come down to us
in its entirety. The Oriental tradition, on the other hand, is
represented by a group of Iranian manuscripts of the
seventeenth century, stemming from a version copied in
Damascus in the twelfth century. Ibn al-Bit:rı¯q’s text has
been more or less consistently revised in the twelfth cen-
tury, and it is one of the three MSS of this version that
served as the model for Badawı¯’s edition. Finally, there is
a fragmentary version (extracts from De caelo I 9–II 9)
preserved in only one MS, accompanied with Abu¯ l-Faraj
ibn al-T˙ayyib’s commentary, who is also likely the author
of this Arabic translation, that was made not from Greek,
but from Syriac. This translation is occasionally cited by
Averroes in his Long Commentary.
Ibn al-Nadı¯m mentions the existence of a commentary
of Alexander (only fragmentarily known in Greek), which
was translated by Abu¯ Bishr Matta¯. Themistius’ commen-
tary, translated from Syriac into Arabic by Abu¯ Bishr Matta¯
and revised by Yah:ya¯ ibn ‘Adı¯, is no longer extant in Arabic,
but one can read it in the Hebrew version done in the
thirteenth century by Zerah:ya¯ H˙ en, which, in its turn, served
as the model for a Latin translation in the sixteenth century.
Many Arabic works are speciﬁcally devoted to the De
caelo. According to Ibn Abı¯ Us:aybi‘a, H˙ unayn b. Ish:a¯q
composed an abridgment of the book On the Heavens
and Earth. This work has been often identiﬁed with the
De caelo et mundo supposedly translated in Toledo by
Gundissalinus and attributed to Avicenna in the Latin
medieval tradition, but this identiﬁcation is dubious.
The same H˙ unayn composed a treatise on the nature of
light (fı¯l-d˙aw’ ‘ala¯ h:aqı¯qatihi), containing an exposition of
the doctrine of motion from De caelo I 2. The bibliogra-
phies mention a commentary by al-Balkhı¯, a follower of
al-Kindı¯, on the beginning of Aristotle’s work. We are also
told that al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ commented upon the De caelo, and that
Ibn Zur‘a did so on a part of book III. Abu¯ l-Faraj ibn al-
T˙ayyib’s commentary mentioned in the sources probably
corresponds to the one which accompanies the translation
of the De caelo in the incomplete unicum MS Paris, BnF ar.
2281. We also know of a commentary by Abu¯ Sahl al-
Ması¯h:ı¯, a friend of Avicenna, who, in his turn, devoted
the second part of the physics of his K. al-Shifa¯’ to the
paraphrase of the De caelo. Averroes composed an abridg-
ment, a Middle Commentary and a Long Commentary.
The only Greek commentary directly known by Averroes is
Themistius’.
Generation and Corruption
The biobibliographical Arabic sources mention three
translations of the De generatione et corruptione, although
none is extant. Probably, the work was known in some
ancient version from the time of al-Kindı¯, who had written
a Clariﬁcation of the Efﬁcient Cause in Generation and
Corruption (al-Iba¯na ‘an al-‘illa al-fa¯‘ila li-l-kawn wa-l-
fasa¯d). Ish:a¯q b. H˙ unayn’s translation, made on the basis of
the Syriac version of his father H˙ unayn, is what the Latin
version of Gerard of Cremona (d. 1187) and the Hebrew
one of Zerah:yah H˙ en (d. after 1291) originate from.
Another translator of the School of H˙ unayn, Abu¯ ‘Uthma¯n
al-Dimashqı¯, seems to have produced his own translation –
mentioned by Ibn al-Nadı¯m – from the same Syriac
Aristotle, Arabic A
109
A

version. Ibn al-Nadı¯m mentions a third Arabic version,
that he attributes to Ibra¯hı¯m ibn Bakku¯sh, a little known
translator who was a contemporary of Yah:ya¯ ibn ‘Adı¯.
The Arabic philosophers knew of several other Greek
commentaries as well, notably Alexander of Aphrodisias’,
which is lost in Greek and in the Arabic version as well, but
was used by Averroes in his Middle Commentary on the De
generatione et corruptione, and in his abridgment of the
same
work:
so,
Averroes’
Middle
Commentary
is
a precious source for our knowledge of Alexander’s
work. One of the writings belonging in the alchemical
corpus attributed to Ja¯bir b. H˙ ayya¯n, the Kita¯b al-tas:rı¯f,
has equally revealed important quotations of Alexander’s
work. If one has to trust Ibn al-Nadı¯m, the Arabic transla-
tion was done by Abu¯ Bishr Matta¯. Another partial trans-
lation would have been done by Qust:a¯ ibn Lu¯qa¯. Less
certain are the traces that remain of Olympiodorus’ com-
mentary, which would have been put into Arabic primarily
by Ust:a¯th in al-Kindı¯’s times and in the tenth century by
Abu¯ Bishr Matta¯, this time from Syriac. We also ﬁnd
mention of two different commentaries by Themistius,
and one by Philoponus (the only one among these works
whose original Greek text has come down to us).
Philoponus’ commentary is also mentioned by Avicenna
in a letter to al-Bı¯ru¯nı¯. Avicenna devotes the third section
of the physics of his Shifa¯’ to the topic of coming-to-be and
passing away. In the Muslim West, Avempace devotes an
abridgment to the De generatione et corruptione, which
counts as a source of inspiration for Averroes in his own
Compendium, written before the Middle Commentary on
this Aristotelian work.
Meteorologica
There are two Arabic versions of Aristotle’s Meteorologica,
neither of which is a literal translation. The oldest one is
attributed to Yah:ya¯ ibn al-Bit:rı¯q by the Ottoman bibliog-
rapher H˙ ajji Khalı¯fa. It was translated from Syriac. Ibn al-
Nadı¯m’s Fihrist mentions another translation by Ibn
Suwa¯r, who is also the author of a work on meteorological
phenomena (al-a¯tha¯r al-mutakhayyala fı¯ l-jaww) in which
he directs the reader to his translation of Aristotle’s text for
the second part of his work; however, the translation is
lost. Ibn Suwa¯r’s translation was in all likelihood limited to
the chapters that Aristotle had devoted to the halo and
rainbow, which form the focus of Ibn Suwa¯r’s writing. It is
thus the version attributed to Ibn al-Bit:rı¯q that is pre-
served, and was consulted by most Arabic authors. This
translation is an adaptation, shorter than the original text,
and adapted in several places for monotheistic purposes.
It modiﬁes the order of the chapters and incorporates
sections from commentaries. This is the text that forms
the basis of Gerard of Cremona’s Latin version. In addi-
tion, we know of a Compendium likely having as a model
a Syriac version of an abridgment tracing back to the
Hellenistic or Imperial ages, which was translated into
Arabic by Ish:a¯q b. H˙ unayn.
Ibn Suwa¯r also translated from Syriac Theophrastus’
Meteorologica: this translation is extant. Alexander of
Aphrodisias’ commentary was translated into Arabic, as
well as Olympiodorus’. They are lost, but have left impor-
tant traces in the subsequent Arabic literature. Samuel ibn
Tibbon (d. around 1230) made use of Alexander’s com-
mentary in inserting fragments in his Hebrew translation
of Ibn al-Bit:rı¯q’s version, under the name Otot ha-
shamayim.
An
Arabic
commentary
attributed
to
Olympiodorus is preserved, but it is different with respect
to the Greek commentary, which is extant and whose
Arabic version is lost. What we have in Arabic is
a different work, in all likelihood the Arabic version by
H˙ unayn of a work originally in Greek or Syriac, that
intermingled Olympiodorus’ commentary and other
sources (Pseudo-Olympiodorus).
Al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ is credited in one source with a commentary
on the Meteorologica, but this work is lost. The Arabic
authors considerably reorganized Aristotle’s doctrines in
this treatise. Even though the authenticity of book IV is
not in doubt to Avicenna’s eyes, nevertheless, following
Alexander of Aphrodisias, he thinks that book IV should
follow the De generatione et corruptione, and deals with it
as with the fourth part of the Physics, devoted to actions
and passions, under the title of al-Af ‘a¯l wa-l-inﬁ‘a¯la¯t (De
actionibus et passionibus): this part should be located,
according to Avicenna, after the doctrine of generation
and corruption and prior to the sections that are properly
meteorological, that is, al-Ma‘a¯din wa-l-a¯tha¯r al-‘ulwiyya
(Metals and higher traces). Although not citing it literally,
Avicenna read Ibn al-Bit:rı¯q’s version, and his exposition
is quite inﬂuenced by the writing of the Pseudo-
Olympiodorus mentioned above. Avicenna’s work then
inﬂuenced the meteorology of the K. Al-Mu‘tabar by Abu¯
l-Baraka¯t al-Bag˙da¯dı¯. Averroes composed an abridgment
of the Meteorologica, taking as his model a similar, less-
reﬁned work from his predecessor Avempace; Averroes
also wrote a Middle Commentary that is a paraphrase of
Ibn al-Bit:rı¯q’s version. In his works, Averroes makes use
here and there of Alexander’s commentary as well as of
Avicenna’s and of that of the Pseudo-Olympiodorus.
De anima
The information from Ibn al-Nadı¯m’s Fihrist on the trans-
lations of the De anima are incomplete and difﬁcult to
interpret. The Fihrist knows of only one translator, Ish:a¯q b.
110 A
Aristotle, Arabic

H˙ unayn, and quotes the latter’s account: Ish:a¯q would have
made two successive versions of his translation, one
incomplete and done in all likelihood on the basis of the
Syriac version of his father H˙ unayn, previously mentioned
in the text; and a second, complete, that he made after he
had found a better manuscript. The Fihrist adds that this
manuscript ‘‘was the commentary of Themistius.’’ If this
passage is not corrupted, knowing that Themistius’ work
is a paraphrase that does not cite literally the lemmas of
Aristotle’s text, one is led to suppose that the MS
contained the text of the De anima in addition to
Themistius’ commentary, unless this passage limits itself
to refer, quite awkwardly, to Ish:a¯q’s translation of
Themistius’ work, which is extant. The Fihrist also men-
tions (1) a commentary by Olympiodorus in Syriac, an
information which is attributed to Yah:ya¯ ibn ‘Adı¯;
(2) a commentary by Simplicius in Syriac, existing
‘‘maybe in Arabic’’; (3) an ‘‘Alexandrian abridgment’’
which has been identiﬁed by R. Arnzen as a Neoplatonic
paraphrase of the De anima; this text circulated in one part
of the tradition as H˙ unayn’s Book of the Soul, and served as
a summary of Aristotle’s work combined with develop-
ments indirectly tied to Philoponus, possibly through
Stephanus of Alexandria. Despite the attribution to
H˙ unayn in part of the manuscript tradition, this work
was certainly translated before H˙ unayn and Ish:a¯q, the
style and vocabulary betraying the ways of al-Kindı¯’s cir-
cle; ﬁnally, (4) an abridgment by Yah:ya¯ ibn al-Bit:rı¯q.
The extant documentation on translations, properly
speaking, is found in the following texts: (1) A version
preserved in Arabic, which was falsely attributed to Ish:a¯q
ibn H˙ unayn by its editor, ‘A. Badawı¯. Indeed, this text is
a nonliteral and sometimes paraphrased version that has
been traced back to al-Kindı¯’s times by H. Ga¨tje, who also
attributed it tentatively to Ibn Na¯‘ima al-H˙ ims:ı¯, the trans-
lator of the pseudo-Theology of Aristotle. Averroes some-
times cites this translation in his Long Commentary on
the De anima (extant only in Latin) as ‘‘alia translatio’’
(2) A paraphrase by Avicenna, fragmentarily preserved in
his Book of Just Judgment (Kita¯b al-Ins:a¯f), citing the
lemmas of the De anima: at the end of the text (after
431a14), these lemmas correspond to the aforementioned
translation; as for the beginning of the text, they corre-
spond, in Arabic, to what we can read in Latin in
(3) Averroes’ Long Commentary on the De anima, which
cites in extenso the Latin version of another Arabic trans-
lation of the De anima, that of Ish:a¯q ibn H˙ unayn. Of the
latter there is as well an Arabic–Hebrew version, done by
Zerah:ya¯ H˙ en at the end of the thirteenth century. The
comparison
between
the
Arabic–Latin
lemmas
in
Averroes’ Long Commentary and in the Arabic–Hebrew
shows that Zerah:ya¯ probably extracted the lemmas from
Averroes’ commentary. As for Avicenna, he commented
on a composite version, constituted mostly from the ver-
sion (or one of the versions) of Ish:a¯q, and completed, as
for the ﬁnal part, with the translation of the Kindı¯ circle. It
is possible that that which was completed in this way was
exactly that ﬁrst version from Ish:a¯q, which according to
the Fihrist claims was unﬁnished. The version used by
Averroes as the basic text for his commentary is different
from Avicenna’s, but the manuscripts of the Arabic–
Hebrew version, that are identical to it, remark in the
same place (431a14) that this is the end of Ish:a¯q’s transla-
tion, adding that it was completed by Abu¯ ‘I¯sa¯ (probably
Ibn Zur‘a). Thus, it seems that another supplement of the
incomplete version did exist. Finally, it should be noted
that the version used by Averroes in the paraphrase that
constitutes the Middle Commentary differs here and there
from that which forms the basis of the lemmatic exegesis
provided in the Long Commentary.
The main Greek sources used by the Arabic readers of
the De anima are Themistius’ paraphrase in Ish:a¯q’s trans-
lation, mentioned above, and Alexander’s De anima. The
latter is no longer extant in Arabic, but is preserved in an
unedited Arabic–Hebrew translation. Generally speaking,
Alexander’s doctrines as expounded in the De anima and
De intellectu often prevailed over the reading of Aristotle’s
own work. Even if al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯had Aristotle’s De anima at his
disposal, he did not use it; the section on the soul in
Avicenna’s K. al-Shifa¯’ recasts his reading of Aristotle
within a synthesis of Alexander’s and Neoplatonic doc-
trines. Avempace, who wrote a Book on the Soul (Kita¯b
al-nafs), as well as Averroes when he wrote his abridgment
on the soul, did not refer to Aristotle’s work, but primarily
to Alexander.
Parva naturalia
The small works gathered in the Latin tradition under the
name Parva naturalia met different fates in the Arabic–
Muslim world. The treatises were not translated in their
entirety. The Fihrist of Ibn al-Nadı¯m mentions a book On
Sense and the Sensed, in two treatises, and claims that there
is no translation deemed worthy of mention, except than
a small part glossed by al-T˙abarı¯, a follower of the Baghdad
scholar Abu¯ Bishr Matta¯.
We know of an Arabic version found in a unique MS
from Rampur (India) by H. Daiber, lacking of the begin-
ning: the text is a version in three books of six of the little
works on natural history: De sens. (lacking in the MS), De
mem., De som., De ins., De div., and De long., that
a compiler completed with Plotinian and Galenic ele-
ments: the edition of this collection, by R. Hansberger, is
Aristotle, Arabic A
111
A

forthcoming. The comparison of this text with Averroes’
commentary shows that the latter is a close paraphrase
that should be classiﬁed as a Middle Commentary.
The motley and clumsy version which was taken to be
Aristotle’s On Sense and the Sensed by all Arabic writers
gave rise to the intense exegetical activity of these philos-
ophers, whose outcome was the famous theory of the
internal senses.
Zoological Treatises
Aristotle’s zoological writings circulated in the Arab world
in a review called Kita¯b al-H˙ ayawa¯n (Book of Animals) in
which treatises (maqa¯la¯t) 1–10 correspond to the Historia
animalium, treatises 11–14 to De part. an., and treatises
15–19 to De gen. an. The Arab translation of the ninth
century is attributed to Yah:ya¯ ibn al-Bit:rı¯q in the Arabic
sources as well as in several manuscripts, but the analysis of
vocabulary and style by the editors of these texts strongly
questions this attribution. The lexicon presents similarities
but also notable divergences with Yah:ya¯’s; however, the
translator did in all likelihood belong in the same circle,
that of al-Kindı¯, so that the name of Ust:a¯th can be advanced,
that is, the translator of the Metaphysics for al-Kindı¯.
Aristotle’s treatises De motu animalium and De incessu
animalium were not read by the Arabs, but in his Long
Commentary on the De anima, Averroes claims he had at
his disposal an abridgment of the De motu included in
Nicolaus of Damascus’summary of Peripatetic philosophy
(PerιtZ̑ς ’Αristοtέlους jilοsοjίaς); the abridgment
of the De motu, however, is not found in the Syriac version
of this work which has come down to us. The three
treatises (Hist. an., De part. an., and De gen. an.) were
also summarized in Nicolas’ summary, probably available
to the Arab writers in its entirety. The Arabic translation of
the PerιtZ̑ς ’Αristοtέlους jilοsοjίaς is attributed to
Ibn Zur‘a (d. 1008). We also know of an abridgment falsely
attributed to Themistius, translated by Ish:a¯q b. H˙ unayn.
In addition to other abridgments completely lost, like
that of Ibn al-Haytham (d. 1039) and that attributed to
‘Abd al-Lat:ı¯f al-Bag˙da¯dı¯ (d. 1231), also Abu¯ l-Faraj Ibn
al-T˙ayyib composed an abridgment of the Book of Animals
which is lost in Arabic, but is extant in the Hebrew version,
as for the books corresponding to the History of Animals.
The Book of Animals occupies an important place in
Avicenna’s K. al-Shifa¯’, where it represents the eighth sec-
tion of the Physics, covering the set of the 19 books,
including the History of Animals. In his exposition of the
generation of animals, Avicenna presents the interesting
peculiarity of holding a reconciliatory position between
Aristotle and Galen on the role of masculine and feminine
semen.
Books 11–19, corresponding to the De part an. and De
gen. an., were particularly studied in the Muslim West,
whereas the Historia animalium did not generate much
interest. Avempace devoted a few treatises to books 11–19
(K. al-H˙ ayawa¯n li-Abı¯Bakr Ibn Ba¯jja), and Averroes made
a paraphrase of them in the Middle Commentary (Talkhı¯s:
tis‘ maqa¯la¯t min Kita¯b al-h:ayawa¯n), lost in Arabic but
extant in Hebrew, as well as in a Latin translation of the
Renaissance. Contrary to Avicenna, Averroes argues for
Aristotle’s doctrine on animal generation, and devotes
a long critique to Galen’s position.
Metaphysics
The oldest Arabic translation of the Metaphysics, made in
the ninth century by a certain Ust:a¯th (Eustathius) for al-
Kindı¯, is mainly known by the use Averroes makes of it in
the Long Commentary on the Metaphysics edited by Mau-
rice Bouyges S.J. after a MS housed in Leiden, which is the
unique testimony of this crucial text. Ust:a¯th’s translation
contained most of Aristotle’s text, with the exception of
books A, K (which was not translated into Arabic), and
N. For book Lambda, as well as Ust:a¯th’s, Ibn al-Nadı¯m
mentions a translation by Abu¯ Bishr Matta¯ accompanied
by Alexander of Aphrodisias’ commentary (lost in Greek):
this is the translation used by Averroes in his Long Com-
mentary on the Metaphysics for book Lambda. Themistius’
paraphrase, translated by Abu¯ Bishr Matta¯, is also pre-
served. Ibn al-Nadı¯m mentions several books of the Meta-
physics translated by Ish:a¯q b. H˙ unayn as well.
To the information given in the Fihrist we must add the
mention of other translations echoed in Averroes’ com-
mentary. Bouyges claimed he could distinguish in these
citations, designed as ‘‘second’’ and ‘‘third translation’’-s,
the traces of at least two translations other than Ust:a¯th’s
and Abu¯ Bishr’s ones, that are cited in the commentary. At
one place, Averroes names the author of one of them: Yah:ya¯
ibn ‘Adı¯. We do not have any other testimonies that Yah:ya¯
ibn ‘Adı¯ did this translation, but Averroes’ mentions allow
this possibility. As for the other version, Bouyges surmises
that it could be the work of that Shamlı¯, otherwise
unknown, who is mentioned by Ibn al-Nadı¯m. An anno-
tation of the Leiden MS also names Ibn Zur‘a as the author
of another translation of Book Lambda. Of this book,
another anonymous and incomplete translation exists,
containing only chapters 6–10: its editor, ‘A. Badawı¯, attri-
butes it to Ish:a¯q b. H˙ unayn, an attribution that, although
not contradicting with the Fihrist, is purely speculative.
This translation nears paraphrase in several places.
The version of Themistius’ paraphrase of Book
Lambda played a signiﬁcant role in the Arabic philosoph-
ical tradition. This work is no longer extant in Greek and
112 A
Aristotle, Arabic

seemingly was not known by Greek authors; on the con-
trary, it enjoyed a considerable diffusion among the Arab
philosophers. The full Graeco-Arabic version is lost either,
except for a small part, but it survives in its entirety in
Hebrew, thanks to the translation by Moses b. Tibbon,
achieved in 1255. Although the Fihrist indicates Abu¯ Bishr
Matta¯ as the translator, a MS attributes it to Ish:a¯q b.
H˙ unayn. Both attributions are accepted in modern
scholarship.
Books A and N, missing from Ust:a¯th’s translation
were, according to A. Bertolacci, translated a bit later
(end of the ninth century) by Nazı¯f ibn Ayman. Averroes
also transmits the main part of book alpha elatton in Ish:a¯q
b. Hunayn’s translation. In cross-checking the testimonies
of ancient bibliographers and citations by the authors, we
can infer that Ish:a¯q’s version would also include at least
book B, G, D, Y, Η, Ι, and L. As for Book A, there are
traces of a version other than Nazı¯f’s (transmitted by
Averroes), done by Ust:a¯th.
See also: ▶‘Abd al-Lat:ı¯f al-Bag˙da¯dı¯ ▶Abu¯ l-Baraka¯t al-
Bag˙da¯dı¯ ▶Alexander of Aphrodisias and Arabic Aristote-
lianism ▶Alexandrian Tradition in Arabic: Philosophy
▶al-Balkhı¯, Abu¯ Zayd ▶al-Bı¯ru¯nı¯, Abu¯ Rayh:a¯n ▶al-
Fa¯ra¯bı¯, Abu¯ Nas˙r ▶Galen, Arabic ▶Ibn Ba¯jja, Abu¯ Bakr
ibn al-Sa¯ʾig˙ (Avempace) ▶Ibn Rushd, Muh˙ammad ibn
Ah˙mad al-H˙ afı¯d (Averroes) ▶Ibn al-Samh: ▶Ibn Sı¯na¯,
Abu¯ ʿAlı¯ (Avicenna) ▶Ibn Suwa¯r (Ibn al-Khamma¯r)
▶Ibn al-T˙ayyib ▶Ibn T˙umlu¯s ▶Ibn Zurʿa, ʿI¯sa¯ ibn Ish:a¯q
▶al-Kindı¯, Abu¯ Yu¯suf Yaʿqu¯b ibn Ish:a¯q ▶Logic in the
Arabic and Islamic World ▶Philoponus, Arabic ▶Ploti-
nus, Arabic ▶Porphyry, Arabic ▶Themistius, Arabic
▶Theophrastus, Arabic ▶Translations from Greek into
Arabic
Bibliography
Primary Sources
General
Ibn al-Nadı¯m (1871–1872) Kita¯b al-Fihrist, 2 vols, ed. Flu¨gel G, Ro¨diger J,
Mu¨ller A. Vogel, Leipzig (English trans. Dodge B (1970) The
Fihrist of al-Nadı¯m, 2 vols. Columbia University Press, New York/
London)
Ibn Juljul (1955) T˙abaqa¯t al-At:ibba¯’ wa-l-h:ukama¯’, ed. Sayyid F. Institut
Franc¸ais d’Arche´ologie Orientale, Cairo
Organon, Categories, De interpretatione, Prior Analytics, Posterior Ana-
lytics, Topics, Sophistical Refutations
(1963) Al-Farabi’s Short Commentary on Aristotle’s ‘‘Prior Analytics’’,
trans., intro. et notes: Rescher N. University of Pittsburgh Press,
Pittsburgh
Aristotelis (1962) Omnia quae extant Opera. Averrois Cordubensis in
ea
opera
omnes,
qui
ad
haec
usque
tempora
pervenere,
commentarii. Minerva GmbH, Frankfurt am Main (repr apud
Junctas, Venetiis, 1562)
Aristotle (1980) Mant:iq Arist:u¯, 3 vols, ed. Badawı¯ ‘Abd al-Rah˙ma¯n.
Wika¯lat al-mat:bu¯‘a¯t/Da¯r al-qalam, Kuweit/Beirut
Averroes (1969) Middle Commentary on Porphyry’s Isagoge, translated
from the Hebrew and Latin versions, and on Aristotle’s Categoriae,
translated from the original Arabic and the Hebrew and Latin ver-
sions, trans. Davidson H. Corpus commentariorum Averrois in
Aristotelem. Versio Anglica, vol 1, a, 1–2. The Mediaeval Academy
of America, Cambridge/Berkeley/Los Angeles
Averroe`s (1982) Paraphrase de la logique d’Aristote, 3 vols, ed. Je´hamy G.
Publications
de
l’Universite´
Libanaise.
Section
des
e´tudes
philosophiques et sociales 12. Librairie orientale, Beirut
Averroes’ (1983) Middle Commentaries on Aristotles’ Categories and De
interpretatione, trans. Butterworth Ch Princeton University Press,
Princeton (reprint St. Augustine’ Press, South Bend, 2000)
Averroe`s (2000) Commentaire Moyen sur le De interpretatione, intro. and
French trans. Benmakhlouf A, Diebler S. Sic et non. Vrin, Paris
Butterworth Charles (1977) Averroe¨s’ Three Short Commentaries on
Aristotles’ ‘‘Topics’’, ‘‘Rhetoric’’ and ‘‘Poetics’’. Studies in Islamic
philosophy and science, ed. and trans. Butterworth Ch. State Uni-
versity of New York Press, Albany
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯
(1971)
Alfarabi’s
Commentary
on
Aristotle’s
PΕΡΙ
ΕΡΜΗΝΕΙΑS (De interpretatione), ed. Kutsch W, Marrow S. Dar el
Machreq, Beirut
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ (1987) Al-Mant:iq ‘inda al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ (al-Maktaba al-falsaﬁyya), ed.
Fakhrı¯ M. Da¯r al-Masˇriq, Beirut
Ferrari Cleophea (2006) Der Kategorienkommentar von Abu¯ l-Faragˇ
‘Abdalla¯h Ibn al-T˙ayyib. Texte und Untersuchungen. Aristoteles
Semitico-Latinus 19. Brill, Leiden
Ibn al-Muqaffaʿ (1978) Al-Mant:iq (Logic) by Ibn al-Muqaffa‘. H˙ udu¯d
al-mant:iq (Deﬁnitions of Logic) by Ibn Bihrı¯z, ed. Daneche-
Pajuh MT. Anjuma¯n-e Sha¯hansha¯hi Falsafe-ye Tehra¯n, Tehran
Ibn Sı¯na¯ (1404–1405 h./1983–1985) K. al-shifa¯’. al-Mant:iq, 4 vols (repr
Manshu¯ra¯t maktabat A¯yatulla¯h al-‘uz˙ma¯ al-Mar‘ashı¯al-Najafı¯, Qom)
Ibn Zur’a (1994) Mant:iq Ibn Zur‘a (al-‘Iba¯ra, al-Qiya¯s, al-Burha¯n), ed.
Jiha¯mı¯ Jr, al-‘Ajam R. Da¯r al-ﬁkr al-lubna¯nı¯, Beirut
Shehaby Nabil (1973) The propositional logic of Avicenna. A translation
from al-Shifa¯’: al-Qiya¯s with introduction, commentary and glossary.
The language of science. Kluwer, Dordrecht
Zimmermann Friedrich Wilhelm (1981) Al-Farabi’s Commentary and
Short Treatise on Aristotle’s De Interpretatione. Classical and medi-
eval logic texts III. Oxford University Press, London/Oxford
Rhetoric
Averroe`s (Ibn Rusˇd) (2003) Commentaire moyen a` la Rhe´torique
d’Aristote, 3 vols, e´d., trans., et comm.: Aouad M. Textes et traditions
5. Vrin, Paris
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ (1987) Kita¯b al-Khat:a¯ba. In: al-Mant:iqiyya¯t li-l-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, vol I: al-
Nus:u¯s: al-mant:iqiyya, ed. Daneche Pajuh MT. Manshu¯ra¯t maktabat
A¯yatulla¯h al-‘uz˙ma¯ al-Mar‘ashı¯ al-Najafı¯, Qom, pp 456–492
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ (1971) Deux ouvrages ine´dits sur la rhe´torique. I. Kita¯b al-
Khat:a¯ba, e´d. et trans. Langhade Jacques. II. Didascalia in Rhetoricam
Aristotelis ex glosa Alpharabi(i), e´d. Grignaschi M. Recherches.
Universite´ Saint Joseph. Pense´e arabe et musulmane 48. Dar el
Machreq, Beirut
Ibn Sı¯na¯ (1404–1405 h./1983–1985) al-Shifa¯’. al-Mant:iq, 4 vols (repr
Manshu¯ra¯t maktabat A¯yatulla¯h al-‘uz˙ma¯ al-Mar‘ashı¯al-Najafı¯, Qom)
De caelo
Abu¯ l-Walı¯d Ibn Rushd (2002) Sharh: al-Sama¯’ wa-l-‘a¯lam li-l-h:akı¯m
Arist:u¯t:a¯lı¯s, 2 vols, ed. Jum‘a As’ad Markaz al-nashr al-ja¯mi‘ı¯, Tunis
Arist:u¯t:a¯lı¯s (1961) fı¯ l-sama¯’ wa-l-a¯tha¯r al-‘ulwiyya (Aristotelis De caelo et
Meteorologica), ed. Badawı¯ ‘A. al-Hay’a al-mis:riyya al-‘a¯mma li-l-
kutub, Cairo
Aristotle, Arabic A
113
A

Averrois (2003) Commentaria Magna in Aristotelem. De celo et mundo,
2 vols, ed. Carmody FJ. Recherches de The´ologie et Philosophie
me´die´vales. Bibliotheca 4. Peeters, Louvain
Ibn Rushd (1984) Talkhıˆs al-sama¯’ wa-l-’aˆlam, e´d. Alaoui J. Universite´ Sidi
Mohamed Ben Abdellah. Publications de la Faculte´ des Lettres – Fe`s.
Faculte´ des Lettres, Fes
Ibn Rushd (1994) Commentary on Aristotle’s Book on the Heaven and
the Universe: Sharh: Kita¯b al-Sama¯’ wa-l-‘a¯lam. With an introduction
by Endress G. Reproduced from MS 11821, National Library, Tunis
(Ah:madiyya Fund, 5538). Institute for the History of Arabic–Islamic
Science, Frankfurt-on-the-Main
Ibn Sı¯na¯ (1404 h./1983–1984) al-Shifa¯’. al-T˙abı¯‘iyya¯t. II. al-Sama¯’
wa-l-‘a¯lam. III. al-Kawn wa-l-fasa¯d. IV. al-Af‘a¯l wa-l-inﬁ‘a¯la¯t, ed.
Qa¯sim M. Da¯r al-Ka¯tib al-‘arabı¯ li-l-t:iba¯‘a wa-l-nashr, s. d., Cairo
(repr al-T˙abı¯‘iyya¯t, vol II. Maktabat A¯yatulla¯h al-‘uz˙ma¯ al-Mar‘ashı¯
al-Najafı¯, Qom)
Themistii (1902) in libros Aristotelis de caelo paraphrasis: hebraice et
latine, ed. Landauer S. CAG V, 4. Reimer, Berlin
Generation and Corruption
Avempace (1995) Libro de la generacio´n y corrupcio´n, e´d. et trans. Puig
Montada
J.
Pensamiento
islamico
4.
Consejo
Superior
de
Investigaciones Cientı´ﬁcas, Madrid
Averroes (1992) Epı´tome del libro Sobre la generacio´n y la corrupcio´n, e´d.
et trans. esp. Puig Montada J. Pensamiento Isla´mico, 2. Consejo
Superior de Investigaciones Cientı´ﬁcas, Madrid
Eichner Heidrun (2005) Averroes’ Mittlerer Kommentar zu Aristoteles’
De generatione et corruptione. Abhandlungen der Nordrhein-
westfa¨lischen Akademie der Wissenschaften. Paderborn/Munich/
Vienna/Zurich
Ibn Sı¯na¯ (1404 h./1983–1984) al-Shifa¯’. al-T˙abı¯‘iyya¯t. II. al-Sama¯’ wa-l-
‘a¯lam. III. al-Kawn wa-l-fasa¯d. IV. al-Af‘a¯l wa-l-inﬁ‘a¯la¯t, e´d.
Qa¯sim M. Da¯r al-Ka¯tib al-‘arabı¯ li-l-t:iba¯‘a wa-l-nashr, s. d., Cairo
(repr al-Tabı¯‘iyya¯t, vol II. Maktabat A¯yatulla¯h al-‘uz˙ma¯ al-Mar‘ashı¯
al-Najafı¯, Qom)
Meteorologica
(1994) Talkhı¯s: al-A¯tha¯r al-‘ulwiyya li-Abı¯al-Walı¯d Muh:ammad ibn Rushd
al-h:afı¯d, ed. al-‘Alawı¯ J. Centre des E´tudes averroı¨stes, Fe`s. Se´rie des
textes averroı¨stes 2. Da¯r al-Maghrib al-isla¯mı¯, Beirut
Daiber Hans (1975) Ein Kompendium der aristotelischen Meteorologie in
der Fassung des H˙ unayn ibn Ish:a¯q (Jawa¯mi‘ Abı¯ Zayd H˙ unayn ibn
Ish:a¯q al-‘Iba¯dı¯ li-kita¯b Arist:u¯t:a¯lı¯s fı¯ l-a¯tha¯r al-‘ulwiyya). Aristoteles
Semitico-latinus. Prolegomena et parerga 1. Noord Hollandsche
U. M., Amsterdam/Oxford
Daiber Hans (1992) The meteorology of Theophrastus in Syriac and
Arabic translation. In: Forthenbaugh W, Gutas D (eds) Theophras-
tus: his psychological, doxographical and scientiﬁc writings. Rutgers
University studies in classical humanities 5. Rutgers University Press,
New Brunswick, pp 166–293
Fontaine Resianne (1995) Otot ha-Shamayim. Samuel Ibn Tibbon’s
Hebrew version of Aristotle’s Meteorology. A critical edition with
introduction, translation & index. Aristoteles Semitico-Latinus 8.
Brill, Leiden
Ibn Rushd (1994) Risa¯lat al-a¯tha¯r al-‘ulwiyya, ed. al-‘Ajam Rafı¯q,
Jiha¯mı¯ Jı¯ra¯r. Rasa¯’il Ibn Rusˇd al-falsaﬁyya, 4. Da¯r al-ﬁkr al-lubna¯nı¯,
Beirut
Ibn Sı¯na¯ (1404 H/1983–1984) al-Shifa¯’. al-T˙abı¯‘iyya¯t. 5. al-Ma‘a¯din wa-l-
a¯tha¯r al-‘ulwiyya, ed. Muntas:ir ‘Abd al-H˙ alı¯m, Za¯yid Sa’ı¯d, Isma¯‘ı¯l
‘Abdalla¯h. al-Hay’a al-‘a¯mma li-shu’u¯n al-mat:a¯bi‘al-amı¯riyya, Cairo
(reprint al-T˙abı¯‘iyya¯t, vol II. Maktabat A¯yatulla¯h al-‘uz˙ma¯ al-
Mar‘ashı¯ al-Najafı¯, Qom)
Ibn Sı¯na¯ (1404 h./1983–1984) al-Shifa¯’. al-T˙abı¯‘iyya¯t. II. al-Sama¯’ wa-l-
‘a¯lam. III. al-Kawn wa-l-fasa¯d. IV. al-Af‘a¯l wa-l-inﬁ‘a¯la¯t, ed.
Qa¯sim M. Da¯r al-Ka¯tib al-‘arabı¯ li-l-t:iba¯‘a wa-l-nashr, s. d., Cairo
(reprint al-T˙abı¯‘iyya¯t, vol II. Maktabat A¯yatulla¯h al-‘uz˙ma¯ al-
Mar‘ashı¯ al-Najafı¯, Qom)
Petraitis Casimir (1967) The Arabic version of Aristotle’s Meteorology.
A critical edition with introduction and Greek–Arabic glossaries.
Recherches publie´es sous la direction de l’Institut des lettres
orientales de Beyrouth. Pense´e arabe et musulmane 39. Dar el
Machreq, Beirut
Schoonheim Pieter Leendert (2000) Aristotle’s Meteorology in the
Arabico-Latin tradition: a critical edition of the texts with introduc-
tion and indices. Aristoteles Semitico-Latinus 12. Brill, Leiden
De anima
Alexander of Aphrodisias (1971) Maqa¯lat al-Iskandar al-Afru¯dı¯sı¯ fı¯ l-‘aql
‘ala¯ ra’y Arist:u¯t:a¯lı¯s. In: Badawı¯ ‘A (ed) Shuru¯h: ‘ala¯ Arist:u¯ mafqu¯da
fı¯ l-yu¯na¯niyya wa-rasa¯’il ukhra¯/Commentaires sur Aristote perdus et
autres e´pıˆtres. Dar el-Machreq, Beirut pp 31–42
Aristotle (1994) Aristotle’s De anima. Translated into Hebrew by
Zerah˙yah Ben Isaac Ben Shealtiel H˙ en, ed. Bos G. Aristoteles
Semitico-latinus 6. Brill, Leiden
Arist:u¯t:a¯lı¯s (1954) Fı¯ l-nafs. . ., ed. Badawı¯ ‘A. Dira¯sa¯t isla¯miyya 16.
Maktabat al-nahd˙a al-mis:riyya, Cairo
Arnzen Ru¨diger (1998) Aristoteles’ De anima. Eine verlorene spa¨tantike
Paraphrase in arabischer und persischer U¨ berlieferung. Arabischer
Text nebst Kommentar, quellengeschichtlichen Studien & Glossaren.
Aristoteles Semitico-Latinus 9. Brill, Leiden/New York/Ko¨ln
Averroe¨s (2002) Middle commentary on Aristotle’s De anima, ed. and
English trans. Ivry A. Brigham Young University Press, Provo
Averrois Cordubensis (1953) Commentarium Magnum in Aristotelis
De anima libros, ed. Crawford FS. Corpus Commentariorum
Averrois in Aristotelem, VI, 1. The Mediæval Academy of America,
Cambridge
Lyons MC (ed) (1973) An Arabic translation of Themistius’ Commentary
on Aristotle’s De anima. Oriental Series, 2. Cassirer, Columbia/
Oxford
Parva naturalia
Abu¯ al-Walı¯d ibn Rushd (1972) Talkhı¯s: Kita¯b Al-H˙ iss wa-l-mah:su¯s/
Averrois Cordubensis compendia librorum Aristotelis qui Parva
naturalia vocantur, ed. and trans. Blumberg H. CCAA: Versionum
Arabicarum 7. The Mediæval Academy of America, Cambridge
Averrois Cordubensis (1949) compendia librorum Aristotelis qui Parva
naturalia vocantur, ed. Shields EL, Blumberg H. CCAA: Versionum
Latinarum VII. The Mediæval Academy of America, Cambridge
Zoological Treatises
Al-‘Imara¯tı¯ Jawa¯d (2002) K. al-H˙ ayawa¯n li-Abı¯ Bakr Ibn Ba¯jja.
Mas:a¯dir al-Tura¯th al-falsafı¯ al-isla¯mı¯. al-Markaz al-thaqa¯fı¯ al-‘arabı¯,
Beirut
Aristotle (1971) Generation of Animals. The Arabic translation com-
monly ascribed to Yah:ya¯ ibn al-Bit:rı¯q, ed. Brugman J, Drossaart Lulofs
H. Publication of the ‘De Goeje Fund’ XXIII. Brill, Leiden
Averroes (1562) Sextum Volumen Aristotelis libri omnes, Ad Animalium
cognitionem attinentes. Cum Averrois Commentariis [. . .]. apud
Iunctas, Venetiis (repr Minerva, Frankfurt am Main, 1962)
Ibn Sı¯na¯ (1406/1985–1986) al-Shifa¯’. al-T˙abı¯‘iyya¯t. VII. Al-H˙ ayawa¯n, ed.
Muntas:ir ‘A et al. al-Hay’a al-mis:riyya li-l-ta’lı¯f wa-l-nashr, s. d.,
Cairo (repr al-T˙abı¯‘iyya¯t, vol III. Maktabat A¯yatulla¯h al-‘uz˙ma¯ al-
Mar‘ashı¯ al-Najafı¯, Qom)
Kruk Remke (1979) The Arabic version of Aristotle’s Parts of Animals.
Books XI–XIVof the Kita¯b al-h:ayawa¯n. Aristoteles Semitico-Latinus,
114 A
Aristotle, Arabic

2. Koninklijke Nederlandse Akademie van Wetenschappen, Amster-
dam/Oxford
Metaphysics
‘Afı¯fı¯ Abu¯ l-‘Ala¯’ (1937) Tarjama ‘arabiyya qadı¯ma li-maqa¯lat al-La¯m min
Kita¯b ma¯ ba‘d al-t:abı¯‘a li-Arist:u¯. Majallat kulliyyat al-a¯da¯b (Cairo) 5
(1): 89–138
Averroe`s (1973) Tafsı¯r ma¯ ba‘d at:-t:abı¯‘a (Grand Commentaire de la
Me´taphysique), 2nd edn, 1 vol, Notice þ 3 vols, ed. Bouyges M.
Bibliotheca Arabica Scholasticorum, V, 1-VII. Dar el Machreq, Beirut
Badawı¯ ‘Abd al-Rah:ma¯n (1947) Arist:u¯ ‘inda l-‘Arab. Dira¯sa wa-nus:u¯s: g˙ayr
manshu¯ra. Dira¯sa¯t isla¯miyya 5. Maktabat al-nahd˙a al-mis˙riyya, Cairo
The´mistius (1999) Paraphrase de la Me´taphysique d’Aristote, Trad. intro.
et notes: Brague R. Livre Lambda. Vrin, Paris
Secondary Sources
General
Bergstra¨sser G (1913) H˙ unain ibn Ish:a¯q und seine Schule. Brill, Leiden
D’Ancona C (2001) Commenting on Aristotle. From Late Antiquity to the
Arab Aristotelianism. In: Geerlings W, Schulze Ch (eds) Der
Kommentar
in
Antike
und
Mittelalter.
Beitra¨ge
zu
seiner
Erforschung. Brill, Boston/Leiden/Cologne, pp 200–251
D’Ancona C (2008) Aristotle and Aristotelianism. In: Encyclopaedia of
Islam Three. Brill, Leiden/Boston, pp 153–169
Endress G (1973) Proclus Arabus. Zwanzig Abschnitte aus der Institutio
Theologica in arabischer U¨ bersetzung. Imprimerie Catholique,
Wiesbaden/Beirut
Endress G (1987) Die Wissenschaftliche Literatur. In: Fischer W,
Ga¨tje H (eds) Grundriß der arabischen Philologie, vol II. Reichert,
Wiesbaden, pp 400–506
Endress G (1992) Die Entwicklung der Fachsprache. In: Fischer W,
Ga¨tje H (eds) Grundriß der arabischen Philologie, vol III (Suppl).
Reichert, Wiesbaden, pp 3–152
Endress G (1997a) The circle of al-Kindı¯: early Arabic translations from
the Greek and the rise of Islamic philosophy. In: Endress G, Kruk R
(e´ds) The ancient tradition and Islamic Hellenism. Studies on
the transmission of Greek philosophy and sciences dedicated to
H. J. Drossaart Lulofs on his ninetieth birthday. Research School
CNWS, Leiden
Endress G (1997b) L’Aristote arabe: re´ception, autorite´ et transformation
du Premier Maıˆtre. Medioevo 23:1–42
Goulet R (ed) (1989) Dictionnaire des Philosophes Antiques. I: Abbam-
(m)on a` Antioche´a. E´ditions du CNRS, Paris
Goulet R (ed) (2003) Dictionnaire des Philosophes Antiques. Supple´-
ment. E´ditions du CNRS, Paris
Gutas D (1998) Greek thought, Arabic culture. The Graeco-Arabic trans-
lation movement in Baghdad and early ‘Abba¯sid Society (2nd–4th/
8th–10th centuries). Routledge, New York
Meyerhof M (1926) New light on H˙ unain ibn Ish:aˆq and his period. Isis
8:685–724
Peters FE (1968) Aristoteles Arabus. The Oriental translations and com-
mentaries on the Aristotelian Corpus. Monographs on Mediterra-
nean Antiquity, 2. Brill, Leiden
Walzer R (1962) Greek into Arabic. Essays on Islamic philosophy. Oriental
studies 1. Cassirer, Oxford
Organon, Categories, De interpretatione, Prior Analytics, Posterior Ana-
lytics, Topics, Sophistical Refutations
Hugonnard-Roche H, Elamrani Jamal A (1989) L’Organon. Tradition
syriaque et arabe. In: Goulet R (ed) Dictionnaire des philosophes
antiques. I: Abbam(m)on a` Antioche´a. E´ditions du CNRS, Paris,
pp 502–528
Rescher N (1963) Studies in the history of Arabic logic. University of
Pittsburgh Press, Pittsburgh
Rescher N (1964) The development of Arabic logic. University of Pitts-
burgh Press, Pittsburgh
Rhetoric
Aouad M (1989) La Rhe´torique. Tradition syriaque et arabe. In: Goulet R
(ed) Dictionnaire des Philosophes antiques, vol 1, E´ditions du CNRS,
Paris, pp 455–472; Watt J, Aouad M (2003) La Rhe´torique. Tradition
syriaque et arabe (comple´ments). In: Goulet R (ed) Dictionnaire
des Philosophes antiques. Supple´ment. CNRS e´ditions, Paris, pp
219–223
Aouad M (1996) Les fondements de la Rhe´torique d’Aristote reconside´re´s
par Averroe`s dans le Commentaire Moyen de la Rhe´torique, ou le
de´veloppement du concept de ‘point de vue imme´diat’. Bulletin
d’E´tudes Orientales 48:113–128
Aouad M (1997) De´ﬁnition du concept de loue´ selon le point de vue
imme´diat dans la Rhe´torique du Sˇifa¯’. In: Hasnawi A, Elamrani Jamal A,
Aouad M (eds) Perspectives arabes et me´die´vales sur la tradition
scientiﬁque
et
philosophique
grecque.
Orientalia
Lovaniensia
Analecta 79. Peeters, Louvain/Paris, pp 409–451
Aouad M, Rashed M (1997) L’exe´ge`se de la Rhe´torique d’Aristote:
recherches sur quelques commentateurs grecs, arabes et byzantins.
Premie`re partie. Medioevo 23:43–189
Aouad M, Rashed M (1999–2000) L’exe´ge`se de la Rhe´torique d’Aristote:
recherches sur quelques commentateurs grecs, arabes et byzantins.
Deuxie`me partie. Medioevo 25:551–649
Black DL (1990) Logic and Aristotle’s Rhetoric and Poetics in medieval
Arabic philosophy. Islamic philosophy and theology. Texts and stud-
ies 7. Brill, Leiden/New York/Copenhagen/Ko¨ln
Wu¨rsch
R
(1991)
Avicennas
Bearbeitungen
der
Aristotelischen
Rhetorik: ein Beitrag zum Fortleben antiken Bildungsgutes in der
islamischen Welt. Islamkundliche Untersuchungen 146. Klaus
Schwartz, Berlin
De caelo
Endress G (1966) Die Arabischen U¨ bersetzungen von Aristoteles’ Schrift
De caelo. Dissertation. Frankfurt-on-the-Main
Endress G (1989) Die Arabischen U¨ bersetzungen von Aristoteles’ Schrift
De caelo. In: Endress G (ed) Symposium Graeco-arabicum II (Akten
des
Zweiten
Symposium
Graeco-Arabicum,
Ruhr-Universita¨t
Bochum, 3.–5. Ma¨rz 1987). Archivum Graeco-arabicum 1. Gruner,
Amsterdam, pp 189–191
Endress G (1995) Averroes’ De caelo, Ibn Rushd’s Cosmology in his
commentaries on Aristotle’s On the Heavens. Appendix, source
materials I. The Arabic versions of Aristotle’s De caelo. Arabic Sci
Philos 5:47–48
Hugonnard-Roche H (2003) De caelo. Tradition syriaque et arabe. In:
Goulet R (e´d) Dictionnaire des philosophes antiques. Supple´ment.
CNRS e´ditions, Paris, pp 304–314
Generation and Corruption
Eichner H (2005) Erstes Kapitel. Die behandelten Texte. In: Eichner H
(ed) Averroes’ Mittlerer Kommentar zu Aristoteles’ De generatione et
corruptione. Abhandlungen der Nordrhein-westfa¨lischen Akademie
der Wissenschaften, 111. Scho¨ningh, Paderborn/Munich/Vienna/
Zurich, pp 1–39
Gannage´
E (1998) Alexandre d’Aphrodise In De generatione et
corruptione apud Gˇ a¯bir b. H˙ ayya¯n, K. al-tas:rı¯f. Documenti e studi
sulla tradizione ﬁlosoﬁca medievale 9:35–86
Rashed M (2003a) Die U¨ berlieferungsgeschichte der aristotelischen
Schrift De generatione et corruptione. Serta Graeca. Reichert,
Wiesbaden
Aristotle, Arabic A
115
A

Rashed M (2003b) De generatione et corruption[sic]. Tradition arabe. In:
Goulet R (ed) Dictionnaire des philosophes antiques. Supple´ment.
CNRS e´ditions, Paris, pp 304–314
Serra G (1973) Note sulla traduzione arabo-latina del De generatione et
corruptione di Aristotele. Giornale critico della ﬁlosoﬁa italiana
52:383–427
Meteorologica
Bafﬁoni C (1981) Il IV Libro dei Meteorologica di Aristotele. Elenchos 3.
Bibliopolis, Naples
Hasnawi A (2002) Avicenne et le livre IV des Me´te´orologiques. In: Viano C
(e´d)
Aristoteles
chemicus.
International
Aristotle
Studies
I.
Academia, Sankt Augustin, pp 133–143
Lettinck P (1999) Aristotle’s Meteorology and its reception in the Arab
world, with an edition and translation of Ibn Suwa¯r’s Treatise on
Meteorological Phenomena and Ibn Ba¯jja’s Commentary on the
Meteorology. Aristoteles Semitico-Latinus 10. Brill, Leiden
Schoonheim PL (2003) Me´te´orologiques. Tradition syriaque, arabe et
latine. In: Goulet R (ed) Dictionnaire des philosophes antiques.
Supple´ment. CNRS editions, Paris, pp 324–328
Viano C (2005) La Matie`re des choses. Le livre IV des Me´te´orologiques
d’Aristote et son interpre´tation par Olympiodore. Vrin, Paris
De anima
Elamrani-Jamal A (2003) De anima. Tradition arabe. In: Goulet R (ed)
Dictionnaire des philosophes antiques. Supple´ment. CNRS e´ditions,
Paris, pp 346–358
Frank RM (1958–1959) Some fragments of Ish:a¯q’s Translation of the De
anima. Cah Byrsa 8:622–655
Ga¨tje H (1966) Zur arabischen U¨ berlieferung des Alexander von
Aphrodisias. Z Dtsch Morgenl Ges 116:255–278
Ga¨tje H (1971) Studien zur U¨ berlieferung der aristotelischen Psychologie
im Islam. Carl Winter Universita¨tsverlag, Heidelberg
Ivry A (1995) Averroes’ Middle and Long Commentaries on the De
anima. Arabic Sci Philos 5:75–92
Ivry A (1999) Averroes’ Three Commentaries on De anima. In: Endress G,
Aertsen JA (eds) Averroes and the Aristotelian tradition. Sources,
constitution and reception of the philosophy of Ibn Rushd (1126–
1198). Proceedings of the fourth symposium Averroicum, Cologne,
1996. Brill, Leiden/Boston/Cologne, pp 199–216
Taylor RC (2009) Introduction. In: Averroes (Ibn Rushd) of Cordoba.
Long Commentary of the De anima of Aristotle, intro., Engl. trans.
and notes: Taylor RC and Druart Th-A. Yale library of medieval
philosophy. Yale University Press, New Haven/London, pp xv–cix
Parva naturalia
Daiber H (1997) Salient trends in Arabic Aristotle. In: Endress G,
Kruk R (eds) The ancient tradition in Christian and Islamic
Hellenism. Studies on the transmission of Greek philosophy
and sciences dedicated to H.J. Drossaart Lulofs on his ninetieth
birthday. CNWS Publications 50. Research School CNWS, Leiden,
pp 29–41
Di Martino C (2003) Parva naturalia. Tradition arabe. In: Goulet R (ed)
Dictionnaire des philosophes antiques. Supple´ment. CNRS e´ditions,
Paris, pp 375–378
Pines S (1986) The Arabic recension of Parva Naturalia and the philo-
sophical doctrine concerning veridical dreams according to al-risa¯la
al-mana¯miyya and other sources. In: The collected works of Shlomo
Pines, vol II. Magnes/Brill, Jerusalem/Leiden, pp 104–153
Zoological Treatises
Brugman J, Drossaart Lulofs HJ (1971) Introduction. In: Aristotle.
Generation of animals. The Arabic translation commonly ascribed
to Yah:ya¯ ibn al-Bit:rı¯q, ed. Brugman J, Drossaart Lulofs HJ. Publica-
tion of the De Goeje Fund XXIII. Brill, Leiden, pp 1–70
Kruk R (1996) Ibn Ba¯jja’s Commentary on Aristotle’s De animalibus. In:
Endress G, Kruk R (eds) The ancient tradition in Christian and Islamic
Hellenism. Studies on the transmission of Greek philosophy and
sciences dedicated to H.J. Drossaart Lulofs on his ninetieth birthday.
CNWS Publications 50. Research School CNWS, Leiden, pp 29–41
Kruk R (2002) Ibn Sı¯na¯ On Animals: between the ﬁrst teacher and the
physician. In: Janssens J, De Smet D (e´ds) Avicenna and his heritage:
acts of the international colloquium Leuven–Louvain-la-Neuve,
8–11 September 1999. De Wulf-Mansioncentrum. I. Ancient and
medieval philosophy, 28. Leuven University Press, Leuven, pp 325–348
Kruk R (2003) La zoologie aristote´licienne. Tradition arabe. In: Goulet R
(ed) Dictionnaire des philosophes antiques. Supple´ment. CNRS
e´ditions, Paris, pp 329–333
Metaphysics
Bertolacci A (2005) On the Arabic translations of Aristotle’s Metaphysics.
Arabic Sci Philos 15(2):241–275
Martin A. La Me´taphysique. Tradition syriaque et arabe. In: Goulet R (ed)
Dictionnaire des philosophes antiques. I, pp 538–634
Martini C. La Me´taphysique. Tradition syriaque et arabe. Mise a` jour
bibliographique. In: Goulet R (ed) Dictionnaire des philosophes
antiques. Supple´ment. CNRS e´ditions, Paris, pp 259–264
Martini C (2001) The Arabic version of book Alpha meizon of
Aristotle’s Metaphysics and the testimony of the ms. Bibl.
Apostolica Vaticana, Ott. lat. 2048. In: Hamesse J (ed) Les
traducteurs au travail. Leurs manuscrits et leurs me´thodes. Peeters,
Louvain, pp 173–206
Martini C (2002) Le traduzioni arabe della Metaﬁsica di Aristotele.
Libri A e a. In: D’Ancona C, Serra G (eds) Aristotele e Alessandro
di Afrodisia nella tradizione araba. Il Poligrafo, Padua, pp 75–112
Martini C (2003) Un commento ad Alpha Elatton ‘‘sicut litterae sonant’’
nella Bagdad del X secolo. Medioevo 27:69–96
Martini C (2004) Hos eromenon. Alcune interpretazioni di Metaph. L 7.
In: Celluprica V, D’Ancona C (eds) Aristotele e i suoi esegeti
neoplatonici.
Logica e ontologia nelle interpretazioni greche
e arabe. Bibliopolis, Naples, pp 213–243
Aristotle, Arabic: Physics
CARMELA BAFFIONI
Dipartimento di Studi e Ricerche su Africa e Paesi Arabi
Facolta` di Studi Arabo-Islamici e del Mediterraneo
Universita` degli Studi di Napoli L‘Orientale
Napoli
Italy
Abstract
The Physics deeply inﬂuenced Arabic philosophy and sci-
ence. It was translated into Arabic several times in the
ninth and tenth centuries, but only the version by Isha¯q
ibn Hunayn (d. 910) survived. It is transmitted in the
Leiden MS (Bibliotheek der Rijksuniversiteit, or. 583),
which contains the transcription of lectures given in
1005, and is a witness of the continuity of the tradition
of this work during the centuries. Isha¯q quotes passages
116 A
Aristotle, Arabic: Physics

from the translations by Qusta¯ ibn Lu¯qa¯ (d. 912) and by
al-Dimashqı¯ (d. 900).
The Greek commentaries on the Physics by Alexander of
Aphrodisias (c. 200), Themistius (c. 320–390) and
Philoponus
(sixth
century;
called
Yahya¯
al-Nahwı¯,
‘‘the Grammarian’’) were also known; those by Eudemus
(ﬂ. c. 320 BCE), Theophrastus (372–288 BCE), and Galen
(131–201) are occasionally mentioned.
While a treatise by Alexander exists in Arabic, refuting
Galen’s position about a passage of the Physics stating that
every moving object which is not moved by an external
mover must have an internal mover (because when a part
of it stops moving the whole stops moving), neither the
Arabic paraphrase of Themistius nor the commentary by
Philoponus survived (however, Books III–VII of this com-
mentary are reported by Isha¯q). A complete survey of the
preserved Arabic commentaries, compared with each
other and with the Greek commentaries, is given by
Lettinck (1994).
The most important center for the study of the Physics
was the Baghdad school of Yahya¯ ibn ‘Adı¯ (d. 973) and his
pupil Ibn al-Samh(d. 1027). Besides the commentaries by
Abu¯ Bishr Matta¯ ibn Yu¯nus (d. 940), Yahya¯’s teacher, and
Abu¯ l-Faraj ibn al-Tayyib (d. 1044), the Physics was stud-
ied and commented by philosophers such as al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯
(d. 950), Ibn Sı¯na¯ (Avicenna, d. 1057), Ibn Ba¯jja
(d. 1138), and Ibn Rushd (Averroes, d. 1198).
Al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ wrote a commentary on the Physics under
the title On Changeable Things, which is not preserved but
was known to Ibn Ba¯jja and Averroes. Avicenna dealt with
the Physics extensively in his al-Shifa¯’ and al-Naja¯t; he
knew Philoponus’ commentary but was independent
from it.
Ibn Ba¯jja was the ﬁrst commentator on Aristotle in the
Muslim West, and the precursor of Averroes in this ﬁeld.
He often quotes Aristotle, sometimes deviating from
Isha¯q’s version. As he seems familiar with Philoponus’
ideas, he might have used Qusta¯’s translation, which was
accompanied with Philoponus’ commentary. He was
inﬂuenced by al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ and inﬂuenced Averroes.
Averroes wrote three commentaries on the Physics: the
Short (1159), the Middle (1170), and the Long Commen-
tary (1186). Only the ﬁrst exists in Arabic, the Middle and
the Long are extant in Latin and Hebrew translations. He
relied on Isha¯q’s translation; he too was inﬂuenced by
Philoponus, and knew Avicenna’s ideas well.
Philoponus’ ideas on place, the motion of physical
bodies, and the eternity of the world differed from
Aristotle’s ones; they inﬂuenced the Arab thinkers and
scientists. Ibn Ba¯jja, too, differs from Aristotle in his
commentary, for example, about the place of the celestial
spheres and the universe as a whole. Sometimes his ideas
were shared by Averroes, at other times he criticized them.
Ibn Ba¯jja’s commentary was not translated into Latin,
but some of his theories were transmitted, thanks to some
quotations of Averroes regarding the motion of a body in
air or water, and the inﬂuence of the resistance of the
medium on velocity; through the Hebrew translations of
Averroes, Ibn Ba¯jja’s ideas were known to the medieval
Jewish philosophers in Spain.
Ibn Ba¯jja contributed to the discussion of three other
subjects: (1) the divisibility of a body in motion or chang-
ing, (2) the idea that a motion does not have a beginning
but does have an end, and (3) the question whether any
motion or actuality must be preceded by a potentiality.
He represents an important stage in the development of
ideas about motion from Aristotle to Galilei. Also
Avicenna’s concept of mayl (inclination) inﬂuenced the
Latin West.
See also: ▶Abu¯ Bishr Matta¯ ibn Yu¯nus ▶Alexander of
Aphrodisias and Arabic Aristotelianism ▶Alexandrian
Tradition into Arabic: Philosophy ▶Aristotle, Arabic
▶al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, Abu¯ Nas˙r ▶Ibn Rushd, Muh˙ammad ibn
Ah˙mad al-H˙ afı¯d (Averroes) ▶Ibn Sı¯na¯, Abu¯ ʿAlı¯ (Avi-
cenna)
▶Impetus
▶Natural
Philosophy,
Arabic
▶Themistius, Arabic ▶Theophrastus, Arabic ▶Transla-
tions from Greek into Arabic ▶Yah:ya¯ ibn ʿAdı¯
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Aristu¯ta¯lı¯s (1964–1965) al-Tabı¯‘a. Tarjamat Isha¯q ibn Hunayn ma‘a
shuru¯hIbn al-Samhwa-Yahya¯ ibn ‘Adı¯ wa-Matta¯ ibn Yu¯nus wa-Abı¯
l-Faraj ibn al-Tayyib, 2 vols, ed. Badawı¯ ‘A. al-Da¯r al-qawmiyya
li’l-tiba¯‘a wa’l-nashr, Cairo
Ibn Ba¯jja (1973) Sharhal-sama¯‘ al-tabı¯‘ı¯, ed. Fakrı¯ M. Da¯r al-naha¯r
lil-nashr, Beirut
Ibn Ba¯jja (1978) Shuru¯ha¯t al-sama¯’ al-tabı¯‘ı¯, ed. Ziya¯da M. Da¯r al-Kindı¯/
Da¯r al-ﬁkr, Beirut
Ibn Rushd (1962a) Long Commentary on Aristotle’s Physics. Latin
translation. In: Aristotelis omnia quae extant Opera. Averrois
Cordubensis in ea opera omnes qui ad haec usque tempora pervenere
commentarii, vol IV. Minerva G.m.b.H., Frankfurt am Main (repr;
or. ed. apud Junctas, Venetiis, 1562)
Ibn Rushd (1962b) Middle commentary on Aristotle’s Physics. Latin
translation Books I–III. In: Aristotelis omnia quae extant Opera.
Averrois Cordubensis in ea opera omnes qui ad haec usque tempora
pervenere commentarii, vol IV. Minerva G.m.b.H., Frankfurt am
Main (repr; or. ed. apud Junctas, Venetiis, 1562)
Ibn Rushd (1987) Kita¯b al-sama¯‘ al-tabı¯‘ı¯(Epitome in Physicorum libros),
ed. Puig J. Instituto Hispano-Arabe de Cultura, Madrid
Lettinck Paul (1994) Aristotle’s Physics & its reception in the Arabic
world. With an edition of the unpublished parts of Ibn Ba¯jja’s
Commentary on the Physics. Brill, Leiden/New York/Ko¨ln
Aristotle, Arabic: Physics A
117
A

Translations
Averroes (1987) Epı´tome de fı´sica, ﬁlosofı´a de la naturaleza, Traduccio´n
y estudio Puig J. Consejo Superior de Investigacio´nes Cientı´ﬁcas,
Instituto Hispano-Arabe de Cultura, Madrid
Averroes (1991) Questions in Physics, ed. and trans. Goldstein HT.
Kluwer, Dordrecht/Boston/London
Harvey S (1977) Averroes on the principles of nature: the middle
commentary on Aristotle’s Physics I, II. Thesis Harvard University,
Cambridge (English translation of Aristotle’s middle commentary
and epitome of the Physics)
Secondary Sources
Clagett M (1959) The science of mechanics in the Middle Ages.
The University of Wisconsin Press, Madison
D’Ancona C (2005) Le traduzioni di opere greche e la formazione del
corpus ﬁlosoﬁco arabo. In: D’Ancona C (ed) Storia della ﬁlosoﬁa
nell’Islam medievale, 2 vols. Einaudi, Torino, vol I, pp 180–258
Ferrari C (2005) La scuola aristotelica di Bagdad. In: D’Ancona C (ed)
Storia della ﬁlosoﬁa nell’Islam medievale, 2 vols. Einaudi, Torino,
vol I, pp 352–379
Geoffroy M (2005a) La formazione della cultura ﬁlosoﬁca dell’Occidente
musulmano. In: D’Ancona C (ed) Storia della ﬁlosoﬁa nell’Islam
medievale, 2 vols. Einaudi, Torino, vol II, pp 671–722
Geoffroy M (2005b) Averroe`. In: D’Ancona C (ed) Storia della ﬁlosoﬁa
nell’Islam medievale, 2 vols. Einaudi, Torino, vol II, pp 723–782
Peters FE (1968) Aristoteles Arabus. Brill, Leiden
Aristotle, Arabic: Poetics
CARMELA BAFFIONI
Dipartimento di Studi e Ricerche su Africa e Paesi Arabi,
Facolta` di Studi Arabo-Islamici e del Mediterraneo
Universita` degli Studi di Napoli L‘Orientale
Napoli
Italy
Abstract
Though no Greek commentaries on the Poetics have come
down to us, the work has a long tradition in the Byzantine
and the Arabic world. It was translated in the sixth or the
seventh century into Syriac, and at the end of the ninth
century into Arabic.
While the most important Greek codex of the Poetics,
the Parisinus 1741, dates at the end of the ninth or at the
beginning of the eleventh century, the Arabic version known
to us today is the one by Abu¯ Bishr Matta¯ ibn Yu¯nus al-
Qunna¯’ı¯ (c. 870/940), made from a Syriac version dating
from around 700 CE, and perhaps relying on a preceding
version by Isha¯q b. Hunayn (d. 910). The bio-bibliographers
Ibn al-Nadı¯m (d. 995) and al-Qiftı¯ (d. 1248) speak of
another translation by Yahya¯ ibn ‘Adı¯ (d. 973), now lost,
and of a commentary by Themistius (c. 320–390).
Jacopo Mantino’s version in 1481 was made on the
basis of the Jewish version by Toˆdroˆs Toˆdroˆsıˆ (ﬁrst half of
the fourteenth century).
The Arabic Reception of Aristotle‘s Poetics
Ibn Abı¯ Usaybi‘a (d. 1270) reports that the famous scien-
tist Ibn al-Haytham (Lat. Alhazen, d. 1038) might have
written a treatise on the Greek and Arabic tradition of the
Poetics. On this tradition, also the scientist Abu¯ l-Baraka¯t
al-Bag˙da¯dı¯ (d. after 1164–1165) wrote in his Kita¯b al-
mu‘tabar; an abridgment of the work came by al-
Khwa¯rizmı¯, the tenth century author of Mafa¯tı¯hal-‘ulu¯m
(Keys of the Sciences).
In spite of the rich poetical tradition of the Arabs, the
Poetics was completely misunderstood in the Muslim
world, due to inadequacies in the available translation of
the Poetics. Abu¯ Bishr’s version, which lacks the last part, is
very literal, but it attempts to interpret Aristotle – and fails
in its goal.
The Arabs were unfamiliar with any of the Greek
tragedies and, consequently, they were hindered from
catching the sense of Greek poetry and of the Poetics in
its Greek application. Hence, a proper understanding of
technical terms such as peripeteia or anagnorisis was
impossible for them.
The religious beliefs of the Arabs hindered them from
a full comprehension of the concept of mimesis itself.
Nobody can be a creator, apart from God; the Arabic
word for ‘‘poetry’’ is shi‘r (originally ‘‘hair’’), while the
idea of ‘‘making,’’ contained in the Greek poiesis, is
completely absent. In addition, the Qurʾa¯n strictly distin-
guishes prophecy from poetry (69:40; 36:69) and denies
poetry value because of its untruthfulness (26:224).
However, the Arabs were interested in Aristotle’s Poet-
ics, perhaps thanks to the inﬂuence of the Persian culture
and vision of life. If it is impossible to ﬁnd in the Arabic
tradition of the Poetics any help for a critical knowledge of
the original, the Arab elaborations of this work are
noteworthy.
Greek commentators had organized the Poetics and the
Rhetoric as the last parts of Aristotle’s Organon. This asset
came to the Arabs via the Syriac tradition, and it explains
why the Poetics took its new ‘‘logical’’ coloring in Arabic.
According to the geographer al-Ya‘qu¯bı¯ (d. in the early
tenth century), the philosopher al-Kindı¯ (d. c. 870) wrote
a short commentary on the Poetics. Al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ (d. 950) and
Ibn Sı¯na¯ (Avicenna, d. 1057) provided logic-oriented
accounts of the work, evaluating poetry in its relation to
truth.
Al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, who might have known Abu¯ Bishr’s trans-
lation, gave a short account of the contents of the work
118 A
Aristotle, Arabic: Poetics

and a theoretical treatment of poetry in his Kita¯b al-shi‘r.
For him, the poetical syllogism was used in the Sacred
Books to make the truth attainable by everybody.
Avicenna, sometimes judged as more faithful to Aris-
totle than Averroes, studied the relation between takhyı¯l
(‘‘imaginative representation,’’ occurring in poetic syllo-
gisms) and tasdı¯q (‘‘assent’’ that occurs in demonstrative
syllogisms).
As to Averroes (d. 1198), who probably relied on al-
Fa¯ra¯bı¯ and Avicenna, two commentaries of his on the
Poetics are known: the Short (written before 1153) and
the Middle Commentary (1175). Perhaps his source was
not Abu¯ Bishr, but another version now lost.
The Middle Commentary is a treatise of aesthetics, on
the rules that should produce a good qası¯da (the classical
ode of the Arabs). Arabic poets are critically examined; so,
the Greek original is adapted to the Arabic tradition, where
poetry plays a role in maintaining individuals’ consciousness
of their group and their contribution to its virtues. Hence,
‘‘good poetry’’ coincides with ‘‘morally good’’ poetry, while
the terms and concepts of ‘‘tragedy’’ and ‘‘comedy’’ are
completely misunderstood, and substituted by the terms
mahd and hija¯’, respectively, ‘‘praise’’ and ‘‘satire.’’
See also: ▶Abu¯ Bishr Matta¯ ibn Yu¯nus ▶Aristotle, Arabic
▶al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, Abu¯ Nas˙r ▶Ibn Rushd, Muh˙ammad ibn
Ah˙mad al-H˙ afı¯d (Averroes) ▶Ibn Sı¯na¯, Abu¯ ʿAlı¯ (Avi-
cenna) ▶Themistius, Arabic ▶Translations from Greek
into Arabic ▶Yah:ya¯ ibn ʿAdı¯
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Abu¯ Bishr Matta¯ ibn Yu¯nus al-Qunna¯’ı¯ (1953) Kita¯b Aristu¯ta¯lı¯s fı¯ l-shi‘r.
In: Badawı¯ ‘A (ed) Fann al-shi‘r. Maktabat al-nahda al-misriyya,
Cairo, pp 83–145
Abu¯ Bishr Matta¯ ibn Yu¯nus al-Qunna¯’ı¯ (1967) Kita¯b Aristu¯ta¯lı¯s fı¯ l-shi‘r,
ed. ‘Ayya¯d S. Da¯r al-Ka¯tib al-‘arabı¯ li l-tiba¯‘a wa’l-nashr, Cairo,
pp 25–160
Aristu¯ta¯lı¯s (1953) Fann al-shi‘r, ed. Badawı¯ ‘A. Maktabat al-nahda
al-misriyya, Cairo, pp 83–145
Averroe¨s (1977) Three short commentaries on Aristotle’s Topics, Rhetoric
and Poetics, ed. and trans. Butterworth CE. State University of New
York Press, Albany
Averroe¨s (1986) Commentarium medium in Aristotelis De arte poetica
liber. Textum arabicum recensuit et adnotationibus illustravit
Butterworth CE adiuvante al-Magid Naridi AA. The General Egyp-
tian Book Organization, Cairo
Cheikho Louis (1889) ‘Ilm al-A¯dab, Maqa¯la¯t li-masha¯hı¯r al-‘Arab, 2 vols.
Imprimerie Catholique, Beirut
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ (1938) Canons of poetry, ed. Arberry AJ. Rivista degli Studi
Orientali 17:266–278
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ (1953) Risa¯la fı¯ Qawa¯nı¯n Sina¯‘at al-Shu‘ara¯’. In: Badawı¯ ‘A (ed)
Fann al-shi‘r. Maktabat al-nahda al-misriyya, Cairo, pp 147–158
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ (1959) Kita¯b al-shi‘r, ed. Mahdi M. Shi‘r 12:1–6
Ibn Sı¯na¯ (1953) Fann al-shi‘r min Kita¯b al-Shifa¯’. In: Badawı¯ ‘A (ed) Fann
al-shi‘r. Maktabat al-nahda al-misriyya, Cairo, pp 159–198
Lasinio Fausto (1872) Il commento medio di Averroe` alla Poetica
di Aristotele, per la prima volta pubblicato in arabo e in
ebraico
e
recato in
italiano
da
Lasinio
F.
presso
l’editore
e traduttore, Pisa
Translations
Averroe` (1990) Commento al Perı` Poietikes, ed. Bafﬁoni C. Coliseum,
Milano
Averroes (1986) Middle commentary on Aristotle’s Poetics, trans. with
intro. and notes: Butterworth CE. Princeton University Press,
Princeton
Avicenna (1974) Commentary on the Poetics of Aristotle, trans. Dahiyat
IM. Brill, Leiden
Secondary Sources
Afnan S (1947) The commentary of Avicenna on Aristotle’s Poetics. J R
Asiat Soc 42:188–190
Ferrari C (2005) La scuola aristotelica di Bagdad. In: D’Ancona C (ed)
Storia della ﬁlosoﬁa nell’Islam medievale, 2 vols. Einaudi, Torino, vol
I, pp 352–379
Gabrieli F (1929) Intorno alla versione araba della Poetica di Aristotele.
Rendiconti dell’Accademia dei Lincei, VI 5:224–235
Gabrieli F (1929–1930) Estetica e poesia araba nell’interpretazione della
Poetica aristotelica presso Avicenna e Averroe`. Rivista degli Studi
Orientali 12:291–331
Heinrichs W (1969) Arabische Dichtung und Griechische Poetik. Ha¯zim
al-Qarta¯g˘annı¯s Grundlegung der Poetik mit Hilfe Aristotelischer
Begriffe. Beirut/Wiesbaden, im Komm/F. Steiner
Kemal S (1991) The poetics of Alfa¯ra¯bı¯ and Avicenna. Brill, Leiden/
New York/København/Ko¨ln
Arnaldus de Villanova
MANFRED GERWING
Theologische Fakulta¨t
Katholische Universita¨t Eichsta¨tt-Ingolstadt
Eichsta¨tt
Germany
Abstract
Arnaldus de Villanova (Arnoldus de Villa Nova, Arnau de
Villanova, Arnaldo de Villanova, Arnald von Villanova,
ArnauddeVilleneuve),borninAragon,diedonSeptember6,
1311 in a shipwreck near Genoa, was a philosophically
educated medical doctor, a prominent physician and out-
standing lay theologian. He taught medicine at the Univer-
sity of Montpellier and was private physician of various
sovereigns, like Peter III of Aragon, James II of Aragon,
and several popes, inter alia. He authored approximately
100 medical works and made translations from Arabic,
which were edited in the sixteenth century, as well as
Arnaldus de Villanova A
119
A

numerous alchemistical writings erroneously attributed
to him. He based his medical theories mainly on Galen
and Avicenna (Ibn Sı¯na¯), while his medical practice was
ﬁrmly established on detailed observation and concrete
experience. His theology was ﬁrst shaped by Dominicans
(Thomas Aquinas), but later was increasingly inﬂuenced
by Franciscans (Peter John Olivi). His theses about the
oncoming arrival of the Antichrist provoked severe con-
troversies at the University of Paris. His eschatologically
motivated and apocalyptically designed
spirituality
targeted a rapid and likewise, broad reform of clergy
and order and a strengthening of the laity within the
church.
Biographical Information
Arnaldus was born around 1238 as child of Catalan par-
ents in Villaneuva di Jilo´ca close to Daroca, a city in the
south of Aragon. From the year 1260, he studied medicine
and theology in Montpellier. His wife Agnes Blasi, daugh-
ter of a merchant, also originated from this city, which
belonged to Catalonia at that time. Arnald’s daughter
Maria became Dominican. Arnald himself took up
a studium linguarum at the Dominicans and studied
Arab and Latin, possibly also Hebrew, and certainly
Humaniora. Soon he became a famous physician and
advanced to the position of being personal physician of
several rulers, like Peter III of Aragon, who in 1285
bequeathed the castle Ollers near Tarragona to him, as
well as Alfonso III and James II of Aragon. To the latter,
he dedicated his Regimen sanitatis, a book on health,
which was passed on multiple times and ﬁnally became
known all over Europe. Altogether, about 100 medical
writings of Arnaldus were delivered to posterity among
them numerous translations from Arab. From 1289/1291
to 1299, Arnald lectured medicine in Montpellier. There
he worked at a place that established reputation not only
for its highly regarded medical education institution but
also since the 1290s for the attachment of the controversial
Franciscan theologian Peter John Olivi (Petrus Johannis
Olivi), whom he loved discussing.
His
multitudinous
theological
writings
(Catalan
and Latin) prove that Arnald received the spirituality
of mendicant orders, the Dominicans and – during
the 1290s increasingly and eventually primarily – the
Franciscan reformers, but he also placed his own empha-
sis. He died in a shipwreck near Genoa on the way from
Naples to Avignon on September 6, 1311. By then, he had
advanced to the personal adviser of the King of Sicily
(Frederick III [II] of Aragon), and presumably had been
summoned by the pope, who sought medical aid from
Arnald.
Thought of Arnald de Villanova
First, Arnald de Villanova became known as a philosopher,
theoretical and practical physician. He advocated the
wide spread Galenism as a basic principle, which he,
and Hippocrates’ works likewise, illustrated didactically,
commented and completed – thanks to numerous own
observations and experiences. He composed collections of
aphorisms, among them his late but famous and all over
Europe copied Parabolae medicationis, wrote a con-
siderable number of textbooks, clinical monographies, as
well as treatises about therapeutics and medical theory
with practically oriented intention. He devoted himself
to particular problems of the art of healing and sought
manual-like and didactically reduced medical overview
works. Altogether he predominantly published works
characterized by a strong inductive way of argumentation
and oriented toward therapeutic effectiveness.
Moreover, the later editions of his medical achieve-
ments and the thereby found erroneous ascription of
works present Arnald as a practical oriented physician,
who raised critical objection against superﬁcial and hasty
blending of philosophy and medicine, and in this regard
polemicized against Averroes (Ibn Rushd), too. In partic-
ular, these are Speculum medicinae, De intentionibus
medicorum, De parte operativa, Liber de gradibus, De
humido radicale, De simplicibus, De arte cognoscendi
venena, Antidotarium, De vinis, De dosibus tyriacalibus,
and De cura febris ethice.
In the 1290s, Arnald increasingly advanced to a homo
spiritualis. While Avicenna already understood medicine
as a philosophical discipline and, moreover, perceived
philosophy as therapy, ‘‘as cure from detrimental delu-
sions,’’ Arnald adopted this view in a modiﬁed form. Cure
for him meant turning toward salvation in Christ. His
religiosity was not conﬁned to religious service, prayer,
family life, and caritas alone, but it imbued the entity of his
existence, to which belonged also his profession as
a physician, an author and – later more and more – a
political actor. His writings Introductio in librum Ioachim
de semine scripturarum seu de prophetis dormientibus,
Allocutio super signiﬁcatione nominis thetragrammaton as
well as De tempore antichristi et ﬁne mundi, and Tractatus
de mysterio cymbalorum belonged to this period, while it is
doubtable whether Arnald authored the apocalypse expo-
sition Expositio super apocalypsi.
Thanks to his medical capabilities and accomplish-
ments, Arnald gained special consideration of the pope
at the beginning of the new century. Thus, he succeeded
in presenting his idea of the imminent arrival of the
Antichrist to Boniface VIII. Previously his thesis raised
a vehement conﬂict at the theological faculty of the
120 A
Arnaldus de Villanova

University of Paris. Arnald’s Antichrist tract was conﬁs-
cated, and he was imprisoned for a short time and accused
of heresy. However, pope Boniface VIII freed him. Pope
Benedict XI took him to custody in Perugia but released
him soon after. Arnald escaped to the court of Frederick III
of Sicily. Frederick accommodated him friendly and called
him the ‘‘new Plato.’’
Arnald gratefully dedicated his newest work, Allocutio
christiani, to the king. Here Arnald expressed what
and how a ruler had to be, had to do and not to do, to
be ruler in a true Christian sense. However, one year later –
1305 – the Catalan was back at the court of James II,
who gladly received him and employed him as physician,
personal adviser, and ﬁnally as ambassador. During
this period, Arnald wrote Antidotum, refering back
again to his earlier warning against the imminent arrival
of the Antichrist, and Informatio Beguinorum, in which
he took the side of the Beguines. For this, he was later in
1316 condemned by the Holy Ofﬁce. But even after his
death, the pope defended Arnald. His sentence was
invalidated, a fact that is often ignored even in specialist
literature.
Clement V, James II, and Frederick III of Sicily
employed Arnald’s services during the last years of his
life, as physician, as emissary, as personal domestic
and political adviser. His reputation as an inﬂuential char-
acter with intensive spiritual concern qualiﬁed him as
a contact and promising advocate for those who
envisioned themselves as misunderstood, socially ecclesi-
astically marginalized, or even prosecuted in their mental-
spiritual aspiration by clerical and secular powers. The
Templars from Aragon asked him to support the existence
of their order in front of the pope and against Philip IVof
France; regrettably they failed, as we know. On the other
hand, Arnald successfully supported the monks of Mount
Athos and Ubertino of Casale.
Frederick III unwaveringly held on to Arnald, he
defended him even against his brother’s offenses and com-
mendably sought to comply with the reform scheme of the
Catalan physician in Sicily kingdom. He also was in close
contact with King Robert. Robert did not only have an
open mind about the peaceful solutions proposed by
Frederick, often submitted by Arnald, to nonviolently
settle the present disputes between Sicily and Naples.
Moreover, Arnald soon could count Robert to the friends
of the spiritual and many ‘‘innovators.’’
In his theological-ascetic and spiritual-practical works,
Arnaldus de Villanova declared himself impressed with the
piety of the mendicant orders, namely the Franciscans. In
them, he saw signs of hope for an emergence of
a strong and convincing-efﬁcacious Christendom. While
he diagnosed the illness of the patient ‘‘mankind,’’ he saw
the medicine, the cure for the diseased body of Christianity
in the practically lived spirituality of the mendicant orders,
primarily in their option for the poor and the poverty. In
doing so, Arnald presented an increasing tendency to rig-
orism, to the ideal of pure poverty advocated by the Fran-
ciscan Spirituals (Spirituale) and to a joachitically
inﬂuenced end time expectance. However, he did not
desire breaking with the church but a reform of the
church. He sought convalescence of its head and limbs.
See also: ▶Alchemy in the Latin World ▶Galen, Arabic
▶Ibn Rushd, Muh˙ammad ibn Ah˙mad al-H˙ afı¯d (Averroes)
▶Ibn Sı¯na¯, Abu¯ ʿAlı¯ (Avicenna) ▶Medicine and Philoso-
phy ▶Peter John Olivi ▶Theology Versus Philosophy in
the Arab World ▶Thomas Aquinas
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Arnaldus de Villanova (1947) Obres catalanes, 2 vols. Editorial Barcino,
Barcelona
Arnaldus de Villanova (1975ff) Opera medica. Edicions Universitat Bar-
celona, Barcelona
Arnaldus de Villanova (1988–1989) De tempore adventus Antichristi. In:
Peranau J (ed) Arxiu de Textos Catalans Antics 7/8, Institut d’Estudis
Catalans, Barcelona, pp 7–169; see ibid. other editions
Arnaldus de Villanova (2004ff) Opera Theologica omnia. Facultat de
Teologia de Catalunya, Barcelona
Secondary Sources
Eusterschulte A (2003) A. v. V. In: St Mu¨ller-Wille et al (ed) Lexikon
bedeutender Naturwissenschaftler und Techniker. MPI/Spektrum
der Wissenschaften, Berlin/Heidelberg
Gerwing M (1996) Vom Ende der Zeit. Aschendorff, Mu¨nster
Mensa i Valls J (1994) Arnau de Vilanova, Espiritual: Guia Bibliogra`ﬁca.
Institut d’Estudis Catalans, Barcelona
Santi F (1987) Arnau de Vilanova. L’obra spiritual, Vale`ncia, Histo`ria
i societat 5
Ziegler J (1998) Medicine and religion. Oxford University Press, Oxford
Arnaud, William
▶William Arnaud
Astronomy and Astrology in the
Arab World
▶Natural Philosophy, Arabic
Astronomy and Astrology in the Arab World A
121
A

Atomism
AURE´LIEN ROBERT
Centre d’Etudes Supe´rieures de la Renaissance (CNRS)
Tours
France
Abstract
At ﬁrst sight, the philosophical idea that the world is
composed of atoms, notably embraced by Greek and
Roman authors such as Democritus, Epicurus, and Lucre-
tius, seemed to have disappeared during the Middle Ages.
It has been frequently said that it only reappeared during
the Renaissance and then in modern philosophy and
chemistry. In fact, atomism never ceased to exist as
a theory of matter and time, both in western Latin tradi-
tion and in the Arabic and Jewish medieval philosophy.
Different versions of atomism were developed in these
traditions: from theological explanations of creation to
pure mathematical theories about the divisibility of the
continuum, through physical theories of matter and time.
The ﬁrst detailed accounts of atomism come from the
ninth- and tenth-century Arabic theologians of Baghdad
and Basra, immediately followed by the Jewish schools,
notably in Egypt. A similar revival of atomism appeared in
the West from the twelfth-century philosophers of
Chartres to the fourteenth-century Christian theologians
of Oxford and Paris. Most of these medieval atomist
theories have very little in common with ancient atomism,
for they are usually linked with more complicated theo-
logical concerns, such as the eternity of the world, crea-
tion, the existence of prime matter, and more generally the
ﬁniteness of created things.
It has long been thought, until the end of the nineteenth
century, that there were no atomist theories in medieval
philosophy and that ancient atomists, such as Epicurus or
Lucretius, remained unknown until the Renaissance,
before Poggio Bracciolini worked on the manuscript of
the De natura rerum discovered by him in 1417. This view
of the history of atomism has been challenged during the
last two centuries. In the nineteenth century, Kurd
Lasswitz and Le´opold Mabilleau already endeavored to
make room for medieval theories in their essays on atom-
istic philosophy (Lasswitz 1890; Mabilleau 1895). But it is
only recently that many efforts have been made to show
the existence of very important atomist theories of matter
and time in the medieval Arabic philosophy and theology
from the ninth to the twelfth century (Pines 1936; Wolfson
1976; Dhanani 1994) and the existence of thorough exam-
inations of them in the Jewish and the Christian traditions
(Maier 1949; Murdoch 1974; Pabst 1994; Pyle 1997).
The main dispute in the medieval Arabic natural phi-
losophy opposed hylomorphism (that is, that the world is
composed of matter and form) to atomism (an ontology
which accepts only atoms and properties). If the former
ontology was accepted by most of the philosophers
(falsafa), a majority of the theologians of the kala¯m
(the mutakallimu¯n), notably in Basra and Baghdad, both
on the Muʿtazilite’s (a school of rational theology founded
in the ninth century in Basra) and the Ashʿarite’s (another
school founded by the theologian Abu al-Hasan al-
Ashʿarite against the Muʿtazilites) sides, accepted atomism
(Rashed 2005). The ﬁrst atomists seem to be the Basrian
theologians Abu¯ al-Hudhayl and al-Nazza¯m (ninth cen-
tury). Abu¯ al-Hudhayl posited the existence of a ﬁnite
number of discrete atoms without extension, without
quality, and without corporeal nature (for they are the
constituents of bodies) that can move through the vac-
uum. The only feature that can really deﬁne the nature of
atoms is their place or location. Al-Nazza¯m accepted the
main tenets of such a view, but argued lengthily against
one of its points, namely that there is a ﬁnite number of
atoms in a body or in a line. Indeed, al-Nazza¯m
maintained that this is impossible because there is an
inﬁnite number of positions in a continuum, for if an
atom does not have any extension, this must also hold for
its place. Strangely enough, he thus maintained that there
is an inﬁnite number of atoms with a typical argument
against atomism. Al-Nazza¯m was conscious that in this
case Zeno’s paradoxes of motion and dichotomy may
apply, for it is impossible for something to pass through
an inﬁnite number of places. In order to explain the
possibility of motion, al-Nazza¯m afﬁrmed that atoms
move by means of leaps, which signiﬁes that motion is
always discontinuous.
The philosophical discussions in thelater mutakallimu¯n
were about the magnitude of the atoms, their number
(ﬁnite or inﬁnite?), and their qualities, but always
under the aspect of the possibility of motion. They
were also very interested about related topics such as
the compatibility of atomism with Euclidian geometry,
as it appears in one of the best summaries of these later
discussions in Fakhr al-Dı¯n al-Ra¯zı¯. The most vehement
critic of atomism in the Arabic tradition was Abu¯ Yu¯suf
Ya‘qu¯b ibn Isha¯q al-Kindı¯ in the ninth century. Of
course, Avicenna (Ibn Sı¯na¯), al-G˙ aza¯lı¯, and Averroes
(Ibn Rushd) also detailed long argumentations against
the mutakallimu¯n’s atomism in order to restore the
Aristotelian hylomorphism.
122 A
Atomism

If the argumentation seems purely philosophical, the
main motives for their acceptance of atomism were theo-
logical and were related to their explanation of the crea-
tion of the world by God. According to them, the world
must have been created because if it were not, the world
should have passed an inﬁnite time, which is not possible.
Most of their philosophical arguments to support atom-
ism are mainly derived from Zeno’s paradoxes and from
John Philoponus’ use of them in his refutation of the
eternity of the world. As a consequence, some of them,
mainly the Ashʿarites, thought that God can create and
destroy the world whenever He wants, for he can destroy
or create new aggregates of atoms at each instant of time.
As a consequence, they contend that accidents cannot exist
longer than one instant. Therefore this radical version of
atomism – occasionalist and deterministic – denied the
existence of real causality in the created world. It appears
that Arabic atomism has very little in common with
Democritus’ and Epicurus’ atomist theories, even if they
were known to the mutakallimu¯n.
Important echoes of these discussions can be traced
back in the Jewish medieval philosophy, both in the kala¯m
and in the Neoplatonic schools. For example, in the ninth
and tenth centuries Saadhia Gaon (Wolfson 1946) and
Isaac Israeli (Zonta 2002) both rejected the Arabic
mutakallimu¯n’s atomism. During the following centuries,
Judah Halevi, Ibn Daud, Maimonides, Gersonides, and
Crescas also argued against Arabic atomism. Maimonides’
criticism in Chap. 71–76 of book I of his Guide of the
Perplexed is probably the better-known among them and
is mostly directed against occasionalism and continuous
Creation of the World. As Tamar Rudavsky has shown
(Rudavsky 2000) Jewish discussions about continua of
space and time are related to the theological problem of
Creation, as was already the case in the Arabic tradition.
Although denying the eternity of the world, they contend
that creationism does not necessarily imply atomism
about time and matter. This is problematic for them
because their argumentation for the non-eternity of the
world is reminiscent of Zeno’s paradoxes and is probably
derived from Philoponus’ book Against Aristotle on the
Eternity of the World, where Zeno’s paradoxes are used
against the eternity thesis. If the world were eternal then
an inﬁnite time would have been passed through, which is
impossible; therefore the world’s temporality is ﬁnite in
some sense. But this argument could also be used in favor
of atomism and ﬁnitism, as will be the case in the Latin
world, which we shall see later. Strangely enough they
denied on the one hand the eternity of the world with
some kind of atomist argument while accepting on the
other hand the inﬁnite divisibility of the continuum.
If we now focus on western Latin philosophy, it
appears that atomism never really ceased to exist during
the Middle Ages. Concerning the myth of Bracciolini, it
must be noticed, as Philippe has shown in his pioneering
study (Philippe 1895, 1896), that Lucretius’ poem was
copied and discussed throughout the Middle Ages with
no interruption from the era of the Church Fathers to the
twelfth century. The same is also true for Epicurus, whose
works were partially known through a still longer chain of
intermediate sources (Cicero, Lactantius, St. Jerome,
St. Ambrose, St. Augustine). In the twelfth century, John
of Salisbury dealt with Epicureanism in his Metalogicon
and in his Entheticus, where he tried to refute its principal
tenets. On the contrary, we ﬁnd a defense of Lucretius and
the Epicureans in the works of William of Conches,
notably in his Dragmaticon philosophiae where he quotes
passages from Lucretius’ De natura rerum.
The idea of a total eclipse of atomism from the Latin
medieval philosophy and theology seems to derive from
the violent reactions of the Church Fathers. Everybody has
in mind Lactantius’ repeated attacks, notably in his De ira
Dei. It is true, indeed, that for a long period ancient
atomists were not discussed for their theories of matter
as such, but rather for the theological consequences of
their views, and among them the negation of Divine
providence, the impassivity of God and the eternity of
the world. In the twelfth century, when William of
Conches decided to defend atomism, he tried to make it
compatible with Christian theology. In his Dialogue on
Philosophy (I, 6), he wrote:
"
When the Epicureans said that the earth consists of atoms,
they were correct. But it must be regarded as a fable when
they said that those atoms were without beginning and
‘flew to and fro separately through the great void’, then
massed themselves into four great bodies. For nothing can
be without beginning and place except God.
This atomist lecture of Creation has never been more
detailed until the fourteenth century. The divisibility of
a continuum, the notion of inﬁnite remained of great
interest during the thirteenth century (Trifogli 2002),
but no atomist theory of matter and time can be found
during this period.
After the thirteenth century, the main sources for this
renewal of intense reﬂections on atoms were not Epicurus
or Lucretius, but rather Democritus through the newly
translated texts of Aristotle into Latin where the compo-
sition and division of a continuous quantity are discussed
(Physics, On Heavens, On Generation and Corruption). Can
a continuum be divided inﬁnitely? Is it composed of
indivisibles? Aristotle argued against Leucippus and
Atomism A
123
A

Democritus that if the world were made of atoms it would
be impossible to explain how they can form continuous
magnitudes. The world would be totally discrete. Atoms
either have a magnitude or not. If they have it, they are
divisible and then ad inﬁnitum. But if they do not have any
magnitude, they cannot form continuous magnitudes
because they cannot be in contact (Physics, 231 a26–b6),
for if two things are in contact they either touch (1) part to
part, (2) part to whole, or (3) whole to whole. The two ﬁrst
possibilities must be rejected for atoms because they do
not have any parts by deﬁnition. And if they touch whole
to whole, it would mean that they are superposed and
therefore they cannot form a new magnitude. Contrarily
to thirteenth-century Aristotelians, some fourteenth-
century philosophers thought that a continuum can be
composed of indivisibles and that it is possible to respond
to Aristotle’s arguments.
The ﬁrst atomist – or indivisibilist – is Henry of
Harclay, chancellor of the University of Oxford in 1312,
who defended the existence of an inﬁnite number of
indivisibles in any continuum when disputing a quaestio
about the eternity of the world. His main argument
consists in refuting the Aristotelian thesis about contact.
Harclay afﬁrmed that two points can touch if they are
situated in contiguous places. It is not very clear whether
this can explain continuity or only contiguity of atoms,
but Harclay clearly asserts that a continuum is composed
of points or indivisibles and that they are inﬁnite in
number. As in the Arabic tradition, atoms are primarily
deﬁned by their position. His successors at Oxford, among
them Walter Chatton, William Crathorn, and John Wyclif,
also accepted the indivisibilist analysis of the continuum
problem, but restricted it with the assertion that the num-
ber of indivisibles is ﬁnite (Zoubov 1959; Murdoch 1974;
Kretzmann 1986; Robert 2009). One of their strongest and
recurrent arguments is derived from one of Zeno’s
paradoxes, called ‘‘the metrical paradox of extension.’’
This paradox – probably known to the medieval
philosophers
through
Simplicius’
commentary
on
Aristotle’s Physics – runs as follows: an extended thing is
either composed of extended or unextended parts; if we
accept inﬁnite divisibility of the continuum, then either
the extended thing is composed of an inﬁnity of extended
parts and is therefore inﬁnite in extension; or it is made up
of an inﬁnity of unextended parts, but we cannot explain
how extension comes from non-extension. Chatton,
Crathorn, and Wyclif accepted Harclay’s basic arguments
– that is, that indivisibles are ﬁrstly deﬁned by their posi-
tions in the continuum – but they added the metrical
paradox to conclude that the number of indivisibles
must
be
ﬁnite.
We
ﬁnd
the
very
same
kind
of
argumentation in Gerard of Odo, General Minister of
the Franciscan order in 1329 (De Boer 2009). Nicolas
Bonetus, another contemporary Franciscan theologian,
and Nicholas of Autrecourt also used Zeno’s paradoxes
but they ﬁnally accepted the inﬁnity of atoms (Grellard
2004).
According to John Murdoch, fourteenth-century
atomism is merely a response to Aristotle’s anti-atomism
and no real traces of ancient physical atomism can be
found in this fourteenth-century indivisibilist literature.
Therefore atomism would only concern the geometrical
continuum and would be only directed against new geo-
metrical arguments (Murdoch 1974, 1982; see also Pabst
1994). At any rate, it is clear that from the divisibilist side –
as in Thomas Bradwardine’s, Adam Wodeham’s, or Greg-
ory of Rimini’s works against the atomists and as in the
Arabic tradition – the strongest arguments against atom-
ism were geometrical. As an example, the incommensura-
bility of the diagonal and the sides of a square was
frequently used against the ﬁnite composition of the con-
tinuum. For example, assume that the sides of a square are
composed of n points. If you draw all the parallels from
each point of a side to its counterpart on the opposite side,
the diagonal which intersects the parallel lines turns out to
be composed of n points too. From a mathematical point
of view, however, the diagonal of a square is incommen-
surable with its sides. According to its opponents, this
mathematical argument proved that atomism was an
absurd theory (Murdoch 1969). Atomists, however, devel-
oped real atomistic physics and even built up some strong
criticisms of the mathematical tools used by anti-atomists.
Indeed, Chatton, Crathorn, and Wyclif argued against the
relevance of geometry to deal with the problem of the
continuum. According to them, indivisibles must be con-
sidered as elemental components of reality, and not as
mere unextended points (Robert 2009; Michael 2009).
The most representative philosopher of this physicalist
way of thought is undoubtedly Nicholas of Autrecourt
(Grellard 2009), who explains generation and corruption,
condensation and rarefaction, and generally all types of
motion by the local motion of atoms. The main motive
of Autrecourt’s atomism is the defense of the eternity
of the world, one of the reasons why he has been
condemned by ecclesiastical authorities. In any case,
their positions are never reducible to a mere reaction to
Aristotle’s arguments, nor to a reconstruction of Democ-
ritus through Aristotelian doxography.
It becomes quite clear that fourteenth-century atom-
ists were inﬂuenced by the Arabic and Jewish discussions
mentioned above. For example, in the writings of
Crathorn, Autrecourt, and Wyclif one can ﬁnd elements
124 A
Atomism

of the debate about continuous motion after al-Nazza¯m.
They all accept the idea that the differences of velocity
come from instants of rest which cannot be perceived by
the senses. What seems to be a continuous motion is
sometimes discontinuous. Therefore, they maintained
that the speed of a continuous motion is always the
same (one atom of space during one instant of time)
and the fastest. They probably knew these debates
and arguments through the criticisms of Isaac Israeli,
Avicenna, Maimonides, and Averroes, whose major
works were translated into Latin since the thirteenth
century.
See also: ▶Adam Wodeham ▶Fakhr al-Dı¯n al-Ra¯zı¯
▶Gerard Odonis ▶Henry of Harclay ▶Intension and
Remission of Forms ▶Isaac
Israeli ▶John Wyclif
▶Moses Maimonides
▶Natural
Philosophy, Arabic
▶Natural
Philosophy
▶Natural
Philosophy,
Jewish
▶Nicholas of Autrecourt ▶Saadia Gaon ▶Thomas
Bradwardine ▶Walter Chatton ▶William Crathorn
Bibliography
Secondary Sources
De Boer SW (2009) The importance of atomism in the philosophy of
Gerard of Odo (OFM). In: Robert A, Grellard C (eds) Atomism in
late medieval philosophy and theology. Brill, Leiden, pp 85–106
Dhanani A (1994) The physical theory of Kalam. Brill, Leiden
Grellard C (2004) Les pre´suppose´s me´thodologiques de l’atomisme: la
the´orie du continu chez Nicolas d’Autre´court et Nicolas Bonet. In:
Grellard C (ed) Me´thodes et statut des sciences a` la ﬁn du moyen aˆge.
Presses du septentrion, Lille, pp 181–199
Grellard C (2009) Nicolas of Autrecourt’s atomistic physics. In: Robert A,
Grellard C (eds) Atomism in late medieval philosophy and theology.
Brill, Leiden, pp 107–126
Kretzmann N (1986) Continua, indivisibles, and change in Wyclif’s logic
of scripture. In: Kenny A (ed) Wyclif in his times. Calrendon Press,
Oxford, pp 31–66
Lasswitz K (1890) Geschichte der Atomistik vom Mittelalter bis Newton.
Leopold Voss, Hamburg
Mabilleau L (1895) Histoire de la philosophie atomistique. Alcan, Paris
Maier A (1949) Kontinuum, Minimum und aktuell Unendliches. In: Die
Vorla¨ufer Galileis im 14. Jahrhundert. Edizioni di storia e letteratura,
Roma, pp 155–215
Michael E (2009) John Wiclif’s atomism. In: Robert A, Grellard C (eds)
Atomism in late medieval philosophy and theology. Brill, Leiden,
pp 183–220
Murdoch JE (1964) Superposition, congruence and continuity in the
Middle Ages. In: L’aventure de la science, Me´langes Alexandre
Koyre´, vol I. Hermann, Paris, pp 416–441
Murdoch JE (1969) Mathesis in philosophiam scholasticam introducta:
the rise and development of the application of mathematics in
fourteenth century philosophy and theology. In: Arts libe´raux et
philosophie au moyen aˆge. Montre´al/Paris, pp 238–246
Murdoch JE (1974) Naissance et de´veloppement de l’atomisme au bas
Moyen Aˆ ge latin. In: Allard GH et al (eds), La science de la nature:
the´ories et pratiques. Bellarmin, Montre´al, pp 11–32
Murdoch JE (1981) Henry of Harclay and the inﬁnite. In: Maieru` A et al
(eds) Studi sul XIV secolo in memoria di Anneliese Maier. Edizioni
Storia e Letterattura, Rome, pp 219–261
Murdoch JE (1982) Inﬁnity and continuity. In: Kretzmann N et al (eds)
The Cambridge history of later medieval philosophy. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, pp 564–591
Murdoch JE (1984) Atomism and motion in the fourteenth century. In:
Mendelsohn E (ed) Transformation and tradition in the sciences.
Essays in honor of I. Bernard Cohen. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, pp 45–66
Pabst
B
(1994)
Atomentheorien
des
lateinischen
Mittelalters.
Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, Darmstadt
Philippe J (1895) Lucre`ce dans la the´ologie chre´tienne du IIIe au XIIIe
sie`cles. Revue de l’Histoire des Religions 32:284–302
Philippe J (1896) Lucre`ce dans la the´ologie chre´tienne du IIIe au XIIIe
sie`cles. Revue de l’Histoire des Religions 33:19–36, 125–162
Pines S (1936) Beitra¨ge zur islamischen Atomenlehre. A. Heine, Berlin
Pyle A (1997) Atomism and its critics. From Democritus to Newton.
Thoemmes Press, Bristol
Rashed M (2005) Natural philosophy. In: Adamson P et al (eds) The
Cambridge companion to Arabic philosophy. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, pp 287–307
Robert A (2009) William Crathorn’s mereotopological atomism. In:
Robert A, Grellard C (eds) Atomism in late medieval philosophy
and theology. Brill, Leiden, pp 127–162
Robert A, Grellard C (eds) (2009) Atomism in late medieval philosophy
and theology. Brill, Leiden
Rudavsky TM (2000) Time matters. Time, creation and cosmology in
medieval Jewish philosophy. SUNY Press, New York
Trifogli C (2002) Matter and form in thirteenth century, discussions of
inﬁnity and continuity. In: Leijenhorst C et al (eds) The dynamics of
Aristotelian natural philosophy. Brill, Leiden, pp 169–187
Wolfson AH (1946) Atomism in Saadia. The Jewish Quarterly Review
37/2, pp 107–124
Wolfson AH (1976) The philosophy of the Kalam. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge
Zonta M (2002) La ﬁlosoﬁa ebraica medievale. Storia e testi. Laterza, Bari
Zoubov VP (1959) Walter Catton, Ge´rard d’Odon et Nicolas Bonet.
Physis: rivista di storia della scienza 1:261–278
Augustine
GARETH B. MATTHEWS
Department of Philosophy
University of Massachusetts at Amherst
Amherst, MA
USA
Abstract
Augustine (354–430 CE) was born in North Africa and,
except for a ﬁve-year sojourn in Italy, lived out his life
there. He is important for having deﬁned the Christian
heresies of Donatism, Manicheanism, and Pelagianism.
His prodigious literary output includes Confessions, City
of God, On the Trinity, and no fewer than ﬁve different
Augustine A
125
A

commentaries on the ﬁrst verses of Genesis. Augustine was
the ﬁrst important western philosopher to philosophize
from a distinctively ﬁrst-person point of view. His works
include important replies to the threat of skepticism (‘‘If
I am mistaken, [still] I am’’), a signiﬁcant discussion of
language acquisition, an epistemological theory of ‘‘illu-
mination,’’ arguments for mind–body dualism, and the
analogical argument for other minds. He has been credited
(and debited) with introducing the notion of the will into
philosophy. He made famous the problem of whether
God’s foreknowledge is compatible with human free will.
His subjective account of time has been particularly inﬂu-
ential. His ethics gives important emphasis to the agent’s
intention. Although he did not invent just war theory or
the philosophy of history, he made signiﬁcant contribu-
tions to both.
St. Augustine (Aurelius Augustinus) (354–430 BCE),
Bishop of Hippo, was the ﬁrst great Christian philosopher,
and, until the ascendancy of Thomas Aquinas at the end
of the thirteenth century, he was the most inﬂuential
Christian thinker in western philosophy. He was born
in Tagaste (modern Souk Ahras, in eastern Algeria) in
the waning years of the Roman Empire. He was educated
in nearby Madaura and at the University of Carthage,
where he studied rhetoric. In 383 he sailed for Rome and
became professor of rhetoric at Milan. There he came
under the inﬂuence of Bishop Ambrose, who baptized
him in 387.
Augustine’s mother, Monica, who had followed him to
Italy, rejoiced in his conversion. She joined him and var-
ious philosophically minded relatives and friends at a villa
at Cassiacium, near Lake Como, where he wrote four of his
earliest works, including his Contra academicos (Against
the Academicians) and his Soliloqua (Soliloquies). Shortly
after his mother’s death, he returned to Carthage in 388
and, after that, never left North Africa.
When Augustine became, ﬁrst a priest, and then
Bishop of Hippo (later Boˆne, now Annaba, Algeria) he
sought to combine his pastoral duties with extensive
writings in philosophy and theology. By deﬁning three
important Christian heresies, namely, Donatism, Mani-
cheanism, and Pelagianism, he did probably as much as
any single person to deﬁne Christian orthodoxy. Two of
these three heresies, namely, Manicheanism and Pelagian-
ism, are of special philosophical interest. The ﬁrst is the
view that there is a cosmic principle of evil and darkness
coeval with, and equal in power to, the principle of good-
ness and light. Manicheanism can be seen as, in part,
a radical solution to the philosophical and theological
problem of evil. Pelagianism is captured by the slogan
modern philosophers associate with Kant: ‘‘Ought implies
can.’’ Against Pelagianism Augustine maintained that,
after the fall of Adam, no human is capable of acting
rightly apart from the gratuitous assistance, that is, the
grace, of God. Adam’s fall produced ‘‘original sin,’’ which
has afﬂicted all subsequent human beings.
No doubt the most popular of Augustine’s work is his
Confessions, which is also the ﬁrst signiﬁcant autobiogra-
phy in western literature. Next in inﬂuence is his mam-
moth City of God, in 20 books. This great work was
initially a response to those who said that the fall of
Rome in 410 was the result of its Christianization. Enor-
mous in scope, this work came to be regarded, in later
centuries, as something of an encyclopedia of knowledge.
Of special importance, especially in the Middle Ages, is
Augustine’s De genesi ad litteram (Literal Commentary on
Genesis). It is one of ﬁve commentaries Augustine wrote
on the biblical story of creation. Of special signiﬁcance to
modern philosophy is Augustine’s De trinitate (On the
Trinity). Book 10 of that work had a clear and strong,
though
unacknowledged,
inﬂuence
on
Descartes’
Meditations.
Like the Meditations, some of Augustine’s thought is
expressed from the ﬁrst-person point of view. In his Solil-
oquies he points out that he has coined the expression
soliloquia for the soul’s conversation with itself. Moreover,
his On Free Choice of the Will, although it is now uniformly
printed as a dialogue between Augustine and his friend
and (later) bishop, Evodius, may also have been conceived
as an inner dialogue. As Simon Harrison has recently
pointed out (Harrison 2006, 31–50), the name ‘‘Evodius’’
does not appear in any of the manuscripts of this work and
was ﬁrst printed in Auerbach’s edition of 1506. So the idea
that this work is a dialogue between these two historical
ﬁgures seems to be a Renaissance invention.
Augustine’s literary output, produced with the aid of
scribes, is prodigious. According to Chadwick, in his
introduction to the Confessions, Augustine’s works make
up the largest body of writing left by any ancient author.
Besides 100 books and treatises, there are some 200 letters
and over 500 sermons. Three years before his death,
Augustine catalogued and commented on each of his
works in a volume he called the Retractiones (Reviews).
They provide a ﬁnal assessment, by the author himself,
of his great opus.
Skepticism
Augustine’s earliest surviving work, his Contra academicos
(Against the Academicians), is a response to skepticism. In
young adulthood Augustine had been a Manichean
‘‘hearer,’’ or disciple. But, after nine years in that role, he
126 A
Augustine

became disenchanted with Manicheanism. About the time
he left Carthage for Rome, he found himself attracted to
the skeptical view of the ‘‘Academics,’’ that is, the followers
of Arcesilaus and the New Academy, who held that ‘‘every-
thing was a matter of doubt and that an understanding of
the truth lies beyond human capacity’’ (Confessions,
5.10.19). In the Contra academicos Augustine discusses
the criterion for knowledge put forward by Zeno of
Citium, according to which something can be known
just in case it cannot even seem to be false. Augustine
proposes a dilemma. Either Zeno’s criterion can be
known to be true, in which case it is false, or else it cannot
be known to be true, in which case we have inadequate
reason to accept it.
Augustine goes on to offer knowledge claims of his
own that he dares the skeptic to reject, among them,
certain logical truths, certain mathematical truths, and
certain reports of immediate experience (e.g., ‘‘That tastes
pleasant to me’’). Especially interesting is his claim to
know that the world exists. To the skeptic’s taunt that he
might be dreaming, Augustine responds that he will call
‘‘the world’’ whatever appears to surround him. In this
way he introduces the idea of a phenomenal world, knowl-
edge of which, he maintains, is impervious to skepticism.
No doubt Augustine’s most famous response to skepti-
cism comes much later, in Book 15 of his On the Trinity and
in Book 11 of his City of God. Here is the latter passage:
"
In respect of these truths I have no fear of the arguments
of the Academics. They say, ‘What if you are mistaken?’ If
I am mistaken, I am [Si fallor, sum.] Whoever does not exist
cannot be mistaken; therefore I exist, if I am mistaken.
Because, then, I exist if I am mistaken, how am I mistaken
in thinking that I exist, when it is certain to me that I am if
I am mistaken (11.26).
The anticipation of Descartes’ cogito, ergo sum is clear.
Language
Wittgenstein begins his Philosophical Investigations with
a quotation from Book 1 of Augustine’s Confesssions,
which seems to say that, as a young child, he learned the
meaning of words by having the objects they name
pointed out to him by his elders. Wittgenstein rejects
this view of language acquisition. But, as Myles Burnyeat
(1987) has pointed out, the passage Wittgenstein quotes is
prefaced with these words:
"
It was not that grown-ups instructed me by presenting me
with words in a certain order by formal teaching, as later
I was to learn the letters of the alphabet. I myself acquired
this power of speech with the intelligence which you gave
me, my God (11.8.13).
And in Augustine’s early dialogue with his son, Adeodatus,
Concerning the Teacher, Augustine brings out, with exam-
ples, the ambiguity of ostension:
"
Augustine: Come now, tell me, if I, knowing absolutely
nothing of the meaning of the word, should ask you
while you are walking what walking is, how would you
each me?
"
Adeodatus: I should walk somewhat more quickly.
"
Augustine: Don’t you know that walking is one thing and
hurrying is something else? (3.6).
It is by an inner illumination, Augustine, argues, that we
learn what things are. Or, as it puts it at the end of his
Concerning the Teacher, it is by Christ, the ‘‘Inner Teacher’’,
that we learn. This is the Augustinian Doctrine of
Illumination.
In Book 15 of Augustine’s On the Trinity we get the
idea that an ‘‘inner word,’’ or concept, mediates between
the word or words of a natural language and items in the
world around us our words can be used to refer to. This
development helps him resolve a puzzle he had raised
already in the Concerning the Teacher about how two
words can mean ‘‘as much’’ without meaning ‘‘the
same,’’ that is, how they can have the same extension
without having the same meaning. (cit.)
The idea that thinking is inner speaking, found already
in Plato’s Theaetetus and Sophist, is also prominent in
Augustine, again, for example, in Book 15 of his On the
Trinity. But it is Augustine to whom, for example, William
of Ockham refers when he develops his own idea of mental
language in his Summa logicae 1.1.
Epistemology
Augustine can be said to have an active theory of sense
perception. ‘‘Active’’ in this context includes the idea that
the eyes emit rays that touch the object of vision. ‘‘For it is
not the body that perceives,’’ he writes in Literal Commen-
tary on Genesis 12.24.51, ‘‘but the soul through the body,
which messenger, as it were, the soul uses to form in itself
the very thing which is announced from the outside.’’
Augustine’s theory of sense perception seems not to be
‘‘representational,’’ if, by that term one means that it is an
image or sense-datum that is the direct object of percep-
tion. In sensing a body, according to him, we immediately
form an image of that body in our sense, yet we cannot
distinguish between the form of the body we see and the
form of the image we produce in our sense (On the Trinity,
11.2.3).
Augustine’s account of knowledge is not based on
the idea of abstraction, as we ﬁnd in the Aristotelian
tradition. Rather, as already noted, Augustine understands
Augustine A
127
A

knowledge to be something arrived at by an intellec-
tual illumination. He thinks that ‘‘intelligible realities,’’
including especially a priori truths, cannot be learned, or
even conﬁrmed, in sense experience. All this, including
the light metaphor so prominent in Augustine’s idea of
illumination, is very Platonic. But Augustine rejects
Plato’s idea that the soul might have been introduced to
items in the purely intelligible realm before birth. ‘‘We
ought rather to believe,’’ he writes, ‘‘that the nature of the
intellectual mind is so formed as to see those things
which, according to the disposition of the Creator, are
subjoined to intelligible things in the natural order, in
a sort of incorporeal light of its own kind’’ (On the
Trinity, 12.15.24).
Mind–Body Dualism
When Plato has Socrates argue in the Phaedo that we have
knowledge we could not have acquired in this life and
therefore our souls must have existed before they took
on this bodily form, he argues for soul–body dualism
from an impersonal point of view. Such is also true of
his other arguments for soul–body dualism. Augustine, by
contrast, argues for mind–body dualism in Book 10 of On
the Trinity from a ﬁrst-person point of view. He argues
there that the mind (mens) is fully present to itself and so
knows and is certain of its own substance or nature.
However, he goes on, the mind does not know nor is it
certain that it is air or ﬁre or any other body that philos-
ophers have theorized it to be; therefore, it is none of these
things, that is nothing bodily (10.10.16).
Like Descartes, long after him, Augustine argues that
the mind is something that remembers, understands, wills,
thinks, knows, and judges (10.10.14). Augustine adds that
the mind also lives, and in this he differs from Descartes,
who supposes life to be a purely material phenomenon.
But the difference between these two thinkers on whether
life is a psychological function is not as great as it might
seem to be. In truth, Augustine does not understand living
to be, necessarily, anything physiological. One can ask
whether there is life after death without asking about
post mortem physiology.
Anticipating
the
critics
of
Cartesian
dualism,
Augustine himself poses for himself the philosophical
problem of other minds, that is, the problem of how
each of us can know that other living creatures have
minds. Augustine’s answer is a form of the Argument
from Analogy. ‘‘Just as we move our body in living,’’ he
writes, ‘‘so, we notice, those bodies are moved’’ and so we
come to think that there is present in another body ‘‘such as
is present in us to move our mass in a similar way’’ (On the
Trinity, 8.6.9).
The Will
Albrecht Dihle (1982) and others have maintained that the
concept of the will originated with Augustine. Certainly
there is nothing exactly like the idea of the will to be
found in Plato or Aristotle, whereas, by contrast, the notion
of the will is prominent in Augustine. In On Free Choice of
the Will Augustine writes that the will, which he thinks is
the ﬁrst cause of sin, is itself uncaused. ‘‘What cause of the
will could there be?’’ he asks rhetorically, ‘‘except the will
itself?’’ (3.17.49.168). So the human will is free. It is also, he
thinks, that component of our being that makes us moral
agents, capable of sin, but also capable of moral rectitude.
In his efforts to deﬁne and reject Pelagianism,
Augustine has to try to explain how the grace of God can
inﬂuence a human will without destroying its freedom. To
this challenge he responds that ‘‘free will is not made void
through grace, but is established, since grace cures the will
whereby righteousness is freely loved’’ (On the Spirit and
the Letter, 30.52).
Another divine threat to human free will seems to be
God’s foreknowledge. Augustine’s efforts to show that,
contrary to appearances, God’s foreknowledge is compat-
ible with free will are most prominent in Book 3 of his On
Free Choice of the Will. One of his responses is to say that
we cannot will what is not in our power. So what we will is
in our power, and, ‘‘since it is indeed in our power, it is free
in us’’ (3.3.8.33). Evodius, Augustine’s nominal interlocu-
tor in that work, points out that the very same reasoning
that leads us to suspect that God’s foreknowledge of what
we will choose to do should apply to God as well. His idea
is that God’s perfect knowledge should include what He
will do, and yet God’s will is perfectly free. Since God’s
foreknowledge does not rule out free will in God’s case, it
should not rule out free will in the case of a human agent
either (3.3.6.23).
God
In Book 2 of On Free Choice of the Will Augustine offers an
argument for the existence of God. It is a purely a priori
argument. Although it is not as important as Anselm’s
famous a priori argument in his Proslogion, it is not
without interest. Augustine gets his interlocutor to admit
that x is God if, and only if, x is more excellent than our
minds and nothing is more excellent than x. He then states
that truth is more excellent than our minds, perhaps on
the ground that truth sits in judgment on our thoughts.
He then concludes that either truth itself is God or there is
something more excellent that truth and it is God. In
either case, God exists.
Although Augustine’s argument for the existence
of God does not use Anselm’s expression for God,
128 A
Augustine

‘‘something than which nothing greater can be conceived,’’
Augustine does sometimes use, in other contexts, expres-
sions quite like that of Anselm, who was a professed
Augustinian. Thus, for example, in Confessions 7.4.6 he
writes: ‘‘Nor could there have been or be any soul capable
of conceiving that which is better than you, who are the
supreme and highest good.’’
Augustine made important contributions in the pro-
ject of giving a philosophical account of the divine attri-
butes. But perhaps his most inﬂuential contribution to
this topic is his espousal of the idea that God is metaphys-
ically simple, so that God is not only, for example, good
and wise, God is God’s own goodness and wisdom. Here is
a passage on the divine simplicity from On the Trinity:
"
But God is not great by a greatness that is not that which
he himself is – as if God were, so to speak, a partaker in
greatness when he is great. For in that case greatness
would be greater than God. But there cannot be anything
greater than God. Therefore, he is great by that greatness
which is identical with himself (5.19.11).
Creation
Augustine wrote no fewer than ﬁve commentaries on the
creation story in the book of Genesis. He rejects, or at least
severely qualiﬁes, the picture of God the Creator as
a divine craftsman, which is, for example, in Plato’s
Timaeus. ‘‘You did not hold anything in your hand,’’ he
writes in Confessions 11.5.7, ‘‘of which you made this
heaven and earth, for how could you come by what you
had not made to make something?’’ According to
Augustine God created heaven and earth out of nothing
(ex nihilo). Although Augustine concedes that the open-
ing verses of Genesis allow multiple defensible interpreta-
tions, he insists that nothing besides God exists, except
through God’s creation, not even space or time.
Interestingly, Augustine also, like Descartes, supposes
that God sustains creation. If God’s power ‘‘ever ceased to
govern creatures,’’ he writes,
"
their essences would pass away and all nature would
perish. When a builder puts up a house and departs, his
work remains in spite of the fact that he is no longer there.
But the universe will pass away in the twinkling of an eye if
God withdraws his ruling hand (Literal Commentary on
Genesis, 4.12.22).
Time
A philosopher’s favorite passage from Augustine is very
likely to be the discussion of the nature of time in Book 11
of the Confessions. ‘‘What, then, is time?’’ Augustine asks;
‘‘if no one asks me, I know; if I should want to explain it to
a questioner, I do not know’’ (11.14.17). This passage is
emblematic of philosophy. In a way, time is an everyday
notion. We all know what it is. We also know how to tell
time and keep our appointments. But we will be unlikely
to be able to give an account of the nature of time that will
satisfy a philosopher.
To begin his discussion of the nature of time Augustine
draws on a perplexity to be found in Aristotle (Physics,
4.10), but not likely to be original even with him. Augus-
tine draws it out to underline its importance. Times are
long or short. He points out. But it is obvious, he thinks,
that the past is no more and the future is not yet. Only the
present exists. But, strictly speaking, not all of the present
century, the present year, the present day even the present
minute is ever really present. Strictly speaking, only the
‘‘now,’’ conceived as a durationless divider between the
past and the future, is ever present. But that is neither long
nor short, so it cannot be time. Thus, if only the present
exists, there is no time.
Augustine resolves this conundrum by looking inward.
‘‘It is in you, my mind, that I measure my times’’
(11.27.37). So time is the measure of something mental.
That is, it is the measure of past events as remembered,
future events as anticipated, and present events as experi-
enced and held together in the mind. This is a classically
subjective view of time.
This famous discussion of the nature of time is embed-
ded in an account of God’s creation of heaven and earth
according to the beginning of the Book of Genesis.
Augustine wrote no fewer than ﬁve commentaries on the
biblical creation story, the longest being his De genesi ad
litteram (Literal Commentary on Genesis). In Confessions
11 he responds to the skeptical challenge (which he attri-
butes in other works to the Manicheans), ‘‘What was God
doing before he made heaven and earth?’’ His response is
that, in creating heaven and earth, God created both time
and place. Thus there was no ‘‘before creation’’ (11.8.15),
nor was there any place where God made heaven and
earth (11.5.7).
In the Confessions Augustine rejects the idea that time
could be the measure of the movement of the heavenly
bodies. In the other commentaries, however, he claims
that time is the measure of motion. On perhaps the most
plausible interpretation of these writings, his idea is that
‘‘unordered time’’ began with the thinking of the angels.
But human time began with the creation of Adam’s mind.
Evil
The problem of evil seems to have occupied Augustine’s
thinking throughout most of his adult life. It is, no doubt,
Augustine A
129
A

central to what he found attractive about Manicheanism
in his nine-year period as a Manichean disciple. If there is
a cosmic principle of evil coeval with, and equally power-
ful to, the cosmic principle of good, then there is no
philosophical problem of evil, that is, no philosophical
problem about how it can be that evil exists. It is when we
suppose, as Augustine came to believe, that ‘‘God is good
and is most mightily superior’’ to everything else that the
problem becomes acute. ‘‘Then where and whence is evil?’’
Augustine asks (Confessions, 7.5.7).
Augustine considers simply denying that evil exists.
‘‘Can it be,’’ he asks, ‘‘that there simply is no evil?’’ Then,
he reasons, the fear of evil is unfounded. Still, an
unfounded fear of evil would itself be evil (ibid.). Augus-
tine returns a little later in Confessions 7 to embrace the
Neoplatonic idea that evil has no real substance; instead it
is privation and so, in a way, does not exist.
In various of his writings Augustine ﬁnds the root
cause of evil in human free will. And he insists that having
free will is necessary for moral agency. His idea is that,
ﬁrst, even though God created human beings and they
created evil, God did not therefore create evil. Moreover,
genuine moral agency is such an important good that
God, in His goodness, gave it to human beings, despite
his foreknowledge that Adam and his progeny would
choose wrongly and create evil.
In On Free Choice of the Will Augustine’s interlocutor,
Evodius, is not satisﬁed with this response. ‘‘Doesn’t it
seem to you,’’ he asks Augustine,
"
If free will is given for acting morally, it ought not to have
been possible to turn it to sinning. Shouldn’t it have been
like justice, which was given to a human being for living in
a good way? (2.2.4.8)
We might expect Augustine to argue that, quite possibly,
even an omnipotent being could not grant human beings
free will without the possibility that they would use it
wrongly. But, toward the end of his life anyway, Augustine
allows that the blessed in heaven will have the most perfect
freedom of the will, which carries with it an inability to sin
(City of God, 22.30). But, he argues, this perfect freedom
could not have been given to Adam or his progeny, with-
out letting them partake in God’s impeccable nature.
Ethics
Augustine was an extreme intentionalist in ethics. In his
Commentary on the Lord’s Sermon on the Mount he iden-
tiﬁes three conditions necessary and sufﬁcient for
a complete sin: (i) suggestion, (ii) pleasure, and (iii) con-
sent. The immediate inspiration for this account is the
saying of Jesus, ‘‘Everyone who looks at a woman
lustfully has already committed adultery with her in his
heart’’ (Matthew 5:28). On Augustine’s view, consent
to perform a sinful action already constitutes a com-
plete sin; no ‘‘outward’’ action needs to have been
carried out.
His intentionalism leads him to worry about whether
he is responsible for the acts of his dream self (Confessions,
10.30.42). Although it seems to him unfair to count
dreamt adultery as a sin, it is unclear how his various
ethical and metaphysical commitments can allow him to
escape moral responsibility for acts he commits in his
dreams.
Drawing on a contrast between those things that are
desirable in themselves with those things that are desirable
for the sake of something else, Augustine says that things
of the ﬁrst sort are to be enjoyed (frui), whereas things of
the second sort are to be used (uti). Vice, he say, is wanting
to use what is meant to be enjoyed or wanting to enjoy
what is meant to be used (On Diverse Questions, 83.30). In
the end, it is only God who is to be enjoyed.
Augustine followed Ambrose in adding the Pauline
virtues of faith, hope, and charity to the classical virtues
of temperance, courage, wisdom, and justice. He offers an
interpretation of each of virtues that makes each one an
expression of the love of God. Thus, for example, temper-
ance is love ‘‘keeping itself whole and incorrupt for God’’
and courage is love ‘‘bearing everything readily for the
same of God’’ (On the Morals of the Catholic Church,
15.25). In this way Augustine provides a Christian ana-
logue to the idea of the unity of the virtues that one ﬁnds
in Plato and Aristotle.
Just War
Augustine
was
certainly
not
the
ﬁrst
thinker
to
suppose that a war could be a just war if, and only if, it
satisﬁed certain conditions. Requirements for justice in
going to war (jus ad bellum) and requirements for waging
a war justly (jus in bello) were already laid out by Cicero
in his On the Republic. But Augustine’s views on this
topic have had great inﬂuence on later thinkers and even
politicians.
Although Augustine takes the biblical commandment
‘‘Thou shalt not kill!’’ to be quite a strict prohibition, he
supposes it does not apply directly to a soldier in a just war
or to an executioner carrying out a lawful order; they are
only ‘‘an instrument, a sword in the user’s hand’’ (City of
God, 1.21). According to him, a war is truly just if either it
is commanded by God or at least it is waged by legitimate
authority for just cause with the right intention and with
the right love. ‘‘The real evils of war’’, he writes, ‘‘are love of
violence, revengeful cruelty, ﬁerce and implacable enmity,
130 A
Augustine

wild resistance, and the lust of power’’ (Reply to Faustus,
22.74).
Philosophy of History
In City of God 12.14 Augustine illustrates the idea of
eternal recurrence in history, which he attributes to
Plato, but which most of us today link with Nietzsche.
Augustine’s own conception of history is linear, starting
with the creation of Adam and leading to the second
coming of Christ. His account divides universal history
into seven ages, analogous to the seven days of creation.
He argues that divine providence, like divine foreknowl-
edge, is compatible with human free will.
See also: ▶Anselm of Canterbury ▶Certainty ▶Church
Fathers ▶Epistemology ▶Mental Word/Concepts ▶Pla-
tonism ▶Proofs of the Existence of God ▶Sense Percep-
tion ▶Skepticism ▶Thomas Aquinas ▶Time ▶Trinity
▶Will
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Latin Texts
(1866)
Corpus
Scriptorum
Ecclesiasticorum.
Tempsky,
Vienna.
Augustinian texts scattered throughout the series
(1954) Corpus Christianorum, Series Latina. The Hague, Brepols.
Augustinian texts scattered through the series
Migne Jacques-Paul (1844–1864) Patrologia Latina, vols 32–47. Own
available online: http://ccat.sas.upenn.edu/jod/augustine/
Nuova Biblioteca Augustina: http://ccat.sas.upenn.edu/jod/augustine/
English Translations
Collections
Schaff Philip (ed) (1994) A select library of Nicene and post-Nicene
fathers, vols 1–8. T&T Clark/Wm. B. Eerdmans, Edinburgh/Grand
Rapids.
Also
available
online:
http://ccat.sas.upenn.edu/jod/
augustine/
The works of Saint Augustine: a translation for the 21st century. New City
Press, Hyde Park (this series will eventually includes all of Augustine’s
works)
Individual Works in Translation
Bettenson Henry (trans) (1984) City of God. Penguin, London
Chadwick Henry (trans) (1991) Confessions. Oxford University Press,
Oxford
Hill Edmund (trans) (1990) On genesis. New City Press, Hyde Park
Holmes Peter (trans) (1948) On the spirit and the letter. In: Oates
Whitney J (ed) Basic writings of Saint Augustine, vol 1. Random
House, New York, pp 461–518
Jepson John J (trans) (1948) The Lord’s sermon on the mount. Ancient
Christian writers, No 5. Newman Press, New York
King Peter (trans) (1995) Against the academicians and the teacher.
Hackett, Indianapolis
Matthews Gareth B (ed) (2002) On the trinity, books 8–15, trans.
McKenna S. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Watson Gerard (trans) (1990) Soliloquies and immortality of the soul.
Aris & Phillips, Westminster
Williams Thomas (trans) (1993) On free choice of the will. Hackett,
Indianapolis
Secondary Sources
Books
Dihle A (1982) The theory of the will in classical antiquity. University of
California Press, Berkeley
Harrison S (2006) The way into the will: the theological and philosophical
signiﬁcance of Augustine’s De Libero Arbitrio. Oxford University
Press, Oxford
Kirwan C (1989) Augustine. Routledge, London
Markus RA (1972) Augustine: a collection of critical essays. Doubleday,
Garden City
Matthews GB (1992) Thought’s ego in Augustine and Descartes. Cornell
University Press, Ithaca
Matthews GB (ed) (1999) The Augustinian tradition. University of
California Press, Berkeley
Matthews GB (2005) Augustine. Blackwell, Oxford
Rist JM (1994) Augustine: ancient thought baptized. Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, Cambridge
Stump E, Kretzmann N (eds) (2001) The Cambridge companion to
Augustine. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Wetzel J (1992) Augustine and the limits of virtue. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge
Articles
Burnyeat MF (1987) Wittgenstein and Augustine De Magistro. Proc
Aristot Soc Suppl, 1–24 (repr. in Matthews, 1999)
Other Internet Resources
Mendelson M. Stanford encyclopedia of philosophy: ‘‘Saint Augustine.’’
http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/augustine/
O’Donnell JJ. Augustine site. http://ccat.sas.upenn.edu/jod/augustine/
Augustine in Byzantium
JOHN A. DEMETRACOPOULOS
Department of Education
University of Patras
Patras
Greece
Abstract
Up to 1281, when Maximos Planoudes, an erudite
Byzantine theologian and scholar, who had been engaged
in the discussions of the Byzantine with Roman Church
and was well trained in Classical Latin, translated
Augustine’s De trinitate, Augustine’s thought was almost
totally unknown to the Christian East. The De trinitate
was widely read and used; still, this was done almost
exclusively from the theological viewpoint, most usually
in the debates over Palamite theology and the quarrel
between pro-Latin and anti-Latin theologians. A probable
minor exception, Nicholas Kabasilas’ use of the anti-
skeptical ‘‘Augustinian cogito,’’ does not alter this image.
In the second half of the fourteenth century, Demetrios
and Prochoros Kydones, motivated by their theological
Augustine in Byzantium A
131
A

stands, translated also the Homilies on John’s Gospel 94–96
and 99–100, ﬁve excerpts from the Contra Julianum, the
De libero arbitrio I,1–90, eight Epistles, some small sections
from the De vera religione, the De beata vita and the
Enchiridion sive de ﬁde, spe et caritate, Pseudo-Augustine’s
De decem plagis Aegyptiorum et de decem praeceptis,
Pseudo-Augustine’s (Fulgentius of Ruspe’s) De ﬁde seu de
regula ﬁdei ad Petrum, the pseudo-Soliloquia, and
Prosperus of Aquitania’s Sententiae ex Augustino delibatae.
It was the ﬁrst time that these texts became available to the
Byzantine world; yet, as far as we know, they contributed
nothing to Byzantine philosophy proper; they found
a place only in theological disputes.
Phases of the Byzantines’ Knowledge of
Augustine
From the Beginning up to the Middle
Thirteenth Century
Because of the gradually strengthened language barrier,
the Latin Patristic literature was almost completely inac-
cessible to the Byzantines. Augustine’s texts were no excep-
tion to this rule. In the Byzantine literature from the sixth
to the middle of the thirteenth century, his name occurs
only from time to time, usually mentioned among other
Patristic authorities, in the context of ecclesiastical history
or of the history of dogma.
From 1281 to the Middle Fourteenth Century
In 1281, Maximos Planoudes, an erudite Byzantine theo-
logian and scholar, who had been engaged in the discus-
sions of the Byzantine with Roman Church and was well
trained in Classical Latin, translated (among several
ancient Latin works) Augustine’s De trinitate in its
entirety. The inﬂuence of the translation was considerable;
yet, it was conﬁned to the theological ﬁeld, in the context
of which it was produced. Most (if not all) of the readers of
this text, such as Barlaam of Calabria (c. 1290?–1348),
Gregory Palamas (1296–1359), Makarios Chrysokephalos
(c. 1300–c. 1382), Joseph Bryennios (c. 1350–c. 1431),
George Scholarios – Gennadios II (c. 1400–1472), were
primarily interested in Augustine’s doctrine of the proces-
sion of the Holy Spirit. Most of them regarded the De
trinitate as compatible with the Orthodox rejection of
the Filioque. Palamas was also highly impressed by the
soteriological theory of Book XIII, by the way Augustine
elaborated Plotinus’ doctrine of the inapplicability of
Aristotle’s Categories on God and used it in order to refute
Eunomius’ Trinitarian doctrine (Books V–VII), by the
Trinitarian images in the human soul as well as by some
minor
moral
remarks.
Palamas
found
Augustine’s
doctrine of the way Categories (especially ‘‘relation’’) can
describe God as a useful tool in his polemic against the
deniers of his distinction between God’s ‘‘essence’’ and
‘‘energies.’’ Nobody, however, showed any interest in the
rich
philosophical
aspects
of
this
work,
especially
Augustine’s doctrine of the human soul and its epistemo-
logical implications. The only probable instance of
philosophical use of this work is Nicholas Kabasilas’
(c. 1325–post 1391) Contra Pyrrhonem, where skepticism
is combated, inter alia, by means of an argument close to
the famous ‘‘Augustinian cogito,’’ which occurs in many of
Augustine’s works, the De trinitate included, too.
Middle Fourteenth Century Onwards
In the second half of the Byzantine fourteenth century, two
issues dominated in almost every intellectual’s mind: the
tug of war between Palamite and anti-Palamite theolo-
gians and the conﬂict between pro-Latins and anti-Latins.
Demetrios Kydones (c. 1324–c. 1397), who was both
pro-Latin and anti-Palamite, and his brother, Prochoros
(c. 1330–c. 1369), who was an anti-Palamite (ofﬁcially
condemned in 1368), translated into Greek many Augus-
tinian (or pseudo-Augustinian) writings in order to rein-
force their theological positions. Demetrios, by so doing,
was cumulating authoritative texts over texts where the
Filioque was explicitly stated (and thus making the tradi-
tional apologetic strategies of the Greek theologians difﬁ-
cult to follow) or Palamas’ doctrine of the ‘‘divine light’’
was contradicted. The latter also holds true for Prochoros.
In particular, Demetrios translated four pieces as having
allegedly been produced by Augustine: two genuine, that
is, the Homilies on John’s Gospel 94–96 and 99–100
(regarding the Holy Spirit) and ﬁve excerpts from the
Contra Julianum, and two spurious, that is Fulgentius of
Ruspe’s De ﬁde seu de regula ﬁdei ad Petrum and the late
thirteenth century pseudo-Soliloquia (imbued with the
devotional spirit of Augustine’s Confessiones). In the
pseudo-Soliloquia, probably translated in 1371–1373
and dedicated to the empress Helen Kantakouzene
Palaiologina (1333/1334–1397; daughter of John VI
Kantacouzenos and wife of John V Palaiologos), the trans-
lator believed that he found the sane doctrine of what
‘‘God’s light’’ is, that is, not a strange sort of being ‘‘around
God’’ but Jesus Christ himself (cf. Joh. 1, 9). Traces of
inﬂuence of this work are seen in Nicholas Kabasilas’ De
vita in Christo. Demetrios also translated Prosperus of
Aquitania’s Sententiae ex Augustino delibatae, which con-
sists of numerous genuine excerpts from Augustine’s
œuvre. Prochoros translated eight of Augustine’s Epistles
(132, 137, 138, 92, 143, 28, 147 in part, and 82), several of
which touch themes of apologetics (Incarnation) and
132 A
Augustine in Byzantium

systematic theology. In some of them it is stressed that
God cannot be seen through the bodily eyes, but only by
pure heart. He also translated De libero arbitrio I,1–90 and
some small sections from the De vera religione, the De
beata vita and the Enchiridion sive de ﬁde, spe et caritate,
as well as Pseudo-Augustine’s De decem plagis Aegyptiorum
et de decem praeceptis. Investigation into the reasons why
these texts were chosen by Demetrios and Prochors for
translation is still in process. In any case, both Palamites
and anti-Palamites, as well as both pro-Latin and anti-
Latin theologians regarded Augustine as one of the
greatest Fathers of the Church, though this was stressed
particularly by the pro-Latins. Some of the above trans-
lations remain unedited or insufﬁciently edited. Offering
a full account of their role in Late Byzantine thought
requires that they all be properly edited.
See
also:
▶Demetrios Kydones ▶Gregory Palamas
▶Nicholas Chamae¨tos Kabasilas ▶Prochoros Kydones
▶Thomism, Byzantine
Bibliography
Primary Sources
(1847) Migne Jacques-Paul (1131C–1158A) PatrologiaGraeca, vol 147, Paris
(1984) Prochoros Kydones. U¨ bersetzungen von acht Briefen des Hl.
Augustinus. Wiener Studien 9, ed. Hunger H, Wien
(1990) Prochoros Kydones’ U¨ bersetzungen von Augustinus, De libero
arbitrio I 1-90 und Ps.-Augustinus, De decem plagis Aegyptiorum
(lateinisch-griechisch). Wiener Studien 14, ed. Hunger H, Wien
(1995) Augoustinou Peri Triados biblia pentekaideka, haper ek tes Latinon
dialektou eis ten Hellada metenegke Maximos ho Planoudes. Editio
Princeps, vols I–II, ed. Papathomopoulos M, Tsavari I, Rigotti G, Athens
(1996) Prosper of Aquitania. Anthologion ek ton ergon Augoustinou
Hipponos exellenisthen hypo Demetriou Kydone, ed. Kalamakis
Dionysios, Athens (in Modern Greek)
(1999) Demetrios Cydones’ Translation of Fulgentius’ “De Fide”. Intro-
duction and Editio Princeps, ed. Koltsiou-Nikita A, Thessaloniki (in
Modern Greek)
(2000) The authority of the Church Fathers. An unedited epistolary
treatise [by Demetrios Cydones], ed. Koltsiou-Nikita A, Thessaloniki
(in Modern Greek)
(2005) Demetrios Cydones’ Translation of Pseudo-Augustine’s “Soliloquia”.
Introduction, critical text, and indices. Corpus Philosophorum Medii
Aevi – Philosophi Byzantini 11, ed. Koltsiou-Nikita A, Athens (in
Modern Greek; with ample bibliography)
Secondary Sources
Demetracopoulos JA (1997) Augustine and Gregory Palamas. Aristotle’s
Categories and the Psychological Images of the Holy Trinity (in
Modern Greek; with three appendices). Athens
Demetracopoulos JA (2006) The Sitz im Leben of Demetrius Cydones’
Translation of Pseudo-Augustine’s Soliloquia. Remarks on a recent
edition. Quaestio 6:191–258
Endrizzi L (1962–1963) Le opere di Sant’ Agostino nelle versioni greche
del saec. XIV. Doctoral dissertation, Padova
Flogaus R (1996) De heimliche Blick nach Westen. Zur Rezeption von
Augustinus’ De trinitate durch Gregorios Palamas. Jahrbuch der
o¨sterreichischen Byzantinistik 46:275–297
Kapriev G (2006) Die nicht-psychologische Deutung des Menschen bei
Gregorios Palamas. Archiv fu¨r mittelalterliche Philosophie und
Kultur 12:187–198
Lo¨ssl J (1999) Augustine’s On the Trinity in Gregory Palamas’ One
Hundred and Fifty Chapters. Augustine Studies 30:61–82
Lo¨ssl J (2000) Augustine in Byzantium. J Eccles Hist 51(2):267–295
Mercati G (1931) Notizie di Procoro e Demetrio Cidone, Manuele Caleca
e Teodoro Meliteniota ed altri appunti per la storia della teologia e
della letteratura bizantina del secolo XIV. Studi e Testi, 56. Biblioteca
Apostolica Vaticana, Citta` del Vaticano
Russell N (2003) Palamism and the circle of Demetrios Cydones.
In: Dendrinos C, Harris J, Harvalia-Crook E, Herrin J (eds)
Porphyrogenita. Essays on the history and literature of Byzantium
and the Latin East in honour of J. Chrysostomides. Ashgate,
Farnham, pp 153–174
Tinnefeld F (1981) Demetrios Kydones. Briefe. U¨ bersetzt und Erlau¨tert.
Erster Teil. Erster Halbband: Einleitung und 47 Briefe. Bibliothek der
griechischen Literatur, 12. Stuttgart
Trizio M (2006) ‘Un uomo sapiente ed apostolico’. Agostino a Bizanzio:
Gregorio Palamas lettore del De trinitate. Quaestio 6:131–189 (with
ample bibliography)
Augustine of Ancona
ARTHUR STEPHEN MCGRADE
Department of Philosophy (Professor Emeritus)
University of Connecticut
Storrs, CT
USA
Abstract
Augustine
of
Ancona (Augustinus
[Triumphus]
de
Ancona) (1270/1273–1328), an Augustinian friar, wrote
at least 32 theological and philosophical works but is
chieﬂy known for his Summa de ecclesiastica potestate,
a systematic argument for the supreme power of the
pope in both temporal and spiritual affairs.
Biographical Information
Augustine of Ancona studied at Paris and lectured there
on the Sentences of Peter Lombard between 1302 and 1306.
He then served as lector, probably at Padua, in a school of
his monastic community, the Augustinian Order of Her-
mits. In 1313 or, more likely, 1315, he returned to Paris to
lecture for 3 years as a master in theology. He became
chaplain to Charles, son of King Robert of Naples, in 1322.
He completed the Summa de ecclesiastica potestate by the
end of 1326. The cognomen ‘‘Triumphus,’’ based on
a supposed relationship to an ancient family of Ancona,
Augustine of Ancona A
133
A

is ﬁrst used in 1581. It appears in the
1582 Rome
edition of the Summa, along with an inﬂated biography
of Augustine, later corrected by Ministeri (1951/1952).
Thought
Augustine of Ancona’s Summa de ecclesiastica potestate is
distinctly a theological treatise, relying primarily on argu-
ments from the Scripture, the church fathers, and canon
law. Nevertheless, it is of interest for political philosophy
in two ways: for its recurrent engagement with philosoph-
ical themes, especially natural law, and for its outline of
a global political structure dependent on one supreme
power.
Augustine considers the pope’s power ﬁrst in itself
(qq 1–34), then in relation to the acts of temporal and
spiritual dominion or lordship (dominium) for which it is
ordained (qq 35–75), and ﬁnally in relation to the graded
perfections of status resulting from such power (qq
76–112). All ultimate earthly authority is claimed for the
papacy. The world as a whole (tota machina mundialis) is
a single governmental unit (principatus) and should have
a single ruler (q 22, a 3; q 49, a 2; q 60, a 4). The pope is the
intermediate between God and Christians (q 44, a. 1; cf.
q 1, aa 1, 3–9), and, since Christ by his passion has merited
judicial power over every creature, the pope’s authority
extends to pagans and Jews as well (qq 23–24). He can
correct, depose, or institute (without the request or con-
sent of others) the rulers of any realm (q 46, aa 1–3).
Anyone suffering unjustly may appeal to him from the
sentence of any man whatever, whether king or emperor
(q 45, a 3). The pope could not relinquish such power even
if he wished to, for just as God cannot deny himself to be
lord of all, so his vicar cannot exempt anyone from papal
jurisdiction, cannot deny that he has universal dominium.
To do so would be to fall into Manichaeism (q 61, aa 2–3).
Accordingly, all rights are derived from God to men
through the pope, and it is principally for him to maintain
others in these derived rights (q 1, aa 3, 7–8; qq 44–46;
q 75, a 1).
Virtually all recent discussion of the Summa, reviewed
by Walsh (2000), has been sparked by Wilks’ 1964 mono-
graph, The Problem of Sovereignty in the Later Middle Ages:
The Papal Monarchy with Augustinus Triumphus and the
Publicists. On the basis of theses such as those summarized
above, Wilks argued that Augustine’s account of papal
power amounted to a theory of ‘‘true sovereignty’’ (287).
Critics of Wilks have sometimes charged him with anach-
ronism in applying a modern concept, sovereignty, to
a medieval author and have pointed to passages in the
Summa, which seem to show that for Augustine the pope’s
authority was not as absolute as Wilks made it appear.
There are indeed important qualifying passages, as
we shall see and as Wilks himself recognized, but it is
not always clear that these are consistent with the
maximalist theses above (Wilks thought not). Even if
they are, Augustine’s claim that only papal authority
comes immediately from God places the pope’s power
on a distinctly higher plane than that of any other mortal.
Considered in this light, the charge of anachronism seems
ill founded.
The scholastic quaestio form of the Summa required
discussion of positions counter to the one defended by the
author. Augustine’s discussion of claims to authority made
for councils of the whole church was sufﬁciently substan-
tial to make his work an important resource in the concil-
iar period (Walsh 1991). His account of papal authority in
relation to natural law is complex. The pope should not be
obeyed if he commands anything contrary to natural or
divine law (q 22, a 1). Consequently, he cannot justly
deprive pagans of political authority, although he can
punish them for acting against natural law (q 23, aa
3–4); he cannot free slaves (q 22, a 5) or arbitrarily take
one person’s property and give it to another (q 54, a 4,
ad 1). Yet a papal precept binds more than the law of
nature, since it binds not only potentially but also actually,
not only universally but also particularly. Moreover, the
‘‘impressing’’ of the power of binding in the pope in
Christ’s committal of the church to Peter (Matt. 16:18) is
more unfailing (infallibilior) than the impression in our
minds of the law of nature, also made by God but only as
a habit, which can fall into evil in its actual exercise (q 63,
a 1; cf. q 60, a 1). On some matters, Augustine counsels
restraint in the pope’s exercise of his unlimited power. If
the pope orders one thing and the emperor another, the
pope is to be obeyed, not the emperor. However, since all
power is from God, the pope ought to maintain and
govern – not abolish or undermine – secular rulers and
kings (q 22, a 3).
The most fundamental apparent qualiﬁcation of
Augustine’s papal absolutism stems from his distinction
between the perfection of the papal status and the possible
imperfection of an individual pope (q 101, a 3). Augus-
tine, who had been distressed at the election of Clement V,
held that a faulty pope was subject to censure by any
Christian (q 7, a 1). Further, a pope who fell into heresy
was spiritually dead, ipso facto ceased to be pope, and
could be declared deposed by others, most suitably by
a general council (q 5, aa 1, 6; cp. q 22, a 1). The practical
import of Augustine’s acceptance of papal heresy as
a possibility is unclear, however, since there is no formal
procedure in his system for determining the actual occur-
rence of such an event.
134 A
Augustine of Ancona

See also: ▶Giles of Rome, Political Thought ▶James of
Viterbo ▶John Torquemada ▶Marsilius of Padua ▶Wil-
liam of Ockham
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Augustine
of
Ancona
(2001)
Summa
on
ecclesiastical
power
(selections), ed. and trans. McGrade A. In: McGrade A, Kilcullen J,
Kempshall M (eds) The Cambridge translations of medieval philo-
sophical texts 2: ethics and political philosophy. Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, Cambridge, pp 418–483
Augustinus de Ancona (1473) Summa de ecclesiastica potestate.
(Augsburg 1473; Cologne 1475; Rome 1479; place unstated 1484;
Venice 1487)
Augustinus de Ancona (1902) Tractatus contra articulos inventos ad
diffamandum papam Bonifaciam VIII. In: Finke H (ed) Aus den
Tagen Bonifaz’ VIII, Vorreformationsgeschichtliche Forschungen II.
Aschendorffer, Mu¨nster, pp 69–99
Augustinus de Ancona (1903a) Tractatus brevis de duplici potestate
praelatorum et laicorum. In: Scholz R (ed) Die Publizistik zur
Zeit Philipps des Scho¨nen und Bonifaz VIII. F. Enke, Stuttgart,
pp 486–501
Augustinus de Ancona (1903b) Tractatus de potestate collegii mortuo
papa. In: Scholz R (ed) Die Publizistik zur Zeit Philipps des Scho¨nen
und Bonifaz VIII. F. Enke, Stuttgart, pp 501–508
Augustinus Triumphus de Ancona (1582) Summa de ecclesiastica
potestate. G. Ferrarius, Rome (Repr. 1583, 1584, 1585)
Secondary Sources
Monographs
Tierney B (1988) Origins of papal infallibility. Brill, Leiden, pp 1150–1350
(1st publ. 1972)
Wilks M (1964) The problem of sovereignty in the later Middle Ages: the
papal monarchy with Augustinus Triumphus and the publicists.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Collections
McGrade A (1994–1997) William of Ockham and Augustinus de Ancona
on the righteousness of dissent. In: Andrews R (ed) Franciscan
theology and philosophy: essays in honor of Father Gedeon Ga´l,
O.F.M on his eightieth birthday. Franciscan Stud 54. The Franciscan
Institute, St. Bonaventure, pp 143–165
Walsh K (1991) Augustinus de Ancona as a conciliar authority:
the circulation of his Summa in the shadow of the council of
Basle. In: Wood D (ed) The church and sovereignty c. 590–
1918: essays in honour of Michael Wilks. Blackwell, Oxford, pp
345–368
Journal Articles
Horst U (1991) Die Lehrautorita¨t des Papstes nach Augustinus von
Ancona. Analecta Augustiniana 54:271–303
McCready W (1977) The papal sovereign in the ecclesiology of
Augustinus Triumphus. Medieval Stud 39:177–204
Ministeri B (1951/1952) De Augustini de Ancona O.E.S.A. ({ 1328) vita et
operibus. Analecta Augustiniana 22:7–56, 148–262
Shogimen T (2001) From disobedience to toleration: William of Ockham
and the medieval discourse on fraternal correction. J Eccles Hist
52:599–622
Walsh K (2000) Die Souvera¨nita¨tsfrage im Spa¨tmittelalter: Augustinus
Triumphus von Ancona und Michael Wilks. Innsbr Historische Stud
22:231–278
Auriol, Peter
▶Peter Auriol
Avempace
▶Ibn Ba¯jja, Abu¯ Bakr ibn al-Sa¯ʾig˙ (Avempace)
Avenasar
▶al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, Abu¯ Nas:r
Averroes
▶Ibn Rushd (Averroes), Latin Translations of
Averroes, Latin Translations of
▶Ibn Rushd (Averroes), Latin Translations of
Avicebron
MARIENZA BENEDETTO
Dipartimento di Scienze Filosoﬁche
Universita` degli Studi di Bari
Bari
Italy
Abstract
From the eleventh century, the axis of philosophical pro-
duction in Arabic gradually moved from eastern terri-
tories to Andalusia (Muslim Spain), which was also the
main centre of Jewish culture until at least the mid-twelfth
century. One of the most original and representative ﬁg-
ures in this period is Solomon ibn Gabirol (1021–1058),
author of very popular poems in Hebrew and not so
popular (though no less important) philosophical trea-
tises in Arabic. We ﬁnd exactly in one of these treatises, the
Avicebron A
135
A

Fountain of Life, the most characteristic expression of Ibn
Gabirol’s
thought,
i.e.,
the
doctrine
of
universal
hylomorphism: all beings, unlike God, are composed of
matter and form (hylomorphism derives from the
Greek terms hyle ‘‘matter’’ and morphe ‘‘form’’); this is
also true of spiritual substances (intelligences and angels),
whose matter is not corporeal or sensible, but purely
intelligible.
Biographical Information
The scarce, essential biographical information on Solo-
mon ibn Gabirol (Abu¯ Ayyu¯b Sulayma¯n ibn Jabı¯ru¯l
l-Qurt˙u¯bı¯ in Arabic) has a double source: the internal
one of his poetical compositions, and the external one of
the Arab bibliographer, Ibn Sa‘ı¯d of Toledo (1029–1070)
and the Jewish thinker, Mosheh ben Ya‘aqov ibn ‘Ezra
(1055–1138).
Ibn Gabirol was born in Malaga around 1021, though
his family originally came from Cordoba. He spent most
of his life in Saragossa, distinguishing himself from the age
of 16 in a series of poetical compositions of both a sacred
and profane character. He was forced to leave the city
because of a declared interest in philosophical enquiry,
for which he was accused of heresy: he sought and
obtained protection in Granada, under Shemuel ha-
Nagid ibn Nagrela, vizier to the local sovereign Habbus.
He died prematurely in Valencia in 1058, when he was in
his 30s, leaving a variety of writings, which as a whole can
be classiﬁed on the basis of a precise linguistic distinction.
Reﬂecting the bilingualism of many Jewish thinkers of
his day, Ibn Gabirol uses Hebrew for his poetical works
and Arabic for his prose. On the one hand, he wrote a vast
and popular collection of poems (dı¯wa¯n), with over
500 compositions in various genres, and a grammar in
verse (’Anaq), conceived speciﬁcally in order to extol the
Hebrew language. On the other hand, he wrote philosoph-
ical works in Arabic: The Improvement of the Moral Qual-
ities (Kita¯b is:la¯h al-ah˘la¯q), written in Saragossa in 1045, is
primarily an ethical treatise with a psychophysiological
bent that leaves no room for doubt as to Ibn Gabirol’s
religious and cultural identity (indeed the work is full of
quotations from the Old Testament in support of his
theses); the Choice of Pearls, of which only the Hebrew
translation is extant, is a collection of proverbs, maxims,
and parables taken from Arabic literature; the Fountain of
Life (Kita¯b yanbu¯‘al- h:aya¯t) is a work of pure metaphysics,
freed from the theological or apologetic concerns that
characterize so much of medieval Jewish philosophical
production. No longer extant in the original Arabic
(apart from a few quotations in Mosheh ibn ‘Ezra), the
Fountain of Life has survived mainly in its Latin version,
produced
around
1150
in
Toledo
by
Dominicus
Gundissalinus and John of Spain.
This team work ‘‘for four hands’’ followed a standard
procedure in medieval Toledo, whereby Latin translators
(who did not know Arabic) were able to translate Arabic
philosophical texts into their own language, since Arab
and Jewish scholars ﬁrst translated these texts into the
vernacular, thereby allowing the Latin translators to
carry out their work. So the Fountain of Life, written by
a certain ‘‘Avicebron,’’ was made accessible to the Latin
world with the title Fons vitae. Given that the text had no
biographical references, the Latin masters knew nothing of
the author’s actual identity, nor of his ethnic or religious
background, and so they generally took Avicebron (or
Avencebrol, Avicembron, Avicebrol, depending on the var-
ious deformations of the name in Latin due to the inﬂuences
of the Iberian vernacular) to be one of the great Arab
philosophers (fala¯sifa) or else an Arab who had converted
to Christianity.
This misunderstanding persisted until the French
scholar Solomon Munk demonstrated in 1846 that the
Avicebron of the Latins could be identiﬁed with Ibn
Gabirol, known in the Hebrew world as the author of
famous religious compositions. And so the two ﬁgures,
who until that time had enjoyed a parallel yet independent
fame within a Hebrew and Latin context (it is now an
indisputable fact that Ibn Gabirol’s philosophical works
were well known almost exclusively in the Latin world),
were reunited in a single historical personage.
A Hebrew version of the Fountain of Life, with the title
Liqqut:im mi-sefer Meqor h:ayyıˆm, or Extracts from the
Fountain of Life, also exists. It was produced around 1270
by the philosopher Shem Tov ibn Falaquera with the
purpose of reducing the work to its discursive nucleus.
Apart from being later and shorter, the Hebrew version
differs from the Latin in not being presented in the form of
a dialogue (between a magister and his discipulus), which
instead characterizes the latter.
Thought
In the history of ideas the doctrine of universal
hylomorphism is most often associated with the name of
Avicebron: all beings other than God, as is frequently
repeated in the Fons vitae, are composed of matter and
form, even though it is impossible to ﬁnd in simple, or
spiritual, substances the same matter (corporeal matter)
that characterizes composite, or sensible, substances. Yet
how does Avicebron develop his thesis?
The Fons vitae is divided into ﬁve books that focus on
the conceptual pair of matter and form, analyzed
according to a progressive broadening of the ﬁeld of
136 A
Avicebron

enquiry: the ﬁrst book establishes the metaphysical and
cosmological premises necessary for the deﬁnition of uni-
versal matter and universal form; the second examines
universal corporeal matter as a substratum of corporeal
form; the third demonstrates the existence of simple sub-
stances; the fourth shows that these too are composed of
matter and form; and the ﬁfth analyzes universal matter
and universal form in themselves. This is not all, however:
looking at the different ways in which matter and form are
present in the different levels of the universe, Avicebron
offers the reader a path of progressive ascent from the
sensible world to the ‘‘ﬂowering garden’’ of the intelligible
world, as the only means of ﬁnally achieving the happiness
and the end for which man was created. In this sense, the
expression evasio mortis et applicatio ad originem vitae
with which the ﬁfth book ends expresses in the most
efﬁcacious and suggestive way possible the idea that only
those who have undertaken the route of self-puriﬁcation
can reach not only the afterlife, but also, and above all, the
Fountain of life itself.
The overall scheme of the Fons vitae is typically Neo-
platonic and therefore legitimates the general evaluation
of Avicebron as the most important heir of the Neopla-
tonic tradition in Jewish philosophy. The universe is
ordered hierarchically, descending from the First Cause,
i.e., God, in less and less pure degrees of perfection,
starting from which it is possible to reascend (and
know), up to a certain point. The First Cause is in itself
unknowable: the only access to it is represented by its
effects, which depend on the Will, rather than the essence,
of God. The presence of the Will as a link between the First
Cause and Creation is indispensable to Avicebron’s cos-
mos, in order to preserve the purity and transcendence of
God, since it is only one of his faculties (in Latin virtus),
i.e., the Will, that comes into contact with all the rest.
So, if these are the general coordinates of Avicebron’s
discourse, it is easy to conclude that the ﬁrst effects of the
divine Will are universal matter and universal form, pur-
posely introduced as the ‘‘roots’’ of the whole universe or,
in other words, as the principles from which every being is
composed. These are followed, in descending order, by the
Intellect (the Neoplatonic hypostasis Nous); the Soul,
subdivided into rational, animal, and vegetable; and
ﬁnally the Nature, which represents the lowest level of
simple substances, from which corporeal substance origi-
nates. Of course, the term ‘‘matter’’, which the different
substances in Avicebron’s cosmos have in common, takes
on different meanings in reference to the various hierar-
chical levels of the real. It indicates, ﬁrst of all, primary
universal matter, which, at least potentially, is simple and
devoid of form, and as such functions as a common
substratum of the intelligible and sensible worlds; next,
intelligible matter, which sustains the simple and spiritual
forms of intelligible substances; corporeal matter emanat-
ing from Nature, which functions as a substratum of the
forma corporeitatis and the form of quantity; then, in
succession, the incorruptible matter of the heavenly bod-
ies, the matter of primary elements, and ﬁnally, the matter
of composite single substances.
The basic premises of the doctrine of hylomorphism
are expounded by Avicebron mainly in the fourth book of
the Fons vitae and can be summarized in the following
three points:
●
The need to indicate as clearly as possible the differ-
ence between the absolute simplicity of the First Cause
and the composite nature of every one of its effects
(both intelligible and sensible).
●
The analogy between the inferior, or sensible, world,
and the superior, or intelligible, one. The inferior
world is made in the image of the superior one, and
ﬂows from it. Therefore, if the inferior world has
a hylomorphic composition, then inevitably, the supe-
rior one has the same composition. In other words, the
superior world cannot in itself be devoid of those
properties that it communicates to what is inferior.
●
The absolutely innovative idea that matter, as the
founding dimension of all reality, is not a principle
of differentiation, as Aristotle maintains. If it is true
that even spiritual realities differ, they evidently con-
verge in something (in matter, to be precise) and are
distinguished by their form. The conclusion is
unequivocal: every level of reality is conﬁgured in the
framework outlined by Avicebron as a progressive
determination, or limitation, of primary matter,
wrought by the different forms (whether spiritual or
corporeal) that imprint themselves on this matter,
establishing, in each case, its spiritual or corporeal
nature.
To his disciple’s objection that if everything were effec-
tively composed of matter and form, it would not make
any sense to distinguish between simple and composite
substances, Avicebron replies (once again in strictly Neo-
platonic terms) that some things are called ‘‘simple’’ not in
an absolute, but only in a relative sense: every being is
simple in relation to that which follows it and composite
in relation to that which precedes it, with the result that
simplicity can coexist, without any inconvenience, with
the composition of matter and form. Nevertheless, if this
is still not sufﬁcient to demonstrate the omnipresence of
the two elements, we can also recall that matter does not
exist without form, just as form does not exist without
Avicebron A
137
A

matter, not even in the twinkling of an eye (ictu oculi).
Matter needs form in order to be actualized, just as form
subsists only where there is a substratum to be in-formed.
Therefore, given that matter and form are never present at
different times (except in opinione), and that every sub-
stance is both simple and composite, the obvious conse-
quence is that these two roots characterize every ﬁnite
being and are found at every level of the universe.
The doctrine of hylomorphism became an important
subject of debate in the Latin production of the thirteenth
century. Certain Franciscan masters – for instance,
Alexander of Hales and Bonaventure – while not referring
directly to Avicebron, use the theory of hylomorphic com-
position in order to distinguish the First Cause from its
effects, demonstrating thereby that it is only possible to
predicate simplicity, in the full and perfect sense, of God.
Angels, on the other hand, though they too are called
‘‘simple’’ in that they are incorporeal, nevertheless possess
intelligible matter (and hence an element in potency).
The case of the Dominican masters (Albert the Great
and Thomas Aquinas) is the exact opposite. Avicebron
is expressly indicated by them as the artiﬁcer of an
unfounded and erroneous doctrine that needs to be rad-
ically contested. More precisely, the exigency underlying
the doctrine of universal hylomorphism – i.e., the need to
postulate a composition that distinguishes God from
spiritual creatures – is recognized in all its importance,
but is transferred to a deeper level. Indeed, Aquinas sus-
tains the idea that the composition of ﬁnite beings is not
the physical composition of matter and form, but rather
the metaphysical one of essence and being, in which
essence functions as a potential substratum and being
functions as actuality; and since, in simple substances,
essence coincides with form, the true metaphysical cae-
sura is not to be sought between what is really immaterial
and what is not, but instead between that which is above
every form (God) and that which possesses at least
a formal determination.
See also: ▶Alexander of Hales ▶Aristotelianism in the
Greek, Latin, Syriac, Arabic, and Hebrew Traditions
▶Bonaventure ▶Essence and Existence ▶Form and Mat-
ter ▶Philosophy, Jewish ▶Thomas Aquinas
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Baeumker Clemens (ed) (1892) Fons vitae. Translationem ex Arabico in
Latinum. Aschendorff, Mu¨nster, 1892 [-1895], 19952 (Beitra¨ge zur
Geschichte der Philosophie und Theologie des Mittelalters, 1/2–4)
Benedetto Marienza (a cura di) (2007) La fonte della vita, testo latino
a fronte. Bompiani, Milano
Davidson Israel (ed) (1952) Selected religious poems. Jewish Publication
Society of America, Philadelphia
Gatti Roberto (a cura di) (2001) Fons vitae. Meqor hayyıˆm. il Melangolo,
Genova
Lomba Fuentes Joaquı´n (introduccio´n y traduccio´n) (1990) La correcio´n
de los caracteres. Prensas Universitarias de Zaragoza, Zaragoza
Schlanger Jacques (trad. par) (1970) Livre de la source de vie. Aubier-
Montaigne, Paris
Secondary Sources
Monographs
Adler H (1964) Ibn Gabirol and his inﬂuence upon Scholastic philosophy.
University College Essays, London
Bertola E (1953) Salomon Ibn Gabirol (Avicebron). Vita, opere e pensiero.
CEDAM, Padova
Brunner F (1955) Platonisme et aristotelisme. La critique d’Ibn Gabirol
par St. Thomas d’Aquin. Publications Universitaires de Louvain,
Louvain
Brunner F (1997) Metaphysique d’Ibn Gabirol et de la tradition
platonicienne. Variorum, Aldershot (Hampshire)
Guttmann J (19792) Die Philosophie des Salomon Ibn Gabirol. Olms,
Hildesheim
Kaufmann D (19802) Studien u¨ber Salomon Ibn Gabirol. Arno, New York
Loewe R (1989) Ibn Gabirol. Halban, London
Milla´s Vallicrosa JM (1993) Selomo Ibn Gabirol como poeta y ﬁlosofo.
Servicio de publicaciones de la Universidad de Granada, Granada
Munk S (19882) Me´langes de philosophie juive et arabe. Extraits de la
Source de la vie de Ibn-Gebirol. Ibn-Gebirol, ses e´crits et sa
philosophie. Des principaux philosophes arabes et de leurs doctrines.
Esquisse historique de la philosophie chez les Juifs. Vrin, Paris
Ortega Mun˜oz JF (1995) Ibn Gabirol. Ediciones del Orto, Madrid
Schlanger J (1968) La philosophie de Salomon Ibn Gabirol. Brill, Leiden
Collections
Dillon JM (1992) Solomon Ibn Gabirol’s doctrine of intelligible matter.
In: Goodman LE (ed) Neoplatonism and Jewish thought. State
University of New York Press, Albany, pp 43–59
Rudavsky T (2003) Avencebrol. In: Gracia J, Noone T (eds) A companion
to philosophy in the Middle Age. Blackwell, Oxford, pp 174–181
Journal Articles
Benedetto M (2005) Sapienza e ﬁlosoﬁa nel Fons vitae di Ibn Gabirol.
Quaestio 5:259–272
Ferrer Rodrı´guez MP (1994) Relacio´n transcendental ‘materia-forma’ en
el Fons vitae de Ibn Gabirol. Mediævalia 5(6):247–258
Harvey WZ (2000) Filosoﬁa y poesia en Ibn Gabirol. Revision del
Neoplatonismo. Anuario Filosoﬁco 2:491–504
Rudavsky T (1978) Conﬂicting motifs in Ibn Gabirol’s discussion of
matter and evil. The New Scholasticism 52:54–71
Avicenna
▶Ibn Sı¯na¯, Abu¯ ʿAlı¯ (Avicenna)
Avicenna, Latin Translations of
▶Ibn Sı¯na¯, Abu¯ ʿAlı¯ (Avicenna), Latin Translations of
138 A
Avicenna

