284
Hidden Variables
Hermitian Operator
See  Hilbert space, Indistinguishability, Operator, Propensities in Quantum
Mechanics, Rigged Hilbert Space in Quantum Mechanics, Self-adjoint operator,
Superposition Principle, Wave Mechanics.
Hidden Variables
B. J. Hiley
Standard quantum mechanics, in the hands of von Neumann, makes the assumption
that the  wave function, ψ(r, t), provides the most complete description of state
of an evolving system. It then uses the Born probability postulate ( Born rule)
and assumes that the probability of ﬁnding the system at position r at time t is
given by P = |ψ(r, t)|2. This gives an essentially statistical theory,  probability
interpretation but a statistical theory unlike those found in classical situations where
all the dynamical variables such as position, momentum, angular momentum etc.,
are well deﬁned but unknown.
The dynamical variables of a quantum system are determined by the eigenvalues
of operators called  ‘observables’. Given a quantum state, not all the dynamical
variables have simultaneous values. For example, if the position is sharply deﬁned,
then the momentum is undeﬁned and vice-versa. In other words there exist sets of
complementary variables such that if one set are well deﬁned, the other set are com-
pletely undeﬁned. This is the feature that underlies the  Heisenberg uncertainty
principle.
Furthermore it is assumed that the complementary set of variables cannot even
be postulated to exist with unknown numerical values. Thus  quantum statistics
do not emerge from averaging over a set of unknown parameters. This means that
quantum statistics must have a very different origin from classical statistics and
these statistics are totally different from the statistics that arise, for example, in sta-
tistical mechanics. This surprising result was already noticed by Born when he ﬁrst
introduced the  probability interpretation. He wrote “But, of course, anybody dis-
satisﬁed with these ideas may feel free to assume that there are additional parameters
not yet introduced into the theory which determine the individual event” [1]. These
new variables could then be regarded as hidden. This then is one of the ideas lying
behind the search for a hidden variable interpretation of quantum theory.
This point of view was strongly opposed by Bohr on what today would be
regarded as a philosophical argument. For Bohr the  Heisenberg uncertainty re-
lations implied an indivisibility of the quantum of action, which in turn implied
that it was not possible to make a sharp separation between the properties of the
observed system and those of the observing apparatus. In other words, quantum

