F
Fakhr al-Dı¯n al-Ra¯zı¯
FRANK GRIFFEL
Department of Religious Studies
Yale University
New Haven, CT
USA
Abstract
One of the most inﬂuential exponents of Islamic philoso-
phy and theology in the era after al-G˙ aza¯lı¯(d. 1111), Fakhr
al-Dı¯n al-Ra¯zı¯ (c. 1150–1210) rearranged the structure of
the philosophical summa in the Islamic East and thus also
the curriculum of philosophical studies. His work com-
pletes the process of integrating the discourse of Aristote-
lian philosophy (falsafa) into Muslim rationalist theology
(kala¯m), a process that started shortly before al-G˙ aza¯lı¯.
Original in his own thinking, Fakhr al-Dı¯n al-Ra¯zı¯ was
inﬂuenced by the systematic philosophy of Avicenna
(Ibn Sı¯na¯, d. 1037). His works were widely studied, par-
ticularly during the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries.
His commentaries on Avicenna’s works, in which he often
keeps a critical distance to falsafa, became the subject of
super-commentaries that are among the most inﬂuential
texts in Arabic philosophy and Islamic theology. Most
inﬂuential, however, was his monumental Qurʾa¯n com-
mentary Keys to the Unknown (Mafa¯tih: al-g˙ayb), in which
through a well-structured rationalist analysis he aims at
resolving most questions that are brought up in the text
of revelation.
Biographical Information
Muh:ammad ibn ʿUmar Fakhr al-Dı¯n al-Ra¯zı¯ was born
either in 1149 or 1150 in Rayy, a city in central Iran that
is now incorporated into Tehran, into a family of Muslim
religious scholars. His father was a well-educated theolo-
gian, known as the ‘‘preacher of Rayy’’ due to his popular
sermons. Thus, Fakhr al-Dı¯n is also known as Ibn al-
Khat:ı¯b, ‘‘the preacher’s son.’’ After studying with his
father, who may have died in 1163, Fakhr al-Dı¯n contin-
ued his education with famous teachers at Nishapur in
northeastern Iran. In Nishapur, he is said to have come
into contact with the works of Ibn Sı¯na¯, which set him on
a path to study philosophy. Back in Rayy, he became close
to Majd al-Dı¯n ʿAbd al-Razza¯q al-Jı¯lı¯, a philosophical
scholar and the author of a book on logic. When al-Jı¯lı¯
was invited to teach at the famous Muja¯hidiyya madrasa in
Maragha in northwestern Iran, Fakhr al-Dı¯n went with
him. He studied with al-Jı¯lı¯ at the same time that another
inﬂuential philosopher in Islam, Shihab al-Dı¯n Yah:ya¯
al-Suhrawardı¯ (d. 587/1191), is said to have learned
from him.
After completing his studies in Maragha, Fakhr al-Dı¯n
taught at madrasas in Marand (Azerbaijan), Hamadan
(central Iran), and in his hometown Rayy. Fakhr al-Dı¯n
began to write books early in his life. One of his earliest
works is The Instruction in the Science of kala¯m (al-Isha¯ra fı¯
ʿilm al-kala¯m), a handbook of rationalist theology in
Islam (kala¯m). Another early work is his inﬂuential The
Limitations to Rationality (Niha¯yat al-ʿuqu¯l, MS Istanbul,
Reisu¨lku¨ttap 564), a full-ﬂedged summa of kala¯m that
established his fame as a rationalist theologian. In January
1184, he ﬁnished The Summary in Philosophy and in Logic
(al-Mulakhkhas: fı¯ l-h:ikma wa-l-mant:iq, MS London,
British Library, Or. 2360), a work based on his earlier
Eastern Investigations (al-Maba¯h:ith al-mashriqiyya) that
would revolutionize the way rationalist theology and phi-
losophy was pursued in Islam. Later that year, at age 34,
Fakhr al-Dı¯n traveled to Khwarezm and Transoxania, two
regions in today’s Uzbekistan. Here, he entered into the
patronage of the ruling family of the Khwa¯rezmsha¯hs.
Complaining about opposition to his teachings from
other scholars in that region, Fakhr al-Dı¯n left Khwarezm
and Transoxania around 1199 and entered into the service
of the G˙ u¯rid family, the most important rivals of the
Khwa¯rezmsha¯hs, who ruled over Afghanistan and north-
ern India. It appears that despite strong opposition from
conservative and traditionalist scholars at their courts,
both rival dynasties, the Khwa¯rezmsha¯hs and the G˙ u¯rids,
competed to attract Fakhr al-Dı¯n, a situation that greatly
beneﬁted him and made him very rich. Under the G˙ u¯rids,
Fakhr al-Dı¯n worked at various places in Afghanistan until
one of their sultans, G˙ iya¯th al-Dı¯n Muh:ammad (d. 1203),
built a madrasa for him in Herat (western Afghanistan).
Henrik Lagerlund (ed.), Encyclopedia of Medieval Philosophy, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4020-9729-4,
# Springer Science+Business Media B.V., 2011

In G˙ u¯rid service, Fakhr al-Dı¯n began work on his volumi-
nous Qurʾa¯n commentary and his magnum opus in
theological metaphysics The Higher Issues (al-Mat:a¯lib
al-ʿa¯liya). Fakhr al-Dı¯n was occupied with these two
works until his death, probably not ﬁnishing any of them
but leaving that task to his students. In Herat, like in many
places earlier, Fakhr al-Dı¯n was violently opposed by more
traditionalist scholars and by the populace. He needed to
rely on bodyguards for his safety.
When in 1208 Herat fell into the hands of the
Khwa¯rezmsha¯h
ʿAla¯
l-Dı¯n
Muh:ammad
ibn
Tekish
(r. 1200–1220), who had been a student of Fakhr al-Dı¯n,
he was again honored and patronized by this dynasty.
Although
ailing
and
frail,
he
traveled
with
the
Khwa¯rezmsha¯h to his capital Gurgan in today’s Uzbeki-
stan and continued to work on his Qurʾa¯n commentary
and the book on metaphysics. Returning to Herat, Fakhr
al-Dı¯n fell ill in 1209 and died there on March 29, 1210
among his family and his students. After a mock-funeral at
a cemetery outside of Herat he was secretly buried in the
courtyard of his own house to prevent his enemies from
mutilating his corpse.
Thought
Fakhr al-Dı¯n al-Ra¯zı¯ was the most important philosopher
and theologian in Islam in the century after al-G˙ aza¯lı¯ (d.
1111) and much of his work complements al-G˙ aza¯lı¯’s
activity and consolidates the project started by him.
With al-G˙ aza¯lı¯ begins the integration of techniques and
teachings developed by Muslim philosophers (fala¯sifa)
such as Ibn Sı¯na¯ (d. 1038) and al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ (d. 950) into the
discourse of Muslim rationalist theology (kala¯m). Al-
G˙ aza¯lı¯ approached this project from two sides; ﬁrst, by
criticizing attitudes and certain teachings held by the
Muslim fala¯sifa most famously in his Incoherence of the
Philosophers (Taha¯fut al-fala¯sifa), and second, by adopting
positions and teachings that were developed by fala¯sifa
and that appeared to him the best solutions to the prob-
lems at hand. Thus, al-G˙ aza¯lı¯ ﬁrst identiﬁed elements in
the tradition of falsafa that were unﬁt to be integrated into
Muslim theology and, second, he integrated those ele-
ments that he saw ﬁt, without, however, telling his readers
in theology from where he had adopted them. In fact, in
his most public statements, such as his widely read auto-
biography The Deliverer from Error (al-Munqidh min al-
d˙ala¯l), al-G˙ aza¯li takes a very critical stance toward the
tradition of falsafa that gives his readers the wrong impres-
sion he was an enemy thereof.
Fakhr al-Dı¯n al-Ra¯zı¯ follows al-G˙ aza¯lı¯ in his general
attitude toward falsafa, that is, he takes a distanced but at
the same time appreciative stance that allows for the
widespread introduction of philosophical teachings into
Muslim kala¯m yet also for the rejection of others. In
contrast to al-G˙ aza¯lı¯, however, he saw no need to hide
his true attitude toward falsafa behind overtly critical
comments and public rejection. Other than al-G˙ aza¯lı¯,
who read the books of Ibn Sı¯na¯ and al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ very closely
but never quotes them appreciatively, Fakhr al-Dı¯n
engaged in an active discourse with the works of the
fala¯sifa quoting them wherever necessary, and abbreviat-
ing them, as well as commenting them in separate works.
While al-G˙ aza¯lı¯ aimed at introducing some teachings of
the fala¯sifa to the Muslim theologians without encourag-
ing religious scholars to study the books of the fala¯sifa
themselves, Fakhr al-Dı¯n had no reservation to engage
actively in a dialogue with, for instance, Ibn Sı¯na¯’s most
theological book, his Pointers and Reminders (al-Isha¯ra¯t
wa-l-tanbı¯ha¯t), to which he composed a commentary
(Sharh: al-Isha¯ra¯t). The often critical attitude toward
falsafa that Fakhr al-Dı¯n adopts in this book is later
countered in a super-commentary by Nas:ı¯r al-Dı¯n al-
T˙u¯sı¯ (1201–1274). Together with this super-commentary,
Fakhr al-Dı¯n’s commentary on the Pointers and Reminders
became part of the madrasa education up until the
twentieth century.
Fakhr al-Dı¯n’s different attitude to the writings of the
fala¯sifa is due to the fact that he begins his career 60 years
after the death of al-G˙ aza¯lı¯ at a time when the books of Ibn
Sı¯na¯ and al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ were already studied in the religious
madrasas of the Islamic East, that is, Iran and Iraq. He was,
for instance, not the ﬁrst religious author who wrote
a commentary on Ibn Sı¯na¯’s Pointers and Reminders; the
Transoxanian al-Masʿu¯dı¯ (d. after 1186) preceded him in
that. Fakhr al-Dı¯n grew up into a scientiﬁc discourse,
where the traditional boundaries between religious and
philosophical literature had more and more disappeared
and where scholars could compare arguments and solu-
tions developed in kala¯m and in falsafa without the need
to disguise the provenance of the teachings they adopted.
Much of the change since the time of al-G˙ aza¯lı¯ was due
to the work of Abu¯ l-Baraka¯t al-Bag˙da¯dı¯ (d. c. 1165),
a Jewish-born physician active in Baghdad and western
Iran, who had published his Book of Well-Considered
Teachings (Kita¯b al-Muʿtabar) around the middle of the
twelfth century. The work is a comprehensive philosoph-
ical summa in three parts (logic, natural science, and
metaphysics) that follows in its structure the Aristotelian
curriculum as it had been established in late antiquity and
also been followed, for instance, by Ibn Sı¯na¯. Unlike
Ibn Sı¯na¯ and other fala¯sifa, who rarely discuss the
pros and cons of their adversaries’ positions but are
mostly concerned with presenting their own teachings,
342 F
Fakhr al-Dı¯n al-Ra¯zı¯

Abu¯ l-Baraka¯t includes in each chapter a detailed discus-
sion of different arguments and solutions to a problem,
without, however, associating them to certain individual
thinkers of the past. Rather, his discussion aimed, at least
at the outset, at a balanced and sober comparison of all
available solutions to a philosophical problem that would
eventually lead to the adaptation of a ‘‘well-considered
position’’ (muʿtabar), which he thought to be superior to
its alternatives. It is most remarkable that in this project
Abu¯ l-Baraka¯t admits the arguments and positions of
kala¯m theologians – most notably that of Ashʿarite kala¯m
presented in al-G˙ aza¯lı¯’s Incoherence of the Philosophers – to
the debate of philosophical problems, the catalogue of
which is largely determined by an Aristotelian curriculum
of studies. Abu¯ l-Baraka¯t’s work was thus the ﬁrst book in
the Muslim philosophical tradition, where arguments
from Aristotelian falsafa stood side-by-side with that of
theological kala¯m, and where the position eventually
adopted could be one or the other, or a combination
of elements from both tradition, or, what was also possi-
ble, even both positions, when these were regarded as
cum-possible.
Fakhr al-Dı¯n’s own technique of writing about philo-
sophical problems owes much to Abu¯ l-Baraka¯t’s Book of
Well-Considered Teachings in that he attempted to look at
any given problem from various angles and would openly
discuss and consider points of views that were earlier not
regarded worthy of serious consideration. This applies
particularly to the teachings of Ibn Sı¯na¯, which impressed
Fakhr al-Dı¯n tremendously. Fakhr al-Dı¯n’s style of
writing also adopts the kala¯m technique of ‘‘exhaustive
investigation and disjunction’’ (al-sabr wa-l-taqsı¯m),
where the consequences or implications of a given posi-
tion are fully investigated, individually discussed, and
often dismissed and refuted one by one. These two fea-
tures, that is, the comparison of various view-points and
an exhaustive discussion of all their implications, leads to
very thorough, yet at the same time quite tiresome writing.
The discussions in Fakhr al-Dı¯n’s philosophical works are
often divided into various aspects and sub-aspects, which
may reach the number of several dozens. His texts remind
the modern reader of academic or legal dissertations that
use a system of variously leveled cardinal numbers (such as
1.2.6.3.14) to illustrate their internal divisions and their
structure. In the Arabic tradition, they revolutionize the
way scholars write about philosophy. Fakhr al-Din’s most
inﬂuential philosophical encyclopedia, The Summary in
Philosophy and in Logic (al-Mulakhkhas: fı¯ l-h:ikma wa-l-
mant:iq), introduces a novel division of the philosophical
sciences that replaces the traditional ones in Aristotelian
philosophy, based on the curriculum of studies as it had
been handed down from Andronicus’ edition of the works
of Aristotle in the ﬁrst century BCE. Fakhr al-Dı¯n regards
this new structure as his own original contribution (al-
Ra¯zı¯, al-Maba¯h:ith, 2:557). He maintains the most basic
division of philosophy into (1) logic as a tool of philo-
sophical inquiry and (2) that part of philosophy that deals
with proper subject matters. This latter part is divided into
three ‘‘books’’ (singl. kita¯b): (1) On the Things that Are
Common [to All Being] (fı¯ l-umu¯r al-ʿa¯mma), (2) On Sub-
stances and Accidents (fı¯ l-jawa¯hir wa-l-aʿra¯d˙), and (3) On
Philosophical Theology (fı¯ al-ʿilm al-ila¯hı¯). The most sig-
niﬁcant change in Fakhr al-Dı¯n’s division is the dissolu-
tion of the Metaphysics into two different parts (Eichner
2007). The roots of this dissolution lie in Avicenna, who
had already argued that metaphysics is concerned with
two different subject matters and can thus be divided
into two parts, namely into metaphysics proper, that is,
the science that deals with ‘‘the existent insofar it is exis-
tent’’ (al-mawju¯d bi-ma¯ huwa mawju¯d), and into ila¯hiyya¯t,
that is, philosophical theology that deals with knowledge
about the Creator and the First Cause, that is, God. While
Ibn Sı¯na¯ did not develop this distinction into a proper
division of metaphysics, some of his students and fol-
lowers, most importantly Bahmanya¯r ibn al-Marzuba¯n
(d. 458/1066) and al-Lawkarı¯ (d. after 503/1109) divided
their section on metaphysics accordingly. In fact, some of
Fakhr al-Dı¯n’s originality in this matter can be traced back
to Bahmanya¯r’s Book of Acquiring Knowledge (Kita¯b al-
Tah:s:ı¯l) (Eichner 2007:155–157).
Unlike Bahmanya¯r and al-Lawkarı¯, Fakhr al-Dı¯n also
develops a new division of what was earlier called ‘‘the
natural sciences’’ (al-t:abı¯ʿiyya¯t). The celestial bodies, for
instance, are no longer treated in a segment that would
represent the equivalent of Aristotle’s book On the
Heavens (De caelo/Fı¯ l-sama¯ʾ), but rather in a chapter
‘‘on uncomposed bodies’’ (fı¯l-ajsa¯m al-bası¯t:a). That chap-
ter, in turn, is part of a broader discussion of bodies (fı¯
l-ajsa¯m), which together with souls and intellects form the
three sub-divisions in the segment on substances (fı¯
l-jawa¯hir). The divisions in Fakhr al-Dı¯n’s Summary in
Philosophy and in Logic follow an Avicennan–Aristotelian
analysis of the subject matter of philosophy. This analysis
is no longer determined by such criteria as the place where
these things are found (‘‘in the heavens’’), for instance, or
whether they belong to a certain class of being like min-
erals, but rather by more systematic analytic criteria, such
as the difference between substance and accident, whether
the substance has a body or is immaterial, whether the
bodies are composed or uncomposed, lifeless or living,
and animated or inanimated. Overall, this leads to a
new perspective on philosophy that will have a lasting
Fakhr al-Dı¯n al-Ra¯zı¯ F
343
F

inﬂuence on later works on these subjects. Fakhr al-Dı¯n’s
Summary in Philosophy and in Logic constitutes the basis
out of which the most inﬂuential works in the Islamic
philosophical tradition evolve. Among them are al-
Bayd˙a¯wı¯’s (d. c. 1286) Risings Lights (T˙awa¯liʿ al-anwa¯r)
and ʿAd˙ud al-Dı¯n al-I¯jı¯’s (d. 1355) Book of Stations (Kita¯b
al-Mawa¯qif ), works that together with the commentaries
on them stood at the center of philosophical and theolog-
ical instruction in Islam between the ﬁfteenth up until the
twentieth centuries. Fakhr al-Dı¯n al-Ra¯zı¯ is the most
important link in the evolution from Avicennan philoso-
phy to Post-Avicennan kala¯m (Eichner 2007).
While admired for their precision, Fakhr al-Dı¯n al-
Ra¯zı¯’s philosophical encyclopedias are not always easy to
read, and next to none of these texts have been translated
into European languages. The Summary in Philosophy and
in Logic still waits to be edited. In many of his works, stating
his own opinion to any given philosophical problem was
secondary to Fakhr al-Dı¯n who mostly aims to provide an
exhaustive discussion of all aspects and implication
involved. He also applies this technique in his monumental
Qurʾa¯n commentary Keys to the Unknown (Mafa¯tih: al-
g˙ayb), which is highly regarded for its well-structured dis-
cussion and rationalist analysis of textual and theological
problems. In his own positions, Fakhr al-Dı¯n was an
Ashʿarite theologian who, like al-G˙ aza¯lı¯ before him, modi-
ﬁed certain Ashʿarite teachings or augmented certain
Ashʿarite explanations with teachings and elements taken
from philosophical literature, most importantly Ibn Sı¯na¯.
Here, he went even further than al-G˙ aza¯lı¯, who condemned
the philosophical teaching that the world is created from
past eternity and has no beginning in time as unbelief and
apostasy. Fakhr al-Dı¯n disagreed stating, ﬁrst of all, that this
should not be a matter of religious doctrine since there is no
scriptural basis to al-G˙ aza¯lı¯’s position (al-Ra¯zı¯, al-Mat:a¯lib,
4:29–32; Griffel 2009:116–120). A discussion of the various
arguments on this subject leads to the conclusion that the
fala¯sifa are unable to prove the pre-eternity of the world
but that their adversaries are equally unable to prove the
opposite. True to his spirit as a thorough scientist, Fakhr
al-Dı¯n leaves this question open (I˙skenderogˇlu 2002).
Fakhr al-Dı¯n al-Ra¯zı¯ accepted al-G˙ aza¯lı¯’s earlier ‘‘Rule
of Interpretation’’ (qa¯nu¯n al-taʾwı¯l) that aimed at resolving
conﬂicts between reason and the literal wording of revela-
tion. That rule says that all passages in revelation should be
accepted in their literal meaning unless they violate the
results of a valid demonstration (burha¯n). In such cases,
allegorical interpretation (taʾwı¯l) must be applied and the
text should be understood as a metaphor (al-Ra¯zı¯, Taʾsı¯s
al-taqdı¯s; Heer 1993). In his most mature thought in his
The Higher Issues (al-Mat:a¯lib al-ʿa¯liya), Fakhr al-Dı¯n also
followed al-G˙ aza¯lı¯ in his cosmological views: God creates
events in this world through chains of secondary causes of
which He is the only efﬁcient cause (fa¯ʿil; Shihadeh
2006:39–44). Ashʿarites teach that humans do not ‘‘create’’
their own acts; rather these acts are ‘‘acquired’’ when God
creates them within us. Like al-G˙ aza¯lı¯, Fakhr al-Dı¯n inter-
prets the human’s ‘‘acquisition’’ (kasb) of his or her actions
in terms of secondary causality: the human’s actions are
causally determined by his or her motives (singl. da¯ʿin),
while the motive has causes that are grounded in the
human’s knowledge, which again is caused by events in the
outside world. Thus, God creates the human acts through
chains of secondary causes just like He creates every other
event in this world. These teachings combine classical
Ashʿarite views about the predestination of human acts
and their creation through God with an Avicennan–Aristo-
telian view of secondary causality. While human actions are
causally determined by their proximate and remote causes
and thus not the result of free choice (ikhtiya¯r), the notion
of ‘‘acquisition’’ (kasb) expresses the fact that humans are
given the impression that they choose freely. In an adap-
tation of one of Ibn Sı¯na¯’s dictums, Fakhr al-Dı¯n al-Ra¯zı¯
taught that the human is ‘‘a compelled actor in the guise of
a free agent’’ (al-Ra¯zı¯, al-Mat:a¯lib, 9:25; 9:57; Gimaret
1980:134–153; Shihadeh 2006).
In some matters, Fakhr al-Dı¯n sides openly with the
fala¯sifa against earlier Ashʿarite teachings, such as on the
important issue of how prophecy is veriﬁed. The Ashʿarite
school, with its insistence on a divine command theory of
ethics, had always maintained that prophecy cannot be
proven by rationalist criteria. Judgments about the sound-
ness of a prophet’s revelation have no bearing of whether
or not that person is truly a prophet. Prophecy can only be
veriﬁed through a criterion that lies outside of revelation.
In the case of earlier Ashʿarites, this is the prophetical
miracle – a suspension of the laws that govern creation –
that God performs in order to prove the claims of
a prophet. Realizing that the existence of prophetical mir-
acles poses numerous problems for a rationalist theolo-
gian who accepts secondary causality, al-G˙ aza¯lı¯ had
already abolished this element of Ashʿarite thought and
replaced it with a criterion based in the Suﬁexperience
(Griffel 2009:194–201). Fakhr al-Dı¯n al-Ra¯zı¯ aims at
a more radical change of Ashʿarite doctrine by arguing
that prophethood is established if the prophet’s revelation
calls for those actions that we know from reason are good
and if it forbids those that we know from reason are bad
(al-Ra¯zı¯, al-Mat:a¯lib, 8:103; Abrahamov 2000; Shihadeh
2006:129–142). He thus shifts from a divine command
ethics toward an Aristotelian position about the moral
good where the focus lies on the development of virtuous
344 F
Fakhr al-Dı¯n al-Ra¯zı¯

character traits (akhla¯q). This has signiﬁcant repercus-
sions for various elements of Fakhr al-Dı¯n’s theology,
including his work on Islamic law (ﬁqh). Among the
jurists of Islam, for instance, Fakhr al-Dı¯n is the one who
most forcefully argued to make the rational consideration
of public beneﬁt (mas:lah:a) a vital part of the jurists’
decisions (Shihadeh 2006:69–73; Opwis 2010:88–131).
See also: ▶Abu¯ l-Baraka¯t al-Bag˙da¯dı¯ ▶Abu¯ l-Faraj ibn al-
ʿlbrı¯ (Barhebraeus) ▶Aristotelianism in the Greek, Latin,
Syriac, Arabic, and Hebrew Traditions ▶Ethics, Arabic
▶al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯,
Abu¯
Nas˙r
▶al-G˙ aza¯lı¯,
Abu¯
H˙ a¯mid
Muh:ammad
▶Ibn
ʿArabı¯,
Abu¯
Bakr
Muh:ammad
Muh:yiddı¯n ▶Ibn Sı¯na¯, Abu¯ ʿAlı¯ (Avicenna) ▶Kala¯m
▶Logic, Arabic, in the Latin Middle Ages ▶Logic in the
Arabic
and
Islamic
World
▶Nas:ı¯r
al-Dı¯n
al-T˙u¯sı¯
▶Natural
Philosophy,
Arabic
▶Philosophy,
Arabic
▶Theology Versus Philosophy in the Arab World
Bibliography
Primary Sources
al-Ra¯zı¯ Fakhr al-Dı¯n (1328/1910–1911) Taʾsı¯s al-taqdı¯s, published under
the title Asa¯s al-taqdı¯s, ed. S˙abrı¯ al-Kurdı¯ M. Mat:baʿat Kurdista¯n
al-ʿIlmiyya, Cairo
al-Ra¯zı¯ Fakhr al-Dı¯n (1352/1933) al-Tafsı¯r al-kabı¯r aw-Mafa¯tih: al-g˙ayb,
32 vols, ed. ʿAbd al-H˙ amı¯d MM. al-Mat:ba¯ʿa al-Bahiyya al-Mis:riyya,
Cairo
al-Ra¯zı¯ Fakhr al-Dı¯n (1384/2005) Sharh: al-Isha¯ra¯t wa-l-tanbiha¯t, jild
devom: Falsafat-i t:abı¯ʿiyya¯t, ila¯hiyya¯t, ve-ʿirfa¯n, ed. Najafza¯deh ʿA.
A¯njuman A¯z¯a¯r ve-Mafa¯khir Farhangı¯, Tehran
al-Ra¯zı¯ Fakhr al-Dı¯n (1410/1990) al-Maba¯h:ith al-mashriqiyya, 2 vols, ed.
al-Bag˙da¯dı¯ MM. Da¯r al-Kita¯b al-ʿArabı¯, Beirut
al-Ra¯zı¯ Fakhr al-Dı¯n (1411/1991) Kita¯b al-Muh:as:s:al wa-huwa Muh:as:s:al
afka¯r al-mutaqaddimı¯n wa-l-mutaʾakhkhirı¯n min al-h:ukama¯ʾ wa-l-
mutakallimı¯n, ed. Ata¯y H˙ . Maktabat Da¯r al-Tura¯th, Cairo
al-Ra¯zı¯ Fakhr al-Dı¯n (1987) al-Mat:a¯lib al-ʿa¯liya min al-ʿilm al-ila¯hı¯,
9 parts in 5 vols, ed. H˙ ija¯zi al-Saqqa¯ A. Da¯r al-Kita¯b al-ʿArabı¯, Beirut
al-Ra¯zı¯ Fakhr al-Dı¯n (n.d./1986) Sharh: ʿUyu¯n al-h:ikma, 3 vols, ed. H˙ ija¯zi
al-Saqqa¯ A. Maktabat al-Anjelo, Cairo
al-Ra¯zı¯ Fakhr al-Dı¯n (n.d./1969) Ima¯m al-Ra¯zı¯’s ʿIlm al-akhlaq, English
transl. of his Kita¯b al-nafs wa-l-ruh: wa-quwahuma¯, transl. al-
Maʿs˙u¯mı¯ MS˙H˙ . Islamic Research Institute, Islamabad
al-Ra¯zı¯
Fakhr
al-Dı¯n
(n.d./2009)
al-Isha¯ra
fı¯ʿilm
al-kala¯m,
ed.
Muh:ammad H˙ MH˙ . Maktabat al-Azhar, Cairo
Secondary Sources
Abrahamov B (2000) Religion versus philosophy. The case of Fah˘r al-Dı¯n
al-Ra¯zı¯’s Proof for Prophecy. Oriente Moderno 80:415–425
Arnaldez R (2002) Fakhr al-Dıˆn al-Raˆzıˆ: commentateur du Coran et
philosophe. Vrin, Paris
Dughaym S (2000) Mawsu¯ʿat mustalah:a¯t al-Ima¯m Fakhr al-Dı¯n al-Ra¯zı¯.
Maktabat Lubna¯n, Beirut
Eichner H (2007) Dissolving the unity of metaphysics: from Fakhr al-Dı¯n
al-Ra¯zı¯ to Mulla¯ Sadra¯ al-Shı¯ra¯zı¯. Medioevo 32:139–197
Gimaret D (1980) The´ories de l’acte humain en the´ologie musulmane.
Vrin, Paris
Griffel F (2007) On Fakhr al-Dı¯n al-Ra¯zı¯’s life and the patronage he
received. J Islam Stud 18(3):313–344
Griffel F (2009) Al-Ghaza¯lı¯’s philosophical theology. Oxford University
Press, New York
Heer N (1993) The priority of reason in the interpretation of scripture:
Ibn Taymı¯ya and the Mutakallimu¯n. In: Mir M (ed) Literary heritage
of classical Islam. Arabic and Islamic studies in honor of James A.
Bellamy. The Darwin Press, Princeton, pp 181–195
I˙skenderogˇlu M (2002) Fakhr al-Dı¯n al-Ra¯zı¯ and Thomas Aquinas on the
question of the eternity of the world. Brill, Leiden
Kholeif F (1966) A study on Fakhr al-Dı¯n al-Ra¯zı¯ and his controversies in
Transoxania, 2nd edn. Dar el-Machreq, Beirut (including an edition
and English translation of al-Muna¯z˙ara¯t fı¯ bila¯d ma¯ wara¯ʾa l-nahr)
Opwis F (2010) Mas:lah:a and the purpose of the law: Islamic discourse on
legal change from the 4th/10th to 8th/14th century. Brill, Leiden
Pu¯rjava¯dı¯ N
(2002)
Do¯
mujaddid:
Pazhu¯hish-ha¯-yi
dar
ba¯ra-yi
Muh:ammad-i Ghazza¯lı¯ va-Fakhr-i Ra¯zı¯/Two renewers of faith. Stud-
ies on Muhammad-i Ghazza¯lı¯ and Fakhruddı¯n-i Ra¯zı¯ [in Persian].
Markaz-i Nashr-i Da¯nishga¯hı¯, Tehran
Shihadeh A (2005) From al-Ghaza¯lı¯ to al-Ra¯zı¯: 6th/12th century devel-
opments in Muslim philosophical theology. Arabic Sci Philos
15(2):141–179
Shihadeh A (2006) The teleological ethics of Fakhr al-Dı¯n al-Ra¯zı¯. Brill,
Leiden
Shihadeh A (2007) The mystic and the sceptic in Fakhr al-Dı¯n al-Ra¯zı¯. In:
Shihadeh A (ed) Suﬁsm and theology. Edinburgh University Press,
Edinburgh, pp 101–122
Street T (2005) Fah˘raddı¯n ar-Ra¯zı¯’s critique of Avicennan logic. In: Perler
D, Rudolph U (eds) Logik und Theologie. Das Organon im
arabischen und lateinischen Mittelalter. Brill, Leiden, pp 101–116
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, Abu¯ Nas.r
PHILIPPE VALLAT
IFPO-Damascus
IFPO Abu Rumaneh
Damascus
Syria
Abstract
Abu¯
Nas:r al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, known in the Latin West as
Alpharabius or Avenasar, is one of the most inﬂuential
thinkers in the history of Arabic philosophy. Most of his
preserved works are introductions to, and abridged or
lemmatic commentaries on, Aristotle’s logics. The inter-
pretation of the Organon, from the Categories to the
Posterior Analytics and from the latter to the Poetics,
forms in his view a curriculum consisting of a twofold
system of science, each part of which he respectively
assimilates to the climbing out of Plato’s Cave and to the
return. Philosophy is the Whole in which Aristotelian
science is ordained toward the political end assigned to
philosophy by Plato.
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, Abu¯ Nas.r F
345
F

Biographical Information
One biographer, Ibn Khallika¯n (d. 1282) tells us that Abu¯
Nas:r al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ lived 80 years. There is no other informa-
tion to conﬁrm his date of birth. Based on his nisba, the
most likely place of origin of his family is in the district
of Fa¯ra¯b in Transoxiana (Turkestan), in the small town of
Vası¯j, as Ibn H˙ awqal (d. after 967) claims, or in the town of
Fa¯ra¯b which gave its name to the district. Judging by his
Political Regime 103, and Grand Book on Music 57–58, he
was neither of Turkish nor of Arab descent, but most
probably Persian.
The date and place of his death are better known.
According to Mas‘u¯dı¯ (d. 956), he died in Damascus, in
Rajab 339 (December 950–January 951). S˙a¯‘id al-Andalusı¯
(d. 1070) adds that he died there under the protection
(kanaf) of Sayf al-Dawla (r. 945–967), although kanaf
means a form of tutelary authority which Sayf al-Dawla,
the Hamdanid Emir of northern Syria (Aleppo, Diyar
Mudar, Diyar Bakr), never had upon Damascus. Nonethe-
less, some notes in the manuscripts of al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s Perfect
State inform us that he left Baghdad and went to Syria in
942, possibly to Aleppo, his presence there being recorded
by an undated dedication of a commentary to one of his
students. According to the same notes, he was already in
Damascus in 943 and there completed the Perfect State,
before going to Egypt (between July 948 and June 949) and
returning to Damascus, hardly leaving any time for an
acquaintance with the Emir.
From the semiautobiographical relation of his curric-
ulum preserved by Ibn Abı¯ Us:aybi‘a (d. c. 1269), we can
infer: ﬁrst, that al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ was taught logic in Baghdad by
the Christian Abu¯ Bishr Matta¯ ibn Yu¯nus (d. 940) from
Porphyry’s Isagoge to the Prior Analytics, I, 7; second, that
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ broke away from him, apparently accusing him
and Christians in general of observing a clerical ban on
teaching beyond Prior An., I, 7, that is, from I, 8 to the
end of the Posterior Analytics, although Matta¯ is known to
have translated it. Al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s account of his curriculum
seems to echo a rivalry between the two men, later to be
interpreted ideologically, like other related texts, as
a religious quarrel between Christian and Muslim
scholars. Indeed, al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ says he was taught logic till
the end of Posterior Analytics by another Christian,
Yu¯h:anna¯ b. H˙ ayla¯n. This apparent inconsistency might
be explained if al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ applied to himself what he says
about the rest of the curriculum, beyond Prior Analytics, I,
7, that is, that, despite the ban, it was still studied among
Christians albeit covertly. In his view, Ibn H˙ ayla¯n may
have been a representative of this tradition. In any case,
this supposition is in accordance with Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s main
intention in this text, to present himself as the heir of an
unbroken chain of teaching from Alexandria to Baghdad.
In this regard, J. Watt has shown that there were two trends
within the Syriac commentary tradition: one which
indeed restricted the logical training to the ﬁrst part of
the Organon, terminating at Prior Analytics, I, 7, but which
had deep roots in the ancient world; and the other
represented by the ‘‘Syriac writers who were proﬁcient in
Greek’’ and who ‘‘adhered throughout to the other strand
of this two-strand tradition, that of the full Organon.’’ In
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s view, Ibn H˙ ayla¯n probably belonged to the
latter.
We cannot know for certain where and when he stud-
ied with Ibn H˙ ayla¯n, or where he taught his foremost
pupil, the Christian Yah:ya¯ ibn ‘Adı¯ (d. 974). Similarly, it
is hard to determine if al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ succeeded Matta¯ at the
head of a school in Baghdad, before moving to Syria and
whether he taught in a schole` or in one or more private
schools.
In his Grand Book on Music, 58, dedicated to Vizier
Abu¯ Ja‘far al-Karkhı¯ (June–August 936), al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ states
that he was in relation with Greeks who were not Byzan-
tine Christians, but ‘‘pure’’ or ‘‘faithful’’ Greeks whose
musical practice he refers to as being akin to the one
systematized by ‘‘the Ancient Greeks’’ in their books on
musical theory. They lived in a ‘‘land’’ ‘‘in the vicinity’’ of
the Empire of the Arabs to which many were emigrating.
Whatever the bearing of this information on the history of
Hellenism, al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ claims he was acquainted with some
‘‘faithful Greeks’’ living somewhere along a border region
where pagan culture was still alive. In northern Mesopo-
tamia, H˙ arra¯n, which enjoyed some autonomy in the ﬁrst
half of the tenth century, seems a likely candidate. Apart
from al-Mas‘u¯dı¯’s (d. 956) other accounts of the traces of
pagan intellectual life in H˙ arra¯n, this is further evidence
of the relationship between falsafa and a persistent form of
pagan culture.
His Grand Book on Music being a well-known work of
maturity composed in Baghdad, the general absence of
information concerning al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s teaching activities
during his time there is puzzling.
Works and Influence
Al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, who did not have any Greek, worked as
a commentator and teacher. As such, he was indebted to
Alexander of Aphrodisias, Themistius, and the members
of the Neoplatonic School of Alexandria (sixth century)
and probably to Simplicius, that is, to the commentators
of Aristotle known in Arabic. He claimed to be heir to the
Alexandrian scientiﬁc curriculum, the Aristotelian part
of which he, along with his Christian colleagues from
the ‘‘School of Baghdad’’ (tenth to eleventh century),
346 F
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, Abu¯ Nas.r

contributed to reestablish, before the tradition of com-
mentaries on Aristotle was revived in Andalusia by
Avempace (Ibn Ba¯jja, d. 1139) and Averroes (Ibn Rushd,
1126–1198), followed by Jewish and Latin philosophers. In
fact, the religiously indifferent Saracen philosopher staged
by Peter Abelard in his Dialogue of a Philosopher with a Jew
and a Christian may have been Avempace whose sole
declared master was al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯.
Though he wrote commentaries on Plato’s Laws,
Euclid’s Elements, and Ptolemy’s Almagest, al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯
mainly devoted himself to the interpretation of the Aris-
totelian treatises on logic and physics. According to the
known lists of his works, he composed long or lemmatic,
as well as brief or paraphrastic, commentaries on all the
treatises of the Organon, most of the longer ones being
lost. As for the physical treatises, he commented upon the
Physics, On the Heavens and the Universe, On Generation
and Corruption, Meteorology, and perhaps upon the De
anima. All of them are apparently lost. He also wrote on
speciﬁc themes from the Physics: On the Void, On the
Divisible and the Indivisible, On Finite and Inﬁnite Power,
That the Movement of the Spheres Is Eternal and On Chang-
ing Beings – of which only the ﬁrst has been preserved. The
titles of these works and what we learn from those that
were preserved show that he never departed from the
Greek view that the world is eternal. He was opposed to
the philosophical and theological trend of thought origi-
nating in John Philoponus’ Against Aristotle and Against
Proclus on the Eternity of the World. His refutation of the
former has been preserved. His commentary on Physics
VIII also seems to have been preserved, albeit in a Latin
translation, that remains to be edited and studied. Apart
from the previously known Latin translations of a few
treatises,
that
is,
De
intellectu,
De
scientiis,
Liber
exercitationis ad viam felicitatis – the ﬁrst two having
signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced Latin Scholasticism – other
works may have been translated and therefore made avail-
able to Albert the Great, such as the paraphrase of, and
possibly also the long commentary on Aristotle’s Posterior
Analytics. In the same way, excerpts from al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s mas-
terpieces, the Political Regime and the Perfect State, may
have been known in Latin. A long sentence common to
these works is often quoted by Latin authors.
Al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s allegedly deeper inﬂuence on Arabic-
speaking philosophers is paradoxically difﬁcult to assess.
Although Avicenna (Ibn Sı¯na¯: 980–1037), Avempace,
Averroes, Maimonides (1135–1204), and a few others
knew his works and held him in high esteem, the fact
remains that most of his writings rapidly failed to be
copied, and therefore read. That some texts were ulti-
mately preserved can most probably be attributed to
Avicenna’s deference to him and the respect paid to
Avicenna’s philosophical achievements by numerous phi-
losophers, especially in the East of the Islamic world. Apart
from the philosophers mentioned above, al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s writ-
ings were attacked and emendated early on. Avempace’s
urge to defend him against allegations of being a heretic is
what informs us of the widespread accusations started by
the Persian theologian al-G˙ aza¯lı¯ (1058–1111).
Furthermore, there is proof of the emendation of al-
Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s thought. A few decades only after his death,
Miskawayh (936–1030), a Muslim polymath directly
acquainted with some of his genuine works, ascribed to
him a sort of social climber’s guide to life at Court.
The text, a pastiche of al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s style, predicates the
prevailing community opinion as a criterion of truth,
when compliance with popular opinion is what al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s
philosophy emphatically denies. This bowdlerization of
his thought did not stop at Miskawayh.
Thought
The Hierarchical Structure of Being
From the Ptolemaic geocentric cosmology, al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ elab-
orated a standard onto-cosmology which was later
adopted to varying degrees. Here are its tenets.
Being eternally emanates from the First Principle. In
the same way that a productive act necessarily follows
from any immaterial substance in actuality, this emana-
tion process is inherent to its substance, therefore does not
proceed from deliberation nor is aimed at an extrinsic end.
Each of the ten secondary Intellects emanates from the
First through the one immediately superior to it. They are
self-subsistent substances, coeternal with the First. The
tenth Intellect is the Active Intellect which constitutes
the formal, efﬁcient, ﬁnal and exemplar separated cause
of human intellects and the agent of their preservation in
being if they succeed in becoming free of matter.
The being of each of the celestial spheres emanates
from each Intellect independently. Their soul is not
enmattered. Each one has a speciﬁc substrate. There is
no ﬁfth element common to all of them. The upper sphere
impresses on them a common movement from which the
prima materia proceeds eternally. Through their differen-
tiated movements with regard to one another and to
materia, the four elements and qualities of the sublunary
world are brought forth, set in motion, and combined to
make up sensible substances. The paradigm of this com-
bination is provided by the Active Intellect which aims,
as a ﬁnal cause, to foreordain the physical inﬂuences
exerted by the celestial bodies so that the sublunary species
can emerge from these inﬂuences. Thus, the spheres
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, Abu¯ Nas.r F
347
F

themselves do not take part in a plan, but through their
inﬂuence are ordained to bring about a goal which they
ignore. Given that each one acts autonomously, regardless
of others and of the providence exercised by the Active
Intellect toward human intellects, their respective physical
inﬂuence may come into conﬂict with each other and with
the Active Intellect’s activity. As a result, various contin-
gencies affect the sublunary world.
The System of Science
According to al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, philosophy is a concordant
reading of Plato and Aristotle. In his system, the
Neoplatonized Aristotle weighs heavier than Plato. How-
ever, the type of Neoplatonism he elaborates from the
translated material at his disposal is unique. Though he
declares Aristotle to be his Master, which he undeniably
was, the claim needs to be reﬁned.
With Aristotle, he shares the conviction that philoso-
phy is what man can know through his own natural
ability and an uncompromisingly rational method
presented in the Posterior Analytics. ‘‘Philosophy’’ even
comes to speciﬁcally signify the demonstrative science
obtained through this method, that is, primarily the ﬁrst
philosophy or metaphysics. For, strictly speaking, and in
conformity with the Neoplatonic understanding of ‘‘meta-
physics,’’ only that which is beyond nature and is free from
matter can demonstratively be known. With Alexander of
Aphrodisias, he shares the view that the human soul is
a mixture of the four elements and as such is corruptible.
Though given by the Active Intellect, human reason is at
ﬁrst merely an enmattered disposition. But he concurs
with the Greek Neoplatonists on the possibility of
a transmutation of human condition attained through
the progressive acquisition of knowledge up to the theoria
of the divine principles. Finally, with Plato he shares the
conviction that philosophy is the only hope of salvation
for humanity and therefore must achieve a concrete polit-
ical end, the establishment of a philosophical regime or
civic religion, failing which philosophy cannot accomplish
its true end.
This conviction makes particular practical ends and
universal theoretical sciences dependent upon each other
for the realization of philosophy’s end. This is not conceiv-
able within the framework of Aristotle’s thought, since
knowledge, being universal, cannot be prescriptive regard-
ing particular actions. Aristotle’s ontology, epistemology,
and ethics are then redeﬁned so that virtues can be seen as
particular instances of universal transcendental norms, and
not only as relative and immanent middle grounds between
excess and defect. This requirement gives birth to a remark-
able theory wherein Being and knowledge are divided up
according to the statistical degrees of actuality of their
respective forms: (1) always or necessarily existent !
divine Intellects; (2) necessarily existent for an indeﬁnite
period of time ! celestial spheres; (3) possibly occurring
most of the time ! most natural phenomena and rules of
virtuous human actions; (4) equally occurring and not
occurring ! association and dissociation of homeomeric
substances; (5) occurring most rarely ! indeﬁnable events
and phenomena. While (1–5) encompass all the degrees
of Being except materia, (1–3) gather all knowable
forms, (1) being metaphysics, including the deﬁnition of
human felicity, (2) astronomy, and (3) physics and ethics,
including politics. Not only does he thus interpret the
doctrine of the threefold modes of being of the universals,
he also presents this statistical scale as a redeﬁnition of
Plato’s Line in Republic, 509d–511e. In effect, sound opin-
ion, seen as the type of knowledge possible in the case of
(3), is the likeness of science found in (1) and (2). Bearing
in mind the metaphysical end of human life, that is,
felicity, the philosopher-king must deﬁne the principles
of sound theological opinions, institute pedagogic reli-
gious symbols accordingly, and establish legal forms
which will prove possible in most cases and as long-lasting
as possible given the contingency of human affairs and
natural phenomena. In turn, these opinions, symbols, and
legal forms, along with the affects which they induce in the
souls, are regarded as a likeness of, and a preparation to,
eudemonic contemplation.
Philosophy as Pedagogy
The gap between universality and particularity being
ﬁlled, the virtuous city becomes an achievable program,
its goal being to remove evitable contingencies, alleviate
those that are inevitable, and supply the pedagogical con-
ditions for the Active Intellect to act upon people’s minds
and set them free from matter. The philosopher’s main
task is to relay the plan of the Active Intellect by means of
the appropriate education. Becoming human implies
acquiring knowledge. Education is the substitute pro
tempore of the Active Intellect whose activity is mainly
that of a ﬁnal cause. And since this activity concerns all
human beings of sound constitution, the city-state can in
theory encompass all the temperate climates on earth
where sound human beings live.
In brief, man, however corruptible like other generated
and composed substances, can become a perpetual reality
thanks to the philosophical knowledge dispensed within the
virtuous city. Only a philosopher-legislator can shape
the civic religion capable of dispensing this knowledge in
the appropriate fashion and of preparing nonphilosophers’
souls for immortality. The philosophical religion contains
348 F
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, Abu¯ Nas.r

in an analogical form the same salviﬁc knowledge as the one
in theoretical teaching. This implies that all the city’s insti-
tutions, whether cultic, legal, or cultural, are pedagogically
oriented to ﬁt the philosopher’s aim.
The systematic nature of al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s thought lies in the
link established between (a) the physical deﬁnition of
human nature; (b) the metaphysical deﬁnition of its ulti-
mate end, immortal felicity; and (c) politics, which is the
primary means of realizing this end: to enable each citizen
to partake of immortality when he/she does not possess it
by nature. Consequently, politics deals with worldly goods
in so far as the allocation of goods within the city is the
material condition for supreme felicity to be attained,
their just allocation being possible only if felicity remains
the Law’s goal. Felicity represents the common good.
Starting from the working hypothesis that what man
desires the most is to satisfy his bodily needs, al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯
comes to the conclusion that one other desire more spe-
ciﬁcally characterizes humanity: the desire to ascertain the
ultimate causes of phenomena and human experience.
Philosophy’s role is to provide this knowledge and philos-
ophy is therefore the most desirable thing. In turn, phi-
losophy teaches that its own acquirement is what allows
human beings to escape their fate and become immortal
souls. Thus, each individual should be given the opportu-
nity to assimilate philosophy in a way possible to him- or
herself (Philosophy of Aristotle). To make this teaching
possible is the very purpose of the virtuous regime.
Nowhere does Aristotle put forward the idea that
everyone needs to assimilate philosophy, especially if ‘‘phi-
losophy’’ is taken to mean ‘‘ﬁrst philosophy’’ and if this
knowledge is seen as the condition of becoming immortal.
The epistemological pattern and general architecture of
Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s thought are in fact a new elaboration of the
Alexandrian philosophers’ pedagogical doctrine and
a generalization of the ideal of contemplative life as put
forward in the tenth book of the Nicomachean Ethics –
a generalization which al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ conceives as the true
purpose of the philosopher’s return into the Cave and as
a form of reconciliation between leisure and active life,
theory and practice, scientiﬁc and political activities.
Al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ genuinely hoped for this program to be
applied by sovereigns-philosophers. The main evidence
for this is the repeated claim that a philosopher incapable
of accomplishing the political end of philosophy is an
impostor who demotes philosophy to a triﬂing endeavor.
Moreover, his writings mention the constitution of armies
attended by pedagogues and, as mentioned in the quota-
tion below (see p. 350), the ﬁght to the death which will
inescapably occur between philosophy and historical reli-
gions for the control of people’s souls. In order to bring in
the new political order, he advises the Prince to convince
people of the corrupt form of the existing Law and of the
need to restore it to its original true version. Stratagems,
persuasion, and compulsion must combine for the philos-
opher’s political plan to materialize. Such concrete pro-
posals suggest that he may have wanted to suit his actions
to his words. Ultimately, he views suicide as preferable to
living in a world where the philosophical way of life cannot
become a reality.
How al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ Composed His Political Works
and How to Read Them
On the basis of all the principles mentioned above,
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ proceeds with several corollaries scattered all
over his works. The First Cause is only the proximate
cause of the being of the secondary Intellects (Political
Regime 31:12–13). Therefore, it cannot be viewed as the
cause of what comes to be and passes away within the
sublunary world. No divinity rules over the world (Perfect
State 304:3–4). The doctrine of God’s knowledge of par-
ticulars is vehemently repelled (Political Aphorisms }86; cf.
On De interpretatione 98:11–19). Those who claim some
political authority received directly from God are impos-
tors (Perfect State 258:4–9; 304–308:}12). One shall note
here that the ‘‘Ancients’’ to whom R. Walzer’s translation
attributes the doctrines stigmatized in Perfect State ch.
18–19 do not appear in the Arabic text. There is no
inspiration (ilha¯m) which could supposedly precede
knowledge acquired through teaching (On Demonstration
82:1–8). About the philosopher-prophet of the Perfect
State, al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ explicitly states in the same work that he
needs no prophetical insight, indha¯r. Philosophers are the
only ones who can govern with knowledge of the true
purpose of human existence, which is obtained through
physical and metaphysical investigation (Political Apho-
risms }94: 95, 14–96, 11; Attainment of Felicity }57: 186,
13–187, 5; Book of Religion 66:8–10). With regard to this
knowledge, a ‘‘prophet’’ or enthusiast, mu¯h:a¯ ilayhi, cannot
be said to be more knowledgeable than a soothsayer, ka¯hin
(Political Aphorisms }94: 98, 4–99, 2). ‘‘Revelation’’
(wah:iy) is a word employed by the ancient philosophers
to refer to the ‘‘conjunction’’ of the perfected human
intellect with the Active Intellect (Political Regime 79,
3–80, 1). A true religion can only rely on a true, demon-
strative philosophy (Book of Particles }147; cf. Attainment
of Felicity }56: 184, 14–16), meaning that its founder
must have been perfectly trained in demonstrative syllo-
gisms. To sum up Political Regime 85, 12–87, 4 and 104,
17–105, 6: the symbols chosen and used by the philosopher-
king in order to institute a true religion necessarily contain
hidden contestable topoi, mawa¯d˙iʿ al-ʿina¯d (cf. Book of
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, Abu¯ Nas.r F
349
F

Dialectics: 361) – an allusion to Aristotle’s Topics VIII and
Categories X. These topoi serve as a test. Those in the
perfect city who succeed in detecting these dialectical
topoi are apt to be instructed. Among those men, some
are philosophers by nature and hence deserve to be ele-
vated to demonstrative truth – a direct reference to Plato’s
Republic and to the prisoner who has been untied and is
given the chance to ascend out of the Cave (515c ss.). The
men who, on the contrary, come short of perceiving the
topoi embodied in the symbols are believers for whom
philosophically chosen symbols are sufﬁcient, meaning
that these symbols incorporate all the truth needed for
their mental capacity to be truly perfected.
Al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ envisaged two possibilities: (a) a religion
built on a perfect demonstrative philosophy, the perfect
or virtuous religion whose dialectical or rhetorical pre-
mises (or tenets) have been deﬁned by the philosopher
who at the same time has the capacity to ascertain the
truth and what truly is in the likeness of it – see Aristotle,
Rhetoric 1355a 14–18 and cf. Book of Religion }4:46; Attain-
ment of Felicity }53–54: 178–181; (b) religions built on
various types of defective philosophy – Book of Particles
}}108–158. Al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ regarded all religious communities
and political regimes in his day as depraved (fuju¯r), igno-
rant (i.e., of philosophy: ja¯hiliyya) and in disarray (d˙a¯lla),
compare: Book of Religion 45:18–19; Summary of the Per-
fect State 86:10–12; Political Aphorisms }90: 92, 16–17; cf.
Enumeration of the Sciences 107–113. Put together, these
statements unambiguously mean that the perfect religion
was still to be founded.
As for the relations between demonstrative philosophy
and existent religions built on defective kinds of phi-
losophy, he describes them as destructive of each other
(cf. Aristotle, Physics, I 9, 192a21–22) He says:
"
If the religion transferred to them [sc. a certain people] is
a religion which stems in its very beginning from an
ancient and corrupt philosophy, either rhetorical or dia-
lectical or sophistical, and if the sound and demonstrative
philosophy is then transferred to them after that, the latter
will contradict that religion in all respects and this religion
will totally contradict that philosophy. And then each of
them will tend to annihilate the other. Whichever prevails
in establishing itself ﬁrmly in the souls will annihilate
(abt:alat) the other and whichever takes over (qaharat)
this nation will eradicate (abt:alat) the other from it (Book
of Particles }150, translated from M. Mahdi’s unpublished
and improved edition; cf. Book of Letters }150:155–156).
Above are some of the data which show why, in the
Perfect State, al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ purposely elaborates doctrines
which seem at variance with his own thought. These
doctrines are in fact symbols and contain mawa¯d˙iʿ
al-ʿina¯d, contestable topoi. The doctrine of prophecy,
which cannot be philosophically conceptualized since
God knows nothing but himself and hence cannot reveal
anything about human affairs, is nonetheless tactically
necessary to fulﬁll the purpose of the treatise. This
means that the Perfect State is not a theory or description
of the perfect city, but is, rigorously speaking, performa-
tive in the sense that it actually founds the city. The
possible intelligent reader of the Perfect State is in fact
the potential philosopher apprentice to whom al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯
alludes in the abovementioned crucial passage of Political
Regime. The latter work represents the key to understand-
ing what al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ had in mind when composing the
former: in order to be recognized as a philosopher appren-
tice, the reader of the Perfect State must be able to detect its
mawa¯d˙iʿ al-ʿina¯d or internal contradictions. This is why
the Perfect State is performative: it brings together the
fundamental conditions for the institution of the perfect
state to take place. In other terms, the Perfect State was
meant to bring to al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s and his possible successors’
attention the individuals ﬁrstly capable of receiving
a complete philosophical training and subsequently apt
to become the rulers of the future perfect city. Such is
the concrete historical meaning of the training of young
philosopher-apprentices which is also brieﬂy described
in the Attainment of Felicity. In short, al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ never
departed from the view that the philosopher’s role is to
teach and to rule.
The fact that the unity of composition of the Perfect
State and the Political Regime has escaped interpreters’
attention can be explained by the prevailing approach
which analyzes each treatise separately. In fact, al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s
work or at least his three main political treatises, the
Perfect State, the Political Regime, and the so-called Polit-
ical Aphorisms, ﬁrst need to be envisioned and examined
as an organic whole in order to then be understood indi-
vidually. Al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ alludes to the connection between
these three works in his Summary of the Perfect State
where he refers to seemingly unknown ‘‘Addenda’’
(ziya¯da¯t), the description of which coincides with the
content of Political Regime and Political Aphorisms.
M. Mahdi, who edited Summary of the Perfect State, was
the ﬁrst to suggest that the Political Aphorisms might be
a part of the Addenda in question.
See also: ▶‘Abdallat:ı¯f al-Bag˙da¯dı¯ ▶Abu¯ Bishr Matta¯ ibn
Yu¯nus ▶Aristotelianism in the Greek, Latin, Syriac,
Arabic,
and
Hebrew
Traditions
▶Aristotle,
Arabic
▶Contemplative Happiness and Civic Virtues ▶Ethics,
Arabic ▶Ibn Ba¯jja, Abu¯ Bakr ibn al-Sa¯’ig˙ (Avempace)
350 F
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, Abu¯ Nas.r

▶Ibn Rushd, Muh˙ammad ibn Ah˙mad al-H˙ afı¯d (Averroes)
▶Ibn Sı¯na¯, Abu¯ ʿAlı¯ (Avicenna) ▶Logic in the Arab and
Islamic World ▶Modal Theories and Modal Logic
▶Moses Maimonides
▶Natural
Philosophy, Arabic
▶Philoponus, Arabic ▶Philosophy, Arabic ▶Plato,
Arabic ▶Translations from Greek into Arabic ▶Yah:ya¯
ibn ʿAdı¯
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Abelard Peter (2001) Collationes, ed. and trans. Marenbon J, Orlandi G.
Oxford University Press, Oxford (see also Jolivet J (1963) Abe´lard et
le philosophe (Occident et Islam au XIIe sie`cle). Rev Hist Relig
164:181–189)
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ Abu¯ Nas.r (1408 h.q.) Al-Mant:iqiyya¯t li-l-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, 3 t., ed.
Da¯neshpadju¯h MT. Qom
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ Abu¯ Nas.r (1408 h.q.) Book of dialectics: Al-Mant:iqiyya¯t li-l-
Fa¯ra¯bı¯, t 1, ed. Da¯neshpadju¯h MT. Qom, pp 358–455
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ Abu¯ Nas.r (1949) Enumeration of the sciences: Ih:s:a¯’ al-ʿulu¯m,
ed. Amine O. Cairo; Islamic philosophy, vol 10, Abu¯ Nas:r M. b. M.
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, Texts and studies IV, collected and reprinted by Sezgin F.
Institute for the History of Arabic-Islamic Science at the Johann
Wolfgang Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, 1999, pp 1–146
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ Abu¯ Nas.r (1960) On de interpretatione: Sharh: al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ li-kita¯b
Arist:u¯t:a¯lı¯s
fı¯
l-‘iba¯ra:
Commentary
on
Aristotle’s
PΕΡΙ
ΕΡΜΗΝΕΙΑS, ed. Kutsch W, Marrow S. Beirut, Dar al-Mashreq
(English translation: Zimmermann FW (1981) Al-Farabi’s commen-
tary and short treatise on Aristotle’s De interpretatione. Oxford
University Press, Cambridge/New York)
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ Abu¯ Nas.r (1961) Falsafa Arist:u¯t:a¯lı¯s: Al-Farabi’s philosophy of
Aristotle, ed. Mahdi M. Dar Majalla Shiʿr, Beirut (English translation:
Mahdi M (1962) Alfarabi’s philosophy of Plato and Aristotle. New
York, pp 59–130)
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ Abu¯ Nas.r (1971) Political aphorisms: Fus:u¯l Muntaza‘ah
(Selected aphorisms), ed. Najjar FM. Dar al-Mashreq, Beirut (English
translation: Butterworth Ch (2001) Alfarabi, The political writings.
Cornell University Press, Ithaca/London, pp 11–67)
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ Abu¯ Nas.r (1985) Perfect state: Kita¯b maba¯di’ a¯ra¯’ ahl al-madı¯na
al-fa¯d˙ila: On the perfect state, a revised text with introduction,
translation, and commentary by Walzer R. Clarendon Press, Oxford
(German translation: Ferrari C (2009) Abu¯ Nas:r al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, Die
Prinzipien der Ansichten der Bewohner der vortrefﬂichen Stadt.
Reclam, Stuttgart)
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ Abu¯ Nas.r (1986a) Book of religion: K. al-milla. In: Book of
religion and related texts, ed. Mahdi M. Dar al-Mashreq, Beirut
(English translation: Butterworth Ch (2001) Alfarabi, The political
writings. Ithaca/London, pp 93–113)
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ Abu¯ Nas.r (1986b) Summary of the perfect state: Fus:u¯l maba¯di’
a¯ra¯’ ahl al-madı¯na al-fa¯d˙ila. In: Book of religion and related texts, ed.
Mahdi M. Dar al-Mashreq, Beirut
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ Abu¯ Nas.r (1987) On demonstration: Kita¯b al-burha¯n. In:
Al-mant:iq ʿinda al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, ed. Fakhry M. Dar al-Mashreq, Beirut
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ Abu¯ Nas.r (19902) Book of particles: Kita¯b al-h:uru¯f: Book of
letters, ed. Mahdi M. Dar al-Mashreq - Librairie Orientale, Beirut
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ Abu¯ Nas.r (1992) Attainment of happiness: Kita¯b tah:s:ı¯l al-sa‘a¯da:
The attainment of happiness. In: Al-Farabi, The philosophical works,
ed. Al Yasin. Dar al-Manahel, Beirut, pp 119–197 (see also Tah:s:ı¯l
al-sa‘a¯da, Hyderabad, 1345 A.H.; English translation: Mahdi M.
Alfarabi’s philosophy of Plato and Aristotle. The Free Press of Glen-
coe, New York, pp 13–50)
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ Abu¯
Nas.r (19932) Political regime: Kita¯b al-siya¯sa al-
madaniyya: The political regime, ed. Najjar FM. Beirut (English
translation of the second part: Najjar M (1963) In: Lerner R,
Mahdi M (eds) Medieval political philosophy: a sourcebook. Cornell
Paperbacks,
New
York,
of
the
ﬁrst
part:
McGinnis
J,
Reisman D (2007) Classical Arabic philosophy, an anthology of
sources. Hackett, Indianapolis/Cambridge)
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ Abu¯ Nas.r (1998) Grand book on music, ed. Neubauer E. Insti-
tute for the History of Arabic-Islamic Science at the Johann Wolfgang
Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main
Ibn Abı¯ Us:aybi‘a Muwaffaq al-Dı¯n (1965) ‘Uyu¯n al-anba¯’ fı¯ t:abaqa¯t
al-at:ibba¯’, ed. Rida N. Dar Maktabat al-Hayat, Beirut, pp 603–609
Ibn H˙ awqal Muh˙ammad Abu¯ l-Qa¯sim (19392) Kita¯b s:u¯rat al-ard˙, t. 2, ed.
de Goeje J, et Kramers JH. Leiden, pp 510–511 (French translation:
Kramers JH, Wiet G (1964) Ibn Hauqal, Conﬁguration de la terre,
t. II. Commission internationale pour la traduction des chefs-
d’œuvre, Beirut/Paris, p 488)
Ibn Khallika¯n Shams al-Dı¯n al-Barmakı¯ (1972) Wafa¯ya¯t al-a‘ya¯n, vol V,
ed. ‘Abba¯s I. Beirut, Dar al-Thaqafa, pp 153–157 (English translation:
De Slane (1970) Ibn Khallikan’s biographical dictionary, vol III.
Librairie du Liban, Beirut, pp 307–311)
al-Mas‘u¯dı¯ Abu¯ l-H˙ asan (1939) Kita¯b al-tanbı¯h wa-l-ishra¯f, t. 8, ed. de
Goeje J. Leiden, pp 161–162
Miskawayh Abu¯ ʿAlı¯ Ah˙mad b. Muh:ammad (1952) Al-h:ikma al-kha¯lida,
ed. Badawı¯ ‘A. Maktabat al-Nahd˙a al-Mis:riyya, Cairo
S˙a¯‘id al-Andalusı¯ Abu¯ l-Qa¯sim Qa¯d˙ı¯ (1985) Kita¯b t:abaqa¯t al-umam, ed.
Bu¯ Alwa¯n H. Dar al-Tali’a, Beirut, pp 137–140
Secondary Sources (Representing Different Interpretations)
Adamson P (2006/2007) The Arabic Sea battle: al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ on the problem
of future contingents. Arch Gesch Philos 88:163–188
Black DL (1996) Al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯. In: Nasr SH, Leaman O (eds) History of
Islamic philosophy. Routledge, London/New York, pp 178–197
Brague R (1996) Eorum praeclara ingenia. Conscience de la nouveaute´ et
pre´tention a` la continuite´ chez Farabi et Maı¨monide. Bulletin
d’Etudes Orientales 48:87–102 (Damascus)
Crone P (2004) Al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s imperfect constitutions. Me´langes de
l’Universite´ Saint-Joseph 57:191–228
Druart T-A (1981) Al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s Causation of the heavenly bodies. Islamic
philosophy and mysticism, ed. Morewedge P. Caravan, New York,
pp 35–45
Druart T-A (1992) Al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, emanation, and metaphysics. Neoplatonism
and Islamic thought, ed. Morewedge P. State University of New York
Press, Albany, pp 127–148
Gutas D (2004) The meaning of madanı¯ in al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s ‛political’ philos-
ophy. Me´langes de l’Universite´ Saint-Joseph 57:269–281
Hugonnard-Roche H (1999) Averroe`s et la tradition des Seconds
Analytiques. In: Endress G, Aertsen JA (eds) Averroes and the
Aristotelian tradition. Brill, Leiden, pp 172–187
Janos D (2010) The Greek and Arabic Proclus and al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s theory of
celestial intellection and its relation to creation. Documenti e Studi
sulla tradizione ﬁlosoﬁca medievale 19
Mahdi M (1971) Al-Faˆraˆbıˆ. In: Gillispie CC (e´d) Dictionary of
scientiﬁc biography, t. IV. New York, Ch. Scribner’s Sons, col.
523a–526b
Mahdi M (2001) Alfarabi and the foundation of Islamic political philos-
ophy. University of Chicago Press, Chicago
Menn S (2008) Al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s Kita¯b al-h:uru¯f and his analysis of the senses of
being. Arabic Sci Philos 18:59–97
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, Abu¯ Nas.r F
351
F

Rashed M (2008) Al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s lost treatise on changing beings and the
possibility of a demonstration of the eternity of the world. Arabic Sci
Philos 18:19–58
Vallat Ph (2004) Farabi et l’E´cole d’Alexandrie, Des pre´misses de la
connaissance a` la philosophie politique. Vrin, Paris
Vallat Ph (2008) Du possible au ne´cessaire. La connaissance de l’universel
chez Farabi. Documenti e Studi sulla tradizione ﬁlosoﬁca medievale
19:89–121
Vallat Ph (2011) Al-Farabi’s arguments for the eternity of the world. In:
Watt J, Lo¨ssl J (eds) Interpreting the Bible and Aristotle – the
Alexandrian commentary tradition between Rome and Baghdad.
Aldershot, Ashgate
Vallat Ph (2011) Farabi (ob. 950), Un philosophe intransigeant.
Philosophie, politique et religions au IVe sie`cle de l’he´gire (Xe s.).
Les Belles Lettres, Paris
Walzer R (1967) Al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ and his successors. The Cambridge history of
later Greek and early medieval philosophy, ed. Armstrong AH. Cam-
bridge University Press, Cambridge, pp 652–669
Watt J (2009) Al-Farabi and the history of the Syriac Organon. Gorgias
Press, Piscataway
Yarshater E (ed) (1985–1993) Encyclopedia Iranica: ‘‘Fa¯ra¯bı¯’’, vol 9/2.
Routledge & Kegan Paul, London/Boston, pp 208–229
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, Latin Translations of
MAURO ZONTA
Dipartimento di Studi Filosoﬁci ed Epistemologici
Universita` di Roma
Rome
Italy
Abstract
Some of al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s philosophical works were translated
into Latin during the Middle Ages. Two of them were
translated literally from Arabic by Gerard of Cremona
around 1175: the Enumeration of the Sciences, and
a summary of books V–VIII of Aristotle’s Physics. Other
Farabian works were translated into Latin in a less literal
way: the Enumeration of the Sciences was ‘‘re-written’’ by
Dominicus Gundissalinus in his De scientiis (c. 1154–
1166).
There
are
Latin
translations,
probably
by
Gundissalinus, also of the treatise On the Intellect, of the
Book of Exhortation to the Way of Happiness, as well as of
part of The Sources of Questions; the introduction and the
beginning of the Long Commentary on Aristotle’s Rhetoric
was translated by Hermann the German, in 1243–1244.
Al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s
Summaries
and
Long
Commentaries
on
Aristotle’s Organon, as well as his Commentaries on the
Physics and the Nicomachean Ethics, might have been
translated into Latin, since they are apparently one of the
sources of Albert the Great. Moreover, some short works
ascribed to al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ were translated into Latin, but their
Farabian authorship is not sure.
Al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ was well-known as an interpreter of Aristotle,
but the medieval Latin translations of only a few works by
him have come to us (Salman 1939). Probably, medieval
Latin philosophers were more interested in Averroes, who
replaced al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ for them as a faithful representative
of the Arabic interpretation of Aristotle’s works; most
quotations from al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s commentaries on Aristotle
come from Averroes’ own commentaries (Steinschneider
1869:39). A number of Latin translations of Averroes’
works were based upon the already existing Hebrew trans-
lations, which covered almost all of them, while only
a limited number of al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s works had been translated
into Hebrew. It should also be noted that al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ had
been active in Iraq, while Averroes was active in Andalusia,
nearer to the main centers of medieval Latin philosophy.
Probably, the main philosophical work by al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯
translated into Latin and read during the Middle Ages
was his Enumeration of the Sciences (Arabic Ih:s:a¯’ al-
‘ulu¯m). There were two different translations of it, both
of which written in Toledo in the second half of the
twelfth century. Dominicus Gundissalinus (or Dominic
Gundisalvi) translated, or better ‘‘re-wrote,’’ al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s
work into Latin, under the title De scientiis, probably
between
1154
and
1166,
while
he
was
active
as
a translator of Arabic texts at the court of the Archbishop
of Toledo, John of Castelmoron-sur-Lot. This translation
was ﬁrst published by William Chalmers in 1638; a ﬁrst
critical edition of it, by Manuel Alonso Alonso, appeared
in 1954 (Gundisalvo 1954), and a second one, together
with a German translation, has been published by Jakob
H. Schneider (al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ 2006). In reality, this work was
a sort of adaptation of the contents of al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s work on
the demand of its Latin readers; it was employed by
Gundissalinus as a source of his De divisione philosophiae
(Steinschneider 1869:83; Gundissalinus 1903), as well as
by other medieval Latin philosophers, like Vincent de
Beauvais (Gundisalvo 1954:143–167). A more faithful,
literal translation of al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s original Arabic text of the
Enumeration of the Sciences into Latin was made in Toledo
around 1175 by the Italian scholar Gerard of Cremona.
This translation was probably based upon the same
Arabic manuscript used by Gundissalinus for his own trans-
lation, and might have been inﬂuenced by the latter; after
a ﬁrst noncritical edition of it by A´ ngel Gonza´lez Palencia
(al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ 1932:117–176), a critical edition and a German
translation by Franz Schupp appeared (al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ 2005).
The musical section of this work has been studied in detail
by Henry Farmer (Farmer 1934): he compared the Arabic
352 F
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, Latin Translations of

original text of it with both Latin translations. A tentative
reconstruction of the relationship between these two ver-
sions and the other witnesses of the textual tradition (the
Arabic manuscripts of the original text, its quotations
among other medieval authors, and two Hebrew trans-
lations of it), leads to the conclusion that both versions
were based upon an ‘‘occidental’’ version of the text, which
came to Spain before 1150, and was partially different
from the ‘‘oriental’’ version of it, known in the Middle
East (Zonta 1990).
Other philosophical works by al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ or ascribed to
him were translated from Arabic into Latin during the
Middle Ages, probably by Gundissalinus (Alonso Alonso
1947). The treatise On the Intellect (Arabic: Fı¯ l-‘aql)
was translated into Latin under the title De intellectu:
this translation was ﬁrst published together with some
works by Avicenna in 1508, another time together with
the De scientiis in 1638, and ﬁnally in a very good,
although noncritical edition, with a French translation,
by E´tienne Gilson (Gilson 1929:108–141). A medieval
Latin translation of al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s Book of Exhortation to the
Way of Happiness (Arabic: Kita¯b fı¯ l-tanbı¯h ila¯ sabı¯l al-
sa‘a¯da), bearing the title Liber ex(er)citationis ad viam
felicitatis and extant in a unique manuscript, has been
published by Dominique H. Salman (Salman 1940). Part
of a philosophical work commonly ascribed to al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯,
The Sources of Questions (Arabic: ‘Uyu¯n al-masa¯’il), was
translated into Latin. This translation, bearing the title
Fontes quaestionum, covers paragraphs 1–6 of the whole
work, and was published in critical edition (Cruz
Hernandez 1950–1951:316–318).
A different case is that of al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s Summaries and
Long Commentaries on the whole Aristotelian Organon
(including Porphyry’s Eisagoge), as well as his Commen-
taries on Aristotle’s Nicomachean Ethics and Physics. In this
case, it is not yet sure if medieval Latin translations of
them were really made (Salman 1939:247–248, 253–256),
apart from that of some short passages of the Summaries
(Salman 1939:260–261, 1948; Grignaschi 1972:44–45).
As for the Organon, the existence of such translations
was discussed in detail by Mario Grignaschi (Grignaschi
1972). According to Grignaschi, these texts were translated
into Latin before 1250 c., since Albert the Great quoted or
at least read some passages of them. In any case, al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯
might have inﬂuenced Albert the Great’s philosophical
thought (Cortabarria Beitia 1954).
There are two other philosophical works by al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯,
whose original Arabic text is now lost but was partially
translated into Latin during the Middle Ages. The whole
introduction and the ﬁrst passage of al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s Long Com-
mentary on Aristotle’s Rhetoric (about Rhet. 1354a1–2),
lost in their original Arabic text, were translated into
Latin by Hermann the German (Hermannus Alemannus)
at Burgos in 1243–1244 under the title Didascalia in
rhetoricam
Aristotelis
ex
glosa
Alpharabii;
they
are
found in a unique manuscript, and were ﬁrst published
according to a partial and revised version (as Declaratio
compendiosa Alfarabii super rhetoricorum libris Aristotelis)
in 1481; then they were critically edited by Grignaschi
(al-Farabi 1971:125–252). A short summary of books
V–VIII of Aristotle’s Physics, Distinctio Alfarabii super
librum Aristotelis de naturali auditu, possibly a fragment
of a wider commentary on the Physics, was translated into
Latin by Gerard of Cremona. It is still extant in at least ﬁve
manuscripts, and has been published according to three of
them (Birkenmajer 1935). The authorship of other works
ascribed to al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ and transmitted by the Latin tradi-
tion only is not yet sure. A very short, otherwise unknown
Liber Alpharabii about some points of botany, still
unpublished, has been found in a unique manuscript
(Paris, Bibliothe`que Nationale de France, lat. 7156, folio
82v: Hoefer 1842:326; Steinschneider 1869:77). A short
treatise De ortu scientiarum, or Epistula de assignanda
causa ex qua ortae sunt scientiae philosophiae et ordo
earum in disciplina, ascribed to al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ and preserved
in ﬁve manuscripts, has been published in a critical
edition (Alfarabi 1916); however, its Farabian authorship
is still in doubt, since its contents appear to be partially
different from those of the Enumeration of the Sciences
(but see Alonso Alonso 1946).
See also: ▶Albert the Great ▶Logic, Arabic, in the Latin
Middle Ages ▶Arabic Texts: Philosophy, Latin Transla-
tions of ▶Dominicus Gundissalinus ▶al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, Abu¯
Nas˙r ▶Gerard of Cremona
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Alfarabi (1916) U¨ ber den Ursprung der Wissenschaften (De ortu
scientiarum), ed. Baeumker C. Aschendorff, Mu¨nster
Birkenmajer Alexander (1935) Eine wiedergefundene U¨ bersetzung
Gerhards von Cremona. In: Aus der Geisteswelt des Mittelalters.
Studien und Texten M. Grabmann. . . gewidmet. Aschendorff,
Mu¨nster, pp 472–481
Cruz Hernandez Miguel (1950–1951) El Fontes quaestionum (‘Uyu¯n
al-masa¯’il) de Abu¯ Nasr al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯. Arch Hist Doctrin Litt M.-Age
25–26:303–323
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ (1932) Cata´logo de las ciencias, ed. Gonza´lez Palencia A.
Maestre, Madrid
al-Farabi (1971) Deux ouvrages ine´dits sur la Rhe´torique, ed. Langhade J,
Grignaschi M. Dar El-Machreq, Beirut
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ (2005) U¨ ber die Wissenschaften. De scientiis, nach der
lateinischen U¨ bersetzung Gerhards von Cremona, ed. and trans.
Schupp F. Felix Meiner, Hamburg
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, Latin Translations of F
353
F

al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ (2006) U¨ ber die Wissenschaften. Lateinisch-Deutsch, ed.
Schneider JH. Herder, Freiburg im Breisgau
Grant Edward (1974) A source book in mediaeval science. Harvard
University Press, Cambridge
Gundisalvo Domingo (1954) De scientiis, ed. Alonso Alonso M. Consejo
superior de investigaciones cientiﬁcas, Madrid/Granada
Gundissalinus Dominicus (1903) De divisione philosophiae, ed. Baur L.
Aschendorff, Mu¨nster
Salman Dominique H (1940) Le Liber exercitationis ad viam felicitatis
d’Alfarabi. Rech The´ol Ancienne Me´die´v 12:33–48
Salman Dominique H (1948) Fragments ine´dits de la logique d’Alfarabi.
Rev Sci Philos The´ol 32:222–225
Secondary Sources
Alonso Alonso M (1946) El autor del Liber de ortu scientiarum.
Pensamiento 2:333–340
Alonso
Alonso
M
(1947)
Traducciones
del
arcediano
Domingo
Gundisalvo. Al-Andalus 12:295–338
Cortabarria Beitia A (1954) Las obras y la ﬁlosofı´a de Alfarabi y Alkindi en
los escritos de San Alberto Magno. Las Caldas de Besaya, Santander
Farmer H (1934) Al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s Arabic–Latin writings on music. Civic Press,
Glasgow
Gilson E´ (1929) Les sources gre´co-arabes de l’augustinisme avicennisant.
Arch Hist Doctrin Litt M.-Age 4:1–149
Grignaschi M (1972) Les traductions latines des ouvrages de la logique
arabe et l’abre´ge´ d’Alfarabi. Arch Hist Doctrin Litt M.-Age 47:41–107
Hoefer F (1842) Histoire de la chimie, vol I. Bureau de la Revue
scientiﬁque, Paris
Salman D (1939) The medieval Latin translations of Alfa¯ra¯bı¯’s works. New
Scholast 13:245–261
Steinschneider M (1869) Al-Farabi
(Alpharabius) des arabischen
Philosophen Leben und Schriften. Academie Impe´riale des Sciences
de St. Petersbourg, St. Petersburg
Zonta M (1990) L’Ih:s:a¯’ al-‘ulu¯m in ambiente ebraico. 1: Il T˙abb al-nufu¯s di
Ibn ‘Aqnı¯n. Henoch 12:53–75
Feudal Law
JOSEPH CANNING
Girton College
University of Cambridge
Cambridge
UK
Abstract
There is no consensus among historians on the subject of
feudal law, and the notion of ‘‘feudalism’’ is contested. The
traditional approaches, the broader one treating feudal
society, the narrower focussing on the contract between
lord and vassal, have been questioned as being constructs
of modern historians. The Libri feudorum was the main
text of medieval feudal law and was the subject of
ius commune jurisprudence. The core notion in feudal
relations was the bond of ﬁdelity or fealty. Feudal bonds
limited the ruler. They were found in a range of relation-
ships in secular and ecclesiastical society. Both the parties
beneﬁted in a feudal relationship. With the development
of forms of state from the twelfth century, the feudal
aspect of rulership was by no means purely personal.
Feudal notions persisted beyond the Middle Ages. Feudal
custom was perceived as part of natural law.
The subject of feudal law is one of the most contentious
among historians. There is no general agreement about
the nature of feudal relations and, indeed, whether the
term ‘‘feudalism’’ has any real meaning. What is at stake is
a fundamental organizing principle for understanding the
Middle Ages.
The debate in the middle of the twentieth century
featured two approaches. The ﬁrst saw feudal relations as
so pervasive as to justify the concept of feudal society. The
classic exposition of this view was Marc Bloch’s master-
piece, La socie´te´ fe´odale (1940, English trans., 1961). The
other, while accepting the larger vision, chose to focus on
the contract between lord and vassal – this would be
represented by F.L. Ganshof’s magisterial work, Qu’est-ce
que la fe´odalite´? (1944, English trans., 1952). The ﬁrst
approach would include the peasantry and issues of serf-
dom, the second would not. This comfortable arrangement
was shattered by Elizabeth Brown (1974) who argued that
feudalism was a construct produced by modern historians
and projected back onto the Middle Ages, a construct,
which did not conform to the multifarious reality of
medieval life. Susan Reynolds (1994) deepened the elabo-
ration of this thesis by seeking to demonstrate that the
feudal models with which most historians had been work-
ing derived ultimately from the theories of sixteenth-
century lawyers themselves drawing on the works of late
medieval jurists: that the whole ediﬁce of feudal law,
let alone the concept of ‘‘feudalism,’’ was built on the
unsound foundations of lawyers’ theories distanced from
the inﬁnitely complicated real world of medieval society.
The legal historian, Kenneth Pennington (2004), arguing
from a detailed knowledge of feudal, Roman, and canon
law, responded critically to Reynolds.
Feudal law was essentially customary, but it came to
some degree to be written down. The most important text
was the Libri feudorum. This was mainly based on Lom-
bard feudal law. Its ﬁrst recension dated back from the
mid-twelfth century and was created by Obertus de Octo,
a judge at Milan. Almost all the manuscripts of the ﬁrst
two recensions vary; some include eleventh- and twelfth-
century statutes of the Emperors Conrad II, Lothar II,
354 F
Feudal Law

and Frederick I. The ﬁrst commentary on the Libri
feudorum was written (on the second recension) by the
Roman law jurist, Pilius in c. 1200. The ﬁnal, vulgate
recension added constitutions of Emperor Frederick II. It
also included the famous letter of Bishop Fulbert of
Chartres, written in c. 1020, and which had become the
locus classicus for the obligations and duties incurred by
a vassal through the feudal oath of fealty. This had been
included in Gratian’s handbook of canon law, the
Decretum. The letter’s inclusion in the Libri feudorum,
together with the fact that Pilius was a civilian, neatly
demonstrated that the jurisprudence of the feudal law
was a product of the ius commune – the combined
Roman and canon law approach to legal scholarship. The
canonist, Huguccio, had already treated the principles
enshrined in the letter of Fulbert as applying to relation-
ships within the ecclesiastical hierarchy and to those
between the emperor and ecclesiastics – such principles
did not just apply to the feudal bond between lord and
vassals (Pennington 2004).
The consolidation of the place of the Libri feudorum in
the scholarship of the ius commune came with the com-
mentary of Accursius in the 1220s (based on Pilius’ com-
mentary). From the 1230s, the Libri feudorum were treated
as part of the Roman law, the Corpus iuris civilis. They
were added as a tenth collation to the Authenticum, the
form in which Justinian’s Novels were transmitted to
the Middle Ages. This meant that the Libri feudorum
became a standard part of civilian jurisprudence through
the medium of Accursius’ Glossa ordinaria, the culmina-
tion of the work of the school of the Roman law Glossa-
tors. Further commentaries were written on the Libri
feudorum, notably that of Baldus de Ubaldis (1393).
Indeed, feudal law continued as an integral part of the
jurisprudence
of
the
ius
commune
into
the
early
seventeenth century.
Feudal matters were also treated in many secular, legal
codiﬁcations after the early thirteenth century. For exam-
ple, Frederick II’s Constitutions of Melﬁ(1231), for Sicily,
included the succession and bestowing of ﬁefs and was
commented on by jurists. Similarly, in Castile and Leon,
the Siete partidas (1256/1258) of Alphonso X, and, in
France, the Etablissements de S. Louis (1272/1273) treated
feudal customs.
Feudal relations varied at different times and places,
but there persisted the core notion of the personal bond of
ﬁdelity, or fealty. This established a contract with rights
and duties on both sides. It was a mutual bond which
either party could treat as broken by the other’s perceived
violation of feudal law. At the political level this marked
the beginnings of a right of resistance to the ruler. Feudal
law, in short imposed limits on the ruler – as Baldus
famously said of grants of ﬁefs by the emperor, ‘‘God has
subjected the laws to him, but has not subjected to him
contracts by which he is bound’’ (deus subiecit ei leges, sed
non subiecit ei contractus ex quibus obligatus est) (Com-
mentary on Libri feudorum, 1.7). Whereas in Roman law
there was no inheritance of obligations entered into by
contract, a ruler’s successor did inherit a feudal contract.
The feudal bond could be found in a range of relation-
ships within both secular and ecclesiastical society. It was
a bond which applied far more widely than just to the
relationship between the lord and his vassal: according to
this, a lord received an oath of fealty, following the act of
self-surrender known as homage, from a man who thereby
became his vassal and received a beneﬁce or ﬁef (feudum –
hence ‘‘feudal’’) in land or rents in return, to enable him to
perform the required services (primarily military) for his
lord. Feudal notions became so entrenched that, by the
late Middle Ages, relationships which originally had not
been seen as feudal at all became feudalized: a prime case
would be the way in which the fourteenth-century popes
claimed that at his coronation the Roman emperor swore
to the pope an oath of ﬁdelity, which was feudal in nature,
a contention rejected by the imperial side because it
suggested that the Empire was a papal ﬁef. Earlier in the
Middle Ages, the papacy had not seen the emperor’s oath
in terms of feudal ﬁdelity but of subordination.
Feudal bonds created an enduring relationship in
a way that was useful to both sides. A major example is
provided by late medieval Italy. The lords (signori) who
increasingly supplanted republican forms of government
from the mid-thirteenth century onward were in part
legitimized by grants of imperial or papal vicariates,
which were feudal in form. This arrangement aided the
emperor or the pope, who did not lose ultimate sover-
eignty over the ﬁef, and gave the signori rights of public
jurisdiction. It was particularly helpful in the case of
Giangaleazzo Visconti, when the emperor-elect, Wences-
las, took the further step of creating him duke of Milan
in 1395. The feudal nature of this grant meant that
Wenceslas, Giangaleazzo, and lawyers supporting them
could argue that this was not the alienation of imperial
rights forbidden by Roman law. (This did not prevent
Wenceslas’ fall from power in 1400 on these grounds.)
The general problem for historians is how much they
should privilege feudal notions in interpreting medieval
society. To overemphasise them would indeed be to mis-
lead. At the level of rulership and government, from
at least the twelfth century, apparatuses of power and
Feudal Law F
355
F

nascent bureaucracy indicated the emergence of forms of
state. This meant that the feudal aspect of rulership was by
no means purely personal, because ﬁefs came to be seen as
grants of the royal or imperial ofﬁce. Papal ﬁefs ﬁtted in
with this view: those receiving them became vassals not of
the individual pope but of St. Peter. The notion of ofﬁce
further explained why feudal contracts were inherited by
subsequent rulers.
Feudal notions were peculiarly persistent. Snobbery
and the desire to consolidate upward social mobility
partly explained the pursuit of feudal titles in the late
Middle Ages – the preeminent civilian jurist, Bartolus of
Sassoferrato (d. 1357), for example, was immensely proud
when Emperor Charles IV gave him a coat of arms. But far
more was involved. Feudal ideas became part of the intel-
lectual web for understanding the world. This is best
summed up by the contention put forward by jurists
from the thirteenth century onward that feudal custom
formed part of natural law, a perception deriving ulti-
mately from the Aristotelian and Ciceronian notions of
custom as second nature (Canning 1987:82–83; Ullmann
1967:83).
See also: ▶Canon Law ▶Civil (Roman) Law ▶Natural
Law ▶Roman Empire
Bibliography
Primary Sources
(1892) Consuetudines feudorum, ed. Lehmann K, rev. Eckhardt KA.
Libraria Dieterichiana, Go¨ttingen (repr. Aalen, 1971)
Baldus de Ubaldis (1495) Super usibus feudorum interpretatio, Pavia
Secondary Sources
Monographs
Bloch M (1961) Feudal society, trans. Manyon MA, with a foreword by
Postan MM. Routledge, London
Canning J (1987) The political thought of Baldus de Ubaldis. Cambridge
studies in medieval life and thought, 4th series, vol 6. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge
Cortese E (1995) Il diritto nella storia medievale, vol 2. Il cigno Galileo
Galilei, Rome
Danusso C (1991) Ricerche sulla ‘Lectura feudorum’ di Baldo degli
Ubaldi. Giuffre`, Milan
Ganshof FL (1952) Feudalism, trans. Grierson P, with a foreword by Sir
Stenton FM. Longmans, London
Giordanengo G (1988) Le droit fe´odale dans les pays de droit e´crit.
L’Exemple de la Provence et du Dauphine´ XIIe-de´but XIVe sie`cle.
Bibliothe`ques des Ecoles Franc¸aises d’Athe`nes et de Rome, Fascicule
266. Ecole Franc¸aise de Rome, Rome
Reynolds S (1994) Fiefs and vassals. The medieval evidence reinterpreted.
Oxford University Press, Oxford
Ullmann W (1967) The individual and society in the middle ages.
Methuen, London
Vallone G (1999) Isituzioni feudali dell’Italia meridionale: Tra medioevo
ed antico regime: L’area salentina. Viella, Rome
Collection
Ryan M (1998) The oath of fealty and the lawyers. In: Canning J,
Oexle OG (eds) Political thought and the realities of power in the
Middle Ages/Politisches Denken und die Wirklichkeit der Macht im
Mittelalter.
Vero¨ffentlichungen
des
Max-Planck-Instituts
fu¨r
Geschichte. Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, Go¨ttingen, 147. pp 211–228
Journal Articles
Brown EAR (1974) The tyranny of a construct: feudalism and historians
of medieval Europe. Am Hist Rev 79:1063–1088
Pennington K (2004) The formation of the jurisprudence of the feudal
oath of fealty. Rivista Internazionale di Diritto Commune 15:57–76
Fishacre, Richard
▶Richard Fishacre
Fitzralph, Richard
▶Richard Fitzralph
Form and Matter
CATHERINE KO¨ NIG-PRALONG
De´partement de philosophie
Universite´ de Fribourg
Fribourg
Switzerland
Abstract
The notions of form and matter are treated in very differ-
ent contexts before and after the Latin translations of the
Aristotelian physical and metaphysical texts. Up to the
second half of the twelfth century, the Platonic tradition
(directly, through the Timaeus, and indirectly) and
Augustine of Hippo presented matter as a formless recep-
tacle that precedes the reception of forms. The problem
lies in forms coming to be in matter. A parallel tradition
begun by Boethius engages in an ontologizing reading of
Aristotle’s Categories that leaves matter in the margins of
formal ontology. Starting from the thirteenth century, the
new context of Aristotelian epistemology reoriented the
debate considering the ontology of compound things.
Form and matter are then conceived as metaphysical prin-
ciples that account for change (Thomas Aquinas), or as
the constituent parts of things (the Franciscan tradition).
356 F
Fishacre, Richard

In fourteenth-century England, several theories arose that,
while very different among themselves, presented matter
and form as absolute things. In Germany, a new meta-
physics of forms arises that excludes matter from philo-
sophical discussion.
In medieval ontology, the notions of form and matter
most often serve to describe the condition of individual
things. According to some authors, only things belonging
to the sensible world and subject to change are composed
of matter and form. For others, such a composition also
extends to beings beyond the sphere of ﬁre (from the
moon outwards): although they are not subject to gener-
ation and corruption, they are material insofar as they are
multiplied and individuated within the same species.
Form (morphe¯/forma) is the principle of determination
that makes a thing what it is in actuality. Matter (hyle¯/
materia) is the receptive principle or the potential ‘‘sub-
strate,’’ which signiﬁes of what a thing is made or in which
it is. The notion of matter allows one to account for
change, and for the differentiation and multiplication of
individual forms.
Nevertheless, this conceptual pair has very different
meanings according to era and author. The Middle Ages
can be divided into two philosophical periods: before and
after the Latin translations of the Aristotelian physical and
metaphysical texts.
1. The ﬁrst period runs from the end of Antiquity and
Augustine of Hippo (354–430) to the second half of
the twelfth century. During these eight centuries, the
Latin Middle Ages did not have access to Aristotelian
physical and metaphysical works. The (direct and indi-
rect) Platonic tradition set the terms of discourse on
physics. The ﬁrst part of Plato’s Timaeus (to 53c) is
transmitted in the Latin translation made by Calcidius
(c. 321). There, Plato distinguishes three primordial
genera (48d–52c): (a) immutable and intelligible
forms, which are the eternal models of mutable things;
(b) sensible and mutable forms, which are the copies
of these forms in matter; (c) the matter, in which these
copies come to be. Plato describes matter as the uni-
versal receptacle or mother. It constitutes the form’s
alterity: it is outside all forms so that it may be that in
which the forms come to be. As opposed to the form,
which is in itself intelligible, matter is not intelligibile –
one only perceives it in ‘‘dream.’’ Plotinus (c. 205–270)
would add that matter is nonbeing and evil, insofar as
it is the opposite of the one (Enneads II, 4).
Following this Platonic line, Augustine of Hippo gives
an interpretation of matter that would have much success
during the Middle Ages. Commenting on the beginning of
Genesis, he compares matter to the shadowy abyss from
which God separates things and organizes the world. In
the Confessions (Confessiones XII, 6) and in De Genesi ad
litteram (I), he describes matter as an absence of form
(informitas) and an almost-nothing (prope nihil), but
which is something. Created ex nihilo, this formless mate-
rial is gradually formed thanks to dispositions that are
present in it from its creation: seminal reasons (semina,
rationes seminales), which Augustine borrows from Stoic
physics (De Genesi ad litteram III.12; IV.33; V.7). Such
a reading of Genesis allows Augustine to afﬁrm the onto-
logical priority of nothing to the world, and of matter to
forms. Terrestrial things, forms engaged in matter, are
essentially transitory, mutable, and corruptible.
Medieval commentaries on the Timaeus only appear
by the middle of the twelfth century. The most Platonic
moment of the Latin Middle Ages occurs at the time of the
so-called ‘‘School of Chartres.’’ William of Conches and
Bernard of Chartres composed glosses on the Timaeus.
With respect to the issue of form and matter, the most
important work from this time is perhaps Bernard
Silvestre’s Cosmography, a poem mixed with prose com-
mentaries, which, modeled on the beginning of Ovid’s
Metamorphosis, tells the origin of the world. As with
Augustine, matter (Yle¯) precedes the formation of the
world. Bernard names this shadowy material Silva (forest).
Matter is wild, but it is also halfway between good and evil.
The intellect (Nous) must organize it, that is, give it form.
In this Platonic tradition, the pair matter/form also con-
stitutes the projection into nature of the Fall and the
turning away from the Good.
Alongside Augustine, the other great philosophical
authority of the High Middle Ages was Boethius (c. 480–
524/525), the Latin translator and commentator of
Aristotle’s logical treatises. Among other texts, Aristotle’s
Categories and Boethius’ Commentary on Porphyry’s
Isagoge played the role of ontological treatises during this
period. In this context, the question of substance is not
posed in terms of matter and form, but in terms of
a Platonized Aristotelian logic: how a genus descends
into its species and how the species is individuated. Boe-
thius explains the individuality of substances without
recourse to matter, relying on a unique bundle of accidents
in each thing. The hylemorphic composition of things
does not appear among the problems addressed in the
Boethian tradition.
In
the
ninth
century,
John
Scotus
Eriugena
retranslated the works of the Pseudo-Dionysius the Are-
opagite and adopted Proclus’system of formal emanation.
The ontological reading of the Porphyrian tree, begun by
Form and Matter F
357
F

Boethius, receives a strong Proclian ﬂavor: the genus is
the most formal entity, that is, both the most universal
and the most essential, and it descends into its species and
their individuals by emanation (see, in particular, the
Annotationes in Marcianum). Such a formal ontology
leaves little room for matter.
2. The second period is that of the reception of the
Aristotelian
physical
and
metaphysical
corpus.
Starting in the second half of the twelfth century,
almost the entirety of Aristotle’s texts, as well as
numerous Arabic and Byzantine commentaries and
treatises, are translated into Latin from Greek and
Arabic. In the Physics (II, 1–3) and the Metaphysics
(VII, 3, 7–8, 10–11), Aristotle considers matter and
form as intrinsic and constituent principles of mutable
things or ‘‘composites.’’ In physics, matter explains the
continuity of change: in transformation, what was
wood becomes ash. In the material thing, matter
expresses potentiality, the possibilities of becoming.
It is also the principle that allows one to say in what
a thing is and of what it is constituted. The Aristotelian
vision is the opposite of Augustine’s: according to
Aristotle, act and form are always prior to potency
and matter, otherwise it would be necessary to posit
an absurd nonbeing – chaos – that existed before being
(Metaphysics XII, 7, 1072a7-19).
During this Aristotelian period, three works from the
Arabic-speaking world, translated into Latin, played
a major role: the ‘‘Metaphysics’’ of the Shifa¯‘ by Avicenna
(Ibn Sı¯na¯), the Fountain of Life (Fons vitae) of Avicebron
(Ibn Gabirol), and the commentaries on Aristotle’s works
by Averroes (Ibn Rushd).
Avicenna (980–1037) bequeathed to the Latin world
a Neoplatonic cosmology and a metaphysics of forms. The
cosmos is ordered by a procession of ten intelligences,
purely formal substances that cause the world by their
essential activity (Metaphysics IX, 4). Material things
come about by means of the cosmos’ emanationist
dynamics: they are the exterior traces of the activity of
intelligences that are always in act. All the bodies of the
cosmos,
terrestrial
and
celestial,
are
composed
of
a receptive matter and a form or soul infused in it by an
intelligence. With respect to Terrestrial matter, it consti-
tutes the stuff that receives the forms emanating from the
last of the ten intelligences, the ‘‘agent intelligence,’’ under-
stood as ‘‘giver of forms’’ (dator formarum).
Written in the middle of the eleventh century, the
Fountain of Life of Ibn Gabirol provided the model for
‘‘universal hylemorphism.’’ Ibn Gabirol also adopted
a Neoplatonic cosmology, but he gave the matter/form
pair a universal, ontological scope: matter is the original
material of the whole cosmos. All created substances are
composed of matter and form, from the most perfect and
universal celestial intelligences down to natural and cor-
poreal beings, characterized by their particularity. In this
system, particularity, and not materiality, is the indicator
of a degraded state, as in the ontological readings of
Porphyry’s tree. On the joint authority of Ibn Gabirol
and Augustine, the majority of Latin scholastics associated
with the angelic intelligences and with the human intellect
a proper matter, independent of any bond to a body.
In his commentaries on the Physics, the Metaphysics,
and On the Heavens, Averroes (1126–1198) returns matter
and form to their Aristotelian epistemic context: these
principles are only discovered in the course of an investi-
gation of physical changes. Against Avicenna, Averroes
speciﬁes that only natural things of the sublunary world
are composed of matter and form. The celestial bodies are
incorruptible; therefore they are not composed of matter
(In De caelo I, c. 20). Matter is the potential principle that
explains sublunary change: generation, corruption, and
accidental changes. According to Averroes, matter is
endowed with ‘‘indeterminate dimensions’’ (three-dimen-
sionality), which assure the possibility of being immedi-
ately divided into as many individual substances as there
are forms in act to determine it.
Aristotle’s
philosophical
texts
were
read
and
commented at the University of Paris and in England
from the beginning of the thirteenth century. In the mid-
dle of the century, the lectures of Albert the Great provide
a ﬁrst glimpse of the points of scholastic debate. Albert
rejects Ibn Gabirol’s universal hylemorphism and adopts
Averroes’ approach: only natural (sublunary) beings are
composed of matter and form (Summa theologiae II, tr. 1,
q. 3–4). Commenting on the Metaphysics (Metaph. II, tr. 3,
c. 10), he describes matter and form as correlative princi-
ples, intrinsic to the thing. Matter as such is the desire for
form. It is therefore necessary that the form be present in it
in an inchoative manner, as in an embryonic state. Albert
calls this inclination and this desire on the part of matter
for a form inchoatio formae (Metaph. I, tr. 5, c. 8; XI, tr. 1,
c. 8). He places Aristotelian nature in a Neoplatonic cos-
mological frame: these embryos of forms, which evoke
Augustine’s seminal reasons, are infused in prime matter
by the celestial intelligences. The action of natural agents
still must realize in act the forms that in an inchoate state
preexisted in matter.
From approximately 1260, the interests of university
theology carried over into ontology and physics. Three
particularly important questions arose concerning matter
and form: (a) Can God create some matter without form?
358 F
Form and Matter

(b) Do a plurality of substantial forms cohabit the same
substance, in particular, that of a human? (c) Is there
matter in spiritual and separate substances (i.e., in angels,
in the pure intelligences of Peripatetic cosmology, or in
human intellects considered separately from the body)?
Thomas Aquinas (1224/1225–1274) decides the three
questions in a distinctly Aristotelian fashion:
a.
God cannot make matter exist without form, since
prime matter is pure potentiality. The entire being in
act of a substance proceeds from its form, to which the
matter is essentially relative. According to this view,
matter is deprived of any ontological weight. Consid-
ered in itself, matter is a metaphysical principle
diametrically opposed to form. It accounts for the
potentialities of natural substances. At the level of
physical reality, however, it does not enjoy any proper
substantiality or actuality. On this basis, Thomas crit-
icizes the theory of seminal reasons (Sentences II, dist.
12, q. 1; De potentia, q. 4; Quodlibet III, q. 1; Sententia
libri Metaphysicae VII; De principiis naturae, c. 4; In
libros Physicorum II).
b. Consequently, Thomas rejects the coexistence of
a plurality of substantial forms in one same individual.
If matter is pure potency, then the actuality of the ﬁrst
form provides complete being for the substance. In the
case of man, the rational soul realizes the whole man in
substance. It is impossible to suppose a partition of
prime matter that would be prior to the reception of
the substantial form, or that remains under a plurality
of substantial forms, because such a division can only
come about by an act of information, to which matter,
pure potency, is repugnant by deﬁnition. In the sub-
stantial composite, however, matter remains the prin-
ciple that allows the explanation of accidental change
(man can grow, acquire knowledge, etc.) and then
corruption (death) (Quaestio de anima; Summa
theologiae I, q. 75–76).
c.
Thomas limits the composition of matter and form to
the world of generation and corruption. He refuses to
explain individuation and the mutability of angels and
intelligences by means of a certain type of matter,
a spiritual matter. According to Thomas, angels are
pure forms, although imperfect ones; they are not
therefore individuated under an angelic species, but
there are as many angelic species as angels (De
spiritualibus creaturis; De ente et essentia).
These doctrines constitute the points of contention during
the debates that took place in the last quarter of the
thirteenth century. Some authors (such as Giles of Rome,
Godfrey of Fontaines, Richard Knapwell, and Giles of
Lessines) defended Thomas’ theses, with adaptations and
modiﬁcations. But the majority of doctors and almost all
Franciscans attacked them. In 1277, Giles of Rome is
condemned for having maintained Thomas’ solution to
the ﬁrst problem (a). Thomas’ solutions to the other two
questions (b and c) were condemned in 1277 at Oxford,
and in 1286 at London.
a.
The majority of the Franciscans grant that matter has
some ontological weight proper to it and a minimal
actuality. John Pecham afﬁrms very clearly that God
could make matter exist without form (Quodlibet IV,
q. 1). The secular master Henry of Ghent holds the
same thesis, invoking divine omnipotence. If matter is
essentially something, it is also possible that God could
bring it about in isolation, in an order different than
the one actually realized (Quodlibet I, q. 10; X, q. 8). To
grant matter its own substantiality, and to justify its
minimal actuality, Bonaventure reworked the theory
of seminal reasons (Sentences II, dist. 7, pars 2, art. 2, q.
1; II, dist. 15, art. 1, q. 1). Only some of the Franciscans
would follow him down this path (e.g., Roger
Marston, Quodlibet II, q. 22).
b. The plurality of substantial forms is a doctrine shared
by almost all Franciscans (with the notable exception
of Peter John Olivi’s doctrine: Sentences II, q. 50–51).
The Franciscan approach is more empiric and less
metaphysical
than
that
of
Thomas.
Man
is
a microcosm that contains in act the divisions
observed in the larger world. His body, his nutritive
soul, his sensitive soul, his intellectual soul, and each
of the intermediate degrees are endowed with a proper
substantiality. The matter/form pair becomes the
means of graduating the scale of being and the parts
of a being, from the less perfect (the more material) to
the more perfect (the more formal). The same entity
can be conceived as matter or form, according to the
perspective one takes; for example, the sensitive soul is
the matter of the intellective soul, but the form of the
nutritive soul (See, e.g., Matthew of Aquasparta,
Quaestiones de anima XIII; Richard of Middleton, De
gradu formarum; John Pecham, Quodlibet IV, q. 11;
and also Roger Bacon, Libri communium naturalium I,
pars 2, dist. 1–2, who superimposes the distinction
between matter and form on that between genus and
species).
c.
Consequently, Ibn Gabirol’s universal hylemorphism
is largely adopted by Franciscan theologians, following
Bonaventure (Sentences II, dist. 3, pars 1, art. 1). Mat-
ter is not conﬁned to the physical world, nor is it
conceived of as a principle opposed to any actuality.
Form and Matter F
359
F

On the contrary, it is endowed with a minimal actual-
ity and coexists with form in every created substance,
including the angels. It accounts for their condition as
creatures: limitation, mutability, potentiality, individ-
uality, and receptivity.
In the fourteenth century, two new traditions appear, one
English, the other German.
In England, John Duns Scotus (c. 1265–1308) places
the problem of matter and form in a global metaphysical
context. In this metaphysics, everything that is possible is
also real, intelligible, and endowed with a certain formal
characteristic, prior to any concrete and created existence.
If matter is not nothing – if it is legitimate to speak of
matter – it is therefore something in itself possible. Scotus
grants to the matter a certain reality and a formal entity at
metaphysical level, a more foundational level than that of
its physical existence. In a concrete substance, matter
and form remain two distinct absolutes, joined by a rela-
tion of connection. Composition becomes therefore the
distinguishing mark of the world and of created sub-
stances (Lectura II, dist. 12, q. unica).
Among Scotus’ numerous critics, William of Ockham
(1285–1347) rejects the Scotist metaphysics of the real-
possible, and proposes a physics of existence and an ontol-
ogy of the singular. If discourse is extramentally relevant, its
terms must supposit for singulars. This logico-linguistic
critique likewise leads to a rejection of Thomas’ solution,
where matter is a metaphysical principle. According to
Ockham, matter and form are two absolute singulars and
are in act in each compound substance. Prime matter is
immediately divided into as many substances as actually
exist in the world. With an epistemology radically opposed
to that of Scotus, Ockham also makes matter absolute;
thus he insists on substance being compound (Summula
philosophiae naturalis I, c. 9–11; Expositio in librum
Physicorum I, c. 16–18; III, c. 14).
The German tradition, with such representatives as
Dietrich of Freiberg
(c. 1250–1320) and Berthold of
Moosburg (d. after 1361), develops a metaphysics of
forms that excludes matter, relegating it to the world
of the contingent and the corruptible. In his treatise
De quiditatibus entium, Dietrich gives a new reading of
Aristotelian
ontology.
Scientiﬁc
discourse
describes
only the necessary and per se relations of which Aristotle
speaks in the Posterior Analytics I, 4. Only forms and the
formal properties of things can be the object of such
discourse. Matter is not intelligible, because it is contin-
gent and potential; it is able not to be and to be otherwise
than how it is. If one considers the compound substance,
matter is posterior to the form and does not enter into
the quiddity or the deﬁnition of the thing. It no longer
has a place in the necessary discourse of metaphysics.
In commenting on Proclus, Berthold of Moosburg
arrives at the same sort of conclusions by a different path.
See also: ▶Aristotelianism in the Greek, Latin, Syriac,
Arabic, and Hebrew Traditions ▶Augustine ▶Boethius
▶Divine Power ▶Essence and Existence ▶Ibn Sı¯na¯, Abu¯
ʿAlı¯ (Avicenna) ▶John Duns Scotus ▶John Scottus
Eriugena ▶Metaphysics ▶Natural Philosophy ▶Plato-
nism ▶Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite ▶Thomas
Aquinas ▶William of Ockham
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Aquinas Thomas (1882ff.) Opera omnia, iussu Leonis XIII edita.
Comissio leonina-Cerf, Roma-Paris
Aquinas Thomas (1929) Scriptum super libros sententiarum (primum et
secundum), ed. Mandonnet P. Lethiellieux, Paris
Aquinas Thomas (1971) In duodecim libros Metaphysicorum Aristotelis
expositio, ed. Cathala M-R, Spiazzi RM. Marietti, Torino-Roma
Augustine (1894) De Genesi ad litteram, ed. Zycha I. In: Corpus
scriptorum ecclesiasticorum Latinorum 28.1. Tempsky, Wien
Augustine
(1981)
Confessiones,
ed.
Verheijen
L,
In:
Corpus
Christianorum, Series Latina 27. Brepols, Turnhout
Averroes
Latinus
(1562–1574)
Aristotelis
opera
cum
Averrois
commentariis, Venetiis apud Junctas (repr. Minerva, Frankfurt/
Main, 1962)
Avicebron Latinus (1995) Fons vitae, ed. Baeumker C. Aschendorff,
Mu¨nster
Avicenna Latinus (1977/1980) Liber de philosophia prima sive scientia
divina, ed. Van Riet S. Peeters/Brill, Louvain/Leiden
Bacon Roger (1905–1940) Opera hactenus inedita Rogeri Baconi, ed.
Steele
R.
Clarendon,
Oxford
[fasc.
2–3:
Libri
communium
naturalium, ed. Steele R. fasc. 8: Quaestiones supra libros quatuor
physicorum Aristotelis, ed. Delorme FM.]
Bernard of Chartres (1991) Glosae super Platonem, ed. Dutton PE.
Pontiﬁcal Institute of Mediaeval Studies, Toronto
Berthold
of
Moosburg
(1984)
Expositio
super
elementationem
theologicam Procli. Meiner, Hamburg
Boethius (1906) In ‘‘Isagogen’’ Porphyrii commenta, ed. Brandt S. Corpus
scriptorum ecclesiasticorum Latinorum 48. Tempsky, Wien (repr.
Johnson, New York 1966)
Bonaventure
(1885)
In
quatuor
libros
sententiarum.
In:
Opera
omnia S. Bonaventurae, ed. Collegii S. Bonaventurae. Quaracchi,
Ad Claras Aquas
Dietrich of Freiberg (1977–1985) Opera omnia, ed. and coor. Flasch K.
Meiner, Hamburg
Duns Scotus John (1993) Lectura II, dist. 7–44. In: Opera omnia 19, ed.
and coor. Balic C. Citta` del Vaticano, Roma
Duns Scotus John (1997) Quaestiones super libros metaphysicorum
Aristotelis. In: Opera philosophica 3–4, ed. Andrews R et al. The
Franciscan Institute, St. Bonaventure
Henry of Ghent (1978) Opera omnia, ed. and coor. Macken R. Leuven
University Press/Brill, Leuven/Leiden
Magnus Albertus (1895) Summa theologiae, ed. Borgnet A. In: Opera
omnia 31–33. Vive`s, Paris
360 F
Form and Matter

Magnus Albertus (1960–1964) Metaphysica, ed. Geyer B. In: Opera omnia
16. Aschendorff, Mu¨nster
Marston Roger (1994) [1968] Quodlibeta quatuor, ed. Etzkorn GJ, Brady
IC. Quaracchi, Grottaferrata
Matthew of Aquasparta (1961) Quaestiones de anima XIII, ed. Gondras
AJ. Vrin, Paris
Olivi Peter John (1922–1926) Quaestiones in secundum librum
sententiarum, ed. Jansen B. Quaracchi, Ad Claras Aquas
Pecham John (1989) Quodlibeta quatuor, ed. Etzkorn GJ, Delorme F.
Quaracchi, Grottaferrata
Plato (1962) Timaeus a Calcidio translatus, ed. Waszink JH. Warburg
Institute-Brill, London/Leiden
Richard of Middleton (1951) Quaestio fratris Richardi de gradu
formarum, ed. Zavalloni R. Editions de l’Institut Supe´rieur de
Philosophie, Louvain
Scotus Eriugena John (1970) Annotationes in Marcianum, ed. Lutz CE.
The Mediaeval Academy of America, Cambridge (repr. Kraus, New
York, 1970)
Silvestre Bernard (1978) Cosmographia, ed. Dronke P. Brill, Leiden
William of Conches (1965) Glosae super Platonem, ed. Jeauneau E. Vrin,
Paris
William of Ockham (1967–1989) Opera philosophica et theologica, ed.
Boehner Ph et al. The Franciscan Institute, St. Bonaventure
Secondary Sources
Adams MM (1987) William Ockham. University of Notre-Dame Press,
Notre-Dame
Bettoni E (1969) La teoria ilemorﬁca nell’interpretazione di Ruggero
Bacone. Riv Filosof Neo-Scolas 61:666–692
Donati S (2002) La discussione sulla materia nella tradizione di
commento della Fisica: commentatori inglesi degli anni 1240–1270
c. In: Fioravanti G, Leonardi C, Perfetti S (eds) Il commento
ﬁlosoﬁco nell’Occidente Latino (secoli XIII–XV). Brepols, Turnhout,
pp 185–232
Duba W (2006) Aristotelian traditions in Franciscan thought: matter
and potency according to Scotus and Auriol. In: Taifacos I (ed)
The origins of European scholarship. Steiner, Stuttgart, pp
147–161
Fioravanti G (1975) Forma ed esse in Enrico di Gande: preoccupazioni
teologiche ed elaborazione ﬁlosoﬁca. ASN Pisa, Serie 35:985–1031
Flasch
K
(2007)
Dietrich
von
Freiberg.
Philosophie,
Theologie,
Naturforschung um 1300. Klostermann, Frankfurt/Main
Goddu A (1984) The physics of William of Ockham. Brill, Leiden/Ko¨ln
Goheen J (1940) The problem of matter and form in the De ente et
essentia of Thomas Aquinas. Harvard University Press, Cambridge
Gracia JJE (1984) Introduction to the problem of individuation in the
early Middle Ages. Philosophia, Mu¨nchen
Ko¨nig-Pralong C (2005) Ave`nement de l’aristote´lisme en terre chre´tienne.
L’essence et la matie`re. Vrin, Paris
Macken R (1979) Le statut de la matie`re premie`re dans la philosophie
d’Henri de Gand. RTAM 46:130–182
Mazzarella P (1978) Controversie medievali. Unita` e pluralita` delle forme.
Giannini, Napoli
McMullin E (ed) (1965) The concept of matter in Greek and medieval
philosophy. University of Notre Dame Press, Notre Dame
Perez-Este´vez A (1998) La materia. De Avicena a la Escuela Franciscana.
Ed. de la Universidad del Zulia, Maracaibo
Porro P (ed) (2007) La materia. Quaestio 7. Brepols, Turnhout
RodolﬁA (2004) Il concetto di materia nell’opera di Alberto Magno.
SISMEL-Edizioni del Galluzzo, Firenze
Santogrossi A (1993) Duns Scotus on potency opposed to act in questions
on the metaphysics, IX. Am Cath Philos Quart 67:55–76
Schneider Th (1973) Die Einheit des Menschen. Die anthropologische
Formel ‘anima forma corporis’ im sogenannten Korrektorienstreit
und bei Petrus Johannis Olivi. Aschendorff, Mu¨nster.
Suarez-Nani T (2009) Introduction. In: Pierre de Jean Olivi (ed) La
matie`re. Vrin, Paris, pp 7–60
Forms, Plurality of
▶Form and Matter
Fortescue, John
▶John Fortescue
Francis of Marchia
ROBERTO LAMBERTINI
Dipartimento di Scienze Storiche, Documentarie,
Artistiche e del Territorio
Universita` di Macerata
Macerata
Italy
Abstract
Francis of Marchia (also known as Franciscus de Esculo, de
Apponiano, or de Pignano, called sometimes Franciscus
Rubeus, either a nickname or a family name) was a Fran-
ciscan theologian, who became doctor theologiae in Paris
and taught also in other Franciscan studia, such as that
located in Avignon. Little is known about his life. His
biography is however marked by his rebellion against the
Pope John XXII, when in 1328 he decided to side with
Michael of Cesena and ﬂed Avignon. After escaping from
Avignon, he spent many years at the Franciscan Convent
in Munich, under the protection of the excommunicated
German emperor Lewis IVof Bavaria. In 1343 he recanted.
After this date, he disappears from the extant records.
Although an important part of his works still awaits an
edition in print, Francis of Marchia has already emerged
as an interesting and innovative thinker in many ﬁelds.
Francis of Marchia F
361
F

Scholars are still discussing the actual signiﬁcance of his
criticism of Aristotle’s theory of motion and of his rejec-
tion of a substantial difference among terrestrial and
celestial bodies. His position concerning the relationship
between God’s foreknowledge and human freedom proved
to be very inﬂuential, so that specialists speak of a ‘‘Marchist
school’’ in this ﬁeld. Francis’ treatise Improbatio, aiming at
a radical refutation of John XXII’s bull Quia vir reprobus,
deeply inﬂuenced the formation of Ockham’s political
thought.
Francis was born in the small village of Appignano,
not far from Ascoli Piceno, in central Italy. The only
reliable information we possess concerning his career as
a theologian in the Franciscan Order derives from his
writings. Combining what it is known about other Fran-
ciscan masters who were active in the same years with
evidence contained in his commentary on the Sentences,
it is possible to date his lectures as bachelor of the
Sentences to the academic year 1319–1320. Francis’ com-
mentary has come down to us in different versions, which
numerous scholars have studied and (partially) edited in
recent decades. The editorial enterprise is still in progress,
but it is already clear that Marchia read the Sentences not
only in Paris, but also elsewhere, as was the case for many
theologians from the Mendicant Orders, although it is not
yet known exactly where and when. After his Paris lectures
Francis revised his commentary into a scriptum that may
have been completed, according to a colophon, in 1323.
Some historians have maintained that Francis was
acting as lector at the Franciscan convent in Avignon in
1324. This is quite possible, but the earliest explicit men-
tion of him in this position, bearing the title of doctor in
sacra theologia, dates to 1328, in the ﬁrst document related
to his rebellion against Pope John XXII. While in Avignon,
Francis had come into contact with the minister general of
his Order, Michael of Cesena, who had been summoned
by the pope in 1327 and later forbidden to leave the city
without permission. In the difﬁcult months of tension
between the pope and the leadership of the Franciscan
Order, stemming from the controversy over the doctrine
of absolute poverty, but worsened by the dispute with the
excommunicated German Emperor Louis of Bavaria,
Francis moved over to the side of his minister general. In
1328 Francis ﬂed Avignon along with Michael of Cesena,
Bonagratia of Bergamo, and William of Ockham, signed
the appeals in which they accused John XXII of heresy,
and, with Bonagratia, Ockham, and Henry of Thalheim,
coauthored
the
Allegationes
religiosorum
virorum,
defending Michael of Cesena. Francis was probably the
ﬁrst to respond to the papal bull Quia vir reprobus, pen-
ning a long treatise entitled Improbatio. In 1331 he signed
the letter sent by Michael of Cesena to the general chapter
of the Friars Minor in Perpignan. From a vitriolic letter of
Gerald Odonis to Michael of Cesena, we learn that Francis
had been robbed of a rather large sum of money while
heading to Munich, probably in Como. Newly discovered
documents conﬁrm this passage through Como.
Fragments of a trial record inform us that at one point
(most probably in 1341) Francis was in the hands of the
Roman Church. At ﬁrst he tried to defend his position,
claiming that his statements were compatible with the
doctrine held by Pope John XXII. In the end he recanted,
on December 1, 1343. He then disappears from our
records, although a late-fourteenth-century source (the
Franciscan Andrea Richi) reports that Francis wrote
a treatise in which he argued in favor of the compatibility
of Nicholas III’s Exiit qui seminat with John XXII’s Cum
inter nonnullos (that is, the contrary of what he had
maintained while siding with Michael of Cesena). This
work does not seem to have survived.
Francis of Marchia’s thought is far from having been
investigated in full, so the present entry is limited to
certain aspects. For several decades Francis’ writings have
been the object of interest for historians of science,
because in his commentary on book IV of the Sentences
he puts forth an account of projectile motion that is
different from that of Aristotle. It centers on the idea
that a projectile can continue to move when no longer in
contact with the source of its motion, because this source
has impressed a certain virtus on the projectile. Since this
virtus is, so to speak, ‘‘left’’ in the projectile by the mover, it
is called virtus derelicta. Such a virtus diminishes gradually
during motion, and this progressive diminution explains
why projectile motion comes to an end. It is easy to see
why Francis could have been considered a sort of ‘‘fore-
runner’’ of Galileo Galilei. Nevertheless, on the one hand,
most recent studies have shown that Francis did not invent
the basis for his account of projectile motion, but it had
been circulating for decades in European arts faculties
among commentators on Aristotle’s Physics, although
few authors supported it at length or with Francis’ argu-
ments; on the other, the link between virtus derelicta and
the modern theory of inertia has been fundamentally
reassessed. While scholars debate the true relationship
between the virtus derelicta approach to a theory of
motion and seventeenth-century mechanics, it is beyond
doubt that Francis’ theory exerted an important inﬂuence,
even on authors who only partially accepted his sugges-
tions or who rejected them. Something similar holds for
Francis’ rejection of Aristotle’s distinction between celes-
tial and terrestrial matter. However ‘‘revolutionary’’ such
a claim may appear at ﬁrst glance, Francis did not draw the
362 F
Francis of Marchia

consequences as a ‘‘modern’’ reader would expect, so the
connection between his position and the ‘‘Scientiﬁc Rev-
olution’’ is not as close as some historians of thought
claimed in the past.
More recently, scholars have investigated Marchia’s
ideas concerning necessity and contingency with respect
to divine foreknowledge. Like many Franciscan authors of
his era, Francis is acquainted with the innovative theories
Peter Auriol formulated in his lectures on the Sentences,
reacting to them. In particular, Francis opposes Auriol’s
opinion that propositions concerning future contingents
are neutral, in the sense that they are neither true nor false.
Francis of Marchia develops a solution to the problem
that, while avoiding the existence of indeterminate future
contingents, still maintains that contingency exists, and
not only in an accidental way, that is, because of the
shortcomings of our limited human knowledge, but also
in itself, grounded in God’s freedom. Francis therefore
supports a kind of ‘‘determinism’’ that does not rule out
the possibility of human freedom. On this point, Francis
found many followers in the fourteenth century, so that
Chris Schabel speaks of a ‘‘Marchist’’ school.
Generally speaking, as our knowledge of the theolog-
ical debates of the ﬁrst decades of the fourteenth century
increases, the inﬂuence that the thinker from Appignano
actually exerted is turning out to be much greater than
expected. This also holds true in the ﬁeld of political
theory. In his almost word-for-word refutation of John
XXII’s Quia vir reprobus (which in turn resembles more
a scholastic treatise than a papal bull), the lengthy
Improbatio, Francis discusses some issues that connect
the defense of the Franciscan theory of poverty to political
theory. In particular he develops John Duns Scotus’
account of the origins of ownership and dominium in
general into a refutation of Pope John’s claim that the
division of property among men is a divine institution.
According to Francis, on the contrary, the institution of
ownership is nothing but an ad hoc solution to the prob-
lems caused by Original Sin. God’s plan and human nature
privilege the community of goods. To some extent this
inﬂuences the postlapsarian state as well, since humans
can still renounce property by taking a religious vow that
allows them to live in a state closer to perfection. More-
over, in cases of extreme necessity, the rule of property
ceases to be valid and the person in need can use what she/
he requires to survive. Like ownership, political power is
also solely of human and not of divine origin. This
claim implies that, in order for temporal power to be
legitimate, it need not be authorized by the spiritual
power, because it belongs to the sphere of autonomous
human initiative, which tries to adjust to the negative
consequences of the Fall. As Hilary S. Ofﬂer and Ju¨rgen
Miethke have shown, such ideas deeply inﬂuenced
William of Ockham in the early stages of his involvement
in the debate on Franciscan poverty and also paved the
way for his political theory.
See also: ▶Future Contingents ▶John Duns Scotus
▶Nicholas Oresme ▶Peter Auriol ▶William of Ockham
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Francisci de Esculo OFM (1993) Improbatio contra libellum Domini
Johannis qui incipit ‘‘Quia vir reprobus,’’ ed. Mariani N. Editiones
Collegii S. Bonaventurae ad Claras Aquas, Grottaferrata
Francisci de Marchia (2008) Reportatio IIA (Quaestiones in secundum
librum Sententiarum) 1, qq. 1–12, ed. Suarez Nani T, Duba W,
Babey E, Etzkorn GJ. Leuven University Press, Leuven
Francisci de Marchia sive de Esculo (2003) Commentarius in IV libros
Sententiarum Petri Lombardi. I, Quaestiones praeambulae et
prologus, ed. Mariani N. Editiones Collegii S. Bonaventurae ad
Claras Aquas, Grottaferrata
Francisci de Marchia sive de Esculo (2006) Commentarius in IV libros
Sententiarum Petri Lombardi. II, Distinctiones primi libri a prima ad
decimam, ed. Mariani N. Editiones Collegii S. Bonaventurae ad
Claras Aquas, Grottaferrata
Francisci de Marchia sive de Esculo (2007) Commentarius in IV libros
sententiarum
Petri
Lombardi.
III,
Distinctiones
primi
libri
a undecima ad vigesimam octavam, ed. Mariani N. Editiones Collegii
S. Bonaventurae ad Claras Aquas, Grottaferrata
Francisci de Marchia sive de Esculo (2009) Commentarius in IV libros
sententiarum Petri Lombardi. IV, Distinctiones primi libri a vigesima
nona ad quadragesimam octavam, ed. Mariani N. Editiones Collegii
S. Bonaventurae ad Claras Aquas, Grottaferrata
Francisci de Marchia sive de Esculo OFM (1997) Quodlibet cum
questionibus selectis ex commentario in librum Sententiarum, ed.
Mariani N. Editiones Collegii S. Bonaventurae ad Claras Aquas,
Grottaferrata
Francisci de Marchia sive de Esculo OFM (1998) Sententia et compilatio
super libros Physicorum Aristotelis, ed. Mariani N. Editiones Collegii
S. Bonaventurae ad Claras Aquas, Grottaferrata
Secondary Sources
Folger-Fonfara S (2008) Das ‘Super’-Transzendentale und die Spaltung
der Metaphysik: Der Entwurf des Franziskus von Marchia. Brill,
Leiden/Boston
Friedman RL, Schabel C (2001) Francis of Marchia’s commentary on the
sentences. Mediaev Stud 63:31–106
Friedman RL, Schabel C (eds) (2006) Francis of Marchia – theologian and
philosopher. A Franciscan at the University of Paris in the early
fourteenth century. Brill, Leiden (= Vivarium XLIV, 1 (2006))
Mariani N (2002) Certezze ed ipotesi sul Commento alle Sentenze di
Francesco della Marca OMin. Archivum Franciscanum Historicum
95:93–183
Mariani N (2003) Due sermoni attribuiti a Francesco della Marca.
Archivum Franciscanum Historicum 98:571–595
Schneider N (1991) Die Kosmologie des Franciscus de Marchia. Brill,
Leiden/New York/Copenhagen/Ko¨ln
Francis of Marchia F
363
F

Francis of Meyronnes
WILLIAM DUBA
Department of Philosophy
University of Fribourg
Fribourg
Switzerland
Abstract
Francis of Meyronnes, O.F.M. (c. 1288–c. 1328), was
a Provenc¸al Franciscan theologian and sermonist. Francis
studied with John Duns Scotus at the University of Paris
and came to prominence in the early 1320s as a bachelor
and then master of theology at Paris. His works were
extremely inﬂuential from the years immediately follow-
ing his teaching into the modern era, but only a small
fraction is edited. Heavily inﬂuenced by John Duns
Scotus, he does not hesitate to modify or abandon Scotus’
thought. His metaphysics is heavily realist: he explicitly
declares his allegiance to Platonic ideas, which he under-
stands as identical with quiddities and beings of essence,
and he holds that propositions have real existence. Francis’
doctrine of divine knowledge largely derives from Scotus;
his notion of intuitive and abstractive cognition, on the
other hand, differs by positing that intuitive cognition is
the mental seizing of an object with all its merely formally
distinct modes, and can occur through species. Francis
deﬁnes place as the located object’s presentiality as related
to God, and time as the ﬂux of place to God. His sermons
have been praised for their mystical and ascetic quality, but
his treatises on the mystical and ascetic topics have been
characterized as impersonal. In his political writings,
Francis favored the subjection of secular authority to
the pope.
Born in the village of Meyronnes in Provence, Francis of
Meyronnes joined the Franciscan convent of Digne and
entered the Franciscan educational system. Between 1304
and 1307, he was sent to the University of Paris, where he
attended the lectures of his confrere John Duns Scotus.
After teaching in the provincial studia of the Franciscan
Order, Francis returned to Paris as a Bachelor of Theology
and lectured on the Sentences of Peter Lombard in
1320–1321,
notably
engaging
in
debate
with
the
Benedictine Pierre Roger (later Pope Clement VI) and
the Dominican John of Prato. In 1323, Francis was pro-
moted to master of theology, and elected provincial min-
ister of Aquitaine. In 1324, he appears at the Papal Curia in
Avignon, giving sermons and holding theological debates,
and served on a diplomatic mission to Gascony. He died in
Piacenza.
Francis of Meyronnes beneﬁted from the patronage of
the Angevin dynasty, to which his family was related. On
May 24, 1323, in a letter instructing the chancellor of the
University of Paris to award Francis the title Master of
Theology, Pope John XXII notes that Robert of Anjou,
King of Naples, requested this promotion. In autumn of
the same year, Francis was present at the death of St. Elze´ar
de Sabran, who had come to Paris to negotiate Charles of
Anjou’s marriage. Francis also pronounced Elze´ar’s funeral
oration. Francis dedicated to Robert of Anjou his commen-
tary on the works of Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite.
Referred to by later generations as the doctor
illuminatus or acutus, the magister abstractionum and
even the princeps scotistarum, Francis of Meyronnes had
immediate and lasting impact through his writings, above
all his commentary on the Sentences of Peter Lombard,
which exists in over 100 medieval manuscripts. Subse-
quent Franciscan theologians, such as Himbert of
Garda (1320s), Aufredo Gonteri Brito (1325), and Pastor
of Serrescudio (1332–1333), summarized or copied
Meyronnes’ works in their own commentaries on the
Sentences. Fifteenth-century thinkers cite not only Francis’
thought, but also refer to mayronistae and via mayronis.
Many of Meyronnes’ works exist in numerous early mod-
ern printings. Yet this very breadth and diversity in
Meyronnes’ writings has proved a hindrance to modern
scholarship. A handful of select passages and minor trea-
tises are available in modern critical edition, and nearly
half of Meyronnes’ writings are accessible only in manu-
script. Contemporary studies on particular subjects reveal
Meyronnes’ originality and philosophical interest, but not
even the fundamental study of Roth (1936) achieves
a comprehensive overview of his thought.
Francis of Meyronnes is a reputed Scotist, referring
frequently to John Duns Scotus as doctor noster, and is
perhaps the earliest author to speak of opposing schools of
thought at Paris, which some scholars interpret as indi-
cating the existence of a Scotist and a Thomist school. He
defends many doctrines characteristic of Scotus, such as
the Immaculate Conception and the univocity of being,
and he uses Scotistic notions, such as the formal distinc-
tion, haeccitas as principle of individuation, and the
division of being into being-in-actuality and being-in-
objective-potency. In outlining his speciﬁc opinions,
however, Francis does not hesitate to oppose the mature
position of Scotus. Meyronnes criticizes Scotus’ doctrine
of formal nonidentity ex natura rei, and instead deﬁnes the
formal distinction as founded on really different intrinsic
modes inhering in the same thing.
364 F
Francis of Meyronnes

Among ancient authorities, Francis of Meyronnes
favors Augustine and the Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopa-
gite, and even compiled selected texts with commentary
for each of these authors. His use of the Pseudo-Dionysius
is idiosyncratic, perhaps deriving from his stated belief
that Dionysius received from Paul formal instruction in
the content of the Beatiﬁc Vision. Meyronnes treats the
Pseudo-Dionysius’ works as a guide to positive knowledge
about God in this life, interpreting these treatises of Greek
negative theology in terms of fourteenth-century western
scholasticism.
Augustine likewise exerted a powerful inﬂuence on
Francis’ realism. While rejecting all arguments from rea-
son for the necessary existence of divine ideas, Francis
claims on the authority of Augustine that they do exist.
He distinguishes these inﬁnite and exemplary ‘‘theological
ideas’’ from ‘‘metaphysical ideas.’’ Ideas in the theological
sense are foundational relations, distinct from formal rela-
tions in that foundational relations require only the foun-
dation to exist, and not the term, whereas both must exist
in the case of a formal relation. Francis identiﬁes ideas in
the metaphysical sense as the ideas of Plato, properly
understood, and not as Aristotle presents them; indeed,
Francis calls Aristotle the ‘‘worst metaphysician’’ for
having
misunderstood
Platonic
ideas.
Presumably,
Meyronnes interprets Platonic ideas through Augustine,
for the only work Meyronnes cites as being written
by Plato is Porphyry’s Isagoge to the Categories. For
Meyronnes, ‘‘idea’’ in the metaphysical sense, ‘‘quiddity,’’
and the ‘‘being of essence’’ (esse essentiae) all refer to the
same thing: the formal nature of a reality, abstracted from
all intrinsic modes, including existence, actuality, reality,
and contingency. As such, the quiddities are independent
of any rational or real relation of production and contem-
plation. With respect to the being of essence, creatures are
said to be in (objective) potency prior to being in actuality
and having the mode of existence (esse existentiae).
Francis of Meyronnes argues for the priority of the
will over the intellect in the divine determination and
knowledge of contingent propositions. Following Scotus,
Francis divides God’s determination into four logically
ordered instants (instants of nature), corresponding to
the divine essence’s presentation of the terms of all possi-
ble propositions to the intellect, said intellect’s generation
of necessary and contingent propositions, the determina-
tion of contingent propositions through the action of the
will, and, ﬁnally, the knowledge of these propositions by
the divine intellect.
Propositions, as complexes of things existing together
or divided, have real (subjective) existence, and on them is
founded the proposition as it exists objectively in the
mind. Francis bases this subjective existence on the real
identity and formal distinction of extramental beings,
such as ‘‘man’’ and ‘‘white.’’ For as these beings are really
the same thing, a formal relation holds between them, and
a formal relation requires the existence of both term and
foundation. Objective mental existence comes about
through intuitive cognition, in this life, based on infallible
human sensation; intuitive cognition can occur through
species. In intuitive cognition, the mind grasps the entire
thing, including all its really identical (and formally dis-
tinct) modes, including existence. In contrast, abstractive
cognition occurs when the mind considers merely the
essence, ‘‘quidditatively in quidditative being,’’ which
Francis identiﬁes as a concept of ﬁrst intention. Francis
develops two other types of cognition, namely discursive
and inferential (illative) cognition, the latter being the
means by which the rational soul is self-aware. Cognition
itself is really identical with a relation to the cognized
being, and so not even God could cause an intuitive
cognition of a nonexistent.
Francis’ doctrine of relations also plays a major role
in his natural philosophy. Place is the presentiality
(praesentialitas) of the thing to God, that is, the relation
of the located thing to the eternal and ubiquitous
unmoved mover; motion involves changing presentiality,
and hence is a ﬂuxus formae rather than a forma ﬂuens.
Time is a foundational relation of the succession of
places, and therefore is, in Meyronnes’ words, ‘‘the ﬂux
of presentiality to God’’ (In II Sent. 2.14). As a conse-
quence, all created reality is mobile, at least metaphori-
cally: God has the power to make the Earth revolve (but
does not).
Francis of Meyronnes was a proliﬁc sermonist;
Roßmann praises the ascetic and mystical quality of
his sermons and declares them closer to the devotio
moderna than those by Meister Eckhart (Roßmann
1972). Yet studies of Meyronnes’ other works touching
on ascetic and mystical topics have revealed that he focuses
on detached, rational analysis. Speaking of his commen-
tary on the writings of Pseudo-Dionysius, one scholar
observed ‘‘Meyronnes seems to hide his own religious
experience behind the objectivity of the discussion’’
(Alliney 2002).
Francis authored a treatise on apostolic poverty, argu-
ing for the radical poverty of Christ and the Apostles. In
his political writings, Francis was a papal hierocrat, and in
a quodlibetal question, he managed to align his political
philosophy with his biggest patrons, maintaining that
the Kingdom of Naples was all the more noble because it
was subordinate to the Church. Francis remained an ally
of John XXII and produced pro-Papal consultations on
Francis of Meyronnes F
365
F

ongoing theological and philosophical controversies,
including the 1324 proceedings against William of Ockham
and the Lectura in Apocalypsim of Peter John Olivi.
See also: ▶Augustine ▶Dante Alighieri ▶Divine Power
▶John Duns Scotus ▶Meister Eckhart ▶Peter Lombard
▶Peter John Olivi ▶Platonism ▶Pseudo-Dionysius, the
Areopagite ▶William of Ockham
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Francis of Meyronnes (1966) In libros sententiarum, Quodlibeta,
Tractatus
formalitatum,
De
primo
principio,
Terminorum
theologicalium, Declarationes, De univocationes, Venice 1520,
(repr. Minerva, Frankfurt am Main)
Francis of Meyronnes (1956) Sermo: ‘‘Absit,’’ ed. Jurie´ J, De redactione
inedita sermonis ‘Absit.’ Studi Francescani 53:3–54
Francis of Meyronnes (1940–1942a) Quaestio de subiectione universalis
et plenitudine potestatis seu principatus monarchae ad hierarcham,
ed. de Lapparent P, L’oeuvre politique de Franc¸ois de Meyronnes, ses
rapports avec celle de Dante. Archives d’Histoire Doctrinale et
Litte´raire du Moyen Age 15–17, 5–151:76–92
Francis of Meyronnes (1940–1942b) Quodlibet, q. 12 (Tractatus de
principatu regni Siciliae), ed. de Lapparent P, pp 94–116
Francis
of
Meyronnes
(1941)
Tractatus
de
Vita
Contemplativa,
ed. Roth B, Franz von Mayronis u¨ber das kontemplative Leben.
In:
Freudenreich
I-M
(ed)
Kirchengeschichtliche
Studien.
P. Michael Bihl als Ehrengabe dargeboten. Alsatia, Colmar, pp
114–144
Francis of Meyronnes (1954) Flores Dionysii (prologus), ed. Barbet J,
Le prologue du commentaire dionysien de Franc¸ois de Meyronnes.
Archives d’Histoire Doctrinale et Litte´raire du Moyen Age 29:183–
191; De mystica theologia, cap. 1, ed. Alliney G (2002) Francesco di
Meyronnes e lo pseudo-Dionigi. I Flores Dionysii sul primo capitolo
del De mystica theologia. In: Bakker PJJM (ed) Chemins de la pense´e
me´die´vale. E´tudes offertes a` Ze´non Kaluza. Brepols, Turnhout, pp
255–288
Francis of Meyronnes (1955) Sermones de conceptione Beatae Virginis
Mariae, ed. Pompei A, Sermones duo Parisienses saec. XIV De
conceptione
Beatae
Virginis
Mariae.
Miscellanea
Francescana
55:224–263
Francis of Meyronnes (1959) Quaestio ‘‘Utrum in universo secundum
optimam sibi dispositionem sit dare unum monarcham qui
praesideat omnibus temporalibus et nulli temporaliter subsit’’
(Tractatus de principatu temporali), ed. Baethgen F. Dante und
Franz von Mayronis. Deutsches Archiv 15:103–136
Francis of Meyronnes (1961) Principia in I, IV, II, III sententiarum, ed.
Barbet J. Franc¸ois de Meyronnes – Pierre Roger. Disputatio (1320–
1321). Vrin, Paris
Francis of Meyronnes (1972a) Commentarium in IV sententiarum, d. 19,
q. 4, ed. Roßmann H. Die Hierarchie der Welt. Gestalt und System
des Franz von Meyronnes OFM mit besonderer Beru¨cksichtigung
seiner Scho¨pfungslehre. Dietrich Coelde, Werl in Westfalen, pp
127–131
Francis of Meyronnes (1972b) Quaestio ‘‘Utrum Deus possit acceptare
hominem in puris naturalibus existentem tamquam dignum vita
aeterna,’’ ed. Roßmann H. Dietrich Coelde, Werl in Westfalen, pp
251–257
Francis of Meyronnes (1972c) Sermo: ‘‘Quodcumque ligaveris super
terram. . .,’’ partial ed. Roßmann H. Dietrich Coelde, Werl in
Westfalen, pp 239–242
Francis of Meyronnes (1994–1997) Tractatus de intuitiva et abstractiva
notitia, ed. Etzkorn GJ. Franciscus de Mayronis: a newly-discovered
treatise on intuitive and abstractive cognition. Francisc Stud
54:15–50
Francis of Meyronnes (2004) Tractatus de transcendentibus, ed. Mo¨hle
H. Der Tractatus de Transcendentibus des Franciscus de Mayronis,
Peeters, Leuven
Francis of Meyronnes (2005a) Commentarium in I sententiarum
(Conﬂatus), d. 35, ed. Mohle H, Aristoteles, Pessimus metaphysicus.
Zu einem Aspekt der Aristotelesrezeption im 14. Jahrhundert. In:
Honnefelder L, Wood R, Dreyer M, Aris M-A (eds) Albertus Magnus
und
die
Anfa¨nge
der
Aristoteles-Rezeption
im
lateinischen
Mittelalter: von Richardus Rufus bis zu Franciscus de Mayronis.
Aschendorff, Mu¨nster, pp 727–755
Francis of Meyronnes (2005b) Tractatus de esse essentiae et existentiae,
ed. Sousedı´k S, Franciscus de Mayronis a jeho trakta´t De esse
essentiae et existentiae. Studia Neoaristotelica 2:271–322
Francis of Meyronnes (2006a) Commentarium in I sententiarum
(Conﬂatus), d. 38, qq. 1–4, ed. Fiorentino F, Francesco di Meyronnes.
Liberta` e contingenza nel pensiero tardo-medievale. Antonianum,
Roma, pp 219–246
Francis of Meyronnes (2006b) Quodlibet, qq. 6–7, ed. Sousedı´k S,
Frantisˇek
Mayronis
o
pomyslny´ch
jsoucnech.
Studia
Neoaristotelica 3:196–239
Secondary Sources
Bos EP (2003) Francis of Meyronnes on relation and transcendentals. In:
Pickave´ M (ed) Die Logik des Transzendentalen. Feschrift fu¨r Jan A.
Aertsen. Gruyter, Berlin, pp 320–336
Cesalli L (2007) Le re´alisme propositionnel: Se´mantique et ontologie des
propositions chez Jean Duns Scot, Gauthier Burley, Richard Brinkley
et Jean Wyclif. Vrin, Paris, pp 218–222
Hoffmann T (2002) Creatura intellecta. Die Ideen und Possibilien bei
Duns Scotus mit Ausblick auf Franz von Mayronis, Poncius und
Mastrius. Aschendorff, Mu¨nster
Lambertini R (1999) Da Egidio Romano a Giovanni da Parigi. Da Dante
a Marsilio. Fautori ed espositori della teocrazia papale agli inizi del
Trecento. In: Andreatta A, Baldini AE, Dolcini C, Pasquino G (eds) Il
pensiero politico: idee teorie dottrine. UTET, Turin, I: 209–254, at
228–235
Maurer A (1990) Francis of Meyronnes’ defense of epistemological real-
ism. In: Maurer A (ed) Being and knowing. Studies in Thomas
Aquinas and later medieval philosophers. PIMS, Toronto, pp
311–331
Mo¨hle H (2007) Formalitas und modus intrinsecus. Die Entwicklung der
scotischen Metaphysik bei Franciscus de Mayronis. Aschendorff,
Mu¨nster
Rossini M (1993) Scientia Dei conditionata: Francesco di Meyronnes e i
futuri contingenti. Medioevo 19:287–322
Roth B (1936) Franz von Mayronis OFM, Sein Leben, seine Werke, seine
Lehre vom Formalunterschied in Gott. Franziskus-Druckerei, Werl
in Westfalen
Schabel C (2000) Theology at Paris, 1316–1345: Peter Auriol and the
problem of divine foreknowledge and future contingents. Ashgate,
Aldershot, pp 149–158
Tachau KH (1986) Vision and certitude in the age of Ockham. Brill,
Leiden, pp 327–332
366 F
Francis of Meyronnes

Francisco de Vitoria
HOLLY HAMILTON-BLEAKLEY
Brampton
UK
Abstract
Francisco de Vitoria (1485–1546) was a Spanish theolo-
gian and philosopher known in the history of philosophy
as a major ﬁgure in the revival of the study of Thomism in
the sixteenth century. He used Thomism to formulate
inﬂuential responses to the spiritual and political issues
of his time, such as the Reformation, the nature of sover-
eignty and the notion of the sovereign state, imperial
expansion, and the rights of conquered peoples. As
a Counter-Reformation theologian, he asserted the
goodness and rationality of man’s nature, which were
manifested in his natural inclinations, irrespective of
man’s reception of grace or spiritual status. His doctrine
of natural inclinations had political consequences, and
made him an opponent not only of Lutheranism but
also of republicanism, as political authority – and partic-
ularly monarchy – was natural to man, not a result of
his sinfulness, and its purpose was to enable man to
fulﬁll his God-given human nature. The source of polit-
ical authority was God, and God was therefore the source
of human law, which men must see as binding in con-
science. Yet, Vitoria contributed not only to the idea of
a God-given mandate for the exercise of political power,
but also to the idea of the limits of political power,
as it must be constrained by the fulﬁllment of man’s
humanity.
Francisco de Vitoria (1485–1546) was a Spanish theolo-
gian and philosopher who was a leading ﬁgure in the
sixteenth-century revival of Thomism, a movement
which was central to early modern ideas about natural
law, individual rights, and the state. This revival of
Thomism is associated most closely with the ‘‘School of
Salamanca’’ or, the ‘‘Second Scholastic’’, a group of
Spanish theologians and jurists spanning two generations
who wrote immensely inﬂuential works on moral and
political philosophy. Vitoria is known as the ‘‘father’’ of
this school, as nearly all of these scholars were either his
students, or students of his students.
Vitoria was born around 1485. He entered the Domin-
ican Order in Burgos in 1506. In 1509 he went to study in
Paris at the Colle`ge de Saint Jacques, where he eventually
studied under the Thomist Peter Crockaert, who, in
a pivotal move for the history of ideas, changed the set
text in his lectures from Lombard’s Sentences to Aquinas’
Summa theologiae. Vitoria continued this tradition when
he himself became a professor. Vitoria returned to Spain in
1523, and was elected Prime Chair of Theology at the
University of Salamanca in 1526.
Vitoria published nothing of his own during his life-
time; what we have of his works are notes taken by his
students during his lectures. Vitoria lectured on the
Summa theologiae as well as on the Sentences, and he also
gave several relectiones, which were longer and more for-
mal lectures given at a certain time during the year on
a particular academic problem. Since they have a distinct
focus, these ‘‘relectiones’’ are, therefore, an especially good
source for becoming familiar with Vitoria’s thought on
a variety of different subjects.
Vitoria’s fame comes not because of his role in the
revival of Thomism, but rather because of his role in
employing Thomism to develop a political philosophy
which was responsive to the challenges of sixteenth-
century Europe, such as the notion of the sovereign
state, the Reformation and the questions which it raised
about the nature of the power of the church as well as the
power of the state, and the conquest of America and
imperial expansion. He is known in the history of polit-
ical thought, perhaps most famously, for his writings on
‘‘international relations,’’ by which is meant his theory
of the just war, the legitimation of the Spanish conquest
of America, and his theory of the rights of the American
Indians as the indigenous people of a conquered terri-
tory. His Thomist approach enabled him to formulate
a theory of rights in which all human beings had rights
because of their inborn rational nature, rights not
dependent upon God’s grace or the righteousness of
the individual. He could, therefore, assert that the
Indians had rights over themselves and their property
although they were non-Christians. Because much
scholarly work on Vitoria has been done on his treat-
ment of these subjects of human rights and imperial
expansion (Fernandez-Santamaria 2005:58–59; Pagden
and Lawrance 1991:xxxi–xxxii and 383–387; Tierney
1997:255–256), I will focus on his responses to other
challenges of his time, speciﬁcally the sovereignty of the
state and some of the theological and political problems
posed by the Reformation. Addressing these issues will
allow us to look at some of the more basic elements of
his political thought, namely, his theory of natural law,
natural inclinations, naturalness of the state, and the
location of sovereignty. I regret that for reasons of space
it will not be possible to treat his theory of the church in
this article.
Francisco de Vitoria F
367
F

Vitoria’s most systematic treatment of political ques-
tions is the De potestate civili, which is one of his earliest
relectiones, delivered in 1528. The political theory that
Vitoria lays out here was formed in the shadow of two
major rebellions: the comuneros revolt of 1521–1522 and
the Peasants’ War of 1525. The ﬁrst was republican in
inspiration, the second, Catholics saw as a direct result of
Lutheranism (Cargill Thompson 1984:99–100). Despite
the differences between republicanism and Lutheranism,
both led to what Vitoria perceived as disrespect for polit-
ical authority. Neither saw the state as natural to man in
his present condition, and therefore both portrayed polit-
ical authority in a way that could lead to discontent and
unrest.
Vitoria’s thinking on political issues throughout his
career was of course not limited to countering republican-
ism and Lutheranism. However, these movements set the
agenda for Vitoria in two ways. First, the fact that they
‘‘dissuade . . . simple men from due obedience to their
princes . . .’’ was to make the preservation of the civil
order a central theme in Vitoria’s political thought; anar-
chy was to be avoided through political obedience and
a strong monarchy. Second, the way in which he tries to
counter these issues in De potestate civili – by proving
the necessity and legitimacy of political authority through
showing that political society is the arrangement best suited
to man because it fulﬁlls his rational, human nature – sets
the framework of his theory which was to endure through-
out his work. I will ﬁrst brieﬂy set out some republican and
Lutheran arguments and their political consequences, and
then look at the way Vitoria used elements in his theory to
directly or indirectly counter these arguments.
In 1520, the cities of Castile rebelled against Charles
I in what is now known as the Comunero movement. Due
to various grievances committed by the king, the members
of these cities grouped together to form a body of repre-
sentatives (procuradores) which saw itself as a parliamen-
tary institution, which could convene itself and legislate
without regard to the king’s will (Fernandez-Santamaria
1977:55). Although the movement was crushed by royal
forces in 1522, the fundamental questions which it raised
about the nature of sovereignty were kept alive through
the publication of the Tractado de republica in 1521, writ-
ten by Trinitarian friar Alonso de Castrillo, who was
sympathetic to the movement (Fernandez-Santamaria
2005:292).
In his treatise, Castrillo had tried to discredit the idea
of royal power, arguing that the political servitude which it
represented was far from natural. According to Vitoria, the
republican cause ‘‘denied that kingly power or any kind of
rule by a single person comes from God’’ and afﬁrmed
‘‘that all sovereigns, generals, and princes are tyrants
and robbers of human liberty’’ (De potestate civili, 1.5,
trans. in Pagden and Lawrance 1991). Instead, they
argue that ‘‘man was born free,’’ since in the state of
innocence ‘‘no man was master and no man was slave.’’
God has never decreed that men ‘‘should suffer the
dominion of some other man who had violently arro-
gated sovereignty to himself,’’ which is the way in which
they portray the relationship of a king to his subjects. The
result of these arguments is that they ‘‘stir up sedition
against our rulers.’’
In Vitoria’s view, Lutheranism, too, led to political
disobedience, but for different reasons. Luther’s main
political work, Secular Authority: To What Extent It Should
Be Obeyed, appeared in March, 1523, and argued that
there were limits to political authority, which should not
be overstepped by the ruler. These limits were a result of
Luther’s view of the purpose of government, which in turn
resulted from his view of the nature of man. Man in his
human nature is sinful and naturally inclined to act
against the law which God has given to him; political
authority, which is ordained of God, is founded solely to
restrain these natural inclinations for evil and malice. Its
purpose is to ‘‘punish the wicked and protect the just.’’ It
is, therefore, a purely temporal authority; that is, it’s laws
‘‘extend no further than the body, goods and outward,
earthly matters,’’ such as maintaining order and peace
(Von Weltlicher Oberkeit, in Luther and Calvin on Secular
Authority, ed. Ho¨pﬂ). Thus, if secular rulers ‘‘command
anything that is contrary to God’s word or which involves
disobedience to God, they must not be obeyed (Cargill
Thompson 1984:97).’’
Vitoria’s basis for refuting both of these positions is his
view of the origin and purpose of political society and,
therefore, of political authority. This, in turn, is founded
on his theory of natural law and man’s natural inclina-
tions, so I will turn to this aspect of his theory ﬁrst.
Following Aquinas, Vitoria maintains that there are
four varieties of law: eternal law, natural law, human law,
and divine law. Eternal law is God’s dictate of practical
reason which governs all of his creation, and natural law is
the participation of rational creatures in this summa ratio.
It was accessible to man in two ways; the ﬁrst way was
through a set of ‘‘ﬁrst’’ principles self-evident (per se nota)
to man’s understanding. Per se nota principles were known
to man through a habit called synderesis. They consisted of
principles such as ‘‘good is to be done and evil avoided’’
and ‘‘do unto others as you would have others do unto
you,’’ and could be recognized as true by everyone. These
were regarded among scholastics as implanted by God in
man, and were proof of man’s inherent rationality and
368 F
Francisco de Vitoria

sense of justice, which could be developed through good
education and experience.
The second way in which natural law was recognizable
to man was through divinely implanted natural inclina-
tions towards certain ends. Just as in speculative reasoning
there are principles which are per se nota, so too there are
principles which are per se nota in practical reasoning. Yet,
the process by which these principles are known is differ-
ent for each. In the case of practical reasoning, man knows
the per se nota principles through natural inclinations
which he has; these natural inclinations thus indicate the
way in which God has ordered man to live, and therefore
indicate precepts of the natural law. Vitoria explains: ‘‘if
a thing is against natural inclination it is prohibited,
if it is according to natural inclination it is a precept’’
(Comentario al tratado de la ley, trans. in Pagden and
Lawrance 1991).
It was through his theory of natural inclinations that
Vitoria was able to offer some of his strongest refutations
of Luther – both of Luther’s concept of man, as well as of
his concept of political society. Although Vitoria discusses
his notion of natural inclinations in his commentary on
qu. 94 of the Summa without mentioning theories which
may be opposed to it, in his De homicidio he offers
a sustained defense of natural inclinations, speciﬁcally
directing his arguments against current ideologies in
which ‘‘nature and grace, law and natural inclination’’
are opposed to one another (Relecciones, ed. Gatino, 3:26).
Vitoria recognizes here that there is a diverse group of
scholars and theologians arguing for the opposition of
man’s nature and the law of God: some are Aristotelians,
who argue that although man by nature is inclined to seek
what is good, the ‘‘good’’ which man naturally seeks is
really the ‘‘pleasurable,’’ which is most often sinful and
against the law of God; others note that man is naturally
inclined against what is demanded by virtue and the law of
God, such as the commandment to have charity toward
others and love God more than himself, as man is natu-
rally inclined to preserve himself before others. Still others
show through Scripture that the natural inclination of
man is to sin and seek out what is bad. Yet, the conclusion
drawn through all these arguments is the Lutheran con-
tention that ‘‘all the works of every human being are
sinful,’ and man is able to do nothing good of himself
without the grace of God.
Vitoria asserts that he cannot believe that ‘‘human
nature, which an all powerful and most wise God formed
in his image,’’ could have been created with bad inclina-
tions and a depraved character, such that he would be
inclined ‘‘to his own destruction and condemnation.’’
Rather, ‘‘the inclination of human nature is immediately
from God Himself,’’ and it is therefore impossible for that
inclination to be toward what is bad. God is the author of
human nature, and Vitoria invokes Aristotle to explain
how this authorship is to be understood: God created man
with his particular form, by which is dictated man’s end,
and whatever gives form, also determines the conse-
quences of that form. Thus, only God can be the cause of
human inclinations, which are toward the end which God
has established for man.
If we say therefore, that ‘‘man is naturally inclined to
the bad,’’ that inclination, along with the motions toward
sin which follow from that inclination, must be imputed
to God. Since God would not give a particular end to man,
and a nature completely repugnant to it, Vitoria argues
that nature inclines us only toward the good, and ‘‘thus
everything that is contrary to natural inclination is bad.’’
Vitoria’s theory of the origin of the state – and there-
fore of civil power – follows directly from this notion of
natural inclinations. Man is naturally inclined toward
political society, ﬁrst because he lacks certain physical
qualities which would enable him to live alone; and sec-
ond, man’s ‘‘rational soul itself makes man need partner-
ship’’ (De potestate civili, 1.2). Both man’s reason and his
will can only be perfected by interacting with others. So,
God ‘‘was responsible for endowing men with the neces-
sity and inclination which ensure that they cannot live
except in partnership.’’ The city is the partnership which
best fulﬁlls these needs, and is therefore the most natural
arrangement for men to establish. In this way, the city is
God-given, since God has given man his form, and man’s
form dictates that he live in partnership with others.
Furthermore, since God made man ‘‘part of the republic,’’
he also gave man a natural inclination toward the social
virtues, such as to love the common good more than his
own proper good (De homocidio:31).
Vitoria uses this notion of political society fulﬁlling
man’s God-given human nature as the foundation of his
arguments for political obedience, and even (against the
republicans) for the divine right of kings. First, since
political society is God-given, and the city cannot exist
without some ruling power, civil power is also God-given.
Throughout his work, Vitoria cites many times the Pauline
phrase ‘‘whosoever resisteth the power, resisteth the ordi-
nance of God.’’
In order to counter republican arguments, it is essen-
tial to identify the location of this power. Vitoria attempts
this in De potestate civili. He maintains that ‘‘ﬁrst and per
se’’ civil power resides in the commonwealth itself, for
‘‘there is no convincing reason why one man should have
more power than another’’ (1.4). Thus, the common-
wealth has this power as a whole body, and it has this
Francisco de Vitoria F
369
F

power collectively ‘‘over the individual members of the
commonwealth’’ (1.5).
However, it is impossible for the whole common-
wealth to exercise this power over itself. It is therefore
‘‘necessary that the government and administration of
affairs be entrusted to certain men who take upon them-
selves the responsibilities of the commonwealth and look
after the common good . . ...’’ Although republicans
declare that there cannot be liberty in any system other
than government ‘‘by the whole commonwealth,’’ Vitoria
dismisses this idea, arguing that there is no more liberty in
rule by the multitude than there is in a monarchy or
aristocracy (1.8). Yet, Vitoria is interested in justifying
royal power in particular. The establishment of rulers –
indeed, of a king – does not represent political servitude;
for, not only does the naturalness of political society show
that the relationship between king and subject is not one
of unnatural dominion, but also, the commonwealth, as
possessor of civil power over itself, sets up its own sover-
eign to administer its affairs.
Initially, Vitoria held that even though sovereignty
resides in the body of the people, the ruler does not have
his power from the people: ‘‘sovereigns are set up by the
commonwealth, [but] royal power derives immediately
from God . . . therefore we must say about royal power
exactly what we have asserted about the power of the
commonwealth, namely that it is set up by God and by
natural law’’ (1.5). Vitoria then used this idea of the divine
right of kings to argue for political obedience. Because
God is the source of political authority, he is also, there-
fore, the source of human law, for ‘‘a work of God is not
only one which He performs Himself, but also one which
He produces through intermediate causes’’ (3.1). For
Vitoria, this means, contra Luther, that human laws are
binding in conscience. It is incorrect to say that ‘‘secular
power is solely temporal,’’ and therefore ‘‘has nothing to
do with conscience.’’ Although he maintains a distinction
between temporal and spiritual authority, Vitoria’s notion
of man and the divine origins of the ruler’s power allows
him to dismiss the limits which Luther had placed on
secular power. Rather, Christ has decreed obedience to
rulers, and their laws therefore are binding in conscience,
just as divine laws are.
These ideas of the ruler’s power and his laws coming
directly from God are conservative to be sure; the most
likely explanation for them is Vitoria’s fear of anarchy and
desire for political order. In Vitoria’s later writings, he
seemed to drop the idea of the ruler’s power coming
directly from God, and asserted instead that the ruler’s
power came wholly from the people; however, he contin-
ued to maintain the importance of a strong monarchy, as
well as the fact that human law was ordained of God
and
was therefore
binding
in
conscience
(Tierney
1997:294–295).
Yet, Vitoria’s conservative conclusions were based
on Thomist principles of the rationality and goodness of
man. These principles allowed him to set out two essen-
tial political doctrines. First, political power, although
ordained of God, was separate from spiritual power – an
idea that was to become crucial with the rise of the mon-
arch as head of state and of church, as with Henry VIII.
Second, the individual as political subject was a rational
being who had certain natural inclinations, pointing
toward his end as a human being. The fulﬁllment of
these inclinations gave political power its purpose, but
also its limitations. The agenda of political authority was
written according to man’s God-given needs and rights,
not according to his unworthiness, or the ruler’s desire for
power. From these foundations, Vitoria would contribute
to the idea of a just and limited secular power in a way that
Lutheranism never could. Although his successors of the
‘‘second scholastic’’ were to come to different conclusions
than Vitoria as they faced their own problems and fought
their own ideological battles, they owed to him the begin-
nings of a crucial project to reinsert man’s inherent ratio-
nality and goodness into the heart of sixteenth-century
political thought.
See also: ▶Natural Law ▶Natural Rights ▶Thomas
Aquinas
▶Thomas
Aquinas,
Political
Thought
▶Thomism
Bibliography
Primary Sources
de Vitoria Francisco (1932–1952) Comentarios a la Secunda Secundae de
Santo Toma´s, 6 vols, ed. Beltra´n de Heredia V. Universidad de
Salamanca, Salamanca
de Vitoria Francisco (1933–1935) Relecciones teolo´gicas del Maestro Fray
Francisco de Vitoria: edicio´n crı´tica, con facsı´mil de co´dices y
ediciones
prı´ncipes,
variantes,
versio´n
castellana,
notas
e
introduccio´n, 3 vols, ed. Getino LGA. Imprenta La Rafa, Madrid
de Vitoria Francisco (1952) Comentario al tratado de la ley (In I–II, qq.
90–108). Fragmentos de relecciones. Dicta´menes sobre cambios, ed.
Beltra´n
de
Heredia
V.
Consejo
Superior
de
Investigaciones
Cientı´ﬁcas, Madrid
de Vitoria Francisco (1991) Political writings, ed. and trans. Pagden A,
Lawrance J. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Luther M, Calvin J (1991) On secular authority, ed. and trans. Ho¨pﬂH.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Secondary Sources
Bireley R (1990) The counter-reformation prince. Anti-Machiavellianism
of Catholic statecraft in early modern Europe. University of North
Carolina Press, Chapel Hill
370 F
Francisco de Vitoria

Cargill Thompson WDJ (1984) The political thought of Martin Luther,
ed. Broadhead P. Harvester, Brighton
Fernandez-Santamaria JA (1977) The state, war and peace. Spanish polit-
ical thought in the Renaissance, 1516–1559. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge
Fernandez-Santamaria JA (2005) Natural law, constitutionalism, reason
of state and war. Counter-reformation Spanish political thought, vol
1. Peter Lang, New York
Hamilton B (1963) Political thought in sixteenth-century Spain.
Clarendon, Oxford
Pagden A, Lawrance J (1991) Introduction. In: Francisco de Vitoria,
Political writings, ed. and trans. Pagden A, Lawrance J. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge
Skinner Q (1978) The foundations of modern political thought, 2 vols.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Tierney B (1997) The idea of natural rights. Studies on natural rights,
natural law and church law 1150–1625. Scholars, Atlanta
Future Contingents
SIMO KNUUTTILA
Faculty of Theology
University of Helsinki
Helsinki
Finland
Abstract
The philosophical debate concerning the truth-value of
singular statements about future contingents derives from
Chapter 9 of Aristotle’s treatise De interpretatione. In his
inﬂuential commentary, Boethius assumed that Aristotle
qualiﬁed the validity of the principle of bivalence with
respect to singular future contingent propositions—they
only have the disjunctive truth-value ‘‘true-or-false.’’ Abe-
lard believed that Aristotle assumed that future contingent
statements were true or false, though not determinately
true or false before the actuality of the things to which
they refer. He retained the principle of bivalence for all
assertoric statements, but rejected the universal applica-
tion of the stronger principle that every assertoric state-
ment is determinately true or determinately false in
the sense of having determinate truth-makers. As for
interpreting
Aristotle,
later
medieval
thinkers
were
inclined to follow Boethius rather than Abelard. However,
since theologians usually thought that divine omni-
science presupposed bivalence, the discussion of future
contingents was divided into historical constructions of
Aristotle’s view and the systematic discussions in theol-
ogy which usually followed the Abelardian lines. An
inﬂuential formulation of this approach was put forward
by William of Ockham. Boethius, Thomas Aquinas, and
many others thought that God could know future con-
tingents only because the ﬂux of time was present to
divine atemporal eternity. Peter Auriol argued that
from God’s atemporal knowledge one could not con-
clude that future contingent propositions were true or
false at all. This view found some supporters until it was
damned by Pope Sixtus IV in 1474. Many late medieval
thinkers defended God’s ability to foreknow free acts. This
led to the famous middle knowledge theory of the counter-
factuals of freedom which was put forward by Luis de
Molina in the sixteenth century.
The philosophical debate concerning the truth-value of
future contingents propositions derives from Chapter 9 of
Aristotle’s treatise De interpretatione, where it is asked
whether predictions such as ‘‘There will be a sea battle
tomorrow’’ are true or false, whether they are necessarily
true if true, and whether their truth entails that future
things are inevitable. Some Stoics took Aristotle to deny
that future contingent propositions are true or false, as
Boethius reports in his longer commentary on Aristotle’s
De interpretatione. Future contingent propositions were
regarded as true or false in Stoic logic, and the universally
valid principle of bivalence was taken to imply the prede-
termination of all future events. Boethius regarded the
Stoic view of future contingent propositions as well as
the Stoic characterization of Aristotle’s position as false,
his interpretation being based on the distinction between
deﬁnite and indeﬁnite division of truth and falsity in the
contradictory pairs of propositions. According to Boe-
thius, Aristotle argues that if all pairs of contradictory
propositions deﬁnitely divide truth and falsity and all
propositions are deﬁnitely true or deﬁnitely false, then
everything necessarily occurs as it does. The fact that
contingent future things, events, and states of affairs are
not determined refutes the thesis that all afﬁrmations or
negations are deﬁnitely true or deﬁnitely false. The dis-
junctive pairs of contradictory future contingent proposi-
tions can be said to divide truth and falsity only in an
undifferentiated and indeﬁnite way. Most contemporary
commentators believe that in Boethius’ view these prop-
ositions are neither deﬁnitely true nor deﬁnitely false and
therefore neither true nor false. In answering the Stoic
criticism, Boethius might have thought that future con-
tingent propositions have the disjunctive property of
being true-or-false, which would mean something other
than simply lacking a truth-value. The same view is
ascribed to Ammonius and some other late ancient
thinkers.
Another
contemporary
interpretation
of
Boethius holds that future contingents are not deﬁnitely
Future Contingents F
371
F

true or false, because their truth-makers are not yet deter-
mined, but are true or false in an indeterminate way. No
qualiﬁcation of the principle of bivalence is involved. True
statements are either determinately true or simply (inde-
terminately) true. Boethius’ formulations often suggest
that future contingent propositions are true-or-false with-
out being true or false, but perhaps he was not quite sure
about this.
The past and the present are necessary in Boethius.
Prospective contingent alternatives with respect to a future
event remain open until the relevant causes are settled or
the event takes place and the alternative options vanish.
Even though Boethius developed an elaborated concep-
tion of diachronic future alternatives with respect to
a given future time, he did not associate this with the
idea of simultaneous alternatives at that time. In his opin-
ion the actuality of a state of affairs excludes its possible
alternatives. Correspondingly, he seems to take the truth
of future propositions to mean that things cannot be
otherwise, for the antecedently assumed actuality of future
truth-makers implies that alternative prospective possibil-
ities refer to things that are rendered temporally impossi-
ble by the actualized alternatives.
In his logical works, Peter Abelard argues that future
contingent propositions are true or false, although not
determinately or necessarily so, and takes this to be
Aristotle’s view as well. The difference between future
contingent propositions and other propositions has noth-
ing to do with a difference with respect to bivalence; it
concerns the determinateness or indeterminateness of the
truth and truth-makers of propositions. The central thesis
of Chapter 9 of Aristotle’s De interpretatione is that of all
contradictory pairs of propositions necessarily one part is
true and the other false. This does not imply that one is
necessarily true and the other necessarily false, although
one is true and the other false.
Abelard pays attention to some propositions about
past and present states of affairs the truth and falsity of
which depend on future contingents, such as ‘‘Socrates is
the name of a man going to eat tomorrow’’ or ‘‘He has
spoken falsely,’’ when this is said of a man who said
yesterday that Socrates will eat tomorrow. The truth and
falsity of propositions of this kind are not knowable with-
out knowledge of future contingent states of affairs which
are indeterminate and epistemically inaccessible to human
beings. Hence the propositions have an indeterminate
truth and falsity and do not differ from future contingent
propositions in this respect. While propositions are
indeterminately true or false if their truth depends on
indeterminate future contingent states of affairs, the actual
inherence of truth in propositions of the form ‘‘Socrates will
eat tomorrow’ is true’ is determinate as a present state of
affairs; in this noncausal sense, all propositions are deter-
minately true or false. Abelard also remarks that God
knows whether any proposition is true and false, but this
supranatural knowability does not make things necessary.
In discussing the necessity of the present, Abelard
follows Boethius in stating that what is actual at a certain
point of time is necessary in the sense that it can no longer
be avoided, but he also argues that unrealized alternatives
may be possible at the same time in the sense that they
could have happened at that time. The actuality of
a contingent state of affairs at a speciﬁed future time
does not exclude the nontemporal possibility of simulta-
neous alternatives, nor does the truth of a proposition
about this state of affairs make it necessary. This is the
background of Abelard’s deviation from Boethius’ view of
the truth and falsity of future contingent propositions.
According to Albert the Great and Thomas Aquinas,
Aristotle argues in De interpretatione 9 that future contin-
gent propositions differ from other assertoric proposi-
tions in not being determinately true or determinately
false. Their general view of the structure of Chapter 9 is
similar to that of Boethius. Instead of the Boethian
deﬁnite–indeﬁnite
distinction,
Albert
and
Aquinas
employed the terms ‘‘determinate’’ and ‘‘indeterminate,’’
as Abelard and many other medieval commentators did.
Assertoric propositions are related to truth or falsity in the
same way as their correlates are related to being or
nonbeing. When future things are indeterminate with
respect to being and nonbeing, the contradictory propo-
sitions about them must also be indeterminate with
respect to truth and falsity. A future contingent proposi-
tion and its denial form a disjunction which is necessarily
true. The members of this disjunction are disjunctively
true or false. The indeterminate truth or falsity of
a member of the disjunction does not imply that it is
true or that it is false. It is merely true-or-false. Because
of the prospective indeterminateness of a sea battle, the
propositions pertaining to it must be true or false under
disjunction, being related to either, not to this or that
determinately. Following Boethius, Aquinas thinks that
contingency pertains to the future. Past and present things
are necessary. The absence of the idea of synchronic alter-
natives in Boethius’ approach makes a true proposition
about a future contingent event determinately and neces-
sarily true. In his commentary on De interpretatione,
Aquinas describes this assumption by stating that if some-
thing concerning the future is posited to be true, it is not
possible that this not be in the future (I.13).
372 F
Future Contingents

The interpretation of Aristotle which restricted the
bivalence with respect to future contingent propositions
was also defended by the Arabic commentators al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯
and Averroes. Among Latin authors it was put forward
by many later commentators, such as Walter Burley and
William of Ockham. John Buridan read Aristotle in the
same way as Abelard. All assertoric statements are true or
false though those about future contingents are not deter-
minately true.
Since theologians usually thought that divine omni-
science presupposes bivalence, the discussion of future
contingents was divided into historical constructions of
Aristotle’s view and the systematic discussions in theology
that usually followed the Abelardian lines. Boethius argues
that God is atemporal and has timeless knowledge of
everything. God’s timelessness involves his having the
whole history present to him simultaneously. God’s
knowledge is not foreknowledge, since it is not temporally
located, but the predictions of future contingents are true
or false from the point of view of God’s eternal knowledge
of the things referred to. This approach was very inﬂuen-
tial and was further developed in Aquinas’ theory of God
who grasps all combinations of things at particular times
by one eternal vision. God has an immediate knowledge of
all things and their relative temporal order, though none
of them is past or future with respect to His cognition. The
objects of divine omniscience are necessary by supposition
(i.e., with respect to God’s knowledge and providential
plan), but many of them are contingent with respect to
their proximate causes. God can supranaturally inform
lower intellects about these things—otherwise there
could not be true prophetic predictions. This is how
Aquinas tries to combine the doctrine of divine omni-
science and the lack of deﬁnite truth and falsity in future
contingent propositions.
Medieval critics found the idea of the nontemporal
presence of each instant of time to God’s eternal vision
problematic. Ockham believed, like Scotus, that future
contingent propositions are true or false, that created
wills are nondetermined free causes the acts of which are
contingent, and that God knows these without their being
eternally present to God. Scotus and Ockham argued that
only God and the present things are actual. While Scotus
preferred to distinguish God’s eternal knowledge and
choice from the temporal order sharply, Ockham thought
that they could be treated as temporally past. This led him
to ask how God’s foreknowledge as something past and
ﬁxed is compatible with the contingency of the future
things. Ockham’s answer was that even though God’s
foreknowledge is past, its content is future, and as far as
it is about future contingents, it is itself contingent. This is
the hallmark of what is called the Ockhamist view of
divine foreknowledge—it shows similarities to Abelard’s
analysis.
Many early fourteenth-century authors were inter-
ested in the distinctions between determinate and inde-
terminate truth and falsity. Ockham characterized all
prospective truths, whether necessary or contingent, as
temporally unchanging and therefore determinate, but
there were other suggestions as well. Some authors who
associated the notions of indeterminate truth and falsity
with the denial of bivalence for future contingent propo-
sitions held that these should not be treated as true or false
in theology. One of these was Peter Auriol, who argued
that even God is aware of the future in a way which does
not imply that future contingent propositions are true or
false. This view found some supporters until it was
damned by Pope Sixtus IV in 1474.
Giving up the Boethian–Thomistic view of the atem-
poral presence of the ﬂux of time to God, many authors
wondered how God can foreknow the free decisions of
people. This question was dealt in the theory of middle
knowledge by Luis de Molina (1535–1600). In addition to
the general knowledge of metaphysical possibilities and
historical actualizations in the chosen world, God has
a third kind of knowledge (scientia media) which com-
prises the hypothetical truths about possible beings. In
creating the world God knows of possible free creatures
and what they would do in various possible situations.
Molina’s ‘‘middle knowledge’’ theory about counterfac-
tuals of freedom was actively debated in the sixteenth
and seventeenth century and it has remained a living
theme in the philosophy of religion.
See also: ▶Boethius ▶Logic ▶Peter Abelard ▶Peter
Auriol
▶Truth,
Theories
of
▶Thomas
Aquinas
▶William of Ockham
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Abelard Peter (1919–1927) Philosophische Schriften I. Die Logica
‘Ingredientibus’, ed. Geyer B. Beitra¨ge zur Geschichte der Philosophie
und Theologie des Mittelalters XXI, 1–3. Aschendorff, Mu¨nster
Abelard Peter (1956) Dialectica, ed. de Rijk LM. Wijsgerige teksten en
studies 1. van Gorcum, Assen
Albert the Great (1890) Commentarius super Perihermenias, ed. Borgnet
A. Opera omnia, vol 1. Vive`s, Paris
Ammonius (1998) On Aristotle: On Interpretation 9, trans. Blank D, with
Boethius, On Aristotle: On Interpretation 9, ﬁrst and second com-
mentaries, trans. Kretzmann N with essays by Sorabji R, Kretzmann
N, Mignucci M. Duckworth, London
Future Contingents F
373
F

Aquinas Thomas (1948–1950) Summa theologiae, ed. Caramello P.
Marietti, Turin
Aquinas Thomas (1989) Expositio libri Peryermenias, cura et studio
fratrum praedicatorum. Commissio Leonina Rome; Vrin, Paris;
On Interpretation, trans. Oesterle JT. Marquette University Press,
Milwaukee, 1962
Auriol Peter (1995) Scriptum in I sententiarum, dist. 38–39, ed. Schabel
C. Peter Aureol on divine foreknowledge and future contingents.
Cahiers de l’Institut du moyen-aˆge grec et latin. Universite´ de
Copenhague 65, pp. 63–212
Boethius (1877–1880) Commentarii in librum Aristotelis Perihermeneias
I-II, ed. Meiser C. Teubner, Leipzig; Commentaries on chapter 9 are
translated by N. Kretzmann in Ammonius, On Aristotle: On Inter-
pretation 9, pp 129–191
Buridan John (1983) Questiones longe super librum Perihermeneias, ed.
van der Lecq R. Artistarium 4. Ingenium, Nijmegen
Duns Scotus John (1999) Reportatio IA, 38–40, ed. So¨der J. Kontingenz
und Wissen. Die Lehre von den futura contingentia bei Johannes
Duns Scotus, Beitra¨ge zur Geschichte der Philosophie und Theologie
des Mittelalters, Neue Folge 49. Aschendorff, Mu¨nster
Ockham William (1978) Tractatus de praedestinatione et de praescientia
Dei respectu futurorum contingentium, ed. Boehner Ph, Brown S.
Opera philosophica, vol 2. St. Bonaventure University, St. Bonaven-
ture; trans. in Adams M, Kretzmann N (1981) William of Ockham:
predestination, God’s foreknowledge, and future contingents, 2nd
edn. Hackett, Indianapolis
Secondary Sources
Craig WL (1988) The problem of divine foreknowledge and future con-
tingents from Aristotle to Suarez. Brill, Leiden
Freddoso AJ (1988) Luis de Molina, on divine foreknowledge, Part IV of
the concordia (trans. with introduction and notes). Cornell Univer-
sity Press, Ithaca
Gelber H (2004) It could have been otherwise. Contingency and necessity
in dominican theology at Oxford, 1300–1350. Studien und Texte zur
Geistesgeschichte des Mittelalters 81. Brill, Leiden/Boston
Knuuttila S (2008) Medieval modal theories and modal logic. In: Woods J,
Gabbay DM (eds) Handbook of the history of logic II. Elsevier,
Amsterdam, pp 505–578
Kretzmann N (1998) Boethius and the truth about tomorrow’s sea battle.
In Ammonius, On Aristotle: On Interpretation 9, 24–52
Marenbon J (2005) Le temps, l’e´ternite´ et la prescience de Boe`ce a` Thomas
d’Aquin. Vrin, Paris
Mignucci M (1998) Ammonius’ sea battle. In Ammonius, On Aristotle:
On Interpretation 9, 53–86
Normore C (1982) Future contingents. In: Kretzmann N, Kenny A,
Pinborg J (eds) The Cambridge history of medieval philosophy.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp 358–381
Schabel C (2001) Theology at Paris, 1316–1345: Peter Auriol and the
problem of divine foreknowledge and future contingents. Ashgate,
Aldershot
Sorabji R (1998) The tree deterministic arguments opposed by
Ammonius. In Ammonius, On Aristotle: On interpretation 9, 3–15
374 F
Future Contingents

