Wave Function Collapse
813
W
Primary Literature
1. E. Schr¨odinger: Quantisierung als Eigenwertproblem. Annalen der Physik 79, 361–376 (1926)
2. M. Born: Quantenmechanik der Stossvorg¨ange. Zeitschrift f¨ur Physik 38, 803–827 (1926)
3. J. B. Hartle, St. W. Hawking: The Wave Function of the Universe. Physical Review D 28,
2960–2975 (1983)
Secondary Literature
4. M. Beller: Quantum Dialogue. The Making of a Revolution (University of Chicago Press,
Chicago 1999)
Wave Function Collapse
I.-O. Stamatescu
Under “collapse of the wave function” (or “state vector reduction”) one understands
the ‘sudden’ change of the system’s state in a measurement. This change is not
reducible to classical “information gain”, but is a genuine quantum mechanical con-
cept, directly related to the concept of quantum state. It is especially relevant if we
consider that quantum mechanics describes the behaviour of individual systems. In
the following we shall ﬁrst describe the role of the collapse as a formal concept in
this context, then we shall discuss some variants of physical approaches to collapse.
We shall comment on the notion of “individual systems” in quantum mechanics at
the end of this article.
Collapse in the formalism of quantum theory. (Figure 1).
Fig. 1 Time evolution, E, of ψ and collapse, C, adapted from R. Penrose, The Road to Reality
(2005, 823)

814
Wave Function Collapse
The notion of state of a system is a fundamental concept in physics. In classical
physics all quantities which can be measured upon the system ( “observables”:
e.g., positions and momenta of a point particle) can, in principle, be simultaneously
assigned precise values and this uniquely deﬁnes the state. There is therefore a one
to one relation between states and observations. In quantum theory, however, only a
subset of observables can be ﬁxed at any given moment. A maximally determined
state obtains by ﬁxing a maximal set of simultaneously measurable (“compatible”)
observables, e.g., the position components. But there will be other observables, here
the momenta, which do not posses deﬁnite values in this state. Relating states to
observations is therefore a more special and not trivial procedure.
This also implies that the concept of  measurement becomes essential. Here
we shall only refer to an ideal measurement, which is understood as any physical
arrangement by which a particular observable concerning the system of interest is
ﬁxed to some well deﬁned value. But if the initial state of the system was such
that it did not determine this particular observable beforehand, this indeterminacy
will show up as irreproducibility of the result when repeating the experiment under
the same conditions (same apparatus and identically “prepared” systems). Only the
relative frequency of these results can be associated to a probability distribution de-
termined by the initial state (quantum effects show up here as interference terms and
non-trivial correlations when performing correlated measurements, which cannot be
understood classically  correlations in quantum mechanics). After the measure-
ment, however, the state of the system must be such that the measured observable
is no longer undetermined but has now been ﬁxed to the measured value, hence the
state has changed abruptly and randomly with the given probability distribution. We
speak of collapse of the state anterior to the measurement onto the state in which
the measurement leaves the system.
The formalism of quantum theory allows to write any given state as a  super-
position of other states, in particular of such states where the observable of interest
has well deﬁned values. Collapse, or state reduction means then the survival after
measurement of only that state out of the superposition for which the value of the
observable matches the result of the measurement.
In as much, therefore, that we can speak of individual systems and measurements,
collapse is a logically necessary ingredient in the formalism. The representation
of states as vectors in a  Hilbert space makes the above considerations transpar-
ent and well deﬁned: linear combinations of vectors realize the superposition of
states, with the coefﬁcients giving the weights and their square modulus the corre-
sponding probabilities. Here collapse appears as a sudden and generically random
change in the state vector, as opposed to the continuous, deterministic transfor-
mations of the latter due to the various physical interactions the system may be
subjected to. Accordingly, in this setting the axioms of quantum mechanics include
a measurement and collapse postulate (von Neumann’s “ﬁrst intervention”), besides
the deﬁnition of states as vectors in a Hilbert space (which incorporates the su-
perposition principle), the deﬁnition of observables and expectation values and the
dynamical evolution equations (von Neumann’s “second intervention”).

Wave Function Collapse
815
W
In the following we shall be slightly more formal. The reader who does not want
to be bothered with technical detail may go directly to the Physical approaches.
The quantum mechanical Hilbert space is a generically inﬁnitely-dimensional
linear space over the complex ﬁeld, with an inner scalar product and the associated
norm and distance and which is complete under this norm. The states of a physical
system are represented as vectors in this space and physical interventions upon the
system as  operators acting on these vectors. In particular observables are repre-
sented as hermitean operators, in accordance with the reality of measurements. We
can use ortho-normalized bases and any vector can be decomposed in such a basis as
|ψ⟩=

n
cn |ϕn⟩, ⟨ϕm|ϕn⟩= δmn,
(1)
where we used in the Dirac bracket notation ( Dirac notation) for the vectors and
scalar products (for all these concepts see the corresponding articles). In the follow-
ing we shall only consider so-called pure states ( states, pure and mixed) and use
normalized vectors ∥ψ∥= 1 with ∥· ∥: the Hilbert space norm. The expectation
of any operator A in the state |ψ⟩is then ⟨ψ|A|ψ⟩and all information about possi-
ble observations onto the system in this state is contained in the “density operator”
(“ density matrix”)
ρ = |ψ⟩⟨ψ| =

n,m
cn c∗
m |ϕn⟩⟨ϕm|.
(2)
with the help of which we can obtain expectation values for any observable.
If we choose the basis vectors |ϕn⟩above to be eigenstates of some observable A
A |ϕn⟩= an |ϕn⟩,
(3)
then a measurement of A upon the system in state |ψ⟩will produce some value,
say an0, with probability ⟨ϕn0| ρ |ϕn0⟩= |cn0|2 and leave the system in the state
ϕn0. This means an abrupt change of the state vector which can be seen as a sudden
“rotation” of the latter aligning it with one of its components, chosen randomly with
the mentioned probability:
|ψ⟩=

n
cn |ϕn⟩−→|ψ′⟩= |ϕn0⟩.
(4)
This “reduction of the state vector” (collapse, or von Neumann’s “ﬁrst interven-
tion”) is to be contrasted with the deterministic dynamical evolution of the state
vector due to physical interactions (von Neumann’s “second intervention”), realized
by a  unitary operator acting continuously in time, (written in differential form this
is the  Schr¨odinger equation):
|ψ(t)⟩= U(t, t0) |ψ(t0)⟩.
(5)

816
Wave Function Collapse
Physical approaches to collapse
The conceptual differences between von Neumann’s ﬁrst and second interven-
tions have led to many interpretational problems. In standard quantum theory the
collapse of the wave function is associated with the measurement but the moment of
its occurrence (the “Heisenberg cut”) can be anywhere between the actual interac-
tion of the system with the apparatus and the conscious registration of the result. If
the observer is considered external this appears to introduce a subjective element in
the theory, with corresponding ambiguities ( “Wigner’s friend”). These problems
have prompted many attempts to give the collapse a more physical ground. These
attempts can be divided in three classes: “no collapse” (in deterministic extensions
which reproduce quantitatively quantum theory), “apparent collapse” (in quantum
theory itself within a certain interpretation) and “dynamical collapse” (in the frame
of theories which approximate quantum theory).
The ﬁrst class essentially corresponds to the  hidden variables theories. In this
case there is no collapse at all, the state precisely determines every observable and
the spread of results in a repeated experiment is due to the different values taken by
the “hidden variables” which make that we in fact deal with different initial states
each time, the difference escaping however our control (is hidden). An elaborated
theory hereto has been set up by D. Bohm 1952 and has been further developed
thereafter. It is a celebrated theorem established by J. S. Bell 1964 that demanding
agreement with quantum theory requires non-local hidden variables. This is brought
to a quantitative test in the so called Bell inequalities  Bell’s theorem for correlated
measurements which should be fulﬁlled for local hidden variable theories. Experi-
ments up to date appear to violate these inequalities and show agreement with the
quantum mechanical predictions. Non-local hidden variables, though allowed by
this test, contradict a basic principle of physics –  locality. This, and difﬁculties in
pursuing this program for realistic physical theories diminishes the attractiveness of
hidden variable theories.
In the second case the accent is on illuminating the physics of the measurement
process. We shall here discuss the so called environmental decoherence argument
as raised by H. D. Zeh 1970 and W. H. Zurek 1981. The measurement is realized
by some physical interaction with an “apparatus” understood as a quantum system.
The discussion uses the observation that quantum systems which in some way form
a compound have to be considered as “entangled”, which means that in a generic
state of the compound system the component systems do not possess a separate
state. This is a generic feature of quantum theory and means among others that, in
principle, the notion of isolated system is only an approximation whose goodness
depends on the physical situation. Now, a measurement implies an  entanglement
between the system and the apparatus. Moreover, since the latter essentially is a
macroscopic system, it unavoidably will be entangled with an environment which is
not accessible to our observations (e.g., light scattered from the pointers and leaving
the experimental arrangement). Observations upon the system imply therefore an
averaging over the states of the environment which are associated with different
“pointer” states of the apparatus and are macroscopically different. This leads to the

Wave Function Collapse
817
W
loss of observable interference between the different states of the apparatus. This
simulates therefore a classical statistics.
To be more speciﬁc (again, these technical aspects can be skipped), if ϕ{1}
n , ϕ{2}
n
are bases for the two component systems in a binary compound (say, two atoms in
a molecule) a generic state of the latter is
|⟩=

m,n
cmn |ϕ{1}
m ⟩|ϕ{2}
n ⟩
=

n
cn |ψ{1}
n ⟩|ϕ{2}
n ⟩,
(6)
where for the second equation we used a certain redeﬁnition of the states. This
total wave function generally does not factorize, hence it does not allow any of the
two systems to be in a deﬁnite state. With ‘1’ designating an apparatus and ‘2’ a
system to be measured (6) is also a model for the physical interactions during a
measurement process:
|⟩=

m,n
cmn |ϕ{app}
m
⟩|ϕ{sys}
n
⟩
=

n
cn |ψ{app}
n
⟩|ϕ{sys}
n
⟩.
(7)
The apparatus is entangled both with our system and with the environment. Let us
consider the apparatus as being such that the total wave function can be written as
|⟩=

n
cn |φ{env}
n
⟩|ψ{app}
n
⟩|ϕ{sys}
n
⟩,
(8)
where the environmental states |φ{env}
n
⟩differ macroscopically and are therefore or-
thogonal. Since we have no access to the situation of the environment (we cannot
make correlated experiments involving the states of the environment), according to
the quantum mechanical formalism any information we can obtain about the system
is contained in the “reduced density matrix” where the environmental situation has
been “traced out”:
ρred =

k
⟨φ{env}
k
| |⟩⟨| |φ{env}
k
⟩
=

n
|cn|2 |ψ{app}
n
⟩|ϕ{sys}
n
⟩⟨ψ{app}
n
| ⟨ϕ{sys}
n
|.
(9)
At variance to the general case (2), ρred is diagonal, which implies that we cannot
observe the typical quantum mechanical interference between the different possible
issues of the measurement.

818
Wave Function Collapse
This consequence – the simulation of a classical statistics – of the “unavoidable
entanglement” with an uncontrollable environment stays at the basis of the effect
called  decoherence which is a speciﬁc quantum mechanical effect implying no
further hypothesis. It is always present, independently of interpretations, of mea-
surement models, etc. and is well deﬁned in each physical situation. Its relevance for
the measurement is to “de-correlate” the various possible results, as shown above,
which therefore appear as distributed according to a classical ensemble. This does
not replace collapse (which requires the choice of just one of these possible results,
accompanied by the corresponding acquirement by the system of the correspond-
ing wave function, after the interaction with the apparatus has ceased). However, it
makes possible an alternative point of view, that of an “apparent collapse”. The basis
for this point of view is the so called “relative state interpretation” of quantum me-
chanics proposed by H. Everett III 1957, according to which all possible outcomes
of each measurement coexist but that due to the local nature of the observations
their histories form different branches of the evolution of the total system (in end
effect, the world). ( Many worlds interpretation). The role of decoherence effects
at measurement is now to ensure that no local observations can put into evidence
correlations between the different branches, which are thus completely “unaware”
of each other. From the point of view of one given branch the other components
of the wave function appear therefore as irretrievably lost. Although the system is
still entangled with the rest of the universe and therefore does not possess in princi-
ple a wave function for itself, any observations upon the system within one branch
give the same results as if formal collapse had occurred (the observer is viewed
as part of the quantum world and thus his consciousness follows the same branch-
ing pattern). This perspective calls for cosmological arguments. A picture of these
steadily branching histories is however difﬁcult to realize and, for instance in the so
called “many-worlds” representation, somewhat unintuitive. Related interpretations
are provided, e.g., in the  consistent histories approach of R.B. Grifﬁth 1984 and
M. Gell-Mann and J. B. Hartle 1990.
Finally, the class 3 models deﬁne collapse as a genuine physical effect. This
obtains as a supplementary postulate, which, in the formulation of G. C. Ghirardi,
A. Rimini and T. Weber 1975, ( GRW Theory) states that the wave function of any
spatial degree of freedom collapses spontaneously in a random manner, thereby ﬁx-
ing this degree of freedom to a value randomly chosen with the distribution given by
the wave function before collapse (“spontaneous collapse” or “spontaneous localiza-
tion” hypothesis). There are also other possibilities to achieve a dynamical collapse,
for instance turning the Schr¨odinger equation into a stochastic differential equation
through the addition of a non-linear noise term as proposed by P. Pearle 1976. In
this case the collapse is only approximate, the collapsed wave function retaining an
exponentially falling tail. The main features are, however, similar, namely:
– Even if for each degree of freedom the collapse occurs extremely rarely, the
apparatus being a macroscopic object will be steadily subject to collapses. Since
the (microscopic) system to be measured becomes entangled with the apparatus,
see (7), the collapse acting in the latter and retaining some term, say |ψ{app}
n0
⟩

Wave Function Collapse
819
W
of the superposition automatically selects the correspondingcomponent vector of
the system, |ϕ{sys}
n0
⟩, ﬁxing in this way the corresponding observable and leaving
the system in a pure state. Therefore this model explains measurement.
– Collapse as a physical random process is not compatible with quantum mechan-
ics in the sense that it leads to measurable deviations from the predictions of the
latter. The details (parameters) of this process can be, however, so tuned, that
these effects are detectable only for macroscopic systems, where they are wel-
come, but not for microscopic systems, where to a good precision the standard
quantum mechanical predictions should hold.
To be more speciﬁc, in the discrete random collapse model, for instance, with
a frequency of spontaneous collapses of, e.g., 10−17s−1 the wave function of a
microscopic system will collapse about once in 1010 years, the age of the uni-
verse, while a macroscopic body with typically 1023 degrees of freedom would
undergo a collapse as often as 106 times per second. This is compatible both
with the behaviour of atoms, with the action of an apparatus and with the local-
ized appearance of macroscopic objects, for which the successive spontaneous
localizations of internal degrees of freedom soon pins down the center of mass
of the body. Similar effects are obtained in the noisy dynamics models.
– The collapse is assumed to act on spatial degrees of freedom (“spontaneous local-
ization”) which is reasonable since usual interactions are local. It seems difﬁcult,
however, to obtain relativistic generalizations of the model, in particular for local
quantum ﬁeld theories.
Replacing the formal postulate of “collapse in the measurement” by the postulate
of “general stochastic evolution” of the wave function appears somewhat arbitrary
and one would like to have corroboration from further observations. This, however,
appears very difﬁcult, since the predicted new physics has similar signature with
environmental decoherence and would be masked by the latter even if present. As
long as we have no independent evidence for such a universal stochastic dynamics
its postulate remains however ad hoc.
Note that none of these proposals really solves the problem, namely to provide
a non-formal explanation for the collapse and the measurement process of standard
quantum mechanics: either we modify the theory in an in principle measurable way
(even if we may tune the parameters to ensure that the difference does not show up in
practice), or we only provide an “as if” effect (even if the difference to true collapse
might be of only cosmological relevance). This has prompted Bell to speak of “good
for all practical purposes” in connection with some of these (and others) “solutions”.
Finally, non-local hidden variables might not be seen as a real alternative. But even
if not solving the problem the various theoretical studies contributed very much to
illuminate it.
As already mentioned, the problem of collapse is relevant in an interpretation
of quantum theory pertaining to individual events. Many of the conceptual prob-
lems can be discarded in a statistical interpretation which states that wave function,
collapse, etc. are only mathematical instruments which allow us to make statistical
predictions, and the latter are the only place where theory meets the real world. It
may appear, however, that this ”economical” point of view unnecessarily impov-

820
Wave Function Collapse
erishes the theory. In fact statistics is not a real “thing” or event in itself, but is a
conclusion drawn from the observation of many single events. The theory does refer
to the latter individually and in some special cases does this in an unambiguous way,
for instance when it predicts probability 0 or 1 for a certain event. These are incen-
tives to assume that it does account for individual events generally, even if we cannot
make an intuitive picture of this reference. It would seem, in some sense, quite a mir-
acle and in fact unintuitive to have the extraordinary explanatory power of quantum
theory based on a lucky choice of theoretical “instruments” completely detached
from reality. This does not mean that wave functions, etc. should exist as such in
reality, but that there are things and a structure in reality which support such abstrac-
tions. On the other hand it seems rather difﬁcult to grasp this structure. Its features,
as they might be suggested by the theory, do not appear unambiguous and easily
understandable. The foregoing discussion of the collapse illustrates these problems.
Bell’s inequalities. (See also  Bell’s theorem)
The non-classical character of the correlation in the expectations concerning cor-
related measurements on two entangled subsystems which do not possess states of
their own, i.e., if it is not possible to rewrite (6) as a product of two factors, can
be quantitatively exhibited in corresponding experiments. Assume we measure the
properties A, A′ on system ‘1’ and B, B′ on ‘2’, that is, we use the observables
(hermitean operators) {O} = {A ⊗B, A′ ⊗B, · · · } and construct the quantity:
(A, A′; B, B′) ≡|E(AB) −E(AB′)| + |E(A′B) −E(A′B′)|,
(10)
where E denote the corresponding expectations in the given state of the total system:
E(O) = ⟨|O|⟩.
(11)
Then we have (we choose ∥O∥⩽1, i.e., ∥Oψ∥⩽∥ψ∥, ∀ψ):
(A, A′; B, B′) = |⟨|A(B −B′)|⟩| + |⟨|A′(B + B′)|⟩|
(12)
= |⟨A|(B −B′)⟩| + |⟨A′|(B + B′)⟩|
⩽∥A∥.∥(B −B′)|∥+ ∥A′∥.∥(B + B′)∥
⩽∥(B −B′)∥+ ∥(B + B′)∥
⩽
9
2[∥(B −B′)∥2 + ∥(B + B′)∥2]
(13)
=
9
4[∥B∥2 + ∥B′∥2] ⩽2
√
2.
(14)
If we were dealing with a classical problem, that is the expectations were taken
with respect to a classical ensemble:
Ec(O) =

Odμ,
(15)

Wave Function Collapse
821
W
with dμ a (positive semideﬁnite) probability measure and {O} real valued functions
(assumed to be less than 1 in absolute value) we would have instead:
c(A, A′; B, B′) = |Ec(A(B −B′))| + |Ec(A′(B + B′))|
(16)
⩽Ec(|A|.|B −B′|) + Ec(|A′|.|B + B′|) ⩽Ec(|B −B′|)| + Ec(|B + B′|)
= Ec(|B −B′| + |B + B′|) ⩽2,
(17)
since the general inequality:
∥a∥+ ∥b∥⩽
9
2(∥a∥2 + ∥b∥2)
(18)
which was used in (13) could be replaced by the equality:
|a| + |b| = |a + b.sgn(ab)|
(19)
if a, b are real numbers. The inequality (12,14) can be saturated if B, B′ (A, A′) do
not commute and the subsystems are non-trivially correlated, i.e., |⟩does not fac-
torize and the subsystems are not in pure states. Notice that (16,17) would also hold
if our quantum mechanical problem were reducible to a classical one (local hidden
variables). These are the well known Bell’s inequalities, 1980, and the experimental
evidence to date seems to violate the bound (16,17) and to support (12,14).
Primary Literature
1. D. Bohm, Phys. Rev. 85 (1952) 166
2. H. D. Zeh, Found. Phys. 1 (1970) 69
3. W. H. Zurek, Phys. Rev. D24 (1981) 1516
4. H. Everett III, Rev. Mod. Phys. 29 (1957) 454
5. R.B. Grifﬁth, J. Stat. Phys. 36 (1984) 219
6. M. Gell-Mann and J. B. Hartle, in Complexity, Entropy and the Physics of Information
W. H. Zurek Ed. (Addison Wesley 1990)
7. G. C. Ghirardi, A. Rimini and T. Weber, Il Nuovo Cim. 30B (1975) 133
8. P. Pearle, Phys. Rev. D13 (1976) 857
Secondary Literature
Discussion of these problems beyond that in the standard textbooks can be found,
e.g., in
9. B. d’Espagnat: Conceptual Foundations of Quantum Mechanics (Benjamin 1976); Veiled Re-
ality (Addison Wesley 1995)
10. J. S. Bell: Speakable and Unspeakable in Quantum Mechanics (Cambridge University Press
1987) which contains a collection of J. S. Bell’s papers on the subject

822
Wave Mechanics
11. D. Bohm: Quantum Theory (Dover 1989)
12. E. Joos, H. D. Zeh, C. Kiefer, D. Giulini, J. Kupsch and I.-O. Stamatescu: Decoherence and
the Apperence of a Classical World in Quantum Theory (Springer, 3rd edition 2002)
which also includes an extensive bibliography. A collection of early papers is
13. J. A. Wheeler and W. H. Zurek: Quantum Theory and Measurement (Princeton University
Press 1983)
Wave Mechanics
Marianne Breinig
In 1926 Erwin Schr¨odinger published a consistent mathematical theory of quantum
mechanics, which became known as wave mechanics. He developed a partial dif-
ferential equation, the  Schr¨odinger equation, which now is considered the basic
equation of non-relativistic quantum mechanics. Although wave mechanics was
soon shown to be equivalent to  matrix mechanics, the competing theory of
quantum mechanics developed by Werner Heisenberg in 1925, many physicists fa-
vored wave mechanics, because they considered it more intuitive and because the
 Schr¨odinger equation was often easier to solve than the Heisenberg equation.
The Schr¨odinger equation,
(−ℏ2/(2m))∇2ψ(r, t) + U(r, t)ψ(r, t) = iℏ∂ψ(r, t)/∂t,
describes the time evolution of the wave function ψ(r,t) which characterizes a non-
relativistic particle of mass m, without internal structure, whose potential energy is
given by U(r, t). It can be generalized to a many-body equation

i
[(−ℏ2/(2mi))∇2
i ψ(r1, r2, . . . , t)]
+U(r1, r2, . . . , t)ψ(r1, r2, . . . , t) = iℏ∂ψ(r1, r2, . . . , t)/∂t.
Consider a single particle. The  wave function ψ(r, t) contains all the informa-
tion the rest of the world, called the observer, can have about the particle at time t,
without interacting with the particle. An interaction is called a  measurement. It
changes the information the observer has about the particle and therefore changes
the wave function. Between measurements the wave function evolves determini-
stically.
The wave function is interpreted as the probability amplitude of the particle’s
presence. |ψ(r, t)|2 is the probability density. ( Born rule) The probability that
a particle at time t will be found in a volume element d3r located about r is

