Schr¨odinger’s Cat
685
S
K(2,1) can be interpreted to be the coherent superposition of the probability ampli-
tudes associated with all possible space-time paths starting at 1 and ending at 2.
This concept of the propagator as the coherent  superposition of the probabil-
ity amplitudes has led to Feynman’s postulates, a new formulation of the postulate
concerning the evolution of a physical system.
Primary Literature
1. E. Schr¨odinger: Quantisierung als Eigenwert-Problem. Annalen der Physik. (4) 79 (1926),
361–76, 489–527, 80, S. 437–90, 81 (1926), S. 109–40 (all also reprinted in Schr¨odinger’s
Gesammelte Werke. Braunschweig: Vieweg 1984, vol. 3); Engl. transl.: An undulatory theory
of the mechanics of atoms and molecules. Phys. Rev. 28 (1926), 1049–070.
Secondary Literature
2. C. Cohen-Tannoudji, B. Diu, F. Lalo¨e: Quantum Mechanics. Volume One (Wiley, 1977)
3. J.J. Sakurai: Modern Quantum Mechanics. Revised Edition (Addison Wesley, 1994)
4. B.H. Brandsden, C.J. Joachain: Quantum Mechanics. 2nd edition (Prentice Hall, 2000)
5. K. Przibram (Hrsg.) Schr¨odinger, Planck, Einstein, Lorentz: Briefe zur Wellenmechanik
(Springer, Wien 1963)
6. V.V. Raman, P. Forman: Why was it Schr¨odinger who developed de Broglie’s ideas? Historical
Studies in the Physical Sciences 1 (1969), 291–303
7. L. Wessels: Schr¨odinger’s route to wave mechanics. Studies in the History and Philosophy of
Science. 10 (1977), 311–40
8. H. Kragh: Erwin Schr¨odinger and the wave equation: the crucial phase. Centaurus. 26 (1982),
154–97
9. M. Jammer: The Conceptual Development of Quantum Mechanics. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins
University Press 1966, chap. 5
10. J. Mehra and H. Rechenberg: The Historical Development of Quantum Theory. New York:
Springer, vol. 4
Schr¨odinger’s Cat
Henry Stapp
Erwin Schr¨odinger and Werner Heisenberg were the originators of two approaches,
known respectively as “ wave mechanics” and “ matrix mechanics”, to what is
now called “quantum mechanics” or “quantum theory”. The two approaches appear
to be extremely different, both in their technical forms, and in their philosophical un-
derpinnings. Heisenberg arrived at his theory by effectively renouncing the idea of
trying to represent a physical system, such as a hydrogen  Bohr’s atom model for

686
Schr¨odinger’s Cat
example, as a structure in space–time, but instead, following the lead of Einstein’s
1905 theory of relativity, representing only empirically observable properties, such
as the transition amplitudes between the stationary states of the atom. These ampli-
tudes can be arranged in square arrays of numbers. In Heisenberg’s scheme these
arrays, and other like them, are combined according to certain rules that were later
recognized by Max Born to be the rules of matrix multiplication. The whole scheme
is abstract and mathematical, and avoids using any space–time picture of what is go-
ing on at the atomic level. Schr¨odinger, on the other hand, represented the electron
in an atom by a cloudlike wave surrounding the nucleus. This is a space–time struc-
ture that, superﬁcially at least, is more in line with the classical physical theories of
the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries.
Niels Bohr invited Schr¨odinger to come to Copenhagen to present his ideas, and
to discuss this subject with himself, Heisenberg, and others. Schr¨odinger arrived
in Copenhagen on October 1st, 1926, and was immediately intensively engaged by
Bohr and the others in a “debate” that lasted for days. Eventually, Schr¨odinger be-
come ill, and was conﬁned in Bohr’s home to a bed, upon which Bohr sat, continuing
the discussion. Schr¨odinger ﬁnally exclaimed “If all the quantum jumping is here
to stay, then I am sorry that I ever became involved in quantum mechanics”. Bohr
replied, “But we are glad that you did!”
This “quantum jumping” ( quantum jumps) was the key issue. Schr¨odinger [1]
represented the electron in an atom by a wave that obeyed an equation similar to
the one obeyed by the waves occurring in classical electromagnetic theory, or by
the waves on the ocean. ( Schr¨odinger picture) He believed that his waves would
have a “realistic” interpretation similar to what had come before in physics. But the
Copenhagen group argued that his wave must be viewed as an abstraction that could
be used to compute results of measurements, but that could not be “real” in the same
sense that the waves in classical physics could be imagined to be real. In particu-
lar, the wave had to undergo sudden jumps when a measurement was performed
that revealed new knowledge or information. ( Wave function collapse; see also
 ensembles in quantum mechanics). (Copenhagen interpretation. See  Born rule;
Consistent Histories; Metaphysics in Quantum Mechanics; Nonlocality; Orthodox
Interpretation; Transactional Interpretation).
The problem was how to understand these “jumps”. They are required to occur
because if one accepts that our measuring devices, along with our own bodies and
brains, and the entire surrounding physical universe, are made of atoms, then this
whole lot, taken as a whole, should be subject to the laws of atomic physics. But
these laws entail that the states, ﬁrst of our measuring devices, and then of our
bodies and brains, will generally evolve into continuous smears that represent a
mixtures of “all possibilities” for what might happen, in stark contrast to the partic-
ular possibilities that we experience as actually happening. For example, in the case
of a radio-active nucleus surrounded by an instrument that detects, and signals, the
detection of the decay of the nucleus, the evolving quantum state of the world will
eventually contain contributions associated with the continuum of times at which
the decay might possibly be detected by the instrument. And the state will contain
also contributions associated with the continuum of times at which the brains of the

Schr¨odinger’s Cat
687
S
observers of the instrument might possibly register the signal associated with the
detection, rather than just the part corresponding to the time that observer actually
experiences the signal.
The straight-forward way out of this difﬁculty would be to introduce into the
physical theory some new physical process that would, at some level between
“atomic size” and “macroscopic size”, manage to bring the properties at the macro-
scopic quantum scale into line with what we normally see. That would mean that the
present orthodox theory, which lacks the speciﬁcation of any such process, would
be fundamentally incomplete, and that correct predictions would depend in the end
on the details of this currently unspeciﬁed process.
Bohr, Heisenberg, and Pauli, thinking along the lines initiated by Einstein, rec-
ognized that a neater solution, much more in line with Ockham’s razor, could be
constructed by stipulating, economically, that no such new physical process exists,
and by then using, instead of such a process, the fact the space–time structures
that are needed for the description of relationships between our observations are
the space–time structures occurring in our observations themselves. The theory is
then formulated as a set of rules connecting our observation to the symbols in the
quantum mathematical formalism.
Bringing the knowledge of observers into the theory in this essential and explicit
way is a huge departure from the ideas of classical physics, where the external phys-
ical world is imagined to have, independently of all observers, the space–time
properties that observers can “see” if they happen to look. Their observations play
no essential role. Of course, Einstein had broken the ice with his focusing on the
readings on clocks and rulers that idealized observers could “see”. But behind the
quantum shift was also the emphasis on the (long-standing) philosophical view that
the proper mission of science is to provide us with useful tools, rather than with the
philosophical satisfaction of believing that we know the truth about nature. Clas-
sical mechanics deceived scientists and philosophers for more than two centuries
into believing that it provided them with an essentially true picture of reality. The
founders of quantum theory sought to avoid making the same mistake.
The quantum shift in perspective was proclaimed in the opening words of Bohr’s
1934 book:
The task of science is both to extend the range of our experience and reduce it to order.
Later on he elaborates:
In our description of nature the purpose is not to disclose the real essence of phenomena,
but only to track down as far as possible relations between the multifold aspects of our
experience. ([2] p. 18)
. . . the formalism does not allow pictorial representation along accustomed lines, but aims
directly at establishing relations between observations obtained under well deﬁned condi-
tions. ([3] p. 71)
. . . we must recognize above all, that even when phenomena transcend the scope of clas-
sical physical theories, the account of the experimental arrangement and the recording of
observations must be given in plain language, suitably supplemented by technical physical
terminology. This is a clear logical demand, since the very word “experiment” refers to a
situation where we can tell others what we have done and what we have learned. ([3] p. 72)

688
Schr¨odinger’s Cat
These quotes emphasize the fact that, according to the Bohr/Copenhagen view,
a space–time description comes into the quantum mechanical theory through us;
through our own descriptions of our probing actions and the feedbacks we receive.
There is in orthodox (Copenhagen) quantum mechanics no speciﬁcation of any
observer-independent process that endows even large measuring devices with the
essentially-classical space–time structure that we all intuitively believe each macro-
scopic device possesses, even when we are not seeing or otherwise sensing it. Thus
if a system is conﬁned to a black box that blocks our being able to have any knowl-
edge of its contents, beyond what follows from our knowledge of the preparation,
then the quantum theoretic representation of the contents of the box will be just
the quantum state that evolves from the prepared state via the Schr¨odinger equation
governed evolution.
It is within this context that Schr¨odinger proposed his diabolical experiment.
(Fig. 1) He places his cat in a black box containing a radio-active source that triggers
a device that has a 50% chance to release the contents of a pellet of cyanide that,
if released, will kill the otherwise health cat. Under these conditions, the evolution
in accordance with the Schr¨odinger equation of what’s in the box will eventually
generate a state representing a 50–50 mixture of one part corresponding to a dead
cat and another part corresponding to an alive cat. Since no one can observe what is
happening inside the box, and since the theory does not allow any endowing of any
space–time properties except via observation and Schr¨odinger evolution, the theory
is left in the posture of having to retain, until someone looks inside the box, both
the dead-cat part and the alive-cat part. (Interaction with the environment renders
certain interference experiments unfeasible, but does not eliminate either part.)
This situation seems highly counter-intuitive. But it poses no problem for the
Copenhagen view, which speciﬁes that the entire theory is naught but a set of rules
designed to allow predictions about relationships between observations to be calcu-
lated (See  Matrix Mechanics for an example.) The cat situation is in accord with
what Bohr and company had said all along: Schr¨odinger’s wave is an abstraction
Fig. 1 Source: B.S. De Witt and N. Graham (eds.): The Many Worlds Interpretation of Quantum
Mechanics (Princeton 1973, 156). Reproduced by permission of Princeton University Press

Schr¨odinger Picture
689
S
that can be used to compute expectations about human experiences, but it cannot ra-
tionally be imagined to be real in sense that the waves in classical physical theories
could be imagined to be real.
Heisenberg suggested, later on, that the quantum state could be interpreted as an
“objective tendency” for an observational event to occur. There is no problem with
the idea that there is in the box a “state” that represents both a tendency for the cat
to be found completely dead when some person looks, and also an equally weighted
tendency for the cat to be found to be completely healthy, with no tendency for any
other possibility to be found.
Because science is regarded as a cooperative human endeavour, cats are not in-
cluded among the “we” who “can tell others what we have done and what we have
learned”.
The rational coherence of Bohr’s position rest squarely on his premise that
the purpose of science is to provide us with useful practical tools, not to explain
essences. Schr¨odinger’s cat highlights this fact.
Literature
1. E. Schr¨odinger: Die Gegenw¨artige Situation in der Quantummechanik. Naturwissenschaften
23, 807–812, 823–849 (November 1935)
2. N. Bohr: Atomic theory and the description of nature (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
1934)
3. N. Bohr: Atomic physics and human knowledge (Wiley, New York 1959)
Schr¨odinger Picture
Marianne Breinig
In non-relativistic quantum mechanics, the state of a physical system at a ﬁxed time
t0 is deﬁned by specifying a ket |ψ(t0)⟩belonging to the space ε. ε is a complex,
separable  Hilbert space, a complex linear vector space in which an inner product
is deﬁned and which possesses a countable,  orthonormal basis. The vectors in
such a space have the properties mathematical objects must have in order to be
capable of describing a quantum system.
In the Schr¨odinger picture the time evolution of the state vector is governed by
the  Schr¨odinger equation,
(iℏ∂/∂t)|ψ(t)⟩= H(t)|ψ(t)⟩,
which is a recipe for calculating |ψ(t)⟩when |ψ(t0)⟩is known. The Schr¨odinger
equation is linear. The correspondencebetween |ψ(t)⟩and |ψ(t0)⟩is therefore linear.

