626
Quasi-Classical Limit
Quarks
See  Color Charge Degree of Freedom in Particle Physics; Mixing and Oscillations
of Particles; Particle Physics; Parton Model; QCD; QFT.
Quasi-Classical Limit
N.P. Landsman
The quasi-classical limit of quantum mechanics refers, roughly speaking, to the
limit ℏ→0. Of course, ℏis a dimensionful constant, but in practice one studies
the semi-classical regime of a given quantum theory by forming a dimensionless
combination of ℏand other parameters; this combination then re-enters the theory
as if it were a dimensionless version of ℏthat can indeed be varied.
The oldest example of this procedure is Planck’s radiation formula  black body
radiation; Planck’s constant. Indeed, the observation of Einstein [5] and Planck [8]
that in the limit ℏν/kT →0 this formula converges to the classical equipartition law
may well be the ﬁrst use of the ℏ→0 limit of quantum theory; note that Einstein
put ℏν/kT →0 by letting ν →0 at ﬁxed T and ℏ, whereas Planck took T →∞
at ﬁxed ν and ℏ.
Another example is the one-particle  Schr¨odinger equation, where one may
pass to dimensionless parameters by introducing a typical energy scale ϵ and a typ-
ical length scale λ. In terms of the dimensionless variable ˜x = x/λ, the rescaled
Hamiltonian H/ϵ is then dimensionless and contains ℏthrough the dimensionless
variable ˜ℏ= ℏ/λ
√
2mϵ. In particular, large mass means effectively small ℏ.
Finally, as perhaps ﬁrst remarked by Bogoliubov [1], averages of N single-
particle operators satisfy commutation relations in which ℏhas been replaced by
ℏ/N, so that the limit ℏ→0 is effectively equivalent to the limit N →∞. This
remark lies at the basis of the quantum theory of macroscopic observables (see [19]
and references therein).
The quasi-classical limit has two separate aims, which should be sharply distin-
guished conceptually (although there is considerable overlap in the mathematical
techniques that are used):
1. The approximation of solutions to the quantum-mechanical equations of motion
(e.g. the Schr¨odinger equation) by solutions of the corresponding classical equa-
tions.
2. The derivation of classical mechanics, and more generally the explanation of the
appearance of the classical world, from quantum theory.

