

Modern Birkh¨auser Classics
applied mathematics published by Birkh¨auser in recent decades have
been groundbreaking and have come to be regarded as foundational to
the subject. Through the MBC Series, a select number of these modern
classics, entirely uncorrected, are being re-released in paperback (and
as eBooks) to ensure that these treasures remain accessible to new
generations of students, scholars, and researchers.
Many of the original research and survey monographs in pure and

and Hamiltonian Dynamics
Symplectic Invariants 
Reprint of the 1994 Edition
Helmut Hofer 
 
Eduard Zehnder

Printed on acid-free paper
Springer Basel AG is part of Springer Science+Business Media
www.birkhauser-science.com
Cover design: deblik, Berlin
c
¨
speciﬁcally the rights of translation, reprinting, re-use of illustrations, broadcasting, reproduction on microfilms
owner must be obtained.
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved, whether the whole or part of the material is concerned,
or in other ways, and storage in data banks. For any kind of use whatsoever, permission from the copyright
Helmut Hofer
Institute for Advanced Study (IAS)
Einstein Drive
Princeton, New Jersey 08540
USA
Eduard Zehnder
Switzerland
hofer@math.ias.edu 
ETH Zürich
eduard.zehnder@math.ethz.ch 
Leonhardstrasse 27
ISBN 978-3-0348-0103-4
e-ISBN 978-3-0348-0104-1
DOI 10.1007/978-3-0348-0104-1
⃝1994 Birkhäuser Verlag
Birkhauser Verlag, Switzerland, ISBN 978-3-7643-5066-6
Reprinted 2011 by Springer Basel AG
School of Mathematics
8092 Zürich
2010 Mathematics Subject Classiﬁcation: 37-02, 54H20, 57R17, 58E05
Originally published under the same title in the Birkhäuser Advanced Texts - Basler Lehrbücher series by 
Library of Congress Control Number: 2011924350
Departement Mathematik

Contents
1
Introduction
1.1
Symplectic vector spaces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Symplectic diﬀeomorphisms and Hamiltonian vector ﬁelds . . . . .
6
1.3
Hamiltonian vector ﬁelds and symplectic manifolds . . . . . . . . .
9
1.4
Periodic orbits on energy surfaces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
1.5
Existence of a periodic orbit on a convex energy surface . . . . . .
23
1.6
The problem of symplectic embeddings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
1.7
Symplectic classiﬁcation of positive deﬁnite quadratic forms . . . .
35
1.8
The orbit structure near an equilibrium, Birkhoﬀnormal form . . .
42
2
Symplectic capacities
2.1
Deﬁnition and application to embeddings
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
2.2
Rigidity of symplectic diﬀeomorphisms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
3
Existence of a capacity
3.1
Deﬁnition of the capacity c0 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
3.2
The minimax idea
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
3.3
The analytical setting
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
3.4
The existence of a critical point . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
3.5
Examples and illustrations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
98
4
Existence of closed characteristics
4.1
Periodic solutions on energy surfaces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
105
4.2
The characteristic line bundle of a hypersurface . . . . . . . . . . .
113
4.3
Hypersurfaces of contact type, the Weinstein conjecture . . . . . .
119
4.4
“Classical” Hamiltonian systems
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
127
4.5
The torus and Herman’s Non-Closing Lemma . . . . . . . . . . . .
137
5
R2n
5.1
A special metric d for a group D of
Hamiltonian diﬀeomorphisms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
143
5.2
The action spectrum of a Hamiltonian map . . . . . . . . . . . . .
151
5.3
A “universal” variational principle
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
154
5.4
A continuous section of the action spectrum bundle . . . . . . . . .
161
5.5
An inequality between the displacement energy
and the capacity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
165
5.6
Comparison of the metric d on D with the C0-metric . . . . . . . .
173
5.7
Fixed points and geodesics on D
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
182
v
Geometry of Compactly supported symplectic mappings in

vi
Contents
6
The Arnold conjecture, Floer homology and symplectic homology
6.1
The Arnold conjecture on symplectic ﬁxed points . . . . . . . . . .
194
6.2
The model case of the torus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
202
6.3
Gradient-like ﬂows on compact spaces
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
217
6.4
Elliptic methods and symplectic ﬁxed points . . . . . . . . . . . . .
222
6.5
Floer’s appraoch to Morse theory for the action functional . . . . .
250
6.6
Symplectic homology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
265
Appendix
A.1 Generating functions of symplectic mappings in R2n
. . . . . . . .
273
A.2 Action-angle coordinates, the Theorem of Arnold and Jost . . . . .
278
A.3 Embeddings of H1/2(S1) and smoothness of the action . . . . . . .
286
A.4 The Cauchy-Riemann operator on the sphere . . . . . . . . . . . .
291
A.5 Elliptic estimates near the boundary and an application . . . . . .
298
A.6 The generalized similarity principle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
302
A.7 The Brouwer degree
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
305
A.8 Continuity property of the Alexander-Spanier cohomology . . . . .
314
Index
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
321
Bibliography
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
327

We dedicate this book to our friend
Andreas Floer
1956–1991

  

Preface
The discoveries of the past decade have opened new perspectives for the old ﬁeld of
Hamiltonian systems and led to the creation of a new ﬁeld: symplectic topology.
Surprising rigidity phenomena demonstrate that the nature of symplectic map-
pings is very diﬀerent from that of volume preserving mappings which raised new
questions, many of them still unanswered. On the other hand, due to the analysis
of an old variational principle in classical mechanics, global periodic phenomena in
Hamiltonian systems have been established. As it turns out, these seemingly diﬀer-
ent phenomena are mysteriously related. One of the links is a class of symplectic
invariants, called symplectic capacities. These invariants are the main theme of
this book which grew out of lectures given by the authors at Rutgers University,
the RUB Bochum and at the ETH Z¨urich (1991) and also at the Borel Seminar in
Bern 1992. Since the lectures did not require any previous knowledge, only a few
and rather elementary topics were selected and proved in detail. Moreover, our se-
lection has been prompted by a single principle: the action principle of mechanics.
The action functional for loops in the phase space, given by
F(γ) =

γ
pdq −
1

0
H

t, γ(t)

dt ,
diﬀers from the old Hamiltonian principle in the conﬁguration space deﬁned by a
Lagrangian. The critical points of F are those loops γ which solve the Hamiltonian
equations associated with the Hamiltonian H and hence are the periodic orbits.
This variational principle is sometimes called the least action principle. However,
there is no minimum for F. Indeed, the action principle is very degenerate. All
its critical points are saddle points of inﬁnite Morse index, and at ﬁrst sight, the
principle appears quite useless for existence proofs. But surprisingly it is very eﬀec-
tive. This will be demonstrated using several variational techniques starting from
minimax arguments due to P. Rabinowitz and ending with A. Floer’s homology.
The book includes the following subjects:
The introductory chapter presents in a rather unsystematic way some back-
ground material. We give the deﬁnitions of symplectic manifolds and symplectic
mappings and brieﬂy recall the Hamiltonian formalism. For convenience, Cartan’s
calculus is used. The classiﬁcation of 2-dimensional symplectic manifolds by the
Euler-characteristic and the total volume is proved. Some questions dealt with
later on in detail are raised and discussed in special examples. We illustrate the
so-called direct method of the calculus of variations in order to establish a periodic
orbit on a convex energy surface of a Hamiltonian system in R2n. The Birkhoﬀ
invariants are introduced in order to describe without proofs the intricate orbit
ix

x
Preface
structure of a Hamiltonian system near an equilibrium point or near a periodic
solution. These local results are quite in contrast to the global questions dealt with
in the following chapters.
In a systematic way the symplectic invariants, called symplectic capacities, are
introduced axiomatically in Chapter 2. Considering the family of all symplectic
manifolds of ﬁxed dimension 2n, a capacity c is a map associating with every sym-
plectic manifold (M, ω) a positive number c(M, ω) or ∞satisfying these axioms:
a monotonicity axiom for symplectic embeddings, a conformality axiom for the
symplectic structure, and a normalization axiom which rules out the volume in
higher dimensions. For subsets of R2n, the capacity extends a familiar linear sym-
plectic invariant for positive quadratic forms to nonlinear symplectic mappings.
If M and N are symplectically diﬀeomorphic then c(M, ω) = c(N, τ). In view of
its monotonicity property a capacity represents, in particular, an obstruction to
certain symplectic embeddings and it will be used in order to explain rigidity phe-
nomena for symplectic embeddings, discovered by Ya. Eliashberg and M. Gromov.
In particular, Gromov’s squeezing theorem is deduced using capacities as well as
Eliashberg’s C0-stability of symplectic diﬀeomorphisms. We introduce a notion
of a symplectic homeomorphism, a concept which raises many questions. There
are many diﬀerent capacity functions. For example, the size of the largest ball
in R2n which can be symplectically embedded into a symplectic manifold (M, ω)
leads to a special capacity called the Gromov width. It is the smallest capacity
function originally introduced by M. Gromov. There are many other “embedding”
capacities.
Chapter 3 is devoted entirely to a very detailed construction of a distinguished
symplectic capacity c0. It is dynamically deﬁned by means of Hamiltonian systems.
It measures the minimal C0-oscillation of a Hamiltonian function H : M →R
which allows to conclude the existence of a fast periodic solution of the corre-
sponding Hamiltonian vector ﬁeld XH on M. In the special case of a connected
2-dimensional symplectic manifold, the capacity c0 agrees with the total area. The
existence proof is based on the above action principle which is introduced from
scratch in its proper functional analytic framework. The interesting aspect of this
principle is that it is bounded neither from below nor from above so that stan-
dard variational techniques do not apply directly. Techniques going back to P.
Rabinowitz permit us to establish eﬀectively distinguished saddle points of the
functional representing special periodic solutions of the system. In the special case
of a convex, bounded and smooth domain U ⊂R2n, the capacity is represented by
a distinguished closed characteristic of its boundary ∂U: it has minimal reduced
action equal to c0(U). But, in general, it is rather diﬃcult to compute the invariant
c0. Some of the recent computations based on more advanced techniques of ﬁrst
order elliptic systems and Fredholm theory are presented without proofs. With the
construction of the capacity c0, the proofs of the rigidity phenomena described in
Chapter 2 are complete. Due to its special properties this invariant turns out to
be useful also for the dynamics of Hamiltonian systems.

Preface
xi
In Chapter 4 the dynamical capacity c0 is applied to an old question of the
qualitative theory of Hamiltonian systems originating in celestial mechanics: does
a compact energy surface carry a periodic orbit? We shall demonstrate that many
well-known global existence results previously obtained by technically intricate
proofs emerge immediately from this invariant. The phenomenon is simply this:
if a compact hypersurface in a symplectic manifold possesses a neighborhood of
ﬁnite capacity c0, then there are always uncountably many closed characteristics
nearby. If one poses, in addition, symplectically invariant restrictions, such as of
“contact type”, then the hypersurface itself carries a closed characteristic. We
shall prove, in particular, the seminal solution of the Weinstein conjecture in R2n
due to C. Viterbo. A nonstandard symplectic torus shows that, in contrast to
the Gromov width mentioned above, not every compact symplectic manifold is
of ﬁnite capacity c0. Our special example is related to M. Herman’s celebrated
counterexample to the closing lemma which answers a longstanding open question
in dynamical systems. M. Herman’s “non-closing-lemma” is proved at the end of
the chapter.
In Chapter 5 we study the subgroup D of symplectic diﬀeomorphisms of R2n
which are generated by time dependent Hamiltonian vector ﬁelds of compact sup-
port. The distance from the identity map or the energy E(ϕ) of such a symplectic
diﬀeomorphism ϕ will be measured by means of the oscillation of its generating
Hamiltonian function. This will lead to a surprising bi-invariant metric on D called
the Hofer metric and deﬁned by d(ϕ, ψ) = E(ϕ−1 ◦ψ). The deﬁnition does not
involve derivatives of the Hamiltonian and is of C0-nature. The veriﬁcation of the
metric property requiring that d(ϕ, ψ) = 0 if and only if ϕ = ψ is the diﬃcult as-
pect. It is based on more reﬁned minimax arguments for the action functional valid
simultaneously for a large class of Hamiltonians. We shall investigate the relations
of this distinguished metric to the dynamical symplectic invariant c0 introduced
in Chapter 3 and also to another symplectic invariant which is deﬁned for subsets
of R2n and called the displacement energy. The displacement energy of a subset
U measures the minimal energy E(ϕ) needed in order to dislocate a given set U
from itself in the sense that U ∩ϕ(U) = ∅. The bi-invariant metric will also be
compared with the standard sup-metric. Geodesic arcs associated with the metric
will be deﬁned and described in detail. A special example of a geodesic arc is the
ﬂow generated by an autonomous Hamiltonian. An important role in our approach
is played by the action spectrum of a Hamiltonian mapping ϕ ∈D, which turns
out to be a nowhere dense subset of the real numbers. Our minimax principle
singles out a nontrivial continuous section of the action spectrum bundle over D
called the γ-invariant. This invariant is the main technical tool in this chapter. It
allows the characterization of the geodesics and is used also in the existence proof
of inﬁnitely many nontrivial periodic points for compactly supported Hamiltonian
mappings.
The subject of Chapter 6 is the ﬁxed point theory for Hamiltonian mappings
on compact symplectic manifolds (M, ω). It diﬀers from topological ﬁxed point

xii
Preface
theories. A Hamiltonian map is a special symplectic map: it is homotopic to the
identity and the homotopy is generated by the ﬂow of a time dependent Hamilto-
nian vector ﬁeld. Prompted by H. Poincar´e’s last geometric theorem, V.I. Arnold
conjectured in the sixties that such a Hamiltonian map possesses at least as many
ﬁxed points as a real-valued function on M possesses critical points. Reformulated
in terms of dynamical systems, the conjecture asks for a Ljusternik-Schnirelman
theory respectively for a Morse theory of forced oscillations solving a time periodic
Hamiltonian system on M. We shall ﬁrst prove the conjecture for the special case
of the standard torus T 2n. The proof is again based on the action principle. But
this time the aim is to ﬁnd all its critical points. Our strategy is inspired by C.
Conley’s topological approach to dynamical systems: we shall study the topology
of the set of all bounded solutions of the regularized gradient equation belonging
to the action functional deﬁned on the set of contractible loops on the manifold M.
This way the study of the gradient ﬂow in the inﬁnite dimensional loop space is
reduced to the study of a gradient like continuous ﬂow of a compact metric space,
whose rest points are the desired critical points. Their number is then estimated
by Ljusternik-Schnirelman theory presented in 6.3. A reinterpretation will then
lead us to the proof of the Arnold conjecture for the larger class of symplectic
manifolds satisfying [ω]|π2(M) = 0. In this general case there is no natural regu-
larization and we are forced to investigate in 6.4 the set of bounded solutions of
the non regularized gradient system which now are smooth solutions of a special
system of ﬁrst order elliptic partial diﬀerential equations of Cauchy Riemann type.
These solutions are related to M. Gromov’s pseudoholomorphic curves in M. The
compactness of the solution set will be based on an analytical technique which is
sometimes called bubbling oﬀanalysis. Following this procedure, we shall arrive
at the high point of these developments: A. Floer’s new approach to Morse theory
and Floer homology. We shall merely outline Floer’s beautiful ideas in 6.5. A com-
bination of Floer’s approach with the construction of the dynamical capacity c0
results in a symplectic homology theory which is not yet in its ﬁnal form and which
will be sketched without proofs in the last section. The technical requirements of
these theories are quite advanced and beyond the scope of this book. Floer’s ideas
and further related developments will be presented in detail in a sequel. Chapter 6
illustrates, in particular, that old problems emerging from celestial mechanics still
lead to powerful new techniques useful also in other branches of mathematics. We
should point out that the Arnold conjecture for a general symplectic manifold is
still open in the dimensions ≥8.
The Appendix contains some technical topics presented for the convenience of
the reader. In A.1 we show that a symplectic diﬀeomorphism can be locally rep-
resented in terms of a single function, the so-called generating function. This clas-
sical fact is used in Chapter 5. Appendix A.2 illustrates the generating functions
in the construction of action-angle coordinates for integrable systems occurring in
Chapter 4. A special Sobolev embedding theorem required in the analysis of the
action functional (Chapter 5) is proved in A.3. We derive some basic estimates

Preface
xiii
for the Cauchy-Riemann operator on the sphere (A.4), elliptic estimates near the
boundary (A.5) and prove the generalized Carleman similarity principle (A.6); all
these results for special partial diﬀerential equations are important in Chapter 6.
While the analytical tools required in the ﬁrst ﬁve chapters are introduced in de-
tail, we make use of topological tools without explanations: we use the Brouwer
mapping degree (Chapter 2), the Leray-Schauder degree (Chapter 3), the Smale
degree (mod2) and (co-) homology theories (Chapter 6). References concerning
these topological topics are given in A.7 and A.8 where we explain the Brouwer
degree and the continuity property of the Alexander-Spanier cohomology. This
continuity property is important to us for the proof of the Arnold conjecture in
the general case.
Acknowledgements
We are very grateful for many helpful comments, ideas and suggestions, for en-
couragement to write and to ﬁnish this book. In particular, we would like to
thank M. Chaperon, Y. Eliashberg, S. Kuksin, J. Moser, D. Salamon, J.C. Siko-
rav, C. Viterbo and K. Wysocki. We are indebted to M. Bialy and L. Polterovich
for giving us their results on geodesics prior to publication. For carefully reading
the manuscript, discovering numerous mistakes, correcting them and improving
the presentation, we are very grateful to C. Abbas, K. Cieliebak, M. Flucher, A.
G¨oing, B. Gratza, L. Kaas, M. Kriener, M. Schwarz and K.F. Siburg. We enjoyed
the interest of the participants of the Borel seminar in Bern and appreciated their
questions. We thank R. McLachlan for his valuable help in improving our En-
glish, and Claudia Flepp for her eﬃciency and patience typing and retyping the
manuscript.
E.T.H. Z¨urich, March 28, 1994.

  

Chapter 1
Introduction
We shall introduce the concepts of symplectic manifolds, symplectic mappings and
Hamiltonian vector ﬁelds. It is not the intention to give a systematic treatment of
the Hamiltonian formalism, because it is already presented in many books. Rather
we shall ask some questions related to these concepts which recently lead to new
phenomena and interesting open problems. The question: “What can be done with
a symplectic mapping?” leads, for example, to new symplectic invariants diﬀerent
from the volume and discussed in detail in subsequent chapters. We shall illustrate
that a seemingly very diﬀerent and old problem originating in celestial mechan-
ics is related to these invariants. Namely, prompted by the Poincar´e recurrence
theorem, we ask whether a compact energy surface of a Hamiltonian vector ﬁeld
possesses a periodic orbit. For the very special case of a convex hypersurface in
R2n, historically one of the landmarks in this qualitative problem of Hamiltonian
systems, we shall give an existence proof in order to illustrate the so-called direct
method of the calculus of variation. This classical method is in contrast to the more
recent methods introduced in the following chapters in order to establish global
periodic solutions. At the end of the introduction we shall illustrate without proofs
the rich and intricate orbit structure to be expected near a given periodic orbit.
The considerations are based on the local, nonlinear Birkhoﬀ-invariants presented
in detail.
1.1
Symplectic vector spaces
Deﬁnition. A symplectic vector space (V, ω) is a ﬁnite dimensional real vector
space V equipped with a distinguished bilinear form ω which is antisymmetric
and nondegenerate, i.e.,
ω(u, v) = −ω(v, u) ,
u, v ∈V
(1.1)
and, for every u ̸= 0 ∈V , there is a v ∈V satisfying ω(u, v) ̸= 0. This nondegen-
eracy is equivalent to the requirement that the map
V →V ∗,
v 
→ω(v, ·)
(1.2)
is a linear isomorphism of V onto its dual vector space V ∗. An example is the
so-called standard symplectic vector space (R2n, ω0) with
ω0(u, v) = ⟨Ju, v⟩
for all
u, v ∈R2n,
(1.3)
1 
H. Hofer and E. Zehnder, Symplectic Invariants and Hamiltonian Dynamics,  
Modern Birkhäuser Classics, DOI 10.1007/978-3-0348-0104-1_1, © Springer Basel AG 2011

2
Chapter 1 Introduction
where the bracket denotes the Euclidean inner product in R2n, and where the
2n × 2n matrix J is deﬁned by
J =

0
1
−1
0

(1.4)
with respect to the splitting R2n = Rn ×Rn. Clearly det J ̸= 0 and since JT = −J
the form ω0 is nondegenerate and antisymmetric. We note that
JT = J−1 = −J.
(1.5)
In particular J2 = −1 and
ω0(u, Jv) = ⟨u, v⟩.
Therefore, J is a complex structure on R2n compatible with the Euclidean inner
product. Recall that a complex structure on a real vector space V is a linear
transformation J : V →V satisfying J2 = −1. It makes V into an n-dimensional
complex vector space by deﬁning
(α + iβ)v = αv + βJv
for α, β ∈R and v ∈V . In the example (R2n, ω0) we may identify R2n with Cn in
the usual way by mapping z = (x, y) ∈Rn × Rn onto x + iy ∈Cn. The linear map
J corresponds to the multiplication by −i in Cn.
In the following we shall call v orthogonal to u and write v ⊥u if ω(v, u) = 0.
If E is a linear subspace of V , we deﬁne its orthogonal complement by
E⊥=

u ∈V
 ω(v, u) = 0
for all
v ∈E

.
(1.6)
E⊥is a linear subspace and in view of the nondegeneracy of the bilinear form ω,
we have
dim E + dim E⊥= dim V.
(1.7)
Indeed, choosing a basis e1, . . . , ed in E, the subspace E⊥is the kernel of the
linearly independent functionals ω(ej, ·) on V such that dim E⊥= dim V −dim E
as claimed. Since u ⊥v is equivalent to v ⊥u we see that
(E⊥)
⊥= E.
(1.8)
The concept of orthogonality in symplectic geometry diﬀers sharply from that
in Euclidean geometry: E and E⊥need not be complementary subspaces. For
example, every vector v ∈V is orthogonal to itself since ω(v, v) = −ω(v, v). Hence
if dim E = 1 we have E ⊂E⊥.

1.1 Symplectic vector spaces
3
We can, of course, restrict the bilinear form ω to a linear subspace E ⊂V .
This restricted form will obviously be antisymmetric but, in general, fails to be
nondegenerate. It is nondegenerate on E if and only if
E ∩E⊥= {0},
(1.9)
which follows immediately from the deﬁnitions. In view of (1.7) the statement (1.9)
holds precisely if E and E⊥are complementary, i.e.,
E ⊕E⊥= V.
We see that (E, ω) is a symplectic vector space if (1.9) is satisﬁed and we call E
a symplectic subspace. Because of the symmetry of (1.9) in E and E⊥, we conclude
that E is symplectic if and only if E⊥is symplectic.
The following proposition shows that every symplectic space looks like the
standard space (R2n, ω0).
Proposition 1. The dimension of a symplectic vector space (V, ω) is even. If dim V =
2n there exists a basis e1, . . . , en, f1, . . . , fn of V satisfying, for i, j = 1, 2, . . . n,
ω(ei, ej)
=
0
ω(fi, fj)
=
0
ω(fi, ej)
=
	 1
if
i = j
0
if
i ̸= j
.
Such a basis is called a symplectic (or canonical) basis of V . Representing
u, v ∈V in this basis by
u
=
n
j=1

xj ej + xn+j fj

v
=
n
j=1

yj ej + yn+j fj

one computes readily that
ω(u, v) = ⟨Jx, y⟩,
x, y ∈R2n ,
where the matrix J is deﬁned by (1.4). The subspaces Vj =
span {ej, fj} are
symplectic and orthogonal to each other if i ̸= j, so that the vector space V is the
orthogonal sum
V = V1 ⊕V2 ⊕· · · ⊕Vn
(1.10)

4
Chapter 1 Introduction
of 2-dimensional symplectic subspaces. With respect to this splitting the bilinear
form ω is, in symplectic coordinates, represented by the matrix
















0
1
−1
0


0
1
−1
0

...

0
1
−1
0
















.
Proof of Proposition 1. Choose any vector e1 ̸= 0 in V . Since ω is nondegenerate
we ﬁnd u ∈V satisfying ω(u, e1) ̸= 0, and we can normalize f1 = αu such that
ω(f1, e1) = 1.
Consequently, f1 and e1 are linearly independent since ω is antisymmetric so that
E = span {e1, f1} is a 2-dimensional symplectic subspace of V . If dim V = 2 the
proof is ﬁnished. If dim V > 2 we apply the same argument to the complementary
symplectic subspace E⊥of V and thus ﬁnd the desired basis in ﬁnitely many
steps. ■
We see that for ﬁxed dimension every symplectic vector space (V, ω) can be
put into the same normal form, quite in contrast to the situation of nondegenerate
symmetric bilinear forms. The symplectic form ω singles out those linear maps of
v which leave the form invariant.
Deﬁnition. A linear map A : V →V of a symplectic vector space (V, ω) is called
symplectic (or canonical) if
A∗ω = ω.
By deﬁnition, A∗ω is the so-called pullback 2-form given by A∗ω(u,v)=ω(Au,Av).
In the standard space (R2n, ω0) a matrix A is, therefore, symplectic if and only if
⟨JAu, Av⟩= ⟨Ju, v⟩for all u, v ∈R2n, or equivalently,
AT J A = J.
(1.11)
In the special case R2 of two dimensions this is equivalent to the condition that
det A = 1. In general we conclude from (1.11) immediately that (det A)2 = 1. It
turns out that
det A = 1,
(1.12)
so that symplectic matrices in R2n are volume-preserving. This requires a proof
and it is convenient to use the language of diﬀerential forms . Recall that, with the

1.1 Symplectic vector spaces
5
coordinates z = (z1, . . . , z2n) ∈R2n, the bilinear form dzi ∧dzj on R2n is deﬁned
by
(dzi ∧dzj)(u, v) = uivj −ujvi,
for u, v ∈R2n. Introducing the notation z = (x, y) ∈R2n, we can, therefore,
represent ω0 in the form
ω0 =
n

j=1
dyj ∧dxj.
Then the 2n-form
Ω= ω0 ∧ω0 ∧. . . ∧ω0 (n times )
on R2n is the volume form
Ω= c dx1 ∧. . . ∧dxn ∧dy1 ∧. . . ∧dyn
with a constant c ̸= 0. If A is a matrix in R2n then A∗Ω= (det A)Ωby the
deﬁnition of a determinant. Assuming that A∗ω0 = ω0 we conclude A∗Ω= Ωand,
hence, det A = 1 as claimed.
The set of symplectic matrices in R2n, which meet the conditions (1.11), is
a group under matrix multiplication. It is one of the classical Lie groups and is
denoted by Sp(n).
Proposition 2. If A and B ∈Sp(n) then A−1, AB ∈Sp(n). Moreover, AT ∈Sp(n)
and J ∈Sp(n).
Proof. By multiplying AT JA = J with A−1 from the right and with (AT )−1 from
the left, we ﬁnd J = (AT )−1JA−1 so that A−1 ∈Sp(n). Taking now the inverse
on both sides of the latter identity we ﬁnd J−1 = AJ−1AT , and since J−1 = −J
we ﬁnd (AT )
T JAT = J and AT ∈Sp(n). ■
Note that if a 2n by 2n matrix is written in block form
U =

A
B
C
D

(1.13)
with respect to the splitting R2n = Rn × Rn, it is symplectic if and only if
AT C , BT D
are symmetric and
AT D −CT B = 1,
as is readily veriﬁed. For example, a matrix U having B = 0 is symplectic if and
only if A is nonsingular and U can be written as
U =


A
0
0
(AT )
−1


 1
0
S
1

,
with some symmetric matrix S.

6
Chapter 1 Introduction
Deﬁnition. If (V , ω
1
1) and (V , ω
2
2) are two symplectic vector spaces we call a linear
map A : V1 →V2 symplectic if
A∗ω2 = ω1,
where, by deﬁnition, (A∗ω2)(u, v) = ω2(Au, Av) for all u, v ∈V1. Clearly A is
injective such that dim V1 ≤dim V2.
Proposition 3. If (V1, ω1) and (V2, ω2) are two symplectic spaces of the same dimen-
sion, then there exists a linear isomorphism A : V1 →V2 satisfying A∗ω2 = ω1.
This means that all symplectic vector spaces of the same dimension are, in this
sense, equivalent; they are symplectically indistinguishable.
Proof. The proof follows immediately from the normal form in Proposition 1.
Choosing symplectic bases (ej, fj) in (V1, ω1) and (ˆej, ˆfj) in (V2, ω2) we deﬁne the
linear map A : V1 →V2 by
A ej = ˆej
and
A fj = ˆfj
for 1 ≤j ≤n. Then clearly A∗ω2 = ω1 by deﬁnition of a symplectic basis. ■
Since the choice of e1 and ˆe1 in the construction of the symplectic bases is at our
disposal we conclude from the above proof that the group Sp(n) acts transitively
in R2n. Moreover, it also acts transitively on the set of symplectic subspaces of R2n
having the same dimension. This follows because a symplectic basis in a subspace
E can always be completed to a basis of V by adding a symplectic basis of its
complement E⊥, as we did in the proof of Proposition 1.
1.2
Symplectic diffeomorphisms and Hamiltonian
vector ﬁelds in (R2n, ω0)
We now turn to nonlinear maps in the symplectic space (R2n, ω0). A diﬀeomor-
phism ϕ in R2n is called symplectic if
ϕ∗ω0 = ω0,
(1.14)
where, by deﬁnition, the pullback of any 2-form ω is given by
(ϕ∗ω)x(a, b) = ωϕ(x)(ϕ′(x)a, ϕ′(x)b)
for x ∈R2n and for all a, b ∈TxR2n = R2n. Here ϕ′(x) denotes the derivative
of ϕ at the point x represented by the Jacobian matrix. In view of the deﬁnition
of ω0, a symplectic diﬀeomorphism in (R2n, ω0) is, therefore, characterized by the
identity
ϕ′(x)T J ϕ′(x) = J ,
x ∈R2n
(1.15)

1.2 Symplectic diffeomorphisms and Hamiltonian vector fields
7
for the ﬁrst derivatives of ϕ. Hence ϕ′(x) is a symplectic matrix and, in particular,
det ϕ′(x) = 1,
(1.16)
so that symplectic diﬀeomorphisms are volume-preserving. However, if n > 1 the
class of symplectic diﬀeomorphisms is much more restricted than that of volume-
preserving diﬀeomorphisms. This will become clear below when, taking our lead
from Gromov, we look at the question: what can be done with symplectic diﬀeo-
morphisms?
A symplectic diﬀeomorphism ϕ in (R2n, ω0) not only preserves ω0 and the
associated volume form Ωbut also the action of closed curves, as we shall see
next. The form ω0 is an exact form, since
ω0 =
n

j=1
dyj ∧dxj = dλ,
(1.17)
with the 1-form λ deﬁned by
λ =
n

j=1
yj dxj.
Therefore, λ−ϕ∗λ is a closed form provided ϕ is symplectic. Indeed, d(λ−ϕ∗λ) =
dλ −d(ϕ∗λ) = dλ −ϕ∗dλ = ω0 −ϕ∗ω0 = 0. Using the Poincar´e lemma one ﬁnds
a function F : R2n →R satisfying
λ −ϕ∗λ = dF.
(1.18)
If γ is an oriented simply closed curve we can integrate and ﬁnd in view of (1.18)

γ
λ =

γ
ϕ∗λ =

ϕ(γ)
λ
since the integral of an exact form over a closed curve vanishes. Deﬁning the action
A(γ) of a closed curve γ by
A(γ) =

γ
λ ∈R,
(1.19)
we see that
A

ϕ(γ)

= A(γ)
(1.20)
provided ϕ is symplectic; hence ϕ leaves the action invariant as claimed. Con-
versely, of course, if a diﬀeomorphism ϕ in R2n satisﬁes (1.20) for all closed curves

8
Chapter 1 Introduction
in R2n we conclude that ϕ is symplectic. Parameterizing γ by x(t), with 0 ≤t ≤1
and x(0) = x(1), the action becomes
A(γ) = 1
2
1

0
⟨−J ˙x, x⟩dt.
(1.21)
Examples of symplectic diﬀeomorphisms are generated by the so-called Hamilto-
nian vector ﬁelds which we now recall. To the symplectic form ω0 and to a smooth
function
H : R2n →R,
we can associate a vector ﬁeld XH on R2n by requiring
ω0

XH(x), a

= −dH(x)a
(1.22)
for all a ∈R2n and x ∈R2n. Since ω0 is nondegenerate, the vector XH(x) is deter-
mined uniquely. The condition (1.22) is equivalent to ⟨JXH(x), a⟩= −⟨∇H(x), a⟩
where the gradient of H is, as usual, deﬁned with respect to the Euclidean inner
product. Therefore, JXH(x) = −∇H(x) and in view of J2 = −1 we ﬁnd the
representation
XH(x) = J∇H(x) ,
x ∈R2n.
(1.23)
Clearly the Hamiltonian vector ﬁelds are very special. They diﬀer in particular
sharply from vector ﬁelds X = ∇H(x) of gradient type, since J is antisymmetric.
In the following we denote by ϕt the ﬂow of a vector ﬁeld X. It is deﬁned by
d
dtϕt(x)
=
X

ϕt(x)

ϕ0(x)
=
x ,
x ∈R2n .
The curve x(t) = ϕt(x) solves the Cauchy initial value problem for the initial
condition x ∈R2n. Assume now that X = XH is the Hamiltonian vector ﬁeld
determined by ω0 and H. Then every ﬂow map ϕt preserves the form ω0:
(ϕt)
∗ω0 = ω0,
(1.24)
and is, therefore, a symplectic map. This is easily veriﬁed and will be proved in
the next section in a more abstract setting.
It is useful for the following to recall the transformation formula for vector
ﬁelds X on Rm. Assume x(t) is a solution of the diﬀerential equation
˙x = X(x) ,
x ∈Rm.

1.3 Hamiltonian vector fields and symplectic manifolds
9
If u : Rm →Rm is a diﬀeomorphism we can deﬁne the curve y(t) by
x(t) = u

y(t)

.
Diﬀerentiating in t we conclude that y(t) solves the equation
˙y = Y (y) ,
y ∈Rm
for the transformed vector ﬁeld Y deﬁned by
Y (y) = du(y)−1 · X ◦u(y).
In the following, we shall use the notation
u∗X : = (du)−1 · X ◦u.
(1.25)
We have demonstrated that the two ﬂows ϕt of X and ψt of u∗X are conjugated
by the diﬀeomorphism u, i.e.,
ϕt ◦u = u ◦ψt .
If we subject a Hamiltonian vector ﬁeld XH in R2n to an arbitrary transformation u
its special form will be destroyed. However, a symplectic transformation preserves
the class of Hamiltonian vector ﬁelds. Indeed, if u∗ω0 = ω0 then
u∗XH = XK
and
K = H ◦u.
(1.26)
This is easily veriﬁed: deﬁning the function K as the composition K = H ◦u,
then by the chain rule, dK = dH ◦u · du, and the gradient with respect to the
Euclidean scalar product becomes ∇K = (du)T ∇H ◦u. By assumption, du is, at
every point, a symplectic map and, therefore, also (du)T so that du·J ·(du)T = J.
Consequently, in view of the deﬁnition (1.23) of a Hamiltonian vector ﬁeld
XK
=
J∇K = J(du)T ∇H ◦u
=
(du)−1(J∇H) ◦u
=
u∗XH,
as we set out to prove.
1.3
Hamiltonian vector ﬁelds and symplectic manifolds
In order to introduce Hamiltonian vector ﬁelds on a manifold, we ﬁrst have to
extend the symplectic structure
ω0 =
n

j=1
dyj ∧dxj
on
R2n
to even dimensional manifolds.

10
Chapter 1 Introduction
Deﬁnition. A symplectic structure on an even dimensional manifold M is a 2-form
ω on M satisfying
(i)
dω = 0, i.e., ω is a closed form.
(ii)
ω is nondegenerate.
The second condition requires that for every tangent space TxM: if ωx(u, v) = 0
for all v ∈TxM then u = 0. The pair (M, ω) is then called a symplectic manifold.
Thus every tangent space TxM of a symplectic manifold becomes a symplectic
vector space with respect to the distinguished antisymmetric and nondegenerate
bilinear form ωx at x. Therefore, M has even dimension.
An example is the symplectic manifold (R2n, ω0); indeed, since ω0 is a constant
form we have dω0 = 0. Since the symplectic form ω is assumed to be closed, every
symplectic manifold looks, locally, like (R2n, ω0); we shall now prove that there
are always local coordinates in which the symplectic form is represented by the
constant form ω0.
Theorem 1. (Darboux) Suppose ω is a nondegenerate 2-form on a manifold of
dim M = 2n. Then dω = 0 if and only if at each point p ∈M there are coordinates
(U, ϕ) where ϕ : (x1, . . . , xn, y1, . . . , yn) →q ∈U ⊂M satisﬁes ϕ(0) = p and
ϕ∗ω = ω0 =
n

j=1
dyj ∧dxj.
Such coordinates are sometimes called symplectic coordinates. They are clearly
not determined uniquely; the most general coordinates of this sort are related to
(x, y) by symplectic transformation u∗ω0 = ω0 in R2n, as previously introduced.
We see that we can deﬁne a symplectic manifold alternatively as follows: it is
a manifold of dim M = 2n for which there are local coordinates ϕj mapping
open sets Uj ⊂M onto open sets of the ﬁxed symplectic space (R2n, ω0) such
that the coordinates changes ϕi ◦ϕ−1
j
deﬁned on ϕj(Ui ∩Uj) are symplectic local
diﬀeomorphisms in (R2n, ω0).
Proof. Choosing any local coordinates, we may assume that ω is a 2-form on R2n
depending on z ∈R2n and that p corresponds to z = 0. By a linear change of
coordinates we can achieve that the form be in normal form at the origin, i.e.,
ω(0) =
n

j=1
dyj ∧dxj
at
z = 0.
This is precisely the same as the statement that any nondegenerate antisymmet-
ric bilinear form can be brought into normal form (Proposition 1). With ω0 we
shall denote the constant form Σdyj ∧dxj on R2n. The aim is to ﬁnd a local
diﬀeomorphism ϕ in a neighborhood of 0 leaving the origin ﬁxed and solving
ϕ∗ω = ω0.

1.3 Hamiltonian vector fields and symplectic manifolds
11
We shall solve this equation by a deformation argument. We interpolate ω and ω0
by a family ωt of forms deﬁned by
ωt = ω0 + t(ω −ω0) ,
0 ≤t ≤1,
such that ωt = ω0 for t = 0 and ω1 = ω, and look for a whole family ϕt of
diﬀeomorphisms satisfying ϕ0 = id and
(ϕt)∗ωt = ω0 ,
0 ≤t ≤1.
(1.27)
The diﬀeomorphism ϕt for t = 1 will then be the solution to our problem. In order
to ﬁnd ϕt we shall construct a t-dependent vector ﬁeld Xt generating ϕt as its
ﬂow. Diﬀerentiating (1.27), such a vector ﬁeld Xt has to satisfy the identity
0 =
d
dt(ϕt)∗ωt = (ϕt)∗
LXtωt + d
dt ωt

.
(1.28)
Here LY denotes the Lie derivative of the vector ﬁeld Y . Now we use Cartan’s
identity
LX = iX ◦d + d ◦iX
(1.29)
and the assumption that dωt = 0 and ﬁnd
0 = (ϕt)∗
d(iXtωt) + ω −ω0

.
Hence, Xt has to satisfy the linear equation
d(iXtωt) + ω −ω0 = 0.
(1.30)
In order to solve this equation we observe that ω −ω0 is closed, hence, locally
exact by the Poincar´e lemma and there is a 1-form λ satisfying
ω −ω0 = dλ
and
λ(0) = 0.
Since ωt(0) = ω0 the 2-forms ωt are nondegenerate for 0 ≤t ≤1 in an open
neighborhood of the origin and hence there is a unique vector ﬁeld Xt determined
by
iXtωt = ωt(Xt, ·) = −λ
for 0 ≤t ≤1 which then solves the equation (1.30). Since we normalized λ(0) = 0
we have Xt(0) = 0 and there is an open neighborhood of the origin on which the
ﬂow ϕt of Xt exists for all 0 ≤t ≤1. It satisﬁes ϕ0 = id and ϕt(0) = 0. We can
follow our arguments backwards: by construction this family ϕt of diﬀeomorphisms
satisﬁes
d
dt(ϕt)∗ωt = 0 ,
0 ≤t ≤1,
hence (ϕt)∗ωt = (ϕ0)∗ω0 = ω0 for all 0 ≤t ≤1, as we wanted to prove. ■

12
Chapter 1 Introduction
The method employed in the proof above is the so-called deformation method
of J. Moser. Its unusual aspect is that one searches for a diﬀerential equation to be
solved. J. Moser introduced the method in [160] in order to prove, in particular,
that two symplectic structures ω0 and ω1 on a compact manifold M are equivalent,
in the sense that
ϕ∗ω1 = ω0
for a diﬀeomorphism ϕ of M, provided the forms can be deformed into each other
within the class of symplectic forms having their periods ﬁxed. Incidentally, the
classiﬁcation of symplectic forms up to equivalence is still open.
From Darboux’s normal form we conclude that any two symplectic manifolds
having the same dimension are locally indistinguishable: symplectic manifolds do
not possess any local symplectic invariants other than the dimension. This is in
sharp contrast to Riemannian manifolds: two diﬀerent metrics generally are not
locally isometric, e.g., the Gaussian curvature is an invariant. It is our aim later
on to construct global symplectic invariants.
Every manifold M carries a Riemannian structure. In contrast, not every even
dimensional manifold admits a symplectic structure. For example, spheres S2n do
not admit a symplectic structure if n ≥2. Indeed, arguing by contradiction we
assume ω is a symplectic structure. Then Ω= ω ∧ω ∧. . . ∧ω (n times) is a
volume form, since ω is nondegenerate. But ω = dα for a 1-form α on S2n since
the second de Rham cohomology group vanishes: H2(S2n) = 0. Therefore, Ω= dβ
with β = ω ∧ω ∧. . . ∧ω ∧α and by Stokes’ theorem

S2n
Ω=

∂S2n
β = 0
which is, of course, not possible for a volume form. This argument evidently applies
to any compact manifold M without boundary having H2j(M) = 0 for some
1 ≤j ≤n −1.
Next we introduce the analogue of symplectic maps in (R2n, ω0). A diﬀeren-
tiable map f : M1 →M2 between two symplectic manifolds (M1, ω1) and (M2, ω2)
is called symplectic if
f∗ω2 = ω1,
where, by deﬁnition of the pullback of a 2-form ω
(f∗ω)x(u, v) = ωf(x)(df(x)u, df(x)v) for all u, v ∈TxM.
Since ω1 is nondegenerate the tangent map df(x) must be injective at every point
and hence dim M1 ≤dim M2. If dim M1 = dim M2 then f is a local diﬀeomor-
phism. In the case that f maps a symplectic manifold (M, ω) into itself the con-
dition for f to be symplectic becomes
f∗ω = ω,

1.3 Hamiltonian vector fields and symplectic manifolds
13
i.e., f preserves the symplectic structure. Expressed in the distinguished local
symplectic coordinates deﬁned by Darboux’s theorem, this condition for f agrees
with our previous condition for a map to be symplectic in (R2n, ω0). It is useful to
point out that locally such a symplectic map can be presented in terms of a single
function on R2n, a so-called generating function and we refer to the Appendix for
details.
The symplectic structure, being nondegenerate, deﬁnes an isomorphism be-
tween vector ﬁelds X and 1-forms on M given by X 
→ω(X, ·). In particular,
if
H : M →R
is a smooth function on M, then dH is a 1-form on M and hence together with ω
determines the vector ﬁeld XH by

iXHω

(x) = ω

XH(x), ·

= −dH(x),
(1.31)
x ∈M. This distinguished vector ﬁeld XH is called the Hamiltonian vector ﬁeld
belonging to the function H. Since dω = 0 we deduce from (1.31) using Cartan’s
formula LX = diX + iXd and ddH = 0 that
LXHω = 0.
(1.32)
We conclude that the maps ϕt belonging to the ﬂow of a Hamiltonian vector ﬁeld
XH leave the symplectic form invariant,
(ϕt)∗ω = ω,
(1.33)
hence are symplectic. Indeed, the derivative
d
dt(ϕt)∗ω = (ϕt)∗LXω = 0 vanishes
in view of (1.32) and since (ϕ0)∗ω = ω the claim follows. The set of Hamiltonian
vector ﬁelds is invariant under symplectic transformations as we shall verify next.
Recall that u∗X = (du)−1X ◦u for a vector ﬁeld X and a diﬀeomorphism u, and,
equivalently, ϕt ◦u = u ◦ψt for the associated ﬂows ϕt of X and ψt of u∗X.
Proposition 4. If u : M →M satisﬁes u∗ω = ω then for every function H : M →R
u∗XH = XK
and
K = H ◦u.
Proof. In view of the deﬁnition of a Hamiltonian vector ﬁeld
iXH◦u ω
=
−d(H ◦u)
=
−u∗(dH)
=
u∗(iXHω)
=
iu∗XH(u∗ω)
=
iu∗XHω
and since ω is nondegenerate the vector ﬁelds XH◦u and u∗XH must be equal. ■
From the symplectic structure we shall deduce an auxiliary structure which
will be convenient later on. Recall that an almost complex structure on a manifold
M associates smoothly with every x ∈M a linear map J = Jx : TxM →TxM
satisfying J2 = −1.

14
Chapter 1 Introduction
Proposition 5. If (M, ω) is a symplectic manifold there exists an almost complex
structure J on M and a Riemannian metric ⟨·, ·⟩on M satisfying
ωx(v, Ju) = ⟨v, u⟩x
(1.34)
for v, u ∈TxM. From the symmetry of the bilinear form ⟨·, ·⟩it follows that
ωx(Jv, Ju) = ωx(v, u),
(1.35)
i.e., J is a symplectic map of the symplectic vector space (TxM, ωx). Moreover,
J∗= J−1 = −J ,
(1.36)
where J∗is the adjoint of J in the inner product space (TxM, ⟨·, ·⟩x).
Proof. We choose any Riemannian metric g on M. Fixing a point x ∈M we shall
construct J = Jx in TxM. All the constructions will depend smoothly on x and, for
notational convenience, the dependence on x will not be explicitly mentioned. Since
ω is nondegenerate there exists a unique linear isomorphism A : TxM →TxM
satisfying
ω(u, v) = g(Au, v) ,
u, v ∈TxM.
Since ω is antisymmetric we infer g(Au, v) = ω(u, v) = −ω(v, u) = −g(Av, u) =
−g(v, A∗u) = g(−A∗u, v), where A∗is the g-adjoint map of A. Hence
A∗= −A.
Consequently, A∗A = AA∗= −A2 is a positive deﬁnite g-self-adjoint map and we
denote by Q =
√
−A2 the positive square root of −A2. Set
J = AQ−1.
Since A and A∗do commute, A is a normal operator and consequently A and Q−1
commute and we compute
J2 = AQ−1AQ−1 = A2(−A2)−1 = −id.
Finally,
ω(u, Jv)
=
g(Au, Jv) = g(Au, AQ−1v)
=
g(A∗Au, Q−1v) = g(Q2u, Q−1v)
=
g(Qu, v).
Since Q is symmetric and positive deﬁnite we conclude that
⟨u, v⟩: = g(Qu, v)
deﬁnes a Riemannian metric on M which, in general, is diﬀerent from g. It is the
desired metric. The remainder of the statement is now readily veriﬁed making use

1.3 Hamiltonian vector fields and symplectic manifolds
15
of the fact that the metric ⟨u, v⟩= ⟨v, u⟩is symmetric. Since the construction
depends smoothly on x the proof is completed. ■
This almost complex structure compatible with ω extends the complex struc-
ture in (R2n, ω0) considered above. Moreover, if ∇H denotes the gradient of a
function H with respect to the Riemannian metric ⟨·, ·⟩of Proposition 5, i.e.,
⟨∇H(x), v⟩= dH(x)v for all v ∈TxM, we ﬁnd for the Hamiltonian vector ﬁeld
XH the representation
XH(x) = J∇H(x) ∈TxM
(1.37)
using that J2 = −1. This agrees with the representation of XH in (R2n, ω0).
We should point out that the almost complex structure is not unique. If we
denote by Jω the set of almost complex structures compatible with ω in the sense
of (1.34), it can easily be shown that this set is contractible. Indeed, for every
J ∈Jω there exists, by deﬁnition, a unique Riemannian metric gJ satisfying
ω(u, Jv) = gJ(u, v). Starting from any Riemannian metric g, we constructed in
the proof of the proposition an almost complex structure J = Jg and a metric gJ
such that JgJ = J. Hence, ﬁxing any metric g∗on M, we can deﬁne the contraction
in Jω by
(t, J) 
→J(1−t)gJ+tg∗
for 0 ≤t ≤1 and J ∈Jω.
In view of Darboux’s theorem there are locally no symplectic invariants other
than the dimension. On the other hand, the total volume is a trivial example of
a global symplectic invariant. Indeed, if u : (M1, ω1) →(M2, ω2) is a symplectic
diﬀeomorphism of M1 onto M2 then it follows from u∗ω2 = ω1 that the associated
volume forms Ω1 = ω1 ∧. . . ∧ω1 (n times) on M1 and similarly Ω2 on M2 are
related by
u∗Ω2 = Ω1.
(1.38)
Since the diﬀeomorphism u : M1 →M2 preserves the orientation we have

M1
u∗Ω2 =

M2
Ω2
and in view of (1.38),

M1
Ω1 =

M2
Ω2,
so that the total volumes of Ω1 and Ω2 have to agree. Consider now the special case
of compact, connected and oriented manifolds of dimension 2, i.e., surfaces. The
orientation will be given by a volume form denoted by ω. It evidently is a closed
form, since every 3-form on a surface vanishes. Therefore, (M, ω) is a symplectic
manifold with the volume form as the symplectic structure.

16
Chapter 1 Introduction
Assume now that (M1, ω1) and (M2, ω2) are two such surfaces and let u : M1 →
M2 be a symplectic diﬀeomorphism u∗ω2 = ω1, which in dimension 2 is the same
as a volume-preserving diﬀeomorphism, then

M1
ω1 =

M2
ω2,
(1.39)
so that the volumes agree. Our aim is to prove the converse. We shall prove that if
two compact, connected and oriented surfaces (M1, ω1) and (M2, ω2) are diﬀeomor-
phic (which is the case if their Euler characteristics are equal) and if, in addition,
their total volumes agree, then there exists a diﬀeomorphism u : M1 →M2, which
satisﬁes u∗ω2 = ω1. This gives a classiﬁcation of compact connected 2-dimensional
symplectic manifolds according to the Euler characteristic and the total volume.
More generally we shall prove the following statement for volume preserving dif-
feomorphisms.
Theorem 2. (Moser) Assume M is a compact, connected and oriented manifold of
dimension m without boundary. If α and β are two volume forms such that their
total volumes agree, i.e.,

M
α =

M
β,
(1.40)
then there is a diﬀeomorphism u of M satisfying u∗β = α.
Consequently the total volume is the only invariant of volume-preserving dif-
feomorphisms.
Proof. We proceed as in the proof of Darboux’s theorem and deform the volume
form α into β deﬁning
αt = (1 −t)α + tβ ,
0 ≤t ≤1.
These forms αt are volume forms since locally α and β are represented by α =
a(x)dx1∧. . .∧dxm and β = b(x)dx1∧. . .∧dxm with nonvanishing smooth functions
a and b, which, by assumption (1.40), must have the same sign. We shall construct
a family ϕt of diﬀeomorphisms satisfying

ϕt∗
αt = α ,
ϕ0 = id
(1.41)
for 0 ≤t ≤1, so that the diﬀeomorphism u = ϕ1 will solve our problem. Since M
is compact, connected and oriented we conclude from

M
(β −α) = 0 that
β −α = dγ
(1.42)

1.3 Hamiltonian vector fields and symplectic manifolds
17
for some (m −1)-form γ on M. This is a special case of the de Rham theorem.
Since αt is a volume form we ﬁnd a unique time-dependent vector ﬁeld Xt on M
solving the linear equation
iXt αt = −γ
for 0 ≤t ≤1. Denote by ϕt the ﬂow of this vector ﬁeld Xt satisfying ϕ0 = id.
Since M is compact it exists for all t. Since dαt = 0 for volume forms we ﬁnd,
again using Cartan’s formula,
d
dt

ϕt∗
αt
=

ϕt∗
LXtαt +
d
dtαt

=

ϕt∗
d(iXtαt) + β −α

,
which vanishes since d(iXtαt) + β −α = d(iXtαt + γ) = 0 by our choice of the
vector ﬁeld Xt. Therefore (1.41) holds and the proof is ﬁnished. ■
We have seen that symplectic diﬀeomorphisms are volume-preserving diﬀeo-
morphisms so that the total volume is a (trivial) global symplectic invariant. More-
over, for volume-preserving diﬀeomorphisms, this is the only invariant. One of our
aims later on is to establish symplectic invariants other than the volume which
will prove that symplectic diﬀeomorphisms are of a diﬀerent nature than volume-
preserving diﬀeomorphisms. An example of such a global symplectic invariant is
prompted by Darboux’s theorem. Recall that this theorem states that locally near
every point on a symplectic manifold (M, ω) there is a local diﬀeomorphism ϕ
from a small ball of R2n into M satisfying ϕ∗ω = ω0. This means in particular
that there is always a symplectic embedding of a small open ball B(r) into M,
ϕ :

B(r), ω0

→(M, ω),
where B(r) = {x ∈R2n | |x|2 < r2}.
We should mention that this is, of course, only a local result; even on R2n with
n ≥2 there exist symplectic structures ω of inﬁnite volume for which there is
no diﬀeomorphism ϕ of R2n solving ϕ∗ω = ω0. The existence of such an exotic
symplectic structure is a deep result due to M. Gromov [107].
We now look for the largest ball B(r) ⊂R2n which can be symplectically
embedded into a given symplectic manifold (M, ω) of dimension dim M = 2n, and
deﬁne
D(M, ω) = sup

πr2  there exists
a symplectic embedding ϕ :

B(r), ω0

→(M, ω)

.
This is a positive number or ∞which we shall call the Gromov width of (M, ω).
At this point we cannot explain why we choose πr2 in the deﬁnition and not,
for example, the volume of B(r). We mention, however, that πr2 agrees with
the action |A(γ)| for every closed characteristic γ on the boundary ∂B(r) of the
standard sphere of radius r in R2n. This will be explained later on.

18
Chapter 1 Introduction
It is easy to see that D(M, ω) is a symplectic invariant. We ﬁrst show that
D(M, ω) has a monotonicity property in the sense that
D(M, ω) ≤D(N, τ),
(1.43)
if there exists a symplectic embedding ψ : M →N. To every symplectic embedding
ϕ : B(r) →M there is a symplectic embedding B(r) →N deﬁned by ψ ◦ϕ.
Therefore, the supremum in the deﬁnition of D(N, τ) is taken over a possibly
larger set so that indeed D(N, τ) ≥D(M, ω) as claimed. If f : M →N is a
symplectic diﬀeomorphism of M onto N we can apply the monotonicity property
to f and also to f−1 and conclude:
Proposition 6. If (M, ω) and (N, τ) are symplectically isomorphic, then D(M, ω) =
D(N, τ).
We see that the Gromov width is a symplectic invariant. It will turn out, and
this is not obvious, that this invariant is quite diﬀerent form the total volume
if n ≥2. The Gromov width is merely one example in the class of symplectic
invariants called symplectic capacities which will be introduced in Chapter 2.
1.4
Periodic orbits on energy surfaces
The existence problem we shall brieﬂy describe originates in the search for periodic
solutions in celestial mechanics and is, as we shall see in Chapter 4, related to
special symplectic invariants. For simplicity we consider the standard symplectic
manifold (R2n, ω0). We have seen that a function H : R2n →R together with ω0
determines the Hamiltonian vector ﬁeld XH on R2n by
iXH ω0 = −dH.
(1.44)
The ﬂow ϕt of the vector ﬁeld XH leaves the function H invariant, i.e.,
H

ϕt(x)

= H(x) ,
x ∈R2n
(1.45)
for all t for which the ﬂow is deﬁned, hence H is an integral of XH. Indeed diﬀer-
entiating (1.45) we ﬁnd, using the deﬁnition of the ﬂow
d
dtH(ϕt)
=
dH(ϕt) · d
dtϕt = dH(ϕt) · XH(ϕt)
=
−ω0

XH, XH

◦(ϕt) ,
which vanishes since ω0 is antisymmetric. Geometrically, the level sets
S =

x ∈R2nH(x) =
const

⊂R2n

1.4 Periodic orbits on energy surfaces
19
are invariant under the ﬂow of XH. We shall assume now that S is a compact
regular energy surface, i.e.,
dH(x) ̸= 0
for x ∈S.
(1.46)
Then S is a smooth hypersurface, i.e., a submanifold of R2n of codimension 1,
whose tangent space at x ∈S is given by
TxS =

v ∈TxR2n  dH(x)v = 0

.
∇H(x)
TxS
S
v
x
Fig. 1.1
Evidently XH(x) ∈TxS for x ∈S since dH(x)·XH(x) = −ω0(XH(x), XH(x)) = 0,
so that XH deﬁnes a vector ﬁeld on S which does not vanish. Since S is compact the
ﬂow ϕt on S exists for all times. It should be emphasized that this ﬂow is, in general,
extremely complicated, since Hamiltonian vector ﬁelds describe systems without
friction in which oscillations never decrease. However, the ﬂow on S has strong
recurrence properties due to the volume-preserving character of Hamiltonian ﬂows.
We shall brieﬂy recall this phenomenon known to H. Poincar´e.
Let Ω= ω0 ∧. . . ∧ω0 be the volume form on R2n. Since dH(x) ̸= 0 in a
neighborhood U of S we ﬁnd a (2n −1)-form α on U satisfying
Ω= dH ∧α
on U.
(1.47)
Denoting by j : S →R2n the inclusion mapping, the (2n −1)-form
µ = j∗α
on S
(1.48)
is clearly a volume form on S. It is uniquely determined by (1.47). Indeed, if
Ω= dH ∧α = dH ∧β then dH ∧(α −β) = 0 so that α −β = dH ∧γ for a
(2n −2)-form γ on U. In view of j∗dH = 0 we ﬁnd j∗α = j∗β + j∗(dH ∧γ) = j∗β
as claimed. The volume form µ is invariant under the ﬂow ϕt of XH:
(ϕt)∗µ = µ.
(1.49)

20
Chapter 1 Introduction
This follows from (ϕt)∗Ω= Ωand (ϕt)∗dH = dH. Indeed, in view of (1.47) we ﬁrst
ﬁnd Ω= dH ∧(ϕt)∗α, and using the uniqueness we conclude j∗(ϕt)∗α = j∗α.
But ϕt ◦j = j ◦ϕt and hence (ϕt)∗(j∗α) = (j∗α), proving the claim (1.49). If we
denote the regular measure on S associated to the form µ by m we see that
m

ϕt(A)

= m(A) ,
A ⊂S.
(1.50)
Moreover, m(S) < ∞since S is compact.
Theorem 3. (Poincar´e’s recurrence theorem) Let S be a compact and regular energy
surface of the Hamiltonian vector ﬁeld XH with ﬂow ϕt. Then almost every point
(with respect to m) on S is a recurrent point, i.e., for almost every x ∈S there is
a sequence tj ↑∞satisfying
lim
j→∞ϕtj(x) = x.
Proof. The proof is surprisingly easy. By ϕ we denote the time-1 map of the ﬂow
ϕt. We ﬁrst use the invariance and ﬁniteness of the measure to show that for every
A ⊂S
m

A ∩
 
k≥0

j≥k
ϕ−j(A)

= m(A).
(1.51)
Observe that the points x in the above set [ · ] are those points x ∈S which have
the property that for every integer k there is an integer j ≥k such that x ∈ϕ−j(A)
i.e., ϕj(x) ∈A. The intersection with A consists of the points x in A which return
inﬁnitely often to the set A. In order to prove (1.51) we abbreviate
Ak :=

j≥k
ϕ−j(A) ,
k = 0, 1, 2, . . .
and have the decreasing sequence of subsets A0 ⊃A1 ⊃A2 ⊃. . . . Clearly,
ϕk(Ak) = A0 and consequently m(Ak) = m(A0) since ϕ preserves the measure.
Since m(A0) < ∞we conclude that A0 = Ak almost everywhere for k = 0, 1, 2, . . .
and consequently, 
k≥0
Ak = A0 almost everywhere. Hence, in view of A ⊂A0 we
ﬁnd
A ∩

k≥0
Ak = A ∩A0 = A almost everywhere,
which is the desired equation (1.51). Now we use the topological fact that there is
a countable basis in S. For every n there are countably many open balls Bj( 1
n) of
radius 1
n covering S. Applying the ﬁrst step to every ball, we ﬁnd a null set N ⊂S
having the property that every x ∈S\N returns inﬁnitely often to every ball to
which it belongs. Since for every n there exists a j = j(x) such that x ∈Bj( 1
n),
the theorem is proved. ■

1.4 Periodic orbits on energy surfaces
21
We note that the compactness is not relevant: the statement follows if the
invariant measure on S is ﬁnite and the topology of S has a countable basis.
This observation allowed Poincar´e to apply his theorem to the restricted 3-body
problem.
In view of the recurrence theorem it seems quite natural to search for periodic
phenomena on S. One could hope that by perturbing the Hamiltonian system
slightly some of the recurrent points do not only return inﬁnitely often but close
up in ﬁnite time, thus giving rise to a periodic orbit. This is the so-called Closing
Problem. In their celebrated Closing-Lemma, C.C. Pugh and C. Robinson ([179]
1983) proved that generically (in the C2-category of the Hamiltonian functions) the
periodic orbits are dense on a compact and regular energy surface. In sharp contrast
to this generic phenomenon we are interested in the following global existence
question:
Question. Does a compact and regular energy surface S in (R2n, ω0) possess a
periodic solution of the Hamiltonian vector ﬁeld XH?
The question is still open. It should be emphasized that we are looking for
periodic solutions of a very restricted class of vector ﬁelds on S and recall that H.
Seifert ([193], 1950) raised the question, whether every nonvanishing vector ﬁeld
on the three sphere S3 has a closed orbit. The problem remained open for many
years. In 1974, P.A. Schweitzer [192] constructed a surprising vector ﬁeld in the
class C1 on S3 which has no periodic solutions, and only very recently in 1993
K. Kuperberg [132] gave an example of a C∞vector ﬁeld on S3 with no periodic
solutions. For manifolds with dimension higher than three the question had been
answered similarly in 1966 by F.W. Wilson [228]. One could ask whether there
are vector ﬁelds in the more restricted class of measure-preserving smooth vector
ﬁelds not admitting any periodic solution. For the special class of Reeb vector
ﬁelds, however, the existence of closed orbits has been established quite recently
by H. Hofer [118]: every smooth Reeb vector ﬁeld on S3 possesses a periodic orbit.
A vector ﬁeld X on S3 is called a Reeb vector ﬁeld, if there exists a 1-form λ on
S3 with λ ∧dλ deﬁning a volume form and satisfying
iXdλ = 0 and iXλ = 1 .
We shall come back to Reeb vector ﬁelds in Chapter 4 in connection with the
Weinstein conjecture on contact manifolds.
It will be crucial later on that the above question is independent of the par-
ticular choice of the Hamiltonian function representing S. It only depends on the
hypersurface and the symplectic structure. This fact is well-known from the regu-
larization of collision singularities in the celestial 2-body problem. Assume that F
is a second function deﬁning S, such that
S =

x
 H(x) = c

=

x
 F(x) = c′
(1.52)

22
Chapter 1 Introduction
with dH ̸= 0 and dF ̸= 0 on S. Then ker dF(x) = ker dH(x) and, therefore,
dF(x) = ρ(x)dH(x) for every x ∈S, with a nowhere-vanishing smooth function
ρ. Consequently, the Hamiltonian vector ﬁelds are parallel:
XF = ρXH
on
S ,
(1.53)
with ρ(x) ̸= 0. It follows that XH and XF have the same orbits on S although
their parametrization will be diﬀerent, in general. To be more precise, if ϕt is the
ﬂow of XH on S, then the ﬂow ψs of XF on S is given by
ψs(x) = ϕt(x) , t = t(s, x) ,
x ∈S ,
(1.54)
where the function t is deﬁned by the diﬀerential equation
dt
ds = ρ

ϕt(x)

,
t(0, x) = 0 ,
depending on the parameter x ∈S. We see that, in particular, XH has the same
periodic orbits as XF .
For example, if XH has the energy surface S = {x ∈R2n | 1
2 |x|2 = R > 0}, then
all the solutions of XH on S are periodic. Indeed, also the Hamiltonian F deﬁned
by F(x) = 1
2 |x|2 represents S = {x | F(x) = R} as a regular energy surface. The
vector ﬁeld XF is linear and has the ﬂow
ψs(x) = esJx = (cos s)x + (sin s)Jx,
which evidently is periodic.
We can reformulate the problem more abstractly in terms of a distinguished
line bundle. Assume S is a hypersurface in R2n. Then TxS has dimension 2n −1
so that the restriction of ω0 onto TxS must be degenerate and of rank (2n −2).
Its kernel is, therefore, 1-dimensional and we see that ω0 and S determine the line
bundle
LS =

(x, ξ) ∈TS

ω0(ξ, v) = 0 for all v ∈TxS

.
(1.55)
If S is a regular energy surface for XH, then ω0(XH(x), v) = −dH(x)v = 0 for all
v ∈TxS. Therefore,
XH(x) ∈LS(x) ,
x ∈S
for every Hamiltonian vector ﬁeld having S as a regular energy surface. Conse-
quently, the periodic solutions for XH on S correspond to the closed character-
istics of the line bundle LS. These are deﬁned as the 1-dimensional submanifold
P ⊂S diﬀeomorphic to circles for which the tangent spaces belong to LS, i.e.,
TP = LS|P. Therefore, the existence question of periodic solutions of Hamilto-
nian equations on regular energy surfaces can be reformulated geometrically as
follows:

1.5 Existence of a periodic orbit on a convex energy surface
23
Question. Does a compact smooth hypersurface S ⊂(R2n, ω0) admit a closed
characteristic of the distinguished line bundle LS?
Note that LS is deﬁned by the hypersurface and ω0. It will be demonstrated in
Chapter 4 that there are hypersurfaces S ⊂R2n and symplectic structures ω near
S and diﬀerent from ω0, such that the line bundle of S with respect to ω does not
admit closed characteristics.
The breakthrough in this global existence question is due to A. Weinstein
[225] and P. Rabinowitz [225] in 1978 who established the existence of a closed
characteristic on a convex respectively star-like hypersurface in R2n. The proofs are
based on variational principles. In particular P. Rabinowitz demonstrated that the
highly degenerate action principle previously used to derive formal transformation
properties for Hamiltonian vector ﬁelds can be used very eﬀectively for existence
proofs. This crucial idea turned out to be decisive in the further development in
which the next landmark was C. Viterbo’s proof of the A. Weinstein conjecture in
R2n in 1987. The conjecture states that every hypersurface of contact type carries
a closed characteristic. This type of symplectically restricted hypersurfaces will be
described in Chapter 4, which is devoted to the existence of closed characteristics
on hypersurfaces in symplectic manifolds. We should mention that every compact
hypersurface S gives rise to an abundance of periodic orbits which, however, are
not necessarily on the given surface but on surfaces nearby. We illustrate this with
a result which also will be proved in Chapter 4. Assume the hypersurface S belongs
to a family deﬁned by
Sε =

x
 H(x) = 1 + ε

⊂R2n
for ε in an interval I around 0, where S corresponds to S0.
Theorem 4. For almost every ε ∈I, the hypersurface Sε in R2n possesses a periodic
solution for XH.
In Chapter 4 we shall easily deduce this phenomenon from a distinguished
symplectic invariant.
1.5
Existence of a periodic orbit on a convex energy surface
In this section we shall prove a very special qualitative existence result, which
historically marked the beginning of a rapid development in global questions of
symplectic geometry and Hamiltonian mechanics. Our purpose is to illustrate the
classical technique of direct methods of the calculus of variations. This technique
is in sharp contrast to the more recent technique introduced in Chapter 3. In
Chapter 4 the result itself will be an immediate consequence of the existence of a
special symplectic invariant.

24
Chapter 1 Introduction
Theorem 5. Assume the hypersurface S ⊂(R2n, ω0) is the smooth (in the class
C2) boundary of a compact and strictly convex region in R2n. Then S carries a
closed orbit.
We conclude, in particular, that every Hamiltonian vector ﬁeld XH having S
as a regular energy surface possesses a periodic solution on S. The result is due to
P. Rabinowitz [180] and A. Weinstein [225], 1978. The proof we shall give below
is based on an idea due to F. Clarke [53].
In order to prove the theorem we make use of the freedom to choose a convenient
Hamiltonian function and introduce a particular Hamiltonian H which is positively
homogeneous of degree 2 and which represents the hypersurface as S = {x ∈
R2n  H(x) = 1}. S is the boundary of a compact and strictly convex region C
in R2n, and we may assume that C contains the origin in its interior. Then each
ray issuing from the origin meets S in exactly one point nontangentially. Thus if
x ̸= 0 is given, there is a unique point ξ = λ−1x on S, where λ > 0.
x
ξ
O
C
S = ∂C
Fig. 1.2
If we deﬁne the function F on R2n by F(x) = λ if ξ = λ−1x ∈S for x ̸= 0,
and F(0) = 0, then the manifold S is represented by S = {x
 F(x) = 1}. We
would like to describe S in terms of a strictly convex function H as the level set
{x
 H(x) = 1}, i.e., a function whose Hessian Hxx(x) is positive deﬁnite at every
point x ̸= 0. Since F is homogeneous of degree 1, it is obviously never strictly
convex. Indeed, diﬀerentiating Euler’s formula ⟨Fx, x⟩= F gives Fxxx = 0. By the
convexity assumption Fxx
 TS > 0. Therefore, we deﬁne the function
H(x) =

F(x)
2
which is strictly convex precisely if S is strictly convex as one proves without diﬃ-
culty. We thus have shown that every strictly convex energy surface S containing

1.5 Existence of a periodic orbit on a convex energy surface
25
the origin in its interior can be represented by
S
=
{x
 H(x) = 1}
(1.56)
with a function H : R2n −→R satisfying
(i)
H ∈C2(R2n\{0}),
H(0)
=
0
(ii)
Hxx(x) > 0
if
x
̸=
0
(iii)
H(ρx) = ρ2H(x)
if
ρ
≥
0.
(1.57)
In view of our discussion in the previous section, it suﬃces to show that this
special Hamiltonian vector ﬁeld XH possesses a periodic solution on this energy
surface S, i.e., we have to show that there is a periodic solution of
˙x = J∇H(x)
on
S.
Normalizing the period we can ask for a periodic solution of period 2π on S for
the equation
˙x = λ J∇H(x)
for some
λ ̸= 0.
(1.58)
For example, the variational principle
min
2π

0
H

x(t)

dt
under
1
2
2π

0
⟨Jx, ˙x⟩= 1 ,
where the functions x(t) are assumed to be 2π-periodic, has the above equations as
Euler equations. But one easily shows that neither the inﬁmum nor the supremum
is taken on, even if H(x) = 1
2|x|2. The trick now is to use an alternative variational
principle having the same diﬀerential equations for which, however, the inﬁmum is
taken on. We shall form the Legendre transformation of H, but in contrast to the
usual Legendre transformation of physics, all variables will be transformed. The
function G(y) related to H(x) by a Legendre transformation can be deﬁned by
G(y) = max
ξ∈R2n

⟨ξ, y⟩−H(ξ)

= ⟨x, y⟩−H(x).
There is indeed a unique maximum x ∈R2n given by y = ∇H(x), since Hxx(y) is
positive deﬁnite for y ̸= 0 and since H satisﬁes
1
c |y|2 ≤H(y) ≤c |y|2, y ∈R2n
(1.59)
for some constant c > 1. The estimate is an immediate consequence of the homo-
geneity of H. Summarizing, we have
G(y) + H(x) = ⟨x, y⟩
(1.60)

26
Chapter 1 Introduction
for
y = ∇H(x)
and
x = ∇G(y).
(1.61)
Clearly G(0) = 0, G ∈C2(R2n\{0}) and G is positively homogeneous of degree
2. Since Hxx(x) · Gyy(y) = 1l for x ̸= 0, G is also strictly convex if y ̸= 0, so that
G enjoys the same properties as H :
(i)
G(0)
= 0, G ∈C2(R2n\{0})
(ii)
Gyy(y)
> 0
if
y ̸= 0
(iii)
G(ρy)
= ρ2G(y)
for
ρ ≥0.
We now look at the new, alternate, variational principle for 2π-periodic functions z:
min
2π

0
G( ˙z)dt
under
1
2
2π

0
⟨Jz, ˙z⟩= 1 ,
(1.62)
which we shall solve by the standard direct variational methods. To be more pre-
cise, we deﬁne the following function space F of periodic functions z(t) = z(t+2π)
having mean value 0:
F = {z ∈H1(S1)
 1
2π
2π

0
z(t)dt = 0} ,
where H1(S1) is the Hilbert space of absolutely continuous 2π-periodic functions
whose derivatives are square integrable, i.e., belong to L2(S1). Note that with z
also z+ const. is a solution of (1.62), hence the condition on the mean value ﬁxes
the constant. By A ⊂F we shall denote the subset
A = {z ∈F
 1
2
2π

0
⟨Jz, ˙z⟩= 1}.
Following the standard procedure we shall verify that the functional
I(z) =
2π

0
G

˙z(t)

dt
on A
meets the following properties:
(i) It is bounded from below on A.

1.5 Existence of a periodic orbit on a convex energy surface
27
(ii) It takes on its minimum on A, i.e., there exists z∗∈A satisfying
2π

0
G( ˙z∗)dt = inf
z∈A
2π

0
G( ˙z)dt = µ > 0.
(iii) z∗solves the Euler equations
∇G( ˙z∗) = αJz∗+ β
in L2(S1) with constants α ̸= 0 and β.
(iv) z∗belongs to C2 and satisﬁes
˙z∗= ∇H(αJz∗+ β)
pointwise, and x(t) = c (αJz∗(t) + β) is the desired solution of ˙x = J∇H(x)
on S for an appropriate constant c.
Ad (i): We need some estimates. Since every z belonging to F has mean value
zero, the Poincar´e inequality
∥z∥≤∥˙z∥
,
z ∈F
holds, where ∥·∥denotes the L2 norm. This follows simply from the Fourier series.
For z ∈A we conclude
2 =
2π

0
⟨Jz, ˙z⟩≤∥z∥∥˙z∥≤∥˙z∥2, z ∈A.
(1.63)
The function G being strictly convex and positively homogeneous of degree 2
satisﬁes the estimate
1
K |y|2 ≤G(y) ≤K|y|2 for y ∈R2n with some constant
K ≥1. Therefore, by means of (1.63), we ﬁnd for z ∈A
2π

0
G( ˙z)dt ≥1
K ∥˙z∥2 ≥2
K > 0 ,
(1.64)
i.e., the functional is bounded from below by a positive constant, in particular,
µ > 0.
Ad (ii): We choose a minimizing sequence zj ∈A such that
lim
j→∞
2π

0
G( ˙zj)dt = µ.
(1.65)
In view of (1.63) and (1.64) there is a constant M > 0 with 2 ≤∥˙zj∥2 ≤M
and we obtain ∥zj∥≥2∥˙zj∥−1 ≥
2
√
M and hence, by Poincar´e’s inequality
2
√
M ≤

28
Chapter 1 Introduction
∥zj∥≤
√
M. In particular zj is a bounded sequence in the Hilbert space H1(S1)
and, therefore, a subsequence, also denoted by zj converges weakly in H1(S1) to
an element z∗∈H1(S1) :
zj →z∗
weakly in H1(S1).
(1.66)
We have used the well-known fact that the closed unit ball of a Hilbert space is
weakly sequentially compact. In addition, for a function ˆz∗∈C(S1) ,
sup
t |zj(t) −ˆz∗(t)| →0 ,
(1.67)
i.e., zj converges uniformly to ˆz∗. Indeed the zj are equicontinuous:
|zj(t) −zj(τ)|
≤
|
t

τ
˙zj(s)ds |
≤
|t −τ|1/2∥˙zj∥
≤
|t −τ|1/2√
M,
and the claim follows from the Arzel`a-Ascoli theorem. Clearly z∗(t) = ˆz∗(t) almost
everywhere. Indeed, with the L2 inner product we can write (z∗−ˆz∗, z∗−ˆz∗) =
(zj −ˆz∗, z∗−ˆz∗)+(z∗−zj, z∗−ˆz∗). The ﬁrst term on the right hand side converges
to 0 in view of the uniform convergence and the second one in view of the weak
convergence.
We shall show that z∗∈A. By (1.67) we conclude that the mean value of z∗
vanishes. Also,
2 =
2π

0
⟨Jzj, ˙zj⟩=
2π

0
⟨J(zj −z∗), ˙zj⟩+
2π

0
⟨Jz∗, ˙zj⟩.
The ﬁrst term on the right hand side tends to 0 by (1.67) since ∥˙zj∥≤
√
M is
bounded, and the second term converges by (1.66) so that
2π

0
⟨Jz∗, ˙z∗⟩= 2
and therefore z∗∈A. We next show that this z∗is a minimum. From the convexity
of G we deduce the pointwise estimate ⟨∇G(y1), y2 −y1 ⟩≤G(y2) −G(y1) ≤
⟨∇G(y2), y2 −y1⟩, which applied to ˙z∗(t) = y2 and y1 = ˙zj(t) gives
2π

0
G( ˙z∗)dt −
2π

0
G( ˙zj)dt ≤
2π

0
⟨∇G( ˙z∗), ˙z∗−˙zj⟩dt.

1.5 Existence of a periodic orbit on a convex energy surface
29
Observing that ∇G, being positively homogeneous of degree 1, satisﬁes an estimate
|∇G(y)| ≤C|y| for y ∈R2n and for some constant C > 0, we conclude that ∇G( ˙z∗)
belongs to L2 so that the right hand side tends to zero, since ( ˙z∗−˙zj) →0 weakly
in L2. Thus
µ ≤
2π

0
G( ˙z∗) ≤lim inf
j→∞
2π

0
G( ˙zj)dt = µ
by (1.65) and we have proved that z∗is a minimum of I(z), for z ∈A.
Ad (iii): Since z∗is a minimum, we have
2π

0
⟨∇G( ˙z∗), ˙ζ⟩= 0
(1.68)
for every test function ζ ∈F satisfying
2π

0
⟨Jz∗, ˙ζ⟩= 0.
(1.69)
We now choose ζ of the form
˙ζ = ∇G( ˙z∗) −αJz∗−β
with two constants α und β. In order that ζ be periodic we pick β so that the
mean value of ˙ζ is zero:
2π

0
˙ζdt =
2π

0
∇G( ˙z∗)dt −2πβ = 0 ,
and next determine the constant α so that (1.69) holds true. Using again that z∗
has mean value zero we ﬁnd that the equation
0 =
2π

0
⟨Jz∗, ˙ζ⟩=
2π

0
⟨Jz∗, ∇G( ˙z∗)⟩−α
2π

0
⟨Jz∗, Jz∗⟩
(1.70)
has a unique solution α, since its coeﬃcient does not vanish. With this test function
ζ we compute
2π

0
| ˙ζ|2 =
2π

0
⟨∇G( ˙z∗), ˙ζ⟩−α
2π

0
⟨Jz∗, ˙ζ⟩−⟨β,
2π

0
˙ζ⟩

30
Chapter 1 Introduction
which, in view of the condition (1.68) vanishes. We conclude that z∗satisﬁes the
Euler equations
∇G( ˙z∗) = αJz∗+ β
(1.71)
for constants α and β, as was, of course, to be expected. For the constant α we
ﬁnd α = µ, so that α > 0. Indeed, using the Euler equations and the homogeneity
of G we compute
2µ = 2
2π

0
G( ˙z∗) =
2π

0
⟨∇G( ˙z∗), ˙z∗⟩= α
2π

0
⟨Jz∗, ˙z∗⟩= 2α .
Ad (iv): It is easy to see that z∗belongs to C2. Recalling that x = ∇G(y) is
inverted by y = ∇H(x) pointwise we ﬁnd from the Euler equations that
˙z∗(t) = ∇H(αJz∗(t) + β)
(1.72)
for almost every t. The right hand side is continuous and we conclude that z∗∈C1,
and, inserting it again into the right hand side, we ﬁnd z∗∈C2. Finally, setting
x(t) = c

αJz∗(t) + β

,
with c > 0, we obtain from (1.72) using the homogeneity of ∇H
˙x = c αJ ∇H(αJz∗+ β) = αJ ∇H(x)
and, since H is of degree 2,
2π

0
H(x)dt = 1
2
2π

0
⟨∇H(x), x⟩= 1
2c2α
2π

0
⟨˙z∗, Jz∗⟩= c2α
which is equal to 2π if we choose c =

2π
α . Therefore, x(t) is a 2π-periodic solution
of the equation ˙x = αJ ∇H(x) and lies on the energy surface H = 1. Consequently
y(t) = x(α−1t) is the desired periodic solution of ˙x = J∇H(x) on H = 1 which
has the period T = 2πα = 2πµ. But this is unimportant since the period of the
periodic solution on S depends on our choice of the Hamiltonian function. This
ﬁnishes the proof of the theorem. ■
Recalling the transformation properties of Hamiltonian vector ﬁelds, one con-
cludes from the above theorem that every hypersurface in R2n which is symplec-
tically diﬀeomorphic to a strictly convex one, always possesses a closed charac-
teristic. Such a situation is, however, hard to recognize and we shall see below
that there are hypersurfaces which are not symplectically diﬀeomorphic to convex
ones. It will be our aim in Chapter 4 to describe symplectically invariant prop-
erties of a hypersurface which guarantee the existence of a closed characteristic.

1.6 The problem of symplectic embeddings
31
The existence will, however, be established by means of a very diﬀerent variational
principle.
The idea of the above proof, sometimes called the dual action principle, prompt-
ed many existence results for convex Hamiltonians. For example, I. Ekeland [65]
1984 established a Morse theory for periodic solutions on convex hypersurfaces
which is analogous to the one for closed geodesics on compact Riemannian man-
ifolds. Using Ekeland’s Morse theory he showed that generically (in the C∞cat-
egory) every compact and convex hypersurface S ⊂R2n carries inﬁnitely many
periodic orbits [65, 66, 67]. In the special case that the convex surface S ⊂R2n is
close to a round sphere in the sense that
B(r) ⊂S ⊂B(R)
and
R ≤
√
2r
for two open balls of radius r and R (where the ﬁrst inclusion means contained in
the inside of S), one can prove that S carries at least n closed characteristics [70].
Here the convexity requirement can be relaxed somewhat and we refer to [21] for
the precise statement.
For an account of this circle of questions concerning convex Hamiltonians,
we refer to the recent book by I. Ekeland: “Convexity Methods in Hamiltonian
Mechanics” (1990), [66].
1.6
The problem of symplectic embeddings
We consider two compact connected domains D1 and D2 in Rm having smooth
boundaries. If the domains are diﬀeomorphic by an orientation preserving diﬀeo-
morphism, one can ask the question: under what additional conditions on D1 and
D2 does there exist a volume-preserving diﬀeomorphism, i.e., a diﬀeomorphism
ϕ : D1 →D2 satisfying det ϕ′(x) = 1 for every x in the interior of D1? Clearly,
vol (D1) = vol (D2)
is a necessary condition. It turns out that this is already the only condition which is
also suﬃcient for the existence of a volume-preserving diﬀeomorphism. This follows
from the following extension of Theorem 2 in Section 3 to the case of manifolds
with boundaries.
Theorem 6. (Dacorogna-Moser) Let D1 and D2 be two compact connected domains
with smooth boundaries in Rm. Assume α(x) = a(x) dx1 ∧. . . ∧dxm is a smooth
volume form on D1 and β(x) = b(x)dx1∧. . .∧dxm is a smooth volume form on D2
with a > 0 and b > 0. If ϕ : D1 →D2 is an orientation preserving diﬀeomorphism,
then there exists a diﬀeomorphism ψ : D1 →D2 satisfying, in addition, ψ = ϕ on
∂D1 and
det

ψ′(x)

· b

ψ(x)

= λa(x),

32
Chapter 1 Introduction
where the constant λ is deﬁned by

D2
b = λ ·

D1
a.
If, in particular, vol D1 = vol D2 we choose a = 1 and b = 1 and ﬁnd λ = 1 and
det ψ′(x) = 1, so that ψ is volume-preserving. We conclude that the total volume is
the only invariant of volume preserving diﬀeomorphisms. For a proof of Theorem 6
with precise regularity conditions for the boundaries and the volume forms, we refer
to Dacorogna and Moser [59]. In the special case R2, the volume form dx1 ∧dx2 is
a symplectic form and we see that the total area alone distinguishes diﬀeomorphic
symplectic manifolds from each other. In higher dimensions the situation is very
diﬀerent.
In the symplectic space (R2n, ω0) one can ask the same questions for symplec-
tic diﬀeomorphisms instead of volume preserving diﬀeomorphisms. Consider, for
example, a symplectic diﬀeomorphism ϕ of R2n which maps D1 onto D2. Then it
maps the boundary ∂D1 of D1 onto ∂D2. The canonical line bundles of the two
hypersurfaces are, therefore, isomorphic and the corresponding Hamiltonian ﬂows
are conjugated up to reparametrization. In particular, the actions of the corre-
sponding closed characteristics, if there are any, have to agree. We can, moreover,
thicken the boundaries into a one parameter family of hypersurfaces. As we shall
prove in Chapter 4, the leaves of such a foliation of a neighborhood of a hyper-
surface carry an abundance of closed characteristics. Consequently, one expects
many symplectic invariants and we see that the problem of distinguishing diﬀeo-
morphic domains from the symplectic point of view is of quite a diﬀerent nature
than the volume preserving situation. Turning, therefore, to a seemingly simpler
but related problem, we consider two open domains U and V in R2n and look for
conditions which allow a symplectic embedding ϕ : U →V . This is an embedding
ϕ : U →R2n satisfying, in addition, ϕ∗ω0 = ω0 and ϕ(U) ⊂V .
U
ϕ
V
Fig. 1.3
Since such a ϕ is also volume preserving we clearly have the restriction vol(U) ≤
vol(V ). The condition vol (U) < vol (V ) is already suﬃcient to guarantee the

1.6 The problem of symplectic embeddings
33
existence of a volume preserving embedding. The question arises whether there
are obstacles apart from the volume for symplectic embeddings. Consider, for
example, an open ball B(R) of radius R > 0:
B(R) =

(x, y) ∈R2n  |x|2 + |y|2 < R2
which, of course, has ﬁnite volume. It can easily be embedded symplectically into
the special open cylinders of inﬁnite volume which are deﬁned by
ˆZ(r) =

(x, y) ∈R2n  x2
1 + x2
2 < r2
for every r > 0. Indeed, simply take the linear symplectic map
ϕ(x, y) =

εx1, εx2, x3, . . . , xn, 1
εy1, 1
εy2, y3, . . . , yn

.
Then ϕ(B(R)) ⊂ˆZ(r) if ε > 0 is chosen suﬃciently small. Note that the 2-plane
span
{e1, e2} of R2n deﬁning this cylinder is isotropic and hence inherits no
symplectic structure. The situation changes drastically if we replace ˆZ(r) by the
cylinder
Z(r) =

(x, y) ∈R2n  x2
1 + y2
1 < r2
.
This cylinder is deﬁned by the 2-plane span {e1, f1} which is a symplectic sub-
space. Trying similarly with the map
ψ(x, y) =

εx1, 1
εx2, x3, . . . , xn, εy1, 1
εy2, y3, . . . , yn

one ﬁnds ψ(B(R)) ⊂Z(r) if ε is small. The map ψ is volume preserving. But,
ψ is symplectic only if ε = 1 in which case we can have ψ(B(R)) ⊂Z(r) only if
r ≥R. So far we experimented using linear symplectic mappings and one might
hope to do better with nonlinear symplectic mappings. This is not the case. In
1985, M. Gromov [107] discovered the following surprising result.
Theorem 7. (Gromov’s squeezing theorem) Assume there is a symplectic embedding
ϕ deﬁned on B(R) and satisfying
ϕ(B(R)) ⊂Z(r)
then r ≥R (Fig. 1.4).
This phenomenon demonstrates clearly that the symplectic structure of a map
is much more rigid than the volume preserving structure. Gromov’s discovery moti-
vated the search for symplectic invariants and a class of such symplectic invariants
was constructed in 1987 by I. Ekeland and H. Hofer [68, 69] by means of a varia-
tional principle for periodic solutions of Hamiltonian equations; the construction
was motivated by earlier results in [67]. These invariants, described in the next

34
Chapter 1 Introduction
R
r
Z(r)
(x1, y1)-plane
Fig. 1.4
chapter, will give an explanation of rigidity phenomena for many symplectic em-
beddings, among them the result above.
One is tempted to give an explanation of the rigidity phenomenon above from
a dynamical point of view. Observe that the hypersurface ∂B(R) is the stan-
dard sphere on which all characteristics are closed. It is an energy surface for the
quadratic Hamiltonian function
H(x, y) = 1
2

|x|2 + |y|2
.
The Hamiltonian equations ˙z = J∇H(z) with z ∈R2n are linear and the solutions
z(t) = eJtz(0)
satisfy |z(1)|2 = |z(0)|2. They are periodic with period 2π. Moreover, on ∂B(R)
they all have the same action
A(z) = πR2,
z(t) ∈∂B(R).
Similarly, one veriﬁes that the characteristics on ∂Z(r) are all closed, wind around
the cylinder, and have the actions A(z) = πr2 for z(t) ⊂∂Z(r), quite in contrast
to the characteristics on ∂ˆZ(r) which are straight lines. If now ϕ is a symplectic
embedding of B(R), then on ∂ϕ(B(R)) the characteristics are also closed and have
the actions πR2. Imagine now that there is an “optimal embedding” of B(R) into
Z(r) in which case one is inclined to think that the boundary of the embedded ball
touches the boundary of the cylinder and that this is happening along a closed
characteristic. We then conclude in view of the invariance of the actions that r = R.
A proof of Gromov’s theorem along these lines does not exist and we shall proceed
diﬀerently later on.

1.7 Symplectic classification of . . .
35
1.7
Symplectic classiﬁcation of positive deﬁnite quadratic forms
Before we turn to the subtle problem of embedding an open set in another one using
a symplectic map, it is useful to study the special case in which the open sets are
ellipsoids and the symplectic maps under consideration are linear. We start with an
algebraic observation well-known in mechanics. Recall that a function q : V →R
on a vector space V is called a quadratic form if there is a symmetric bilinear form
ˆq : V × V →R such that
q(x) = 1
2 ˆq(x, x), x ∈V.
The quadratic form q is called positive deﬁnite if ˆq is an inner product in V .
Choosing a basis in V , we have the representation
ˆq(x, y)
=
⟨Sx, y⟩
q(x)
=
1
2⟨Sx, x⟩, S = ST > 0
for x, y ∈V . From now on (V, ω) = (R2n, ω) is the standard symplectic vector
space with the symplectic form (previously denoted by ω0) given by
ω(x, y)
=
⟨Jx, y⟩,
x, y ∈R2n
and
J
=

0
−1
1
0

.
Denoting by P the set of positive deﬁnite quadratic forms on V , and by G = Sp(n)
the group of linear symplectic maps ϕ of V , i.e., ϕ∗ω = ω, we have the G-action
on P deﬁned by the composition
P × G →P :
[q, ϕ] 
→q ◦ϕ.
It turns out that the orbits of P under this action are characterized by n positive
numbers. The form q can be diagonalized by means of a linear map which leaves
the form ω invariant. This algebraic fact was already known to K. Weierstrass
[220].
Theorem 8. If q ∈P then there is a linear map ϕ satisfying ϕ∗ω = ω and
q ◦ϕ(x) = 1
2
n

j=1
λj(x2
j + x2
n+j),
with 0 < λn ≤λn−1 ≤. . . ≤λ1. The numbers λj are uniquely determined by q
and ω. Indeed (±iλj) for 1 ≤j ≤n are the eigenvalues of the linear Hamiltonian
vector ﬁeld Xq associated with q and ω by
ω (Xq(x), y) = −dq(x)(y)
for all x, y ∈R2n.

36
Chapter 1 Introduction
Postponing the proof we observe that if q(x) = 1
2⟨Sx, x⟩with a positive def-
inite symmetric matrix S, then Xq is the linear vector ﬁeld Xq(x) = JSx, and
if τ ∈Sp(n) is any symplectic matrix, we conclude by the transformation law of
Hamiltonian vector ﬁelds
Xq◦τ = τ −1 · Xq · τ.
Thus the two linear vector ﬁelds Xq and Xq◦τ are similar to each other and have,
therefore, the same eigenvalues. Associating with q the n positive real numbers
λ = λ(q) ∈Rn guaranteed by the theorem, we conclude that
λ(q ◦τ) = λ(q)
for all q ∈P and τ ∈Sp(n), so that these numbers characterize the orbits of P
under Sp(n).
This is, of course, in contrast to the action of the orthogonal group of ma-
trices satisfying AT A = 1. Since q ◦A(x) =
1
2⟨SAx, Ax⟩=
1
2⟨AT SAx, x⟩=
1
2⟨A−1SAx, x⟩we see that the orbits of P under O(2n) are determined by the
2n positive eigenvalues of the symmetric matrix S in contrast to the n imagi-
nary eigenvalue pairs (±iλj) of JS. On R2, for example, a positive quadratic form
is, after an orthogonal transformation, of the form q(x) =
1
2⟨Sx, x⟩with a di-
agonal matrix S = Diag (λ1, λ2) and λj > 0. The theorem guarantees a linear
map τ satisfying det τ = 1 which transforms q into the symplectic normal form
q ◦τ(x) = 1
2⟨Qx, x⟩with Q = Diag (λ, λ). Geometrically the ellipsoid {q(x) < 1}
is symplectically mapped onto the disc {q ◦τ(x) < 1} having the same area. We
see that in R2 the normal forms correspond to discs distinguished by the area.
Proof. On the product space (x, y) ∈V ×V , the functions K(x, y) = q(x)+q(y) and
ω(x, y) are quadratic forms. Since K is positive deﬁnite we can apply a well-known
variational argument. On the compact manifold M = M(q) deﬁned by
M = {(x, y) ∈V × V | q(x) + q(y) = 1} ,
the continuous function (x, y) 
→ω(x, y) attains a maximum, say at (a, b) ∈M,
such that
ω(a, b)
=
max
ω(x, y).
(x, y) ∈M
We point out that a critical point (a, b) ∈M of ω|M lies in a whole circle consisting
of critical points belonging to the same critical level. Indeed, if we deﬁne the circle
action on V × V by
eit · (x, y) = (x(t), y(t)) , t ∈R,
where
x(t) = (cos t)x + (sin t)y,
y(t) = (cos t)y −(sin t)x,

1.7 Symplectic classification of . . .
37
then one veriﬁes readily that the quadratic forms are invariant under the action,
i.e.,
K (x(t), y(t)) = K (x, y)
and
ω (x(t), y(t)) = ω (x, y)
for all (x, y) ∈V × V .
If λ ∈R denotes the Lagrange multiplier of the critical point (a, b) ∈V × V ,
we have for the derivatives dK(a, b) = λ dω(a, b) or explicitly
ˆq(a, x)
=
dq(a)(x)
=
λ ω(x, b)
(1.73)
ˆq(y, b)
=
dq(b)(y)
=
λ ω(a, y)
for every x, y ∈V . We have used the representation dq(x)(y) = ˆq(x, y) of the
derivative of q. In view of q(x) =
1
2 ˆq(x, x) one concludes from (1.73) that 2 =
2(q(a) + q(b)) = 2λ ω(a, b). Since the maximum ω(a, b) is positive,
ω(a, b) = 1
λ > 0.
(1.74)
In particular, a, b are linearly independent in V since ω is antisymmetric. As
ω(a, b) ̸= 0 the 2-dimensional subspace V1 = span {a, b} ⊂V is symplectic. It is
the eigenspace of Xq belonging to the pair ±iλ of purely imaginary eigenvalues.
Indeed, the equations (1.73) are equivalent to
Xq(a) = +λb and Xq(b) = −λa
so that Xq(a ± ib) = ∓(iλ)(a ± ib). Normalizing, we introduce e1 = αa, f1 = −αb
with α2 = λ and ﬁnd ω(f1, e1) = 1. Hence the pair e1, f1 constitutes a symplectic
basis of V1 for which
q(e1) = q(f1) = λ
2
and
ˆq(e1, f1) = 0.
(1.75)
Recalling the identity ˆq(x, y) = q(x + y) −q(x) −q(y) for x, y ∈V , we, therefore,
have
q(v) = λ
2 (ξ2 + η2)
(1.76)
if v = ξe1 + ηf1 ∈V1, which is the desired normal form in V1. In order to iterate
this argument we denote by
V ⊥
1 = {v ∈V | ω(v1, v) = 0 for all v1 ∈V1}
the symplectic complement in V . Then V ⊥
1
is a symplectic subspace and
V = V1 ⊕V ⊥
1 .

38
Chapter 1 Introduction
Indeed, V1 ∩V ⊥
1 = {0} since ω is nondegenerate on V1; moreover v −ω(v, e1)f1 +
ω(v, f1)e1 ∈V ⊥
1
for every v ∈V so that V = V1 + V ⊥
1 . If v ∈V1 and w ∈V ⊥
1
then
ω(v, w) = 0 and we claim that v and w are also orthogonal with respect to ˆq:
ˆq(v, w) = 0.
This is true, since V1 is an eigenspace. Indeed, by inserting x and y ∈V ⊥
1
into the
equations (1.73), the right hand side vanishes, hence also the left hand side, and
since V1 = span {a, b}, the claim is proved. Equivalently we have
q(v + w) = q(v) + q(w)
if
v ∈V1 and w ∈V ⊥
1 .
(1.77)
We can apply the same arguments as above to the restriction of q onto the sym-
plectic space V ⊥
1 . Iteratively we ﬁnd a splitting V = V1 ⊕V2 ⊕· · · ⊕Vn into n
distinguished 2-dimensional symplectic spaces Vj, which are the eigenspaces of Xq
belonging to the pairs (∓iλj) of eigenvalues, with λj > 0. In view of (1.77)
q(v) = q(v1) + q(v2) + · · · + q(vn)
if v = v1 +v2 +· · · +vn with vj ∈Vj. Moreover, there are symplectic bases (ej, fj)
in Vj such that
q(v) = 1
2
n

j=1
λj(x2
j + x2
n+j)
if v =
n
j=1
(xjej + xn+jfj). This is the required normal form of q and the proof of
Theorem 8 is ﬁnished. ■
Changing the notation and introducing λi =
2
r2
i , i = 1, 2, . . . , n, we shall write
for the normal form
q ◦ϕ(x) =
n

j=1
1
r2
j
(x2
j + x2
j+n),
hence associating with every q ∈P, the positive numbers
0 < r1(q) ≤r2(q) ≤· · · ≤rn(q)
which characterize the orbits of the Sp(n)-action on P. Abbreviating r = (r1, r2,
. . ., rn) we have proved:
Proposition 7.
r(q) = r(q ◦ϕ)
for all q ∈P and all ϕ ∈Sp(n). Moreover, if
r(q) = r(Q)
for q, Q ∈P then there is a ϕ ∈Sp(n) satisfying Q = q ◦ϕ. ■

1.7 Symplectic classification of . . .
39
Proposition 8. Assume q and Q ∈P.
Q ≤q
=⇒
rj(q) ≤rj(Q)
for
1 ≤j ≤n.
Proof. From our proof of Theorem 8 we know, recalling the notation above,
1
2rn(q)2 =
1
λn(q) = max
M(q) ω = ω(a, b) ,
where M(q) = {(x, y) ∈V × V | q(x) + q(y) = 1}. Since Q(x) ≤q(x) for all
x ∈V there exists α ≥1 such that 1 = Q(αa) + Q(αb). Hence (αa, αb) ∈M(Q) =
{(x, y)|Q(x) + Q(y) = 1} and ω(αa, αb) = α2 ω(a, b)
≥
ω(a, b). Taking the
maximum of ω on M(Q), we conclude rn(Q) ≥rn(q). More generally, one veriﬁes
the estimates rj(Q) ≥rj(q) for 1 ≤j ≤n readily, using the following minimax
characterization of the critical levels:
1
2rj(q)2 = min
W∈Fj

max
W∩M(q) ω

,
where Fj denotes the family of all linear subspaces W ⊂V × V of dimension
2n + 2j and 1 ≤j ≤n. Indeed, recalling that ω and K are, on the product
space V × V , quadratic forms and that K is positive deﬁnite, this is simply the
Courant-Hilbert minimax principle for the eigenvalues of the symmetric matrix
associated to the form ω with respect to the inner product deﬁned by the positive
form K. We took, however, into account that the problem is invariant under the
circle action deﬁned above. In particular, if (a, b) ∈V × V is a critical point then
(−b, a) is also a critical point on the same critical level. Hence each eigenvalue in
the Courant-Hilbert principle has multiplicity at least 2. The general principle will
give the positive characteristic levels c4n ≥c4n−1 · · · ≥c2n+1, and, in order to ﬁnd
all the positive critical levels, we have chosen above
1
2rj(q)2 = c2n+2j
for 1 ≤j ≤n. ■
In order to interpret the above results geometrically, we associate with the form
q ∈P the ellipsoid E(q), deﬁned as the open set
E(q) = {x | q(x) < 1} ⊂R2n.
(1.78)
The group action of Sp(n) is then visualized by
ϕ−1(E(q)) = E(q ◦ϕ).
(1.79)
Observe that
E(q) ⊂E(Q)
⇐⇒
q ≥Q ,
(1.80)

40
Chapter 1 Introduction
so that E(q) = E(Q) if and only if q = Q. We can, therefore, associate with the
open set E, the numbers r(E), deﬁned by
r(E) = r(q)
if E = E(q).
(1.81)
In view of (1.79), we conclude from Proposition 7 that the numbers r are invariant
under the group of linear symplectic mappings. Summarizing, we have proved:
Proposition 9. If E, F are ellipsoids and ϕ ∈Sp(n) then
r (ϕ(E)) = r(E).
Conversely, if r(E) = r(F) then there exists a map ϕ ∈Sp(n) satisfying ϕ(E) =
F. ■
The crucial observation now is that these invariants have a monotonicity prop-
erty. Indeed, in view of (1.80) the Proposition 8 can be restated as follows.
Proposition 10. If E, F are ellipsoids, then
E ⊂F
⇒
rj(E) ≤rj(F)
for 1 ≤j ≤n .
Conversely, if rj(E) ≤rj(F) for 1 ≤j ≤n, then there exists a ϕ ∈Sp(n) satisfying
ϕ(E) ⊂F.
Summarizing our considerations, we have deﬁned for the open sets E of ellip-
soids in R2n the invariants r(E) which allow us to answer the question of linear
symplectic embeddings of ellipsoids as follows:
Theorem 9. If E and F are two ellipsoids, then there exists ϕ ∈Sp(n) such that
ϕ(E) ⊂F
if and only if rj(E) ≤rj(F) for all 1 ≤j ≤n. ■
We illustrate the statement with an example. If B = B(R) = {x| |x|2 < R2}
is the open ball of radius R, then rj(B) = R for all 1 ≤j ≤n and we can ﬁnd
a map ϕ ∈Sp(n) embedding B into the ellipsoid E if and only if E is restricted
by the condition r1(E) ≥R. All this is, of course, not surprising. After all we
consider only linear symplectic mappings and one might hope that the use of
nonlinear symplectic embeddings is more ﬂexible. It turns out, however, and this
is a very surprising phenomenon discovered only recently, that if ϕ : B(R) →E
is any symplectic embedding then, r1(E) ≥R still. We shall prove this rigidity
statement later on using a global symplectic invariant c(U) deﬁned for every open
set U ⊂R2n and satisfying c(ϕ(U)) = c(U) for symplectic diﬀeomorphisms. This
invariant extends r1 so that c(E) = πr1(E)2 for ellipsoids E. It has, in addition,
the monotonicity property in the sense that c(U) ≤c(V ) provided there is a
symplectic embedding ϕ : U →V .
Since the construction of this global invariant c will be related to special pe-
riodic solutions of Hamiltonian equations, it is useful to interpret the symplectic

1.7 Symplectic classification of . . .
41
invariants r(E) from a dynamical point of view. There is a relation between r(E)
and certain closed characteristics on the boundary ∂E of E, which is the compact
hypersurface
∂E = {z | q(z) = 1 } ,
if E = E(q).
We may assume q to be in normal form
q(z) =
n

j=1
x2
j + y2
j
r2
j
.
Correspondingly, V splits into the 2-dimensional symplectic planes V = V1 ⊕V2 ⊕
· · ·⊕Vn and zj = (xj, yj) ∈R2 are the symplectic coordinates in Vj. The solutions
z(t) = (z1(t), . . . , zn(t)) of the associated Hamiltonian vector ﬁeld Xq are easily
computed. Setting λj =
2
r2
j , we have
zj(t) = etλjJzj(0),
1 ≤j ≤n,
where J is the standard 2 × 2 matrix of the symplectic structure. Consequently,
∂E ∩Vj carries the distinguished periodic solution wj(t) = (0, . . . , 0, zj(t), 0, . . . , 0)
given by
zj(t) = etλjJzj(0) and |zj(0)|2 = r2
j
and having period T = πr2
j. Its action, a global symplectic invariant, is
A(wj) = 1
2
T

0
⟨−J ˙wj, wj⟩= πr2
j.
We see that the invariant rj of the set E is represented by a closed characteristic
on ∂E. In particular,
πr1(E)2 = min { |A(z)| :
z is a closed characteristic on ∂E} .
In the following, the dynamical approach will be extremely useful in the con-
struction of symplectic invariants.
We would like to add that the quadratic forms play an important role if one
studies the orbit structure of a Hamiltonian vector ﬁeld XH locally near an equi-
librium point, i.e., a point at which XH vanishes. We shall ﬁnish this chapter by
describing some well-known results illustrating this. We may assume the equilib-
rium to be the origin, so that ∇H(0) = 0 and
XH(z) = JHzz(0)z + · · ·
for z near the origin in R2n. From now on we shall assume the eigenvalues of
JHzz(0) to be purely imaginary, so that (±iλj) for 1 ≤j ≤n are all the eigenval-
ues. If one assumes, in addition, that JHzz(0) can be diagonalized symplectically

42
Chapter 1 Introduction
one can write, after a linear symplectic transformation,
H(z) = 1
2
n

j=1
λj(x2
j + y2
j ) + · · · ,
with real numbers λj ∈R. In view of Theorem 8, we can always achieve this nor-
mal form if Hzz(0) is positive deﬁnite. Now R2n is decomposed into the sum of
symplectic 2-planes (xj, yj) which are ﬁlled with periodic solutions of the linear
system ˙z = JHzz(0)z having periods
2π
|λj|. The question arises whether these fami-
lies have a continuation to solutions of the nonlinear system near z = 0. The vector
ﬁeld XH may not admit any periodic solution except z = 0, as examples show.
By restricting the λj, a well-known result due to Lyapunov [145] guarantees a
continuation under inﬁnitely many nonresonance conditions. It is, therefore, quite
remarkable that in the positive deﬁnite case studied above, no such conditions are
needed, as the following result due to A. Weinstein [223] demonstrates:
Theorem 10. Assume Hzz(0) > 0. Then there are at least n closed characteristics on
the hypersurfaces H(z) −H(0) = ε2 for ε > 0 suﬃciently small. As parameterized
solutions of the system XH, they have periods close to the ones of the linearized
system ˙z = JHzz(0)z.
This local existence statement has been generalized by J. Moser [163]. The
periodic solutions mentioned so far are prompted by the solutions of the linearized
equation and we turn now to genuinely nonlinear phenomena. First we recall a
nonlinear normal form of H at z = 0 which goes back to G. Birkhoﬀ([26] 1927),
and which establishes nonlinear local symplectic invariants associated with H at
the equilibrium point.
1.8
The orbit structure near an equilibrium, Birkhoff normal form
If H is a smooth function of the form
H(z) =
n

j=1
αj
2 (x2
j + y2
j) + . . . = H2 + . . .
near the equilibrium point z = 0, then we consider the group action H ◦τ where τ
belongs to the group G1 of symplectic and smooth diﬀeomorphisms deﬁned locally
near z = 0 and leaving the origin and the quadratic part H2 of H invariant,
G1 = {τ
 τ ∗ω0 = ω0
and
τ(0) = 0, dτ(0) = id}.
The aim is to ﬁnd a map τ ∈G1 such that H◦τ is in a particularly simple form. We
emphasize that, in the following, the quadratic part H2 is ﬁxed and not assumed
to be a deﬁnite quadratic form.

1.8 The orbit structure near an equilibrium . . .
43
Theorem 11. (Birkhoff normal form) Assume the linear invariants α = (α1, α2,
. . ., αn) are nonresonant of order s, i.e.,
⟨α, j⟩̸= 0
for
j ∈Zn, 0 < |j| ≤s,
where |j| =
n
ν=1
|jν|. Then there exists an analytic map τ ∈G1 such that
H ◦τ = F(I1, . . . , In) + os,
where F is a polynomial of degree [ s
2] in the n variables I = (I1, I2, . . . , In) of
the form
F = ⟨α, I⟩+ 1
2⟨βI, I⟩+ . . . ,
with a n × n matrix β. The functions Ij on R2n are given by
Ij (x, y) = 1
2 (x2
j + y2
j )
for
1 ≤j ≤n .
In addition, the polynomial F is uniquely determined by H and does not depend
on the choice of τ ∈G1.
The coeﬃcients of F are, therefore, local symplectic invariants of H called the
Birkhoﬀinvariants. Postponing the discussion about the signiﬁcance of this normal
form, we ﬁrst give the proof, which is of an algebraic nature.
Proof. We proceed iteratively and assume that
H = H2 + H3 + . . . + Hm−1 + Hm + . . .
is already in normal form up to order m−1, where Hj are homogeneous polynomials
of degree j. We look for a symplectic map τ ∈G1 which does not change the normal
form already achieved and which puts H ◦τ into normal form up to order m. We
take
τ = exp XP ,
i.e., the time-1 map of the Hamiltonian vector ﬁeld XP , with a homogeneous
polynomial P of degree m. Since τ belongs to the ﬂow of a Hamiltonian vector
ﬁeld it is symplectic, and of the form
τ(z) = z + J∇P(z) + . . . ,
where the dots stand for the higher order terms, and one computes readily
H ◦τ = H2 + H3 + . . . + Hm−1 + (Hm −{H2, P}) + . . . .
The polynomial in the parenthesis is homogeneous of degree m and the bracket
{·, ·} stands for the Poisson bracket deﬁned for two functions F and G as follows:
{F, G} = ω(XG, XF ).
We see that we can modify H by functions of the form {H2, P}.
Denote by Vm the vector space of homogeneous polynomials of degree m and
let L : Vm −→Vm be the linear operator deﬁned by L(P) = {H2, P} for P ∈Vm.

44
Chapter 1 Introduction
Lemma 1. The kernel K = K(L) and the range R = R(L) of the linear operator
L are complementary:
Vm = K + R
and
K ∩R = {0} .
If, in addition, ⟨α, j⟩̸= 0 for 0 < |j| ≤m, then K = {0} if m is odd. If m = 2k is
even, then
K = span {Ik1
1 . . . Ikn
n

n

j=1
kj = k} .
The normal form, therefore, consists of elements in the kernel of L, and we
shall abbreviate the set of normal forms by
N = {P
 {H2, P} = 0
and
P is a polynomial} .
Proof of the Lemma. In order to diagonalize L in Vm, we go to complex variables
and choose the symplectic coordinates
ξν
=
1
√
2
(xν + iyν)
ην
=
1
√
2
(yν + ixν)
so that ξvην = i
2 (x2
ν + y2
ν) and H2 = 1
i
n
ν=1
αν(ξνην). Consequently,
L(ξkηℓ) = {H2, ξkηℓ} = 1
i ⟨α, ℓ−k⟩ξkηℓ.
We abbreviated ⟨α, ℓ−k⟩=
n
ν=1
αν(ℓν −kν). If P ∈Vm then
P =

|k|+|ℓ|=m
pkℓξkηℓ
is decomposed into P = P K +P N, where P K ∈K(L) contains the coeﬃcients pkℓ
for ⟨α, k−ℓ⟩= 0 and P N the coeﬃcients for ⟨α, k−ℓ⟩̸= 0. In case of nonresonance
of order m, we have ⟨α, ℓ−k⟩= 0 if and only if k = ℓ. In this case K(L) consists
of the monomials of the form ξkηk = (ξη)k which are, in the original coordinates,
monomials of the form Ik = Ik1
1 . . . Ikn
n , as desired. This ﬁnishes the proof of the
lemma. ■
In view of the lemma, it is easy to determine the desired map τ. Splitting
Hm = HR
m + HK
m into HR
m ∈R(L) and HK
m ∈K(L), so that
Hm −{H2, P} = HR
m + HK
m −{H2, P},
we choose the polynomial P as a solution of {H2, P} −HR
m = 0. The function
H ◦τ is now in normal form up to order m. Denoting the map just constructed by

1.8 The orbit structure near an equilibrium . . .
45
τ = τm, we see that the desired map which puts H into normal form up to order
s is iteratively found as a composition of mappings:
τs ◦τs−1 ◦. . . ◦τ3 ,
where τj ∈G1. It remains to prove the uniqueness of the normal form. This follows
from the next lemma.
Lemma 2. Assume that α is nonresonant of order s. If τ1, τ2 ∈G1 satisfy
H ◦τ1
=
F + os
H ◦τ2
=
ˆF + os ,
where F and ˆF are polynomials of degree s which are in normal form, i.e., F, ˆF ∈
N, then
(i)
F
=
ˆF
(ii)
τ
=
τ −1
1
◦τ2 = exp XP + os ,
where P = P3 + . . . + Ps is a polynomial of degree s and P ∈N.
Proof. It clearly suﬃces to take H = F already in normal form, so that
ˆF ◦τ = F + os .
We have to show that ˆF = F and that τ ∈G1 satisﬁes (ii). Proceeding again by
induction, we assume that
P = P3 + . . . + Pm−1 + Pm + . . . + Ps
with Pj ∈N for 3 ≤j ≤m−1, and show that also Pm ∈N. In order to determine
the terms of order m, we use the formula
H ◦exp XG = H + {H, G} + {{H, G}, G} + . . .
for two functions H, G. This follows from the Taylor expansion of H ◦exp tXG
in t at t = 0. If now ˆF = H2 + ˆF3 + . . . + ˆFs and similarly, F = H2 + F3 + . . . + Fs
we ﬁnd
ˆFm + {H2, Pm} + Am = Fm,
where, by the induction assumption, Am is a sum of Poisson brackets of elements
in N. Since N is a subalgebra we have Am ⊂N, and therefore,
{H2, Pm} ∈N.
In view of the previous lemma we conclude {H2, Pm} = 0 and hence Pm ∈N.
The induction step is ﬁnished and we can, therefore, assume that P ∈N. The
algebra N is abelian up to order s, since we assume the nonresonance condition

46
Chapter 1 Introduction
for α to hold up to order s. This follows from Lemma 1. Therefore, { ˆF, P} = 0 so
that
ˆF ◦τ = ˆF ◦exp XP = ˆF .
Since ˆF ◦τ = F + os we conclude ˆF = F as claimed in the lemma. This ﬁnishes
the proof of the lemma and hence that of Birkhoﬀ’s theorem. ■
From the dynamical point of view, the signiﬁcance of Birkhoﬀ’s normal form
lies in the fact that the symplectic transformation τ makes the Hamiltonian system
integrable in a small neighborhood of the equilibrium point, of course, only up to
the terms os of higher order. Indeed, dropping for the moment the higher order
terms, the corresponding integrable system is deﬁned by the Hamiltonian
F(I1, I2, . . . , In)
on R2n, which is a polynomial in the n functions Ij(x, y) =
1
2(x2
j + y2
j). These
functions are n integrals of F which are, in addition, in involution, i.e., {Ii, Ij} = 0.
The solutions of the Hamiltonian equations XF can, therefore, be given explicitly
and for all times in terms of the integrals. Removing the coordinate axis from R2n
and introducing the symplectic polar coordinates by
yν + ixν =
√
2rνeiϑν ,
ν = 1, 2, . . . n, rν > 0 and ϑν (mod 2π), then
n

j=1
dyj ∧dxj =
n

j=1
dϑj ∧drj
and the symplectic phase space becomes
T n × Ω,
Ω= (R+)n ⊂Rn .
Since rν = Iν the transformed Hamiltonian is given by F(r1, r2, . . . , rn) and does
not depend on the angle variables ϑ1, . . . , ϑn. The ﬂow φt(r) of the vector ﬁeld
XF :



˙ϑ
=
∂
∂rF(r)
˙r
=
−∂
∂ϑF(r) = 0
can be read oﬀimmediately:
ϕt(ϑ, r) = (ϑ + tω, r).
The so-called frequency vector ω is deﬁned by
ω = ω(r) = ∂
∂rF(r) ∈Rn .

1.8 The orbit structure near an equilibrium . . .
47
The ﬂow leaves every torus T n × {r} ⊂T n × Ωinvariant and, moreover, on the
torus the ﬂow is a linear Kronecker ﬂow deﬁned by the frequencies ω(r). In contrast
to the linear case these frequencies depend, in general, on the integrals r. This is
the case, for example, if det β ̸= 0 with β as deﬁned in the normal form. In the
original coordinates the solutions are quasi-periodic and represented by
yν(t) + ixν(t) = √2rνei
 
ϑν+tων(r)
!
,
where yν(0) + ixν(0) = √2rνeiϑν.
As a side remark we point out that if the αj are nonresonant of every order,
i.e., rationally independent, then we ﬁnd inductively by proceeding, as in the
proof of the normal form, a symplectic map τ in the form of a formal power series
map, which puts the Hamiltonian H into the integrable form H ◦τ = P∞(I).
It is given in terms of a formal power series in the integrals I = (I1, I2, . . . In)
representing inﬁnitely many symplectic invariants of H at 0. This is a purely
algebraic statement. If H is analytic and if τ can be chosen to be convergent, then
the Hamiltonian system can be solved explicitely near the equilibrium point. It
is known, however, that divergence of τ is the typical case. This was proved by
C.L. Siegel 1954 [195]. At ﬁrst sight it seems, therefore, that the normal forms are
useless for the investigation of the orbit structure of a Hamiltonian system near the
equilibrium point. This, however, is not the case. The normal form in Birkhoﬀ’s
theorem can be used very eﬀectively if one views XH as a perturbation of the
integrable system XF near the equilibrium point. Indeed, perturbation methods
allow us to continue some dynamical phenomena of the integrable system XF to
the full system XH near the origin as we shall illustrate, although without giving
a proof.
Assume that α is nonresonant of order s = 4. In view of Birkhoﬀ’s theorem,
we may assume after a nonlinear symplectic transformation τ ∈G1, that the
Hamiltonian is, near z = 0, of the form
H(z)
=
F(I) + o4(z)
F(I)
=
⟨α, I⟩+ 1
2⟨βI, I⟩.
Assuming the system XH to be nonlinear and nondegenerate, by requiring that
det β ̸= 0
for the symplectic invariant β, one veriﬁes readily that every punctured neigh-
borhood 0 < |z| < ε of the equilibrium point contains a periodic solution of the
integrable system XF , so that z = 0 is a cluster point of periodic solutions of XF .
The periods of these solutions tend to inﬁnity. The same statement holds true also
for the full system XH instead of XF , as was shown by G. Birkhoﬀand Lewis
in 1933 [27]. For a proof we refer to J. Moser [164], who gave a proof of a more
general result.

48
Chapter 1 Introduction
If, in addition, XH is suﬃciently smooth (e.g., if H ∈Cℓfor ℓ= 2n+3) then the
celebrated K.A.M.-theory is applicable and allows a deeper insight into the orbit
structure of XH near the equilibrium point. Although the integrability breaks
down under the perturbation one can still conclude that many tori T n × {r} with
r small which are invariant under the integrable system XF , have a continuation
as embedded Lagrangian tori Tr = ϕ(T n × {r}) invariant under the ﬂow XH. On
the tori Tr the ﬂow is the Kronecker ﬂow given by ˙ϑ = ω(r), so that Tr is covered
by quasi-periodic solutions of XH having the frequencies ω(r). In addition, these
invariant tori ﬁll out a Cantor set in the phase space of relatively large Lebesgue
measure.
The proofs are analytical in nature and very subtle due to the diﬃculty of
small denominators. This diﬃculty was overcome in the sixties by Kolmogorov
[128], Arnold [7, 8], and Moser [159]. For a recent presentation and for references
we refer to J. P¨oschel [178]; see also [189].
It turns out that the invariant tori constructed by the K.A.M. theory lie in the
closure of the set of periodic orbits. This observation leads to the following local
existence statement for periodic orbits near an equilibrium point, a proof of which
can be found in [56].
Theorem 12. Assume H ∈Cℓfor ℓ≥2n+3 and satisﬁes the nonresonance condition
for α of order s = 4. Assume the system is nonlinear requiring det β ̸= 0. If Sε
denotes the closure of the set of periodic solutions contained in the open ball B(ε)
of radius ε centered at the equilibrium point, then
m

B(ε)\Sε

= O (√ε)m

B(ε)

,
where m denotes the Lebesque measure.
These periodic solutions, as well as the quasi-periodic solutions near the equi-
librium point, are established supposing only ﬁnitely many inequalities for ﬁnitely
many local symplectic invariants of H at z = 0. Higher order resonances of the lin-
ear invariants play no role because of the postulated nonlinarity. This is a typical
phenomenon in Hamiltonian mechanics. On the other hand, it should be recalled
that the analytical methods applied require a lot of derivatives for the system.
The orbits near the equilibrium point described so far are concluded by means
of perturbation methods from corresponding orbits of the integrable part of the
Birkhoﬀnormal form. There exist, in general, other orbits of very diﬀerent nature
which are not compatible with the integrable part and whose existence explain the
divergence of the normal form. This is best illustrated by the celebrated sketch due
to V. Arnold and A. Avez in their book [12], 1968. It demonstrates the complexity
of the orbit structure of a nonlinear symplectic map ϕ near a stable ﬁxed point in
the plane R2. Such a map arises, for example, as a transversal section map of a
Hamiltonian system on a three-dimensional energy surface near a stable periodic
orbit. Instead of studying nearby orbits for all times, one can just as well study
the iterates of its section map.

The ﬁxed point 0 in the middle is surrounded by smooth curves close to circles
which are invariant under the map ϕ. They were discovered by J. Moser 1962
[159]. These curves ﬁll out a Cantor set of relatively large measure, reﬂecting the
integrable approximation of the map near the ﬁxed point. Between these curves
one discovers generically orbits of elliptic and hyperbolic periodic points. Moreover,
the stable and unstable invariant manifolds issuing from the hyperbolic periodic
points do intersect transversally in so-called homoclinic points. It is well-known
that these points complicate the orbit structure of ϕ considerably and destroy the
integrable pattern. They give, in particular, rise to invariant hyperbolic sets on
which the iterates of the map can be described statistically by means of topological
Bernoulli shifts. One can even show that the elliptic ﬁxed point is a cluster point
of such homoclinic points. In addition, this picture is repeated near the elliptic
periodic orbits for the higher iterates of the map and so on. The dotted lines in
the picture indicate the recently discovered Mather sets, for which we refer to
J. Mather [151]. The generic existence of the homoclinic orbits in the picture was
established by E. Zehnder in [230], 1973. For an improved and modern version we
point out C. Genecand [104], 1991; further references are A. Chenciner [49] and J.
Moser [162].
Fig. 1.5
The above picture illustrates the complexity of the orbit structure of Hamil-
tonian systems and shows, in particular, that orbits of very diﬀerent longtime
behaviour do, in general, coexist side by side. This phenomenon makes the inves-
tigation of the long time behaviour by means of solving the Cauchy initial value
problem a hopeless task. In contrast, the existence question for periodic solutions
with which we shall deal later on, leads to a boundary value problem distinguished
by a variational principle.
1.8 The orbit structure near an equilibrium . . .
49

50
Chapter 1 Introduction
The local existence results described above are of analytical nature. In con-
trast, the aim in Chapter 4 is to ﬁnd global periodic solutions. Similarly as in the
situation near an equilibrium point, the orbit structure near a periodic solution
can also be studied by means of a Birkhoﬀnormal form. This normal form repre-
sents an integrable approximation of the system locally near the periodic solution
where the linear invariants are now the Floquet multipliers of the periodic orbit.
We should mention that although the qualitative methods employed in ﬁnding
these global periodic solutions are powerful, they are not suﬃcient to gain infor-
mation about the Birkhoﬀinvariants of these periodic solutions. Nevertheless, it
is important to keep in mind that a single periodic orbit of a Hamiltonian system
carries potential information about a nearby very rich orbit structure including
many other periodic orbits having larger periods, quasi-periodic solutions and also
hyperbolic phenomena.

Chapter 2
Symplectic capacities
2.1
Deﬁnition and application to embeddings
In the following we introduce a special class of symplectic invariants discovered by
I. Ekeland and H. Hofer in [68, 69] for subsets of R2n. They were led to these in-
variants in their search for periodic solutions on convex energy surfaces and called
them symplectic capacities. The concept of a symplectic capacity was extended to
general symplectic manifolds by H. Hofer and E. Zehnder in [123]. The existence
proof of these invariants is based on a variational principle; it is not intuitive,
and will be postponed to the next chapter. Taking their existence for granted, the
aim of this chapter is rather to deduce the rigidity of some symplectic embed-
dings and, in addition, the rigidity of the symplectic nature of mappings under
limits in the supremum norm, which will give rise to the notion of a “symplectic
homeomorphism”.
Deﬁnition of symplectic capacity. We consider the class of all symplectic manifolds
(M, ω) possibly with boundary and of ﬁxed dimension 2n. A symplectic capacity is
a map (M, ω) 
→c(M, ω) which associates with every symplectic manifold (M, ω)
a nonnegative number or ∞, satisfying the following properties A1–A3.
A1. Monotonicity:
c(M, ω) ≤c(N, τ)
if there exists a symplectic embedding ϕ : (M, ω) →(N, τ).
A2. Conformality:
c(M, αω) = |α|c(M, ω)
for all α ∈R, α ̸= 0.
A3. Nontriviality:
c(B(1), ω0) = π = c(Z(1), ω0)
for the open unit ball B(1) and the open symplectic cylinder Z(1) in the standard
space (R2n, ω0). For convenience, we recall that with the symplectic coordinates
(x, y) ∈R2n,
B(r) =

(x, y) ∈R2n  |x|2 + |y|2 < r2
and
Z(r) =

(x, y) ∈R2n  x2
1 + y2
1 < r2
for r > 0. It is often convenient to replace (A3) by the following weaker axiom
(A3′):
A3′. Weak nontriviality:
0 < c
 
B(1), ω0
!
and c
 
Z(1), ω0
!
< ∞.
It should be pointed out that the axioms (A1)–(A3) do not determine a unique
capacity function. There are indeed many ways to construct capacity functions as
H. Hofer and E. Zehnder, Symplectic Invariants and Hamiltonian Dynamics,  
51 
Modern Birkhäuser Classics, DOI 10.1007/978-3-0348-0104-1_2, © Springer Basel AG 2011

52
Chapter 2 Symplectic capacities
we shall see later on. We ﬁrst illustrate the concept and deduce some simple conse-
quences of the axioms (A1)–(A3). In the special case of 2-dimensional symplectic
manifolds, n = 1, the modulus of the total area
c(M, ω) := |

M
ω |
is an example of a symplectic capacity function. It agrees with the Lebesgue mea-
sure in (R2, ω0). In contrast, if n > 1, then the symplectic invariant ( vol )
1
n is ex-
cluded by axiom (A3), since the cylinder has inﬁnite volume. If ϕ : (M, ω) →(N, σ)
is a symplectic diﬀeomorphism between the two manifolds M and N, one applies
the monotonicity axiom to ϕ and ϕ−1 and concludes
c(M, ω) = c(N, σ).
Therefore, the capacity is indeed a symplectic invariant. Observe also that, by
means of the inclusion mapping, we have for open subsets of (M, ω) the mono-
tonicity property
U ⊂V
=⇒
c(U) ≤c(V ).
In order to describe some simple examples in (R2n, ω0) we start with
Lemma 1. For U ⊂(R2n, ω0) open and λ ̸= 0,
c(λU) = λ2c(U).
Proof. This is a consequence of the conformality axiom. The diﬀeomorphism
ϕ : λU →U,
x 
→1
λx
satisﬁes ϕ∗(λ2ω0) = λ2ϕ∗ω0 = ω0. Therefore, ϕ : (λU, ω0) →(U, λ2ω0) is symplec-
tic, so that c(λU, ω0) = c(U, λ2ω0) = λ2c(U, ω0) as claimed. ■
For the open ball of radius r > 0 in R2n we ﬁnd, in particular
c(B(r)) = r2c

B(1)

= πr2.
(2.1)
Since B(r) ⊂B(r) ⊂B(r + ε) for every ε > 0 we conclude by monotonicity that
c(B(r)) = πr2. We see that in the special case of (R2, ω0)
c

B(r)

= c

B(r)

= area

B(r)

agrees with the Lebesgue measure of the disc. This can be used to show that the
capacity agrees with the Lebesgue measure for a large class of sets in R2, as has
been observed by K.F. Siburg [194].

2.1 Definition and application to embeddings
53
Proposition 1. If D ⊂R2 is a compact and connected domain with smooth bound-
ary, then
c(D, ω0) = area (D).
Proof. By removing ﬁnitely many compact curves from D, we ﬁnd a simply con-
nected domain D0 ⊂D satisfying m(D0) = m(D), which in view of the uni-
formization theorem is diﬀeomorphic to the unit disc B(1) ⊂R2. Therefore, there
exists a ρ > 0 and a diﬀeomorphism ϕ : B(ρ) →D0 satisfying, in addition,
m(B(ρ)) = m(D0). Given ε > 0 we ﬁnd r < ρ such that D1 := ϕ(B(r)) ⊂D0 sat-
isﬁes m(D1) ≥m(D) −ε. By the theorem of Dacorogna-Moser there is, therefore,
a measure preserving diﬀeomorphism ψ : B(r) →D1. Since this ψ is symplectic
we can estimate using the monotonicity, the invariance under symplectic diﬀeo-
morphisms and the normalization
m(D) −ε ≤m(D1) = m

B(r)

= c

B(r)

= c(D1) ≤c(D).
On the other hand, there exists a diﬀeomorphism ϕ : D →B(R)\{ ﬁnitely many
open discs of total measure ≤ε}. Choosing R appropriately we can assume, again
by Dacorogna and Moser’s theorem, that ϕ is symplectic so that
c(D) ≤c

B(R)

= πR2 ≤m(D) + ε.
To sum up: m(D)−ε ≤c(D) ≤m(D)+ε for every ε > 0 and the result follows. ■
Clearly,
0 < c(U) < ∞
for every open and bounded set in (R2n, ω0), since U contains a small ball and is
contained in a large ball. A similar argument as for B(r) above shows for symplectic
cylinders that
c(Z(r)) = πr2.
(2.2)
Therefore, if an open set U satisﬁes
B(r) ⊂U ⊂Z(r)
for some r > 0, we ﬁnd by the monotonicity that πr2 = c(B(r)) ≤c(U) ≤
c(Z(r)) = πr2 and hence
c(U) = πr2.
(Fig. 2.1)
This demonstrates that very diﬀerent (in shape, size, measure and topology)
open sets can have the same capacity, if n > 1. Recall that the ellipsoids E ⊂R2n
introduced in the previous chapter are characterized by the (linear) symplectic

54
Chapter 2 Symplectic capacities
U
B(r)
r
Z(r)
Fig. 2.1
invariants r1(E) ≤r2(E) ≤. . . ≤rn(E). Applying a linear symplectic map which
preserves the capacities we may assume, in view of Theorem 9 of Chapter 1, that
B(r1) ⊂E ⊂Z(r1) ,
where r1 = r1(E). We conclude that the capacity of an ellipsoid E is then deter-
mined by the smallest linear symplectic invariant r1(E).
Proposition 2. The capacity of an ellipsoid E in (R2n, ω0) is given by
c(E) = πr1(E)2
.
We see that every capacity c extends the smallest linear invariants πr1(E)2
of ellipsoids E and the question arises, whether the linear invariants πrj(E)2 for
j > 1 also have extensions to invariants in the nonlinear case. We shall come back
to this question later on. Symplectic cylinders are “based” on symplectic 2-planes.
They are very diﬀerent from cylinders “based” on isotropic 2-planes on which the
2-form ω0 vanishes, as for example Z1(r) =

(x, y) ∈R2n  x2
1 + x2
2 < r2
. We
claim that
c(Z1(r)) = +∞, for all r > 0.
This is easily seen as follows. For every ball B(N) there is a linear symplectic
embedding ϕ : B(N) →Z1(r). Therefore, πN 2 = c(B(N)) ≤c(Z1(r)). This holds
true for every N and the claim follows.
In order to generalize this example we recall some deﬁnitions. If V ⊂R2n is a
linear subspace, its symplectic complement V ⊥is deﬁned by
V ⊥=

x ∈R2n | ω0 (v, x) = 0 for all v ∈V

.
Clearly (V ⊥)⊥= V and dim V ⊥= dim R2n −dim V , since ω0 is nondegenerate.
A linear subspace V is called isotropic if V ⊂V ⊥, that is ω(v1, v2) = 0 for all v1
and v2 ∈V .
Proposition 3. Assume Ω⊂R2n is an open bounded nonempty set and assume
W ⊂R2n is a linear subspace with codim W = 2. Consider the cylinder Ω+ W,
then
c(Ω+ W) = +∞
if W ⊥is isotropic
0 < c(Ω+ W) < ∞
if W ⊥is not isotropic.

2.1 Definition and application to embeddings
55
Proof. We may assume that Ωcontains the origin. Observe that dim W ⊥= 2.
Therefore, in the second case, W ⊥is a symplectic subspace and R2n = W ⊥⊕W.
Choosing a symplectic basis (e1, f1) in W ⊥we can, therefore, assume by a linear
symplectic change of coordinates that
W = {(x, y) | x1 = y1 = 0} .
Since Ωis bounded, we have for z ∈Ω+ W, that x2
1 + y2
1 < N 2 for some N;
consequently Ω+W ⊂B2(N)×R2n−2, and hence c(Ω+W) ≤c(B2(N)×R2n−2) =
πN 2 < ∞by (2.2). This proves the second statement. To prove the ﬁrst statement
we can assume that
W = {(x, y) | x1 = x2 = 0} .
There exists α > 0, so that the point (x, y) ∈Ω+ W if x2
1 + x2
2 < α2. Hence every
ball B(R) can be symplectically embedded in Ω+ W: simply deﬁne the linear
symplectic map ϕ by ϕ(x, y) = (εx, 1
εy); then ϕ(B(R)) ⊂Ω+ W provided ε > 0
is suﬃciently small. Consequently, by the monotonicity of a capacity, c(Ω× W) ≥
c(B(R)) = πR2. This holds true for every R > 0 so that c(Ω+ W) = +∞as
claimed. ■
In view of the monotonicity property, the symplectic invariants c(M, ω) repre-
sent, in particular, obstructions of symplectic embeddings. An immediate conse-
quence of the axioms is the celebrated squeezing theorem of Gromov [107] which
gave rise to the concept of a capacity.
Theorem 1. (Gromov’s squeezing theorem) There is a symplectic embedding ϕ :
B(r) →Z(R) if and only if R ≥r.
Proof. If ϕ is a symplectic embedding, then using the monotonicity property of
the capacity, together with (2.1) and (2.2), we have
πr2 = c
 
B(r)
!
≤c
 
Z(R)
!
= πR2,
and the theorem follows. ■
The next result also illustrates the diﬀerence between volume preserving and
symplectic diﬀeomorphisms. We consider in (R4, ω0) with symplectic coordinates
(x1, y1, x2, y2) the product of symplectic open 2-balls B(r1) × B(r2). By a linear
symplectic map we can assume that r1 ≤r2.
Proposition 4. There is a symplectic diﬀeomorphism ϕ : B(r1) × B(r2) →B(s1) ×
B(s2) if and only if r1 = s1 and r2 = s2.
Note that, in contrast, there is a linear volume preserving diﬀeomorphism ψ :
B(1) × B(1) →B(r) × B( 1
r ) for every r > 0. As r →0, we evidently have





c

B(r) × B

1
r

→
0
vol

B(r) × B

1
r

=
const.

56
Chapter 2 Symplectic capacities
Proof. Since r1 ≤r2 we can use the diﬀeomorphism ϕ to deﬁne the symplectic
embedding B4(r1) →B(r1) × B(r2)
ϕ→B(s1) × B(s2) →B(s1) × R2 = Z(s1),
where the ﬁrst and last mappings are the inclusion mappings. By the monotonicity
of c, we conclude s1 ≥r1. Applying the same argument to ϕ−1, we ﬁnd r1 ≥s1,
so that r1 = s1. Now ϕ is volume preserving; hence r1r2 = s1s2 and the result
follows. ■
Clearly, if one assumes that ϕ is smooth up to the boundary, then the conditions
on the radii follow simply from the invariance of the actions |A(∂B(rj))| = πr2
j
under symplectic diﬀeomorphism. One might expect the same rigidity as in Propo-
sition 4 to hold also in the general case of a product of n open symplectic 2-balls in
R2n. This is indeed the case, but does not follow from the capacity function c alone.
Actually, the proof given in [52] is rather subtle and uses the symplectic homology
theory, as developed by A. Floer and H. Hofer in [90], see also K. Cieliebak, A.
Floer, H. Hofer and K. Wysocki [52]. Finally the restrictions for symplectic em-
beddings of ellipsoids mentioned in the previous chapter follow immediately from
Proposition 2.
Proposition 5. Assume E and F are two ellipsoids in (R2n, ω0). If ϕ : E →F is a
symplectic embedding, then
r1(E) ≤r1(F)
.
The existence of one capacity function permits the construction of many other
capacity functions.
As an illustration we shall prove that the Gromov-width D(M, ω) which ap-
pears in Gromov’s work [107] and which was explained in the introduction is a
symplectic capacity satisfying (A1)–(A3). Recall that there is always a symplectic
embedding ϕ : (B(ε), ω0) →(M, ω) for ε small by Darboux’s theorem and deﬁne
D(M, ω) = sup

πr2  there is a
symplectic embedding ϕ :

B(r), ω0

→(M, ω)

.
Theorem 2. The Gromov-width D(M, ω) is a symplectic capacity. Moreover
D(M, ω) ≤c(M, ω)
for every capacity function c.
Because a compact symplectic manifold (M, ω) has a ﬁnite volume we conclude
D(M, ω) < ∞for compact manifolds. This is in contrast to the special capacity
function c0 constructed in the next chapter which can take on the value ∞for
certain compact manifolds.
Proof. We have already veriﬁed the monotonicity axiom (A1) in the introduction.
In order to verify the conformality axiom (A2), that D(M, αω) = |α|D(M, ω) for
α ̸= 0, it is suﬃcient to show that to every symplectic embedding
ϕ :

B(r), ω0

→(M, αω),

2.1 Definition and application to embeddings
57
there corresponds a symplectic embedding
ˆϕ :

B

r
#
|α|

, ω0

→(M, ω),
and conversely, so that by deﬁnition of D, we conclude that D(M, αω) =
|α|D(M, ω). If ϕ : (B(r), ω0) →(M, αω) is a symplectic embedding, then
ϕ∗(αω) = ω0 so that
ϕ∗ω = 1
α ω0.
Abbreviating ρ =
r
√
|α| we deﬁne the diﬀeomorphism ψ : B(ρ) →B(r) by setting
ψ(x) =
#
|α| · x and ﬁnd
ψ∗ 1
α ω0

= |α|
α ω0.
Thus, if α > 0, the map ˆϕ = ϕ ◦ψ : (B(ρ), ω0) →(M, ω) is the desired sym-
plectic embedding. If α < 0 we ﬁrst introduce the symplectic diﬀeomorphism
ψ0 : (B(ρ), ω0) →(B(ρ), −ω0) by setting ψ0(u, v) = (−u, v) for all (u, v) ∈R2n,
and ﬁnd the desired embedding ˆϕ = ϕ ◦ψ ◦ψ0 : (B(ρ), ω0) →(M, ω).
The veriﬁcation of D(B(r), ω0) = πr2 is easy. If ϕ : B(R) →B(r) is a symplec-
tic embedding, we conclude R ≤r since ϕ is volume preserving. On the other hand
the identity map induces a symplectic embedding B(r) →B(r) so that the claim
follows. Since there exists a symplectic embedding ϕ : B(R) →Z(r) if and only
if r ≥R by Gromov’s squeezing theorem, we conclude that D(Z(r), ω0) = πr2,
hence the Gromov-width satisﬁes also the nontriviality axiom (A3). In order to
prove the last statement of the theorem, we assume c(M, ω) to be any capacity.
If ϕ : B(r) →M is a symplectic embedding we conclude by monotonicity that
πr2 = c(B(r), ω0) ≤c(M, ω). Taking the supremum, we ﬁnd D(M, ω) ≤c(M, ω)
as claimed in the theorem. ■
To a given capacity c one can associate its inner capacity ˇc, deﬁned as follows:
ˇc(M, ω) = sup

c(U, ω) | U ⊂M open and U ⊂M\∂M

.
Correspondingly, we introduce the following
Deﬁnition. A capacity c has inner regularity at M if
ˇc(M, ω) = c(M, ω).
Proposition 6. The function ˇc is a capacity having inner regularity and it satisﬁes
ˇc ≤c. In addition, if d is any capacity having inner regularity and satisfying d ≤c,
then d ≤ˇc.

58
Chapter 2 Symplectic capacities
Proof. The proof follows readily from the deﬁnitions and the axioms for capacity.
Assume, for example, that d is a symplectic capacity satisfying d ≤c and having
inner regularity.
Then
ˇd(M)
=
sup

d(U)| U ⊂M, U ⊂M\∂M

≤
sup

c(U)| U ⊂M, U ⊂M\∂M

=
ˇc(M) ,
as claimed. ■
Because it is the smallest capacity, the Gromov-width D(M, ω) has inner reg-
ularity; another example having this property is the capacity c0 introduced in
Chapter 3. If we consider subsets of a given manifold we can also deﬁne the con-
cept of outer regularity (relative to the manifold). The outer capacity of a set is
deﬁned as the inﬁmum taken over the capacities of open neighborhoods of the
closure of the given set. We shall return to this concept in the next section.
2.2
Rigidity of symplectic diffeomorphisms
We consider a sequence ψj :R2n →R2n of symplectic diﬀeomorphisms in (R2n,ω0).
By deﬁnition, the ﬁrst derivatives satisfy the identity
ψ′
j(x)T J ψ′
j(x) = J ,
x ∈R2n.
Therefore, if the sequence ψj converges in C1 then the limit ψ(x) = lim ψj(x) is
also a symplectic map. By contrast, we shall now assume that the sequence ψj
only converges locally uniformly to a map
ψ(x) =
lim
j→∞ψj(x),
which is, therefore, a continuous map. Since det ψ′
j(x) = 1 for every x, we ﬁnd, in
view of the transformation formula for integrals, that

f

ψ(x)

dx =

f(x) dx
(2.3)
for all f ∈C∞
c (R2n), so that ψ is measure preserving. Assume now that ψ is
diﬀerentiable, then evidently det ψ′(x) = ±1. However it is a striking phenomenon
that ψ is even symplectic,
ψ′(x)T Jψ′(x) = J,
if it is assumed to be diﬀerentiable. Hence the symplectic nature survives under
topological limits.

2.2 Rigidity of symplectic diffeomorphisms
59
Theorem 3. Let ϕj : B(1) →(R2n, ω0) be a sequence of symplectic embeddings
converging locally uniformly to a map ϕ : B(1) →R2n. If ϕ is diﬀerentiable at
x = 0, then ϕ′(0) = A is a symplectic map, i.e., A∗ω0 = ω0.
We see that, in general, a volume preserving diﬀeomorphism cannot be ap-
proximated by symplectic diﬀeomorphisms in the C0-topology. By using, locally,
Darboux charts we deduce immediately from Theorem 3
Theorem 4. (Eliashberg, Gromov) The group of symplectic diﬀeomorphisms of a
compact symplectic manifold (M, ω) is C0-closed in the group of all diﬀeomor-
phisms of M.
In the early seventies M. Gromov proved the alternative that the group of sym-
plectic diﬀeomorphisms either is C0-closed in the group of all diﬀeomorphisms or
its C0-closure is the group of volume preserving diﬀeomorphisms. That symplec-
tic diﬀeomorphisms can be distinguished from volume preserving diﬀeomorphisms
by global properties which are stable under C0-limits was announced in the early
eighties by Y. Eliashberg in his preprint “Rigidity of symplectic and contact struc-
ture”, (1981) [78], which in full form has not been published. Proofs are partially
contained in Eliashberg [71], 1987. Gromov gave a proof of Theorem 4 in [107]
using the techniques of pseudoholomorphic curves. Both Eliashberg und Gromov
deduced the C0-stability from non embedding results. In his book [108] Gromov
uses so-called Nash-Moser techniques of hard implicit function theorems, while
Eliashberg [71], 1987, uses an analogue of Theorem 3. Following the strategy of
I. Ekeland and H. Hofer in [68], we shall show next, that Theorem 3 is an easy
consequence of the existence of any capacity function c.
It is convenient in the following to extend the capacity to all subsets of R2n.
To do so we take a capacity function c given on the open subsets U ⊂R2n and
deﬁne for an arbitrary subset A ⊂R2n:
c(A) = inf

c(U)
A ⊂U and U open

.
Then the monotonicity property
A ⊂B
=⇒
c(A) ≤c(B)
holds true for all subsets of R2n. From the symplectic invariance of the capacity
on open sets, one deduces the invariance
c
 
ϕ(A)
!
= c(A)
under every symplectic embedding ϕ deﬁned on an open neighborhood of A.
Proof of Theorem 3. Without loss of generality we shall assume in the following
that ϕ(0) = 0. We ﬁrst claim that the linear map ϕ′(0) = A is an isomorphism.
Indeed, because ϕ is diﬀerentiable at 0, we have ϕ(x) = Ax + O(|x|), so that for
the open balls Bε of radius ε > 0 and centered at 0,
m

ϕ(Bε)

m(Bε)
−→| det A| as ε →0 .

60
Chapter 2 Symplectic capacities
On the other hand, because the symplectic diﬀeomorphisms ϕj are volume preserv-
ing and ϕj →ϕ uniformly, we have m(ϕ(Bε)) = m(Bε) and hence | det A| = 1, so
that A is an isomorphism, as claimed. We shall see later on (Lemma 3) that A is an
isomorphism under weaker assumption: instead of requiring ϕj to be symplectic,
we shall merely require these mappings to preserve a given capacity function.
Next we claim that to prove Theorem 3, it is suﬃcient to show that
A∗ω0 = λω0 for some λ ̸= 0 .
(2.4)
Indeed, with ϕj we can also consider the symplectic embeddings (ϕj, id) : B(1) ×
R2n →(R2n × R2n, ω0 ⊕ω0) and hence conclude for the derivative at (0, 0), given
by ¯A = (A, 1), that also ¯A∗(ω0 ⊕ω0) = µ(ω0 ⊕ω0) for some µ ̸= 0. On the other
hand, in view of (2.4), ¯A∗(ω0 ⊕ω0) = (λω0) ⊕ω0 and consequently µ = 1 = λ, as
required in Theorem 4, proving our claim. In order to prove (2.4) we make use of
the following algebraic lemma due to Y. Eliashberg [71].
Lemma 2. Assume A is a linear isomorphism satisfying A∗ω0 ̸= λω0. Then for
every a > 0 there are symplectic matrices U and V such that U −1AV has the
form
U −1AV =




a
0
0
a
0
∗
∗



,
with respect to the splitting of R2n = R2 ⊕R2n−2 into symplectic subspaces.
Postponing the proof of the lemma, we ﬁrst show that A∗ω0 = λω0 for some λ ̸=
0. Arguing by contradiction, we assume that A∗ω0 ̸= λω0 and apply the lemma.
Deﬁning the symplectic maps ψj := U −1ϕjV in the neighborhood of the origin,
we conclude that ψj →ψ := U −1ϕV locally uniformly, and ψ′(0) = U −1AV .
Choosing a suitable constant a in the lemma, we have U −1AV (B(1)) ⊂Z( 1
8) and
hence U −1ψV (B(ε)) ⊂Z( ε
4) provided ε is suﬃciently small. Because ψj →ψ
locally uniformly, U −1ψjV (B(ε)) ⊂Z( ε
2) if j is suﬃciently large and ε suﬃciently
small. Since U −1ψjV is symplectic, we conclude by the invariance and monotonic-
ity property of a capacity that c(U −1ψjV (B(ε))) = c(B(ε)) ≤c(Z( ε
2)), which
contradicts the nontriviality Axiom (A3). We have proved the statement in (2.4)
and it remains to prove Lemma 2.
Proof of Lemma 2. Let B be the symplectic adjoint of A satisfying
ω0(Ax, y) = ω0(x, By)
for all x, y, and abbreviate ω = B∗ω0. Then ω ̸= λω0, as is easily veriﬁed using
the fact that A is an isomorphism. We claim that there is an x such that ω(x, ·) ̸=
λω0(x, ·) for every λ. Arguing by contradiction, we assume that for every x, there
exists a λ(x) ∈R satisfying ω(x, ·) = λ(x)ω0(x, ·). If x ̸= 0 there exists ξ such

2.2 Rigidity of symplectic diffeomorphisms
61
that ω0(ξ, x) ̸= 0, since ω0 is nondegenerate. This remains true for all y in a
neighborhood U(x) of x. Hence
λ(ξ) ω0(ξ, y)
=
ω(ξ, y) = −ω(y, ξ)
=
−λ(y)ω0(y, ξ)
=
λ(y)ω0(ξ, y),
which implies that λ(ξ) = λ(y) for y in a neighborhood of x. Since R2n\{0} is
connected and since the function λ(x) on R2n\{0} is locally constant, it is constant.
Therefore ω(x, ·) = λω0(x, ·) for x ̸= 0 and hence for every x. This contradicts the
assumption that ω ̸= λω0 and proves our claim. Consequently there exists an x
such that the linear map (ω0(x, ·), ω(x, ·)) : R2n →R2 is surjective. For a given
a > 0, we therefore ﬁnd an y satisfying
ω0(x, y) = 1 and ω(x, y) = a2.
Recalling ω(x, y) = ω0(Bx, By), we can choose two symplectic bases (e1, f1, . . .)
and (e′
1, f′
1, . . .) such that e1 = x, f1 = y and e′
1 = 1
aBx, f′
1 = 1
aBy. In these bases
Be1 = ae′
1, Bf1 = af′
1.
From ⟨JAx, y⟩= ⟨Jx, By⟩= ⟨BT Jx, y⟩we read oﬀA = −JBT J. Representing
now A in the new bases as a map from R2n with basis (e1, f1, . . .) onto R2n with
basis (e′
1, f′
1, . . .), we ﬁnd the representation U −1AV of the desired form. The
symplectic matrices are deﬁned by their column vectors as U = [e1, f1, . . .] and
V = [e′
1, f′
1, . . .]. ■
We know that symplectic diﬀeomorphisms preserve the capacities. Theorem 3
can, therefore, be deduced from the following, even more surprising statement for
continuous mappings due to I. Ekeland and H. Hofer [68].
Theorem 5. Let c be a capacity. Assume ψj : B(1) →R2n is a sequence of contin-
uous mappings satisfying
c(ψj(E)) = c(E)
for all (small) ellipsoids E ⊂B(1) and converging locally uniformly to
ψ(x) = lim ψj(x).
If ψ is diﬀerentiable at 0, then ψ′(0) = A is either symplectic or antisymplectic:
A∗ω0 = ω0 or A∗ω0 = −ω0.
Note that the mappings are not required to be invertible.
In order to prove Theorem 5, we start with

62
Chapter 2 Symplectic capacities
Lemma 3. Let c be a capacity. Consider a sequence ϕj of continuous mappings in
R2n converging locally uniformly to the map ϕ. Assume that c(ϕj(E)) = c(E) for
the open ellipsoids for all j. If ϕ′(0) exists it is an isomorphism.
Proof. Arguing by contradiction, we assume that A is not surjective, so that A(R2n)
is contained in a hyperplane H. Composing, if necessary, with a linear symplectic
map we may assume that
A(R2n) ⊂H = {(x, y)| x1 = 0} .
(2.5)
Deﬁning the linear symplectic map ψ by
ψ(x, y) =
 1
α x1, x2, . . . , xn, α y1, y2, . . . , yn

we can choose α > 0 so small that
ψA

B(1)

⊂B2( 1
16) × R2n−2 = Z( 1
16) ,
where the open 2-disc B2 on the right hand side is contained in the symplectic
plane with the coordinates {x1, y1}. Be deﬁnition of a derivative, we have |ψϕ(x)−
ψA(x)| ≤a(|x|) |x| where a(s) →0 as s →0. Consequently
ψϕ

B(ε)

⊂Z(ε
4)
if ε is suﬃciently small. Since ψϕj converges locally uniformly to ψϕ,
ψϕj

B(ε)

⊂Z(ε
2) ,
provided j is suﬃciently large. By assumption ψϕj preserves the capacity and so
by monotonicity
c

B(ε)

= c

ψϕj(B(ε))

≤c

Z(ε
2)

= 1
4c

B(ε)

.
This contradiction shows that A is surjective. ■
Proof of Theorem 5. We may assume that ψ(0) = 0. By Lemma 3, A = ψ′(0) is an
isomorphism and we shall prove ﬁrst that A∗ω0 = λω0 for some λ ̸= 0. Arguing
by contradiction, we assume A∗ω0 ̸= λω0 and ﬁnd (by Lemma 2) symplectic maps
U and V satisfying U −1AV (B(1)) ⊂Z( 1
8). Proceeding now as in Theorem 4, we
deﬁne the sequence ϕj := U −1ψjV . Then ϕj →ϕ := U −1ψV locally uniformly,
and ϕ′(0) = U −1AV . Hence ϕ(B(ε)) ⊂Z( ε
4) and consequently ϕj(B(ε)) ⊂Z( ε
2)
for j suﬃciently large and ε > 0 suﬃciently small. Since, by assumption on ψj,
we have c(ϕj(B(ε))) = c(B(ε)), we infer by the monotonicity of a capacity that
c(B(ε)) ≤c(Z( ε
2)), contradicting Axiom (A3) for a capacity.

2.2 Rigidity of symplectic diffeomorphisms
63
We have demonstrated that A∗ω0 = λω0. By conformality a linear antisymplec-
tic map preserves the capacities. Composing the maps ψj and ψ with the symplec-
tic map B =

1
√
λA
−1
if λ > 0 and with the antisymplectic map B =

1
√−λA
−1
if λ < 0, we are therefore reduced to the case
A = α 1, with α > 0
and we have to show that α = 1. If α < 1 there is a small ball and an α < r < 1
such that ψj(B(ε)) ⊂B(rε) for j large. Since ψj preserves the capacities we ﬁnd
c(B(ε)) = c(ψj(B(ε)) ≤c(B(rε)) = r2c(B(ε)) which is a contradiction. In the
case α > 1 we shall show that
ψj (B(ε)) ⊃B(rε)
(2.6)
for some α > r > 1, ε small and j large, which leads to the contradiction
r2c(B(ε)) = c(B(rε)) ≤c(B(ε)). Consequently, α = 1 as claimed in the theo-
rem.
To prove (2.6) we have to show that for every y ∈B(rε) there exists an
x ∈B(ε) solving ψj(x) = y. We use an index argument based on the Brouwer
mapping degree. Fix 1 < r < α. Then, in view of A(B(ε)) = B(αε),
deg(B(ε), A, y) = 1,
for y ∈B(rε), and the proof follows if we can show that
deg(B(ε), ψj, y) = deg(B(ε), A, y).
In view of the homotopy invariance of the degree, it is suﬃcient to verify that
the homotopy h(t, x) = tψj(x) + (1 −t)Ax satisﬁes h(t, x) ̸= y if x ∈∂B(ε) and
0 ≤t ≤1.
Recall ψ(0) = 0 and hence |ψ(x) −Ax| ≤a(|x|)|x|, with a(s) →0 as s →0.
Since ψj →ψ uniformly on compact sets we have, for every σ > 0 and j ≥j0(σ)
|ψj(x) −Ax| ≤a(|x|)|x| + σ.
(2.7)
Arguing by contradiction, we assume tψj(x) + (1 −t)Ax = y for x ∈∂B(ε) and
y ∈B(rε). Then
t(ψj(x) −Ax) = y −Ax.
The right hand side is larger than |Ax| −|y| = αε −|y| ≥(α −r)ε. The left hand
side, however is smaller than a(|ε|)ε + σ according to (2.7). Therefore, choosing
σ = a(|ε|)ε and ε suﬃciently small we get a contradiction, hence proving that
h(t, x) ̸= y for all 0 ≤t ≤1 and all x ∈∂B(ε). This ﬁnishes the proof of Theorem
5. ■
As an interesting special case we conclude from Theorem 5 the following

64
Chapter 2 Symplectic capacities
Corollary. A linear map A in R2n preserving the capacities of ellipsoids, c(A(E)) =
c(E) is either symplectic or antisymplectic.
A∗ω0 = ω0 or
A∗ω0 = −ω0.
Let c be any capacity function and consider a homeomorphism h of R2n satis-
fying
c(h(E)) = c(E) for all (small) ellipsoids E.
Then, if h is in addition diﬀerentiable, we conclude from Theorem 5 that h is
a diﬀeomorphism which is either symplectic or antisymplectic, h′(x)∗ω0 = ±ω0.
This is analogous to a measure preserving homeomorphism, i.e., a homeomorphism
satisfying (2.3). Here we conclude that det h′(x) = ±1 in case h is diﬀerentiable.
We see that every capacity function c singles out the distinguished group of home-
omorphisms preserving the capacity of all open sets. The elements of this group of
homeomorphisms have the additional property that they are symplectic or anti-
symplectic in case they are diﬀerentiable. This group can, therefore, be viewed as
a topological version of the group of symplectic diﬀeomorphisms. It is not known
whether this group is closed under locally uniform limits. But the following weaker
results hold true.
Theorem 6. Assume hj : R2n →R2n is a sequence of homeomorphisms satisfying
c(hj(E)) = c(E)
for all (resp. all small) ellipsoids E. Assume hj converges locally uniformly to a
homeomorphism h of R2n. Then
c(h(E)) = c(E)
for all (resp. all small) ellipsoids E.
Proof. Since h−1 ◦hj →id locally uniformly, we conclude for every ellipsoid E and
every 0 < ε < 1
h−1 ◦hj((1 −ε)E) ⊂E ⊂h−1 ◦hj((1 + ε)E),
if only j is suﬃciently large. This topological fact is easily veriﬁed using the same
degree argument as above. Hence
hj((1 −ε)E) ⊂h(E) ⊂hj((1 + ε)E).
By monotonicity and conformality, (1−ε)2c(E) = c((1−ε)E) = c(hj((1−ε)E)) ≤
c(h(E)) ≤c(hj((1 + ε)E)) = c((1 + ε)E) = (1 + ε)2c(E). In short
(1 −ε)2c(E) ≤c(h(E)) ≤(1 + ε)2c(E).
This holds true for every ε > 0 so that c(h(E)) = c(E) as desired. ■

2.2 Rigidity of symplectic diffeomorphisms
65
In order to generalize this statement, we denote by O the family of open and
bounded sets of R2n and associate with Ω∈O
ˇc(Ω)
=
sup
	
c(U) |U open and
U ⊂Ω

ˆc(Ω)
=
inf
	
c(U) |U open and
U ⊃Ω

.
The distinguished family Oc of open sets is deﬁned by the condition
Oc = {Ω∈O |ˆc (Ω) = ˇc(Ω)} .
Proposition 7. Assume hj is a sequence of homeomorphisms of R2n converging
locally uniformly to a homeomorphism h of R2n. If c(hj(U)) = c(U)
for all
U ∈
O and all j, then c(h(Ω)) = c(Ω)
for all
Ω∈Oc.
Proof. If Ω∈Oc and ε > 0 we ﬁnd ˆU, ˇU ∈O with ˆU ⊃Ωand ˇU ⊂Ωsatisfying
c( ˆU) ≤c(Ω) + ε
and
c( ˇU) ≥c(Ω) −ε.
For j large we have by the above degree argument hj( ˆU) ⊃h(Ω) ⊃hj( ˇU), and
hence using the monotonicity property of the capacity
c( ˆU) = c(hj( ˆU)) ≥c(h(Ω)) ≥c(hj( ˇU)) = c( ˇU),
so that c(Ω) + ε ≥c(h(Ω)) ≥c(Ω) −ε. This holds true for every ε > 0 and the
theorem is proved. ■
Deﬁnition. A capacity c is called inner regular, respectively, outer regular if
c(U) = ˇc(U)
resp. if
c(U) = ˆc(U)
for all U ∈O.
Proposition 8. Assume the capacity c is inner regular or outer regular. Assume ϕj
and ϕ are homeomorphisms of R2n and
ϕj →ϕ
and
ϕ−1
j
→ϕ−1
locally uniformly. If c(ϕj(U)) = c(U) for all U ∈O and all j, then also
c

ϕ(U)

= c(U)
for all
U ∈O.

66
Chapter 2 Symplectic capacities
Proof a) Assume c is inner regular and let Ωbe open and bounded. Then if U
is open and U ⊂Ωwe have ϕj(U) ⊂ϕ(Ω) if j is large and thus c(ϕj(U)) =
c(U) ≤c(ϕ(Ω)) so that c(U) ≤c(ϕ(Ω)). Hence, taking the supremum we ﬁnd
c(Ω) ≤c(ϕ(Ω)). Similarly one shows that c(Ω) ≤c(ϕ−1(Ω)) for every open and
bounded set Ω. Consequently, since ϕ is a homeomorphism c(Ω) = c(ϕ−1◦ϕ(Ω)) ≥
c(ϕ(Ω)) ≥c(Ω) and thus c(ϕ(Ω)) = c(Ω) as desired.
b) If c is outer regular and Ωis open and bounded we conclude for ε > 0
that ϕj(Ω) ⊂Uε(ϕ(Ω)) if j is suﬃciently large; here Uε = {x| dist (x, U) < ε}.
Therefore, c(Ω) = c(ϕj(Ω)) ≤c(Uε(ϕ(Ω))) and taking the inﬁmum on the right
hand side we ﬁnd c(Ω) ≤c(ϕ(Ω)). Arguing as in the part a) we conclude that
c(ϕ(Ω)) = c(Ω) for every Ω∈O. ■
So far we have deduced from the existence of a symplectic capacity some sur-
prising phenomena about symplectic mappings. Nevertheless, the notion itself is
still rather mysterious and raises many questions. It is, for example, not known
whether the knowledge of the capacities of small sets is suﬃcient to understand the
capacity of larger sets. To be more precise, does, for example, a homeomorphism
preserving the capacity of small sets preserve the capacity of large sets?
We have no example of a homeomorphism which preserves one capacity but not
another. Neither do we know whether a homeomorphism preserving the capacity
of open sets, also preserves the Lebesgue measure of open sets. But it is easy to see
that a homeomorphism preserving all capacities of open sets is necessarily measure
preserving. In order to prove this we ﬁrst deﬁne a special embedding capacity γ.
Introducing for r > 0 the open cube
Q(r) = (0, r)2n ⊂R2n,
having edges parallel to the coordinate axis, we deﬁne
γ(M, ω) : = sup

r2 | there is a symplectic embedding ϕ : Q(r) →M

.
Clearly γ is a capacity satisfying the Axioms (A1), (A2) and the weak nontriviality
condition (A3′). It is not normalized. One can prove, by using the n-th order
capacity function cn of Ekeland and Hofer in [69], that γ(B(r)) = 1
nπr2, moreover
γ(Z(r)) = πr2.
Proposition 9. Assume h is a homeomorphism of R2n satisfying
γ

h(Ω)

= γ(Ω)
for all Ω∈O. Then h preserves the Lebesgue measure µ of open sets, i.e.,
µ

h(Ω)

= µ(Ω)
for all Ω∈O.

2.2 Rigidity of symplectic diffeomorphisms
67
Proof. From the deﬁnition of γ we infer
µ

Q(r)

= r2n = γ

Q(r)
n
.
Since every symplectic embedding is volume preserving we ﬁnd for the capacity
γ(Ω) of the open and bounded set Ω⊂R2n that
µ(Ω) ≥sup
r
µ

Q(r)

= γ(Ω)n,
where the supremum is taken over those r, for which there is a symplectic embed-
ding Q(r) →Ω. If Q is any open cube having its edges parallel to the coordinate
axes we conclude that
µ(Q) = γ(Q)n = γ

h(Q)
n
≤µ

h(Q)

.
It follows that
µ(Ω) ≤µ

h(Ω)

,
for every Ω∈O. Indeed assume Ω∈O; then given ε > 0 we ﬁnd, in view of the
regularity of the Lebesgue measure, ﬁnitely many disjoint open cubes Qj contained
in Ωsuch that µ(Ω) −ε ≤ µ(Qj). Hence by the estimate above
µ(Ω) −ε
≤
 µ

h(Qj)

=
µ

h(
j
Qj)

≤
µ

h(Ω)

.
This holds true for every ε > 0 and the claim follows. By the same argument,
µ(Ω) ≤µ(h−1(Ω)) and hence µ(Ω) ≤µ(h(Ω)) ≤µ(h−1 ◦h(Ω)) = µ(Ω), proving
the proposition. ■
Corollary. If a homeomorphism of R2n preserves all the capacities of open sets in
R2n, then it also preserves the Lebesgue measure.
All our considerations so far are based on the existence of a capacity not yet
established. In the next chapter we shall construct a very special capacity function
deﬁned dynamically by means of Hamiltonian systems.

Chapter 3
Existence of a capacity
This chapter is devoted to the existence proof of a distinguished capacity function,
denoted by c0, and introduced by H. Hofer and E. Zehnder in [123]. It is intimately
related to periodic orbits of Hamiltonian systems. The capacity c0(M, ω) measures
the minimal C0-oscillation of special Hamiltonian functions H : M →R, needed in
order to conclude the existence of a distinguished periodic orbit having small pe-
riod and solving the associated Hamiltonian system XH on M. For 2-dimensional
manifolds, c0 agrees with the total area, and in the special case of convex, open and
smooth domains U ⊂(R2n, ω0) it is represented by a distinguished closed charac-
teristic of the boundary ∂U having minimal (reduced) action equal to c0(U, ω0).
This can be used, for example, to exhibit a class of compact hypersurfaces in R2n,
which are not symplectically diﬀeomorphic to convex ones. The proof will be based
on the action principle. The variational approach will be explained in detail. In
the analytical framework of the Sobolev space H1/2, we shall introduce a special
minimax argument which originated in the work of P. Rabinowitz. The construc-
tion of the capacity c0 completes the proof of the symplectic rigidity phenomena
described in Chapter 2. The special features of c0, however, will also be useful later
on for the dynamics of Hamiltonian systems.
3.1
Deﬁnition of the capacity c0
If (M, ω) is a symplectic manifold we recall that to a smooth function H : M →IR
there belongs a unique Hamiltonian vector ﬁeld XH on M deﬁned by
ω(XH(x), v) = −dH(x)(v), v ∈TxM
and x ∈M. A T-periodic solution x(t) of the Hamiltonian equation
˙x = XH(x)
on
M
is a solution satisfying the boundary conditions x(T) = x(0) for some T > 0.
We now single out a distinguished class of Hamiltonian functions H which look
qualitatively as depicted in the following ﬁgure 3.1.
When M has a boundary ∂M, the Hamiltonian vector ﬁeld XH has compact
support contained in the interior of M. Our guiding principle is the hope that
if the oscillation of the function H is suﬃciently large, then the corresponding
Hamiltonian vector ﬁeld possesses, independently of the size of its support, a fast
periodic solution, i.e., a periodic solution having a small period T, say 0 < T ≤1.
H. Hofer and E. Zehnder, Symplectic Invariants and Hamiltonian Dynamics,  
69 
Modern Birkhäuser Classics, DOI 10.1007/978-3-0348-0104-1_3, © Springer Basel AG 2011

70
Chapter 3 Existence of a capacity
M
∂M
m(H)
Osc (H)
0
Fig. 3.1
To be precise we denote by H(M, ω) the set of smooth functions H on M
satisfying the following three properties:
P.1. There is a compact set K ⊂M (depending on H) such that K ⊂(M\∂M)
and
H(M\K) ≡m(H) (a constant)
P.2. There is an open set U ⊂M (depending on H) on which
H(U) ≡0
P.3. 0 ≤H(x) ≤m(H) for all x ∈M.
The constant m(H) = max H −min H is the oscillation of H. A function
H ∈H(M, ω) will be called admissible if all the periodic solutions of ˙x = XH(x)
on M are either constant, i.e., x(t) ≡x(0) for all t or have a period T > 1.
Abbreviating the set of admissible functions by Ha(M, ω) ⊂H(M, ω), we deﬁne
c0(M, ω) = sup {m(H) | H ∈Ha(M, ω)} .
Therefore, if c0(M, ω) < ∞then this number is characterized by the property that
for every function H in H(M, ω) whose oscillation satisﬁes m(H) > c0(M, ω), the
vector ﬁeld XH possesses a nonconstant T-periodic solution for some 0 < T ≤1,
and c0(M, ω) is the inﬁmum of the real numbers having this property. The main
result of this chapter is
Theorem 1. The function c0 is a symplectic capacity. Moreover, c0 = ˇc0, i.e., c0
has the property of inner regularity.
As an illustration, we consider the ellipsoid E in (R2n, ω0) determined by the
invariants r1(E) ≤r2(E) ≤. . . rn(E). We know that c(E, ω0) = πr1(E)2 for every
capacity c. This linear invariant can, therefore, dynamically be deﬁned as follows:

3.1 Definition of the capacity c0
71
Proposition 1. If H ∈H(E, ω0) satisﬁes m(H) > πr1(E)2, then the Hamiltonian
vector ﬁeld XH on E possesses a nonconstant periodic solution of period 0 < T ≤
1. Moreover, πr1(E)2 is the inﬁnimum of the real numbers with this property.
Corollary. If H ∈H(B(r), ω0) satisﬁes
m(H) > πr2,
then the Hamiltonian system ˙x = XH(x) on B(r) has a nonconstant periodic
solution of period 0 < T ≤1.
Observe ﬁrst that the statement about inner regularity c0(M, ω) = ˇc0(M, ω)
follows immediately from the deﬁnitions. We only consider the case c0(M, ω) < ∞,
the case c0(M, ω) = ∞if treated similarly. If ε > 0 then there exists H ∈Ha(M, ω)
with m(H) > c0(M, ω) −ε. Let K = supp (XH) ⊂(M\∂M) and pick an open
set U with K ⊂U ⊂¯U ⊂(M\∂M). Clearly H ∈Ha(U, ω) and hence c0(U, ω) ≥
c0(M, ω) −ε so that c0(M, ω) = sup{c0(U, ω) | U ⊂M open and ¯U ⊂M\∂M}
which by deﬁnition is equal to ˇc0(M, ω).
We have to prove that c0(M, ω) meets the axioms of a capacity c which we
recall for the convenience of the reader. All the symplectic manifolds considered
are of ﬁxed dimension 2n.
A.1. c(M, ω) ≤c(N, σ) provided there exists a symplectic embedding ϕ : M →N.
A.2. c(M, αω) = |α| c(M, ω), α ̸= 0.
A.3. c(Z(1), ω0) = π = c(B(1), ω0).
The ﬁrst two properties follow very easily from the deﬁnition of c0.
Lemma 1. c0 satisﬁes the monotonicity axiom A.1.
Proof. If ϕ : M →N is a symplectic embedding we can deﬁne the map ϕ∗:
H(M, ω) →H(N, σ) as follows:
ϕ∗(H) =

H ◦ϕ−1(x)
if
x ∈ϕ(M)
m(H)
if
x /∈ϕ(M).
Note that if K ⊂M\∂M for a compact set K ⊂M, then also ϕ(K) ⊂N\∂N,
so that indeed ϕ∗(H) ∈H(N, σ). Clearly m(ϕ∗(H)) = m(H), so that the lemma
follows if we show that ϕ∗(Ha(M, ω)) ⊂Ha(N, σ). Since ϕ is symplectic ϕ∗(XH) =
Xϕ∗(H) on ϕ(M) so that the ﬂows are conjugated. In particular, the nonconstant
periodic solutions together with their periods correspond to each other. ■
Lemma 2. c0 satisﬁes the conformality axiom A.2.
Proof. Assume α ̸= 0 and deﬁne the obvious bijection ψ : H(M, ω) →H(M, αω) by
ψ : H →|α|·H = Hα. Clearly m(Hα) = |α|·m(H) so that the lemma follows if we
show that ψ is also a bijection between Ha(M, ω) and Ha(M, αω). By the deﬁnition

72
Chapter 3 Existence of a capacity
of Hamiltonian vector ﬁelds (αω) (XHα, ·) = −dHα = −|α|dH = |α| ω(XH, ·).
Hence, since ω is nondegenerate
α
|α| XHα = XH on M.
Therefore, XHα = XH or XHα = −XH and the two vector ﬁelds have the same
periodic solutions with the same periods. ■
Lemma 3. c0(B(1), ω0) ≥π.
Proof. Pick 0 < ε < π, we shall construct a function H ∈Ha(B(1)) satisfying
m(H) = π −ε, hence proving c0(B(1), ω0) ≥π −ε. Choose a smooth function
f : [0, 1] →[0, ∞) satisfying
0 ≤
f′(t)
< π
f(t)
= 0
for t near 0
f(t)
= π −ε
for t near 1.
f
π
π −ε
t
0
1
Fig. 3.2
Deﬁne H(x) = f(|x|2) for x ∈B(1). Then m(H) = π −ε and we claim that
H ∈Ha(M, ω). Indeed, the Hamiltonian system
−J ˙x = ∇H(x) = 2f′(|x|2)x
has the function G(x) = 1
2|x|2 as integral, since ⟨∇G, J∇H⟩= 2 f′ (|x|2) ⟨x, Jx⟩=
0. Therefore, if x(t) is a solution, then
2 f′ ( |x(t)|2 ) = a
is constant and the solution satisﬁes
−J ˙x = ax.

3.1 Definition of the capacity c0
73
Consequently, all the solutions are periodic and given by x(t) = eaJtx(0) =
(cos at)x(0) + (sin at)Jx(0). If a = 0 then the solution is constant, while if a > 0
the period is given by T = 2π
a > 1 since, by construction, 0 ≤a < 2π. Therefore,
H is admissible as we wanted to prove. ■
The inclusion map B(1) →Z(1) is a symplectic embedding and we deduce
from Lemma 1 and Lemma 3
c0(Z(1)) ≥c0(B(1)) ≥π.
In order to show that c0 meets the normalization A.3 we have to prove that
c0(Z(1)) ≤π. This is the subtle part of the proof. It requires an existence proof
and our next aim is to prove
Theorem 2. If H ∈H(Z(1)) satisﬁes m(H) > π, then the Hamiltonian system
˙x = J∇H(x) on Z(1) possesses a periodic solution in Z(1) having period T = 1
and which is not a constant solution.
The theorem is qualitative in nature. We observe that, in proving Theorem 2,
we may replace H by H ◦ψ, where ψ is a compactly supported symplectic diﬀeo-
morphism of Z2n(1), i.e., the closure of the set {x|ψ(x) ̸= x} is a compact subset
of Z2n(1). Indeed, in view of the transformation law of Hamiltonian vector ﬁelds
(Chapter 1), the ﬂows of XH and XH◦ψ are conjugated. Using this observation, we
may assume without loss of generality that H vanishes in a neighborhood of the
origin. This is proved as follows. By assumption H|U ≡0. We pick a point z0 ∈U
and choose a smooth function ρ : R2n →R with compact support in Z2n(1) and
which is equal to 1 on a neighborhood V of the line {tz0|0 ≤t ≤1} connecting
the origin with z0. Deﬁne the Hamiltonian K : Z2n(1) →R by
K(z) = ρ(z)⟨z, −Jz0⟩.
Then the time-1 map ψ of XK is symplectic and has compact support in Z2n(1).
Since XK(z) = z0 if z ∈V , the line ψt(0) = tz0 is a solution for 0 ≤t ≤1 moving
the origin to the point z0. Hence
ψ(0) = z0 ,
and the Hamiltonian H ◦ψ vanishes in a neighborhood of 0.
From now on we therefore assume that the Hamiltonian H vanishes in an open
neighborhood of the origin and ﬁrst extend H deﬁned on Z(1) to a function deﬁned
on the whole space R2n. This is, of course, easy since the function is constant near
the boundary of Z(1). However, in view of the proof later on, we shall choose a
very special continuation. Observe ﬁrst that if H ∈H(Z(1), ω0) then there exists
an ellipsoid E = EN such that H ∈H(E, ω0), where
EN =

z ∈R2n  q(z) < 1

,

74
Chapter 3 Existence of a capacity
is, in the coordinates z = (x, y) given by,
q(z) = (x2
1 + y2
1) + 1
N 2
n

j=2
(x2
j + y2
j)
and N ∈Z+ is suﬃciently large (Fig. 3.3).
Since H ∈H(Z(1), ω0) satisﬁes m(H) > π there is an ε > 0 such that m(H) >
π + ε. We can, therefore, pick a smooth function f : R →R satisfying
f(s)
=
m(H)
for
s ≤1
f(s)
≥
(π + ε)s
for all
s ∈R
f(s)
=
(π + ε)s
for
s large
0 < f′(s)
≤π + ε
for
s > 1.
(Fig. 3.4)
The extension of H is now deﬁned by
H(z)
=





H(z)
z ∈E
f(q(z))
z /∈E .
Clearly H ∈C∞(R2n) and H is quadratic at inﬁnity,
H(z) = (π + ε)q(z),
if
|z| ≥R
for some large R. The following crucial proposition describes the distinguished
periodic solutions we are looking for.
Proposition 2. Assume x(t) is a periodic solution of ˙x = XH(x) having period 1.
If it satisﬁes
Φ(x) : =
1

0
1
2⟨−J ˙x, x⟩−H(x(t))

dt > 0,
then x(t) is nonconstant and x(t) ⊂E. Hence x(t) is a nonconstant 1-periodic
solution of the original system ˙x = XH(x) on Z(1).

3.1 Definition of the capacity c0
75
Z(1)
E
K
1
Fig. 3.3
f
m(H)
π + ε
0
1
s
Fig. 3.4
Proof. If x(t) = x∗is a constant solution, then Φ(x∗) ≤0 since H ≥0. The
Hamiltonian vector ﬁeld XH vanishes on ∂E. Therefore, if for a solution x(t0) /∈E
for some t0, then x(t) /∈E for all t ∈R and hence it solves the equation
−J ˙x = ∇H(x) = f′(q(x)) · ∇q(x).
Note that, outside of E, the function q is an integral of this equation since
⟨∇q, Jf′(q)∇q⟩= f′(q)⟨∇q, J∇q⟩= 0. Consequently, if x(t) is a solution then
q(x(t)) = q(x(t0)) = τ

76
Chapter 3 Existence of a capacity
is constant in t, and in view of ⟨∇q(z), z⟩= 2q(z), for z ∈R2n, we can compute
Φ(x)
=
1
0
	 1
2⟨−J ˙x, x⟩−H(x)

dt
=
1
0
1
2f′(τ) ⟨∇q(x), x⟩dt −
1
0
f(q(x))dt
=
1
2
1
0
f′(τ) 2q(x(t))dt −f(τ)
=
f′(τ) · τ −f(τ).
By deﬁnition of f, this is smaller than or equal to (π + ε)τ −(π + ε)τ = 0. Hence
Φ(x) ≤0 for all solutions outside of E and the proposition is proved. ■
In view of this remark we have to ﬁnd a 1-periodic solution x = x(t) of the
Hamiltonian system ˙x = XH(x) which satisﬁes Φ(x) > 0. In the following we shall
change the notation and replace H by H. In order to establish the existence of a
periodic solution, we make use of a well-known variational principle for which the
critical points are the required periodic solutions. To introduce this principle, we
proceed at ﬁrst on a informal level and consider the loop space
Ω= C∞(S1, R2n) where S1 = R/Z ,
of smooth loops in R2n. We deﬁne a function Φ : Ω→R by setting
Φ(x) =
1

0
1
2 ⟨−J ˙x, x⟩dt −
1

0
H(x(t))dt,
x ∈Ω,
and claim that the critical points of Φ are the periodic solutions of ˙x = XH(x).
Computing the derivative at x ∈Ωin the direction of y ∈Ω, we ﬁnd
Φ′(x)(y)
=
d
dε Φ(x + εy)

ε=0
=
1
0
⟨−J ˙x −∇H(x), y⟩dt.
Consequently, Φ′(x)(y) = 0 for all y ∈Ωif and only if the loop x satisﬁes the
equation
−J ˙x(t) −∇H(x(t)) = 0,
i.e., x(t) is a solution of the Hamiltonian equation which also satisﬁes x(0) = x(1).
Hence it is periodic of period 1. Therefore, the principle picks out precisely the
1-periodic solutions among the intricate set of all solutions of a Hamiltonian vector
ﬁeld. This principle is the well-known action principle in mechanics, where it is

3.2 The minimax idea
77
often used to derive the transformation law of Hamiltonian vector ﬁelds. It might
seem rather awkward to use this principle for existence proofs, since it is highly
degenerate. Indeed, taking the special loops xj,
xj(t) = ej2πJtξ = (cos j2πt)ξ + (sin j2πt)Jξ
where |ξ| = 1, one computes readily for the ﬁrst part of Φ
1

0
1
2 ⟨−J ˙xj, xj⟩dt = πj, ∥xj∥L2 = 1,
while the second part of Φ stays bounded. We see that the functional is bounded
neither below nor above. In particular, the variational techniques based on mini-
mizing sequences do not apply. This is in sharp contrast to the variational principle
for closed geodesics on Riemannian manifolds. This geometric problem gave rise to
two powerful variational methods, the so-called Morse theory and the Ljusternik-
Schnirelman theory. We should also mention that the Morse theory is not applica-
ble directly to our functional. Indeed, a priori the Morse indices of critical points
are inﬁnite and hence topologically not visible. It is this diﬃculty which forced
Andreas Floer to develop powerful new techniques extending the Morse theory,
which led him to the so-called Floer complex described in more detail later on.
It was only relatively recently that P. Rabinowitz [180, 181] demonstrated
that the degenerate variational principle can be used very eﬀectively for existence
proofs. For this purpose he introduced special minimax principles adapted to the
structure of the functional Φ. Before we describe the technical details, it might be
helpful to recall in an abstract setting the minimax idea.
3.2
The minimax idea
We consider a diﬀerentiable function
f : E →R, f ∈C1(E, R)
deﬁned on a Hilbert space E whose inner product is denoted by ⟨·, ·⟩and whose
norm is ∥x∥2 = ⟨x, x⟩for x ∈E. We search for critical points of f, i.e., points
x∗∈E at which the derivative of f vanishes:
df(x∗) = 0
⇐⇒
df(x∗)(y) = 0 for all y ∈E.
The derivative df(x) is, by deﬁnition, an element of the dual space L(E, R) = E∗.
Recall that by a well-known theorem due to F. Riesz, there is a distinguished linear
isometry I from E∗onto E such that e∗(x) = ⟨I(e∗), x⟩for every x ∈E, where
e∗∈E∗. Therefore,
df(x)(y) = ⟨v(x), y⟩
and
∥df(x)∥∗= ∥v(x)∥

78
Chapter 3 Existence of a capacity
where v(x) ∈E is uniquely determined by df(x). It is called the gradient of f at
x (with respect to the inner product ⟨·, · ⟩) and denoted by
v(x) = ∇f(x) ∈E.
The critical points of f are the zeros of the gradient function x →∇f(x) in E.
Using a dynamical approach, we interpret the critical points of f as the equilibrium
points of the gradient equation
˙x = −∇f(x), x ∈E.
This is an ordinary diﬀerential equation on E, and we shall assume now that it
has a global ﬂow ϕt(x), i.e., that we can solve the Cauchy initial value problem
uniquely and for all times t ∈R:
d
dtϕt(x)
=
−∇f (ϕt(x))
ϕ0(x)
=
x,
for all initial conditions x ∈E. Such a global ﬂow does exist, for example, if there
is a constant M ≥0 such that ∥∇f(x) −∇f(y)∥≤M∥x −y∥for all x, y ∈E, as
is, of course, well-known. The crucial property of the gradient ﬂow is that f(ϕt(x))
decreases along nonconstant solutions ϕt(x). This follows immediately from the
deﬁnitions; indeed
d
dsf (ϕs(x))
=
df (ϕs(x))
 d
dsϕs(x)

=
df (ϕs(x)) (−∇f(ϕs(x)))
=
−⟨∇f (ϕs(x)) , ∇f (ϕs(x))⟩.
In particular,
f

ϕt(x)

−f(x)
=
t

0
d
dsf (ϕs(x)) ds = −
t

0
∥∇f (ϕs(x)) ∥2ds.
(3.1)
Since E is not compact we cannot expect f to have any critical points unless we
impose additional conditions on f, as the example f(x) = e−x on x ∈R already
shows. The following strong compactness condition goes back to Palais and Smale
[175] and guarantees a critical point in many variational problems.
Deﬁnition. f is said to satisfy P.S., if every sequence xj ∈E satisfying
∇f(xj) →0 in E and |f(xj)| ≤c < ∞,
for some c ≥0, possesses a convergent subsequence. Since f is assumed to be C1,
the limit of this subsequence is a critical point of f.

3.2 The minimax idea
79
If F is a family of subsets F ⊂E one deﬁnes the minimax c(f, F) belonging
to f and F by
c(f, F) = inf
F ∈F sup
x∈F
f(x)
∈
R ∪{∞} ∪{−∞}
Minimax Lemma. Assume f ∈C1(E, R) and F meet the following conditions:
(i) f satisﬁes P.S.
(ii) ˙x = −∇f(x) deﬁnes a global ﬂow ϕt(x)
(iii) The family F is positively invariant under the ﬂow, i.e., if F ∈F then
ϕt(F) ∈F for every t ≥0
(iv) −∞< c(f, F) < ∞.
Then the real number, c(f, F) is a critical value of f, i.e., there exists x∗∈E
satisfying
∇f(x∗) = 0 and f(x∗) = c(f, F).
Proof. Abbreviating c = c(f, F) which, by assumption, is a real number, we shall
show that for every ε > 0 there exists an x ∈E satisfying
c −ε ≤f(x) ≤c + ε
and ∥∇f(x) ∥≤ε.
Then choosing εj = 1/j we ﬁnd a sequence xj which has, by the P.S. condition,
a convergent subsequence whose limit satisﬁes ∇f(x∗) = 0 and f(x∗) = c, hence
proving the Lemma. Arguing by contradiction we ﬁnd an ε > 0 such that
∥∇f(x) ∥> ε
(3.2)
for all x satisfying c −ε ≤f(x) ≤c + ε. By the deﬁnition of c, there exists an
F ∈F satisfying
sup
x∈F
f(x) ≤c + ε.
(3.3)
Pick a point x ∈F; then f(x) ≤c + ε and we claim that the solution ϕt(x)
satisﬁes f(ϕt∗(x)) ≤c −ε if t∗= 2/ε. Indeed, if f(ϕt(x)) ≤c −ε for some
0 ≤t ≤t∗there is nothing to prove since f(ϕt(x)) is decreasing. Assume now, by
contradiction, that f(ϕt(x)) > c −ε for all 0 ≤t ≤t∗. Then by, (3.2), we have
||∇f(ϕt(x))|| ≥ε, for 0 ≤t ≤t∗, and hence, by (3.1), f(ϕt(x)) ≤f(x) −ε2t, so
that f(ϕt∗(x)) ≤c + ε −ε2t∗= c −ε, a contradiction. Setting F ∗= ϕt∗(F) we
have shown that
sup
x∈F ∗f(x) ≤c −ε .
Since, by assumption, F ∗∈F, this estimate contradicts the deﬁnition of c. ■

80
Chapter 3 Existence of a capacity
c + ε
c
c −ε
F
F ∗
Fig. 3.5
For example, if f is, in addition, bounded from below we can choose F to be
the family of subsets {x} consisting of the elements of E so that
c

f, F

= inf
x∈E f(x).
The lemma then guarantees a minimum, i.e., we ﬁnd x∗∈E satisfying ∇f(x∗) = 0
and
f

x∗
= inf
x∈E f(x).
As another illustration we describe the celebrated Mountain Pass Lemma dis-
covered by A. Ambrosetti and P. Rabinowitz [6]. We reproduce the visually at-
tractive version found in R. Palais and C. Terng [174]. A subset R ⊂E is called a
mountain range relative to f if it separates E, if
α := inf
R
f > −∞
and if on every component of E\R, the function f assumes a value strictly less
than α. Consider an f ∈C1(E, R) satisfying the P.S. condition and assume that
the gradient equation generates a global ﬂow.
Mountain Pass Lemma. If R ⊂E is a mountain range relative to f, then f has a
critical value c satisfying
c ≥inf
R f.
Proof. We choose two diﬀerent components E0 and E1 of E\R and deﬁne Ej
α =
{x ∈Ej | f(x) < α} for j = 0, 1. By assumption, these sets are not empty. Let Γ be
the set of all continuous paths γ : [0, 1] →E satisfying γ(0) ∈E0
α and γ(1) ∈E1
α
and deﬁne the family F of compact subsets of E by
F =

image (γ)
 γ ∈Γ

.

3.2 The minimax idea
81
R
E0
E1
Fig. 3.6
Since γ(0) and γ(1) belong to diﬀerent components of E\R, we conclude that
γ(t0) ∈R for some 0 < t0 < 1 so that f(γ(t0)) ≥α and hence
α ≤c(f, F) < ∞.
In view of the minimax lemma, it suﬃces to verify that F is positively invariant
under the ﬂow ϕt of −∇f. For this it is suﬃcient to show that if x ∈Ej
α then also
ϕt(x) ∈Ej
α for all t ≥0. But this follows in view of f(ϕt(x)) ≤f(ϕ0(x)) = f(x) <
α for all t ≥0. ■
For other versions of the Mountain Pass Lemma as well as for many applica-
tions, we refer to the books Variational methods by M. Struwe [208] and Minimax
methods in critical point theory with applications to diﬀerential equations by P.
Rabinowitz [182]. It should be said that if f is bounded neither from above nor
from below, it is often a subtle task to analyze the qualitative behaviour of f and
to ﬁnd an appropriate family F meeting the estimate (iv) above. This will be done
for our special functional Φ in the next two sections. First, however, we have to
deﬁne the appropriate functional analytic setting.
As for more sophisticated classical techniques in critical point theory, we would
like to mention the classical paper by R.S. Palais [173] (1970) and the monographs
by P. Blanchard, E. Br¨uning [28] (1992), by J. Mawhin, M. Willem [152] (1989)
and, quite recently, by Kung-Ching Chang [39] (1993). New methods designed for
the action functional on the loop space of a compact symplectic manifold will be
described in Chapter 6.

82
Chapter 3 Existence of a capacity
3.3
The analytical setting
Let H ∈C∞(R2n, R) denote the special Hamiltonian function introduced in Sec-
tion 3.1. It vanishes on an open neighborhood of the origin and satisﬁes
H(z) = Q(z),
|z| ≥R ,
(3.4)
with the quadratic form Q(z) = (π + ε)q(z), z ∈R2n. We shall translate these
properties of the Hamiltonian into properties of the corresponding functional Φ
on an appropriate Hilbert space. Recall that on the space Ω= C∞(S1, R2n) of
smooth loops Φ is deﬁned by
Φ(x) =
1

0
1
2⟨−J ˙x, x⟩dt −
1

0
H (x(t)) dt, x ∈Ω.
(3.5)
In order to ﬁnd the convenient Hilbert space, we represent the periodic loops
x ∈C∞(S1, R2n) by their Fourier-series
x(t) =

k∈Z
ek2πJt xk , xk ∈R2n
(3.6)
which converge, together with all their derivatives, in the supremum norm. Con-
sidering ﬁrst the dominant part of Φ which reﬂects the symplectic structure, we
abbreviate
a(x, y) =
1

0
1
2⟨−J ˙x, y⟩dt, x, y ∈Ω.
(3.7)
Then, inserting the Fourier expansions of x, y ∈Ωinto a(x, y), and observing that
1

0
⟨ej2πJt xj, ek2πJt yk⟩dt = δjk⟨xj, yk⟩,
one obtains
2a(x, y)
=
2π

j∈Z
j ⟨xj, yj⟩
(3.8)
=
2π

j>0
|j| ⟨xj, yj⟩−2π

j<0
|j| ⟨xj, yj⟩.
Consequently, a(x, y) can be deﬁned as a continuous bilinear form on the larger
space H1/2 = H1/2(S1) which is a special Sobolev space. Recall that the spaces

3.3 The analytical setting
83
Hs = Hs(S1) for s ≥0 are deﬁned by
Hs =


x ∈L2(S1)


j∈Z
|j|2s|xj|2 < ∞



where
x =

j∈Z
ej2πJtxj , xj ∈R2n
is the Fourier series of x which converges in L2(S1). The space Hs is a Hilbert
space with inner product and associated norm deﬁned by
⟨x, y⟩s
=
⟨x0, y0⟩+ 2π 
k∈Z
|k|2s⟨xk, yk⟩
∥x∥2
s
=
⟨x, x⟩s,
for x, y ∈Hs. Note that the norm ||x||0 is equivalent to the L2-norm. We shall
denote the distinguished Hilbert space H1/2 which will be the underlying space of
our functional by
E
≡
H1/2
⟨, ⟩
≡
⟨, ⟩1
2 and ∥∥= ∥∥1
2 .
There is an orthogonal splitting of E
E = E−⊕E0 ⊕E+
into the spaces of x ∈E having only Fourier coeﬃcients for j < 0, j = 0, j > 0.
The corresponding orthogonal projections are denoted by P −, P 0, P +. Therefore,
every x ∈E has a unique decomposition
x = x−+ x0 + x+.
In view of (3.8) we deﬁne for x, y ∈E
a(x, y)
=
1
2⟨x+, y+⟩−1
2⟨x−, y−⟩
(3.9)
=
1
2⟨(P + −P −)x, y⟩,
which is a continuous bilinear form on E and which agrees for x, y ∈C∞(S1, R2n)
with (3.7). The function a : E →R, deﬁned by
a(x) = a(x, x) =
1
2∥x+∥2 −1
2∥x−∥2,
(3.10)
is diﬀerentiable with derivative
da(x) (y) = ⟨(P + −P −)x, y⟩,

84
Chapter 3 Existence of a capacity
so that the gradient of a is
∇a(x) = (P + −P −)x = x+ −x−
∈E,
(3.11)
at every point x ∈E.
Next we point out some useful properties of the spaces Hs needed later on.
Clearly the spaces decrease,
Ht ⊂Hs ⊂H0
for t ≥s ≥0,
while the norms increase:
∥x∥t ≥∥x∥s ≥∥x∥0
for x ∈Ht.
In particular, the inclusion maps I : Ht →Hs for t ≥s are continuous.
Proposition 3. Assume t > s ≥0. Then the inclusion map I : Ht →Hs is compact,
i.e., it maps bounded sets of Ht onto relatively compact subsets of Hs.
Proof. The continuous linear operator PN : Ht →Hs deﬁned by
PN x =

|k|≤N
ek2πJt xk
has ﬁnite dimensional range and hence is a compact operator. The estimate
∥(PN −I)x∥2
s = ∥

|k|>N
ek2πJt xk∥2
s
= 2π

|k|>N
|k|2s |xk|2 = 2π

|k|>N
|k|2(s−t) |k|2t |xk|2
≤N 2(s−t) 2π

|k|>N
|k|2t |xk|2 ≤N 2(s−t) ∥x∥2
t
shows that PN →I in the operator norm, i.e., the norm of L(Hs, Ht). Conse-
quently I is also compact, which is well-known and easily seen as follows. Let
ε > 0 and choose N so large that ∥PN −I∥< ε/2 in the operator-norm. If B is
the unit ball in Ht, then PN(B) ⊂Hs is covered by ﬁnitely many balls of radius
ε/2 which are centered at the points y1, y2, . . . , ym ∈Hs. Hence, if x ∈B we ﬁnd
an yj satisfying ∥PN(x) −yj∥s < ε/2 and together with ∥PN(x) −I(x)∥s < ε/2
this implies that ∥I(x) −yj∥s < ε. Thus I(B) is covered by ﬁnitely many balls
of radius ε > 0. This holds true for every ε > 0 and we conclude that I(B) is
relatively compact in Hs. ■
The set C∞(S1, R2n) is dense in Hs for every s ≥0. However, not all elements of
H1/2 are represented by continuous functions. In order to ﬁnd continuous functions
the following proposition will be helpful.

3.3 The analytical setting
85
Proposition 4. Assume s >
1
2. If x ∈Hs then x ∈C(S1). Moreover, there is a
constant c = cs such that
sup
0≤t≤1
|x(t)| ≤c ∥x∥s ,
x ∈Hs(S1).
Proof. We show that the Fourier series
x =

k
ek2πJt xk,
which converges in L2, also converges in the sup-norm. This follows from the
estimates:

k̸=0
ek2πJt xk

=

k̸=0
xk
 =

k̸=0
|k|−s |k|s |xk|
≤
 
k̸=0
1
|k|2s
 1
2 ·
 
k̸=0
|k|2s |xk|2 1
2
≤
c ∥x∥s,
where we have used that 2s > 1. ■
The same argument shows that, more generally, if s >
1
2 + r for an integer r,
then x ∈Hs belongs to Cr(S1) and
sup
Djx(t)

≤c ∥x∥s ,
x ∈Hs(S1) .
0 ≤j ≤r
0 ≤t ≤1
This is again a special case of the Sobolev embedding theorem. In view of Propo-
sition 3, the inclusion map
j : H1/2 −→L2
(3.12)
is compact. Its adjoint operator
j∗: L2 −→H1/2
(3.13)
is, as usual, deﬁned by

j(x), y

L2 = ⟨x, j∗(y)⟩1
2
(3.14)
for all x ∈H1/2 and y ∈L2. The following property of j∗will be useful later on.

86
Chapter 3 Existence of a capacity
Proposition 5.
j∗(L2) ⊂H1
and
∥j∗(y)∥1 ≤∥y∥L2.
The map j∗factors: L2 →H1 →H1/2, thus we have veriﬁed using Proposition
3 that j∗is a compact operator. This follows also from the compactness of j, as is
well-known.
Proof. By deﬁnition of the adjoint

k
⟨xk, yk⟩= ⟨x0, j∗(y)0⟩+ 2π

k
|k| ⟨xk, j∗(y)k⟩
for x ∈H1/2 ⊂L2 and y ∈L2. One reads oﬀthe following formula for j∗
j∗(y) = y0 +

k̸=0
1
2π |k| ek2πJt yk,
if y ∈L2. The estimate
∥j∗(y)∥1 ≤∥y∥L2
is now obvious. ■
Coming back to the functional Φ, we next study the function
b(x) =
1

0
H

x(t)

dt ,
recalling that H vanishes in a neighborhood of the origin. In view of |H(z)| ≤
M|z|2, for all z ∈R2n, this map b is deﬁned for x ∈L2 and hence also for
x ∈E ⊂L2. If we consider b as a function on L2, we shall denote it by ˆb, so that,
with the inclusion map j : E →L2, we can write
b(x) = ˆb

j(x)

, x ∈E.
(3.15)
In order to prove that ˆb : L2 →R is diﬀerentiable, we start from the identity
H(z + ξ) = H(z) + ⟨∇H(z), ξ⟩+
1

0
⟨∇H(z + tξ) −∇H(z), ξ⟩dt
(3.16)
for z, ξ ∈R2n. Since |Hzz(z)| ≤M the last term is ≤M|ξ|2. Assume now that
x ∈L2 then ∇H(x) = ∇H(x(t)) ∈L2 in view of |∇H(z)| ≤M|z| for all z ∈R2n.
Therefore, given x and h ∈L2, we ﬁnd by integration
ˆb(x + h) = ˆb(x) +
1

0
⟨∇H(x), h⟩dt + R(x, h).

3.3 The analytical setting
87
Moreover, |R(x, h)| ≤M ∥h∥2
L2. This estimate shows that ˆb is diﬀerentiable with
derivative at x given by
dˆb(x)(h)
=
1
0
⟨∇H(x), h⟩dt = (∇H(x), h)L2
=
(∇ˆb(x), h)L2.
For the gradient (with respect to L2) we read oﬀ∇ˆb(x) = ∇H(x) ∈L2. The
derivative of b : E →R is in view of (3.14) given by
⟨∇b(x), y⟩= db(x)(y)
=
dˆb (j(x)) (j(y))
=

∇ˆb

j(x)

, j(y)

L2 = ⟨j∗∇ˆb(j(x)), y⟩.
Therefore,
∇b(x) = j∗∇ˆb

j(x)

= j∗∇H(x) .
(3.17)
Lemma 4. The map b : E →R is diﬀerentiable. Its gradient ∇b : E →E is
continuous and maps bounded sets into relatively compact sets. Moreover,
∥∇b(x) −∇b(y)∥≤M∥x −y∥
and |b(x)| ≤M||x||2
L2 for all x, y ∈E.
Proof. Clearly x →∇H(x) is globally Lipschitz continuous on L2 and maps,
therefore, bounded sets into bounded sets. The ﬁrst claim follows from (3.17),
since j∗: L2 →E is compact. Moreover,
∥∇b(x) −∇b(y)∥1
2 = ∥j∗
∇H(x) −∇H(y)

∥1
2
≤∥∇H(x) −∇H(y)∥L2 ≤M ∥x −y∥L2
≤M ∥x −y∥1
2 .
The last estimate follows from |H(z)| ≤M|z|2, for all z ∈R2n. ■
It should be mentioned that b ∈C∞(E, R) provided H ∈C∞(R2n, R). This is
readily seen by using the Taylor formula together with the nontrivial fact that E
is continuously embedded in Lp for every p ≥1 which is proved in the Appendix.
To keep our presentation elementary we shall, however, not use this observation
here. Summarizing the discussion so far, we have extended Φ from the space Ωof
smooth loops to the Hilbert space E ⊃Ωby
Φ(x) = a(x) −b(x) ,
x ∈E.

88
Chapter 3 Existence of a capacity
This function Φ : E →R is diﬀerentiable and its gradient is given by
∇Φ(x) = x+ −x−−∇b(x).
We are interested in classical solutions of diﬀerential equations. It is, therefore,
important to observe now that a critical point of Φ is not simply an element in E
which might not even be a continuous function, but it is actually a smooth periodic
solution of the Hamiltonian equation XH having period 1. Indeed the following
“regularity” statement holds true.
Lemma 5. Assume x ∈E is a critical point, ∇Φ(x) = 0. Then x ∈C∞(S1).
Moreover, it solves the Hamiltonian equation
˙x(t) = J∇H

x(t)

,
0 ≤t ≤1,
so that x ∈Ωis a 1-periodic solution.
Proof. Represent x and ∇H(x) ∈L2 by their Fourier expansions in L2
x
=
 ek 2π Jt xk
∇H(x)
=
 ek 2π Jt ak.
By assumption dΦ(x)(v) = 0.
Hence, using ⟨∇b(x), v⟩= ⟨j∗∇H(x), v⟩= (∇H(x), v)L2,
⟨(P + −P −)x, v⟩=
1

0
⟨∇H(x), v⟩dt
for all v ∈E. Choosing the test functions v(t) = ek2πJt v, we ﬁnd
2πk xk = ak ,
k ∈Z
(3.18)
and a0 = 0. We infer that

|k|2 |xk|2 ≤

|ak|2 < ∞,
so that x ∈H1 and by Proposition 4, the element x ∈E belongs to C(S1).
Consequently ∇H(x(t)) ∈C(S1), and, therefore,
ξ(t) =
t

0
J∇H

x(t)

dt ∈C1(R).
Comparing the Fourier coeﬃcients we ﬁnd in view of (3.18), that ξ(t) = x(t)−x(0),
hence x belongs to C1(S1) and also solves the equation ˙x(t) = J∇H(x(t)). The

3.3 The analytical setting
89
right hand side of the equation is in C1, hence x ∈C2, and iterating this argument
we conclude that x ∈C∞(S1) as claimed. ■
The careful choice of the asymptotic behaviour of the Hamiltonian function H
implies that XH has, in the region of R2n where |z| is large, no periodic solutions
of period 1. From this dynamical behaviour, we shall conclude that Φ satisﬁes the
P.S. condition.
Lemma 6. Every sequence xj ∈E satisfying ∇Φ(xj) →0 contains a convergent
subsequence. In particular, Φ satisﬁes the P.S. condition.
Proof. Assume ∇Φ(xj) →0 so that
x+
j −x−
j −∇b(xj) →0.
(3.19)
Recall the splitting xj = x−
j + x0
j + x+
j . If xj is bounded in E, then x0
j ∈R2n is
bounded and we conclude in view of the compactness of ∇b that there exists a
convergent subsequence. To prove that xj is bounded we argue by contradiction
and assume ∥xj∥→∞. Deﬁne
yk =
xk
∥xk∥
so that ||yk|| = 1. By assumption, using (3.17),
(P + −P −)yk −j∗

1
∥xk∥∇H(xk)
 
→0.
Since |∇H(z)| ≤M|z| the sequence
∇H(xk)
∥xk∥
∈L2
is bounded in L2. Since j∗: L2 →E is compact, (P +−P −)yk is relatively compact,
and since, in addition, y0
k is bounded in R2n, the sequence yk is relatively compact
in E. After taking a subsequence we can assume yk →y in E and hence yk →y
in L2.
∥∇H(xk)
∥xk∥
−∇Q(y)∥L2 ≤
1
∥xk∥∥∇H(xk) −∇Q(xk)∥L2 + ∥∇Q(yk −y)∥L2.
Since |∇H(z) −∇Q(z)| ≤M for all z ∈R2n and since ∇Q deﬁnes a continuous
linear operator of L2, we conclude
∇H(xk)
∥xk∥
→∇Q(y)
in
L2.
Consequently,
∇b(xk)
∥xk∥
= j∗
∇H(xk)
∥xk∥
 
→j∗
∇Q(y)

in
E.

90
Chapter 3 Existence of a capacity
This implies that y ∈E solves the linear equation in E
y+ −y−−j∗∇Q(y) = 0
∥y∥= 1.
As in Lemma 5 one veriﬁes that y belongs to C∞(S1, R2n) and also solves the
linear Hamiltonian equation
˙y(t)
=
XQ

y(t)

y(0)
=
y(1).
Recall now that Q = (π +ε)q, and q(z) = (x2
1 +y2
1)+
1
N 2
n
j=2
(x2
j +y2
j ). We see that
the symplectic 2-planes {xj, yj} are ﬁlled with periodic solutions of XQ having
periods T ̸= 1. Since the linear equation does not admit any nontrivial periodic
solutions of period 1 we conclude y(t) = 0. This contradicts ∥y∥= 1 and we
conclude that the sequence xk must be bounded. ■
The gradient equation
˙x = −∇Φ(x),
x ∈E
is in view of Lemma 4 globally Lipschitz continuous and, therefore, deﬁnes a unique
global ﬂow
R × E →E
:
(t, x) →ϕt(x) ≡x · t,
which maps bounded sets into bounded sets. All this is well-known from the the-
ory of ordinary diﬀerential equations. Our ﬂow has, in addition, a compactness
property which will be crucial for the topological arguments in the next section.
Lemma 7. The ﬂow of ˙x = −∇Φ(x) admits the representation
x · t = et x−+ x0 + e−t x+ + K(t, x),
(3.20)
where K : R × E →E is continuous and maps bounded sets into precompact sets.
Proof. Prompted by the variation of constant formula, we deﬁne K by
K(t, x) = −
t

0

et−s P −+ P 0 + e−t+s P +
∇b (x · s) ds.
We have to verify that K has the desired properties. Abbreviating the right hand
side of (3.20) by y(t), one veriﬁes readily that
˙y(t) = (P −−P +)y(t) −∇b(x · t).

3.4 The existence of a critical point
91
Since y(0) = x, the function ξ(t) = y(t) −x · t solves the linear equation
˙ξ(t) = (P −−P +) ξ(t)
and
ξ(0) = 0.
By the uniqueness of the initial value problem ξ(t) = 0 so that y(t) = x · t as
required. In view of (3.16) and (3.17) we can write
K(t, x) = j∗


−
t

0

et−s P −+ P 0 + e−t+s P +
∇H

j(x · s)

ds


.
Abbreviating the map in the bracket by k(t, x) then k : R × E →L2 is continuous
and maps bounded sets into bounded sets. By Proposition 5, the map j∗: L2 →
E maps bounded sets into precompact sets and, therefore, K has the desired
properties. ■
To sum up this rather technical section we have extended the classical Hamilto-
nian functional originally given on the loop space of smooth loops, and constructed
a functional Φ ∈C1(E, R) on the Hilbert space E. Its critical points, if there are
any, are smooth periodic solutions of the Hamiltonian equations with period 1.
The functional Φ has, in addition, crucial compactness properties. It remains to
ﬁnd a special critical point x∗∈E of Φ satisfying Φ(x∗) > 0. This will be done in
the next section.
3.4
The existence of a critical point
A special minimax argument will guarantee the existence of a special critical point
of the functional Φ introduced in the previous section:
Φ(x)
=
a(x) −b(x)
=
1
2∥x+∥2 −
1
2∥x−∥2 −
1
0
H

x(t)

dt,
where x = x−+ x0 + x+ ∈E = E−⊕E0 ⊕E+. Recall that H ≥0 and that H is
identically zero in a neighbourhood of z = 0 ∈R2n. In addition H(z) = (π+ε) q(z)
for |z| suﬃciently large. Evidently, every critical point z ∈R2n of the function H,
i.e., a point in {z|∇H(z) = 0}, is a critical point of Φ satisfying Φ(z) ≤0. We are
looking for critical points of Φ which are not constant loops.
Proposition 6. There exists x∗∈E satisfying ∇Φ(x∗) = 0 and Φ(x∗) > 0.
In order to prove this proposition we ﬁrst single out two distinguished subsets
Σ and Γ of E. The bounded set Σ = Στ ⊂E is deﬁned by
Στ =

x
 x = x−+ x0 + se+ , ∥x−+ x0∥≤τ
and
0 ≤s ≤τ


92
Chapter 3 Existence of a capacity
where τ > 0. Here e+ ∈E+ is the element
e+(t) = e2π Jt e1
and
e1 = (1, 0, . . . , 0) ∈R2n.
Clearly ∥e+∥2 = 2π and ∥e+∥L2 = 1. By ∂Σ we denote the boundary of Σ in
E−+ E0 + Re+.
Lemma 8. There exists τ ∗> 0 such that for τ ≥τ ∗
Φ
 ∂Σ ≤0.
Proof. We use the asymptotic behaviour of Φ. From a|E−⊕E0 ≤0 and b ≥0 we
infer
Φ
 E−⊕E0 ≤0.
It remains to consider those parts of the boundary ∂Σ which are deﬁned by
∥x−+ x0∥= τ or s = τ. By the construction of H there exists a constant γ > 0
such that
H(z) ≥(π + ε) q(z) −γ
for all
z ∈R2n.
Therefore,
Φ(x) ≤a(x) −(π + ε)
1

0
q(x) + γ,
for all
x ∈E.
Recalling the deﬁnition of the quadratic form q, one veriﬁes for the orthogonal
splitting x = x−+ x0 + se+ ∈E−⊕E0 + E+ that
1

0
q(x−+ x0 + se+) dt =
1

0
q(x−) dt +
1

0
q(x0)dt +
1

0
q(se+)dt .
Recalling that ∥e+∥2 = 2π we can, therefore, estimate for x = x−+ x0 + se+
Φ(x)
≤
1
2 s2 ∥e+∥2 −1
2 ∥x−∥2 −(π + ε) q(x0) −(π + ε)
1

0
q(se+) + γ
=
−1
2 ∥x−∥2 −εs2 ∥e+∥2
L2 −(π + ε) q(x0) + γ.
We thus ﬁnd a constant c > 0 such that
Φ(x−+ x0 + se+) ≤γ −c ∥x−+ x0∥2 −c ∥se+∥2.
The right hand side is ≤0 if ∥x−+ x0∥= τ or s = τ for τ suﬃciently large. This
ﬁnishes the proof of the lemma. ■
The subset Γ = Γα ⊂E+ is deﬁned by
Γ =

x ∈E+  ∥x∥= α

.

3.4 The existence of a critical point
93
Lemma 9. There exists an α > 0 and β > 0 such that
Φ
 Γ ≥β > 0.
Proof. We use the behaviour of Φ locally near x = 0 ∈E. Recall that H vanishes
identically near the origin in R2n. We shall prove that
b(x)
1
∥x∥2 →0
as
∥x∥→0.
It then follows for x ∈E+ that
Φ(x)
1
∥x∥2 = 1
2 −
1
∥x∥2 b(x) →1
2 .
Consequently, Φ(x) ≥1
4||x||2 provided ||x|| is small enough and this implies the
desired result. Arguing indirectly, we ﬁnd a sequence xj ∈E and a constant d > 0
satisfying
xj →0
and
1
∥xj∥2 b(xj) ≥d > 0.
Set yj =
xj
∥xj∥so that ∥yj∥= 1. We claim that there is a subsequence yj and
functions y, w ∈L2 satisfying
yj
−→
y
in L2
yj(t)
−→
y(t)
|yj(t)|
≤
w(t)
xj(t)
−→
0
for almost every t.
Indeed, by Proposition 3, E is compactly embedded in L2. Hence we ﬁnd
a subsequence yj which is a Cauchy sequence in L2 and the claim follows by
the following well-known argument. Choosing a fast Cauchy subsequence we may
assume that
||yk+1 −yk||L2 ≤
1
2k ,
k ≥1.
Then the sequence fn ∈L2, deﬁned by
fn(t) : =
n

k=1
|yk+1(t) −yk(t)| ,
is monotone increasing and satisﬁes ||fn||L2 ≤1. Hence by the monotone conver-
gence theorem fn(t) →f(t) a.e and f ∈L2. Since, for m > n,
|ym(t) −yn(t)|
≤
|ym(t) −ym−1(t)| + · · · + |yn+1(t) −yn(t)|
≤
f(t) −fn−1(t),

94
Chapter 3 Existence of a capacity
we conclude that for a.e t the sequence yn(t) is a Cauchy sequence in R and hence
deﬁnes y(t) := lim yn(t) for a.e t. In view of |y(t) −yn(t)| ≤f(t) we therefore
ﬁnd, by Lebesgue’s convergence theorem, that yn →y in L2 and, since |yn(t)| ≤
f(t) + |y(t)| =: w(t) for a.e t and w ∈L2, the claim is proved. By deﬁnition
b(xj)
1
∥xj∥2 =
1

0
H(xj)
1
∥xj∥2 dt.
From H(z) ≤M |z|2, for all z ∈R2n, we infer
H

xj(t)

1
∥xj∥2 ≤Mw(t)2
for almost every t, so that the L1 function w(t)2 is a majorant. Using that H
vanishes at z = 0 with its derivatives up to second order we ﬁnd, using the Taylor
formula,
H

xj(t)

1
∥xj∥2 = O

|xj(t)|

|yj(t)|2 →0
for almost every t. Hence by means of Lebesgue’s theorem
1

0
H

xj(t)

1
∥xj∥2 dt →0 ,
j →∞.
This contradicts the assumption that d > 0 and Lemma 9 is proved. ■
The rather clumsy argument in the proof can, of course, be avoided if one makes
use of the following well-known, but not quite elementary Sobolev estimate. The
space H1/2(S1) is continuously embedded in Lp(S1) for every p ≥1. Hence there
are constants M = Mp such that
∥u∥Lp ≤M∥u∥1/2 ,
u ∈H1/2(S1) .
A proof can be found in the Appendix. Taking this estimate for granted and
observing that |H(z)| ≤c|z|3 for all z ∈R2n, we ﬁnd a constant K > 0 such that
 1
0
|H

x(t)

|dt ≤c ∥x∥3
L3 ≤K ∥x∥3
1/2 ,
for all x ∈H1/2. Now, if x ∈E+, then Φ(x) ≥1
2||x||2 −K||x||3 and the lemma
is now obvious. The following picture (Fig. 3.7) illustrates our situation more
geometrically.
The estimate Φ|∂Σ ≤0 reﬂects our assumptions H ≥0 and m(H) > π + ε
for our original function H ∈H(Z(1), ω0), while Φ|Γ ≥β > 0 is a consequence of

3.4 The existence of a critical point
95
E−⊕E0
Σ
∂Σ
Γ
0
e+
E
+
Fig. 3.7
the assumption that H vanishes identically on some open set for which we could
choose a neighbourhood of the origin in R2n.
Next we study what happens if we translate the set Σ by means of the ﬂow ϕt(x)
belonging to the gradient equation ˙x = −∇Φ(x) on E. Since Φ(ϕt(x)) decreases
in t we conclude immediately from Lemma 8 that
Φ
 ϕt(∂Σ) ≤0
all
t ≥0.
(3.21)
By Lemma 9, on the other hand, Φ|Γ > 0 and consequently ϕt(∂Σ) ∩Γ = ∅for all
t ≥0; the “frame” ϕt(∂Σ) cannot cross the “circle” Γ as t increases. Intuitively it
is, therefore, clear that the “surface” ϕt(Σ) spanned by the frame must intersect
Γ for every t ≥0. This requires, however, a proof. It will be based on a topological
argument.
Lemma 10.
ϕt(Σ) ∩Γ ̸= ∅,
all
t ≥0.
Postponing the proof we shall ﬁrst ﬁnish the proof of Proposition 6. In fact,
we are now in business. We can apply the following minimax argument. We take
the family F consisting of the subsets ϕt(Σ), for every t ≥0 and deﬁne
c(Φ, F) = inf
t≥0
sup
x∈ϕt(Σ)
Φ(x).

96
Chapter 3 Existence of a capacity
We claim that c(Φ, F) is ﬁnite. Indeed, since ϕt(Σ) ∩Γ ̸= ∅and Φ|Γ ≥β we
conclude that
β ≤inf
x∈Γ Φ(x) ≤
sup
x∈ϕt(Σ)
Φ(x) < ∞.
For the second estimate we have used that Φ maps, in view of Lemma 4, bounded
sets into bounded sets. Therefore,
−∞< β ≤c(Φ, F) < ∞.
We know already that the functional Φ satisﬁes the P.S. condition (Lemma 6) and
that the gradient equation generates a unique global ﬂow (Lemma 7). Moreover, by
the properties of a ﬂow, determined by time-independent equations, the family F
is positively invariant. Consequently the Minimax Lemma guarantees that c(Φ, F)
is a critical value. We deduce a point x∗∈E satisfying ∇Φ(x∗) = 0 and
Φ(x∗) = c(Φ, F) ≥β > 0,
and the Proposition is proved. It remains to prove Lemma 10.
Proof of Lemma 10. We shall use the Leray-Schauder degree. This degree extends
the Brouwer mapping degree to inﬁnite dimensional spaces for the restricted class
of continuous mappings which are of the form id+ compact. Abbreviating the ﬂow
by ϕt(x) ≡x · t, we wish to verify that (Σ · t) ∩Γ ̸= ∅for all t ≥0. We can rewrite
this by requiring
(P −+ P 0)(x · t)
=
0
(3.22)
∥x · t∥
=
α
x
∈
Σ
.
Recall that, by Lemma 7, the ﬂow has the representation x · t = et x−+ x0 +
e−t x+ + K(t, x), so that (3.22) becomes
0
=
et x−+ x0 + (P −+ P 0)K(t, x)
(3.23)
0
=
α −∥x · t∥
x
∈
Σ
.
Multiplying the E−part by e−t one ﬁnds the equivalent equations
0
=
x−+ x0 + (e−t P −+ P 0)K(t, x)
(3.24)
0
=
α −∥x · t∥
x
∈
Σ
.

3.4 The existence of a critical point
97
Since x ∈Σ is represented by x = x−+ x0 + se+, with 0 ≤s ≤τ, we can rewrite
(3.24) as follows:
0 = x + B(t, x)
and
x ∈Σ,
(3.25)
where the operator B is deﬁned by
B(t, x) = (e−t P −+ P 0) K(t, x) + P +
∥x · t∥−α

e+ −x

.
Abbreviating F = E−⊕E0 + R e+ the map B : R × F →F is continuous and
maps bounded sets into relatively compact sets. This was proved in Lemma 7.
We therefore can apply the Leray-Schauder index theory. The equation (3.25)
possesses, for given t ≥0, a solution x ∈Σ if we can show that deg(Σ, id +
B(t, ·), 0) ̸= 0. In order to compute this degree we ﬁrst observe, in view of ϕt(∂Σ)∩
Γ = ∅for t ≥0, that there is no solution of (3.25) on ∂Σ, i.e.,
0 ̸∈

id + B(t, ·)

(∂Σ) ,
if t ≥0. Hence by the homotopy invariance of the degree,
deg

Σ, id + B(t, ·), 0

= deg

Σ, id + B(0, ·), 0

.
Since K(0, x) = 0 we ﬁnd B(0, x) = P +{(∥x∥−α)e+ −x}. Deﬁning the homotopy
Lµ(x) = P +
(µ∥x∥−α) e+ −µx

for
0 ≤µ ≤1,
we claim x + Lµ(x) ̸= 0 for x ∈∂Σ. Indeed, if x ∈Σ satisﬁes x + Lµ(x) = 0 then
x = se+ and, therefore, s

(1 −µ) + µ ∥e+∥

= α. Consequently 0 < s ≤α so that
x ̸∈∂Σ if τ > α as claimed. Therefore, by homotopy again
deg

Σ, id + B(t, ·), 0

=
deg

Σ, id + L0, 0

=
deg

Σ, id −αe+, 0

=
deg

Σ, id, αe+
=
1,
provided that αe+ ∈Σ, which holds true for τ > α. This ﬁnishes the proof of
Lemma 10 and therefore the proof of the proposition is completed. ■
The critical point found in the proposition is a smooth periodic solution of the
Hamiltonian equation ˙z = J∇H(z) in R2n having period 1, as we know from the
“regularity” Lemma 5. This solution is the distinguished nonconstant 1-periodic

98
Chapter 3 Existence of a capacity
solution we are looking for in Theorem 2 whose proof, therefore, is completed.
With this existence theorem for periodic solutions, we have also established the
existence of the special capacity function c0(M, ω). Consequently, the rigidity re-
sults deduced in the previous chapter from the existence of a capacity function
c are now completely proved. We have demonstrated that these recently discov-
ered rigidity phenomena in symplectic geometry can be traced back to a simple
minimax argument applied to the old action principle of classical mechanics.
3.5
Examples and illustrations
In Chapter 2 we deduced from the axioms that open balls and cylinders in (R2n, ω0)
have the capacities c(B(r)) = e(Z(r)) = πr2 for every capacity function. This
agrees with the actions of the closed characteristics of ∂B(r) and ∂Z(r) as we
have seen in Chapter 1. For an ellipsoid E, the capacity c(E) also agrees with
the action of a particular closed characteristic of its boundary ∂E. Recall that the
(reduced) action A(γ) of a loop γ in (R2n, ω0) is deﬁned by
A(γ) =

γ
pdq .
We consider now, more generally, a convex bounded and smooth domain D of
R2n. Its boundary ∂D carries at least one closed characteristic as we have demon-
strated in Chapter 1. It turns out, for the special capacity function c0 constructed
above, that c0(D) is also represented by a distinguished closed characteristic of
the boundary of D.
Theorem 3. Assume C ⊂R2n is a convex bounded domain with smooth boundary
∂C. Then there exists a distinguished closed characteristic γ∗⊂∂C satisfying
c0(C, ω0) = |A(γ∗)|
and |A(γ∗)| = inf

|A(γ)| : γ ⊂∂C
is a closed characteristic

.
∂C
C
γ∗
Fig. 3.8

3.5 Examples and illustrations
99
The proof of this theorem is quite similar to the proof of Theorem 2 and we
refer to H. Hofer and E. Zehnder [123]. It is useful to point out that the same
representation formula holds true for the diﬀerent capacity function deﬁned on
subsets of R2n which was originally introduced by I. Ekeland and H. Hofer [68].
Consequently, these two capacities agree on such convex subsets C ⊂R2n. As
another immediate consequence we conclude that the following estimate for the
action of periodic solutions x on convex and compact smooth hypersurfaces ∂C
holds true:
|A(x)| ≥sup

πr2
|
there exists
a symplectic embedding
ϕ : B(r) →C

= D(C, ω0).
Here we have used the monotonicity of c0. This estimate considerably sharpens
an inequality due to C. Croke and A. Weinstein [58] for periodic solutions of
convex hypersurfaces. A. K¨unzle [131] observed that Theorem 3 can also be used
to describe a simple class of compact hypersurfaces in R2n which cannot be mapped
onto convex hypersurfaces by means of symplectic diﬀeomorphisms. Consider an
open and bounded domain M ⊂R2n with smooth boundary S = ∂M satisfying
B(r) ⊂M ⊂Z(r)
which is a full Bordeaux bottle as illustrated in the ﬁgure:
∂M
r
M
γ
ρ
Fig. 3.9
M contains in particular a piece of a cylinder Z(ρ) having radius ρ < r. On
this piece the characteristics γ of ∂Z(ρ) are closed and have the action A(γ) =
πρ2. Assume now by contradiction that ϕ is a symplectic diﬀeomorphism of R2n
mapping M onto a convex domain C. Then it maps the hypersurface ∂M onto the
convex hypersurface ∂C. From the invariance of the capacity function, we deduce
πr2 = c0(M) = c0(ϕ(M)) = c0(C).
By Theorem 3 we have, therefore, A(γ) ≥πr2 for all characteristic loops γ of ∂C.
But ϕ leaves the action invariant, so that
πρ2 = A(γ) = A

ϕ(γ)

< πr2 ≤A

ϕ(γ)


100
Chapter 3 Existence of a capacity
which is a contradiction. Evidently, the capacity of the above manifold M is also
represented by a closed characteristic on ∂M which, however, does not minimize
the action. As for general domains with smooth boundaries, it should be recalled
that it is not known whether every compact hypersurface in R2n admits a closed
characteristic.
In the special case of 2-dimensional compact symplectic manifolds, the regular
energy surfaces are, of course, 1-dimensional and consist of ﬁnitely many periodic
orbits. This observation allowed K.F. Siburg [194] to compute the capacity c0 in
this case:
Theorem 4. (K.F. Siburg) Assume (M, ω) is a compact and connected symplectic
manifold, possibly with boundary, with dim M = 2. Then
c0(M, ω) =


M
ω
 .
We see that c0 agrees with the total volume so that in dimension 2 this invariant
classiﬁes symplectically diﬀeomorphic manifolds. This was shown in Chapter 1.
Proof. We ﬁrst show that for every capacity function c
c(M, ω) ≥


M
ω
 .
Given ε > 0, then by removing ﬁnitely many compact curves on M, we ﬁnd a
simply connected manifold N ⊂M which is diﬀeomorphic to a closed disc D ⊂R2
and which satisﬁes


N
ω
 ≥


M
ω
 −ε ,
and we can choose the radius of the disc D such that its Lebesgue measure, µ(D),
agrees with the integral of ω over N. (Recall that a Riemannian surface is obtained
by a polygon in the plane by identifying suitably the edges; hence we might just
remove the curves corresponding to these edges to get a disc, see W. Massey [148].)
By the theorem of Dacorogna and Moser, see Chapter 1, this diﬀeomorphism can be
chosen to be symplectic. Therefore, by the monotonicity property of the capacity
c(M, ω) ≥c(N, ω) = c(D) = µ(D) ≥


M
ω
 −ε.
This holds true for every ε > 0 and the desired estimate is proved. It remains to
prove that
c0(M, ω) ≤


M
ω
.

3.5 Examples and illustrations
101
In view of the conformality property we may assume the integral on the right hand
side to be positive. Pick ε > 0 and H ∈H(M, ω) satisfying
m(H) ≥

M
ω + ε.
We have to establish the existence of a nonconstant T-periodic solution of ˙x =
XH(x) on M with period 0 < T ≤1. Denote by R ⊂[0, m(H)] the set of regular
values of H. Since the set of critical levels is compact, and, in view of Sard’s the-
orem, of Lebesgue measure zero, we ﬁnd ﬁnitely many mutually disjoint intervals
Ij = [aj, bj] ⊂R satisfying

j
(bj −aj) ≥m(H) −ε
2 ≥

M
ω + ε
2.
By deﬁnition of H(M, ω) we have H ≡m(H) near ∂M. Therefore, if h ∈R, then
H−1(h) consists of ﬁnitely many embedded circles S1 ⊂M each of which carries
precisely one (nonconstant) periodic solution γ(t, h) of XH. Choose, for every j,
one of the components of H−1[aj, bj] and call it Aj. It is simply covered by a
smooth family γ(t, h) of periodic solutions having periods denoted by T(h) > 0,
when h ∈Ij. Deﬁne the diﬀeomorphism ϕ = ϕj
ϕ : (t, h) →γ(t, h) ∈Aj,
where 0 ≤t < T(h) and aj ≤h ≤bj. We claim
ϕ∗ω = dt ∧dh.
Indeed, since H(γ(t, h)) = h for all t we conclude, denoting the partial derivatives
with subscripts, ω(γt, γh) = dH(γ(t, h))(γh) = 1. Therefore, one computes for
ξ, η ∈R2, that ϕ∗ω(ξ, η) = ω(dϕ ξ, dϕη) = ω(ξ1 γt + ξ2 γh , η1 γt + η2 γh) =
ξ1 η2 −ξ2 η1 = (dt ∧dh)(ξ, η), proving the claim. Consequently,

Aj
ω =

ϕ−1(Aj)
ϕ∗ω =
bj

aj
T(h) dh.
Arguing now by contradiction we assume T(h) > 1 for all h ∈R. Then

M
ω ≥

j

Aj
ω >

j
(bj −aj) ≥

M
ω + ε
2,
by the assumption on m(H). This contradiction shows that there is indeed an h ∈
R and a periodic solution γ(h) lying in some Aj and having period 0 < T(h) ≤1.

102
Chapter 3 Existence of a capacity
In view of the deﬁnition of c0 the desired estimate follows and the proof of the
theorem is ﬁnished. ■
To illustrate this theorem we consider a compact 2-dimensional manifold with-
out boundary. In this case the proof shows that for every H ∈C2(M, R) satisfying
max H −min H > |

ω| the Hamiltonian vector ﬁeld XH admits a “fast” periodic
solution of period 0 < T ≤1. We would like to add another elementary observation
concerning the special case of subsets of R2. We know from Chapter 2, that for
every capacity function, c(D) = area(D) for a bounded connected subset D of R2
having smooth boundary. Since the special capacity c0 has the additional property
of inner regularity we can easily extend this statement to open subsets of R2.
Proposition 7. If Ω⊂R2 is an open bounded and path connected set, then
c0(Ω, ω0) =
area(Ω).
Proof. Exhaust Ω=  Kj, j ≥1 by compact sets Kj ⊂
◦
Kj+1 and deﬁne smooth
functions βj : Ω⇀R by setting βj(x) = 0 if x ∈Kj and βj(x) = 1 if x ∈Ω\Kj+1.
Deﬁne β ∈C∞(Ω) by
β(x) =

j≥1
βj(x) ,
x ∈Ω.
Then β(x) →+∞as x →R2\Ω. Now take a sequence bn →∞of regular values
of β and consider the compact symplectic manifolds Dj = β−1(−∞, bj] having
smooth boundaries. Then Ω= ∪Dj, j ≥1. Since c0 has the property of inner
regularity we conclude c0(Ω) = lim c0(Dj), as j →∞. From the regularity of
the Lebesgue measure we ﬁnd, on the other hand, area (Ω) = lim
area (Dj)
as j →∞. Since we already know that c0(Dj) =
area (Dj), the proposition is
proved. ■
Although the invariant c0 is deﬁned by means of special periodic solutions, it
is not at all surprising that in the 2-dimensional case it is intimately related to the
area, since the symplectic form is the area form. In higher dimensions the capacity
c0 is, in contrast, not yet understood. It turns out that it is extremely diﬃcult to
compute this capacity. But some examples are known which are mentioned next.
Theorem 5. Consider (CP n, ω) with the standard symplectic structure related to
the Fubini-Study metric. Then
c0 (CP n, ω) = π.
This result is due to H. Hofer and C. Viterbo [122]. We do not give a proof
here and remark that the proof analyzes the structure of the holomorphic spheres
in CP n and is based on a Fredholm theory for ﬁrst order elliptic systems. Now
assume that (M, ω) is any compact symplectic manifold without boundary, and
denote by π2(M) the homotopy classes of maps u : S2 →M. Then there is a map
π2(M) →R given by
u →⟨ω, u⟩=

S2
u∗ω ∈R.

3.5 Examples and illustrations
103
Deﬁne α∗(M) ∈R ∪{∞} by
α∗(M) = inf

⟨ω, u⟩
 u ∈π2(M)
and
⟨ω, u⟩> 0

.
Moreover, if π2(M) = 0, we set α∗= ∞. Then the following result due to A. Floer
– H. Hofer – C. Viterbo[88] and R. Ma [146] holds true.
Theorem 6. Consider the symplectic manifold (M × R2n, ω ⊕ω0) with n ≥1 and
assume α∗= α∗(M) > 0 or α∗= ∞. Then
c0

M × B(r)

= c0

M × Z(r)

= πr2 ,
provided πr2 < α∗.
The case of the symplectic torus T 2n will be discussed in the next chapter.
Incidentally, by restricting the class of Hamiltonian functions admitted in
the deﬁnition of c0(M, ω), one ﬁnds diﬀerent capacity functions. For example,
if ˜H(M, ω) = {H ∈H(M, ω)| support of ∇H is contractible in M} and corre-
spondingly ˜Ha(M, ω) = Ha(M, ω) ∩˜H(M, ω), then we can deﬁne
˜c0 (M, ω) = sup

m(H)
 H ∈˜Ha(M, ω)

.
Our proof shows that ˜c0 is a capacity function; the related periodic solutions are
all contractible. It clearly satisﬁes
D(M, ω) ≤˜c0(M, ω) ≤c0(M, ω)
where D(M, ω) is the Gromov-width introduced in Chapter 1.

Chapter 4
Existence of closed characteristics
In the previous chapter, the dynamical approach to the symplectic invariants led to
the special capacity function c0. Its construction was based on a variational prin-
ciple for periodic solutions of certain Hamiltonian systems. The period of these
periodic solutions was prescribed. In this chapter we shall deduce from this sym-
plectic invariant the existence of periodic solutions on prescribed energy surfaces.
If we neglect the parametrization of such solutions the aim is to ﬁnd closed charac-
teristics of a distinguished line bundle over a hypersurface in a symplectic manifold.
It is determined by the symplectic structure, as explained in the introduction. A
very special symplectic structure on the torus will lead us to M. Herman’s coun-
terexample to the closing lemma in the smooth category.
4.1
Periodic solutions on energy surfaces
The ﬂow ϕt of a Hamiltonian vector ﬁeld
˙x = XH(x) ,
x ∈M
(4.1)
on a symplectic manifold (M, ω) leaves the level sets of the smooth function H on
M invariant, i.e., H(ϕt(x)) = H(x) as long as t is deﬁned. Fixing a value of this
energy function which we can assume to be E = 1, we shall require the subset
S =

x ∈M
 H(x) = 1

(4.2)
to be compact and a regular, i.e.,
dH(x) ̸= 0
for
x ∈S.
(4.3)
Thus S ⊂M is a smooth and compact submanifold of codimension 1 whose tangent
space at x ∈S is given by
TxS =

ξ ∈TxM
 dH(x)ξ = 0

.
(4.4)
By the deﬁnition of a Hamiltonian vector ﬁeld we have XH(x) ∈TxS so that XH is
a nonvanishing vector ﬁeld on S whose ﬂow exists for all times since S is compact.
Our aim is to ﬁnd a periodic solution for XH on the energy surface S. This is a
qualitative existence problem described in the introduction.
In order to illustrate the method employed we start with a preliminary result.
The trick is to thicken the given energy surface S and to consider a 1-parameter
H. Hofer and E. Zehnder, Symplectic Invariants and Hamiltonian Dynamics,  
105
Modern Birkhäuser Classics, DOI 10.1007/978-3-0348-0104-1_4, © Springer Basel AG 2011

106
Chapter 4 Existence of closed characteristics
family of surfaces parameterized by the energy. Since S is compact and regular
there is an open and bounded neighborhood U of S which is ﬁlled with compact
and regular energy surfaces having energy values near E = 1:
U =
!
λ∈I
Sλ,
(4.5)
where I is an open interval around λ = 1 and where Sλ = {x ∈U | H(x) = λ}
is diﬀeomorphic to the given surface S, which corresponds to the parameter value
λ = 1. Indeed, take any Riemannian metric on M, then the gradient of H with
respect to this metric does not vanish, ∇H ̸= 0, in a neighborhood of S, in view
of (4.3). We can, therefore, deﬁne the modiﬁed gradient vector ﬁeld
˙x =
∇H(x)
|∇H(x)|2
near S, which is transversal to S. Its ﬂow ψt satisﬁes
H

ψt(x)

= 1 + t
for x ∈S and, therefore, deﬁnes a diﬀeomorphism (x, t) →ψt(x) from S × (−ε, ε)
onto an open neighborhood U of S as claimed.
Theorem 1. (Hofer-Zehnder) Let S be a compact and regular energy surface for the
Hamiltonian vector ﬁeld XH on (M, ω). Assume there is an open neighborhood
U of S having bounded capacity: c0(U, ω) < ∞. Then there exists a sequence
λj →1 of energy values, such that XH possesses a periodic solution on every
energy surface Sλj.
Actually, the proof establishes more solutions:
Corollary. There is a dense subset Σ ⊂I such that for λ ∈Σ the energy surface
Sλ has a periodic solution of XH, provided c0(U, ω) < ∞.
It should be emphasized that there are no assumptions required for the given
regular and compact energy surface S other than that a bounded open neighbor-
hood must have ﬁnite capacity. For example, in the special case of the standard
symplectic manifold (R2n, ω0) a bounded set U is contained in a large ball B(R)
and, consequently, by the monotonicity of the capacity, always has ﬁnite capacity.
Hence every compact regular energy surface S ⊂R2n gives rise to an abundance
of periodic solutions for the Hamiltonian vector ﬁelds XH having energies near the
prescribed energy.
Proof. The statement is an immediate consequence of the deﬁnition of the spe-
cial capacity c0 if we recall from the introduction that we have the freedom to
choose a convenient Hamiltonian function representing the energy surfaces. We
shall construct an auxiliary Hamiltonian function F on U which is constant on

4.1 Periodic solutions on energy surfaces
107
every surface Sλ contained in U and which, in addition, belongs to the set H(U, ω)
of functions deﬁned in the previous chapter.
If I = {1 −ρ < λ < 1 + ρ} for some ρ > 0 we pick an ε in 0 < ε < ρ. Since, by
assumption, c0(U, ω) < ∞we can choose a smooth function f : R →R satisfying:
f(s)
=
c0(U, ω) + 1
for
s ≤1 −ε
and
s ≥1 + ε
f(s)
=
0
for
1 −ε
2 ≤s ≤1 + ε
2
f′(s)
<
0
for
1 −ε < s < 1 −ε
2
f′(s)
>
0
for
1 + ε
2 < s < 1 + ε.
F
m(F)
0
U
S
Fig. 4.1
f
c0(U, ω) + 1
0
1
1 −ε
1 + ε
s
Fig. 4.2

108
Chapter 4 Existence of closed characteristics
Deﬁne F : U →R by
F(x) = f

H(x)

,
x ∈U.
Then F ∈H(U, ω) and m(F) > c0(U, ω). Consequently, in view of the deﬁnition
of the capacity c0(U, ω) there exists a nonconstant periodic solution x(t) having
period 0 < T ≤1 of the Hamiltonian system:
˙x = XF (x) ,
x ∈U.
In view of the deﬁnition of a Hamiltonian vector ﬁeld ω(XF (x), · ) = −dF(x) =
−f′(H(x)) dH(x) = ω(f′(H(x))XH(x), · ) and, therefore,
XF (x) = f′
H(x)

· XH(x) ,
x ∈U.
Moreover,
H

x(t)

= λ
is constant in t, since d
dt H(x(t)) = dH(x(t))· ˙x(t) = f′(H)·ω(XH, XH) = 0. Since
x(t) is not a constant solution we conclude
f′
H

x(t)

= f′(λ) = τ ̸= 0.
Thus, in view of the deﬁnition of the function f, the value λ belongs to the set
1−ε < λ < 1−ε
2 or 1+ ε
2 < λ < 1+ε. In particular |λ−1| < ε. Reparameterizing,
we deﬁne the closed curve y : R →Sλ by
y(t) = x
 t
τ

which has period τT and satisﬁes
˙y(t) = 1
τ ˙x
 t
τ

= XH

y(t)

,
hence is a periodic solution of the original Hamiltonian vector ﬁeld XH on the
energy surface H(y(t)) = λ. Moreover, |λ−1| < ε. Since ε is arbitrary the theorem
is proved. Replacing λ = 1 by any other value of λ in the interval I we have proved,
by the same argument, also the corollary. ■
One has to keep in mind that the periodic solutions guaranteed by Theorem 1
are very special. They are indeed found indirectly by a special variational principle
hidden in the construction of the symplectic invariant c0 and there may exist many
other periodic solutions. Moreover, the periodic solutions do not necessarily lie on
the given energy surface S for XH but only nearby. However, if we know in addition,
that the periods Tj of the periodic solutions xj on Sλj for XH are bounded, we
can conclude that S too has a periodic solution. This simple observation will be

4.1 Periodic solutions on energy surfaces
109
very useful later on. To be precise we choose a Riemannian metric g on M and
abbreviate g(x)(ξ, η) = ⟨ξ, η⟩and g(x)⟨ξ, ξ⟩= |ξ|2. If x(t) is a periodic solution of
period T we can introduce its length by
l(x) =
T

0
| ˙x(t)| dt.
Possibly after shrinking the open neighborhood U, we may assume
C−1 ≤|XH(x)| ≤C ,
x ∈U
for a constant C > 0. Since the xj(t) solve the Hamiltonian equations ˙xj(t) =
XH(xj(t)) we conclude
C−1 · Tj ≤l(xj) ≤C · Tj.
Proposition 1. Let λj →1 and assume that the periods Tj (or equivalently the
lengths l(xj)) of the periodic solutions xj(t) on Sλj are bounded. Then S = S1
possesses a periodic solution of XH.
Proof. Normalizing the periods to 1 we deﬁne yj(t) = xj(Tj · t) for 0 ≤t ≤1, so
that
˙yj(t) = Tj XH

yj(t)

and H(yj(t)) = λj. Since, by assumption, the right hand side is bounded, we
ﬁnd by means of the Arzel`a-Ascoli theorem a subsequence such that Tj →T and
yj →y with convergence, at ﬁrst in C0, and, by making use of the equation, in
C∞. The function y : [0, 1] →U is periodic with period 1, satisﬁes H(y(t)) = 1,
and
˙y(t) = TXH

y(t)

,
and is thus the desired periodic solution if T ̸= 0. Arguing by contradiction, we as-
sume T = 0. Then yj →{y∗} shrinks to a point y∗and XH(y(t)) →XH(y∗) = V .
Since the energy surface S is regular, V ̸= 0. We can estimate in local coordinates
near the point y∗;
⟨XH(yj), V ⟩≥(1 −ε) |V |2
for some small ε > 0 and all j suﬃciently large, so that
T −1
j
⟨˙yj(t), V ⟩≥(1 −ε) |V |2.
Integrating over the period we conclude V = 0 contradicting V ̸= 0 and proving
the proposition. ■
Having established the existence of periodic solutions of a Hamiltonian vector
ﬁeld XH, it is useful to remember that, in general, a periodic solution belongs to a

110
Chapter 4 Existence of closed characteristics
whole family of periodic solutions parameterized by the energy. This will be proved
by the so-called Poincar´e continuation method. This local technique is based on the
implicit function theorem and requires some knowledge of the Floquet multipliers
of a given reference solution.
Consider a periodic solution x(t) = x(t, E∗) of XH having energy E∗= H(x(t))
and period T = T ∗. Since the vector ﬁeld XH is time independent one of the
Floquet multipliers of x(t) must be equal to 1. Indeed, abbreviating x = x(0) we
can diﬀerentiate the ﬂow ϕt ◦ϕs(x) = ϕs ◦ϕt(x) in s at s = 0 and obtain
dϕt(x) XH(x) = XH

ϕt(x)

for all t. If t = T is the period and hence ϕT (x) = x we obtain
dϕT (x) XH (x) = XH (x)
∈TxM.
By deﬁnition, the eigenvalues of the linear map dϕT (x) : TxM →TxM are the
Floquet multipliers of the periodic solution x(t) and we have just veriﬁed that 1
is always a Floquet multiplier. But since dϕT (x) is a symplectic linear map, the
eigenvalue 1 has necessarily even multiplicity, so that x(t) possesses always at least
two-Floquet multipliers equal to 1. Actually we shall verify this during the proof
of the following proposition which was known to H. Poincar´e.
Proposition 2. Assume a periodic solution x(t, E∗) of XH on M having energy
E∗= H(x(t, E∗)) and period T ∗has exactly two Floquet multipliers equal to
1. Then there exists a unique and smooth 1-parameter family x(t, E) of periodic
solutions with periods T(E) close to T ∗and lying on the energy surfaces
H

x(t, E)

= E
for |E −E∗| suﬃciently small. Moreover, T(E) →T(E∗) as E →E∗.
Postponing the proof we observe that the reference solution x(t, E∗) is not
isolated in M as a periodic solution. The periodic solutions x(t, E) correspond to
diﬀerent values of E and it will turn out in the proof that, on the ﬁxed energy
surface E, this solution is isolated among those periodic solutions having peri-
ods close to T. Geometrically, the periodic solutions x(t, E) ﬁll out an embedded
cylinder in M as illustrated in the following ﬁgure 4.3.
Proof of Proposition 2. It is useful to recall the construction of a transversal section
map belonging to a periodic solution. Assume x(t) to be a nonconstant periodic
solution of a vector ﬁeld X on M and denote by T > 0 its period. Then, we can
intersect x(t) at the point p = x(0) with a (2n −1) dimensional hypersurface,
i.e., a local submanifold Σ ⊂M with codim Σ = 1 to which the vector ﬁeld X is
nowhere tangential. This means that TxΣ and X(x) span the tangent space TxM
for every x ∈Σ near p:
TxM = TxΣ ⊕⟨X(x)⟩,
x ∈Σ.

4.1 Periodic solutions on energy surfaces
111
SE*
Fig. 4.3
If ϕt denotes the ﬂow of X then ϕT (p) = p ∈Σ. Since the ﬂow depends diﬀeren-
tiably on x we can deﬁne a smooth map ψ : Σ →Σ locally near p by following an
initial point x ∈Σ along its solution ϕt(x) until it meets Σ again, i.e.,
ψ(x) = ϕτ(x) (x) ,
x ∈Σ.
Here τ = τ(x) is close to T > 0 and uniquely determined so that ϕτ(x) ∈Σ.
Clearly ψ(p) = p. This map ψ is called the Poincar´e section map of the periodic
solution x(t). It is important for us to know the eigenvalues of the linearized map
dψ(p) : TpΣ →TpΣ
at the ﬁxed point p ∈Σ. The relation of these eigenvalues to the Floquet multipliers
of x(t), i.e., the eigenvalues of dϕT (p)
dϕT (p) : TpM →TpM
is given by the following
Lemma 1. dϕT (p) has 1 as an eigenvalue with eigenvector X(p) and the remaining
eigenvalues are those of dψ(p): i.e., the characteristic polynomials are related by
det

λ −dϕT (p)

= (λ −1) det

λ −dψ(p)

.
Proof. We have already veriﬁed the ﬁrst part of the lemma. Diﬀerentiating ψ at p,
we obtain for ξ ∈TpΣ
dψ(p)ξ
=
dϕT (p)ξ +
d
dtϕt 
t=T · dτ(p)ξ
=
dϕT (p)ξ −λ(ξ)X(p),
where we have abbreviated the linear form dτ(p)ξ by −λ(ξ). With respect to
the splitting TpM = ⟨X(p)⟩⊕TpΣ, the linear map dϕT (p) has, therefore, the

112
Chapter 4 Existence of closed characteristics
representation
dϕT (p) =



1
λ
0
dψ(p)


,
from which the lemma follows immediately. ■
Evidently the ﬁxed points of ψ near p are the initial conditions of all the
periodic solutions near the reference solutions x(t) which have periods near T.
We shall use this observation in order to prove Proposition 2. Let x(t) be the
periodic solution of the proposition. Then H(x(t)) = E∗and dH(x) ̸= 0 for x
near x(t). Moreover, dH(XH) = 0. We can, therefore, introduce near p = x(0)
convenient local coordinates (x1, . . . , x2n) ∈R2n such that p corresponds to x∗=
(E∗, 0, . . . , 0) and such that H(x1, . . . , x2n) = x1 and moreover, such that x2n = 0
is a local transversal section Σ. In view of H(ϕt(x)) = H(x) the section map ψ is,
in these coordinates expressed by
ψ :
" x′
x′′
#
−→
"
ψ′(x′, x′′) = x′
ψ′′(x′, x′′)
#
.
where the coordinates (x′, x′′) ∈Σ stand for x′ = x1 and x′′ = (x2, . . . , x2n−1).
The aim is to ﬁnd the ﬁxed points of ψ near x∗. In order to do this we only have
to solve the equation
ψ′′(x′, x′′) = x′′,
since the ﬁrst equation ψ′(x′, x′′) = x′ is automatically satisﬁed. Since, by as-
sumption, ψ(x∗) = x∗is a reference solution, we can apply the implicit function
theorem, observing that in our coordinates the linearized map is expressed by
dψ(x∗) =



1
0
∗
∂
∂x′′ ψ′′(x∗)


.
Recalling the assumption of Proposition 2 and Lemma 1, the matrix
∂
∂x′′ ψ′′(x∗) −1l2n−2
is nonsingular. Therefore, there exists a unique map x′ →x′′ = a(x′) solving
the equation ψ′′(x′, a(x′)) = a(x′). Thus x′ = E and x′′ = a(E) are the initial
conditions on Σ of the desired periodic solutions satisfying Proposition 2. ■
One is tempted to apply Proposition 2 to the periodic solutions on Sλj guar-
anteed by Theorem 1 in order to establish the existence of a periodic solution
on the given energy surface S as λj →0. But unfortunately nothing can be said
about the Floquet multipliers of these solutions. In addition, Proposition 2 is of
a local nature: globally the cylinder of periodic solutions may eventually become
tangential to an energy surface. This situation has been studied by C. Robinson
in [183], 1970.

4.2 The characteristic line bundle of a hypersurface
113
4.2
The characteristic line bundle of a hypersurface
The search for periodic orbits of a Hamiltonian vector ﬁeld lying on a prescribed
energy surface S is independent of the choice of the Hamiltonian representing S:
it only depends on the submanifold S and the symplectic structure ω. Indeed, as
explained in Chapter 1, this dynamical problem can be described geometrically.
We consider a submanifold S ⊂M of codimension 1, i.e., a hypersurface of the
symplectic manifold (M, ω). Then the symplectic structure ω and S determine a
distinguished line bunde LS ⊂TS, as follows. If x ∈S, then restriction of the
2-form ω to the odd-dimensional subspace TxS ⊂TxM is necessarily degenerate.
The kernel of this restriction if of dimension 1, because ω is nondegenerate on
TxM, and hence deﬁnes a line bundle, LS ⊂TS,
LS = {(x, ξ) ∈TxS | ωx(ξ, η) = 0 for all η ∈TxS} .
This line bundle gives the direction of every Hamiltonian vector ﬁeld having S as
a regular energy surface.
Proposition 3. Assume the smooth function H represents S as S = {x|H(x) =
const} and satisﬁes dH ̸= 0 on S. Then
XH(x) ∈LS(x) for all x ∈S .
Proof. Since the tangent space is given by TxS = {ξ ∈TxM|dH(x)ξ = 0} we have
ω(XH(x), ξ) = −dH(x)ξ = 0 for all ξ ∈TxS. ■
Notation. The bundle LS is called the characteristic line bundle of the hypersurface
S. A closed characteristic of S, or a periodic Hamiltonian orbit of S, is an embedded
circle P ⊂S satisfying
TP = LS | P.
In the following we shall denote the set of closed characteristics of S by
P(S).
It agrees with the set of unparameterized periodic solutions of every Hamiltonian
vector ﬁeld XH on S having S as a regular energy surface.
Assume now that LS →S is orientable, i.e., the bundle possesses a nonvanish-
ing section. We shall show that there exists a Hamiltonian function H : U →R
deﬁned on a neighborhood of S and representing S = H−1(0) as a regular energy
surface. We make use of an almost complex structure on M compatible with ω,
i.e., a smooth family of linear maps J(x) ∈L(TxM), x ∈M, satisfying J2 = −1l
and
ω(x)

ξ, J(x)η

= g(x) (ξ, η)

114
Chapter 4 Existence of closed characteristics
for all ξ, η ∈TxM, with a Riemannian metric g. If NS →S is the normal bundle
of S whose ﬁbre at x ∈S is deﬁned by
NS(x) =

η ∈TxM
 g(x)(η, ξ) = 0
for all
ξ ∈TxS

,
we have the bundle isomorphism
LS →NS : (x, ξ) →

x, J(x)ξ

.
This map is indeed well-deﬁned and injective on each ﬁbre: if ω(ξ, η) = 0 for
all η ∈TxS then g(η, Jξ) = ω(η, J2ξ) = −ω(η, ξ) = 0. The normal bundle NS is
orientable since LS is orientable. Therefore, NS and S×R are isomorphic as vector
bundles. Taking a nonvanishing section σ of NS, so that 0 ̸= σ(x) ∈NS(x) ⊂TxM
we can deﬁne the map
ψ : S × (−ε, ε) →U ⊂M
by means of the exponential map (x, t) →expx(tσ(x)). It is a diﬀeomorphism onto
an open neighborhood U of S if S is compact and ε suﬃciently small. If
F : S × (−ε, ε) →R
is the smooth function F(x, t) = t, then the composition H = F ◦ψ−1 : U →R is
the desired Hamiltonian; it satisﬁes S = H−1(0) and dH ̸= 0 as claimed.
Deﬁnition. Let S be a compact hypersurface in (M, ω). A parameterized family of
hypersurfaces modelled on S is a diﬀeomorphism
ψ : S × I →U ⊂M,
I being an open interval containing 0, onto a bounded neighborhood U of S sat-
isfying
ψ(x, 0) = x
for
x ∈S.
We shall abbreviate in the following Sε = ψ(S ×{ε}) and later on we often simply
write (Sε) instead of ψ.
We remark that the following statements are equivalent: (i) The line bundle
LS →S is orientable. (ii) The normal bundle NS →S is orientable. (iii) S is
orientable. (iv) There exists a parameterized family of hypersurfaces modelled
on S. (v) There exists a smooth function H ∈C∞(U, R) deﬁned on an open
neighborhood U of S representing S = {x ∈U|H(x) = const.} and satisfying
dH ̸= 0. Using these concepts we can reformulate Theorem 1 of the previous
section as follows:

4.2 The characteristic line bundle of a hypersurface
115
Theorem 2. (Hofer-Zehnder) Let S be a compact hypersurface in (M, ω) and let
(Sε) be a parameterized family of hypersurfaces modelled on S. If c0(U, ω) < ∞,
then there exists a dense set Σ ⊂I such that
P(Sε) ̸= ∅
for
ε ∈Σ
.
In order to ﬁnd closed characteristics on the hypersurface S and not merely
close by we shall now restrict the class of hypersurfaces under consideration. We
assume that S is the boundary of a compact symplectic manifold (B, ω) ⊂(M, ω),
i.e., ∂B = S.
S
Bε
Sε = ∂Bε
Fig. 4.4
Then if (Sε) is a parameterized family modelled on S we have Sε = ∂Bε, for
symplectic manifolds Bε and we assume the parametrization to be chosen such
that
Bε ⊂Bε′
if
ε ≤ε′.
In view of the monotonicity property of a capacity we then have
c0(Bε, ω) ≤c0(Bε′, ω)
if
ε ≤ε′,
so that the function
C(ε) : = c0(Bε, ω)
is monotone increasing.
Deﬁnition. The hypersurface Sε∗is called of c0-Lipschitz type if there are positive
constants L and µ such that
C(ε) ≤C(ε∗) + L(ε −ε∗)
for every ε in the interval ε∗≤ε ≤ε∗+ µ.
Using the monotonicity property of c0 one veriﬁes easily that the deﬁnition
does not depend on the choice of the family Sε modelled on Sε∗. We illustrate the
concept by an example. Let S = ∂B be the boundary of the compact manifold B
and assume there exists a vector ﬁeld X in a neighborhood of B satisfying
(i)
LXω = ω
(ii)
X(x) /∈TxS
if
x ∈S .

116
Chapter 4 Existence of closed characteristics
X
B
S = ∂B
Fig. 4.5
The ﬂow ϕt of X deﬁnes a distinguished parameterized family of hypersurfaces
modelled on S by
ψ(x, t) = ϕt(x) ,
x ∈S.
for |t| suﬃciently small. From LXω = ω one deduces (ϕt)∗ω = etω. Deﬁning Bt :=
ϕt(B) the map ϕt : (B, ω) →(Bt, e−tω) is, therefore, symplectic and using the
invariance and conformality of c0 we ﬁnd e−tc0(Bt, ω) = c0(Bt, e−tω) = c0(B, ω)
so that
c0(Bt, ω) = et c0(B, ω).
The function C(t) = c0(Bt, ω) is diﬀerentiable at t = 0 and thus we have veriﬁed
that S is of c0- Lipschitz type.
Theorem 3. Assume c0(M, ω) < ∞. If the compact hypersurface S ⊂M bounds a
symplectic manifold and is, moreover, of c0-Lipschitz type then
P(S) ̸= ∅.
Proof. By assumption we ﬁnd a parameterized family Sε with S = S0 such that
C(ε) ≤C(0) + L · ε
(4.6)
for 0 ≤ε ≤µ. For 0 < τ < µ we introduce the set Fτ consisting of smooth
functions f : R →(C(0) −τL, ∞) satisfying
f(s) = a
if
s ≤0
f(s) = b
if
s ≥τ
2
0 < f′(s) ≤c
if
0 < s < τ
2
where the constants a, b, c are restricted by the conditions
C(0) −Lτ
≤
a
≤
C(0)
C(0) + 2Lτ
≤
b
≤
C(0) + 3Lτ
c
=
10L.

4.2 The characteristic line bundle of a hypersurface
117
Note that Fτ ̸= ∅. Fixing τ and recalling the deﬁnition of c0(B0), we ﬁnd an
admissible function H ∈Ha(B0, ω) satisfying C(0) −Lτ ≤m(H) < C(0). Then
we choose an f ∈Fτ with a = m(H) and deﬁne the Hamiltonian function F by
F(x)
=
H(x)
if
x ∈B0
F(x)
=
f(ε)
if
x ∈Sε, 0 ≤ε ≤τ
F(x)
=
b
if
x /∈Bτ.
Clearly F ∈H(Bτ, ω) and in view of (4.6)
m(F) = b ≥C(0) + 2Lτ > C(0) + Lτ ≥C(τ).
C(τ)
C(0)
Bτ
B0
S
Sτ
Fig. 4.6
Since m(F) > c0(Bτ, ω) = C(τ) we deduce from the deﬁnition of the capacity
function c0 a nonconstant periodic solution x(t) having period 0 < T ≤1 of the
Hamiltonian system
˙x = XF (x) ,
x ∈Bτ.
By construction this solution cannot be contained in B0, since the restriction of F
onto B0 is an admissible function, and B0 being invariant under the ﬂow of XF ,
the solution x(t) must be contained in Bτ\B0. As the solution is not constant we
ﬁnd by the properties of f an ε in 0 < ε < τ
2 such that
x(t) ⊂Sε.
This argument works for every τ > 0, and choosing a sequence τj →0 we thus
ﬁnd sequences Fj and εj and a corresponding sequence xj(t) of periodic orbits of
XFj satisfying
xj(t) ⊂Sεj ,
εj →0

118
Chapter 4 Existence of closed characteristics
and having periods 0 < Tj ≤1. These solutions satisfy, in addition, some estimates
independent of j. Deﬁne on
U =
!
ε∈I
Sε
a ﬁxed Hamiltonian function K having the hypersurfaces Sε as regular energy
surfaces by setting
K(x) = ε
if
x ∈Sε.
If x ∈Sε and 0 ≤ε ≤µ then for every τj we have Fj(x) = fj(K(x)) and,
therefore, XF (x) = f′(K(x)) · XK(x) where we did not indicate the dependence
of the functions f and F on j. By construction, the periodic functions solve the
equations
˙xj(t)
=
f′(εj)XK

xj(t)

xj(0)
=
xj(Tj)
and 0 < Tj ≤1. Reparameterizing, the functions
yj(t) = xj

t
f′(εj)
 
solve the Hamiltonian equations
˙yj(t) = XK(yj)
and
K

yj(t)

= εj.
The crucial observation now is that the periods of yj are given by f′(εj) · Tj
and hence, in view of f′(εj) ≤10M, the periods are bounded. By Proposition
1 we, therefore, conclude that there exists a periodic solution x(t) of XK on the
energy surface K(x) = 0 which is the hypersurface S = S0. This periodic solution
parameterizes the desired closed characteristic on S. ■
Recall now that the function C(ε) = c0(Bε, ω) deﬁned above is monotone. By
a theorem due to Lebesgue it is, therefore, diﬀerentiable almost everywhere and
thus Lipschitz continuous almost everywhere and we deduce from Theorem 3
Theorem 4. Assume the hypersurface S ⊂(M, ω) bounds a compact symplectic
manifold. If (Sε) with ε ∈I is a parameterized family of hypersurfaces modelled
on S, then (m denoting Lebesgue measure)
m

ε ∈I
 P(Sε) ̸= ∅

= m(I),
provided c0(M, ω) < ∞.
A compact and connected hypersurface S ⊂R2n separates the space into a
bounded and an unbounded component. (Indeed, every compact smooth hyper-
surface M ⊂Rm is orientable; the statement follows from the Jordan-Brouwer
separation theorem, we refer to E. Lima [142] for a short diﬀerential geometric
proof in the smooth case.)We, therefore, conclude for the special case of hypersur-
faces in the standard symplectic manifold (R2n, ω0) the

4.3 Hypersurfaces of contact type, the Weinstein conjecture
119
Corollary. For every compact hypersurface S ⊂(R2n, ω0) and every parameterized
family (Sε), ε ∈I, of hypersurfaces modelled on S
m

ε ∈I
 P(Sε) ̸= ∅

= m(I).
This result was ﬁrst proved by M. Struwe in [207] who cleverly modiﬁed the
proof by H. Hofer and E. Zehnder in [123] of the weaker statement that P(Sε) ̸= ∅
for a dense set of ε in I. As an illustration we take a smooth function H ∈C∞
c (R2n),
i.e., having compact support. Then the set of critical levels is compact in R and,
moreover, by Sard’s theorem of measure zero. Consequently, for almost every h in
min H < h < max H
there exists a nonconstant periodic solution xh(t) of the Hamiltonian vector ﬁeld
XH having energy H(xh(t)) = h. This is a local analogue to a recent result due to
C. Viterbo [218] for mappings instead of vector ﬁelds. It states that a symplectic
diﬀeomorphism ϕ of (R2n, ω0) which is the identity map outside a compact set
K ⊂R2n possesses inﬁnitely many periodic orbits contained in K. We should
mention that C. Viterbo also deduced his result from the existence of a symplectic
invariant for subsets in (R2n, ω0) whose relation to the capacity c0 is so far not
understood.
4.3
Hypersurfaces of contact type, the Weinstein conjecture
We next single out another symplectic property of a hypersurface which guarantees
the existence of a closed characteristic. Prompted by the ﬁrst global results for
convex and star-like energy surfaces in R2n, A. Weinstein introduced in [226] the
following concept:
Deﬁnition. A compact and orientable hypersurface S ⊂M in the symplectic man-
ifold (M, ω) is called of contact type if there exists a 1-form α on S satisfying
(i)
dα
=
j∗ω
(ii)
α(ξ)
̸=
0
for
0 ̸= ξ ∈LS ,
where j : S →M is the inclusion map and LS is the canonical line bundle of S.
Since ξ ∈LS is in the kernel of ω|S and α(ξ) ̸= 0, the kernel of α, given
by ker α(x) = {η ∈TxS | αx(η) = 0}, is a (2n −2)-dimensional subspace of TxS
on which the 2-form ω, and hence also dα is nondegenerate. Consequently, α ∧
(dα)n−1 is a volume form on S. Geometrically the 1-form α deﬁnes a smooth
ﬁeld of hyperplanes on S which is an example of a contact structure on the odd-
dimensional manifold S.

120
Chapter 4 Existence of closed characteristics
A. Weinstein conjecture (1978): A hypersurface S of contact type and satisfying
H1(S) = 0 carries a closed characteristic.
We shall verify the conjecture without the topological assumption H1(S) = 0
but under the symplectic assumption that S has a neighborhood U ⊂M of ﬁnite
capacity: c0(U, ω) < ∞. We ﬁrst reformulate the concept of contact type following
A. Weinstein [226].
Proposition 4. A compact hypersurface S ⊂M is of contact type if and only if
there exists a vector ﬁeld X, deﬁned on a neighborhood U of S, satisfying
(i)
LXω
=
ω
on U .
(ii)
X(x)
/∈
TxS
if x ∈S .
i.e., X is transversal to S.
In order to prove the proposition we start with a Poincar´e-type lemma.
Lemma 2. Let π : E →N be a vector bundle and let α be a closed k-form on E
satisfying j∗α = 0, where the inclusion map j : N →E is the zero section of the
bundle. Then there exists a (k −1)-form β on E satisfying
α = dβ
and
β|N = 0.
Proof. Using the linear structure of the ﬁbers we can deﬁne, for t > 0, the con-
traction maps ϕt : E →E along the ﬁbers by multiplication: ϕt(x) = t · x.
With Xt we denote the time-dependent vector ﬁeld on E generated by the fam-
ily of diﬀeomorphisms as usual by
d
dt ϕt(x) = Xt(ϕt(x)) if t > 0. If we deﬁne
X1(x) =
d
dt ϕt(x)|t=1 ∈TxE we have the representation Xt(x) = 1
t X1(x). More-
over, Xt(x) = 0 if x ∈N. Using dα = 0 we ﬁnd by Cartan’s formula
d
dt (ϕt)∗α = (ϕt)∗LXtα = d

(ϕt)∗iXtα

,
where
(ϕt)∗iXtα(x) = α(t · x)
1
t dϕtX1(x), dϕt ·

.
Because lim
t→0(ϕt)∗α = π∗j∗α = 0 and ϕ1(x) = x we conclude that
α
=
(ϕ1)∗α −lim
t→0 (ϕt)∗α
=
lim
t→0
1
t
d
dt (ϕt)∗α dt
=
d
1
0

(ϕt)∗iXtα

dt = dβ
for a smooth (k −1)-form β on E. If x ∈N, then Xt(x) = 0 and hence iXtα = 0
so that β(x) = 0. This ﬁnishes the proof of the lemma. ■
We shall use the lemma to extend the 1-form α on S to an open neighborhood
of S.

4.3 Hypersurfaces of contact type, the Weinstein conjecture
121
Lemma 3. If S ⊂(M, ω) is of contact type then there exists a 1-form τ on a
neighborhood U of S satisfying
(i)
dτ
=
ω
on U
(ii)
j∗τ
=
α
on S
where j : S →U is the inclusion mapping.
Proof. Since S is compact and oriented there exists a diﬀeomorphism ψ : S ×
(−1, 1) →U onto an open neighborhood U of S satisfying ψ(x, 0) = x for all
x ∈S. This has been proved in the previous section. The projection map (x, t) →x
from S × (−1, 1) onto S induces, therefore, a smooth map r : U →S which is the
identity on S. Deﬁne the 1-form µ on U by µ = r∗α. Then j∗µ = j∗r∗α = α. We
now consider the 2-form ω −dµ on U. Then
d(ω −dµ) = dω = 0,
since a symplectic structure is a closed form. Moreover, using that j∗ω = dα
j∗(ω −dµ) = dα −d(j∗µ) = dα −dα = 0.
Since U is diﬀeomorphic to S × (−1, 1), which in turn is isomorphic to the bundle
S × R, we can apply Lemma 2 to the 2-form ω −dµ and ﬁnd a 1-form ϑ on U
satisfying ω −dµ = dϑ and j∗ϑ = 0. Consequently, if we deﬁne the 1-form τ on
U by τ = µ + ϑ we ﬁnd dτ = d(µ + ϑ) = ω and j∗τ = j∗µ = α as desired in the
lemma. ■
We are now ready to prove Proposition 4. Assume S ⊂M is of contact type.
Then taking the 1-form τ of Lemma 3 we can deﬁne the vector ﬁeld X on U by
iXω = τ
on
U.
This vector ﬁeld has the desired properties of the proposition. Indeed, by Lemma
3, ω = dτ = d(iXω) = −iX(dω) + LXω = LXω and it remains to show that X is
transversal to S. If 0 ̸= ξ ∈LS(x) then
ω

X(x), ξ

= τ(ξ) = α(ξ) ̸= 0
by the assumption on α. Since ξ, by deﬁnition belongs to the kernel of ω restricted
to the tangent space TxS we conclude that X(x) /∈TxS.
Conversely, if the vector ﬁeld X meets the assumption (i) and (ii) of the propo-
sition we deﬁne the 1-form α on U by
α = iXω.
Then dα = d(iXω) = LXω = ω, and from the transversality condition X(x) /∈TxS
we conclude 0 ̸= ω

X(x), ξ

= α(ξ) for 0 ̸= ξ ∈LS(x). We have veriﬁed, with
this 1-form α, that S is of contact type. This ﬁnishes the proof of the proposition. ■

122
Chapter 4 Existence of closed characteristics
The signiﬁcance of the property of S being of contact type lies in the fact that S
admits a distinguished parameterized family (Sε) of hypersurfaces modelled on S.
It is deﬁned by the ﬂow ϕt of the special vector ﬁeld X guaranteed by Proposition
4. Since S is compact and X is transversal to S, the map
ψ : S × (−ε, ε) →U ⊂M
deﬁned by ψ(x, t) = ϕt(x) for x ∈S and |t| < ε is a diﬀeomorphism onto an
open neighborhood U of S provided ε > 0 is suﬃciently small. From LXω = ω we
conclude
d
dt(ϕt)∗ω = (ϕt)∗LXω = (ϕt)∗ω. Hence in view of ϕ0 = id,
(ϕt)∗ω = etω.
Assume now that ξ ∈LS(x), then for all η ∈TxS
0 = ω(ξ, η) = etω(ξ, η) = (ϕt)∗ω(ξ, η) = ω

dϕt(x)ξ, dϕt(x)η

,
and consequently dϕt(x)ξ ∈LSt(ϕt(x)). We see that
Tϕt : LS →LSt
is an isomorphism of vector bundles. Therefore, ϕt induces a one-to-one correspon-
dence
P(S) ←→P(St)
of the closed characteristics by P →ϕt(P). This leads us to the following deﬁnition:
Deﬁnition. A compact hypersurface S ⊂(M, ω) is called stable if there exists a
parameterized family (Sε) modelled on S having the following additional property:
the associated diﬀeomorphism ψ : S × (−1, 1) →U induces bundle isomorphisms
Tψε : LS →LSε,
for every ε ∈(−1, 1).
A hypersurface of contact type is stable as we have just proved. A stable hyper-
surface need, however, not be of contact type as the following example illustrates.
Consider the symplectic manifold M = N × R2 with the symplectic structure
ω = ω1 ⊕ω0, where (N, ω1) is a compact symplectic manifold without boundary.
Consider the hypersurface
S = N ×

|z|2 = 1

⊂M
and deﬁne the parametrization ψ : S × (−1, 1) →M by setting ψ((x, z), ε) =
(x, εz), so that Sε = N × {|z|2 = ε2}. Evidently S is stable but S is not of contact
type. Otherwise we ﬁnd a 1-form α on S satisfying dα = j∗ω, with the inclusion
j : S →M. Denoting by i : N →N × {(1, 0)} the inclusion of N in S we infer

4.3 Hypersurfaces of contact type, the Weinstein conjecture
123
that i∗(dα) = i∗j∗ω = ω1. Consequently, the symplectic form ω1 = d(i∗α) must
be exact. This, however, is not possible. Indeed, by Stokes’ theorem
vol (N) =

N
ω1 ∧. . . ∧ω1 = 0,
hence ω(n)
1
is not a volume form and thus ω1 is degenerate, contradicting the
assumption that ω1 is a symplectic form.
A stable hypersurface S admits, by deﬁnition, a parameterized family (Sε)
having the following property: if P(Sε) ̸= ∅for a single ε ∈(−1, 1) then P(S) ̸= ∅.
Consequently, we deduce from Theorem 2 the following global existence statement:
Theorem 5. Assume the compact hypersurface S ⊂(M, ω) admits a neighborhood
U of ﬁnite capacity: c0(U, ω) < ∞. If S is, in addition, stable, then
P(S) ̸= ∅.
In particular, if S is of contact type, then P(S) ̸= 0.
A compact hypersurface in (R2n, ω0) always possesses a bounded neighborhood
of ﬁnite capacity c0 and we deduce from Theorem 5 the celebrated solution of A.
Weinstein’s conjecture due to C. Viterbo [217] in 1987. For another proof we
mention [45], 1988.
Theorem 6. (C. Viterbo)
Every compact hypersurface S ⊂(R2n, ω0) of contact
type carries a closed characteristic.
In contrast to the Weinstein conjecture for general symplectic manifolds (M, ω),
the condition that H1(S) = 0 is not required here. An example is a compact
hypersurface S ⊂R2n which is star-like with respect to an interior point we may
assumed to be the origin in R2n (Fig.4.7).
Denote by X(x) = 1
2x the dilatation, then, by deﬁnition of star-like
X(x) /∈TxS ,
x ∈S.
Moreover, the ﬂow ϕt of X satisﬁes
(ϕt)∗ω0 = etω0,
so that in view of the proposition this hypersurface S is of contact type. In par-
ticular, a smooth hypersurface bounding a compact and convex domain in R2n
is star-like. Thus convex and star-like hypersurfaces in (R2n, ω0) always carry a
periodic Hamiltonian orbit and we have conﬁrmed the pioneering results due to A.
Weinstein [225] and P. Rabinowitz [181] in 1978 which marked the beginning of the
investigation of global phenomena of Hamiltonian systems in higher dimensions.
We point out that by using the technique of attaching symplectic handlebodies,
Y. Eliashberg [72] and A. Weinstein [221] constructed many examples of hyper-
surfaces of contact type which are topologically intricate. Not every hypersurface

124
Chapter 4 Existence of closed characteristics
O
S
Fig. 4.7
is, of course, of contact type. We illustrate this by an example of a hypersurface S
which is of c0-Lipschitz type but not of contact type. Consider within the closure
of the symplectic cylinder Z(R) ⊂(R2n, ω0) a hypersurface which is diﬀeomorphic
to the sphere indented, as in the following picture
Z(r)
n(x)
γR
S
Z(R)
Fig. 4.8
Z(R) =

(x, y) ∈R2n  x2
1 + y2
1 < R2
.
Denoting by n(x) the outer normal at x ∈S, we deﬁne by Jn(x) ∈TxS a smooth
vector ﬁeld on S which belongs to the characteristic line bundle, Jn(x) ∈LS(x).
Assume now, by contradiction, that S is of contact type. Then there exists a 1-form

4.3 Hypersurfaces of contact type, the Weinstein conjecture
125
α near S satisfying dα = ω0 and either
α

Jn(x)

> 0 ,
for all
x ∈S
or α(Jn(x)) < 0 for all x ∈S. Without loss of generality we assume the ﬁrst
alternative to hold. Deﬁne the 1-form λ on R2n by
λ =
n

j=1
yj dxj,
where (x, y) ∈R2n. Then dλ = ω0 and, therefore, dλ = dα on S. Hence, in view
of H1(S) = 0 we ﬁnd a smooth function ρ : S →R satisfying α −λ = dρ.
Consequently, for every periodic solution γ of the vector ﬁeld Jn on S,

γ
α =

γ
λ > 0.
However, for the two distinguished periodic solutions γR and γr on the outer
respectively inner cylinder, as depicted in the above ﬁgure, one ﬁnds

γR
λ = πR2
and

γr
λ = −πr2.
This contradiction shows that S is not of contact type. Evidently, there is a pa-
rameterized family (Sε) modelled on S for which c0(Bε, ω0) = π(R + ε)2 agrees
with the capacity of the cylinders, where Sε = ∂Bε. Therefore, S = S0 is of c0-
Lipschitz type. We remark that the argument above also shows that the actions of
all periodic solutions on a compact energy surface S of contact type and satisfying
H1(S) = 0 have all the same sign. In particular, the actions never vanish on such
hypersurfaces.
We conclude this section with a recent result in dimension 3, which is not
obtained by the variational methods described so far. We consider a smooth closed
and orientable manifold W of dimension 2n −1. A contact form on W is a 1-form
λ such that λ∧(dλ)n−1 is a volume form on W. Such a contact form determines a
so-called contact structure which is the (2n −2) dimensional plane ﬁeld ξλ deﬁned
by
ξλ =
Kern(λ) ⊂TW .
Moreover, the kernel of dλ is 1-dimensional. Thus there exists a unique vector ﬁeld
X = Xλ satisfying
iX dλ ≡0 and iXλ = 1 .
This distinguished non vanishing vector ﬁeld on W is called the Reeb vector ﬁeld
associated to λ. Note that we no longer require that W = ∂M and dλ = ω|M for
a compact symplectic manifold (M, ω) of dimension 2n.

126
Chapter 4 Existence of closed characteristics
We shall say that the Weinstein conjecture holds true for the manifold W, if
for every contact form λ on W, the associated Reeb vector ﬁeld Xλ has a closed
orbit.
Theorem 7. (H. Hofer) The Weinstein conjecture holds true for the three dimen-
sional sphere S3.
Actually the Weinstein conjecture holds true also for every closed orientable
three manifold W 3 satisfying π2(W 3) ̸= 0, see H. Hofer [118] (1993). The proof
is based on ﬁrst order elliptic partial diﬀerential equations of “Cauchy-Riemann”
type and is inﬂuenced by Gromov’s theory of pseudoholomorphic curves in sym-
plectic manifolds [107] and Eliashberg’s outline of ﬁlling techniques using holo-
morphic discs [73].
We point out that there are many contact forms λ on S3, (namely the so-called
overtwisted contact forms) which do not admit an embedding of S3 into R4 such
that the induced Hamiltonian ﬂow is conjugated to the Reeb ﬂow deﬁned by Xλ.
Here a contact form λ on a closed three dimensional manifold W is called
overtwisted by Eliashberg, if there exists an embedded disc F ≃D2, where D2 =
{z ∈C| |z| ≤1}, such that
T(∂F)
⊂
ξλ | ∂F
TxF
̸⊂
ξλ,x for all
x ∈∂F .
In the classical work of Lutz [144] and Martinet, [147] contact structures are es-
tablished in every compact orientable three-manifold. On S3, in particular, there
exist overtwisted contact structures which are not equivalent by a diﬀeomorphism
(in the sense described below).
A contact form λ which is not overtwisted is called tight. By a deep classiﬁcation
result of Eliashberg [74] there is, up to diﬀeomorphisms however only one contact
structure on S3 which is tight. More precisely, if λ1, λ2 are tight forms on S3, then
according to Eliashberg there exists a smooth function f : S3 →R\{0} and a
diﬀeomorphism ψ : S3 →S3 satisfying
ψ∗λ2 = f λ1 .
We shall show now that, for a tight contact structure on S3, the associated Reeb
vector ﬁeld has a periodic solution. Represent S3 as the subset of C2 given by
{(z1, z2)| |z1|2 + |z2|2 = 1}. Writing zj = qj + ipj with qj, pj ∈R, we deﬁne the
one-form λ0 on C2 by
λ0 = 1
2
2

j=1
(pjdqj −qjdpj)
so that dλ0 = ω0. Due to a fundamental result by Bennequin [20], the special
contact form λ0|S3 is tight. Consequently, given any tight contact form λ on S3,

4.4 “Classical” Hamiltonian systems
127
we ﬁnd a nonvanishing function f : S3 →R\{0} and a diﬀeomorphism ψ of S3
such that
ψ∗λ = f · (λ0|S3) .
Hence the Reeb ﬂows for λ and f ·(λ0|S3) are conjugated. We can use this in order
to prove that Xλ has, in this special case, a periodic orbit. Since Xfλ0 = −X−fλ0
we may assume that f is positive. We claim that there is a smooth hypersurface
S ⊂C2 bounding a star-shaped domain and a diﬀeomorphism ψ : S3 →S such
that
Tψ(Lfλ0) = LS ,
where Lfλ0 is the line bundle of S3 deﬁned by the Reeb vector ﬁeld associated to
fλ0, and where LS is the canonical line ﬁeld induced on the hypersurface S by
the standard symplectic structure ω0 in C2 ∼= R4. Indeed, we simply deﬁne the
hypersurface S by
S = {
$
f(z) z | z ∈S3} ⊂C2
and the diﬀeomorphism ψ : S3 →S by ψ(z) =
$
f(z)z. Observing now that
λ0(z) = 1
2ω0(z, ·), z ∈C2 we abbreviate σ = √f and compute, for z ∈S3 and
h ∈TzS3,
ψ∗(λ0|S) (z; h) =
1
2ω0

σ(z)z, (dσ(z)h)z + σ(z)h

= σ(z)2 1
2ω0(z, h)
= (f · λ0)(z, h) .
From this, the claim follows. Using the existence result of P. Rabinowitz proved
above, we conclude that the Reeb vector ﬁeld Xfλ0 has a periodic solution.
To sum up, we have demonstrated that in the exceptional case of a tight contact
structure λ on S3, the associated Reeb vector ﬁeld Xλ possesses at least one closed
orbit.
4.4
“Classical” Hamiltonian systems
The positions of a conservative system of n degrees of freedom are points in the
so-called conﬁguration space, which we assume to be an n-dimensional smooth
manifold N. The motion of the system, in the setting of Lagrangian mechanics,
is determined by a Lagrangian L deﬁned on the tangent bundle TN of N. This
2n-dimensional manifold is called the phase space of the system. In our setting of
Hamiltonian mechanics, the motion of the system is determined by a Hamiltonian
function H deﬁned on the cotangent bundle T ∗N of N. This is the basic example of
a symplectic manifold. It is equipped with a canonical symplectic structure which
we shall recall ﬁrst.
If N is any manifold of dimension n, and if TxN is the tangent space at x ∈N,
we denote its dual space, the so called cotangent space by T ∗
xN. It is the space of

128
Chapter 4 Existence of closed characteristics
linear forms deﬁned on the vector space TxN. The union of all cotangent spaces
is called the cotangent bundle of N and denoted by
T ∗N =
!
x∈N
T ∗
xN.
A point α in this set M = T ∗N is a linear form αx in the tangent space TxN at
some point x ∈N, and we shall sometimes use the notation
ξ = (x, ξx) ∈T ∗N
for a point in M. One can view T ∗N as a diﬀerentiable manifold of dimension 2n by
introducing local coordinates, e.g., as follows. If (x1, . . . , xn) are local coordinates
in N, a 1-form α ∈T ∗
xN is represented by α = n
j=1 yjdxj having the coordinates
(y1, . . . , yn) and together (x1, . . . , xn, y1, . . . , yn) form local coordinates in T ∗N.
In these coordinates one can now deﬁne the special 1-form λ on T ∗N by
λ =
n

j=1
yj dxj,
(4.7)
which has, so far only a local meaning. It is remarkable that the above form λ has
a global interpretation on T ∗N. Since a point of T ∗N is represented by a 1-form
ξ at a point x ∈N we can form ξ(V ) for every vector V ∈TxN. To deﬁne a
one-form on T ∗N, say β, one has to give its value β(X) for every tangent vector
X of T ∗N. If X is such a tangent vector at ξ ∈T ∗N, one can use the form ξ itself
to deﬁne
λξ(X) = ξ(dπX) , X ∈Tξ(T ∗N)
(4.8)
as a linear functional. Here the projection π : T ∗N →N assigns to each ξ ∈T ∗N
its base point x ∈N and, therefore, dπ maps the tangent space Tξ(T ∗N) at ξ
onto the tangent space TxN at x. This 1-form λ on T ∗N is sometimes called the
tautological form on T ∗N since it is deﬁned in terms of itself. It is readily veriﬁed
that in the above local coordinates the form (4.8) agrees with the form (4.7). In
view of the expression (4.7) we ﬁnd
dλ =
n

j=1
dyj ∧dxj
and conclude that, globally, ω = dλ is a closed and nondegenerate 2-form on
T ∗N, hence a symplectic form. It is called the canonical symplectic structure on
T ∗N. The canonical 1-form λ on T ∗N is called the Liouville form. As an aside, we
observe that λ has the distinguished property that
β∗λ = β

4.4 “Classical” Hamiltonian systems
129
for every one-form β on N. Here the one-form β is regarded as a section β : N →
T ∗N. The proof follows from the observation that π ◦β = id on N. Considering
the deﬁnition of λ and using the chain rule, we ﬁnd
(β∗λ)x = λ(x,βx) (dβ)x = βx ◦dπ(x,βx) ◦(dβ)x = βx
as claimed. Classical mechanical systems are described by Hamiltonian functions
on (T ∗N, dλ) given by a sum of kinetic energy and the potential energy. The
kinetic energy is deﬁned by a Riemannian metric k on the conﬁguration space,
which associates with every point x ∈N, a symmetric bilinearform kx(v, w) for
v, w ∈TxN which is positive. This metric deﬁnes a bundle isomorphism γ : TN →
T ∗N by γ(v)(w) = k(v, w) which induces the associated Riemannian metric K on
the cotangent bundle T ∗N by
K(ξ, η) = k

γ−1(ξ), γ−1(η)

.
The potential energy is represented by a smooth function V : N →R on the
conﬁguration space. On T ∗N the Hamiltonian H is now deﬁned by
H(ξ) = K(ξ) + V

π(ξ)

,
ξ ∈T ∗N.
(4.9)
In the above local coordinates we have the formulae:
H
=
K(x, y) + V (x)
λ
=
n

j=1
yj dxj
XH
=
n

j=1
∂K
∂yj
∂
∂xj
−∂H
∂xj
∂
∂yj
 
(4.10)
λ

XH

=
n

j=1
yj
∂K
∂yj
= 2K ,
where K(x, y) = 1
2⟨S(x)y, y⟩with a positive deﬁnite matrix S(x).
If ξ(t) is a solution of the Hamiltonian vector ﬁeld XH contained in the invariant
energy surface
S =

ξ
 H = K + V = E

,
(4.11)
then the geometric motion of the system in the conﬁguration space is given by
x(t) = π(ξ(t)) ∈N where π : T ∗N →N is the projection. Since K ≥0, it is
conﬁned in the subset
NE =

x ∈N
 V (x) ≤E

.
(4.12)

130
Chapter 4 Existence of closed characteristics
If E < max V , this set is an n-dimensional manifold having the smooth boundary
∂NE = {V (x) = E} provided S is a regular energy surface. Indeed, where K = 0
we also have
∂
∂yK = 0 so that necessarily
∂
∂xV (x) ̸= 0 on V (x) = E. However
if E > max V , then NE = N is the whole conﬁguration space and K > 0 on S.
Therefore λ(XH) = 2K > 0 on S and we see that S is a hypersurface of contact
type whose contact structure is deﬁned by means of the Liouville form λ. If the
capacity c0(U) is ﬁnite for a neighborhood U of S in T ∗N we can conclude that S
admits a closed characteristic. Unfortunately, nothing is known about the special
capacity c0 on cotangent bundles, except in the special case of the torus which will
be treated later.
Periodic solutions on S have been found by using geometrical ideas, as we shall
brieﬂy indicate next. Assuming that E > max V , we have
T ∗NE = T ∗N
and we can deﬁne the special Riemannian metric G on T ∗N by
G(ξ) =
K(ξ)
E −V

π(ξ)
 ,
ξ ∈T ∗N.
It is the so-called Jacobi metric. We have now two Hamiltonian functions, namely
H and G, which describe S as the regular energy surface
S =

H(ξ) = E

=

G(ξ) = 1

.
The corresponding Hamiltonian vector ﬁelds are, therefore, parallel, XH = ρXG on
S, with a nonvanishing function ρ deﬁned on S which is actually easily computed
in local coordinates. One ﬁnds that
XH = K · XG
on
S.
Consequently, the vector ﬁelds XH and XG have, on S, the same orbits up to
reparametrization. Geometrically, the vector ﬁeld XG generates the geodesic ﬂow
deﬁned by the Riemannian metric G on T ∗N. The projection π(ξ(t)) of a ﬂow line
is a geodesic line in the conﬁguration space N, i.e., it locally minimizes the length
between two points, where the length is measured with respect to the metric g on
TN given by
gx(v, w) =

E −V (x)
−1
kx(v, w) ,
with
v, w ∈TxN.
We see that the geodesics for the Riemannian metric G on T ∗N agree, up to
reparametrization, with the solutions of the Hamiltonian vector ﬁeld XH on S. This
holds true, of course, only on the distinguished energy surface S. This fact is known
as the Euler-Maupertuis-Jacobi principle. It reduces the dynamical problem of

4.4 “Classical” Hamiltonian systems
131
ﬁnding solutions for the Hamiltonian vector ﬁeld on S to the geometrical problem
of ﬁnding geodesics for the Jacobi metric on N, a problem with a rich history.
Recall that if N is not simply connected, e.g., a torus, one can consider the
family of closed curves in a nontrivial homotopy class and obtain a closed geodesic
of shortest length. This was already known to Hadamard 1889. Technically this
approach requires that the length functional on the subspace of loops attains its
minimum, an analytical problem which was clearly seen and attacked by D. Hilbert
(1890), see [112]. To ﬁnd closed geodesics on a Riemannian manifold N which is
simply connected is a diﬃcult and interesting task. In this case the geodesics cannot
be found as minima but rather as saddle points of the length functional using the
topology of the loop space of the underlying manifold N. G. Birkhoﬀestablished
a closed geodesic on the two-spheres using a minimax principle which later led to
the Ljusternik-Schnirelman theory for critical points. The Morse theory developed
at roughly the same time had its origin in the existence problem of geodesics.
Extending Birkhoﬀ’s idea to higher dimensions, Ljusternik and Fet proved in 1951
[81] that every compact Riemannian manifold (N, g) possesses a closed geodesic.
From this geometrical result one deduces immediately by taking the Jacobi metric
that the energy surface S above possesses a closed characteristic, provided N is
compact and E > max V .
In the case that E < max V the theory of closed geodesics is not applicable
directly, since now the manifold NE has a boundary ∂NE where the Jacobi met-
ric blows up. Despite this analytical diﬃculty, S.V. Bolotin [29] 1978 used the
geometrical approach successfully in order to prove:
Theorem 6. Let N be any smooth manifold and assume H : T ∗N →R describes a
classical system of the form (4.9). Then every compact and regular energy surface
SE possess a periodic solution of XH.
This theorem extends an earlier result by H. Seifert [193] in 1948 which requires
that NE is homeomorphic to an n-cell. In 1917 G. Birkhoﬀproved the statement
for NE = S2.
Using the geometric approach, Bolotin’s result has been rediscovered by H.
Gluck and W. Ziller (1983) [106] and later on by V. Benci (1984) [18]. We should
mention that in the case ∂NE ̸= ∅the periodic solution found by the theorem is a
so-called brake orbit. This is one for which the motion π(ξ(t)) in the conﬁguration
space NE moves back and forth between diﬀerent points of the boundary ∂NE
but otherwise runs through the interior. Note that the systems considered are
reversible: if ξ(t) is a solution of XH then −ξ(−t) is also a solution so that with
a motion x(t) = π(ξ(t)) in the conﬁguration space the motion x(−t) = π(−ξ(−t))
traversed backwards also corresponds to a solution of XH. This situation is, of
course, familiar from the 2-dimensional case of a function H(x, y) = 1
2y2 + V (x),
as depicted in the following ﬁgure.
There are many results for closed geodesics which, applied to the Jacobi metric
lead to closed characteristics of energy surfaces. We refer to Klingenberg’s book

132
Chapter 4 Existence of closed characteristics
V
E
x
y
SE
x
∂NE
NE
Fig. 4.9
[127] and V. Bangert’s survey article [14] for these developments. We should point
out that only very recently V. Bangert [15] and J. Franks [100] succeeded in es-
tablishing inﬁnitely many closed geodesics on every Riemannian two-sphere!
The geometric approach outlined above is applicable only for a very restricted
class of hypersurfaces contained in a cotangent bundle and we would like to men-
tion, that by a quite diﬀerent analytical approach, C. Viterbo and H. Hofer 1988
in [121] conﬁrmed the Weinstein conjecture for cotangent bundles as follows:
Theorem 7. (Hofer-Viterbo) Let N be a compact manifold with dim N ≥2, and
M = T ∗N the canonical symplectic manifold. Assume S is a smooth, compact and
connected hypersurface in M having the property that the bounded component of
M\S contains the zero section of T ∗N. Then P(S) ̸= ∅, if S is of contact type.
It is, so far, not known whether the proviso about the zero section is really
necessary to guarantee a closed characteristic on S.
We next turn to (R2n, ω0) which can be viewed as the trivial cotangent bundle
T ∗(Rn). The Liouville form λ is now globally deﬁned by
λ =
n

j=1
yjdxj
and ω0 = dλ. We know that the capacity c0 is ﬁnite on bounded sets on R2n. This
fact will be used in order to prove some very special existence results based on the
following observation:

4.4 “Classical” Hamiltonian systems
133
Lemma. Assume the smooth Hamiltonian H : R2n →R satisﬁes
λ(XH) > 0
for all
(x, y) ∈R2n
with
y ̸= 0.
Then every compact and regular energy surface S = {H(x, y) = E} is of contact
type.
Since λ(XH) = ⟨∂
∂y H(x, y), y⟩, and since S is contained in a neighborhood
having ﬁnite capacity c0, we immediately conclude in view of the lemma and
Theorem 5:
Theorem 8. If H ∈C∞(R2n, R) satisﬁes
⟨∂
∂yH (x, y), y⟩> 0
for all
(x, y) ∈R2n
with
y ̸= 0,
then every compact and regular energy surface S of H possesses a periodic solution
for XH.
The assumption is satisﬁed e.g. for H(x, y)
=
1
2⟨A(x)y, y⟩+ V (x), with
A(x) > 0, i.e., positive deﬁnite.
Proof of the Lemma. If S does not contain points (x, 0) with x ∈Rn, it is of contact
type as explained above, the contact structure being given by the Liouville form.
Otherwise we simply modify the Liouville form and deﬁne a 1-form α on R2n
setting
α = λ −εdF ,
where the function F ∈C∞(R2n, R) is given by
F(x, y) = ⟨∂
∂x H(x, 0), y⟩.
Clearly, dα = dλ = ω0, and we shall show for ε > 0 suﬃciently small that α(XH) >
0 on S, so that the one-form α meets all the requirements in the deﬁnition of
contact type. By assumption λ(XH) = ⟨∂
∂y H(x, y), y⟩> 0 if y ̸= 0, so that for
ﬁxed x the function y →⟨∂
∂yH(x, y), y⟩has a minimum at y = 0 and it follows
that
∂
∂yH(x, 0) = 0. A computation shows that
α(XH) = λ(XH) + ε


⟨∂H
∂x (x, y), ∂H
∂x (x, 0)⟩−
n

j,k=1
∂2H
∂xk∂xj
(x, 0) ∂H
∂yk
(x, y)yj


.
By assumption, dH ̸= 0 on S, hence
∂
∂xH(x, 0) ̸= 0. Consequently, if (x, y) ∈S
and y is small, the expression in the bracket of the formula above is positive. On
the other hand, if (x, y) ∈S and y is bounded away from y = 0, then the ﬁrst
term is bounded away from zero and, S being compact, we can choose ε > 0 so
small that it dominates the second term. Now α(XH) > 0 on S, as we wanted to
prove. ■
By the same argument we have also proved the following, more general, state-
ment discovered in 1987 by V. Benci, H. Hofer and P. Rabinowitz [19].

134
Chapter 4 Existence of closed characteristics
Theorem 9. Assume the energy surface S = {(x, y) | H(x, y) = E } is compact and
regular and has the following property: if (x, y) ∈S and y ̸= 0 then λ(XH) > 0,
and if (x, 0) ∈S then
∂
∂xH(x, 0) ̸= 0. Then S is of contact type and hence XH has
a periodic solution of energy E.
The compactness of the energy surfaces is a crucial assumption for the results
above. The existence of periodic solutions on non compact energy surfaces requires
additional conditions as the example H(x, y) =
1
2|y|2 in R2n which has no periodic
solutions shows. We would like to mention a result in the non compact case due to
D. Oﬃn, in [171] (1985). It states that if the boundary ∂NE in the conﬁguration
space is disconnected while NE itself is connected then (under some additional
technical assumptions) there exists a periodic orbit of energy E. This orbit is a
brake orbit oscillating between two points belonging to diﬀerent components of
∂NE. Oﬃn obtains the periodic orbit by a direct variational argument minimizing
the energy integral of the corresponding Jacobi metric in the conﬁguration space.
Of special interest in mechanics is the cotangent bundle T ∗(T n) of the torus
T n = Rn/Zn which is isomorphic to T n × Rn. This symplectic manifold occurs
as the phase space in many mechanical systems; in particular, for systems which
are close to integrable ones. We shall brieﬂy explain how it arises, referring to
Appendix 1 for details. We start from a particularly simple system, a so-called
integrable system. It is characterized by the property of having suﬃciently many
integrals such that the task of solving (or integrating) the diﬀerential equations
becomes essentially trivial. More precisely, we consider a Hamiltonian system XH0
on a symplectic manifold (M, ω) of dimension 2n. It is called integrable (in the
sense of Liouville) if there exist n = 1
2 dim M functions Fj : M →R, 1 ≤j ≤n,
having the following properties:
(i)
dF1, dF2, . . . , dFn
are linearly independent on M,
(ii)
{Fi, Fj} = 0
for all
i, j,
(iii)
{H0, Fj} = 0
for all
j,
where the functions {Fi, Fj} = ω(XFj, XFj) are the Poisson brackets. Assume now
that there exists a level set
Nc∗=

x ∈M
 Fj(x) = c∗
j , 1 ≤j ≤n

which is compact and connected. Then one concludes from (i) and (ii) that Nc∗∼=
T n is an embedded n-dimensional torus, which is Lagrangian. Moreover, there
exists an open neighborhood U of Nc∗foliated into such tori in which one can
introduce so-called action and angle variables. This means that there exists a
symplectic diﬀeomorphism
ψ : T n × D −→U
ψ∗ω = d

n
j=1
yj dxj

.
.

4.4 “Classical” Hamiltonian systems
135
Here xj (mod 1) are the angle variables of T n and y ∈D are the action variables,
where D ⊂Rn is an open set. Moreover, the functions Fj ◦ψ(x, y) =: fj(y)
depend only on the action variables. It then follows from assumption (iii) that the
Hamiltonian system looks very simple on U, namely
H0 ◦ψ(x, y) = h0(y),
i.e., it depends only on the action variables. What we have described is the Arnold-
Jost theorem on the existence of action-angle variables. It extends a local statement
which goes back to Liouville, and we refer to the Appendix for a proof. The
Hamiltonian equation on T n × D,
˙x
=
∂
∂y h0(y)
˙y
=
0,
can be solved explicitly and for all times. Indeed we read oﬀfor the ﬂow on T n ×D
ϕt(x, y) = (x + tω, y)
where
ω = ω(y) =
∂
∂y h0(y).
Geometrically each torus T n × {y} is invariant, the motion on it is linear and
given by the frequencies ω(y) ∈Rn. For example, if ω is a rationally independent
vector, the orbits are dense on the torus and describe quasi-periodic motions of the
system. Orbits with ω(y) = j ·α0 for j ∈Zn are evidently periodic. These periodic
solutions have Floquet multipliers all equal to 1 and one expects, therefore, that
the integrability is destroyed immediately under the slightest perturbation of the
system. Indeed integrable systems are very rare, hence of particular interest; we
refer to J. Moser [166] for this topic.
There are, however, many important systems in physics which are close to
integrable systems in the sense that
|H −h0|Ck(T n×D) ≤ε,
is small, where H(x, y) is a function on T n × D. In general, the integrability
is lost under perturbation and the orbit structure of XH is extremely intricate.
Nevertheless, the celebrated K.A.M.-theory states that many of the quasi-periodic
solutions of Xh0 can be continued to quasi-periodic solutions of XH provided only
that ε is suﬃciently small, the number k of derivatives is suﬃciently large and the
integrable system is nondegenerate in the sense that
det
 ∂2
∂y2 h0(y)

̸= 0.
(4.13)

136
Chapter 4 Existence of closed characteristics
This condition requires the system h0 to be nonlinear, so that the frequencies
depend on the amplitudes. In sharp contrast to these analytically very diﬃcult
perturbation results for the existence of special solutions, we shall establish global
periodic solutions for every system H(x, y) on T n × Rn assuming, however, that
the energy surfaces are compact. This will follow from the following result for the
capacities on T ∗(T n) due to Mei-Yue Jiang [125].
Proposition 4. Let M = T n × Rn with T n = Rn
2πZn, equipped with the canonical
symplectic structure ω = d(n
j=1 yjdϑj). Then every capacity function c is ﬁnite
on open and bounded subsets of M. Moreover, for every a > 0,
c(T n × (−a, a)n) = 4πa = c(T n × (−a, a) × Rn−1).
Proof. The proof follows readily from the axioms of a capacity. We start with the
symplectic diﬀeomorphism ϕ in 2 dimensions:
ϕ : S1 × (−a, a) −→A =

(x, y) ∈R2a < x2 + y2 < 5a

given by y = √3a + 2r cos ϑ, x = √3a + 2r sin ϑ, where 0 ≤ϑ ≤2π and −a < r <
+a. Then ϕ∗(dy ∧dx) = dr ∧dϑ. Taking a tensor product we ﬁnd a symplectic
diﬀeomorphism T n × (−a, a)n →A × A × · · · × A ⊂R2n, where the product of the
annuli corresponds to the symplectic splitting R2n = R2 ⊕· · · ⊕R2. Therefore it
remains to show that c(A × A × · · · × A) = 4πa which is the area of the annulus
A. For ε > 0 there exist symplectic embeddings
D(2√a −ε) −→A −→D(2√a + ε),
where D(R) is the two-disk of radius R. They give rise to symplectic embeddings
for the product and we conclude that
π(2√a −ε)2 ≤c(A × A × · · · × A) ≤π(2√a + ε)2.
Since this holds true for every ε > 0 the ﬁrst equation in the theorem follows; the
second one is proved the same way. ■
In particular, the special capacity c0 is ﬁnite on bounded open sets of T ∗(T n)
and we can apply all the qualitative existence results obtained so far. We conclude,
for example, that a compact hypersurface S ⊂T ∗(T n) which is of contact type
always carries a closed characteristic. One can verify, as in the lemma above,
that every compact and regular energy surface of a classical system of the form
H = 1
2|y|2 + V (x) on (x, y) ∈T n × Rn, where V is periodic in all its variables, is
of contact type and hence possesses a periodic solution of XH. Nothing is known,
however, about the nature of this solution. To which homotopy class of loops on
T ∗(T n) does it belong? Is it the brake orbit already guaranteed by Theorem 6?
Special periodic solutions for such classical systems can be found by means of the
Maupertuis-Jacobi principle, as is shown in the survey article [129] by V.V. Koslov
(1985).

4.5 The torus and Herman’s Non-Closing Lemma
137
4.5
The torus and Herman’s Non-Closing Lemma
If ψ : S ×(−1, +1) →U ⊂M is a parameterized family of hypersurfaces modelled
on S in a symplectic manifold (M, ω) then U is the union of hypersurfaces Sε =
ψ(S × {ε}), and we know that
c0(U, ω) < ∞
=⇒
there is an ε with P(Sε) ̸= ∅.
Conversely, of course, if P(Sε) = ∅for every ε then c0(U, ω) = ∞and, by the
monotonicity property of the capacity c0(M, ω) = +∞. We shall next describe an
example due to E. Zehnder[231] which illustrates this situation. We consider the
manifold
M = T 3 × [0, 1] ,
where
T 3 = R3/Z3
is the 3-dimensional torus and deﬁne a distinguished symplectic structure on M by
slightly modifying the standard structure ω0 on R4. Recall that to every constant
matrix A satisfying det A ̸= 0 and AT = −A, we can associate the symplectic
structure ω by
ω(X, Y ) = ⟨AX, Y ⟩
on R4, and then, of course, also on M. A Hamiltonian function H : M →R is
simply a function H : R3 × [0, 1] →R such that H(x1, x2, x3, x4) is periodic in
x1, x2, x3 of period 1. The Hamiltonian vector ﬁeld XH is, as usual, deﬁned by
ω(XH, Y ) = −dH(Y )
for all Y ∈R4, and one obtains
XH = −A−1 ∇H.
We now deﬁne A by setting −A−1 = J∗, and
J∗=








0
1
0
α1
−1
0
0
α2
0
0
0
1
−α1
−α2
−1
0








,
(4.14)
with two real numbers α1, α2 ∈R. Then det J∗= 1 and the symplectic form
ω = ω∗is the following 2-form:
ω∗= dx2 ∧dx1 + dx4 ∧dx3 + α1 dx3 ∧dx2 + α2 dx1 ∧dx3.
(4.15)
Choosing the Hamiltonian function H0 : M →R deﬁned as
H0(x) = x4,
(4.16)

138
Chapter 4 Existence of closed characteristics
the Hamiltonian vector ﬁeld on M, given by
XH0 = J∗∇H0 = J∗e4 = (α1, α2, 1, 0),
is constant. The energy surfaces
H−1
0 (c) =

x ∈M
 H0(x) = x4 = c

(4.17)
are regular and, since xj ∈S1 for 1 ≤j ≤3, equal to the 3-dimensional tori
H−1
0 (c) = T 3 × {c}. We introduce the abbreviation
α = (α1, α2, 1) ∈R3.
(4.18)
The ﬂow of the Hamiltonian equations restricted to the energy surfaces T 3 × {c}
is linear and determined by
˙xk = αk ,
1 ≤k ≤3.
(4.19)
If we choose α rationally independent, requiring
⟨α, j⟩̸= 0
for
0 ̸= j ∈Z3,
then all the orbits of (4.19) are dense on T 3, in view of Kronecker’s theorem.
Consequently, we have an example of a Hamiltonian system whose energy surfaces
are all regular and compact, which, however, does not admit any periodic solution.
Incidentally, the energy surfaces are not of contact type.
As an aside, we remark that one can easily construct an embedding ϕ : T 3 ×
[0, 1] →R4. The induced parameterized family of hypersurfaces modelled on T 3
carries no closed characteristic with respect to the pushed forward symplectic
structure which we denote again by ω∗. However, ω∗on ϕ(M) ⊂R4 is not equiv-
alent to the standard structure (ϕ(M), ω0) induced from R4. Indeed, ω0 is an
exact symplectic structure, while ω∗is not; moreover, c0(ϕ(M), ω∗) = +∞while
c0(ϕ(M), ω0) < ∞. In particular, this example fails to represent a counterexample
to the conjecture that every hypersurface S ⊂(R2n, ω0) has a closed characteristic.
We note that our vector ﬁeld X on T 3 deﬁned by (4.19) satisﬁes β(X) ̸= 0 for the
closed 1-form β = dx1 on T 3. Assume now, more generally, that S is any compact
manifold without boundary of dim S = 2n −1 and that X is a vector ﬁeld on S
satisfying β(X) ̸= 0 for a closed 1-form β on S. Then S cannot be embedded as a
hypersurface S ⊂(M, ω) in any symplectic manifold having an exact symplectic
structure, i.e., ω = dλ, such that X ∈LS, i.e., belongs to the characteristic line
bundle. Indeed, suppose it could be, then we could conclude β ∧(dλ)n−1 to be a
volume form on S, since β(X) ̸= 0 and X ∈ker dλ|S, so that
vol (S) =

S
β ∧(dλ)n−1 ̸= 0 .

4.5 The torus and Herman’s Non-Closing Lemma
139
This, however, is not possible, since the form β ∧(dλ)n−1 is equal to d(λ ∧β ∧
(dλ)n−2) and hence is an exact form on S.
We now restrict the symplectic structure ω∗even further by requiring that
α be not only rationally independent but satisﬁes, in addition, the diophantine
conditions
(D.C.)
|⟨α, j⟩| ≥γ |j|−τ
for all 0 ̸= j ∈Z3 with two constants γ > 0 and τ > 2. Almost every vector
α ∈R3 satisﬁes such conditions. It then turns out that the above example is
actually dynamically stable under perturbations of H0 small with suﬃciently many
derivatives. This surprising phenomenon was recently discovered by M. Herman
[110, 111], see also J.C. Yoccoz [229]. In our setting he proved
Theorem 10. (M. Herman’s non-closing lemma) Consider the symplectic manifold
(M, ω∗) = (T 3 × [0, 1], ω∗) with the symplectic structure (4.15) and α ∈R3 satis-
fying the conditions (D.C.) Let H0(x) = x4. Then there exists a neighborhood W
of H0
W =

H ∈Ck(M)
 |H −H0|Ck ≤δ

,
for some small δ > 0 and k > τ + 2, such that for every H ∈W and every c in
1
2 ≤c ≤3
2, the regular energy surface
H−1(c) ⊂M
has no periodic solution for XH.
We note that this dynamical rigidity phenomenon is a property of the special
symplectic structure ω∗. Postponing the proof we ﬁrst point out an important
consequence of Herman’s theorem.
In view of Poincar´e’s recurrence theorem (see Chapter 1) almost every point x
on a compact energy surface for a Hamiltonian system H, is a recurrent point and
one may ask whether there exists a nearby system having a periodic trajectory
passing near x. This is the so-called Closing Problem. The answer depends on the
notion of what is “nearby”. In their work [179] (1983) C.C. Pugh and C. Robinson
showed for the Hamiltonian case, that there is a sequence of Hamiltonian systems,
Hj and a sequence of corresponding periodic points, xj for these approximate
systems satisfying
Hj →H
in
C2
and
xj →x.
This is a special case of the celebrated C1-Closing Lemma in [184]. It is a long
standing open question whether Hj can be chosen so that Hj →H in Ck for
k > 2. The surprising answer of M. Herman to this question is that on the special
manifold (M, ω∗) the Ck-Closing Lemma is false, if k is suﬃciently large, namely,
roughly larger than the dimension of the manifold in question.

140
Chapter 4 Existence of closed characteristics
Proof of Theorem 10. Consider the neighborhood of H0 given by
H = x4 + h(x)
and
|h|Ck
small
on M. The Hamiltonian vector ﬁeld XH is represented as
XH(x) = J∗∇H(x) =








Hx2
+
α1Hx4
−Hx1
+
α2Hx4
Hx4
−Hx3
−
α1Hx1
−α2Hx2








.
(4.20)
The energy surface for c, deﬁned by
x4 + h(x) = H(x) = c,
is an embedded torus T 3. Indeed we can solve for x4, and ﬁnd x4 = K(x1, x2, x3, c),
where the function K satisﬁes the identity
H

x1, x2, x3, K(x1, x2, x3, c)

= c
(4.21)
for all x ∈T 3. The functions are periodic in x ∈T 3. To compute the vector ﬁeld
XH on H−1(c) we diﬀerentiate the identity (4.21) and ﬁnd Hxj = −Hx4 · Kxj
on H−1(c) for 1 ≤j ≤3. Therefore, in view of (4.20) the vector ﬁeld XH is, on
H−1(c) given, by





˙x1
˙x2
˙x3




= ρ ·





α1
−
Kx2
α2
+
Kx1
1





on
T 3,
(4.22)
where ρ(x) = Hx4(x, K) is a positive function. The vector ﬁeld (4.22) has, up to
reparameterization, the same orbits as





˙x1
˙x2
˙x3




= V (x) :=





α1
−
Kx2
α2
+
Kx1
1





on
T 3.
(4.23)
Note that this vector ﬁeld V on T 3 is a perturbation of the constant vector ﬁeld
˙x = α on T 3, and we can apply a special case of the K.A.M.-theory. We make use
of the following result due to J. Moser 1966 in [161].

4.5 The torus and Herman’s Non-Closing Lemma
141
Theorem 11. On the torus T n = Rn/Zn consider a vector ﬁeld of the form
˙x = α + f(x),
and assume the constant vector α ∈Rn to satisfy the diophantine conditions
|⟨α, j⟩| ≥γ|j|−τ,
for all 0 ̸= j ∈Zn with two constants γ > 0 and τ > n −1. Then, if |f|Cm is
suﬃciently small and m > τ + 1, there exist a constant vector λ ∈Rn and a
C1-diﬀeomorphism u = id + v : T n →T n near the identity, such that
(du)−1 (α + f + λ) ◦u = α .
In other words, if a vector ﬁeld is near the constant vector ﬁeld α together with
suﬃciently many derivatives, it can be modiﬁed by constants λ ∈Rn, so that this
modiﬁed vector ﬁeld is equivalent to α. The proof of this seminal small denominator
result is based on an analytically subtle iteration technique in inﬁnitely many
spaces and will not be carried out here; we refer to [161].
In general λ ̸= 0, as already the example f = const shows. But in our case the
vector ﬁeld f has an additional structure inherited from the Hamiltonian nature of
the problem and this additional structure allows us to conclude that λ = 0. This
will follow from the
Lemma. Let V be a vector ﬁeld on the torus T n satisfying div V = 0. Assume
(du)−1 · V ◦u = α ,
with an irrational vector α ∈Rn, and a diﬀeomorphism u = id + v of the torus.
Then u preserves the Lebesgue measure on T n and

T n
V = α.
Postponing the proof of the lemma we ﬁrst prove Herman’s result. Abbreviating
the vector ﬁeld on the right hand side of (4.23) by α+f(x), we ﬁrst conclude from
Theorem 11 that there exists a λ ∈R3 such that the vector ﬁeld
V : = α + f(x) + λ
is transformed into the constant vector ﬁeld ˙x = α on T 3. The vector ﬁeld f has a
special form inherited from the Hamiltonian structure. Namely

f = 0, since the
integrations of derivatives of periodic functions vanish. Consequently,

T 3
V = α + λ.

142
Chapter 4 Existence of closed characteristics
In addition, V satisﬁes div V = 0. Therefore, we conclude by the lemma that
α + λ = α and thus λ = 0. We have proved that the ﬂow of the vector ﬁeld (4.23)
on T 3 is conjugated to the linear ﬂow of ˙x = α and hence has no periodic solutions.
This holds true for every constant c in 1
2 ≤c ≤2
3. The proof of Theorem 10 is
ﬁnished, and it remains to prove the lemma.
Integrating V ◦u = du(α) and observing that u = id + v we ﬁnd

T n
V ◦u dµ = α
since the integral over dv(α) vanishes. In order to prove the lemma we only have
to show that u∗µ = µ i.e., preserves the Lebesgue measure. The ﬂow ψt of the
vector ﬁeld V satisﬁes
(ψt)∗µ = µ.
This is a consequence of the assumption div V = 0. Moreover
u−1 ◦ψt ◦u = Rtα ,
t ∈R
with the translations Rtα : x →x + tα on the torus. Therefore ψt ◦u = u ◦Rtα
and in view of (ψt)∗µ = µ we ﬁnd
u∗µ = (Rtα)∗(u∗µ) ,
t ∈R.
By assumption, α is irrational so that all the orbits t →Rtα(x) are dense on
T n. Since µ is a constant form we conclude that u∗µ = a · µ with a constant a.
Integrating over the torus

T n
µ =

T n
u∗µ = a

T n
µ
we ﬁnd a = 1, proving that indeed u∗µ = µ. This ﬁnishes the proof of the lemma. ■
Evidently, also the symplectic manifold (T 4, ω∗) has inﬁnite capacity c0
c0(T 4, ω∗) = +∞
if ω∗is the particular symplectic structure deﬁned by (4.15) with α = (α1, α2, 1)
chosen to be irrational. We know that in the 2-dimensional case c0(T 2, ω) < ∞for
every volume form ω. It is an open problem whether
c0(T 2n, ω0) < ∞
if n > 1. Here ω0 is the standard symplectic structure induced from R2n.

Chapter 5
Geometry of compactly supported
symplectic mappings in R2n
In this chapter we shall study the group D of those symplectic diﬀeomorphisms
of R2n which are generated by time-dependent Hamiltonian vector ﬁelds having
compactly supported Hamiltonians. We shall construct, in particular, an astonish-
ing bi-invariant metric d on D, following H. Hofer [116]. Deﬁning the energy E(ψ)
of an element ψ ∈D by means of the oscillations of generating Hamiltonians, the
metric d will be deﬁned by d(ϕ, ψ) = E(ϕ−1ψ). It is of C0-nature. The veriﬁcation
of the property that d(ϕ, ψ) = 0 if and only if ϕ = ψ, is not easy. It is based on
the action principle. The metric d is intimately related, on the one hand, to the
capacity function c0 introduced in Chapter 3 and hence to periodic orbits and, on
the other hand, to a special capacity e deﬁned on subsets of R2n and satisfying
e(U) ≥c0(U). The capacity e is called the displacement energy: e(U) measures
the distance between the identity map and the set of ψ ∈D which displaces U
from itself, in the sense that ψ(U) ∩U = ∅. A crucial role in our considerations
will be played by the action spectrum, σ(ψ), of the ﬁxed points of an element
ψ ∈D. It turns out to be a compact nowhere dense subset of R. In contrast to the
simple variational technique used for a ﬁxed Hamiltonian in Chapter 3, a minimax
principle will be designed which is applicable simultaneously to all Hamiltonians
generating the elements of D. It singles out a distinguished action γ(ϕ) ∈σ(ϕ).
The map γ : (D, d) →R is a continuous section of the action spectrum bundle
over D; it is the main technical tool in this section. Its properties will also be used
in order to establish inﬁntely many periodic orbits for certain elements of D, and
to describe the geodesics of (D, d). We mention that the completion of the group
D with respect to the metric d is not understood.
5.1
A special metric d for a group D of
Hamiltonian diffeomorphisms
We consider the symplectic space (R2n, ω) with the standard symplectic structure
ω = ω0 and denote by H the vector space of all smooth and compactly supported
Hamiltonian functions H = H(t, x) : [0, 1] × R2n →R. Associated to every H ∈H
is a time-dependent Hamiltonian vector ﬁeld XH on R2n deﬁned by
iXHtω = −dHt, where Ht(x) = H(t, x).
H. Hofer and E. Zehnder, Symplectic Invariants and Hamiltonian Dynamics,  
143
Modern Birkhäuser Classics, DOI 10.1007/978-3-0348-0104-1_5, © Springer Basel AG 2011

144
Chapter 5 Compactly supported symplectic mappings
Since the vector ﬁeld XH has compact support the Hamiltonian equations
˙x = XH(t, x),
x(0) = x0 ∈R2n
can be solved over the whole time interval [0, 1] for every given initial value x0 ∈
R2n. We thus obtain a 1-parameter family of symplectic mappings ϕt
H for t ∈[0, 1].
It is deﬁned by
ϕt
H(x0) = x(t),
where x(t) solves the equation for the initial value x0. Clearly ϕt
H(x) = x if |x| is
suﬃciently large. By
ϕH = ϕ1
H
we shall denote the time-1 map of the ﬂow ϕt
H and deﬁne the group D of compactly
supported Hamiltonian diﬀeomorphisms by
D = { ϕH | H ∈H}.
Recall that the support of a map ϕ is deﬁned as the closed set supp(ϕ) = clos
{x | ϕ(x) ̸= x}. Every compactly supported symplectic diﬀeomorphism can be
interpolated this way by the ﬂow of a time-dependent Hamiltonian vector ﬁeld;
however, it is not known whether the Hamiltonian function can be chosen to be in
H if n > 2. It follows from results of M. Gromov [107] that in the special case of R4
the group D is contractible. In particular, every compactly supported symplectic
diﬀeomorphism ϕ in R4 can be written as ϕ = ϕH with H ∈H and, therefore,
belongs to D.
It is the aim of this chapter to study some geometric properties of this group
D of Hamiltonian mappings on R2n. We begin with two preliminary formal state-
ments which will be useful later on.
Deﬁnition. Given H, K ∈H and ϑ ∈D we deﬁne the functions H, H#K and Hϑ
in H as follows:
H(t, x)
=
−H(t, ϕt
H(x))
(H#K)(t, x)
=
H(t, x) + K(t, (ϕt
H)−1(x))
Hϑ(t, x)
=
H(t, ϑ−1(x)).
Proposition 1. For H, K ∈H the following formulae hold true
ϕt
H
=
(ϕt
H)−1
ϕt
H#K
=
ϕt
H ◦ϕt
K
ϑ ◦ϕt
H ◦ϑ−1
=
ϕt
Hϑ
(ϕt
H)−1 ◦ϕt
K
=
ϕt
G
where G = H#K = (K −H)(t, ϕt
H)

5.1 A special metric d for a group D . . .
145
Proof. The third formula is the transformation law of Hamiltonian vector ﬁelds
under symplectic transformations, as we know from the introduction. The ﬁrst
formula follows from the second one while the last one is a consequence of the ﬁrst
two. To prove the second formula, we abbreviate the notation and observe that
d
dtϕt
=
XH ◦ϕt and ϕ0 = id
d
dtψt
=
XK ◦ψt and ψ0 = id.
We have to show that ϕt ◦ψt is the ﬂow of XH#K. Diﬀerentiating, we ﬁnd
d
dt(ϕt ◦ψt)
=
 d
dtϕt
◦ψt + (dϕt ◦ψt) · d
dtψt
=
XH(ϕt ◦ψt) +

dϕt ◦(ϕt)−1 ◦ϕt ◦ψt
· XK ◦

(ϕt)−1 ◦ϕt ◦ψt
.
By the transformation law of Hamiltonian vector ﬁelds the second term is equal
to
XK◦(ϕt)−1 ◦(ϕt ◦ψt),
and the claim is proved. ■
By deﬁnition, a smooth arc in D is a map t →ψt from I = [0, 1] into D such
that (t, x) →ψt(x) is a smooth mapping from I × R2n into R2n and such that
there exists a compact set in R2n containing all the supports of ψt for t ∈I. We
shall denote by A the set of smooth arcs [0, 1] →D : t →ϕt satisfying ϕ0 = id.
Proposition 2. The map H →ψt
H from H into A is a bijection onto A.
Proof. If H and K satisfy ϕt
H = ϕt
K for t ∈I we ﬁnd by diﬀerentiation that
XH = XK. Therefore, dHt = dKt so that H(t, x) = K(t, x) since the functions
have compact support. This proves the injectivity of the map; in order to prove
the surjectivity we consider a smooth arc t →ψt in D satisfying ψ0 = id, and
deﬁne the time-dependent vector ﬁeld
Xt := d
dtψt ◦(ψt)−1,
so that
d
dtψt = Xt(ψt) and ψ0 = id.
Because of (ψt)∗ω = ω, we have LXtω = 0. In view of dω = 0 we ﬁnd d(iXtω) = 0.
The 1-form iXtω being closed is exact on R2n, by the Poincar´e lemma. There is a
function H : I × R2n →R, determined by
H(t, x) = −
 1
0
ω(Xt(sx), x)ds ,

146
Chapter 5 Compactly supported symplectic mappings
which satisﬁes −dHt = iXtω. Since Xt has compact support, dHt(x) = 0, for
t ∈I and |x| ≥R, for some large R and there is a K ∈H with dHt = dKt. It is
given by H(t, x) −H(t, x∗) for some x∗with |x∗| ≥R. Consequently Xt = XKt as
claimed. ■
We next deﬁne the length of an arc t →ψt belonging to A. In view of Propo-
sition 2 there is a unique H ∈H generating this arc by
ψt = ϕt
H.
Deﬁne for H ∈C∞
c (R2n, R) the norm (called the oscillation)
||H|| = sup
x H(x) −inf
x H(x).
(5.1)
Then
||H ◦ϕ|| = ||H||
for every diﬀeomorphism ϕ of R2n. If now H ∈H, we can associate with the
Hamiltonian vector ﬁeld XHt the norm ||XHt|| := ||Ht|| and ﬁnd
 1
0
|| ˙ψt|| dt =
 1
0
||XHt(ψt)||dt =
 1
0
||Ht|| dt.
Introducing the norm in H by
||H|| =
 1
0
||Ht|| dt =
 1
0
[sup
x H(t, x) −inf
x H(t, x)] dt,
(5.2)
which agrees for autonomous H with deﬁnition (5.1), we are led to deﬁne the
length of the arc ψt = ϕt
H connecting ψ1 with id, as
l(ψ[0,1]) = ||H||.
(5.3)
Deﬁnition. The energy of a symplectic map ψ in D is the number E(ψ) ≥0 deﬁned
by
E(ψ) = inf{l(ψ[0,1]) | the arc ψt in A satisﬁes ψ1 = ψ}.
Evidently
E(ϕH) ≤||H||.
(5.4)
The Hamiltonian H = 0 in H generates the identity map ψ = id and consequently
E(id) = 0. Conversely,
E(ψ) > 0, if ψ ̸= id.
(5.5)
But this crucial fact is not at all obvious. It follows from the following estimates
for the energy function in which c0(U) = c0(U, ω) denotes the special capacity
introduced in Chapter 3. For notational convenience we set c0(∅) = 0, and recall
that Z(R) denotes the symplectic cylinder of radius R.

5.1 A special metric d for a group D . . .
147
Theorem 1. (energy-capacity inequality) For every ψ ∈D
sup{c0(U) | U open and ψ(U) ∩U = ∅} ≤E(ψ)
E(ψ) ≤16 inf{πR2 | there is a ϕ ∈D with supp (ϕψϕ−1) ⊂Z(R)}.
We see, in particular, that the energy E(ψ) is always larger than the capacity
c0(U) of every open set U which can be displaced from itself by the map ψ. It is
now easy to deduce the claim (5.5): indeed taking a point x∗satisfying ψ(x∗) ̸= x∗
there exists an open ball B(x∗, ε) = U of radius ε > 0, which is displaced from
itself, ψ(U) ∩U = ∅. Using c0(U) = πε2 we thus conclude from Theorem 1 that
E(ψ) ≥πε2 > 0 proving the claim (5.5).
The proof of the ﬁrst estimate in Theorem 1 will be based on the existence of
a distinguished critical point of the action functional, it will be carried out in the
Sections 5.5 and 5.6 below.
Theorem 2. (C0-energy estimate) For every ψ ∈D
E(ψ) ≤C diameter supp (ψ) |id −ψ|C◦
with a constant C ≤128.
This statement expresses the continuity of E at the identity map in the C0-
topology. The proof of Theorem 2 will also be postponed to Section 5.6 below.
Proposition 3. The energy function E : D →R meets the following properties:
(i)
E(ϕ) ≥0, and E(ϕ) = 0 ⇐⇒ϕ = id
(ii)
E(ϕ) = E(ϕ−1)
(iii)
E(ϑϕϑ−1) = E(ϕ)
(iv)
E(ϕψ) ≤E(ϕ) + E(ψ) ,
where ϕ, ψ ∈D and where ϑ is a symplectic diﬀeomorphism of R2n.
Proof. The proofs of (i) and (ii) follow readily from the deﬁnition of E using the
nontrivial fact (5.5) proved later on. Clearly
l(ϕ[0,1]
H
) = l(ϕ[0,1]
H
)
implying E(ϕ) = E(ϕ−1). From
ϑ ◦ϕt
H ◦ϑ−1 = ϕt
Hϑ
we ﬁnd
l((ϑ ◦ϕH ◦ϑ−1)[0,1]) = l(ϕ[0,1]
Hϑ )

148
Chapter 5 Compactly supported symplectic mappings
implying (iii). Finally, in view of Proposition 1, we have ϕt
H ◦ϕt
K = ϕt
H#K and
l(ϕ[0,1]
H#K)
=
 1
0
{sup
x (H#K)t −inf
x (H#K)t} dt
≤
 1
0
(sup
x Ht −inf
x Ht) dt +
 1
0
(sup
x Kt −inf
x Kt) dt
=
l(ϕ[0,1]
H
) + l(ϕ[0,1]
K
)
which implies E(ϕH ◦ϕK) ≤E(ϕH) + E(ϕK) and the last claim (iv) follows. ■
We can derive an estimate for the commutators in D, denoted by
[ϕ, ψ] := ϕ ψ ϕ−1 ψ−1 ,
(5.6)
and ﬁrst claim that
E([ϕ, ψ]) ≤2 min{E(ϕ), E(ψ)}
(5.7)
for ϕ, ψ ∈D. Indeed, in view of the statements (ii)–(iv) in Proposition 3 we can
estimate E(ϕψϕ−1ψ−1) ≤E(ϕψϕ−1) + E(ψ−1) ≤2E(ψ) and E(ϕψϕ−1ψ−1) ≤
E(ϕ)+E(ψϕ−1ψ−1) = 2E(ϕ), hence proving the claim. We now deduce an “a pri-
ori” estimate for the energy of commutators of those maps having their supports
in a ﬁxed open set.
Proposition 4. If U ⊂R2n is open and bounded and if ϑ ∈D satisﬁes ϑ(U)∩U = ∅,
then
E([ϕ, ψ]) ≤4E(ϑ)
for all ϕ, ψ ∈D with supp(ϕ) and supp(ψ) contained in U.
Proof. Deﬁne
γ := ϕ ϑ−1 ϕ−1 ϑ ∈D
then γ|U = ϕ|U since ϑ(U)∩U = ∅and supp(ϕ) ⊂U. Consequently ϕψϕ−1ψ−1 =
γψγ−1ψ−1 on U, and since both maps are the identity maps outside of U, they
are equal on R2n. Therefore, in view of (5.7) and Proposition 3
E([ϕ, ψ]) = E([γ, ψ]) ≤2E(γ) ≤2E(ϑ−1) + 2E(ϑ) = 4E(ϑ)
as we wanted to show. ■
Proposition 3 allows us to deﬁne a distinguished metric d : D × D →[0, ∞], by
means of the energy:
d(ϕ, ψ) := E(ϕ−1ψ).
(5.8)
In particular, the energy of ψ ∈D, E(ψ) = d(id, ψ), is the distance from the
identity map and we remark that, in view of the last formula in Proposition 1,
d(ϕ, ψ) = inf

∥H −K∥
 H generates ψ and K generates ϕ

.
(5.9)

5.1 A special metric d for a group D . . .
149
Theorem 3. The function d is a bi-invariant metric on D, i.e., it satisﬁes for all
ϕ, ψ and ϑ belonging to D:
(i)
d(ϕ, ψ) ≥0 and d(ϕ, ψ) = 0 ⇔ϕ = ψ
(ii)
d(ϕ, ψ) ≤d(ϕ, ϑ) + d(ϑ, ψ) and d(ϕ, ψ) = d(ψ, ϕ)
(iii)
d(ϑϕ, ϑψ) = d(ϕ, ψ) = d(ϕϑ, ψϑ).
Theorem 3 is an immediate consequence of Proposition 3. In the following we
can consider (D, d) as a topological group. Note that our intrinsic metric on D is
continuous in the C0-metric provided the supports are uniformly bounded. Indeed,
in view of Theorem 1 and Theorem 2,
sup{c0(U)| U open and ψ(U) ∩ϕ(U) = ∅} ≤d(ϕ, ψ)
d(ϕ, ψ) ≤128 ·
diameter ( supp ϕ−1ψ) · sup
x |ϕ(x) −ψ(x)|
(5.10)
for every pair ϕ and ψ belonging to D. The group D admits, in addition, an order
structure. Deﬁne the positive subset D+ ⊂D by
D+ = { ψH | H ∈H and H ≥0}
and the negative subset D−⊂D by
D−= { ψH | H ∈H and H ≤0}.
If ϕ ∈D+ then ϕ−1 ∈D−and ϑϕϑ−1 ∈D+ for every symplectic diﬀeomorphism
ϑ of R2n. This follows from Proposition 1. We shall prove later on in Section 5.4
that
D+ ∩D−= {id}.
(5.11)
A partial order structure ≥on D can, therefore, as we shall prove, be deﬁned as
follows:
ϕ ≥ψ
⇔
ϕ ◦ψ−1 ∈D+.
(5.12)
Proposition 5. Assume ϕ, ψ and ϑ ∈D.
(i)
If ϕ ≥ψ and ψ ≥ϕ then ϕ = ψ
(ii)
If ϕ ≥ψ and ψ ≥ϑ then ϕ ≥ϑ.
In addition, if ϕ ≥ψ, then ϕϑ ≥ψϑ.

150
Chapter 5 Compactly supported symplectic mappings
Proof. If ϕ ◦ψ−1 ∈D+ and ψ ◦ϕ−1 ∈D+, then ϕ ◦ψ−1 ∈D+ ∩D−and hence by
(5.11), we conclude that ϕ = ψ proving (i). Next observe that if ϕ and ψ are in
D+ then also ϕ ◦ψ ∈D+ in view of Proposition 1 implying (ii). ■
We conclude this section with two observations due to Y. Eliashberg and L.
Polterovich [76]. They consider an arbitrary bi-invariant pseudo-metric ρ : D×D →
[0, ∞). By deﬁnition this ρ satisﬁes the properties (i)–(iii) of Theorem 3, except
that it is not required that ρ(ϕ, ψ) ̸= 0 if ϕ ̸= ψ. Recalling that E(ψ) = d(id, ψ)
and arguing as in the proof of Proposition 4, one ﬁnds that
ρ(id, [ϕ, ψ]) ≤4ρ(id, ϑ)
(5.13)
for all ϕ, ψ and ϑ ∈D satisfying ϑ(U) ∩U = ∅and supp(ϕ), supp(ψ) ⊂U, for
some open set U ⊂R2n. Following H. Hofer [116] one can associate with ρ the
so-called displacement energy eρ(U) of an open and bounded subset U ⊂R2n by
deﬁning
eρ(U) := inf{ ρ(id, ϑ) | ϑ ∈D satisﬁes ϑ(U) ∩U = ∅}.
(5.14)
It then follows from (5.13) that
4eρ(U) ≥ρ(id, [ϕ, ψ])
for every pair ϕ and ψ ∈D having their supports contained in U. If ρ is not
only a pseudometric but a metric, then ρ(id, [ϕ, ψ]) > 0 provided ϕ and ψ do not
commute. Consequently eρ(U) > 0 and we have proved
Proposition 6. If ρ is a bi-invariant metric on D then the displacement energy eρ
is positive on open sets.
This applies in particular to our distinguished bi-invariant metric ρ = d. Note,
however, that the metric character of this d is concluded from the nontrivial esti-
mate in Theorem 1 from which it follows that ed(U) ≥c0(U) > 0 for every open
set U. The special displacement energy ed will be studied in more detail later on.
In order to construct the intrinsic bi-invariant metric d on D we started oﬀ
from the sup-norm ||H|| on C∞
c (R2n). We can, of course, start oﬀas well from the
Lp-norm
||H||p := (

|H(x)|p dx)
1
p
which is evidently invariant under D, i.e., ||H ◦ϕ||p = ||H||p if ϕ ∈D. We thus
arrive at dp(ϕ, ψ) = Ep(ϕψ−1) which deﬁnes a bi-invariant pseudometric on D. It
turns out, however, that this dp for 1 ≤p < ∞is not a metric. This has recently
been proved by Y. Eliashberg and L. Polterovich [76]. They showed, more precisely,
that
Ep(ψ) = 0, if p = 1,
for every ψ ∈D having vanishing Calabi invariant, i.e.,
 1
0

R2n H(t, x) dx dt = 0
if ψ = ψH for H ∈H. Moreover, Ep(ψ) = 0 for all ψ ∈D provided 1 < p < ∞.

5.2 The action spectrum of a Hamiltonian map
151
5.2
The action spectrum of a Hamiltonian map
For H ∈H we shall denote the set of ﬁxed points of the associated Hamiltonian
map ϕH by
Fix(ϕH) = {x ∈R2n | ϕH(x) = x}.
If x0 ∈Fix(ϕH) then the solution x(t) = ϕt
H(x0) for 0 ≤t ≤1 of the Hamiltonian
equation ˙x = XH(x) satisﬁes x(1) = x(0) and hence is a loop in R2n. Its action is
the real number A(x0, H) deﬁned by
A(x0, H) =
 1
0
1
2⟨−J ˙x(t), x(t)⟩−
 1
0
H(t, x(t)) dt.
It turns out that A(x0, H) depends only on the ﬁxed point x0 and the map ϕH
and is independent of the choice of the function H generating the map.
Lemma 1. If H and K in H generate the same map, i.e., ϕH = ϕK then
A(x0, H) = A(x0, K)
for every x0 ∈Fix(ϕH) = Fix(ϕK).
Proof. Deﬁne the piecewise smooth arc t →ψt by
ψt
=
ϕt
H, for t ∈[0, 1]
ψt
=
ϕ2−t
K , for t ∈[1, 2].
Thus for every x ∈R2n the map t →ψt(x) from [0, 2] into R2n is a loop and we
set
∆(x) =
 2
0
1
2⟨−J ˙x(t), x(t)⟩dt −
 1
0
H(t, x(t)) dt +
 2
1
K(2 −t, x(t)) dt
where x(t) = ψt(x). This map x →∆(x) is evidently smooth and by diﬀerentiation
in x we obtain
∆′(x)h
=
 2
0 ⟨−J ˙x(t), dψt(x)h⟩dt
−
 1
0 ⟨∇H(t, x(t)), dψt(x)h⟩dt
+
 2
1 ⟨∇K(2 −t, x(t)), dψt(x)h⟩dt,
which is equal to 0, since t →ψt(x) is a solution of the Hamiltonian system
associated to H between [0, 1] and to −K(2 −t, ·) between [1, 2]. For |x| large we
have ∆(x) = 0, since H and K are compactly supported so that x(t) ≡x for
t ∈[0, 2]. This shows that ∆≡0.
Hence if x0 ∈Fix(ϕH) then A(x0, H) −A(x0, K) = ∆(x0) = 0 as claimed. ■
In view of the lemma we can associate with a ﬁxed point x0 of the map ψ ∈D
the action A(x0, ψ) deﬁned by
A(x0, ψ) = A(x0, H),
if ψ = ϕH.

152
Chapter 5 Compactly supported symplectic mappings
Deﬁnition. The action spectrum of ϕ ∈D is the set σ(ϕ) ⊂R deﬁned by
σ(ϕ) = { A(x, ϕ) | x ∈Fix(ϕ)}.
Clearly 0 ∈σ(ϕ) since the Hamiltonians have compact supports. We shall show
that the action spectrum is invariant under symplectic conjugation. More generally,
denote by G the group of conformally symplectic diﬀeomorphisms. By deﬁnition,
ϑ ∈G satisﬁes
ϑ∗ω = αω
(5.15)
for some constant α = α(ϑ) ∈(0, ∞). Note that if ϕ = ϕH, then
ϑ ◦ϕt
H ◦ϑ−1 = ϕt
αHϑ, where Hϑ(t, x) = H

t, ϑ−1(x)

.
(5.16)
Proposition 7. If ϕ ∈D and ϑ ∈G with ϑ∗ω = αω then
In particular,
A(ϑ(x), ϑϕϑ−1)
=
αA(x, ϕ).
σ(ϑϕϑ−1)
=
ασ(ϕ).
Proof. Assume ϕ = ϕH and choose x ∈Fix(ϕ). In view of Lemma 1 and (5.16)
we have to show that A(ϑ(x), αHϑ) = αA(x, H). We set
x(t)
=
ϕt
H(x)
y(t)
=
ϑ

x(t)

= ϑ ◦ϕt
H ◦ϑ−1
ϑ(x)

= ϕt
αHϑ

ϑ(x)

.
Let λ be a primitve of ω, i.e., dλ = ω, then ϑ∗λ −αλ = dF for a function F. Since
the integral of a closed form over a loop vanishes, we ﬁnd
A

ϑ(x), αHϑ

=
1
0
1
2⟨−J ˙y(t), y(t)⟩dt −
1
0
αHϑ

t, y(t)

dt
=

y
ϑ∗λ −
1
0
αHϑ

t, y(t)

dt
=
α 
x
ϑ∗λ −α
1
0
H

t, x(t)

dt = αA(x, H) .
■
The following property of the action spectrum will be crucial later on.
Proposition 8. The action spectrum σ(ϕ) is compact and nowhere dense.

5.2 The action spectrum of a Hamiltonian map
153
Proof. We ﬁrst show that σ(ϕ) is compact. Assume ϕ = ϕH and recall that for
x0 ∈Fix(ϕ) the loop x(t) = ϕt
H(x0) is a solution of
˙x(t) = XH(x(t)), and x(1) = x(0) = x0.
Since H has compact support we ﬁnd an R > 0 such that x(t) = x0 is constant for
|x0| ≥R and hence A(x0, ϕ) = 0. It is, therefore, suﬃcient to consider ﬁxed points
x0 for which |x(t)| ≤R. It then follows that A(x0, ϕ) ≤M for all x0 ∈Fix(ϕ) so
that σ(ϕ) is bounded. To prove the compactness we consider a sequence xj(t) of
solutions corresponding to the ﬁxed points xj = xj(0) and satisfying |xj(t)| ≤R.
By means of the Arzel`a-Ascoli theorem we ﬁnd a subsequence satisfying xj(t) →
x∗(t) in C∞([0, 1], R2n) and x∗(0) = x∗∈Fix(ϕ). Consequently A(xj, ϕ) →
A(x∗, ϕ) implying the compactness of σ(ϕ).
It remains to prove that σ(ϕ) is nowhere dense. We ﬁrst remark that the loop
x(t) = ϕt
H(x0) ∈C∞([0, 1], R2n)
satisfying x(1) = x(0) = x0 is an element of the Sobolev space E = H1/2(S1, R2n)
introduced in Chapter 3. Indeed, its Fourier coeﬃcients xk ∈R2n are, after two
partial integrations, estimated by
|xk| ≤(
1
2π|k|)2(| ˙x(1) −˙x(0)| + |¨x|C0) ,
for k ∈Z. Moreover, as in Chapter 3, one veriﬁes that these special loops are
precisely the critical points of the variational functional
aH(x) = a(x) −bH(x), x ∈E,
where now H ∈H and
bH(x) =
 1
0
H(t, x(t)) dt.
Consequently A(x0, ϕ) = aH(x), with x(t) = ϕt
H(x0), is a critical level of aH. In
order to show that the set σ(ϕ) of critical levels is nowhere dense, we follow an idea
due to J.C. Sikorav [198] and construct a smooth function on R2n whose critical
levels contain σ(ϕ). We extend the function (t, x0) →ϕt
H(x0) : [0, 1] × Fix(ϕ) →
R2n to a smooth function ψ : [0, 1] × R2n →R2n satisfying
ψ(t, x0)
=
ϕt(x0),
if x0 ∈Fix(ϕ)
ψ(1, x)
=
ψ(0, x)
for all x ∈R2n.
To do so simply take a smooth f : [0, 1] →[0, 1] which is equal to 1 near 0 and
equal to 0 near 1 and set
ψ(t, x) = f(t)ϕt(x) + [1 −f(t)]ϕt((ϕ1)−1(x)),

154
Chapter 5 Compactly supported symplectic mappings
where ϕt = ϕt
H. For every x ∈R2n, the map t →ψ(t, x) represents a loop belonging
to E and we can deﬁne the smooth function Ψ : R2n →E by setting Ψ(x)(t) =
ψ(t, x). Using now the fact (proved in Appendix 3), that aH ∈C∞(E, R) we have
a smooth function deﬁned by
aH ◦Ψ : R2n →R.
It has the property that every x0 ∈Fix(ϕ) is a critical point of aH ◦Ψ. In addition,
A(x0, ϕ) = aH ◦Ψ(x0) is a critical level. Since by Sard’s theorem the set of critical
levels of aH ◦Ψ is nowhere dense, we conclude that also σ(ϕ) is nowhere dense.
This ﬁnishes the proof of the proposition. ■
Over the group D we can deﬁne the action spectrum bundle A →D by
A =

ϕ∈D
{ϕ} × σ(ϕ) ,
equipped with the metric induced from (D, d)×R. Every ﬁbre is a compact nowhere
dense set; a generic ﬁbre consists of isolated points except possibly the point 0.
Since 0 ∈σ(ϕ) for every ϕ ∈D there is a trivial continuous section of A. The
action spectrum σ(ϕ) does not depend continuously on ϕ ∈D. In the next two
sections we shall construct a nontrivial continuous section
γ : D −→A ,
i.e., γ(ϕ) ∈σ(ϕ) and γ ̸≡0. It is, in addition, monotone and invariant under
symplectic conjugation. The existence of this distinguished continuous section is
established by means of a minimax argument for the action functional.
5.3
A “universal” variational principle
The results in the ﬁrst section are based on a variational principle to which we
will now turn. Our aim is to establish the existence of a special critical point of
the action functional
aH(x) = a(x) −bH(x), x ∈E
introduced in Chapter 3. In contrast to the principle used there, we shall design
a minimax principle which is independent of the choice of H ∈H. Recall that
E is the Hilbert space E = H1/2(S1, R2n) which splits into an orthogonal sum
E = E−⊕E0 ⊕E+, and, if x = x−+ x0 + x+, then
a(x) = 1
2||x+||2 −1
2||x−||2
and
bH(x) =
 1
0
H(t, x(t)) dt.

5.3 A “universal” variational principle
155
As in Chapter 3 one veriﬁes that the special solutions x ∈C∞([0, 1], R2n)
x(t) = ϕt
H(x0) and x0 ∈Fix(ϕH)
of the Hamiltonian equation ˙x = XH(x) agree with the critical points of aH on E.
We shall single out a family F of subsets F ⊂E such that for every H ∈H
γ(H) := sup
F ∈F
inf
x∈F aH(x)
is a real number and a critical value of aH. The crucial point will be that F is
independent of the choice of H ∈H and therefore a “universal” minimax set for H.
Later on this will be important for us for the following reason: whenever one has
a family of functionals together with a “universal” minimax set F, we conclude
from the pointwise estimate Φ ≤Ψ for two functionals in our family the same
inequality for the associated minimax values. Note that
aH(x+) →+∞as ||x+|| →∞
where x+ ∈E+, while
aH(x−+ x0) ≤M for all x−+ x0 ∈E−⊕E0
with a constant M depending on H.
In order to deﬁne F we ﬁrst introduce a distinguished group of homeomor-
phisms of E, which is prompted by the structure of the gradient ﬂows of aH.
Deﬁnition. We deﬁne a set G of homeomorphisms of E as follows. A homeomor-
phism h belongs to G if h and h−1 map bounded sets onto bounded sets and there
exist continuous maps γ± : E →R and k : E →E mapping bounded sets into
precompact sets and such that there exist r = r(h) satisfying
k(x) = 0,
γ±(x) = 0
for all x ∈E+ with ||x|| ≥r. Moreover,
h(x) = eγ+(x)x+ + x0 + eγ−(x)x−+ k(x)
for all x ∈E.
Lemma 2. G is a group.
Proof. We have to show that with h, g ∈G also h−1 and h ◦g ∈G. By assumption
on h we have
e−γ±P ±h(x)
=
x± + e−γ±P ±k(x)
P 0h(x)
=
x0 + P 0k(x).

156
Chapter 5 Compactly supported symplectic mappings
Hence
x
=
x−+ x0 + x+
=
e−γ−(x)P −h(x) + P 0h(x) + e−γ+(x)P +h(x)
−(e−γ−(x)P −+ P 0 + e−γ+(x)P +)k(x).
Writing x = h−1(y) and y = h(x) we obtain for y = y−+ y0 + y+
h−1(y)
=
e−γ−(h−1(y))y−+ y0 + e−γ+(h−1(y))y+
−
(e−γ−(h−1(y))P −+ P 0 + e−γ+(h−1(y))P +)k(h−1(y))
=:
eσ−(y)y−+ y0 + eσ+(y)y+ + ˆk(y).
Using the properties of γ± and k together with the fact that h−1 maps bounded
sets into bounded sets we conclude that σ± and ˆk have the desired properties and
h−1 ∈G. Similarly one veriﬁes that h ◦g ∈G. ■
The distinguished family F of subsets of E is deﬁned by
F = { h(E+) | h ∈G}.
The crucial topological property of G lies in the following intersection result which
is intuitively clear:
Lemma 3. If h ∈G, then
h(E+) ∩(E−⊕E0) ̸= ∅.
Proof. We have to ﬁnd x ∈E+ satisfying P +h(x) = 0. This is equivalent to
eγ+(x)x + P +k(x) = 0 and x ∈E+, or
x = −e−γ+(x)P +k(x) =: T(x) , and x ∈E+ .
The operator T : E+ →E+ maps E+ into a precompact subset of E+ and hence
T : B →B for a suﬃciently large ball B, so that Schauder’s ﬁxed point theorem
guarantees a solution proving the lemma. ■
Theorem 4. Assume H ∈H, then γ(H), deﬁned by
γ(H) := sup
F ∈F
inf aH(F),
is a critical value of aH.

5.3 A “universal” variational principle
157
E+
h(E+)
O
E −⊕E 0
Fig. 5.1
The remainder of this section is devoted to the proof of this existence theorem.
We shall proceed in several steps and ﬁrst derive from the intersection lemma that
γ(H) is a real number. Deﬁne
q+(H)
=
 1
0
sup
x H(t, x) dt
q−(H)
=
 1
0
inf
x H(t, x) dt.
Then q+(H) ≥0 and q−(H) ≤0 since H ∈H.
Lemma 4. For every H ∈H
−q+(H) ≤γ(H) ≤−q−(H).
Proof. Let F ∈F, then F ∩(E−⊕E0) ̸= ∅in view of Lemma 3 and we can
estimate
inf aH(F)
≤
sup aH(E−⊕E0)
≤
sup
x∈E
[−bH(x)]

158
Chapter 5 Compactly supported symplectic mappings
≤
−
 1
0
inf
x H(t, x) dt.
Since
inf aH(E+) ≥−
 1
0
sup
x H(t, x) dt ,
the lemma follows. ■
If γ(H) = 0, then γ(H) is a critical level which contains in particular all the
constant solutions outside of the support of H. We, therefore, only have to show
that γ(H) ̸= 0 is a critical value of aH. For this we need the following compactness
property.
Lemma 5. Assume γ(H) ̸= 0 and assume the sequence xj ∈E satisﬁes
∇aH(xj) →0, and aH(xj) →γ(H).
Then xj possesses a convergent subsequence.
Proof. We recall from Chapter 3 that
∇aH(x) = x+ −x−−∇bH(x),
where ∇bH : E →E is globally Lipschitz continuous and maps bounded sets into
precompact sets. Moreover ∇bH(x) = j∗∇H(x) with the L2-gradient ∇H(x) of
bH.
Assume that the sequence xj ∈E is bounded in E. Then ∇bH(xj) is pre-
compact and taking a subsequence we may assume that ∇bH(xj) →y in E. By
assumption ∇aH(xj) →0 so that x+
j −x−
j →y. In addition, since dim E0 < ∞, we
ﬁnd a subsequence such that also x0
j converges and we see that xj has a convergent
subsequence.
Therefore, we only have to prove that the sequence xj is bounded. Arguing in-
directly we may assume by taking a subsequence that ||xj|| →+∞. Since H ∈H
the sequence ∇H(xj) is bounded in L2 so that ∇bH(xj) = j∗∇H(xj) is precom-
pact in E. Hence, taking a subsequence, x+
j −x−
j →y in E and also in L2. This
implies that |x0
j| →∞. Consequently we ﬁnd a subsequence such that pointwise
|xj(t)| →∞, for a.e. t
implying that H(t, xj(t)) →0 for a.e. t. Hence by Lebesgue’s theorem, bH(xj) →0.
Also ∇H(t, xj(t)) →0 for a.e. t so that ∇H(xj) →0 in L2 and consequently
∇bH(xj) →0 in E. From ∇aH(xj) →0 we now conclude that x+
j −x−
j →0.
Hence
aH(xj) = a(xj) −bH(xj) →0.
This contradicts the assumption that aH(xj) →γ(H) ̸= 0 and shows that the
sequence xj is bounded. The proof of the lemma is ﬁnished. ■
We are ready to ﬁnish the proof of Theorem 4 which we reformulate as

5.3 A “universal” variational principle
159
Lemma 6. The real number γ(H) is a critical value of aH, for every H ∈H.
Proof. Recall that γ(H) is a real number in view of Lemma 4. If γ(H) = 0 there is
nothing to prove and we assume γ(H) ̸= 0. In this case the Palais-Smale condition
as formulated in Lemma 5 holds. Arguing by contradiction we assume that γ(H)
is not a critical value of aH. Then, in view of Lemma 5, we ﬁnd an ϵ > 0 satisfying
|∇aH(x)| ≥ϵ, if
aH(x) ∈[γ(H) −ϵ, γ(H) + ϵ]
(5.17)
In order to ﬁrst slow down the gradient ﬂow we take a smooth map ˆσ : R →[0, 1]
satisfying
ˆσ(t)
=
1, if t ∈[γ(H) −ϵ, γ(H) + ϵ]
ˆσ(t)
=
0, if t ∈R \ [γ(H) −2ϵ, γ(H) + 2ϵ]
and deﬁne σ(x) = ˆσ(aH(x)), for x ∈E. The ﬂow of the modiﬁed gradient equation
˙x = σ(x)∇aH(x) =: V (x)
on E
(5.18)
exists for all times and we shall denote it by
(s, x) →x · s : R × E →E.
Using this ﬂow we pick T = 2
ϵ and deﬁne the homeomorphism h of E by setting
h(x) = x · T, x ∈E.
(5.19)
By deﬁnition of γ(H) there exists an F ∈F satisfying
F ⊂{x | aH(x) ≥γ(H) −ϵ} ,
and we shall demonstrate that
h(F) ⊂{x | aH(x) ≥γ(H) + ϵ}.
(5.20)
Postponing the proof we ﬁrst show how the lemma is concluded. By deﬁnition of
F we have F = g(E+). Therefore, if h ∈G (a fact which will be proved later
on), then also h ◦g ∈G since G is a group in view of Lemma 2. Consequently
h(F) = h ◦g(E+) ∈F and we arrive at the contradiction
γ(H) ≥inf aH(h(F)) ≥γ(H) + ϵ,
hence concluding the lemma. In order to verify (5.20) we prove that
aH(x) ≥γ(H) −ϵ ⇒aH(h(x)) ≥γ(H) + ϵ.
(5.21)
Arguing by contradiction, we assume that aH(h(x)) < γ(H)+ϵ. Since s →aH(x·s)
is monotone-increasing we have
γ(H) + ϵ > aH(h(x)) ≥aH(x · s) ≥aH(x) ≥γ(H) −ϵ

160
Chapter 5 Compactly supported symplectic mappings
for all 0 ≤s ≤T. Therefore, aH(x · s) ∈[γ(H) −ϵ, γ(H) + ϵ] so that σ(x · s) = 1
for 0 ≤s ≤T. We see that in this time interval x(s) := x · s solves the gradient
equation ˙x = ∇aH(x). Hence using the estimate (5.17) for the gradient:
γ(H) + ϵ
>
aH(h(x)) = aH(x · T)
=
aH(x) +
 T
0
|∇aH(x · s)|2ds
≥
γ(H) −ϵ + Tϵ2 = γ(H) + ϵ,
which is a contradiction. The statement (5.21) is veriﬁed and it remains to show
that h ∈G.
Recall that
V (x) = −σ(x)x−+ σ(x)x+ −σ(x)∇bH(x).
(5.22)
In order to ﬁnd a representation formula for the ﬂow of ˙x = V (x) on E, we consider
for x ∈E ﬁxed, the equation
d
dsu = Ax(s)u + fx(s) on E,
(5.23)
where Ax(s) = −σ(x·s)P −+σ(x·s)P + is a time-dependent but linear vector ﬁeld
on E, and where fx(s) = −σ(x · s)∇bH(x · s). If u(s) is a solution of (5.23) with
initial value u(0) = x, then u(s) = x · s by the uniqueness theorem of ordinary
diﬀerential equations. The variation of constant formula for the solutions of (5.23)
gives now the following representation for the ﬂow of the equation ˙x = V (x):
x · t
=
e
 t
0 −σ(x·s)dsx−+ x0 + e
 t
0 σ(x·s)dsx+
−
 t
0
[e
 t
s −σ(x·τ)dτP −−P 0 + e
 t
s σ(x·τ)dτP +]σ(x · s)∇bH(x · s)ds
=:
eγ−(x)x−+ x0 + eγ+(x)x+ + k(x).
We shall show that for every t ∈R this ﬂow map belongs to the group G. Since
the vector ﬁeld V is globally Lipschitz continuous, it maps bounded sets in E into
bounded sets. This holds true, of course, also for the inverse map. Note that there
exists an r > 0 such that if x ∈E+ satisﬁes ||x|| ≥r then aH(x) ≥γ(H)+2ϵ, and,
therefore, σ(x) = 0 and consequently V (x) = 0. Hence σ(x · s) = 0 for all s ∈R
and all x ∈E+ satisfying ||x|| ≥r. We conclude that γ±(x) = 0 and k(x) = 0
for x ∈E+ satisfying ||x|| ≥r. Finally, the desired compactness properties for the
map k follow from the compactness of the map ∇bH and we have proved that the
ﬂow maps indeed belong to G. This ﬁnishes the proof of the lemma and the proof
of Theorem 4 is complete. ■

5.4 A continuous section of the action spectrum bundle
161
5.4
A continuous section of the action spectrum bundle
Exploiting the fact that the minimax set F is the same for every H ∈H we ﬁrst
derive some properties of the function
γ : H →R, H →γ(H)
where γ(H) = supF ∈F inf aH(F). We ﬁrst prove that the function γ is non-
negative continuous and monotone-decreasing:
Proposition 9.
(i)
γ ≥0 and γ(0) = 0
(ii)
|γ(H) −γ(K)| ≤||H −K||
(iii)
H ≤K ⇒γ(H) ≥γ(K).
Proof. For every x ∈E
aH(x)
=
aK(x) + bK(x) −bH(x)
≤
aK(x) +
 1
0
sup
R2n(K −H) dt
≤
aK(x) +
 1
0
[sup
R2n (K −H) −inf
R2n(K −H)] dt
=
aK(x) + ||H −K||
implying the estimate (ii). Since for every x ∈E we have aH(x) ≥aK(x) if H ≤K
the monotonicity (iii) of γ follows. In order to prove γ(0) = 0 we observe that
γ(0) = sup
F ∈F
inf a(F) ≥inf a(E+) = 0,
and, since F ∩(E−⊕E0) ̸= ∅for F ∈F,
inf a(F) ≤sup a(E−⊕E0) = 0,
implying that γ(0) = 0. Finally, in order to prove that γ(H) ≥0 for H ∈H, we
deﬁne for ﬁxed x0 ∈R2n \ {0} and τ ∈R the family Hτ ∈H of functions by
Hτ(t, x) = H(t, x −τx0).
Deﬁning the symplectic map ϑ by ϑ(x) = x + τx0 we have ϕHτ = ϑϕHϑ−1. If
σ(ϕ) denotes the action spectrum of ϕ ∈D introduced in Section 5.2 we conclude
from Proposition 7 that σ(ϕHτ ) = σ(ϕH). By deﬁnition, γ(Hτ) ∈σ(ϕHτ ) and,

162
Chapter 5 Compactly supported symplectic mappings
therefore, γ(Hτ) ∈σ(ϕH).Since τ →γ(Hτ) is continuous with image in a nowhere
dense set (Proposition 8) it must be constant, so that
γ(H) = γ(Hτ) for all τ ∈R.
Hence it is suﬃcient to estimate γ(Hτ) for τ large. Observing that supp(Hτ) for
τ →∞moves to “inﬁnity” in x we can estimate for τ large
Hτ(t, x) ≤π|x|2
for all (t, x) ∈[0, 1]×R2n. Consequently, recalling that ||x||2
L2 = Σ|xj|2 and a(x) =
πΣj|xj|, for x ∈E+,
γ(Hτ) ≥inf
E+[a(x) −π
 1
0
|x|2 dt] = 0,
implying that γ(H) ≥0 as claimed. This ﬁnishes the proof of Proposition 9. ■
If, for example, H ≥0, then we conclude by monotonicity that 0 ≤γ(H) ≤
γ(0) = 0 implying γ(H) = 0. This proves the ﬁrst part of
Proposition 10.
If H
≥
0
then γ(H) = 0.
If H
≤
0 and H ̸= 0
then γ(H) > 0.
Proof. Assume H ≤0 and H ̸= 0. Then we ﬁnd a bump function α ̸= 0 with
0 ≤α(t) ≤1 and a time-independent G ∈C∞
c (R2n) with G ≤0 and G ̸= 0 such
that
K(t, x) = α(t)G(x)
satisﬁes, for ϵ > 0 and small,
H(t, x) ≤ϵK(t, x).
By monotonicity, γ(H) ≥γ(ϵK) and we shall show that γ(ϵK) > 0. By translation,
as in the proof of the previous proposition, we can assume that G(0) = inf G < 0,
so that
ϵα(t)G(x) ≤ϵα(t)G(0) + π|x|2
for all (t, x), provided ϵ > 0 is suﬃciently small. Hence
γ(ϵK)
≥
inf
x∈E+[a(x) −ϵ
 1
0
α(t)G(x(t)) dt]
≥
−ϵG(0)
 1
0
α dt + inf
E+[a(x) −π
 1
0
|x|2 dt]
=
−ϵG(0) ·
 1
0
α dt > 0.
This ﬁnishes the proof of the proposition. ■

5.4 A continuous section of the action spectrum bundle
163
The distinguished critical level γ(H) of the function aH belongs, by construc-
tion, to the action spectrum of the associated time-1 maps ϕH. We shall show next
that it only depends on the time-1 map and not on the particular choice of the
Hamiltonian H generating the maps.
Proposition 11. Assume H, K ∈H, then
ϕH = ϕK
⇒
γ(H) = γ(K).
Proof. The proof is based on a homotopy argument and we start with a preliminary
observation. Two arcs ψt
0 and ψt
1 in A are called homotopic if there is a smooth
map
[0, 1] × [0, 1] →D : (s, t) →ψt
s
connecting the arcs in A. We then ﬁnd a smooth H : [0, 1] × [0, 1] × R2n →R of
compact support satisfying
ψt
s(x) = ϕt
Hs(x),
where Hs(t, x) = H(s, t, x). Assume now ψ1
s = ψ for all 0 ≤s ≤1; then
γ(Hs) ∈σ(ϕHs) = σ(ψ) .
Since σ(ψ) is nowhere dense (by Proposition 8) the continuous function s →γ(Hs)
is constant so that γ(H0) = γ(H1). The idea of the proof is now as follows, assum-
ing
ϕH = ϕK = ψ
we shall homotope ϕt
H and ϕt
K to arcs ϕt
H′ and ϕt
K′ such that
|γ(H) −γ(K)| = |γ(H′) −γ(K′)| ≤||H′ −K′||
is small. In order to carry out the argument we ﬁrst, by reparametrizing the time,
homotope the arc ϕt
H to an arc ϕt satisfying ϕt = ϕ1 = ψ for 1
2 ≤t ≤1 and we
do the same for the arc ϕt
K. Hence we can assume that
K(t, x) = 0 = H(t, x)
if
1
2 ≤t ≤1.
Deﬁne now for 0 < s ≤1
Hs(t, x)
=
s2H(t, 1
sx)
Ks(t, x)
=
s2K(t, 1
sx).
Then
ϕt
Hs(x)
=
sϕt
H(1
sx)
ϕt
Ks(x)
=
sϕt
K(1
sx).

164
Chapter 5 Compactly supported symplectic mappings
If 1
2 ≤t ≤1 we have
ϕt
Hs(x) = sϕt
H(1
sx) = sψ(1
sx) = ϕt
Ks(x).
Take a smooth β : [ 1
2, 1] →[0, 1] which is equal to 0 near 1
2 and equal to 1 near 1
and deﬁne the arcs
ϕt
s(x) =

ϕt
Hs(x)
0 ≤t ≤1
2
(s + (1 −s)β(t))ψ([s + (1 −s)β(t)]−1x)
1
2 ≤t ≤1
and similarly ψt
s(x) by replacing Hs by Ks. Then
ϕ1
s = ψ = ψ1
s
for all 0 < s ≤1.
If ˆHs generates ϕt
s and ˆKs generates ψt
s we conclude that γ( ˆHs) = γ(H) and
γ( ˆKs) = γ(K). Observe that
ˆHs(t, x)
= ˆKs(t, x),
1
2 ≤t ≤1
ˆHs(t, x)
= Hs(t, x),
0 ≤t ≤1
2
ˆKs(t, x)
= Ks(t, x),
0 ≤t ≤1
2,
and |Hs(t, s)|+|Ks(t, x)| ≤s2(||H||+||K||) if 0 ≤t ≤1
2 and x ∈R2n. Consequently
|γ(H) −γ(K)| = |γ( ˆHs) −γ( ˆKs)| ≤|| ˆHs −ˆKs|| ≤s2(||H|| + ||K||)
for all 0 < s ≤1 and hence γ(K) = γ(H) as claimed. ■
In view of this result we can associate with every ϕ ∈D the real number
γ(ϕ) = γ(H),
if
ϕ = ϕH.
The qualitative properties of the invariant γ are summarized in the next two
propositions.
Proposition 12. The function γ : D →R satisﬁes
(i)
γ ≥0
(ii)
|γ(ϕ) −γ(ψ)| ≤d(ϕ, ψ)
(iii)
ψ ≥ϕ ⇒γ(ψ) ≤γ(ϕ)
(iv)
γ(ϑϕϑ−1) = γ(ϕ)
(v)
γ(ϕ) ∈σ(ϕ) .

5.5 An inequality between the displacement energy . . .
165
Proof. The statement (i) is proved in Proposition 9 (ii). If ϕ = ϕH and ψ = ϕK
then |γ(ϕ)−γ(ψ)| ≤||H −K|| in view of Proposition 9. This proves the statement
(ii) in view of the deﬁnition of the distance d(ϕ, ψ) as reformulated in (5.9). Now
we prove (iii). By deﬁnition we ﬁnd H ≤0 satisfying ϕH = ψ−1 ◦ϕ. Take L such
that ψ = ψL, hence ϕ = ϕL ◦ϕH = ϕL#H. Since H ≤0 we have L#H −L ≤0.
Now we make use of the following observation: if ψ = ϕA and ϕ = ϕB for two
Hamiltonians A, B ∈H satisfying A ≥B, then aA ≤aB pointwise for the asso-
ciated functionals; consequently we conclude from the minimax characterization
of γ that γ(ψ) = γ(A) ≤γ(B) = γ(ϕ). Hence the monotonicity statement in (iii)
follows. The statement (iv) is proved by the same homotopy argument as in the
beginning of the proof of Proposition 11. The last statement is a consequence of the
deﬁnition of γ, in view of Lemma 6 and Proposition 11. The proof of Proposition
12 is complete. ■
In view of Proposition 10 we have, in addition,
Proposition 13.
γ(id)
=
0
γ(ϕ)
=
0, for all ϕ ∈D+
γ(ϕ)
>
0, for all ϕ ∈D−\ {id}.
Corollary.
D+ ∩D−= {id}
Recall that the partial order structure on D introduced in Section 5.1 is based
on this fact. Note also that the real number γ(ϕ) belongs to the action spectrum
σ(ϕ) = {A(x, ϕ) | ϕ(x) = x} associated to the ﬁxed point set of the map ϕ. If x0
is a trivial ﬁxed point of ϕ = ϕH, i.e., satisﬁes (t, x0) /∈supp (H) for 0 ≤t ≤1,
then A(x0, ϕ) = 0. We see that the statement γ(ϕ) > 0 refers to nontrivial ﬁxed
points of ϕ.
Summarizing, Proposition 12 and Proposition 13 show that γ : D →A is a
nontrivial (γ ̸≡0) and continuous section of the action spectrum bundle A →D.
In addition, γ is monotone with respect to the order structure on the group D and
invariant under symplectic conjugation.
5.5
An inequality between the displacement energy and the capacity
The energy function E : D →R+ is deﬁned by
E(ψ) = inf{ ||H|| | ψ = ϕH},
where H ∈H and where, with the notation Ht(x) = H(t, x),
||H|| =
 1
0
(sup
x Ht −inf
x Ht) dt.

166
Chapter 5 Compactly supported symplectic mappings
The energy is related to the capacity as already mentioned previously and we shall
prove
Theorem 5. If ψ ∈D, then
E(ψ) ≥sup{ c0(U) | U open and ψ(U) ∩U = ∅} .
Here c0(U) is the special capacity introduced in Chapter 3. In order to prove
this theorem we shall proceed in several steps, ﬁrst deﬁning the positive and the
negative energy functions E± : D →R+ by
E+(ψ)
=
inf{
 1
0
sup
x Ht dt |ψ = ϕH}
E−(ψ)
=
−sup{
 1
0
inf
x Ht dt |ψ = ϕH} = inf{
 1
0
−inf
x Htdt | ψ = ϕH} .
Evidently,
E+(ψ) + E−(ψ)
≤
E(ψ)
E+(ψ)
=
E−(ψ−1).
Proposition 14. If ϕ, ψ in D, then
γ(ϕ) −E+(ψ) ≤γ(ϕ ◦ψ) ≤γ(ϕ) + E−(ψ).
Setting ϕ = id we ﬁnd, in particular, by using E+(ψ) = E−(ψ−1) that
E(ψ) ≥γ(ψ) + γ(ψ−1).
Proof. Let ϕ = ϕH and ψ = ϕK, then ϕ ◦ψ = ϕH#K and hence
γ(ϕ ◦ψ)
=
sup
F ∈F
inf aH#K(F)
=
sup
F ∈F
inf
x∈F[aH(x) −
 1
0
Kt((ϕt
H)−1(x)) dt]
≥
γ(ϕ) −
 1
0
sup
x Kt dt
implying the ﬁrst inequality; the second one is proved similarly. ■
Lemma 7. Let U ⊂R2n be open and bounded and assume that ϕ, ψ ∈D satisfy
(i)
ϕ = ϕH, with supp(H) ⊂[0, 1] × U.
(ii)
ψ(U) ∩U = ∅.
Then
γ(ϕ ◦ψ) = γ(ψ ◦ϕ) = γ(ψ).

5.5 An inequality between the displacement energy . . .
167
Proof. Denoting by ϕτ = ϕτ
H the ﬂow of H we have Fix(ϕτ ◦ψ) = Fix(ψ ◦ϕτ) =
Fix(ψ) ⊂R2n \ U. If σ denotes the action spectrum, we claim that
σ(ϕτ ◦ψ) = σ(ψ) = σ(ψ ◦ϕτ),
(5.24)
for 0 ≤τ ≤1. Indeed, ﬁxing τ we can choose, by reparameterizing the time, new
Hamiltonians, namely K generating ψ and Hτ generating ϕτ, such that K(t, x) = 0
for 1
2 ≤t ≤1, Hτ(t, x) = 0 for 0 ≤t ≤1
2 and supp(Hτ) ⊂[0, 1] × U. For the
corresponding ﬂows we see that
ψt ◦ϕt
τ(x) = ψt(x) = ϕt
τ ◦ψt(x) ,
x ∈Fix(ψ),
for all 0 ≤t ≤1 implying (5.24). The functions τ →γ(ψ ◦ϕτ) and τ →γ(ϕτ ◦ψ)
being continuous and having values in the nowhere dense set σ(ψ) must be constant
and hence equal to γ(ψ), in view of ϕ0 = id, proving the proposition. ■
The following immediate consequence of the lemma will be crucial for the proof
of Theorem 5.
Proposition 15. Assume that ϕ, ψ ∈D meet the assumptions of Lemma 7, i.e., there
is an open bounded subset U ⊂R2n such that ϕ = ϕH with supp(H) ⊂[0, 1] × U
and ψ(U) ∩U = ∅. Then
γ(ϕ) ≤E(ψ).
Proof. Since, by Lemma 7, γ(ψ) = γ(ϕ◦ψ), we ﬁnd in view of Proposition 14 that
E−(ψ) ≥γ(ψ) = γ(ϕ ◦ψ) ≥γ(ϕ) −E+(ψ)
and hence γ(ϕ) ≤E+(ψ) + E−(ψ) ≤E(ψ) as claimed. ■
It is possible to compute the energy E(ψ) and γ(ψ) for those ψ ∈D which are
generated by special time-independent Hamiltonians.
Proposition 16. Assume H ∈H is independent of time and assume, moreover,
that all T-periodic solutions of ˙x = XH(x) for 0 < T ≤1 are constant. Then for
ϕH = ϕ,
γ(ϕ)
=
−inf
x
H
E(ϕ)
=
||H|| = sup
x H −inf
x H
E(ϕ)
=
γ(ϕ) + γ(ϕ−1).

168
Chapter 5 Compactly supported symplectic mappings
Proof. Abbreviate ϕs = ϕs
H for 0 ≤s ≤1. It follows from the assumption about
the periodic solutions that the ﬁxed points of ϕs are the critical points of H and
hence
σ(ϕs) = {−sH(m) | dH(m) = 0}.
Abbreviating the set of negative critical levels by CH = −{H(m) | dH(m) = 0}
we conclude that γ(ϕs) ∈sCH. By Sard’s theorem CH is nowhere dense and since
s →1
sγ(ϕs) ∈CH is continuous, it is constant. Hence, there exists a critical point
m∗of H satisfying
γ(ϕs) = −sH(m∗), for all 0 ≤s ≤1.
(5.25)
We shall show that H(m∗) = inf H. By translating H as in the proof of Proposition
9 we may assume that H(0) = inf H. In view of Proposition 14
γ(ϕs) = γ(ϕsH) ≤E−(ϕsH) ≤−sH(0).
On the other hand we ﬁnd s0 > 0 such that sH(x) ≤sH(0) + π|x|2 for all
0 ≤s ≤s0 and x ∈R2n implying
γ(ϕsH)
≥
inf
x∈E+[a(x) −π
 1
0
|x|2] −sH(0)
=
−sH(0)
so that γ(ϕsH) = −sH(0) for all 0 ≤s ≤s0 and, hence in view of (5.25) also for
0 ≤s ≤1. We see that
γ(ϕ) = −inf H
as claimed. Now ϕ−H = (ϕH)−1 and the same argument gives
γ(ϕ−1) = γ(ϕ−H) = −inf(−H) = sup H.
Consequently, by Proposition 14 again,
−inf H
=
γ(ϕ) ≤E−(ϕ)
sup H
=
γ(ϕ−1) ≤E−(ϕ−1) = E+(ϕ).
Adding up
||H|| = sup H −inf H ≤E−(ϕ) + E+(ϕ) ≤E(ϕH) ≤||H||,
so that E(ϕ) = ||H|| as claimed. ■

5.5 An inequality between the displacement energy . . .
169
H
O
U
m(H) = ∥H ∥
Fig. 5.2
Proof of Theorem 5. Recall ﬁrst the deﬁnition of the capacity c0(U) where U is
an open subset of R2n. Deﬁne the set Ha(U) of admissible Hamiltonian functions
as follows: H ∈Ha(U) if H ∈C∞
c (R2n), supp(H) ⊂U and H ≤0, moreover,
H(x) = −inf H for x in an open set and all the T−periodic solutions of ˙x = XH(x)
of periods 0 < T ≤1 are constants. Then
c0(U) = sup{||H|| | H ∈Ha(U)}.
Note that ||H|| = −inf H = m(H) in the notation of Chapter 3.
Assume now that ψ ∈D satisﬁes ψ(U) ∩U = ∅. Then U is bounded, since ψ
has compact support and hence c0(U) < ∞. Picking ϵ > 0, we ﬁnd H ∈Ha(U)
satisfying
||H|| ≥c0(U) −ϵ.
Setting ϕ = ϕH we have, by Proposition 16, that γ(ϕ) = −inf H = ∥H∥and
conclude, in view of Proposition 15,
E(ψ) ≥γ(ϕ) = ∥H∥≥c0(U) −ε.
Hence E(ψ) ≥c0(U) −ε for every ε > 0 so that E(ψ) ≥c0(U) implying Theo-
rem 5. ■
We have already seen that the crucial estimate E(ψ) > 0 for ψ ̸= id follows
from Theorem 5 and we would like to point out another astonishing consequence
conjectured by Ya. Eliashberg and proved by H. Hofer in [117] and C. Viterbo in
[218].
Theorem 6. Assume ψj and ψ ∈D and ϕ ∈C0(R2n, R2n). If
(i)
d(ψj, ψ) →0
(ii)
limj→∞ψj = ϕ, locally uniformly
then ϕ = ψ.

170
Chapter 5 Compactly supported symplectic mappings
Corollary. Assume ϕHj ∈D and ϕ ∈C0(R2n, R2n) satisfy
(i)
Hj
−→
0 uniformly
(ii)
ψHj
−→
ϕ locally uniformly.
Then ϕ = id.
Proof. We may restrict ourselves to the case ψ = id. Hence, assuming d(ψj, id) =
E(ψj) →0 and limj→∞ψj = ϕ we have to show that ϕ(x) = x. Arguing indirectly,
we ﬁnd x∗satisfying ϕ(x∗) ̸= x∗. Hence there is an ϵ > 0 such that ϕ(Bϵ)∩Bϵ = ∅
for Bϵ = B(x∗, ϵ). We conclude that ψj(Bϵ/2) ∩Bϵ/2 = ∅for all j ≥j0 so that, by
Theorem 5, E(ψj) ≥c0(Bϵ/2) > 0 contradicting the assumption E(ψj) →0 and
proving the result. ■
Given a bounded subset A ⊂R2n one can ask: how much energy is needed in
order to deform the set A into a set A′ which is disjoint from A?
A
A′
Fig. 5.3
This question prompted the following deﬁnition of the displacement energy
e(A) introduced by H. Hofer [116]:
e(A)
=
inf{ ||H||
| H ∈H, and ψH(A) ∩A = ∅}
=
inf{ E(ψ)
| ψ ∈D, and ψ(A) ∩A = ∅}.
For unbounded sets B we simply set
e(B) = sup{ e(A) | A ⊂B and A bounded }.
Clearly e is monotone in the sense that if A ⊂B then e(A) ≤e(B). For every
symplectic diﬀeomorphism ϑ of R2n we have e(ϑ(A)) = e(A). This follows from
E(ϑ ◦ψ ◦ϑ−1) = E(ψ). Moreover, e(U) > 0 for every open set U. Indeed the
following more quantitative statement follows immediately from Theorem 5.
Theorem 7. For every open U
c0(U) ≤e(U).
More explicitly, we have the estimate
sup{ ||H|| | H ∈Ha(U)} ≤inf{ ||H|| | H ∈H, ψH(U) ∩U = ∅}.

5.5 An inequality between the displacement energy . . .
171
This estimate is much stronger than it looks at ﬁrst sight. We shall see, in
particular, that the existence of the capacity c0, namely c0(B(1)) = π = c0(Z(1))
is an immediate consequence of the estimate. Recall that this normalization of c0
was the subtle part in the construction of c0 which required an existence proof.
We point out that the capacity c0 explained not only all the symplectic rigidity
phenomena discussed in Chapter 2 but also the existence phenomena for periodic
orbits in Chapter 4.
Corollary. For the open ball B = B(1) and the open cylinder Z = Z(1) we have
π ≤c0(B) ≤e(B) ≤e(Z) ≤π.
Proof. In view of Theorem 7 and the monotonicity of e, only the ﬁrst and the
last inequality have to be proved. The ﬁrst one is Lemma 3 of Chapter 3 which
required the construction of an easy example. It remains to prove that e(Z) ≤π.
For this it is suﬃcient to show that
e(B2(1) × B2n−2(R)) ≤π
for every radius R > 1. To displace this set from itself, it is enough to displace
B2(1) ⊂R2 from itself. To do so we ﬁrst take an area- and orientation-preserving
diﬀeomorphism ϕ of R2 mapping B2(1) into a square of side length √π + ϵ.
1
B(1)
ϕ
x
y
√π
√π
Fig. 5.4
A translation in the y direction which displaces the square from itself requires
a Hamiltonian which has a slope close to √π, for example H1(x, y) = (√π +2ϵ)·x.
By smoothly cutting oﬀthis Hamiltonian, we see that we can separate the square
from itself by a Hamiltonian H ∈H with norm ||H|| as close as we wish to π. The
desired ﬂow ϕ−1 ◦ϕt ◦ϕ then displaces B2(1) from itself in time 1, proving the
claim and hence the corollary. ■
As indicated in Fig. 5.5, this construction shows also that, by cutting a given
bounded set V into small disjoint cubes and after removing a set Vϵ ⊂V of
arbitrary small measure, the remaining set V \ Vϵ can be displaced from itself by
arbitrary small energy.

172
Chapter 5 Compactly supported symplectic mappings
ϕ
ψ
Fig. 5.5
Deﬁnition. A special capacity c for open sets in R2n is a map c, associating to an
open set U, a number c(U) or +∞such that
(A.1)
c(U) > 0 if U ̸= ∅and c(B2(1) × R2n−2) < ∞.
(A.2)
If ψ : R2n →R2n is a diﬀeomorphism satisfying
ψ∗ω = αω for some α ̸= 0 and ψ(U) ⊂V
then |α|c(U) ≤c(V ).
Evidently every capacity is a special capacity. However, in contrast to the
axioms of the capacity in Chapter 2, the maps ψ in (A.2) are required to be
deﬁned on all of R2n.
Theorem 8. The displacement energy e is a special capacity in R2n satisfying, in
addition, e(B(1)) = π = e(Z(1)).
Proof. It remains to prove that e satisﬁes A.2. Assume that ψ satisﬁes ψ∗ω = αω.
Then E(ψϕψ−1) = |α|E(ϕ) for ϕ ∈D. If ϕ(U) ∩U = ∅then ψϕψ−1(ψ(U)) ∩
ψ(U) = ∅, implying that e(ψ(U)) = |α|e(U). If now U ⊂V then e(U) ≤e(V ) so
that ψ(U) ⊂V implies e(ψ(U)) = |α|e(U) ≤e(V ) as desired. ■
It should be mentioned that e is not a capacity as deﬁned in Chapter 2, and
c0 ̸= e. Indeed, consider an annulus A in R2.
Then c0(A) = π(R2 −r2), i.e., is the area of A. If ψ(A) ∩A = ∅for ψ ∈D
which is, by deﬁnition, deﬁned on all of R2, then necessarily ψ(B(R)) ∩B(R) = ∅.
Using that ψ is an area-preserving map, this follows from topological reasons, and
we see that
e(A) = e(B(R)) = πR2 > c0(A).

5.6 Comparison of the metric d on D with the C0-metric
173
O
r
R
ψ
ψ(A)
A
Fig. 5.6
5.6
Comparison of the metric d on D with the C0-metric
In order to understand the metric d introduced on D in Section 5.1, it is useful
to compare it with more familiar metrics. One can ask, for example, whether a
symplectic map which is C0-close to the identity mapping can be generated by a
C0-small Hamiltonian. This is not necessarily so as we shall show by means of an
example in R2. We shall construct a sequence ψn ∈D satisfying
|ψn −id|C0
−→
0
d(ψn, id)
−→
∞.
(5.26)
We take the Hamiltonians Hn ∈H deﬁned by
Hn(x, y) =
1
nfn(x)χn(x, y)
on
R2.
Here fn ∈C∞(R) satisﬁes fn(x) = x for 0 ≤x ≤n2 and looks as in Fig. 5.7:
fn
n2
O
n2
x
Fig. 5.7

174
Chapter 5 Compactly supported symplectic mappings
Moreover, χn ∈C∞
c (R2) is a smooth cut-oﬀfunction which is equal to 1 on
the region given by 0 ≤x ≤n2 and 0 ≤y ≤2
n and decreases slowly such that
|∇χn| ≤
1
n2 .
y
2
n
1
n
O
Un
n2
x
Fig. 5.8
Let ψn = ϕHn ∈D be the maps generated by Hn. Since the set Un in Fig.
5.8 is displaced from itself by ψn we can estimate, in view of Theorem 8, that
d(ψn, id) = E(ψn) ≥c0(Un) = n. On the other hand |ψn −id|C0 ≤C
n proving the
claim (5.26).
For the example it is important that the diameters of the supports of the
maps ψn grow. Indeed, there is no such example if we keep the supports uniformly
bounded. This follows from the following estimate due to H. Hofer in [117]:
Theorem 9. For every ϕ, ψ ∈D
d(ϕ, ψ) ≤C
diameter supp (ϕψ−1) |ϕ −ψ|C0
where C is a constant and C ≤128.
The remainder of this section is devoted to the proof of this statement which
compares the intrinsic metric d with the C0-metric. We need some technical prepa-
rations and start with a deﬁnition. The notation in the following refers to the
symplectic splitting R2n = R2 ⊕· · · ⊕R2 and the coordinates (x1, y1, . . . , xn, yn).
If a ∈R we shall denote by {x1 = a} the hyperplane {(x, y) ∈R2n|x1 = a}.
Deﬁnition. Denote by S1, . . . , Sk any subsets of R2n. We call them properly sepa-
rated, if for every choice Aj ⊂Sj of bounded subsets, there exist a map τ ∈D and
numbers a1 < a2 < · · · < ak−1 such that the sets τ(Aj) lie in diﬀerent components
of R2n\ ∪k−1
j=1 {x1 = aj}. Relabeling the sets we can assume that τ(Aj) is to the

5.6 Comparison of the metric d on D with the C0-metric
175
left of τ(Aj+1):
· · ·
{x1 = a1}
{x1 = a2}
{x1 = ak−1}
τ(A1)
τ(A2)
τ(Ak)
Lemma 8. Assume the sets S1, . . . Sk are bounded and already properly separated
by parallel hyperplanes. Then, given R > 0, there exist a map τ = τR ∈D and
vectors v1, v2, . . . , vk ∈R2n, with v1 = 0, satisfying
τ(x) = x + vj
if
x ∈Sj
for all 1 ≤j ≤k and
dist

τ(Sj), τ(Si)

≥R
if
i ̸= j.
Proof. Choosing 0 = α1 < α2 < . . . < αk, we introduce the vectors
vj = αje1
∈R2n,
where e1 = (1, 0, 0, . . . 0) and the translated sets
St
j : = Sj + tvj.
For every t ≥0 these sets are mutually disjoint and separated by hyperplanes.
The mutual distances go to inﬁnity as t →∞. Deﬁne the function
H :

t≥0
{t} ×

k
j=1
St
j

→R
by setting H(t, x, y) = αjy1 if (x, y) ∈St
j. We can consider H as a restriction of
a smooth Hamiltonian function on R × R2n having compact support in the space
variables for t in a compact interval. If we take αj = R(j −1), the time t-map ϕt
H
acts on each set Sj as a translation Sj ·t = Sj +tαje1. Hence the mutual distances
between the sets Sj · t are at least tR, thus proving the lemma. ■

176
Chapter 5 Compactly supported symplectic mappings
Lemma 9. Assume ψ1, ψ2, . . . , ψk ∈D have properly separated supports. Then
E(ψ1ψ2 · · · ψk) ≤2 max
j
E(ψj).
Note that these maps necessarily commute.
Proof. Since the energy E is invariant under conjugation we may assume that
we already have the supports of ψj separated by parallel hyperplanes. A priori
we cannot assume that the generating Hamiltonians have disjoint supports. We,
therefore, use a trick. Let ψj = ϕHj and denote the support by Sj =
supp (ψj).
Choose R > 0 such that
supp(Hj) ⊂[0, 1] × BR(x∗
j)
where x∗
j ∈Sj. Now choose vectors vj such that the sets BR(Sj +vj) are disjoint. If
τ ∈D is the map associated to the Sj guaranteed by Lemma 8, we set ˆψj = τψjτ −1
and ﬁnd
E(ψ1ψ2 · · · ψk) = E( ˆψ1 ˆψ2 . . . ˆ
ψk).
By construction, supp( ˆψj) = τ(Sj) = Sj + vj. Observe now that miraculously
ˆψj(x) = τψjτ −1(x) = ψj(x −vj) + vj = τjψjτ −1
j
(x)
for all x ∈R2n, with the translation τj(x) = x + vj. Therefore, in view of the
transformation law of Hamiltonian vector ﬁelds,
ˆψj = ϕ ˆ
Hj
with
ˆ
Hj(t, x) = Hj(t, x −vj).
By construction, supp( ˆ
Hj) are now mutually disjoint and hence
ˆψ1 ˆ
ψ2 · · · ˆ
ψk = ϕ ˆ
H
with ˆH =
ˆ
H1 + ˆ
H2 + · · · + ˆ
Hk. Given ε > 0, we choose Hj such that ∥Hj∥≤
E(ψj) + ε, so that
E(ψ1ψ2 · · · ψk) = E(ϕ ˆ
H) ≤∥ˆH∥.
By deﬁnition,
∥ˆH∥=
1

0

sup
x
ˆHt −inf
x
ˆHt

dt,
and since the supports of ˆHj are disjoint we have
∥ˆH∥≤2 max
j
1

0

sup
x
ˆHj −inf
x
ˆHj

dt = 2 max
j
∥ˆHj∥≤2 max
j
E(ψj) + 2ε.
This holds for every ε > 0 and the lemma is proved. ■

5.6 Comparison of the metric d on D with the C0-metric
177
It is useful for the following to introduce a reﬁnement of the displacement
energy. If S ⊂R2n is any subset we deﬁne the proper displacement energy ep(S)
as
ep(S) = inf{a > 0
 for every bounded subset A ⊂S
there exists ψ ∈D satisfying E(ψ) ≤a and
A and ψ(A) are properly separated

.
One veriﬁes, as in the previous section, that ep is a special capacity for sets in
R2n which satisﬁes, in addition, ep(B(1)) = π = ep(Z(1)). It is an astonishing
observation that the energy of a mapping ψ ∈D can be estimated through the
proper displacement energy of the smallest support needed in order to generate
the map by a Hamiltonian. This was discovered by J.C. Sikorav in [198]:
Theorem 10. (J.C. Sikorav) If H ∈H satisﬁes supp(H) ⊂[0, 1] × U, then
E(ϕH) ≤16 ep(U).
Proof. Denote by ϕt
H the time evolution of the map ϕH. Given ε > 0, we take N
so large that the maps ψk deﬁned by
ψk = ϕtk
H , with tk =
k
N , 0 ≤k ≤N
satisfy
ψ0 = id ,
ψN = ϕH
supp (ψk) ⊂S ⊂U ,
0 ≤k ≤N
d(ψk, ψk+1) < ε
0 ≤k ≤N −1.
Here S ⊂R2n is a bounded subset of U. By deﬁnition of ep there exists a ϕ ∈D
such that S and ϕ(S) are properly separated and
E(ϕ) ≤ep(S) + ε ≤ep(U) + ε.
We next construct a distinguished sequence of mappings ϕj ∈D for 0 ≤j ≤
2N. If j = 0, 1 we set ϕ0 = id and ϕ1 = ϕ. In order to deﬁne ϕ2, we ﬁrst choose a
map σ2 ∈D as in the proof of Lemma 8 which satisﬁes for s ∈S
σ2(s) = s ,
σ2

ϕ(s)

= ϕ(s) + v2
with a vector v2 ∈R2n.
Setting ϕ2 = σ2ϕσ−1
2 , we have for s ∈S that ϕ2(s) = σ2(ϕ(s)) = ϕ(s) + v2.
Similarly, we construct all the maps ϕj by
ϕj = σjϕσ−1
j
,
2 ≤j ≤2N

178
Chapter 5 Compactly supported symplectic mappings
choosing the translation vectors vj so that the sequence Sj of sets deﬁned by
Sj = ϕj(S),
0 ≤j ≤2N
are disjoint and pairwise properly separated. Deﬁning now the mappings αj, βk ∈
D by
αj
=
ϕ2j−1ψjϕ−1
2j−1,
1 ≤j ≤N
βk
=
ϕ2kψ−1
k ϕ−1
2k ,
0 ≤k ≤N
we see that
supp (αj)
⊂
S2j−1,
1 ≤j ≤N
supp (βk)
⊂
S2k,
0 ≤k ≤N.
By construction the supports are mutually disjoint so that any two mappings
among α1, . . . , αN, β0, β1 . . . βN commute. Since βN = ϕ2NϕHϕ−1
2N and β0 = id we
can use the commutativity of the maps and compute
E(ϕH)
=
E(βN) = E

βN(
N−1

k=0
αk+1 βk)(
N−1

k=0
αk+1 βk)−1
=
E

(
N
k=1
αkβk)(
N−1

k=0
αk+1βk)−1
≤
2 max
1≤k≤N E(αkβk) + 2
max
0≤k≤N−1 E(αk+1βk),
where we have used Lemma 9.
Observing that αkβk = ϕ2k−1 (ψk ϕ−1
2k−1 ϕ2k ψ−1
k )ϕ−1
2k and recalling that the
maps ϕj are all conjugated to ϕ, we can estimate
E(αkβk) ≤4E(ϕ) ≤4ep(U) + 4ε.
Similarly, we ﬁnd by using αk+1 βk = ϕ2k+1 (ψk+1 ψ−1
k )(ψk ϕ−1
2k+1 ϕ2k ψ−1
k )ϕ−1
2k
that
E(αk+1βk)
≤
4E(ϕ) + d(ψk, ψk+1)
≤
4ep(U) + 4ε + ε.
Summing up we have E(ϕH) ≤16ep(U) + 18ε, and since ε > 0 is arbitrary, the
proof of Sikorav’s theorem is ﬁnished. ■
The following localization of Sikorav’s estimate will be crucial for the proof of
Theorem 9.
Lemma 10. Let ψ ∈D with ψ ̸= id and let δ > |ψ −id|C0. For every Q ⊂R2n
open and satisfying Q ∩supp(ψ) ̸= ∅, there exists a ϕ ∈D satisfying
(i)
ϕ|Q = ψ|Q
(ii)
supp(ϕ) ⊂U
(iii)
E(ϕ) ≤16 ep(U),

5.6 Comparison of the metric d on D with the C0-metric
179
where U = Bδ(Q) ∩C. Here C is the convex hull of supp(ψ) and Bδ(Q) =
{x| dist (x, Q) < δ}.
Proof. By deﬁnition there is a smooth homotopy ψt for 0 ≤t ≤1 connecting the
identity map with ψ. Choosing x0 ∈Q∩int supp(ψ), we ﬁnd an R > 0 such that
supp(ψt) ⊂BR(x0) ,
0 ≤t ≤1.
(5.27)
Deﬁne now the 2-parameter family ψt
s ∈D for 0 ≤s < 1 and 0 ≤t ≤1 by setting
ψt
s(x) = sx0 + (1 −s)ψt
x0 + x −x0
1 −s

.
One veriﬁes readily that
supp(ψt
s)
⊂
B(1−s)R(x0)
(5.28)
supp(ψ1
s)
⊂
C.
(5.29)
We can ﬁx s0 ∈(0, 1) such that
B(1−s0)R(x0) ⊂Q ∩C,
(5.30)
and deﬁne a new homotopy ϕτ ∈D for 0 ≤τ ≤1 connecting the identity with ψ
by setting
ϕτ = ψt(τ)
s(τ),
where the smooth functions t(τ) and s(τ) are chosen such that the curve Γ(τ) :=
(t(τ), s(τ)) ⊂R2 looks as follows:
1
O
Γ
ψ
t
1
id
s
s(0)
Fig. 5.9
Here the curve Γ runs in the shaded area for 0 ≤τ ≤1
2 and on the vertical part
for 1
2 ≤τ ≤1. It now follows from (5.28), (5.29) and (5.30) that supp(ϕτ) ⊂C
for all 0 ≤τ ≤1 and supp(ϕτ) ⊂Q ∩C if 0 ≤τ ≤1
2. Moreover, |ϕτ −id|C0 ≤
(1 −s(τ))|ψ −id|C0 if 1
2 ≤τ ≤1, as one veriﬁes readily. Consequently,
ϕτ(Q) ⊂Bd(Q) ,
0 ≤τ ≤1
(5.31)

180
Chapter 5 Compactly supported symplectic mappings
with d := |ψ−id|C0. Since supp(ϕτ) ⊂C and C is convex, this homotopy is gener-
ated by a Hamiltonian F ∈H, ϕτ = ϕτ
F having its support contained in [0, 1] × C.
Cutting oﬀthis function smoothly, we ﬁnd a new Hamiltonian K satisfying
K
Bd(Q)
=
F
Bd(Q)
supp(K)
⊂
[0, 1] × Bδ(Q).
In view of (5.31) we conclude for the time 1-maps that ϕK|Q = ϕF |Q = ψ|Q.
Moreover, supp(K) ⊂([0, 1] × Bδ(Q)) ∩
supp(F) ⊂[0, 1] × (Bδ(Q) ∩C) and
hence supp(ϕK) ⊂Bδ(Q)∩C. We can apply Sikorav’s theorem and ﬁnd E(ϕK) ≤
16ep(Bδ(Q) ∩C). Setting ϕ = ϕK ∈D the lemma is proved. ■
We shall need another consequence of Sikorav’s theorem.
Lemma 11. Assume ψ ∈D and supp(ψ) ⊂U. If U = (a1, a2) × (b1, b2) ⊕R2n−2,
then
E(ψ) ≤16(a2 −a1)(b2 −b1).
Proof. Since U is convex we construct, as in the ﬁrst part of the above proof, a
Hamiltonian H ∈H satisfying supp(H) ⊂[0, 1] × U and generating ψ = ϕH.
One veriﬁes easily, by arguing as in the proof of the Corollary to Theorem 7, that
ep(U)
=
(a2 −a1)(b2 −b1) so that the lemma is a consequence of Sikorav’s
theorem above. ■
Proof of Theorem 9. We consider ψ ∈D with ψ ̸= id and choose
δ > d = |ψ −id|C0.
Deﬁning the sequence aj by a0 = 0 and ak+1 = ak + 2δ, we set
Qk =

(ak −ε, ak + ε) × R

⊕R2n−2
with 0 < ε < (δ −d). Since supp(ψ) is compact, the index set I,
I =

k
 Qk ∩supp(ψ) ̸= ∅

is a ﬁnite set. Choose now d < δ1 < (δ −ε). In view of the localization Lemma 10
we ﬁnd, for every k ∈I, a map ϕk ∈D satisfying
(i)
ϕk|Qk = ψ | Qk
(ii)
supp(ϕk) ⊂Uk
(iii)
E(ϕk) ≤16 ep(Uk)

5.6 Comparison of the metric d on D with the C0-metric
181
where Uk = Bδ1(Qk)∩convex hull supp(ψ). Since Bδ1(Qk)=(ak−ε−δ1,ak+ε+δ1)
×R2n−1 and 2(ε + δ1) < 2δ, these sets are properly separated and, therefore, the
sets supp(ϕk) are also. Abbreviating
R :=
diameter supp ψ,
we ﬁnd a sequence bk ∈R such that for every k ∈I
Uk ⊂(ak −ε −δ1, ak + ε + δ1) ×

bk −R
2 , bk + R
2

⊕R2n−2.
Using Lemma 9 and Lemma 11 we can estimate
E
 
k∈I
ϕk

≤
2 max
k∈I E(ϕk)
≤
2 max
k∈I 16 · 2(ε + δ1) · R
≤
64 R · δ.
(5.32)
Deﬁne ϑ = ( 
k∈I
ϕk)−1. In view of (i) above and using the fact that supp(ϕk) are
properly separated, we conclude for x ∈Qk that
ψϑ(x) = ψϕ−1
k (x) = ψψ−1(x) = x.
We see that the map ψϑ is the identity map on disjoint strips, hence it leaves every
gap in between invariant so that it can be written as a composition of maps having
their supports in the gaps. More precisely there exists a ﬁnite sequence ˆϕj ∈D,
with 1 ≤j ≤l, satisfying
ψ ◦ϑ =
l
j=1
ˆϕj,
with supp( ˆϕj) properly separated and
supp( ˆϕj) ⊂ˆ
Uj,
where ˆ
Uj = [ ˆaj −δ +ε, ˆaj +(δ −ε)]×[ ˆbj −R
2 , ˆbj + R
2 ]⊕R2n−2 for suitable numbers
ˆaj and ˆbj. We can apply Lemma 9 and Lemma 11 and ﬁnd, using the estimate
(5.32),
E(ψ)
=
E(ψϑϑ−1) ≤E(ψϑ) + E(ϑ−1)
=
E( ˆϕj) + E( ϕk)
≤
2 · 16 · 2(δ −ε)R + 64 Rδ
≤
128 R · δ.

182
Chapter 5 Compactly supported symplectic mappings
This holds true for every δ > d = |ψ −id|C0, and we conclude that
E(ψ) ≤128 R |ψ −id|C0,
where R = diameter supp(ψ). Observing that |ϕψ−1−id|C0 = |ϕ−ψ|C0, we ﬁnally
arrive at the desired estimate
d(ϕ, ψ) = E(ϕ ◦ψ−1) ≤128 diameter supp(ϕ ◦ψ−1) |ϕ −ψ|C0,
and the proof of Theorem 9 is ﬁnished. ■
Finally, we shall complete the proof of Theorem 1 by proving the estimate
E(ψ) ≤16 inf{πr2 | there is a ϕ ∈D with supp (ϕψϕ−1) ⊂Z(r)} ,
(5.33)
for every ψ ∈D. Given ε > 0, we pick a map ϑ ∈D and R > 0 satisfying
supp(ϑψϑ−1) ⊂Z(R) and
πR2 −ε ≤inf{πr2 | there is a ϕ ∈D with supp(ϕψϕ−1) ⊂Z(r)}.
Since E(ψ) = E(ϑψϑ−1) we may assume without loss of generality that supp(ψ) ⊂
Z(R). Choosing now H ∈H with ψH = ψ, we consider the corresponding arc
t →ψt and deﬁne for s > 0
ψs
t (x) = sψt(1
sx).
For a suitable function t →s(t) we ﬁnd an arc t →ψs(t)
t
= ¯ψt which is generated
by a Hamiltonian function K ∈H satisfying supp(K) ⊂[0, 1] × Z(R) and ¯ψ1 = ψ.
Therefore, in view of Sikorav’s estimate
E(ψ) ≤16πR2 ,
using that the proper displacement energy of Z(R) is equal to πR2. Since ε > 0 was
arbitrarily chosen the announced estimate (5.33) follows and the proof of Theorem
1 is ﬁnally completed.
5.7
Fixed points and geodesics on D
A symplectic diﬀeomorphism ϕ ∈D possesses, as we have demonstrated, a dis-
tinguished ﬁxed point x = ϕ(x) guaranteed by the minimax principle. Its action
satisﬁes A(x, ϕ) = γ(ϕ). Periodic points are ﬁxed points x = ϕN(x) of higher
iterates of ϕ and we call the ﬁnite set
O(x) = {x, ϕ(x), ϕ(ϕ(x)), . . . , ϕN(x) = x}
the orbit of x. The following qualitative existence theorem is due to C. Viterbo
[218].

5.7 Fixed points and geodesics on D
183
Theorem 11. Every ϕ ∈D−\ {id} possesses inﬁnitely many periodic points xj =
ϕj(xj) having positive actions
A(xj, ϕj) ≥γ(ϕ) > 0
and disjoint orbits
O(xj) ∩O(xk) = ∅,
k ̸= j.
The statement also holds if ϕ ∈D+ \ {id}. Actually, by using his homological
version of a special capacity in R2n, C. Viterbo proved a more general statement
assuming merely that ϕ ∈D satisﬁes ϕ ̸= id.
Proof. In view of the assumption on ϕ we ﬁnd H ∈H satisfying ϕ = ϕH and H ≤0
with H ̸= 0. Hence γ(ϕ) > 0 in view of Proposition 13. Since supp(H) ⊂[0, 1]×U
for some bounded open U, we have
0 < γ(ϕ) ≤e(U).
Indeed, if ψ ∈D satisﬁes ψ(U) ∩U = ∅then, in view of Proposition 15, γ(ϕ) ≤
E(ψ) implying that γ(ϕ) ≤e(U). Since ϕ ≤id, we ﬁnd, using the monotonicity of
γ, the estimate
0 < γ(ϕ) ≤γ(ϕ2) ≤. . . ≤γ(ϕj) ≤e(U)
for all the iterates of ϕ. For every j there is a ﬁxed point xj = ϕj(xj) satisfying
γ(ϕj) = A(xj, ϕj) ≥γ(ϕ) > 0, and it remains to show that inﬁnitely many of
them belong to disjoint periodic orbits. To see this observe that if xk = ϕl(xj) for
some l, then
γ(ϕk) = A(xk, ϕk) = lA(xj, ϕj) = lγ(ϕj),
as the computation shows, so that the theorem follows in view of the above bound
for the sequence γ(ϕj). ■
If the time-independent Hamiltonian function H ∈C∞
c (R2n) does not vanish
then the Hamiltonian system ˙x = XH(x) possesses many periodic solutions lying
on regular energy surfaces of H, as we have seen in Chapter 4. Nothing is known,
however, about their periods and we would like to add a qualitative existence
statement for fast periodic solutions. Recall that if H ∈C∞
c (U) satisﬁes ||H|| >
c0(U), then the system ˙x = XH(x) possesses a nonconstant T-periodic solution
where the period is contained in the interval 0 < T ≤1, provided H ≤0 and
H = inf H on an open subset. This follows immediately from the deﬁnition of the
capacity c0(U). Generalizing this statement we shall prove:
Theorem 12. Assume H ∈C∞
c (U) does not vanish. Then the Hamiltonian system
˙x = XH(x) has a nonconstant T-periodic solution with 0 < T ≤T ∗, where
T ∗> c0(U)
|H|C0 .

184
Chapter 5 Compactly supported symplectic mappings
Proof. By using the arguments of Chapter 5, the proof will follow readily from
the deﬁnition of the capacity c0. Let H+ = max H and H−= −min H, then
|H|C0 = max{H+, H−}. Assume H+ ≥H−so that H+ > 0 since H ̸≡0. Choose
ε > 0 so small that T ∗(H+ −ε) > c0(U). Next choose a smooth function f : R →
[0, ∞] satisfying f(s) = 0 if s ≤0 and f(s) = H+ −ε if s ≥H+ and moreover
0 ≤f′(s) ≤1. Then deﬁne the Hamiltonian K by
K = T ∗f ◦H.
Since ∥K∥> c0(U) there exists a nonconstant τ-periodic solution x(t) of
˙x = XK(x) = T ∗f′(H)XH(x)
of period 0 < τ ≤1. The function T ∗f′(H(x(t))) = c is a positive constant,
hence y(t) = x( 1
ct) is a nonconstant periodic solution of ˙y = XH(y) having period
cτ ≤T ∗. The same argument applies if H−≥H+ and the statement is proved. ■
With a smooth arc ϕt : [a, b] →D, we associate its length by deﬁning
length

ϕ[a,b]
=
b

a
[sup
x Ht −inf
x Ht]dt.
The function H is the unique smooth function on [a, b] × R2n of compact support
which generates the arc and which is determined by ( d
dtϕt)◦(ϕt)−1(x) = J∇H(t, x)
for a ≤t ≤b. In the metric space (D, d) we then call a smooth path ϕt : [a, b] →D
a geodesic path if, locally, its length is the shortest connection of the endpoints;
i.e., if
length (ϕ[t,s]) = d(ϕt, ϕs)
for all a ≤t < s ≤b with |t −s| suﬃciently small. Examples of geodesics are the
ﬂows for time-independent Hamiltonians H ∈C∞
c (R2n), as we shall show. In this
case it follows from the deﬁnition that
length (ϕ[s,t]
H ) = |t −s| · ||H||.
Proposition 17. If H ∈C∞
c (R2n) is independent of time, then the ﬂow ϕt = ϕt
H is
a geodesic in D which moreover satisﬁes
d(ϕt, ϕs) = |t −s| · ||H|| = length (ϕ[t,s])
for all t < s satisfying |t −s| < 2π
h , where h := supx |Hxx|.
Proof. We recall ﬁrst that a T−periodic solution of a time-independent vector
ﬁeld is necessarily a constant solution if the period is too small. Indeed assume
x(t) is a T−periodic solution of ˙x = XH(x). Normalizing the period we deﬁne
y(t) = x(tT), which solves
˙y = XT H(y), and y(0) = y(1).

5.7 Fixed points and geodesics on D
185
Note that for every 1-periodic loop z in R2n having mean value zero, we have the
L2- estimate ||z|| ≤
1
2π|| ˙z||. This is seen by looking at the Fourier series. Applying
this observation to ˙y whose mean value vanishes, we can estimate
|| ˙y|| ≤
1
2π||¨y|| =
1
2π T · ||Hxx(y(t)) ˙y|| ≤Th
2π || ˙y||,
which implies ˙y = 0 if hT < 2π, so that y(t) = y(0) is a constant solution.
Therefore, if hT < 2π, we conclude from Proposition 16 that E(ϕT H) = T||H||.
Hence assuming |t −s| < 2π
h , we can compute the distance as
d(ϕs, ϕt)
=
E((ϕs)−1 ◦ϕt)
=
E(ϕt−s
H ) = E(ϕ(t−s)H) = |t −s|||H||,
as claimed in the proposition. ■
Evidently, for autonomous Hamiltonians,
d(ϕt, id) = t||H|| = length (ϕ[0,t])
as long as ϕt admits no nontrivial ﬁxed point. By deﬁnition, a geodesic in D
minimizes locally the length of the curve. Globally this need not be true as the
following example shows.
Proposition 18. For every ϵ > 0 there exists a geodesic path ϕt in D for 0 ≤t ≤1
starting at ϕ0 = id and satisfying, for all 0 ≤t ≤1,
d(ϕt, id) ≤ϵ
and length (ϕ[0,t]) ≥t
ϵ.
Proof. Pick an open neighborhood U of the origin satisfying 16e(U) < ϵ and choose
a time-independent H ∈C∞
c (U) with ||H|| > 1
ϵ . Then, by Sikorav’s estimate, we
ﬁnd if 0 ≤t ≤1, that d(ϕt, id) = E(ϕtH) ≤16e(U) < ϵ, while length (ϕ[0,t]) =
t||H|| ≥t
ϵ as claimed. ■
We see in particular that the metric space (D, d) is not a “ﬂat” space. “Locally”
however the space (D, d) is “ﬂat”. This has been proved recently by M. Bialy
and L. Polterovich [22], who gave a complete description of a geodesic path in
(D, d) which we shall describe next. In order to avoid pathologies, we consider
only smooth paths g : I →D, with I ⊂R an interval, which are regular. This
requires that the Hamiltonian H : I × R2n →R generating the path g satisﬁes
||Ht|| ̸= 0, for t ∈I. Recall that Ht(x) = H(t, x) and, as above
||Ht|| = max
x
Ht(x) −min
x Ht(x) .

186
Chapter 5 Compactly supported symplectic mappings
Deﬁnition. A regular smooth path g : I →D is called a minimal geodesic if for all
a, b ∈I, with a < b,
length (g|[a,b]) = d

g(a), g(b)

.
Recall that the length is deﬁned by
length (g|[a,b]) : =
b

a
||Ht||dt ,
where H ∈H generates the path g. Consequently g : I →D is a geodesic path if for
every c ∈I there is an interval Ic ⊂I such that g : Ic →D is a minimal geodesic.
In order to characterize geodesics in terms of their generating Hamiltonians, the
following concepts introduced in [22] turn out to be useful.
Deﬁnition. A smooth Hamiltonian H : I × R2n →R is called quasi-autonomous if
there exists two points x+, x−∈R2n satisfying
max
x
Ht(x)
=
H(t, x+)
for all t ∈I
min
x
Ht(x)
=
H(t, x−)
for all t ∈I .
Correspondingly a function H on I ×R2n is called locally quasi-autonomous if, for
every c ∈I, there is an interval Ic ⊂I such that H is quasi-autonomous on Ic×R2n.
Special examples are of course autonomous Hamiltonians. Denote by C = C∞
c (Rn)
the linear space of autonomous Hamiltonians equipped with the metric associated
to the norm ||H|| = max H −min H. We call a smooth nonvanishing arc f : I →C
a minimal geodesic of C if for every a < b in I, we have
||f(b) −f(a)|| =
b

a
|| d
dsf(s)|| ds .
In this terminology a Hamiltonian H ∈H is quasi-autonomous precisely if it is
the time derivative of a geodesic arc in C, in view of Lemma 13 below.
The following theorem extends Proposition 17 and gives a complete description
of geodesics on (D, d).
Theorem 13. (Bialy-Polterovich) A regular smooth path g : I →D is geodesic if
and only if it is generated by a locally quasi-autonomous Hamiltonian.
The rest of this section is devoted to the proof of this theorem. The result will be
deduced from a criterion for minimal geodesics which we formulate ﬁrst. Recall that
with a map ϕ ∈D we have associated in Section 5.2 its action spectrum σ(ϕ) =
{A(x, ϕ)|x ∈Fix(ϕ)}. The action spectrum is a compact and nowhere dense set,
as we have seen in Proposition 8. In general, it does not depend continuously on

5.7 Fixed points and geodesics on D
187
ϕ. To a smooth path g : [a, b] →D there belongs a bifurcation diagram Σ(g). It is
deﬁned as the set
Σ(g) : = {(t, s) ∈R2 a < t ≤b and s ∈σ

g(t)g(a)−1
} .
If the path g : [a, b] →D is generated by a quasi-autonomous Hamiltonian H, we
have the distinguished ﬁxed points x+, x−∈Fix(g(t)g(a)−1) for every a ≤t ≤b.
Their actions are the functions γ+, γ−: [a, b] →R deﬁned by
γ+(t) = −
t

a
Ht(x−)dt ,
γ−(t) = −
t

a
Ht(x+)dt .
Note that γ−(t) ≤0 ≤γ+(t). The corresponding graphs Γ±(t) = (t, γ±(t)) are two
distinguished curves in the bifurcation diagram which are continuous. Of course,
the curve Γ(t) = (t, 0) is always contained in Σ(g) since the Hamiltonians consid-
ered have compact supports.
Deﬁnition. Consider a regular path g : [a, b] →D generated by a quasi-autonomous
Hamiltonian. Then its bifurcation diagram Σ(g) is called simple if the following
conditions are satisﬁed.
(i) Whenever γ+(t) does not vanish identically the following holds true for every
τ > a. There is no continous curve (t, u(t)) ⊂Σ(g), τ ≤t ≤b connecting the point
(τ, u(τ)) ∈Γ+(τ) with a point (b, u(b)) where γ−(b) < u(b) < γ+(b).
(ii) Similarly we require for every τ > a, whenever γ−(t) is not identically 0, that
there is no continuous curve (t, u(t)) ⊂Σ(g), τ ≤t ≤b connecting (τ, u(τ)) ∈
Γ−(τ) with (b, u(b)) satisfying γ−(b) < u(b) < γ+(b).
The ﬁrst of the ﬁgures in Fig. 5.10 illustrates a diagram which is not simple.
The second ﬁgure belongs to a regular path g : [0, b] →D starting for simplic-
ity’s sake at the identity, whose generating Hamiltonian H does not depend on
time t, and which, moreover, does not admit any nonconstant periodic orbits. In
this example the ﬁxed points are the critical points x of H and their actions are
the lines
A

x, g(t)

= −
t

0
H(x)dt = −tH(x) .
The corresponding bifurcation diagram is simple because the critical levels of H
are nowhere dense.
Theorem 14. (Bialy-Polterovich) Assume the regular smooth path g : I →D is
generated by a quasi-autonomous Hamiltonian. If the bifurcation diagram Σ(g) is
simple, then g is a minimal geodesic.

188
Chapter 5 Compactly supported symplectic mappings
a
s
τ
b
Γ+
Γ−
t
a
s
b
Γ+
Γ−
t
Fig. 5.10
Proof. The proof is based on the properties of the distinguished map γ : D →R
introduced in Section 5.3 above. This map is, in particular, continuous and hence
deﬁnes a continuous section of the bifurcation diagram. To simplify matters we
assume that I = [0, 1] and g(0) = id. The crucial step is the following lemma which
extends Proposition 16.
Lemma 12. Assume H is quasi-autonomous and generates a path g : [0, 1] →D
with a simple bifurcation diagram Σ(g). Then
γ

g(1)

= γ+(1),
γ

g(1)−1
= −γ−(1) .
Proof. Recall that γ−(t) ≤γ(g(t)) ≤γ+(t) for all t, in view of Lemma 4. First
we prove that γ(g(τ)) = γ+(τ) if τ > 0 suﬃciently small. Reparameterizing, we
introduce F(t, x) = τH(τt, x) for 0 ≤t ≤1 and τ > 0. We may assume that
x−= 0 so that F(t, x) ≤F(t, 0) + π|x|2 if τ is suﬃciently small. Proceeding as in
the proof of Proposition 10, we use the monotonicity of γ and estimate
γ

g(τ)

= γ(F) ≥−
1

0
F(t, 0)dt = −
τ

0
H(t, 0)dt = γ+(τ) .
Hence γ(g(τ)) = γ+(τ) as claimed. Similarly, γ(g(τ)−1) ≥−γ−(τ) provided τ
is suﬃciently small. The statements for t = 1 now follow from the assumptions
on Σ(g). Indeed, if γ+(t) ≡0 then H(t, x) ≥0 and hence by monotonicity of
γ (Proposition 10) γ(g(1)) = 0 as desired. Assume now γ+(t) ̸≡0. Proceeding
indirectly, we assume that γ(g(1)) < γ+(1) and claim that γ−(1) < γ(g(1)) <
γ+(1). Indeed, if γ−(1) ≡0, then H(t, x) ≤0 and hence γ(g(1)) > 0 by Proposition
10. If γ−(1) < 0 we just note that γ ≥0 and the claim is proved. Consider now

5.7 Fixed points and geodesics on D
189
the graph Γ deﬁned by the continuous function u(t) = min{γ(g(t)), γ+(t)}, for
τ ≤t ≤1. Then Γ ⊂Σ(g) and we arrive at a contradiction to the required
simplicity of Σ(g). We have proved the ﬁrst statement in the lemma; similarly one
obtains the second statement. ■
The proof of Theorem 14 follows now in view of Proposition 14; abbreviating
g(1) = ϕ we can estimate
γ+(1) −γ−(1)
≤
γ(ϕ) + γ(ϕ−1) ≤d(id, ϕ) ≤
≤
length (g|[0,1]) = γ+(1) −γ−(1) ,
where we have used in the last equality that the Hamiltonian is quasi-autonomous.
We conclude that d(id, ϕ) = length (g|[0,1]). Hence g is a minimal geodesic and the
proof of Theorem 14 is completed. ■
A technically convenient way to describe a small neighborhood of a point ϕ ∈D
uses the linear space of generating functions which is explained in Appendix 1.
Assume ϕ ∈D is near the identity mapping and, in symplectic coordinates, given
by ϕ : (x, y) →(ξ, η) = ϕ(x, y) ∈R2n. Then it can implicitly be represented in
terms of a single function S by the relations
x
=
ξ +
∂
∂y S(ξ, y)
η
=
y +
∂
∂ξ S(ξ, y) ,
(5.34)
where S ∈C∞
c (R2n) is also of compact support and small in the C2-sense. Con-
versely every such function S deﬁnes by means of the formula (5.34), a symplectic
map ϕ ∈D near the identity. We, therefore, have a mapping
Φ : S →Φ(S) ∈D ,
deﬁned in a small neighborhood of zero in C∞
c (R2n). To an arc St(ξ, y) = S(t, ξ, y),
t ∈I, there belongs a path g(t) = Φ(St) ∈D for t ∈I. It is generated by a
Hamiltonian H ∈H. Its relation to St is the Hamilton-Jacobi equation
H

t, ξ, y +
∂
∂ξ S(t, ξ, y)

=
∂
∂tS(t, ξ, y) ,
which holds true in our situation for all (ξ, y) ∈R2n. This is, of course, well-known,
and we refer to the book by C.L. Siegel and J. Moser [196]. In the linear space
C∞
c (R2n) of generating functions we introduce the norm ||S|| := max S −min S
and the associated metric d0(S0, S1) := ||S0 −S1||. The arc length of a smooth arc
St, a ≤t ≤b is, therefore, deﬁned by
length (S[a,b]) =
b

a
||∂S
∂t ||dt .

190
Chapter 5 Compactly supported symplectic mappings
A smooth arc St, t ∈I is called a minimal geodesic, if for every a, b ∈I, a < b, we
have d0(Sa, Sb) = length (S[a,b]) or, explicitly, if
||Sa −Sb|| =
b

a
||∂S
∂t ||dt
for all a < b ,
a, b ∈I. Examples of minimal geodesics are straight lines (1 −t)Sa + tSb = St
connecting two points Sa and Sb. Lemma 13 below expresses the fact that a smooth
arc St is a minimal geodesic if and only if ∂S
∂t is quasi-autonomous. It will turn
out that the image of a geodesic under the map Φ is a geodesic in the metric
space (D, d). Indeed we shall deduce from Theorem 14 that Φ is an isometry. This
shows, in particular, that the metric space (D, d) is “locally ﬂat” if one considers
the space (C∞
c (R2n), || · ||) as a “ﬂat” space.
Theorem 15.
d

Φ(S0), Φ(S1)

= ||S0 −S1|| .
Proof. Deﬁne the arc St = (1−t)S0+tS1, 0 ≤t ≤1 connecting S0 with S1. We shall
prove that the path g(t) := Φ(St) is a minimal geodesic in (D, d). It connects g(0) =
Φ(S0) with g(1) = Φ(S1). In order to verify the assumptions of Theorem 14 we
shall prove that Σ(g) is simple and the generating Hamiltonian quasi-autonomous.
Consider a ﬁxed point (ξ, η) ∈R2n of g(τ)g(0)−1, i.e., g(τ)g(0)−1(ξ, η) = (ξ, η)
for some 0 < τ ≤1 ﬁxed. Introducing (ξ, η) = g(0)(x, y), this is equivalent to the
conditions
(ξ, η) = g(τ)(x, y) = g(0)(x, y) .
Expressed in terms of the generating functions Sτ of g(τ), respectively, S0 of g(0)
by means of the formula (5.34), this is equivalent to
x
=
ξ +
∂
∂y Sτ(ξ, y)
=
ξ +
∂
∂y S0(ξ, y)
η
=
y +
∂
∂ξ Sτ(ξ, y)
=
y +
∂
∂ξ S0(ξ, y) .
Consequently ∇Sτ(ξ, y) = ∇S0(ξ, y) and hence ∇(S0−S1)(ξ, y) = 0 and, reversing
the steps, g(t)g(0)−1(ξ, η) = (ξ, η) for all t. We have veriﬁed that the periodic
solutions of H correspond one-to-one to the critical points of the function S0 −S1
and are, moreover, all constant. From the Hamilton-Jacobi equation we deduce for
the critical points (ξ, η) = g(0)(x, y), that
H

t, ξ, y +
∂
∂ξ S0(ξ, y)

= (S1 −S0)(ξ, y) .
Hence, the Hamiltonian function is quasi-autonomous. The action of a ﬁxed point
P = (ξ, η) which corresponds to the critical point (ξ, y) of S1 −S0 is easily com-

5.7 Fixed points and geodesics on D
191
puted:
A

P, g(t)g(0)−1
=
−
t
0
Hs(P)ds = −
t
0
(S1 −S0)(ξ, y)ds
=
−t(S1 −S0)(ξ, y) .
Since the critical values are nowhere dense, the bifurcation diagram Σ(g) is simple.
We have veriﬁed for the path g(t) that the assumptions of Theorem 14 are met.
Using that ||Ht|| = ||S1 −S0|| we ﬁnd
d

Φ(S0), Φ(S1)

=
1

0
||Ht||dt = ||S1 −S0||
and the proof of Theorem 15 is completed. ■
In order to deduce Theorem 13 from Theorem 15, we start with two technical
observations. In order to check that a function is quasi-autonomous the following
lemma is helpful.
Lemma 13. A smooth function H : [a, b] × R2n →R of compact support is quasi-
autonomous if and only if
b

a
||Ht||dt = ||
b

a
H(t, x)dt|| .
Proof. Clearly, if H is quasi-autonomous, the equation follows from the deﬁnition of
the norm. Assuming the equality to hold we now show that H is quasi-autonomous.
By deﬁnition, there exists a compact set K ⊂R2n containing the supports of Ht
for every t. Deﬁning the closed sets
Kt = {x ∈K | Ht(x) = max Ht} ,
a ≤t ≤b,
we have to prove that  Kt ̸= ∅, where a ≤t ≤b. Since K has the ﬁnite intersection
property it suﬃces to verify that Kt1 ∩· · · ∩KtN ̸= ∅for every ﬁnite sequence
t1 < t2 < · · · < tN. Arguing by contradiction, we assume Kt1 ∩· · · ∩KtN = ∅.
Thus we ﬁnd an ε > 0 satisfying
N

j=1
Htj(x) + ε ≤
N

j=1
max Htj
for all x .
Consequently, by taking small intervals around the tj’s we ﬁnd an open set V ⊂
[a, b] on which

V
Ht(x)dt + ε
2 ≤

V
max Htdt
for all x ,

192
Chapter 5 Compactly supported symplectic mappings
and thus arrive at the contradiction
||
b

a
Ht|| + ε
2 ≤
b

a
||Ht|| .
Arguing similarly for the minimum, the proof is completed. ■
Lemma 14. Consider an arc St, t ∈I = [a, b] and the corresponding arc Ht, t ∈I
generating the path g(t) = Φ(St) in D. Then ∂S
∂t is quasi-autonomous in I if and
only if H is quasi-autonomous in I. Moreover, in this case the distinguished points
P± = (ξ±, η±) respectively Q± = (ξ±, y±) of min and max for H respectively
∂S
∂t , are related by (5.34), the generating function being S = Sa. In addition
H(t, P±) = ∂S
∂t (t, Q±) for all t ∈I.
Proof. If H is quasi-autonomous with respect to the distinguished points P±, then
g(t)g(0)−1(P±) = P± for all a ≤t ≤b. Hence, arguing as in the proof of Theorem
15, ∇St(Q±) is independent of t and so ∇St(Q±) = ∇Sa(Q±). Consequently
∂
∂tS
is quasi-autonomous in view of the Hamilton-Jacobi equation. Conversely, if ∂S
∂t
takes on its max and min at the ﬁxed points Q±, then St −Sa also takes on its
min and max at these points, for all t ∈I. Hence ∇St(Q±) = ∇Sa(Q±) and
consequently g(t)g(0)−1(P±) = P±. In view of the Hamilton-Jacobi equation, the
function H is quasi-autonomous with respect to P±. ■
Proof of Theorem 13. The metric in (D, d) is bi-invariant and hence we may con-
sider a path g(t) ∈D near the identity g(0) = id, where t ∈[−ε, ε] = I for a
suﬃciently small ε > 0. It is generated by H ∈H and g(t) = Φ(St), t ∈I for an
arc St of generating functions. We have to show that g is a minimal geodesic in
(D, d) if and only if H, or equivalently ∂S
∂t (by Lemma 14), is quasi-autonomous.
But by Lemma 13, ∂S
∂t is quasi-autonomous if and only if
||
ε

−ε
∂S
∂t || =
ε

−ε
||∂S
∂t || .
(5.35)
The right hand side is, in view of the Hamilton-Jacobi equation, equal to
ε

−ε
||∂S
∂t || =
ε

−ε
||Ht|| =
length (g|[−ε,ε]) ,
while the left hand side is equal to
||
ε

−ε
∂S
∂t || = ||Sε −S−ε|| = d

g(−ε), g(ε)

,
in view of Theorem 15. Hence (5.35) holds if and only if g(t) is a minimal geodesic
for t ∈I. The proof of Theorem 13 is completed. ■

Chapter 6
The Arnold conjecture, Floer homology and
symplectic homology
In the sixties V.I. Arnold announced several seminal and fruitful conjectures in
symplectic topology. This chapter is devoted to his conjecture about ﬁxed points
of symplectic mappings which originates in questions of celestial mechanics dating
back to the turn of the century. Reformulated dynamically, this conjecture gives
a lower bound for the number of global forced oscillations of a time-dependent
Hamiltonian vector ﬁeld on a compact symplectic manifold in terms of the topol-
ogy of this manifold. Forced oscillations are singled out by the action principle;
solutions of the conjecture gave rise to new ideas and techniques in the calculus
of variations and in nonlinear elliptic systems. In particular, it prompted A. Floer
1986 to the construction of his homology theory.
We shall describe in the following the history of the Arnold conjecture and start
with a proof for the special case of the standard torus T 2n in Section 6.2. Here we
can make use of the action principle in the H1/2 setting as introduced in Chapter 3.
But this time the aim is to ﬁnd all its critical points. Our strategy is inspired by C.
Conley’s topological approach to dynamical systems: we shall study the structure
of the set of all bounded solutions of the regularized gradient equation belonging
to the action functional deﬁned on the contractible loops of T 2n. This invariant set
consists of the critical points together with all their connecting orbits. This way
the study of the gradient ﬂow in the inﬁnite dimensional loop space is reduced to
the study of a gradient like continuous ﬂow of a compact metric space whose rest
points are the desired critical points. It turns out that the compact space contains
the cohomology of the torus. The number of rest points is then estimated by the
Ljusternik-Schnirelman theory presented in Section 6.3.
A reinterpretation of the geometric ideas underlying the proof of the torus case
in terms of partial diﬀerential equations will lead us in Section 6.4 to the proof of
the Arnold conjecture for the larger class of compact symplectic manifolds (M, ω)
satisfying [ω]|π2(M) = 0. In this general case there is no natural regularization
and we are forced to investigate the structure of the bounded solutions of the
not regularized gradient system. They are smooth solutions of a special system
of ﬁrst order elliptic partial diﬀerential equations of Cauchy-Riemann type. These
solutions are related to M. Gromov’s pseudo holomorphic curves in (M, ω). The
crucial compactness of the solution set will be established by means of an analytical
technique sometimes called bubbling oﬀanalysis. In order to get an insight into
the topology of the solution set we shall use an approximation procedure. We
approximate the bounded solutions by solutions of a special elliptic boundary value
H. Hofer and E. Zehnder, Symplectic Invariants and Hamiltonian Dynamics,  
193
Modern Birkhäuser Classics, DOI 10.1007/978-3-0348-0104-1_6, © Springer Basel AG 2011

194
Chapter 6 The Arnold conjecture, Floer homology . . .
problem, to which we can apply Fredholm theory based on the Cauchy-Riemann
operator. Using the continuity property of the Alexander-Spanier cohomology we
then deduce the Arnold conjecture by the Ljusternik-Schnirelman theory as in the
torus case.
Assuming, in addition, all the forced oscillations to be nondegenerate, the geo-
metric ideas will lead us in Section 6.5 to A. Floer’s new approach to Morse theory
and Floer homology. It makes use of an additional structure of the set of bounded
solutions of the not regularized gradient equation: namely, since M is compact,
there are only ﬁnitely many nondegenerate forced oscillations and every bounded
solution of the gradient equation tends in forward and backward time asymptot-
ically (exponentially) to a speciﬁc forced oscillation of the Hamiltonian system.
The 1-dimensional connections determine an algebraic complex generated by the
forced oscillations, its grading is deﬁned by a Maslov-type index associated with a
nondegenerate forced oscillation, which plays the role of the Morse index. We shall
merely outline Floer’s beautiful ideas. A combination of Floer’s construction with
our construction of the special capacity c0 of Chapter 3 results in a symplectic
homology theory which, however, is not yet in its ﬁnal form. It will be sketched,
without proofs, in Section 6.6. The technical requirements of these theories, in
particular, the intricate transversality arguments are quite advanced and beyond
the scope of this book. Chapter 6 is, in contrast to the previous chapters, not
self-contained.
6.1
The Arnold conjecture on symplectic ﬁxed points
In his search for periodic solutions in the restricted three body problem of celestial
mechanics, H. Poincar´e constructed an area-preserving section map of an annulus
A on the energy surface. The annulus was bounded by the so-called direct and
retrograde periodic orbits. It inspired him in 1912 to formulate the following the-
orem [177]. It is called the last geometric theorem of Poincar´e announced shortly
before his death. It was later proved by G. Birkhoﬀ.
Theorem 1. (Poincar´e-Birkhoff) Every area preserving and orientation preserving
homeomorphism of an annulus A := S1 × [a, b] rotating the two boundaries in
opposite directions possesses at least 2 ﬁxed points in the interior (Fig.6.1).
The strength of this theorem is that it provides at once inﬁnitely many peri-
odic points if it is applied to the iterates, which leads to inﬁnitely many periodic
solutions in applications, see [24]. In 1913 G. Birkhoﬀ[23] succeeded in proving
this theorem by an ingenious but strictly two dimensional argument. Note that the
theorem is global in nature; there are no interior assumptions required on the map-
ping. It is not a topological result: it is wrong if the area-preserving assumption
is dropped. S. Lefschetz, who undoubtedly would have enjoyed demonstrating to
Birkhoﬀthat the famous Poincar´e-Birkhoﬀﬁxed point theorem is a trivial conse-

6.1 The Arnold conjecture on symplectic fixed points
195
A
Fig. 6.1
quence of his own topological ﬁxed point theory, had to admit defeat: he could not
apply his theory since the Euler characteristic of the annulus vanishes, χ(A) = 0.
The Euler characteristic of the two sphere (χ(S2) = 2) does not vanish, hence
by Lefschetz’s theory every continuous map f of S2 homotopic to the identity
possesses at least one ﬁxed point, as is, of course, well-known. The map f may
have only one ﬁxed point, as for example, the translation z →z+1 on the Riemann
sphere shows: its only ﬁxed point is the north pole at ∞.
∞
S2
Fig. 6.2
It is, however, a striking fact that f possesses at least 2 ﬁxed points if it is, in
addition, area preserving.
Theorem 2. (N. Nikishin, C. Simon, 1974) A homeomorphism f of S2 homotopic
to the identity which preserves a regular measure µ has at least 2 ﬁxed points.
In particular, every diﬀeomorphism of S2 leaving an area form invariant f∗ω = ω
possesses at least 2 ﬁxed points.
Proof. The second statement is a consequence of the ﬁrst one. Indeed, the map has
degree 1, hence is homotopic to the identity by H. Hopf’s theorem. To prove the
ﬁrst statement, assume P ∗∈S2 is the ﬁxed point of f guaranteed by the Lefschetz
theory. Then the map g := f|(S2\P ∗) can be identiﬁed with a homeomorphism of
the plane R2. If g had no ﬁxed point then by Brouwer’s translation theorem there
would be an open set D having the property that gj(D) = fj(D) are mutually

196
Chapter 6 The Arnold conjecture, Floer homology . . .
disjoint for all j > 0. But then, since f preserves the measure
n

j=0
µ

fj(D)

= (n + 1) µ(D) ≤µ(S2) ,
for every integer n ≥1 and hence µ(D) = 0. This contradicts the assumption that
µ(U) does not vanish for an open set U. ■
The translation theorem of Brouwer is a very special two dimensional phe-
nomenon which attracted the attention of many mathematicians, [33, 34, 80, 101,
109, 141, 206]. The same argument as in Theorem 2, used by C. Loewner in the
sixties in his Stanford lectures, also shows that a measure-preserving homeomor-
phism of the open disc in the plane always possesses at least one ﬁxed point. This
is clearly false if the homeomorphism does not preserve a regular measure. The
proofs by C. Simon [200] and N. Nikishin [169] of the theorem above use a diﬀer-
ent argument. They show that the ﬁxed point index j(P) for an area preserving
diﬀeomorphism in the plane is less then or equal to 1. Thus the ﬁxed point formula
χ(S2) =  j(P) requires at least 2 ﬁxed points.
V. Arnold observed in [11] that the Poincar´e-Birkhoﬀresult could be derived
from a ﬁxed point theorem for the two dimensional torus T 2 = R2/Z2 constructed
by gluing together two identical annuli along their boundaries; we refer to [46] for
details.
T 2 = R2
Z2
χ(T 2) = 0.
Fig. 6.3
In contrast to S2, the Lefschetz ﬁxed point theory is not adequate for precisely
this surface, since χ(T 2) = 0. There are, indeed, area preserving diﬀeomorphisms
of the torus without ﬁxed points, as the translation maps on the covering space
R2 given by
X = x + c1 ,
Y = y + c2,
(6.1)
demonstrate. Consequently, the class of symplectic mappings on T 2 needs to be
restricted if it is required that they possess ﬁxed points. With V. Arnold we con-
sider measure-preserving diﬀeomorphisms ψ of T 2 which are homologous to the
identity map, and hence are, on R2, given by ψ : (x, y) →(X, Y ):
X
=
x + p(x, y)
Y
=
y + q(x, y)
(6.2)

6.1 The Arnold conjecture on symplectic fixed points
197
with periodic functions p and q, we require that ψ preserves the center of mass,
hence excluding in particular the translations. Summarizing, the diﬀeomorphisms
ψ of T 2 are required to meet the following conditions
(i)
ψ is homologous to the identity
(ii)
dX ∧dY = dx ∧dy
(iii)

T 2 p = 0 =

T 2 q .
Proposition 1. A diﬀeomorphism ψ of T 2 satisfying (i)–(iii) possesses ≥3 ﬁxed
points provided it is suﬃciently close (in the C1 norm) to the identity. If, in
addition, all the ﬁxed points are nondegenerate, then ψ possesses ≥4 ﬁxed points.
Proof. Since ψ : (x, y) →(X, Y ) is suﬃciently close to the identity map it can be
represented by a generating function F : R2 →R in the implicit form
X
=
x + ∂F
∂Y (x, Y )
y
=
Y + ∂F
∂x (x, Y ) ,
(6.3)
see Appendix 1. The gradient of F is periodic and it follows from assumption (iii)
that the function F itself is periodic and hence is a function on T 2. We conclude
from (6.3) that the ﬁxed points of ψ on T 2 are in one-to-one correspondence with
the critical points of the function F on T 2. By the Ljusternik-Schnirelman theory
every smooth function on the 2-torus possesses at least 3 critical points (see Section
6.3 below), and by the Morse theory it possesses at least 4 critical points, if a priori
we know that all the critical points are nondegenerate. The proposition follows. ■
There are, of course, symplectic maps on T 2, even ones close to the identity
having precisely 3 ﬁxed points. To see this we take a smooth function G on T 2
with precisely 3 critical points. An example of such a function is
G(x, y) = sin πx · sin πy · sin π(x + y) ,
whose level lines look as shown in Fig. 6.4.
G has a maximum in the left triangle, a minimum in the right triangle and
a monkey saddle in the corners of the unit square. If ε > 0 is small, we deﬁne a
map ψ : (x, y) →(X, Y ) implicitly by (6.3) with the generating function F = εG.
Then ψ is close to the identity, satisﬁes (i)−(iii), and has 3 ﬁxed points, namely
the critical points of G on T 2. Similarly, the function G(x, y) = sin 2πx + sin 2πy
deﬁnes a map ψ having 4 ﬁxed points on T 2 which are all nondegenerate. ■
The idea of relating ﬁxed points of symplectic mappings to critical points of
an associated function goes back to H. Poincar´e [176] and is used quite frequently

198
Chapter 6 The Arnold conjecture, Floer homology . . .
T 2 = R2
2πZ2
Fig. 6.4
in order to establish local existence results. For example A. Weinstein [222, 224]
makes use of it in order to show that a symplectic diﬀeomorphism of a compact and
simply connected symplectic manifold M possesses at least as many ﬁxed points
as a function on M possesses critical points provided it is close to the identity
map. For more general results and references we refer to J. Moser [165]. In sharp
contrast to all these perturbation results, the Arnold conjecture we now turn to
asks for ﬁxed points of arbitrary symplectic mappings. For the special case of
T 2, V. Arnold conjectured in [10] that Proposition 1 holds without the restrictive
assumption that ψ is close to the identity map.
In order to introduce the restricted class of symplectic diﬀeomorphisms suitable
for ﬁxed point theory we ﬁrst mention that for a diﬀeomorphism ψ on T 2, the
assumptions (i)–(iii) are equivalent to the requirement that ψ belongs to the ﬂow
of a time-dependent Hamiltonian vector ﬁeld XH on T 2. The proof is not easy and
we refer to C. Conley and E. Zehnder, [55]. Hence ψ is a Hamiltonian map of T 2
in view of the following:
Deﬁnition. Let (M, ω) be a symplectic manifold. A diﬀeomorphism ψ of M is called
Hamiltonian if it belongs to the ﬂow of a time-dependent Hamiltonian vector ﬁeld
XH on M. To be more precise there exists a smooth function H : S1 × M →R
such that ψ = ϕ1 where the family ϕt, t ∈R of symplectic diﬀeomorphisms of M
satisﬁes
d
dt ϕt
=
XH(ϕt)
ϕ0
=
id .
In his thesis, A. Banyaga [16] shows that a map ψ is a Hamiltonian map if
and only if it belongs to the commutator subgroup of the identity component
of the group of symplectic diﬀeomorphisms of M. In addition, he proves that ψ
is Hamiltonian if and only if the Calabi invariant of ψ vanishes. A Hamiltonian
map being homotopic to the identity has, of course, a ﬁxed point according to
Lefschetz’s theory provided the Euler characteristic χ(M) does not vanish.

6.1 The Arnold conjecture on symplectic fixed points
199
The Arnold conjecture. Every Hamiltonian diﬀeomorphism ψ of a compact sym-
plectic manifold (M, ω) possesses at least as many ﬁxed points as a function
F : M →R on M possesses critical points.
In view of the Ljusternik-Schnirelman theory and the Morse theory for func-
tions on M we reformulate this conjecture in the following somewhat weaker form:
# { ﬁxed points of ψ } ≥
cup-length of M + 1 ,
and, if a priori all the ﬁxed points of ψ are nondegenerate,
≥
sum of the Betti numbers of
M .
Recall that a ﬁxed point p of ψ is called nondegenerate if 1 is not an eigenvalue of
the linearized map dψ(p) ∈L(TpM). The cup-length of a manifold M is deﬁned
as the longest product in the cohomology ring: CL(M) = sup{k|∃α1, α2, . . . αk ∈
H∗(M) with dim αj ≥1 such that α1 ∪α2 ∪· · · ∪αk ̸= 0}. Let SB(M) denote
the sum of the Betti numbers βk = dim Hk(M), 0 ≤k ≤dim M. Introducing the
Poincar´e polynomial
P(t, M) =
dim M

k=0
βk tk ,
βk = dim Hk(M)
we have SB(M) = P(1, M) and, of course, P(−1, M) = χ(M) is the Euler char-
acteristic of M. In the special case of a 2n-dimensional torus T 2n these topological
invariants are CL(T 2n) = 2n and SB(T 2n) = 22n while χ(T 2n) = 0. In particular,
for T 2 in Proposition 1 we see that 3 = CL(T 2) + 1 and 4 = SB(T 2).
We prefer to reformulate the conjecture dynamically. A Hamiltonian map ψ is,
by deﬁnition, the time 1-map of the ﬂow of the Hamiltonian equation ˙x = XH(x)
on M with a smooth function H : R × M →R periodic in time, H(t, x) =
H(t + 1, x). Consequently, p is a ﬁxed point of ψ if and only if p = x(0) is the
initial condition of a solution x(t) of the Hamiltonian equation which is periodic
of period 1 and hence satisﬁes x(t + 1) = x(t) for all t ∈R. Such a solution is
also called a forced oscillation. Instead of looking for ﬁxed points of a map, we can
look as well for periodic solutions of a time-dependent Hamiltonian vector ﬁeld;
the Arnold conjecture formulates a universal lower bound on the number of forced
oscillations in terms of topological invariants of the symplectic manifold.
If (M, ω) is a compact symplectic manifold and H : R×M →R a smooth time
periodic function H(t + 1, x) = H(t, x), then for the time-dependent Hamiltonian
equation
˙x = XH(x) ,
x ∈M
the following holds:
# { contractible 1-periodic solutions }
≥CL(M) + 1 .
( ≥SB(M) if all the contractible 1-periodic solutions are nondegenerate) .

200
Chapter 6 The Arnold conjecture, Floer homology . . .
Here a periodic solution x is called nondegenerate if 1 is not a Floquet multiplier
of x. Since there are no assumptions on the function H, we only look for periodic
solutions which are contractible. Indeed the arc length of a 1-periodic solution
x(t) is small if the Hamiltonian vector ﬁeld is small, so that the orbit is necessarily
contractible. This follows from the formula
length (x) =
1

0
| ˙x(t)|dt =
1

0
|XH(x(t))|dt ,
where we have chosen a Riemannian metric on M.
Take now an almost complex structure J on the symplectic manifold (M, ω)
satisfying ωx(v, Ju) = gx(v, u) for all v, u ∈TxM, where g is a Riemannian metric
on M. Then every Hamiltonian vector ﬁeld XH on M is of the form
˙x = Jx∇H(t, x) ,
x ∈M
where the gradient of H with respect to x is deﬁned by means of the associated
Riemannian metric g. Assume now that H(t, x) = H(x) does not depend on the
time and is, moreover, suﬃciently small in the C2 sense. Then every 1-periodic
solution x(t) is contractible and hence contained in a Darboux chart so that, by
the argument in the proof of Proposition 17 in Chapter 5, it is necessarily constant,
i.e., x(t) ≡x(0). Consequently, the 1-periodic solutions are precisely the critical
points of the function H : M →R and the Arnold conjecture is reduced, in this
special case, to the theories of Ljusternik-Schnirelman and Morse about critical
points of functions.
In the special case of a standard torus (T 2n, ω0), the Arnold conjecture was
proved in 1983 by C. Conley and E. Zehnder [55]. The proof is based on the action
principle for forced oscillations. The same principle allowed A. Floer [82], 1986
and J.C. Sikorav [198] 1985 to conﬁrm the conjecture for large classes of sym-
plectic manifolds admitting compatible Riemannian structures with nonnegative
sectional curvatures. These classes include, in particular, all oriented surfaces Sg
with positive genus g.
g = 3
Fig. 6.5
CL(Sg) = 3 ,
SB(Sg) = 2 + 2g .

6.1 The Arnold conjecture on symplectic fixed points
201
The earlier proofs by Ya. Eliashberg for surfaces [77] are based on diﬀerent
ideas and were never published. The case S2 = CP 1 was extended to higher
dimensions by B. Fortune [93, 94] in 1985, who veriﬁed the conjecture for CP n
with its standard symplectic structure. Accordingly every Hamiltonian map on
CP n has ≥n + 1 ﬁxed points. Note that in this case CL + 1 = SB = χ = n + 1,
so that in the nondegenerate case the result follows already from the Lefschetz
theorem. A. Weinstein pointed out in [227] 1986 that the Arnold conjecture is true
for every symplectic manifold (M, ω) if the Hamiltonian map ψ is generated by
a Hamiltonian vector ﬁeld suﬃciently small in the C0 norm. We shall describe
the more recent global results and developments in Sections 4 and 5. It will turn
out, in particular, that the forced oscillations of a Hamiltonian vector ﬁeld XH
on a compact symplectic manifold are more intimately related to the topology of
the underlying manifold M than it is suggested by the conjecture above. First we
study in detail the model case of the standard torus.
Before we turn to the proofs of the Arnold conjecture in higher dimensions, we
would like to refer to some recent two dimensional results related to the Poincar´e-
Birkhoﬀtheorem. As mentioned before, the Arnold conjecture for the two torus
T 2 may be viewed as a generalization of this theorem for diﬀeomorphisms and
one may ask whether there is a topological analogue. Quite recently, P. Le Calvez
[139] succeeded in proving that every homeomorphism of T 2 homotopic to the
identity, preserving a regular measure and preserving the center of gravity (i.e.,
there is a lift to R2 satisfying the condition (iii) in (6.2) above) possesses at least
three ﬁxed points. Earlier M. Flucher [91] found two ﬁxed points by extending
techniques and arguments of J. Franks [96, 97]. Attempts to generalize these results
for homeomorphisms of higher dimensional tori must fail: on T n, n ≥3, there are
measure-preserving diﬀeomorphisms satisfying the assumptions analogous to the
T 2 case without any ﬁxed points, see M. Flucher [91]. An interesting modiﬁcation
of the Poincar´e-Birkhoﬀtheorem for the annulus has been discovered by J.M.
Gambaudo and P. Le Calvez [103] and, independently, by J. Franks [100]:
Theorem 3. A diﬀeomorphism of the closed annulus A = R/Z × [0, 1], isotopic to
the identity and preserving a regular measure, possesses inﬁnitely many periodic
orbits in the interior of A, provided it has a ﬁxed point.
This result has astonishing consequences. By introducing polar coordinates
(r, ϑ) in the neighborhood of a ﬁxed point, one can blow up the ﬁxed point into
an invariant circle deﬁned by r = 0. Given two ﬁxed points on a sphere S2, one
obtains in this way a map of a closed annulus and hence deduces from Theorem 3
the following:
Corollary. Consider a C2-diﬀeomorphism of S2 preserving the orientation and
preserving a regular measure. If it has 3 ﬁxed points then it has inﬁnitely many
periodic orbits.
In view of Theorem 2 such a diﬀeomorphism always has at least two ﬁxed
points and it is suﬃcient to assume one of them to be hyperbolic. Indeed, the

202
Chapter 6 The Arnold conjecture, Floer homology . . .
blown up invariant circle of a hyperbolic ﬁxed point contains 4 ﬁxed points so that
Theorem 3 applies.
J. Franks used Theorem 3 for his breakthrough in an old problem of Rieman-
nian geometry. In [25] G. Birkhoﬀdescribes a reduction of the study of the geodesic
ﬂow on a Riemannian two-sphere to the study of an area preserving annulus map
whose periodic points correspond to the closed geodesics. He showed, for positive
Gaussian curvature, that, associated to a simple closed geodesic, such a Birkhoﬀ
annulus map is deﬁned. Franks, assuming that S2 is equipped with a Riemannian
metric having a simple closed geodesic for which the associated Birkhoﬀannu-
lus map is deﬁned, demonstrates, that this map has a ﬁxed point and hence, by
Theorem 3, inﬁnitely many periodic points. If, on the other hand, a Riemannian
metric on S2 has no simple closed geodesic for which the Birkhoﬀannulus map
is deﬁned, then V. Bangert [15] established inﬁnitely many closed geodesics by
variational methods applied to the energy functional on the loop space of S2. It is
well known that every Riemann sphere possesses a simple closed geodesic. Hence,
on a Riemann two-sphere there are always inﬁnitely many closed geodesics which
are distinct as point sets.
References related to the Poincar´e-Birkhoﬀtheorem and its generalizations are:
[4, 35, 38, 49, 48, 61, 91, 95, 96, 97, 98, 99, 103, 109, 138, 140, 141, 139, 200, 206,
143].
6.2
The model case of the torus
We shall prove the Arnold conjecture for the standard torus (T 2n, ω0), where T 2n =
R2n/Z2n and where ω0 denotes the symplectic structure induced by the standard
one from R2n. A Hamiltonian vector ﬁeld on this torus depending periodically on
time is given simply by a smooth function H : R × R2n →R, (t, x) →H(t, x)
which is periodic in all its variables:
H(t + 1, x) = H(t, x) = H(t, x + j) ,
all j ∈Z2n .
(6.4)
The associated Hamiltonian system is represented by
˙x = J ∇H(t, x) ,
x ∈R2n .
(6.5)
A periodic solution t →x(t) = x(t + 1) ∈R2n of (6.5) represents a contractible
periodic solution of the vector ﬁeld on T 2n. In contrast, a solution of the form
x(t) = jt + ξ(t), with j ̸= 0 ∈Z2n and ξ(t) = ξ(t + 1) represents a 1-periodic
solution on T 2n which is not contractible. Yet, such solutions might not exist
on T 2n, as was explained in the previous section. We shall prove the following
qualitative existence statement for Hamiltonian ﬂows:

6.2 The model case of the torus
203
Theorem 3. (C. Conley and E. Zehnder) Every smooth time periodic Hamiltonian
vector ﬁeld on the standard torus (T 2n, ω0) possesses at least 2n + 1 contractible
1-periodic solutions (resp. at least 22n if all of them are nondegenerate).
We shall merely consider the ﬁrst statement which does not impose any as-
sumptions on the Hamiltonian on T 2n. Our proof in the following is based on the
action principle and is designed to illustrate, in the analytical framework of Chap-
ter 3, some of the underlying geometric ideas which will be used for a large class
of symplectic manifolds described later.
A contractible loop S1 →T 2n is the projection of a smooth loop x : S1 →R2n
represented by its Fourier expansion
x(t) =

k∈Z
e2πk Jt xk ,
xk ∈R2n .
(6.6)
Two such loops x and y on R2n induce the same contractible loop on T 2n iﬀ
x(t) −y(t) = j ∈Z2n for all t ∈R, so that xk = yk for k ̸= 0 and x0 = y0 + j.
Consequently, we can identify the space of smooth contractible loops on T 2n with
the space
T 2n × E∞,
where E∞:= {x ∈C∞(S1, R2n)|
 1
0 x(t)dt = 0}. This space is the quotient under
the Z2n-action of the space R2n × E∞∼= C∞(S1, R2n). Using the same analytical
framework as in Chapter 3, we now replace the space of smooth loops E∞by the
Sobolev space
E =

x ∈H1/2(S1, R2n) |
1

0
x(t)dt = 0

,
(6.7)
which has an orthogonal splitting E = E−⊕E+ according to the decomposition
x =

k̸=0
e2πk Jt xk =

k<0
+

k>0
= x−+ x+ .
We shall denote the loop space of R2n by Ω= R2n × E and the loop space on T 2n
by Ω= T 2n × E. The smooth action ϕ : Ω→R is deﬁned by
ϕ(x) = a(x) −b(x) ,
x ∈Ω
(6.8)
where
a(x) = −1
2||x−||2 + 1
2||x+||2
(6.9)
stems from the symplectic structure, and where
b(x) =
1

0
H

t, x(t)

dt
(6.10)

204
Chapter 6 The Arnold conjecture, Floer homology . . .
contains the given Hamiltonian H. Clearly, ϕ is invariant under the Z2n action:
ϕ(x + j) = ϕ(x), x ∈Ω, and hence deﬁnes a smooth function on the loop space
Ω= T 2n × E of contractible loops on the torus. We know from Chapter 3 that a
critical point x ∈Ωof ϕ,
∇ϕ(x) = 0 ,
(6.11)
is actually a smooth loop. The critical points are precisely the desired contractible
periodic solutions of (6.5) we are looking for. We recall that the gradient of ϕ in
H1/2 is given by
∇ϕ(x) = −x−+ x+ −b′(x) ,
(6.12)
where we denote by b′(x) the gradient of b in H1/2. Also recall that b′(x) =
j∗∇b(x), with the L2-gradient ∇b(x) = ∇H(x) ∈L2 of b, and j∗: L2 →H1/2
the compact operator introduced in Chapter 3. Since H is a periodic function, its
gradient on R2n is bounded and hence b′ maps Ωinto a compact subset of Ω. In
order to ﬁnd the critical points of ϕ, we shall study the quite artiﬁcial gradient
ﬂow on the loop space deﬁned by
d
ds x = −∇ϕ(x) ,
x ∈Ω.
(6.13)
The solutions x(s) = x · s of this smooth ordinary diﬀerential equation exist for
all times since the gradient satisﬁes a uniform Lipschitz estimate (see Chapter 3).
They are represented by
x · s
=
es x−+ x0 + e−sx+ −K(s, x)
K(s, x) :
=
s
0

es−τP −+ P 0 + e−s+τP +
b′(x · τ)dτ .
(6.14)
The linear operators P −, P 0 and P + denote the orthogonal projections belonging
to the splitting Ω= E0 ⊕E−⊕E+, where E0 = R2n. In order to motivate our
strategy to ﬁnd critical points, we ﬁrst consider a bounded orbit of the ﬂow. By
deﬁnition, such an orbit x · s satisﬁes
sup
s∈R
|ϕ(x · s)| < ∞.
(6.15)
For every T > 0,
ϕ(x · T) −ϕ

x · (−T)

= −
T

−T
|∇ϕ(x · s)|2ds .
(6.16)
Since s →ϕ(x · s) is monotone the limit as T →+∞exists in view of (6.15), so
that
∞

−∞
||∇ϕ(x · s)||2 ds < ∞.
(6.17)

6.2 The model case of the torus
205
Thus we ﬁnd a sequence sn →∞such that ∇ϕ(x·sn) →0 and ϕ(x·sn) →d ∈R.
Since ϕ satisﬁes the P.S. condition, a subsequence of x · sn converges in Ωto a
critical point y, ∇ϕ(y) = 0, which, as we already pointed out, is a periodic solution
of the Hamiltonian equation. Moreover, the set Cr(ϕ) of all critical points of ϕ is
compact and one veriﬁes readily that
x · s −→Cr(ϕ) as s →±∞
(6.18)
for every bounded orbit of (6.13). We see that every bounded orbit comes from
and tends to the set of critical points and hence is a so-called connecting orbit.
As an illustration we consider the situation where the Hamiltonian H ≡0
vanishes. Here the ﬂow on T 2n × E is determined by the symplectic structure
alone and is explicitly given by
x · s = esx−+ x0 + e−sx+ ,
where x = x−+ x0 + x+ ∈Ω.
E+
E−
T 2n
Fig. 6.6
The bounded orbits coincide with the critical points x0 ∈T 2n which are the
constant orbits. Moreover the torus T 2n is a transversally hyperbolic invariant
manifold of the ﬂow. The general case is a “compact perturbation” of this picture.
The set of bounded orbits is very small, most of the solutions of (6.13) are un-
bounded in forward and backward time. This is in sharp contrast to the behaviour
of the ﬂow of a variational principle bounded from below where every orbit of the

206
Chapter 6 The Arnold conjecture, Floer homology . . .
negative gradient ﬂow tends to the set of critical points in forward time. The clas-
sical example is the energy functional on the loop space of a compact Riemannian
manifold in the geometric problem of closed geodesics, see W. Klingenberg [127]
and V. Bangert [14].
Our strategy now is to study the structure of the set X∞of bounded orbits
of the gradient ﬂow (6.13), i.e., the critical points together with the connecting
orbits. We shall show that this set is a compact space which inherits the topology
of the underlying manifold T 2n. On this invariant set X∞there is, moreover, a
continuous gradient-like ﬂow induced by the gradient ﬂow (6.13), whose rest points
are precisely the critical points of the functional. Theorem 3 will then follow from
a well-known estimate for the rest points of a continuous gradient-like ﬂow of a
compact space which goes back to Ljusternik-Schnirelman.
Fig. 6.7
Proof of Theorem 3. We deﬁne the set 
X∞of bounded solutions of the negative
gradient equation (6.13) by

X∞=

u ∈C∞
R, R2n × E
 			
d
dsu(s) + ∇ϕ

u(s)

= 0 for s ∈R , sup
s∈R
			ϕ

u(s)
			 < ∞

.
(6.19)
The set 
X∞is equipped with the topology induced from C∞(R, R2n ×E): namely
that of uniform convergence of all derivatives on compact subsets of R. Note that

X∞contains, in particular, the constant solutions satisfying u(s) = u(0) for all
s ∈R; they are critical points of ϕ. On 
X∞we have a natural action of Z2n.
Indeed, since the Hamiltonian is periodic, we conclude that ϕ(u + j) = ϕ(u) and

6.2 The model case of the torus
207
∇ϕ(u + j) = ∇ϕ(u) for all j. In the following we shall denote by X∞the quotient
space. It is deﬁned by (6.20) with R2n replaced by R2n/Z2n = T 2n. Observe now
that the gradient equation (6.13) is independent of time, where the role of the time
is played by the parameter s. Consequently, with s →u(s), also s →u(s + τ) is
a solution for every ﬁxed τ ∈R. This shift in time induces a continuous R-action
on X∞deﬁned by
R × X∞−→X∞, (τ, u) →τ ∗u
(τ ∗u)(s) = u(s + τ) .
(6.20)
This ﬂow has very special property: it is gradient-like with respect to the contin-
uous Ljapunov function
V : X∞−→R deﬁned by V (u) = ϕ

u(0)

.
(6.21)
In order to prove this we have to show that the function V is strictly monotone
decreasing along the nonconstant solutions τ ∗u of the ﬂow (6.20). If τ > σ, then
V (τ ∗u) −V (σ ∗u)
= ϕ

u(τ)

−ϕ

u(σ)

=
τ
σ
d
dtϕ

u(t)

dt
= −
τ
σ
			
			∇ϕ

u(t)
			
			
2
dt
(6.22)
Consequently τ →V (τ ∗u) is monotone-decreasing. Assume now that V (τ ∗u) =
V (σ∗u) for some τ > σ. Then ϕ(u(τ)) = ϕ(u(σ)) and hence, by (6.22), ∇ϕ(u(s)) =
0 for all σ ≤s ≤τ. Therefore, in view of the uniqueness of the solutions of the
gradient equation, u(s) = u(0) for all s ∈R and hence τ ∗u = u for all τ ∈R.
Consequently, τ ∗u is a constant orbit of the ﬂow (6.20) and we have veriﬁed that
V is a Ljapunov function for the continuous ﬂow (6.20).
Conversely, of course, if we have a constant orbit, i.e., τ ∗u = u for τ ∈R, which
is sometimes called a rest point of the ﬂow (6.20), then u(s) ≡u(0) is a constant
solution of the gradient ﬂow (6.13) and hence a critical point of our functional ϕ.
So far we do not even know whether X∞is nonempty. In order to get an insight
into the topology of the set X∞, we deﬁne the continuous map
ˆρ : C∞(R, R2n × E) →R2n
(6.23)
associating with u the meanvalue of the loop u(0) ∈ˆΩ:
ˆρ(u) =
1

0
u(0)(t)dt
∈R2n .
With ρ : C∞(R, T 2n × E) we shall denote the map on the quotient space induced
by ˆρ. It turns out, and this is the crucial step in the proof of Theorem 3, that the
set X∞inherits the topology of the underlying manifold T 2n:

208
Chapter 6 The Arnold conjecture, Floer homology . . .
Theorem 4. X∞is a compact (metric) space and
(ρ|X∞)∗:
ˇH∗(T 2n) →ˇH∗(X∞)
(6.24)
is injective. Here and also in the following ˇH∗denotes the Alexander-Spanier
cohomology with Z2 coeﬃcients.
Postponing for a moment the proof of this theorem, we ﬁrst observe that The-
orem 3 can now be deduced from the following qualitative result of dynamical
systems:
Theorem 5. (Ljusternik-Schnirelman) Consider a continuous gradient-like ﬂow on
a compact metric space X; then
# { rest points } ≥CL(X) + 1 .
We shall prove Theorem 5 in the next section devoted to Ljusternik-Schnirelman
theory. Recalling that the critical points of ϕ are the rest points of the gradient-
like ﬂow (6.20), we conclude from Theorem 5 applied to the compact space X =
X∞, that #{critical points of ϕ} ≥CL(X∞) + 1. Now in view of Theorem 4,
CL(X∞) ≥CL(T 2n). Since CL(T 2n) = 2n we have established at least 2n + 1
critical points of ϕ. They correspond to the desired 2n + 1 periodic solutions of
the Hamiltonian vector ﬁeld and Theorem 3 is proved. ■
Proof of Theorem 4. The remainder of this section is devoted to the proof of The-
orem 4. In order to get an insight into the topology of the set X∞of bounded
orbits of the gradient equation (6.13) we look for smooth compact submanifolds
which “approximate” the set X∞and whose topology can be estimated. The de-
sired cohomology of the set X∞will then be concluded by means of the continuity
property of the Alexander-Spanier cohomology (see Appendix 7).
If T > 0 we deﬁne a set 
XT consisting of solutions of a very special boundary
value problem for the gradient equation:

XT : =

u ∈C∞
[−T, T], R2n × E
 			
d
dsu(s) = −∇ϕ

u(s)

,
−T ≤s ≤T
u(−T)
∈
R2n × E−,
u(T)
∈
R2n × E+
.
(6.25)
We have the natural Z2n action on 
XT and denote by XT the quotient. It is deﬁned
by (6.25) with R2n replaced by T 2n. We shall investigate the set 
XT using standard

6.2 The model case of the torus
209
methods of Fredholm theory. For this purpose we introduce the Banach spaces
B : =

u ∈C1
[−T, T], R2n × E
 			
u(−T)
∈
R2n × E−
u(T)
∈
R2n × E+
E : =

u ∈C0
[−T, T], R2n × E

,
(6.26)
equipped with the usual C1 respectively C0 norms. We denote by B and E the
quotients under the Z2n action. These may be identiﬁed with the Banach manifolds
deﬁned by (6.26) with R2n replaced by T 2n. Now deﬁne the nonlinear smooth map
L : B −→E , u →L(u)
L(u)(s) =
d
dsu(s) + ∇ϕ

u(s)

, −T ≤s ≤T .
(6.27)
Then L(j ∗u) = L(u) and we shall denote by L : B →E the induced map. In the
following we shall use the abbreviation L(u) = ˙u + ∇ϕ(u). Since the solutions of
the smooth ordinary diﬀerential equation are smooth in time, we can represent the
sets 
XT (respectively XT ) as the solution set of L(u) = 0 (respectively L(u) = 0).

XT = L−1(0) and XT = L−1(0) .
(6.28)
Proposition 2. L is a nonlinear Fredholm map and the Fredholm index of the
linearized map is
ind L′(u) = 2n ,
u ∈B .
Proof. From L(u) = ˙u+u+ −u−−b′(u), we obtain for the linearized map at u ∈B
L′(u)h = ˙h + h+ −h−−b′′(u)h ,
(6.29)
and we shall show ﬁrst that the linear operator b′′(u) ∈L( B, E) is compact for
every u ∈B. Since the derivative of a smooth compact map is compact, it is
suﬃcient to verify that the map u →b′(u) : B →E is compact, i.e., maps bounded
sets into precompact sets. Fix u ∈B; then recalling that b′(u(s)) = j∗∇b(u(s)) we
can estimate
||b′
u(s)

−b′
u(t)

||1/2 =
=
||j∗
∇b(u(s)) −∇b(u(t))

||1/2
≤
M ||∇b(u(s)) −∇b(u(t))||L2
≤
M ||H||C2 · ||u(s) −u(t)||L2
≤
C ||u(s) −u(t)||1/2 ≤C||u||
B · |t −s| ,

210
Chapter 6 The Arnold conjecture, Floer homology . . .
for a constant C depending only on the second derivative of the Hamiltonian
function H. We conclude that b′ maps a bounded subset of B into a set in E
which is equi-continuous, and since, for every ﬁxed s, the set {b′(u(s))|u ∈B} =
{j∗∇b(u(s))|u ∈B} is precompact, we conclude by the Arzel`a-Ascoli theorem that
b′ maps indeed bounded sets into precompact sets.
Using now that neither the Fredholm character nor the Fredholm index of a
linear operator changes if we add a compact linear operator, it is suﬃcient to prove
that the linear operator
L0 : B →E, u →˙u + u+ −u−
(6.30)
is Fredholm of index 2n. For its kernel one veriﬁes readily that ker(L0) = {u ∈
B|u(s) = x0 ∈R2n} consists of the constant functions with values in R2n ×{0}, so
that dim ker(L0) = 2n. Hence it suﬃces to show that L0 is surjective. Deﬁne for
g ∈E the function u by
u(s) =
s

−T

e−s+τ g+(τ) + g0(τ) + es−τ g−(τ)

dτ −
T

−T
es−τ g−(τ) dτ .
Then u satisﬁes the boundary conditions, i.e., u ∈B and moreover L0(u) = g as
is readily veriﬁed. This ﬁnishes the proof of the proposition. ■
Proposition 3.
L : B →E is a proper map modulo the Z2n action, i.e., if uk is a
sequence satisfying L(uk) →y, then there exists a sequence jk ∈Z2n such that
uk + jk is precompact in B.
Proof. Recall that L = L0+b′ and set L(un) = yn. Then L0(un) = yn−b′(un). Since
dim ker (L0) < ∞there is a continuous splitting B = B0 ⊕B1 with B0 = ker(L0),
and L0| B1 is an isomorphism of Banach spaces. Now set un = u0
n + u1
n ∈B0 ⊕B1.
Since b′(un) and hence yn −b′(un) is bounded in E we conclude that u1
n is bounded
in B. Pick a sequence jn ∈Z2n such that u0
n + jn is bounded in R2n. Then, by the
compactness of b′, the sequence
yn −b′(un) = yn −b′(un + jn)
is precompact in B so that u1
n is precompact in B. Hence after taking a subsequence
we conclude un + jn →u in B as claimed. ■
Passing to B and E, we conclude from Proposition 2 and Proposition 3 that
the map L : B →E is a proper Fredholm map of index 2n. Similarly, the map
(L, ρ) : B →E × T 2n
(6.31)
deﬁned by u →(L(u), ρ(u)) is a proper Fredholm map having Fredholm index
equal to zero. This class of maps possesses a special degree, the Smale degree

6.2 The model case of the torus
211
mod 2, denoted by
deg2

(L, ρ), (y, m)

(6.32)
for every point (y, m) ∈E × T 2n. The degree “counts” mod 2 the number of
preimages under a proper and smooth Fredholm map of index zero and is deﬁned
as follows. Assume ﬁrst that x ≡(y, m) is a regular value of F ≡(L, ρ). If u solves
F(u) = x, the derivative F ′(u) is a surjective map, and since its index is zero, it
is bijective. Thus the map F is locally one-to-one near the solutions u. Since it is
proper, it follows that there are only ﬁnitely many solutions u and the degree is
deﬁned as the number of these solutions (mod 2)
# {u ∈B | (L, ρ)(u) = (y, m)} mod 2 .
(6.33)
If (y, m) is not a regular value, its degree is deﬁned by taking any regular value
nearby using the Sard-Smale theorem. That this is well-deﬁned can be proved
the same way as for the Brouwer degree of mappings between manifolds of the
same dimensions, see J. Milnor [157]. The Smale degree mod 2 enjoys the same
useful properties as the Brouwer degree. In particular, it is invariant under proper
homotopies in the class of maps considered. For complete proofs we refer to the
forthcoming book by H. Brezis and L. Nirenberg [32]. For a survey on Fredholm
maps and corresponding degrees we refer to [30].
Proposition 4.
deg2

(L, ρ), (y, m)

= 1 for all (y, m) .
Proof. We consider the smooth homotopy of Fredholm operators Φ : [0, 1] × B →
E × T 2n deﬁned by
Φs(u) =

˙u + u+ −u−−s b′(u), ρ(u)

.
(6.34)
Since the compactness properties proved above depend only on the C2 norm of
the Hamiltonian function, we conclude that Φ is a proper homotopy, so that the
degree with respect to a point (y, m) is independent of s and hence
deg2

(L, ρ), (y, m)

=
deg2

Φ0, (y, m)

,
where Φ0(u) = ( ˙u + u+ −u−, ρ(u)). Similarly we can homotope the point (y, m)
to (0, m) and ﬁnd that the degree is equal to
deg2

Φ0, (0, m)

.
(6.35)
We claim that the number of solutions u of Φ0(u) = (0, m) is equal to one. Indeed,
if u ∈B solves
˙u + u+ −u−= 0 , ρ(u) = m
u(−T) ∈T 2n × E−, u(+T) ∈T 2n × E+,
then necessarily u(s) = m ∈T 2n is the unique solution.

212
Chapter 6 The Arnold conjecture, Floer homology . . .
Consequently, deg2 (Φ0, (0, m)) = 1 provided (0, m) is a regular value of Φ0.
To see this we observe that the linearized map at u(s) = m is the linear operator
h →

˙h + h+ −h−,
1

0
h(0)(t)dt

(6.36)
between the corresponding tangent spaces. It clearly is an isomorphism so that
(0, m) is indeed a regular value and the proof is ﬁnished. ■
So far we know that the set XT = L−1(0) ⊂B is compact and a smooth
manifold of dimension 2n, perhaps empty, if 0 is a regular value. Consider now the
continuous map ρ : XT →T 2n, u →ρ(u) induced by the map ˆρ deﬁned in (6.23).
Proposition 5. The map ρ : XT →T 2n induces an injective map in cohomology:
ρ∗:
ˇH∗(T 2n) →ˇH∗(XT ) .
In particular, the set XT is not empty.
Proof. Fix an open neighborhood U of XT in B. If y ∈E is suﬃciently close to 0,
then L−1(y) ⊂U because L is a proper map. Since, by the Sard-Smale theorem
for Fredholm maps, the set of regular points is dense we can assume, in addition,
that y is a regular value of L. The aim is to prove that

ρ|L−1(y)
∗
: ˇH∗(T 2n) →ˇH∗
L−1(y)

(6.37)
is injective. Postponing the proof we conclude from the commutativity of the
diagram

6





-
U
L−1(y)
T 2n
j
ρ|L−1(y)
,
ρ|U
where j denotes the inclusion map, that (ρ|U)∗is injective as well. This holds for
every open neighborhood U of the compact set XT . Hence, using the continuity
property of the Alexander-Spanier cohomology
ˇH∗(XT ) =
dir. lim ˇH∗(U) ,
(6.38)
where this direct limit is taken over all neighborhoods U of XT (see Appendix
7). We obtain that (ρ|XT )∗is indeed injective as claimed in the proposition. It
remains to prove the injectivity of (6.37).

6.2 The model case of the torus
213
Since y is a regular value of L, the map ρ := ρ|L−1(y) : L−1(y) →T 2n is a
map between two compact manifolds of dimension 2n. We shall prove that
deg2(ρ) = 1 .
(6.39)
Pick a regular value m ∈T 2n of ρ. We claim that (y, m) is a regular value of
(L, ρ). Indeed, if (L, ρ)(u) = (y, m) then L′(u) : B →E is surjective since y is,
by assumption a regular value of L. Observe that ker L′(u) = T(L−1(y)). Since
by assumption m is regular for ρ the linear map ρ′(u) : T(L−1(y)) →T(T 2n) is
a bijection. Consequently the linear map (L′(u), ρ′(u)) : B →E × R2n between
the corresponding tangent spaces is a bijection as well, so that (y, m) is regular as
claimed. By Proposition 4 we therefore have
1
=
# {(L, ρ)−1(y, m) }
mod 2
=
# {(ρ|L−1(y))−1(m) }
mod 2 .
Since m is regular, it follows that deg2(ρ) = 1 as claimed in (6.39).
Abbreviating the compact 2n-dimensional manifold L−1(y) by M, we denote
by oM and oT the Z2 fundamental classes of M and T 2n respectively. In view of
(6.39) we conclude by the homological deﬁnition of the Z2 degree (see Appendix
7)
ρ∗(oM) = oT .
(6.40)
We point out that on smooth compact manifolds the usual cohomology theo-
ries (like the singular, Alexander-Spanier, ˇCech) are naturally isomorphic, see F.
Warner [219]. Hence, we may consider the singular cohomology instead of the
Alexander-Spanier cohomology. Then by the Poincar´e duality we have the isomor-
phisms
Hi(M)
∩oM
−→H2n−i(M)
:
α →α ∩oM .
Hi(T 2n)
∩oT
−→H2n−i(T 2n)
:
β →β ∩oT .
Pick α ∈Hi(T 2n), we have to show that ρ∗(α) = 0 implies α = 0. For this purpose
we consider the composition of maps
Hi(T 2n)
ρ∗
−→Hi(M)
∩oM
−→H2n−i(M)
ρ∗
−→H2n−i(T 2n)
(∩oT )−1
−→
Hi(T 2n) .
Using the naturality property of the cap product (see A. Dold [62]) and using
(6.40) we compute
(∩oT )−1 ρ∗{(ρ∗α) ∩oM} =
(∩oT )−1 {α ∩ρ∗(oM)} =
(∩oT )−1 {α ∩oT} = α .

214
Chapter 6 The Arnold conjecture, Floer homology . . .
Consequently if ρ∗α = 0 then α = 0 proving that ρ∗is injective. The proof of
Proposition 5 is completed. ■
We now return to the set X∞of bounded solutions and show that it is a
compact set, which can be “approximated” by XT for T large.
Proposition 6. The space X∞is a compact (metric) space.
Proof. If u ∈X∞then u(s) →Cr(ϕ) as s →±∞. Since sup{|b(u)|, u ∈Ω} < ∞
it follows from the monotonicity of ϕ(u(s)) that there exists a constant C > 0
satisfying
−C ≤ϕ

u(s)

≤C
(6.41)
for all u ∈X∞and all s ∈R. Consequently the set X∞is closed. From the
variation of constants formula (6.14) we conclude, for every T > 0
u(0)+ = e−T u(−T)+ + P +
0

−T
es b′ 
u(s)

ds .
(6.42)
Since u(s) →Cr(ϕ) as |s| →∞, the set u(R) is bounded, and hence we conclude,
as T →∞,
u(0)+ = P + j∗
0

−∞
es∇b

u(s)

ds .
(6.43)
A similar formula holds for u(0)−and hence we ﬁnd a compact set K ⊂T 2n ×
E such that u(0) ∈K for all u ∈X∞. Consequently the set {u(0)|u ∈X∞}
is compact. Since in the C∞-topology the solutions u depend continuously on
their initial conditions, we conclude that X∞is compact as well and the proof is
ﬁnished. ■
If u ∈XT , then u is by deﬁnition a solution of the gradient equation for
|s| ≤T, hence it has a unique continuation to a solution u(s) for all times s ∈R
in view of the global Lipschitz continuity of ∇ϕ. This deﬁnes an inclusion map
j : XT →C∞(R, T 2n × R) by which in the following, we can consider XT as a
subset of C∞(R, T 2n × E).
Proposition 7. If U is an open neighborhood of X∞, then
XT ⊂U
for T suﬃciently large.

6.2 The model case of the torus
215
Proof. Since b maps Ωinto a bounded set, there exists a constant C > 0 such that
ϕ|E−≤C and ϕ|E+ ≥−C .
(6.44)
Consequently, if u ∈XT , then
−C ≤ϕ

u(s)

≤C ,
(6.45)
for all u ∈XT , all |s| ≤T and all T > 0. This follows because u(s) is a solution of
the negative gradient equation (6.13) and hence ϕ(u(s)) is a monotone-decreasing
function. We conclude also, that there exists a constant M > 0 such that
||u(−T)|| + ||u(T)|| ≤M
(6.46)
for u ∈XT and all T > 0. In order to ﬁnish the proof of the proposition we argue
indirectly and assume there is a sequence Tn →∞and a sequence un ∈XTn
satisfying un /∈U. We shall show that a subsequence of un(0) converges to a
point x ∈T 2n × E through which a bounded orbit u ∈X∞passes. Indeed, it
follows from (6.46) together with (6.42), as in the proof of Proposition 6, that
dist (un(0)+, K+) →0 as n →∞, for a compact set K+. Similarly for un(0)−;
hence taking a subsequence un(0) →x ∈T 2n × E. In view of (6.45) we have
−C ≤ϕ(un(s)) ≤C, for |s| ≤Tn for every u where the constant C is independent
of n. We conclude for the solution u(s) through x = u(0) that −C ≤ϕ(u(s)) ≤C
for all s ∈R, hence u ∈X∞. Consequently, un ∈U for n large in view of the
topology of C∞(R, T 2n × E) and the continuous dependence of the solutions on
the initial conditions. This contradiction proves the proposition. ■
End of the proof of Theorem 4. In order to prove the injectivity of (ρ|X∞)∗we
take any open neighborhood U of X∞. By Proposition 6 we have XT ⊂U. By
Proposition 5 the map (ρ|XT )∗: ˇH∗(T 2n) →ˇH∗(XT ) is injective and therefore
(ρ|U)∗: ˇH∗(T 2n) →H∗(U) is injective. This holds true for every open neighbor-
hood of the compact set X∞and, again, we conclude by the continuity of the
Alexander-Spanier cohomology that (ρ|X∞)∗: ˇH∗(T 2n) →ˇH∗(X∞) is injective.
The proof of Theorem 4 is completed. ■
Remarks: It should be pointed out that the torus case permits more elementary
proofs. The original proof by Conley and Zehnder in [55] is also based on the
Hamiltonian variational function on the loop space. However, using the linear
structure of the covering space, the very special symplectic structure ω0 and the
compactness of the torus the problem of ﬁnding critical points on the inﬁnite
dimensional loop space was reduced to the equivalent problem of ﬁnding the critical
points of a related functional on a ﬁnite dimensional bundle T 2n ×RN of the torus.
Here the dimension N is large and depends, of course, on the Hamiltonian function
H considered. The reduction used is the so-called Ljapunov-Schmidt reduction, a
well-known technique in functional analysis. The question arises whether there is
an intrinsic ﬁnite dimensional approach. Indeed M. Chaperon found in [43] (1984)

216
Chapter 6 The Arnold conjecture, Floer homology . . .
another variational functional which is directly deﬁned on a ﬁnite-dimensional
vector bundle of the torus by means of a ﬁnite sequence of generating functions.
He also applied his “method of broken geodesics” to the geometric and global
intersection problem of Lagrangian submanifolds in T ∗(T n). He showed that the
zero section 0∗
T n, which is diﬀeomorphic to T n, can never be separated from itself
by a Hamiltonian map ϕ of T ∗(T n). More precisely he proved that
# { T n ∩ϕ(T n) } ≥
cup-length (T n) + 1 ,
(≥SB(T n) if the intersection is transversal). This was a long-standing open
question raised by V.I. Arnold in [9]. For modiﬁcations and further applications of
this variational approach we refer to [41]–[44]. In this connection we also mention
A.B. Givental [105], M. Brunella [36] and Yu. V. Chekanov [47]. The related ﬁnite
dimensional approach due to J.C. Sikorav [197] (1987) is based on the concept of a
generating phase function for a Lagrangian manifold. The concept appeared earlier
in the theory of Fourier integral operators and we refer to L. H¨ormander [124]. This
elegant approach turned out to be particularly useful for the special symplectic
manifolds (T ∗M, dλ) as demonstrated by the new proof of Hofer’s Lagrangian
intersection theorem in T ∗M for general compact manifolds M generalizing the
torus case above, see [197, 136]. The result was previously discovered by H. Hofer
[114] (1985). It states that
# { M ∩ϕ(M) } ≥
cup-length (M) + 1 ,
for every Hamiltonian map ϕ of (T ∗M, dλ), where we have identiﬁed M with the
zero section 0∗
M.
In this context of ﬁnite dimensional variational arguments we should also men-
tion, that in his work “Symplectic topology as the geometry of generating func-
tions” [218] (1992), C. Viterbo deﬁned symplectic capacities for Lagrangian sub-
manifolds as critical values of the associated phase functions. In this way he deﬁned
the capacities for open subsets of (R2n, ω0) by using Lagrangians which are graphs
of compactly supported Hamiltonian mappings. In his 1992 lectures Ya. Eliashberg
outlined how Viterbo’s approach could be extended to an alternate construction
of the Floer-Hofer symplectic homology theory described in Section 6.6, for the
special case of open subsets of (R2n, ω0). The details of his construction were car-
ried out quite recently by L. Traynor in the preprint “Symplectic homology via
generating functions” [212].
It seems that the ﬁnite dimensional variational approaches introduced so far
are not adequate for general symplectic manifolds. For this reason we based our
proof above for the torus case on the action principle in the loop space. Our proof
demonstrates that the crucial information of the variational principle is contained
in the set of bounded solutions of the artiﬁcial gradient ﬂow. The set consists of the
rest points together with the connecting orbits. This observation will be relevant
in Floer’s approach to the Morse theory of functionals whose gradients do not even
generate a ﬂow.

6.3 Gradient-like flows on compact spaces
217
6.3
Gradient-like ﬂows on compact spaces
In the following X is a compact metric space. A ﬂow on X is a continuous map
ϕ : R × X →X : (t, x) →ϕ(t, x) = ϕt(x) satisfying
ϕt
ϕs(x)

=
ϕt+s(x)
ϕ0(x)
=
x
(6.47)
for all t, s ∈R and x ∈X. An example is the ﬂow of a diﬀerentiable vector ﬁeld
on a compact manifold. We shall use the notation
ϕt(x) = x · t
and abbreviate M · B := {x · t|x ∈M and t ∈B} for subsets M ⊂X and B ⊂R.
If x ∈X, then the map
t →ϕt(x) = x · t
from R into X is called the solution through the point x ∈X. The image of the
positive (respectively negative) solution through x will be denoted by γ±(x) =
x · R± and we set γ(x) = x · R. Every point x ∈X belongs, in view of (6.47), to
precisely one orbit γ(x). The distinguished constant solutions, characterized by
x · t = x ,
t ∈R
are called rest points or ﬁxed points of the ﬂow, clearly γ(x) = {x} in this case.
In order to describe the global orbit structure of a ﬂow, it is useful to recall the
concept of the positive limit set ω(x) and the negative limit set ω∗(x) of the
solution through x ∈X.
Deﬁnition.
ω(x)
=
{y ∈X
			 ∃tj →+∞with x · tj →y}
ω∗(x)
=
{y ∈X
			 ∃tj →−∞with x · tj →y} .
We summarize the well-known properties of these limit sets. Recall that X is
compact.
Proposition 8. If x ∈X then the limit sets ω(x) and ω∗(x) are not empty, compact,
connected and invariant under the ﬂow, i.e., ω(x)·t = ω(x) for all t ∈R. Moreover,
x · t
→
ω(x)
as
t →+∞
x · t
→
ω∗(x)
as
t →−∞.
(6.48)

218
Chapter 6 The Arnold conjecture, Floer homology . . .
Proof. If tj →∞then the sequence x · tj has a convergent subsequence so that
ω(x) ̸= ∅. Assume that (6.48) does not hold; then there exists an open neigh-
borhood U ⊃ω(x) and a sequence tj →∞such that x · tj ∈X\U. Hence
for a subsequence x · tj →y ∈X\U. By deﬁnition y ∈ω(x), in contradiction to
ω(x) ⊂U. If ω(x) is not connected, then ω(x) = ω1∪ω2 for two nonempty compact
and disjoint subsets ωj ⊂X. Take disjoint open neighborhoods Uj of ωj, j = 1, 2;
then, by (6.48), x · t →ω(x) and hence for t ≥t∗, we have x · t ∈U1 ∪U2 and
γ+(x · t) ∩Uj ̸= ∅for j = 1, 2. Consequently the set γ+(x · t) is not connected
contradicting the fact that a continuous image of an interval in R is connected.
The invariance of the limit sets is an immediate consequence of the continuity of
the ﬂow. ■
We assume now, in addition, that the ﬂow is gradient-like, i.e., we require
that there exists a continuous function V : X →R, which is strictly monotone-
decreasing along every nonconstant solution:
t > s =⇒V (x · t) < V (x · s) .
Such a function is usually called a Ljapunov function for the ﬂow. A well-known
special example is the ﬂow generated by a smooth gradient vector ﬁeld ˙x =
−∇V (x) on a compact Riemannian manifold.
Proposition 9. If the ﬂow is gradient-like the limit sets for every solution consists
of rest points:
ω(x) and ω∗(x) ⊂{ rest points } ,
for every x ∈X.
Proof. Since V (x · t) is monotone-decreasing, the limit
lim
t→+∞V (x · t) = inf{V (x · t) | t ≥0}
= : d
exists in R. If y ∈ω(x) we conclude by the continuity of V that V (y) = d and
hence in view of the invariance of ω(x) under the ﬂow, V (y ·t) = d for every t ∈R.
By assumption V is strictly decreasing along nonconstant solutions, hence y must
be a rest point as claimed. ■
If the gradient-like ﬂow possesses only isolated rest points, then there are only
ﬁnitely many of them, say {x1, . . . , xN} and we conclude from the proposition that
every nonconstant solution connects two distinct rest points. Every point x ∈X
tends under the ﬂow to a distinguished rest point in forward and backward time.
It is not surprising that the rest points of the ﬂow are intimately related to
topological properties of X. Indeed, we shall conclude from Proposition 9 the
following existence statement formulated in Section 6.2 as Theorem 5.
Theorem 6. (Ljusternik-Schnirelman)
For every gradient-like ﬂow on a compact
metric space we have
# {rest points } ≥
cup-length (X) + 1 .

6.3 Gradient-like flows on compact spaces
219
xN
x1
V (xN) = max V
V (x1) = min V
Fig. 6.7a
The theorem will follow immediately from a general qualitative statement for
Morse decompositions of ﬂows which are not necessarily gradient-like. The state-
ment is taken from [55].
Deﬁnition. A Morse decomposition of a ﬂow is a ﬁnite collection {Mj}j∈I of
disjoint, compact and invariant subsets Mj ⊂X which can be ordered, say
(M1, M2, . . . , Mk), such that the following property holds: for every
x ∈X\

j∈I
Mj
there exists a pair of indices i < j such that ω(x) ⊂Mi and ω∗(x) ⊂Mj.
Theorem 7. Assume {Mj}j∈I is a Morse decomposition of a ﬂow on a compact
space X. Then
CL(X) + 1 ≤

j∈I
{CL(Mj) + 1} .
(6.49)
In particular, if |I| < CL(X)+1 then some compact invariant set Mj has nontrivial
Alexander-Spanier cohomology and so contains a continuum of points.
We have abbreviated the cup-length of a space S by CL(S). The ﬂow is not
required to be gradient-like. Postponing the proof of this theorem, we ﬁrst prove
Theorem 6.
Proof of Theorem 6. Denote by V the Ljapunov function of the gradient-like ﬂow
and assume it has only ﬁnitely many rest points. Then the rest points can be

220
Chapter 6 The Arnold conjecture, Floer homology . . .
ordered such that V (x1) ≤V (x2) ≤· · · ≤V (xk). Since V is strictly decreasing
along the nonconstant solutions, the rest points {x1, . . . , xk} constitute, in view of
Proposition 9, a Morse decomposition of the ﬂow. Since CL({xj}) = 0 we conclude
from Theorem 7
CL(X) + 1 ≤

1≤j≤k
1
so that the number of rest points must indeed be larger than or equal to CL(X)+1,
thus proving Theorem 6. ■
Proof of Theorem 7. First observe that any Morse decomposition of X can be
obtained by ﬁrst decomposing X into two sets, then decomposing one of these and
continuing until the decomposition is reached. Indeed assume {M1, M2, . . . , Mk} is
an ordered Morse decomposition of X. Then deﬁne the subset X1 = {x ∈X|ω(x)
and ω∗(x) ⊂M1 ∪M2 ∪· · · ∪Mk−1}. This set is compact and invariant under
the ﬂow so that {X1, Mk} constitutes an ordered Morse decomposition of X into
two sets. Therefore one only needs to prove the theorem for decompositions into
two sets. So let {M1, M2} be an ordered Morse decomposition of X. From the
deﬁnition we conclude that there is a compact neighborhood S1 of M1 and a
compact neighborhood S2 of M2 in X satisfying S1 ∪S2 = X and, moreover,
M1 =

t>0
S1 · t and M2 =

t>0
S2 · (−t) .
Consequently, observing that ˇH∗(S1 · t) = ˇH∗(S1) for every t ∈R (similarly for
S2), we conclude by the continuity property of the Alexander-Spanier cohomology
that ˇH∗(S1) = ˇH∗(M1) and ˇH∗(S2) = ˇH∗(M2). It is, therefore, suﬃcient to prove
that c(S1) + c(S2) ≥c(X) for S1 ∪S2 = X, abbreviating c(S) = CL(S) + 1. This
will follow from the following topological observation:
Lemma 1. Let S1 ∪S2 ⊂S be three compact sets. Denote by i1 : S1 →S, i2 : S2 →
S and i : S1 ∪S2 →S the inclusion maps. Assume α, β ∈ˇH∗(S). Then i∗
1(α) = 0
and i∗
2(β) = 0 imply i∗(α ∪β) = 0.
Proof of Lemma 1. Consider the following diagram:
ˇH∗(S, S1)
⊗
ˇH∗(S, S2)
∪
−→
ˇH∗(S, S1 ∪S2)
j∗
1
j∗
2
j∗
ˇH∗(S)
⊗
ˇH∗(S)
∪
−→
ˇH∗(S)
i∗
1
i∗
2
i∗
ˇH∗(S1)
ˇH∗(S2)
ˇH∗(S1 ∪S2) .
The vertical sequences are exact. Hence if α ∈ˇH∗(S) satisﬁes i∗
1(α) = 0 then there
is an ˆα ∈ˇH∗(S, S1) with j∗
1(ˆα) = α. Similarly, if i∗
2(β) = 0 then j∗
2(ˆβ) = ˆα for some

6.3 Gradient-like flows on compact spaces
221
ˆβ ∈ˇH∗(S, S2). By the commutativity of the diagram, j∗(ˆα ∪ˆβ) = j∗
1(ˆα) ∪j∗
2(ˆβ) =
α ∪β. and by the exactness, i∗(α ∪β) = i∗◦j∗(ˆα ∪ˆβ) = 0, as claimed. ■
Returning to the proof of Theorem 7, we assume α1, α2, . . . αl ∈ˇH∗(X) satisfy
α1 ∪α2 ∪· · · ∪αl ̸= 0. Let the α’s be ordered so that α1 ∪· · · ∪αr is the longest
product not in the kernel of i∗
1. Then, by deﬁnition of the cup-length, c(S1) ≥r+1
and i∗
1(α1∪· · ·∪αr ∪αr+1) = 0. Since X = S1∪S2 we conclude from Lemma 1 that
i∗
2(αr+2 ∪· · · αl) ̸= 0 and, therefore, c(S2) ≥l −(r + 1) + 1 = l −r. Consequently
c(S1) + c(S2) ≥l + 1. We have shown that if X admits a nontrivial product with
l factors, i.e., if c(X) ≥l + 1, then c(S1) + c(S2) ≥l + 1 so that Theorem 7 is
proved. ■
We deﬁned a gradient-like ﬂow by a Ljapunov function which is strictly mono-
tone decreasing along the nonconstant orbits of the ﬂow. This tradition comes from
the study of semiﬂows, deﬁned only for positive time, on noncompact manifolds. In
our situation of a ﬂow on a compact space, we could have taken a Ljapunov func-
tion instead, which is strictly increasing along nonconstant orbits and we would
have reached the same conclusions by the same arguments. Actually, we shall make
use of this remark in the next section, where for diﬀerent reasons we consider the
positive instead of the negative gradient equation, which leads to a increasing
Ljapunov function. This is not relevant since our functional is bounded neither
from below nor from above.
Remarks: In this connection we would like to point out another useful inequality
associated with a Morse decomposition {M1, . . . , Mk} of a ﬂow on X which is not
assumed to be gradient-like. It relates dynamical invariants of the invariant sets
Mj to topological invariants of the space X and is due to C. Conley. Every set
Mj in a Morse decomposition is an isolated invariant set in the sense that it is the
maximal invariant set contained in a compact neighborhood. Hence it possesses a
so-called Conley-index h(Mj) which is the homotopy type of a pointed compact
space and which is determined by the ﬂow near Mj, see C. Conley [54]. Denoting
by P(t, h(Mj)) the Poincar´e polynomial of the pointed compact space one has

j
P

t, h(Mj)

= P(t, X) + (1 + t)Q(t) ,
(6.50)
P being the Poincar´e polynomial of the space X and Q being a power series
containing only nonnegative integer coeﬃcients, for a proof we refer to [57]. This
Conley-Morse equation relates the dynamical invariants of the local invariant sets
Mj ⊂X to the global topological invariant P(t, X). Consider, for example, the
special case of a gradient ﬂow deﬁned by ˙x = −∇V (x) on a compact Riemannian
manifold X. If the critical points xj of the smooth function V on X are not only
isolated but, in addition, nondegenerate, one can show that
h ({xj}) =

˙Sm(xj)
is the homotopy type of a pointed sphere whose dimension m(xj) is the Morse index
of the critical point xj. Consequently P(t, h({xj})) = tm(xj) is a monomial, see

222
Chapter 6 The Arnold conjecture, Floer homology . . .
e.g. [56]. Therefore, if all the critical points of V are nondegenerate they constitute
a Morse-decomposition of X and the equation (6.50) for this special ﬂow is the
familiar Morse equation

{x|∇V (x)=0}
tm(x) = P(t, X) + (1 + t)Q(t) .
(6.51)
It relates the nature of the isolated critical points x of the diﬀerentiable function
V to those topological invariants of X which are described by the Betti numbers.
C. Conley designed his homotopy index theory in view of its invariance prop-
erties under deformations. These are crucial for applications. He developed his
theory for continuous ﬂows on locally compact metric spaces. For a concise pre-
sentation of this theory, we refer to D. Salamon [187]. Later on K. Rybakowski in
a series of papers [184, 185, 186] extended Conley’s index theory to a restricted
class of continuous semiﬂows in an inﬁnite dimensional setting. It includes ﬂows
generated by partial diﬀerential equations of parabolic type. In this more general
setting there is also a Morse equation associated with a Morse decomposition of
an isolated compact invariant subset of the space, as has been demonstrated in
[186].
6.4
Elliptic methods and symplectic ﬁxed points
We are going to prove the Arnold conjecture for general compact symplectic man-
ifolds (M, ω) satisfying [ω]|π2(M) = 0. The proof, based on the action functional
on the loop space, is inspired by the geometric ideas underlying the proof for the
standard torus in Section 6.2. But instead of looking at O.D.E. problems, we shall
now be confronted with ﬁrst order elliptic systems.
For the following it is useful to ﬁrst recall our approach to the torus case.
The covering map R2n →T 2n and the special symplectic structure permit by
extending the action functional, originally deﬁned on smooth contractible loops,
to the Hilbert space H1/2. The gradient of the extended functional in H1/2 is
smooth and can be viewed as a regularization of the L2 gradient of the action.
The gradient equation on H1/2 determines a unique global ﬂow, which has, in
addition, the necessary compactness properties. For these reasons we can ﬁnd all
the critical point by using O.D.E.-methods as follows. The study of the gradient
ﬂow on the inﬁnite dimensional space H1/2 of contractible loops can be reduced
to the study of an (induced) gradient-like ﬂow on a compact metric space X∞,
an almost classical situation. The set X∞here is the set of all bounded solutions
of the gradient ﬂow, consisting of all the critical points of the action functional
together with their connecting orbits. It is, in general, not a smooth manifold.
We saw that X∞contained the topology of the underlying manifold T 2n. The
Ljusternik-Schnirelman theorem, applied to the gradient-like ﬂow on X∞, then

6.4 Elliptic methods and symplectic fixed points
223
guaranteed the required number of rest points. In order to get an insight into the
topology of the set X∞, we approximated X∞by a set XT of solutions of a very
special O.D.E. boundary value problem using the special symplectic structure.
Applying Fredholm theory to this boundary value problem we approximated XT
by smooth compact manifolds of dimension 2n whose topology could be estimated.
By the continuity property of the Alexander-Spanier cohomology we ﬁnally found
the desired cohomology of the set X∞.
Since the space H1/2 is not contained in C0, the loops in H1/2 have no local
meaning, and it is not easy to deﬁne H1/2 loops on a general manifold. It can be
done but the space obtained does not carry a natural manifold structure. The main
idea in the case of a general symplectic manifold (M, ω) is to replace the regularized
gradient (of the torus case) by the unregularized gradient of the action functional
on the space of smooth contractible loops of M. The associated gradient equation,
however, does not determine a ﬂow: its Cauchy initial value problem is ill posed,
as we shall see. But analogous to the torus case, we can still deﬁne the set X∞of
all bounded solutions u : R×S1 →M of the unregularized gradient equation; they
are now solutions of a system of ﬁrst order elliptic partial diﬀerential equations of
Cauchy-Riemann type, related to the pseudo-holomorphic curves of M. Gromov
[107]. On this solution set X∞there is, moreover, a natural R-action deﬁning a
gradient-like ﬂow. Hence, following our old strategy, we shall prove that this set
of solutions is compact and contains the cohomology of the underlying manifold
M. The Arnold conjecture then follows by applying the Ljusternik-Schnirelman
theorem as in the torus case. In order to carry out this programme the O.D.E.
methods of the torus case have to be replaced by P.D.E. methods. In order to
determine the topology of X∞we shall approximate the set X∞by the set of
solutions XT of a distinguished elliptic boundary value problem, to which we apply
Fredholm theory based on the Cauchy-Riemann operator on compact surfaces. In
this way we can approximate XT by smooth compact manifolds of dimension
2n whose topology can be determined. The easy compactness arguments for the
torus case, based on O.D.E. methods, will be replaced by an intricate bubbling oﬀ
analysis based on elliptic estimates.
In order to ﬁnd the crucial substitute for XT used in Section 6.2 we begin
with the analysis of the torus case T 2n = R2n/Z2n, this time from the point
of view of the unregularized gradient. The aim is to reinterpret the approach of
Section 6.2 from a P.D.E. point of view. We recall that to a periodic function
H ∈C∞(S1 × T 2n, R), we associated the action functional ΦH, deﬁned on the
space of smooth contractible loops x of T 2n by
ΦH(x) =
1

0
 1
2⟨−J ˙x, x⟩−H

t, x(t)
 
dt .
(6.52)
On the covering space R2n the contractible loops x are simply the smooth
functions x ∈C∞(S1, R2n). By extending ΦH to a smooth functional ϕH on the

224
Chapter 6 The Arnold conjecture, Floer homology . . .
Hilbert space H1/2(S1, R2n) we obtained for the H1/2 gradient, which we now
denote by ϕ′
H, the representation
ϕ′
H(x) = j∗Φ′
H(x) if x ∈C∞(S1, R2n) .
(6.53)
Here Φ′
H(x) is the L2-gradient of ΦH given by
∇ΦH(x) = −J ˙x −∇H(t, x) ,
(6.54)
and j∗is the adjoint of the inclusion mapping j : H1/2 →L2 deﬁned explicitly in
Chapter 3. We may view ϕ′
H as the regularization of the L2-gradient Φ′
H by means
of the positive and compact operator j∗on L2. Instead of the gradient equation
d
dsx = −ϕ′
H(x) on H1/2 studied previously, we now study the unregularized equa-
tion
d
dsx = Φ′
H(x). Observe that we now consider the positive gradient instead of
the negative one considered in Section 6.2. For indeﬁnite functionals this is irrele-
vant. However, this way we are led, as we shall see, in a natural way to the familiar
Cauchy-Riemann operator instead of the anti-Cauchy-Riemann operator. Setting
u(t, s) = x(s)(t) for the loops at time s, we obtain the partial diﬀerential equation
∂u
∂s = −J ∂u
∂t −∇H(t, u) ,
(6.55)
for a smooth function u ∈C∞(R × S1, R2n). Abbreviating the notation in the
following, we write u′ = −J ˙u −H′(t, u) instead of (6.55), where H′ = ∇H stands
for the gradient of the function H in the x variable. The operator
u′ + J ˙u = ∂u
∂s + J ∂u
∂t
(6.56)
is nothing but the well-known Cauchy-Riemann operator for maps u : R2 →
R2n. To see this it is convenient to identify R2n with Cn as follows. We split
R2n = R2 ⊕· · ·⊕R2 into symplectic subspaces R2, having the symplectic structure
ω0(a, b) = ⟨Ja, b⟩with the matrix J given by
J =

0
1
−1
0

.
(6.57)
We identify R2 with C by means of the linear isomorphism U : C →R2 given by
z = (y + ix) →(x, y) = (Im z, Re z). On C, the complex structure is now the
multiplication by i = √−1, since
U −1J U = i ,
(6.58)
and ω0 becomes ω0(z, ξ) = −Im⟨z, ¯ξ⟩. Setting z = s+it ∈C we shall view the map
u : R2 →R2n as a map u : z →u(z) ∈Cn so that the operator (6.56) becomes
the familiar Cauchy-Riemann operator on every copy of C,
∂u
∂s + i ∂u
∂t = ¯∂u .
(6.59)

6.4 Elliptic methods and symplectic fixed points
225
Similarly the operator ∂u
∂s −J ∂u
∂t is, in our complex notation, the operator
∂u
∂s −i∂u
∂t = ∂u .
(6.60)
Note that for convenience we drop the factor
1
2 in the usual deﬁnition of the
Cauchy-Riemann operator.
The Cauchy-Riemann operator is a ﬁrst order elliptic partial diﬀerential oper-
ator and ∇H is a lower order perturbation. There is no well-deﬁned initial value
problem associated with the elliptic equation (6.55). Indeed, assume H = 0. Then
every solution u of (6.55) solves ¯∂u(z) = 0 and hence is holomorphic so that the
initial data u(0, t) = x(t) at s = 0 has to be at least a real analytic loop. But even
working in the space of real analytic loops does not help since there are analytic
loops which are not restrictions of globally deﬁned holomorphic maps.
Assume now that u ∈C∞(R × S1, T 2n) solves the partial diﬀerential equation
(6.55), and deﬁne the map s →u(s) from R →C∞(S1, T 2n) by setting u(s)(t) :=
u(s, t). From (6.52) we compute readily
d
ds ΦH

u(s)

= || −J ˙u(s) −H′
t, u(s)

||2
L2 .
(6.61)
Hence the map s →ΦH(u(s)) is nondecreasing. The following nontrivial fact will
become crucial.
Lemma 2. Assume u ∈C∞(R × S1, T 2n) is a solution of (6.55). If for some s0 ∈R
d
ds ΦH

u(s)

|s=s0 = 0,
then u(s) = u(s0) for all s ∈R hence is independent of s. Moreover x ∈C∞(S1, M)
deﬁned by x(t) := u(s0)(t) is a 1-periodic solution of the Hamiltonian system
associated to H.
Proof. Considering our geometric approach, this statement seems obvious, yet the
proof is not easy. It is based on Carleman’s similarity principle proved in Appendix
5. Without loss of generality we may assume that s0 = 0 so that
−J ˙u(0) −H′
t, u(0)

= 0 ,
for all t ∈S1 .
This means that x(t) := u(0)(t) deﬁnes a 1-periodic solution of the Hamiltonian
vector ﬁeld ˙x = XH(x). We denote by ψt the 1-parameter family of symplectic
diﬀeomorphisms solving
d
dtψt = XH(ψt) and ψ0 = Id. Extending the map u
periodically in t we shall view it as a map u : R × R →M. Now we deﬁne a new
map v : R × R →M by
u(s, t) = ψt

v(s, t)

,
for all (s, t) ∈R2 ,

226
Chapter 6 The Arnold conjecture, Floer homology . . .
and compute,
0
=
∂u
∂s + J ∂u
∂t + H′(t, u)
=
Tψt(v) ∂v
∂s + JTψt(v) ∂v
∂t + J

d
dtψt

(v) + H′
t, ψt(v)

=
Tψt(v)

∂v
∂s +

Tψt(v)−1J Tψt(v)

∂v
∂t

.
Hence, introducing the almost complex structure
J(s, t) := Tψt(v(s, t))−1J Tψt(v(s, t))
the map v : R2 →M solves
∂v
∂s + J(s, t)∂v
∂t = 0 ,
and, since u(0, t) = ψt(v(0, 0)) by the assumption on u,
v(0, t) = v(0, 0) ,
for t ∈R .
Let v(0, 0) = m ∈M. We take a chart around m, say ϕ : U →ϕ(U) ⊂R2n
satisfying ϕ(m) = 0. Then the map w : R2 →R2n, deﬁned by w = ϕ ◦v, satisﬁes,
near 0 ∈R2, the partial diﬀerential equation
∂w
∂s + Tϕ

v(s, t)

J(s, t)Tϕ

v(s, t)
−1 ∂w
∂t
= Tϕ(v)
∂v
∂s + J(s, t)∂v
∂t

.
Moreover, w(0, t) = 0 for t close to t = 0. To sum up, introducing the almost
complex structure ˆJ(s, t) := Tϕ(v(s, t))J(s, t)Tϕ(v(s, t))−1, the map w : R2 →
R2n solves, near 0 ∈R2, the equations
∂w
∂s + ˆJ(s, t)∂w
∂t
= 0 , w(0, t) = 0 for t close to 0 .
In particular, the point (0, 0) ∈R2 is a cluster point of zeroes w(s, t) = 0 of the
solution w. In this situation we can apply the generalized Carleman similarity
principle proved in Appendix 5. It states that w is of the form w(z) = Φ(z)σ(z)
for all z = s + it in a neighborhood U of z = 0 ∈C, where Φ : U →GlR(Cn)
is continuous and σ : U →Cn is holomorphic. We conclude that w = 0 in a full
neighborhood of 0 ∈R2. This implies that v is constant in a neighborhood of zero
and, therefore,
u(s, t) = x(t) for s and t close to 0 .
Consider now the following set of points:
Σ = {(s, t) ∈R × R | u(s, t) = x(t)
and there exists a sequence (sk, tk) →(s, t),
(sk, tk) ̸= (s, t) satisfying u(sk, tk) = x(tk)} .

6.4 Elliptic methods and symplectic fixed points
227
This set is closed, and by the previous discussion nonempty. If (s0, t0) ∈Σ we can
apply the previous argument and deduce that (s0, t0) is an interior point of Σ.
Consequently Σ = R × R, and hence u(s, t) = x(t) for all (s, t) ∈R × S1. This
implies that u(s) = u(0) for all s ∈R, hence u(s) is a rest point representing the
periodic orbit x(t) = u(0)(t). The proof of Lemma 2 is complete. ■
The space X∞of “bounded solutions” of the (unregularized) gradient equation
is deﬁned by
X∞=

u ∈C∞(R × S1, T 2n)
			 u satisﬁes (6.63) below } .
(6.62)
Here
us + Jut + H′(t, u) = 0
−∞< inf
s
ΦH

u(s)

≤sup
s
ΦH

u(s)

< +∞.
(6.63)
We equip the space X∞with the topology induced from C∞(R × S1, T 2n). There
is a continuous R-action on X∞deﬁned by
R × X∞
−→
X∞
(τ, u)
→
u · τ
(6.64)
where (u · τ)(s, t) = u(s + τ, t). The gradient is independent of time; hence with
u(s, t) also u(s+τ, t) is a solutions of (6.63). The ﬂow (6.64) on X∞is gradient-like.
Indeed, deﬁne the continuous function V by
V : X∞−→R , u →ΦH

u(0)

.
Then it follows from Lemma 2 that V is a Ljapunov function, i.e., τ →V (u · τ)
strictly increases with τ, along nonconstant orbits. In addition, the constant orbits
of the ﬂow are the 1-periodic solutions of the Hamiltonian equation ˙x = XH(x).
Hence the rest points are the same as the ones for the set X∞previously introduced
in Section 6.3. But the new set X∞diﬀers from the old one. If the set X∞is
compact and if its cohomology is suﬃciently rich, we can conclude from Theorem
1 a certain number of rest points of the ﬂow. Before we turn to the compactness
proof of X∞which is closely related to elliptic regularity theory, we ﬁrst address
the question how we can replace T 2n by a general compact symplectic manifold
(M, ω).
We choose an almost complex structure J compatible with ω, in the sense that
gJ deﬁned by
gJ(m)(h, k) = ω(m)

h, J(m)k

(6.65)
for m ∈M and h, k ∈TmM, is a Riemannian metric on M. We consider the
partial diﬀerential equation for u ∈C∞(R × S1, M).
∂u
∂s + J(u)∂u
∂t + H′(t, u) = 0 .
(6.66)

228
Chapter 6 The Arnold conjecture, Floer homology . . .
Here H′ is the gradient associated to gJ with respect to the x-variable. Again
we assume that for ﬁxed s, the loop u(s)(·) in C∞(S1, M) is contractible. Hence
s →u(s) deﬁnes a map from R into C∞
c (S1, M), where C∞
c
denotes the set of
contractible loops on M. Here the ﬁrst diﬃculty arises. What should the functional
ΦH be? There is only one way to produce such a ΦH: if x is a contractible loop in
M. We pick an extension ¯x : D →M, where D is the closed unit disc bounded by
S1 = ∂D such that ¯x|∂D = x. We now deﬁne the action by
ΦH(x) =

D
¯x∗ω −
1

0
H

t, x(t)

dt .
(6.67)
Unfortunately, this is in general not well-deﬁned. Namely, if we take another
extension ˜x of x the numbers 
D ¯x∗ω and 
D ˜x∗ω need not be the same. In fact
they may diﬀer by a number r ∈Γ ⊂R, where Γ, the so-called period group, is
the image of the group homomorphism
σ : π2(M) →R : [u] →

S2
u∗ω , where u : S2 →M.
We note that the map σ is well-deﬁned by Stokes’s theorem; moreover, Γ = im
(σ) is a subgroup of (R, +). Summing up we only have a functional
ΦH : C∞
c
(S1, M) →R/Γ .
Since for M = T 2n we have π2 = 0, we conclude that Γ = {0} implying R/Γ = R.
In contrast to this special example, the subgroup Γ can be dense as the following
example shows. Take M = S2 × S2 with the symplectic form Ω⊕rΩwhere Ωis
a volume form of total volume 1 on S2 and where r > 0 is an irrational number.
Then Γ
=

a + br
			 a, b ∈Z

, which is dense in R. We point out that
the condition Γ = {0}, which for example is satisﬁed if π2(M) = 0, is a very
restrictive condition. Indeed, since M is compact we know that the cohomology
class of the symplectic structure ω, say [ω], is nontrivial in H2(M, R). If π1(M) = 0
the Hurewicz-homomorphism
π2(M) →H2(M, Z)
is an isomorphism. Therefore the homomorphism σ is nontrivial, implying that
Γ ̸= {0}. We see that Γ = {0} implies π1(M) ̸= {0}. We want to point out
that the case Γ ̸= {0} can also be treated at least partially. In fact, in order to
do Morse theory, one only needs a hypothesis on the ﬁrst Chern class of TM,
which is vacuous in dimensions 2,4 and 6. Under this condition no hypothesis on
the symplectic form is needed. So, in particular, the Arnold conjectures for the
Morse theory hold in dimensions 2,4 and 6. We refer the reader to H. Hofer and
D. Salamon [119] and K. Ono [172].

6.4 Elliptic methods and symplectic fixed points
229
In the following we shall assume Γ = {0} hence requiring that

S2
u∗ω = 0 for u : S2 →M .
(6.68)
Now we have a well-deﬁned functional ΦH : C∞
c (S1, M) →R deﬁned on the
contractible loops by (6.67). In order to prove the Arnold conjecture we need to
show the compactness of X∞and to compute its cohomology. The compactness will
be studied by using elliptic regularity theory. The cohomology will be computed
by using an approximation argument, replacing the sets XT previously used in
Section 6.2 by suitable substitutes.
The ﬁrst aim is to replace the O.D.E. boundary value problem XT in Section
6.2 by a boundary value problem for an elliptic P.D.E. To ﬁnd the appropriate
modiﬁcation for the general symplectic manifold, we go back to the torus case
and consider x ∈T 2n × E+. Identifying R2n with Cn, a loop x ∈T 2n × E+ is
represented as
x(t) = a0 +
∞

k=1
ak e2πikt ,
(6.69)
with a0 ∈T 2n and ak ∈Cn. We shall view S1 as the boundary ∂D of the closed
disc D = {z ∈C : |z| ≤1} and extend the map x : S1 = ∂D →Cn to a map
u : D →C by deﬁning
u(z) = a0 +
∞

k=1
ak zk ,
z ∈D .
(6.70)
Clearly u(e2πit) = x(t) and since this loop belongs to H1/2(S1), the series
converges on every disc |z| ≤ρ < 1 uniformly and hence deﬁnes a holomorphic
map from the open disc ˚
D = {z ∈C : |z| < 1} into T 2n. Setting z = s + it we
have us + iut = 0 on ˚
D. We claim that
1
2

D

|us|2 + |ut|2
ds dt =

D
u∗ω0 = 1
2||x||2
H1/2(S1) ,
(6.71)
provided a0 = 0. We conclude that an element x ∈T 2n × E+ can be considered as
the boundary x = u|∂D of a holomorphic disc u : D →T 2n of ﬁnite area, which
is positive if x ̸= 0
0 <

D
u∗ω0 < ∞.

230
Chapter 6 The Arnold conjecture, Floer homology . . .
The proof of (6.71) is a simple computation. Setting z = s + it, we ﬁnd
1
2

D

|us|2 + |ut|2
ds dt =

D
ω(us, ut) ds dt
=

D
ω
 ∞

k=1
ak k zk−1,
∞

k=1
ak i k zk−1
ds dt
=
1
0
 2π

0
⟨
∞

k=1
ak k rk−1 e2πi(k−1)ϑ ,  ak k rk−1 e2π(k−1)iϑ ⟩2πr dϑ

dr
=
2π
1
0
∞

k=1
|ak|2 k2 r2k−1 dr = π
∞

k=1
|ak|2 |k| =
1
2||x||2
H1/2 < ∞,
proving the claim. Similarly x ∈T 2n × E−can be considered as boundary of an
anti-holomorphic disc. It is represented by
x(t) = b0 +
∞

k=1
bk e−2πikt ,
and the extension v : D →Cn is deﬁned by
v(z) = b0 +
∞

k=1
bk¯zk ,
z ∈D ,
so that v(e2πit) = x(t). The map v is anti-holomorphic i.e., it satisﬁes vs −ivt = 0
on ˚
D. Moreover, the area is ﬁnite and negative:
−∞< 
D
v∗ω0
=
−1
2

D

|vs|2 + |vt|2
ds dt
=
−1
2||x||2
H1/2(S1) ≤0 ,
(6.72)
provided b0 = 0. We now can rewrite the boundary value problem for XT studied
in Section 6.2 (however replacing the negative gradient ﬂow by the positive one)
as follows
as + J at = 0
on ˚
D
us −u+ + u−+ j∗H′(t, u) = 0
on (−T, T) × S1
bs −Jbt = 0
on ˚
D ,
(6.73)
with the matching boundary conditions
u(−T, t)
=
a(e2πit)
for t ∈S1
u(T, t)
=
b(e2πit)
for t ∈S1 ,
(6.74)
where S1 = R/Z. The solution triplet (a, u, b) can be visualized as follows:

6.4 Elliptic methods and symplectic fixed points
231
Dα
ZT
Dβ
Fig. 6.8
Not regularizing the L2-gradient in the model equation we are led to
as + Jat = 0
on ˚
D
us + Jut + H′(t, u) = 0
on (−T, T) × S1
bs −Jbt = 0
on ˚
D ,
(6.75)
together with the matching boundary conditions (6.74). We shall rewrite the sys-
tem (6.75) together with the boundary conditions as a single equation. We de-
ﬁne the Riemannian sphere ST by adding two caps at the ends of the cylinder
ZT = [−T, T] × S1 such that
ST = D

α
ZT

β
D .
(6.76)
Here α and β denote the identiﬁcations
α
:
e2πit ∼(−T, t)
β
:
e−2πit ∼(T, t) .
Next we deﬁne the structure of a complex manifold on ST by introducing the
charts
ψ : (−T, T) × S1
−→
C
:
(s, t) →e2π(s+it)
ϕ1 : D 
α
[−T, 0) × S1
−→
C
:
 z ∈D →z
(s, t) →e2π(s+T +it)
ϕ2 : (0, T] × S1 
β
D
−→
C
:
 z ∈D →¯z
(s, t) →e2π(s−T +it)
.
(6.77)
We observe that the transition maps ϕ1◦ψ−1 and ϕ2◦ψ−1 are holomorphic. These
charts deﬁne a complex structure j on ST . By the Uniformization Theorem (ST , j)

232
Chapter 6 The Arnold conjecture, Floer homology . . .
is bi-holomorphic to (S2, i), where S2 = C ∪{∞} is the standard Riemannian
sphere, see, e.g., O. Forster [92]. For notational convenience we denote the α-disc
by D1 and the β-disc by D2. Consider now v ∈C∞(ST , T 2n) and deﬁne a map
Lv, which is smooth on ˚
D1, ˚
D2 and (−T, T) × S1 as
Lv = Tv + J ◦(Tv) ◦j + χ[−T,T ]×S1

H′(v)ds −JH′(v)dt

.
(6.78)
Here (s, t) are the coordinates on [−T, T]×S1 and χ[−T,T ]×S1 is the corresponding
characteristic function on ST . Moreover Tv is the tangent map of v : ST →T 2n.
Observe that (Lv)(z) is a linear map TzST →Tv(z)T 2n, which satisﬁes the relation
−J ◦(Lv)(z) = (Lv)(z) ◦j .
We denote by AT 2n →ST ×T 2n the vector bundle whose ﬁbre over (z, m) consists
of all complex anti-linear maps γ : TzST →TmT 2n, satisfying γj = −Jγ. If v
is a map ST →T 2n, we denote by v∗AT 2n the pullback of AT 2n by the graph
z →(z, v(z)) of v. Then Lv may be viewed as a section of v∗AT 2n →ST . Assume
v is continuous and smooth on ST \{(±T, t)|t ∈S1} and moreover satisﬁes Lv = 0
away from the circle {±T} × S1. That precisely means that Lv is the zero section
of v∗AT 2n →ST . Consider the vector ﬁeld
∂
∂s on (−T, T) × S1. Then
0
=
(Lv)(s, t)( ∂
∂s)
=
vs + Jvt + H′(t, v) .
We see that v satisﬁes diﬀerential equation (6.75) on (−T, T) × S1. On D1 and
D2 we have vs + Jvt = 0 and vs −Jvt = 0 respectively. Moreover, the boundary
conditions are satisﬁed on the common parts of D1, D2 and [−T, T] × S1.
This new construction can easily be generalized to arbitrary compact symplec-
tic manifolds. For this let us denote by j the complex structure on ST and by J
an almost complex structure compatible with ω on M. For v : ST →M we deﬁne
the section Lv of v∗AM by
(Lv)(z) = Tv(z) + J(v) ◦Tv(z) ◦j
+χ[−T,T ]×S1(z)

H′
t, v(z)

ds −J

v(z)

H′
t, v(z)

dt

.
(6.79)
In order to study the equation Lv = 0, we need to develop a suitable functional
analytic set up. If 2 < p < ∞we consider the Banach manifold W 1,p(ST , M)
consisting of maps from ST into M belonging to the Sobolev class W 1,p. For the
construction of a natural diﬀerentiable structure on W 1,p(ST , M) we refer the
reader to the article by H. Eliasson [79]. For v ∈W 1,p(ST , M) we consider the
bundle v∗AM →ST and let Lp(v∗AM) be the associated space of Lp-sections.
Then, we can equip
Lp
W 1,p(ST , M)∗AM

=

v∈W 1,p(ST ,M)
{v} × Lp(v∗AM)

6.4 Elliptic methods and symplectic fixed points
233
with the structure of a Banach space bundle over the Banach manifold
W 1,p(ST , M). Summing up we have formulated the elliptic system (6.75) to-
gether with the matching boundary conditions (6.74) in such a way that solu-
tions are to be found as the zeroes of the section L of the Banach space bundle
Lp(W 1,p(ST , M)∗AM) →W 1,p(ST , M). We shall denote the set of solutions by
XT = {v ∈W 1,p(ST , M)|L(v) = 0}.
Note that we cannot expect a solution v : ST →M of L(v) = 0 to be of
regularity better than W 1,p near the boundary ∂ZT of the cylinder ZT . This is
due to the non-smoothness of the cut-oﬀfunction s →χ[−T,T ](s) at the boundary
components s = ±T of ZT . Recall that these two boundary components agree
with the boundaries of the two disks D glued to the cylinder. However, it follows
from the results in Appendix 5, that a solution v of L(v) = 0 is smooth except at
∂ZT where the derivatives in s (i.e., normal to the boundaries) do not match. To
be more precise we have W 1,p(ST , M) ⊂C0(ST , M) by the Sobolev embedding
theorem, since p > 2. Hence v being continuous can be studied in local coordinates.
If z is a point in the interior of the cylinder ZT we have, in local coordinates,
v ∈W 1,p(Bε, R2n) with a small open ball Bε centered at z. Moreover v is a weak
solution of a special system of ﬁrst order elliptic equations and we conclude that
v ∈C∞(Bε, R2n) by the “inner” regularity theory of elliptic partial diﬀerential
equations. Similarly, the solution v of L(v) is smooth in the interior of the disks
D. It is proved in Appendix 5 that, in addition, v has smooth extensions from the
interior of ZT to its boundary ∂ZT and also from the interior of the disks to their
boundaries ∂D1 ∪∂D2 = ∂ZT . This does, of course, not mean that the solutions
ﬁt smoothly at the boundary, since the derivatives (in s) normal to the boundary
do not agree. But the restriction of v to the boundary ∂ZT is smooth, so that, in
particular, v(−T) and v(T) are smooth loops belonging to C∞
c (S1, M).
We can now use the variational structure of our problem to derive a natural
a priori estimate for solutions v ∈XT . Recall the assumption ω|π2(M) = 0 and
assume that L(v) = 0. Let C > 0 be a constant bounding | max
(t,x) H(t, x)| and
| min
(t,x) H(t, x)|. We estimate
ΦH

v(−T)

=

D1
v∗ω −
1
0
H

t, v(−T, t)

dt
≥
−max
(t,x) H(t, x) ≥−C .
We have used that for holomorphic maps

D1
v∗ω = 1
2

D1
|∇v|2
J ds dt ≥0 .

234
Chapter 6 The Arnold conjecture, Floer homology . . .
Similarly
ΦH

v(T)

=

D2
v∗ω −
1
0
H

t, v(T, t)

dt
≤
−min
(t,x) H(t, x) ≤C ,
using that for anti-holomorphic maps

D2
v∗ω = −1
2

D2
|∇v|2
J ≤0 .
Summarizing, we have proved
Lemma 3. There exists a constant C > 0, independent of T > 0 such that every
solution v : ST →M of Lv = 0 satisﬁes
−C ≤ΦH

v(−T)

≤ΦH

v(s)

≤ΦH

v(T)

≤C , for −T ≤s ≤T .
From this we conclude
Lemma 4. There exists a constant C > 0, independent of T > 0 such that every
solution v ∈W 1,p(ST , M) of Lv = 0 satisﬁes
1
2
T

−T
1

0
			∂v
∂s
			
2
J +
			∂v
∂t −XHt(v)
			
2
J

ds dt ≤2C .
Proof. We compute, using Lemma 3,
2C
≥
ΦH

v(T)

−ΦH

v(−T)

=
T
−T
d
ds ΦH

v(s)

ds =
T
−T
||Φ′
H

v(s)

||2
J,L2 ds
=
1
2
T
−T

|| d
ds v(s)||2
J,L2 + ||˙v(s) −XHt

v(s)

||2
J,L2

ds
=
1
2
T
−T
1
0

| ∂v
∂s(s, t)|2
J + | ∂v
∂t −XHt

v(s, t)

|2
J

ds dt .
Here || ||J,L2 is the L2-norm for sections associated to the Riemannian metric gJ. ■
Our next aim is to study compactness properties of the space X∞of “bounded
orbits” deﬁned by
X∞=

u ∈C∞(R × S1, M)
			 us + J(u)ut + H′(t, u) = 0,
u(s) ∈C∞
c (S1, M)and

ΦH(u(s)

s∈R is bounded in R

.
(6.80)

6.4 Elliptic methods and symplectic fixed points
235
We note that for the estimates it is convenient in the following to view M as a
compact submanifold of some RN via Whitney’s embedding theorem, see, e.g., M.
Hirsch [113]. Since C∞(R × S1, RN) is a Frechet space with the usual translation
invariant metric d we may view C∞(R × S1, M) as a closed subspace of C∞(R ×
S1, RN). The induced metric we denote also by d. We shall see that X∞is a
compact subspace of C∞(R × S1, RN). We begin with
Proposition 10. There exists a constant C > 0 such that for every u ∈X∞we have
ΦH

u(s)

∈[−C, C] ,
s ∈R .
Proof. By assumption ΦH(u(R)) is bounded in R. Hence, abbreviating || || =
|| ||J,L2,
+∞

−∞
||Φ′
H

u(s)

||2 ds =
+∞

−∞
 d
dsΦH(u(s))

ds < +∞.
Consequently there exists a sequence (sn) ⊂R, with sn →+∞, such that
ΦH

u(sn)

−→α ∈R and ||Φ′
H

u(sn)

|| −→0 .
Deﬁning xn = u(sn) ∈C∞(S1, M) we obtain
|| ˙xn −XH(xn)|| −→0 .
(6.81)
Considering xn as a map into RN we deduce by the compactness of M that
|| ˙xn||L2(S1,RN ) ≤
const, where we used the usual L2-inner product. Hence we
ﬁnd a subsequence satisfying
xn ⇀x
weakly in H1,2(S1, RN)
xn →x
strongly in C0(S1, RN) .
(6.82)
The latter convergence follows using the Arzel`a-Ascoli Theorem. From (6.81) and
(6.82) we conclude that ˙xn is a Cauchy-sequence in L2 so that
xn →x in H1,2(S1, M) and ˙x = XH(x) .
(6.83)
Consequently x ∈C∞(S1, M) and x is a 1-periodic solution of the Hamiltonian
vector ﬁeld. Now ΦH(xn) →ΦH(x) and hence α = ΦH(x). We can argue similarly
for sequences xn = u(sn) where sn →−∞. By the Arzel`a-Ascoli Theorem the set
of all 1-periodic solutions ˙x = XH(x) is compact in C∞(S1, RN), so that the set
of critical levels
C : =

ΦH(x) | Φ′
H(x) = 0

is compact in R. We choose C > 0 so large that the interval [−C, C] contains C.
Since s →ΦH(u(s)) is monotone and since, as we have seen, the bounded solution
u connects critical points we conclude that −C ≤ΦH(u(s)) ≤C for all s ∈R
completing the proof of the proposition. ■

236
Chapter 6 The Arnold conjecture, Floer homology . . .
Corollary 1. X∞is closed in C∞(R × S1, M).
Proof. Pick any sequence (un) ⊂X∞. We know from Proposition 10 that
ΦH(un(R)) ⊂[−C, C]. Assume un →u for the C∞-metric d. We obtain for every
r > 0
C ≥ΦH

un(r)

≥ΦH

un(−r)

≥−C .
Hence, as n →∞the estimate implies that ΦH(u(R)) ⊂R is bounded. Moreover,
since
∂un
∂s + J(un) ∂un
∂t + H′(t, un) = 0, we may pass to the limit and see that
u satisﬁes the diﬀerential equation as well. This shows that indeed u ∈X∞as
claimed. ■
The geometric picture is as in Section 6.2: a “bounded orbit” u ∈X∞connects
1-periodic solutions of the Hamiltonian equation ˙x = XH(x) on M. We next
prove that X∞is a compact subset of C∞(R × S1, M). Note that the metric
space C∞(R × S1, M) has the Heine-Borel property; this is a consequence of the
Arzel`a-Ascoli Theorem applied to all the derivatives of the functions. Since, by
the Corollary, X∞is a closed set we have to show that X∞⊂C∞(R × S1, M)
is bounded. This requires that for every compact K ⊂R × S1 and every integer
n ∈N there is a constant CK,n > 0, such that
sup
|Dαu(s, t)| ≤CK,n for all u ∈X∞.
(s, t) ∈K
|α| ≤n
(6.84)
The important ingredient for the proof of (6.84) is a gradient estimate uniform in
u ∈X∞. Here we shall use the assumption ω|π2(M) = 0 in a crucial way. Note
that in order to work in local coordinates we have to make sure that, for a whole
sequence of mappings, a ﬁxed local neighborhood of a point is mapped into the
same chart of the image space.
Theorem 8. Suppose ω|π2(M) = 0. Then there exists a constant A > 0 such that
|∇u(s, t)|J ≤A
for all u ∈X∞and (s, t) ∈R × S1.
Proof. Arguing indirectly we ﬁnd sequences (sk, tk) ∈R×S1 and (uk) ⊂X∞such
that
|∇uk(sk, tk)|J −→+∞.
Since X∞is invariant under the R-action (6.64) we may assume that sk = 0
replacing uk by uk · sk. Moreover, taking a subsequence we may assume tk →t0.
Pick any sequence (εk) satisfying
εk > 0 , εk →0 , εk|(∇uk)(sk, tk)|J −→+∞.
(6.85)
We wish this sequence to meet additional conditions and use a little trick. It is
based on the following:

6.4 Elliptic methods and symplectic fixed points
237
Lemma 5. Let (X, d) be a complete metric space and g : X →[0, +∞) a continuous
map. Assume x0 ∈X and ε0 > 0 are given. Then there exists x ∈X and ε > 0
such that
0 < ε ≤ε0
g(x)ε ≥g(x0)ε0
d(x, x0) ≤2ε0
g(y) ≤2g(x) for all y satisfying d(y, x) ≤ε .
Proof of Lemma 5. Assume there is no x1 ∈X satisfying d(x1, x0) ≤ε0 and
g(x1) > 2g(x0). Then the statement follows taking x = x0 and ε = ε0. Otherwise
we can pick such an x1 and, proceeding inductively, we can assume there are
x0, x1, . . . , xn satisfying
d(xk, xk−1) ≤
ε0
2k−1 and g(xk) > 2g(xk−1)
for all 1 ≤k ≤n. Then if there does not exist an xn+1 with
d(xn+1, xn) ≤ε0
2n and g(xn+1) > 2g(xn),
(6.86)
the statement follows choosing x = xn and ε = ε0
2n . Indeed xn satisﬁes d(xn, x0) ≤
d(xn, xn−1) + · · · + d(x1, x0) ≤2ε0, and g(xn) > 2g(xn−1) > 22g(xn−2) > 2ng(x0)
and hence g(xn)ε > g(x0)ε0. Moreover, from (6.86) we conclude that if d(y, xn) ≤
ε, then g(yn) ≤2g(xn), hence proving the claim. If, on the other hand, there
exists an xn+1 satisfying (6.86) we continue the process. It must terminate after
ﬁnitely many steps since otherwise we have a Cauchy sequence (xn) ⊂X satisfying
g(xn) →+∞. This is not possible, since xn →x∗and g is continuous at x∗. ■
In order to simplify the notation we shall write in the following | · | instead of
the Riemannian norm | · |J on the tangent space. In view of the above lemma we
can replace xk = (sk, tk) and εk by slightly modiﬁed sequences and may assume,
again using the R-action, that the above sequence uk satisﬁes, in addition
|∇uk(s, t)| ≤2|∇uk(0, tk)| ,
if |s|2 + |t −tk|2 ≤ε2
k, 0 ≤tk ≤1 .
(6.87)
Here we conveniently view the maps u as maps deﬁned on R × R by a 1-periodic
continuation in the t-variable. Rescaling we deﬁne a new sequence vk ∈C∞(R2, M)
by
vk(s, t) = uk

(0, tk) +
1
Rk
(s, t)

,
where Rk = |∇uk(0, tk)| .
(6.88)

238
Chapter 6 The Arnold conjecture, Floer homology . . .
Denote by Dk the “large” discs Dk = {x = (s, t) ∈R2| |x| ≤εkRk} ⊂R2. Then
the sequence vk has the following properties:
vk ∈C∞(Dk, M)
|∇vk(x)| ≤2 for x ∈Dk
|∇vk(0)| = 1
εkRk −→+∞.
(6.89)
Moreover vk satisﬁes the partial diﬀerential equation
∂
∂s vk + J(vk) ∂
∂tvk = −1
Rk
H′(tk + t
Rk
, vk)
(6.90)
on Dk. Since uk ∈X∞we ﬁnd in view of Lemma 4

Dk
|∇vk|2 ds dt ≤13C ,
(6.91)
for k large, with the universal constant C > 0 of Lemma 4. Indeed, introducing
the “small” discs Bk = Bεk(0, tk) ⊂R2 we ﬁnd

Dk
|∇vk|2 ds dt =

Bk
|∇uk|2 ds dt
=

Bk
 			 ∂uk
∂s
			
2
+
			 ∂uk
∂t −XH(uk) + XH(uk)
			
2 
ds dt
≤
3

Bk
			 ∂uk
∂s
			
2
ds dt + 2

Bk
			XH(uk)
			
2
dsdt
≤
3

R×S1
			 ∂uk
∂s
			
2
ds dt + lk ≤12C + lk ,
where lk →0 as k →∞. This proves the claim (6.91). Since the gradients of vk
are uniformly bounded, we shall conclude later on by the elliptic estimates for the
equations (6.90) the following crucial:
Lemma 6. Assume the sequence vk satisﬁes (6.89) and (6.90). Then there exists
v ∈C∞(R2, M) and a subsequence such that
vk →v in C∞(R2, M) .
Postponing the proof of this lemma, we show next how Theorem 8 follows from
our topological assumption that [ω]|π2(M) = 0. We observe that the smooth map
v guaranteed by the lemma is a holomorphic map of ﬁnite and positive area, hence
not a constant map. Indeed from (6.89), (6.90) and (6.91) we deduce the following

6.4 Elliptic methods and symplectic fixed points
239
properties of v:
|∇v(0)|
=
1
|∇v(x)|
≤
2 ,
x ∈R2
vs + J(v)vt
=
0
0 <
			

R2 v∗ω
			
=
1
2

R2
			∇v
			
2
< ∞.
(6.92)
Deﬁne the monotone function Φ(R) for R > 0 by
Φ(R) : = |

DR
v∗ω| = 1
2

DR
|∇v|2 ↗1
2

R2
|∇v|2 .
(6.93)
The restriction to the boundary of the holomorphic disc v|DR : DR →M deﬁnes
the contractible loop xR : S1 →M by xR(τ) = v(Re2πiτ). In view of the diﬀeren-
tial equation in (6.92) this loop satisﬁes | ˙xR(τ)| = 2πR| ∂v
∂s(Re2πiτ)|. Computing
in polar coordinates we ﬁnd that

R2
|∂v
∂s|2 =
∞

0
1
2πR
1

0
| ˙xR(τ)|2 dτ dR ,
which is ﬁnite in view of (6.92). Consequently, there is a sequence of holomorphic
discs v|DRj such that the arc lengths l(xRj) of their boundaries tend to zero as
j →∞. In order to estimate the area of these discs by the arc length, we cover
the compact manifold M by ﬁnitely many open sets Uj ⊂M, 1 ≤j ≤N such
that each ¯Uj is diﬀeomorphic to a closed ball. There is a constant d > 0 such that
every loop x on M having diameter ≤d is contained in one of the sets Uj. By
Poincar´e’s lemma we conclude that ω| ¯Uj = dλj for a 1-form λj on ¯Uj. Therefore
we can estimate the action of a loop x(t) ⊂Uj for t ∈[0, 1] by the arc length l(x),
|

[0,1]
x∗λj| ≤l(x) ||λj|| ,
(6.94)
where ||λJ|| = max{||λJ(m)||, m ∈¯Uj}, with the standard norm of the linear map
λj(m) ∈(TmM)∗. Consequently, if γ = max ||λj||, 1 ≤j ≤N, we conclude for
every loop x on M having diameter ≤d that
|

x
λj| ≤l(x) · γ .
(6.95)
Consider now the small loop xR(τ) which is the boundary of the holomorphic disc
vR. Then it is contained in one of the open sets, say Uj. Since it is contractible we

240
Chapter 6 The Arnold conjecture, Floer homology . . .
can choose a diﬀerent disc w : DR →M also satisfying w|∂D = xR but which, in
addition, is contained in Uj so that w(DR) ⊂Uj. If, for example α : ¯Uj →B1(0) ⊂
R2n is a local chart we deﬁne such a disc by w(re2πiϑ) = α−1( r
Rα ◦v(Re2πiϑ)).
∂D
D
v
R
v(∂D)
w(D)
M
v(D)
C
Fig. 6.9
Finally we play the Joker. Since [ω]|π2(M) = 0 we conclude for the discs v|DR
and w

DR
v∗ω =

DR
w∗ω .
(6.96)
Hence applying Stokes’ theorem in Uj, we ﬁnd in view of (6.95) that
Φ(R) = |

DR
v∗ω| = |

[0,1]
x∗
Rλj| ≤l(xR) · γ .
However, there is a sequence of holomorphic discs with l(xRj) →0 as we have
seen above, and hence we arrive at a contradiction to the monotonicity (6.93) of
Φ(R). This contradiction shows that our assumption, namely that the gradients
of u ∈X∞are not uniformly bounded, is false. Hence Theorem 8 is true.
The above techniques are usually referred to as bubbling oﬀanalysis. In order
to complete the proof of Theorem 8, it remains to prove Lemma 6.
Proof of Lemma 6. In order to simplify the procedure we ﬁrst get rid of the Hamil-
tonian term in (6.90), which tends to zero as Rk →∞. Using a trick due to M. Gro-
mov [107] we put ˜u = (s, t, m) ∈R2 ×M and deﬁne Jk : T(R2 ×M) →T(R2 ×M)

6.4 Elliptic methods and symplectic fixed points
241
by
Jk(˜u)(α, β, h) =

−β, α, J(m)h + βH′
k(t, m) + αJ(m)H′
k(t, m)

,
(6.97)
where H′
k(t, m) =
1
Rk H′(tk +
t
Rk , m). One veriﬁes readily that J2
k = −id. Hence Jk
is a sequence of almost complex structures on R2 × M converging together with
all its derivatives uniformly on R2 × M to the almost complex structure i ⊕J, if
we identify R2 with C in the usual way. Deﬁne the sequence ˜vk ∈C∞(R2, R2 ×M)
by
˜vk(s, t) =

s, t, vk(s, t)

.
(6.98)
Then, on Dk = BεkRk(0) ⊂R2,
∂
∂s˜vk + Jk(˜vk) ∂
∂t ˜vk
=
0
|∇˜vk(s, t)|
≤
4
|∇˜vk(0, 0)|
≥
1
εk Rk
→
∞.
(6.99)
The aim is to ﬁnd a subsequence such that ˜vk →˜v in C∞(R2, R2 × M) for a map
˜v ∈C∞(R2, R2 × M). In view of the Arzel`a-Ascoli Theorem it is suﬃcient to ﬁnd
C∞
loc-bounds for ˜vk, i.e., for every compact set K we have to ﬁnd uniform (in k)
bounds for vk together with all the derivatives. Choosing p > 2 it is suﬃcient, in
view of Sobolev’s embedding theorem to establish on every compact subset K ⊂R2
uniform bounds in W l,p(K) instead of Cl(K) for all l ≥1. In order to establish
such W l,p
loc-bounds, we proceed by induction. By assumption the gradients of ˜vk are
uniformly bounded so that the W 1,p
loc -bounds are guaranteed. Arguing indirectly
we shall assume now that there are W l,p
loc-bounds but not W l+1,p
loc
-bounds, for some
l ≥1. Hence possibly taking a subsequence of ˜vk, we ﬁnd a sequence xk ∈R2 and
a sequence εk > 0 satisfying εk →0 such that
xk →x0 and |˜vk|W l+1,p(Bεk (xk))→+∞,
(6.100)
where, viewing M as a subset of RN, we consider ˜vk as a map from R2 into RN.
Since, by assumption, |∇˜vk| is uniformly bounded we conclude, by the Arzel`a-
Ascoli theorem, for a subsequence, that
˜vk(x0) →(x0, m) and ˜vk →˜v in C0
loc .
(6.101)
This allows us to localize the problem in a coordinate chart. Around (x0, m) ∈
R2 × M there is a chart given by α : U →R2+2n, satisfying α(x0, m) = 0 and
˜vk

Bε0(x0)

⊂V ⊂V ⊂U ,
(6.102)

242
Chapter 6 The Arnold conjecture, Floer homology . . .
for some ε0 > 0 and for a suitable open neighborhood V of (x0, m) and for all k
suﬃciently large. Hence deﬁning the smooth functions uk := α ◦˜vk : Bε0(x, 0) →
R2+2n, and replacing Jk by Jk deﬁned by
Jk(y) = Tα

α−1(y)

· Jk

α−1(y)

Tα−1(y) ,
(6.103)
y ∈α(U) ⊂R2+2n we have, on Bε0(x0),
∂uk
∂s
+ Jk(uk) ∂uk
∂t
=
0
uk(x0)
→
0
|∇uk(x)|
≤
C
|uk|W l+1,p(Bε0(xk))
→
+∞.
(6.104)
Moreover, Jk →J∞in C∞for some almost complex structure J∞in R2+2n near
0. We shall denote by J0 the following constant complex structure on R2+2n
J0 := J∞(0) ,
J2
0 = −1l .
Now we make use of the following well-known elliptic estimate for the Cauchy-
Riemann operator. For every 1 < p < ∞, m and n ≥0 there exists a constant
C > 0 such that
C|u|m+1,p ≤|us + J0 ut|m,p ,
(6.105)
for every smooth function u : R2 →R2n+2 having compact support in the unit
ball. This is the classical estimate for the Cauchy-Riemann operator (if written in
complex notation), J0 being constant. For a proof we refer to the monograph by
E. Stein [205], p. 60. In order to apply this estimate, we take a smooth function
β : R →[0, 1] such that β(s) = 1 for |s| ≤1
2 and β(s) = 0 for |s| ≥1. For λ > 0 we
deﬁne the function αλ(x) := β( x−x0
λ
). Then αλ(x) = 0 if |x −x0| ≥λ. To simplify
the formulas we shall use the abbreviating notation
|u|l : = |u|W l,p(Bε0(x0)) ,
where p > 2 is ﬁxed. Moreover, we shall abbreviate α ≡αλ. We then conclude
from (6.105) that
C |αuk|l+1 ≤|(αuk)s + J0(αuk)t|l .
By the Cauchy-Riemann equation, (uk)s = −Jk(uk)(uk)t, and
C |αuk|l+1 ≤C1(λ)|uk|l + |αtJk(uk)uk|l + |[(J0 −Jk(uk)](αuk)t|l .
Using now the Leibniz rule for diﬀerentiation and the inductive assumption, name-
ly that |uk|l ≤Cl, we conclude
C |αuk|l+1 ≤|J0 −Jk(uk)|L∞(Bλ(x0)) · |αuk|l+1 + C3(λ) .

6.4 Elliptic methods and symplectic fixed points
243
Since uk(x0) →0, uk →u∞uniformly on Bε0(x0) and J0 = lim Jk(0), we see,
that the factor in front of |αuk|l+1 on the right hand side is smaller than C
2 , if λ
is suﬃciently small, and if k is suﬃciently large. Since α ≡1 on Bεk(xk) as soon
as k is suﬃciently large, we ﬁnally conclude
|uk|W l+1,p(Bεk (xk)) ≤C4 < ∞,
if k is suﬃciently large. This obviously contradicts the last statement in (6.104)
and hence the proof of Lemma 6 is ﬁnished. ■
With Lemma 6, the proof of Theorem 8 is completed: we have uniform gradient
estimates for u ∈X∞. Therefore, we can apply the same arguments as in Lemma
6 and obtain C∞
loc-bounds, uniform for u ∈X∞. In addition, using the R-action
(6.95) on X∞we can get much more, namely Cl
b bounds on R×S1, with the norms
deﬁned by |u|Cl
b = sup |Dαu(s, t)|, where the supremum is taken over |α| ≤l and
(s, t) ∈R × S1. We shall show that
sup
u∈X∞
|u|Cl
b(R×S1,RN ) < ∞,
for every l ≥0, so that X∞is uniformly bounded in C∞(R × S1, M); here we
view M again as a subset of RN. The easiest way to see this is the following.
Since the uniform gradient estimate for X∞holds on all of R × S1, we can take
the R-action on X∞, given by τ · u(s, t) = u(s + τ, t) and only have to prove the
uniform Cl estimates for X∞on a ﬁnite covering of the interval s∗×[0, 1] ⊂R×S1
by compact sets for some ﬁxed s∗∈R. But this we have just done in the proof of
the previous lemma and the claim is proved. Since X∞is closed and bounded in
C∞(R × S1, M) we have demonstrated
Proposition 11. The set X∞of bounded orbits is a compact subset of the metric
space C∞(R × S1, M).
On X∞there is as we have seen a continuous ﬂow which is gradient-like and
we can estimate the number of rest points by Ljusternik-Schnirelman (Theorem
6), provided of course that X∞̸= ∅. In order to get an insight into the topology
of this set X∞of bounded orbits we shall proceed as in Section 6.2 and ﬁrst prove
that the sets XT are close to X∞if T is large. Recall that the space XT is deﬁned
as the set of solutions
XT : = {u ∈W 1,p(ST , M) | Lu = 0} ,
(6.106)
where the nonlinear operator L is deﬁned in (6.79). Recall also that we cannot
expect better regularity properties for these solutions, since L contains the non-
smooth term χ[−T,T ]×S1H1. Since p > 2 we have W 1,p(ST , M) ⊂C0(ST , M) in
view of the Sobolev embedding theorem. However, we shall restrict now the solu-
tions u to the cylinder ZT ⊂ST . By elliptic regularity theory, these restrictions are
smooth as we have pointed out above: u|ZT ∈C∞(ZT , M). Moreover, by Lemma

244
Chapter 6 The Arnold conjecture, Floer homology . . .
4, there exists a constant C > 0 such that for every solutions v ∈XT , the following
estimate (on ZT ) holds
1
2
T

−T
1

0

|∂v
∂s|2
J + |∂v
∂t −XHt(v)|2
J

ds dt ≤2C,
(6.107)
where C is independent of T > 0. Copying now the above C∞-estimates word for
word we ﬁnd, for every given multi-index α, a constant Cα > 0 such that for every
T > 2 and for every v ∈XT , the following estimate holds:
max {|Dαv(s, t)| | (s, t) ∈[−T + 2, T −2] × [0, 1]} ≤Cα.
(6.108)
From this we shall conclude that XT is close to X∞provided T is large enough.
To make this statement more precise we take a smooth function β : R →[0, 1]
satisfying β(s) = 1 for s ≤1, β′(s) > 0 for 1 < s < 2 and β(s) = 0 for s ≥2 and
deﬁne the family of cut oﬀfunctions βT : R →[0, 1] for T ≥5 by
βT (s)
=
1
for
|s| ≤
T −3
βT (s)
=
β(s −T + 3)
for
s ≥T −3
βT (s)
=
βT (−s)
for s ≥0 .
Given T0 > 5 we deﬁne for T ≥T0 a map
σT : XT
→
C∞(R × S1, M)
σT (u)(s, t)
=
u

sβT (s), t

.
(6.109)
By (6.108), we have uniform C∞-estimates on [−T + 1, T −1] × [0, 1]. Assume we
are given an open neighbourhood U of X∞in C∞(R × S1, M). This means that
there exists R > 0, ε > 0 and k ∈N such that every w ∈C∞(R×S1, M) for which
there exists an u ∈X∞satisfying
| Dα(u(s, t) −w(s, t)) | < ε, for all (s, t) ∈[−R, R] × S1, and for all |α| ≤k ,
belongs to U. We conclude that for T large
σT (XT ) ⊂U.
Indeed, arguing indirectly we ﬁnd a sequence Tn →∞and a sequence un ∈XTn
such that vn := σTn(un) ̸∈U. However, in view of (6.108) we ﬁnd that (vn) has
a subsequence converging with all its derivative on bounded subsets of R × S1
to some smooth map v : R × S1 →M. Hence we may assume without loss of
generality that (vn) converges to some v ̸∈U. We observe that for every R > 0
1
2
R

−R
1

0

|∂v
∂s|2
J + |∂v
∂t −XHt(v)|2
J

ds dt ≤2C ,
(6.110)

6.4 Elliptic methods and symplectic fixed points
245
in view of (6.107). If R →∞, we obtain
1
2
+∞

−∞
1

0

|∂v
∂s|2
J + |∂v
∂t −XHt(v)|2
J

ds dt ≤2C.
Clearly v satisﬁes the partial diﬀerential equation
∂v
∂s + J(v)∂v
∂s + H′(t, v) = 0.
This implies that v ∈X∞hence contradicting the fact that v ̸∈U.
Summing up we have shown that for a given open neighbourhood U of X∞in
C∞(R × S1, M), there exists T0 such that, for T ≥T0, the set σT (XT ) belongs to
U. Consequently, we have the following commutative diagram
6
-
?


@
@
@
R
τU
XT
M
U
X∞
j
τT
τ∞
σT
where the maps τT , τ∞and τU are the evaluation maps at the point (s, t) = (0, 0).
Assume now that τ ∗
T is injective in cohomology. Then τ ∗
U is also injective and
we consider the following diagram for the Alexander-Spanier cohomology:
-
@
@
@
I
6
τ ∗
∞
τ ∗
U
ˇH∗(U)
ˇH∗(X∞)
ˇH∗(M)
j∗
In view of the continuity property of the Alexander-Spanier cohomology, we
can take the direct limit over all open neighborhoods U of X∞in C∞(R × S1, M)
and conclude that the map τ ∗
∞is injective. We see that the set of bounded solutions
contains the cohomology of the underlying manifold M, in particular cup-length
(X∞) ≥cup-length (M). Applying the Ljusternik-Schnirelman Theorem (Theorem
6) to the continuous gradient-like ﬂow on X∞, we conclude the desired statement
Theorem 9. (A. Floer, H. Hofer) Assume (M, ω) is a compact symplectic manifold
satisfying [ω]|π2(M) = 0. Then every smooth time-periodic Hamiltonian vector
ﬁeld ˙x = XH(x) on M possesses at least cup-length (M) + 1 contractible periodic
solutions of period 1.

246
Chapter 6 The Arnold conjecture, Floer homology . . .
In order to complete the proof of Theorem 9, we still have to verify that the
map τ ∗
T is injective. Proceeding as in Section 6.2, we shall use Fredholm theory in
order to approximate XT by smooth compact manifolds of dimension 2n, whose
cohomology can be estimated using degree theory. For the following we choose a
ﬁxed number T > 5 and consider the operator L = LT as a smooth section of the
bundle
Lp(W 1,p(ST , M)∗AM) =

v∈W 1,p(ST ,M)
{v} × Lp(v∗AM).
over W 1,p(ST , M). We abbreviate this bundle by
E →B .
The idea now is to homotope the given section L to the Cauchy-Riemann type
section
∂
∂s + J ∂
∂t by considering the homotopy ρ →Lρ, 0 ≤ρ ≤1, deﬁned by
Lρ(v) = Tv + J(v)(Tv)j + ρχ(s)[H′(t, v)ds −J(v)H′(t, v)dt].
Introducing the evaluation map τ : B →M by v →v(0, 0) we deﬁne the associated
homotopy ˆLρ, 0 ≤ρ ≤1 by
ˆLρ(v) =

Lρ(v), τ(v)

, 0 ≤ρ ≤1 .
This is, by deﬁnition, a map from B into E × M, for every 0 ≤ρ ≤1. We may
view E × M as a Banach manifold bundle over B. For ρ = 0, the equation ˆL0(v) =
(0, m), for given m ∈M, only has the constant solution v0 ≡m, since there are
no nontrivial holomorphic spheres because of our assumption [ω]|π2(M) = 0 on
the manifold M. The linearization at this particular section v0 gives in the ﬁrst
component the linear Cauchy-Riemann operator, and in the second component
the evaluation at 0. To be more precise, denoting by D = ˆL′
0(v0) the linearization
at the particular point v0 ≡m, one computes that
Dh = (Th + J(m)(Th)j, h(0)).
In view of the results in Appendix 4, the operator D : W 1,p(ST , TmM) →
Lp(v∗
0AM) × TmM is an isomorphism. Now we use the Z2-degree for Fredholm
sections having Fredholm index zero. Given the necessary compactness conditions
we have just demonstrated that this degree is equal to 1. Let us assume for the mo-
ment that the set of solutions of Lρ(v) = 0, 0 ≤ρ ≤1 is compact. Then there exists
an open neighborhood of this solution set on which the Fredholm map is proper,
see S. Smale [201]. Consequently, by the homotopy property of the Z2-index, the
original map for ρ = 1 given by v →(L1(v), τ(v)) has also Z2-degree equal to 1.
To continue our line of thought, let us also assume for the moment that the image
of the map v →L1(v) is transversal to the zero section 0E of the bundle E. Then

6.4 Elliptic methods and symplectic fixed points
247
the preimage of 0E is a smooth compact submanifold Σ of B with dimension 2n.
Moreover, the evaluation map τ := τ|Σ : Σ →M, deﬁned by v →v(0, 0) will have
Z2-mapping degree equal to 1. This allows us to argue precisely as in Proposition 5
of Section 6.2 in order to prove that in Alexander-Spanier cohomology the map τ ∗
T
is injective as desired, hence completing the proof of Theorem 9. To reach this con-
clusion, we assumed all the necessary compactness properties and, in addition, the
transversality of the image of v →L1(v) to the zero section 0E. The transversal-
ity can be established by an arbitrary C∞-small perturbation of the Hamiltonian
H. However, the argument is quite intricate and we refer the reader to A. Floer,
H. Hofer and D. Salamon [87] for a proof. Hence with this perturbation argument
together with the continuity property of the Alexander-Spanier cohomology, we
are left with the compactness question, and it remains to prove the following
Proposition 12. Assume 2 < p < ∞and [ω]|π2(M) = 0. Then the set of solutions
ˆXT : = {(ρ, v) ∈[0, 1] × W 1,p(ST , M) | Lρ(v) = 0}
is compact in [0, 1] × W 1,p(ST , M).
Proof of Proposition 12. If v ∈ˆXT we deﬁne the number ε(v) ≥0 by
ε(v) = inf{ε > 0
			 there exists z ∈ST
(6.111)
satisfying |∇v|p,Bε(z) = ε
2−p
p } .
Here Bε(z) denotes the ε-ball around z for some ﬁxed metric on ST . (The choice
of the metric is irrelevant since ST is compact.) Note that the function ε →
ε
p−2
p |∇v|p,Bε(z) is nondecreasing. Assume now that
inf
v∈ˆ
XT
ε(v) ≡ε > 0 .
Then
|∇v|p,Bε(v)(z) ≤ε
2−p
p
for every z ∈ST , and hence we have a W 1,p-bound for ˆXT . This bound implies the
compactness of ˆXT in [0, 1] × W 1,p(ST , M) as we shall show next. Viewing M as
a subset of some RN, we can consider W 1,p(ST , M) as a subset of W 1,p(ST , RN).
Pick a sequence (ρk, vk) ∈ˆXT ; then we have to ﬁnd a convergent subsequence.
By taking a suitable subsequence we can assume that ρk →ρ, and vk →v in
C0(ST , RN) (in view of the compact embedding of W 1,p(ST , RN) ⊂C0(ST , RN))
and vk ⇀v weakly in W 1,p(ST , RN) for some v ∈W 1,p(ST , RN) (in view of
the reﬂexivity of the space W 1,p(ST , RN)). We shall show that vk is a Cauchy
sequence in W 1,p(ST , RN). Since we have convergence in C0(ST , RN) we now can
work locally in charts of ST and of M as well. Any diﬃculty that may arise occurs
near the boundary ∂ZT ⊂ST of cylinder ZT ⊂ST , since away from this boundary,

248
Chapter 6 The Arnold conjecture, Floer homology . . .
the maps u ∈ˆXT are smooth (by elliptic regularity theory) and we can therefore
establish C∞-bounds arguing as above. Hence we carry out the local argument
for the worst case only focussing on the lower cap of ST . In order to ﬁnd local
coordinates on ST near the boundary ∂ZT belonging to the lower cap we take a
biholomorphic embedding ϕ of [−1, 1]×S1 into ST satisfying ϕ(s, t) = (s−T, t) for
all 0 ≤s ≤1. Choosing now symplectic coordinates on M we are confronted with
the following situation. We have a sequence of mappings vk ∈W 1,p(Bε(0), R2n)
and a sequence of numbers ρk ∈[0, 1] satisfying
vk
−→
v
in
C0
Bε(0), R2n
vk
⇀
v
in
W 1,p
Bε(0), R2n
ρk
−→
ρ
,
where v ∈W 1,p(Bε(0), R2n) and v(0) = 0, and where Bε(0) ⊂R2 is the open disk
centered at (s, t) = (0, 0). Moreover, these maps satisfy the following system of
ﬁrst order elliptic partial diﬀerential equations
∂vk
∂s
+ J(vk)∂vk
∂t
+ ρkχ(s)H′(t, vk) = 0
on Bε(0), where χ is the characteristic function of the positive half line in s. We
conclude that v solves the equation
∂v
∂s + J(v)∂v
∂t + ρχ(s)H′(t, v) = 0 .
We shall prove that vk is a Cauchy sequence in W 1,p(Bρ(0), R2n) for some small
ρ > 0. Let β : R2 →[0, 1] be a smooth function having its support in the unit disk
and taking on the value 1 on the smaller disk of radius 1/2. For τ > 0 we then
deﬁne the function βτ on R2 by βτ(z) = β(z/τ). By J0 we denote the constant
almost complex structure J(0) on R2n. Finally, we write |.|j for the W j,p-norm
on the ε-disk in R2, recalling that 2 < p < ∞and ﬁxed. If 0 < τ < ε we now
compute, using the classical estimate (6.105) for the Cauchy-Riemann operator,
c|βτ(vk −v)|1
≤
|¯∂(βτ(vk −v))|0
≤
| ∂
∂s(βτ(vk −v)) + J(v) ∂
∂t(βτ(vk −v))|0
+|J0 −J(v)|L∞(Bτ )|βτ(vk −v)|1
≤
|βτ( ∂
∂s(vk −v) + J(v) ∂
∂t(vk −v))|0 + c1(τ)|vk −v|0
+σ(τ)|βτ(vk −v)|1.

6.4 Elliptic methods and symplectic fixed points
249
Here σ(τ) →0 for τ →0, and c1(τ) is a constant depending on τ. Hence, if τ > 0
is small enough,
c
2|βτ(vk −v)|1
≤
c1(τ)|vk −v|0 + |J(v) −J(vk)|L∞(Bτ )|vk|1
+|ρkχH′(t, vk) −ρχH′(t, v)|0 .
By assumption, |vk|1 is a bounded sequence, |vk −v|0 →0, J(vk) →J(v) uni-
formly on Bε(0) and |ρkH′(t, vk) −ρχH′(t, v)|0 →0. Consequently vk →v in
W 1,p(Bδ(0), R2n) for some δ > 0 suﬃciently small. Covering ST by ﬁnitely many
charts we have demonstrated the vk →v in W 1,p(ST , M), so that ˆXT is compact,
as claimed in the proposition.
To ﬁnish our argument, it remains to verify our assumption that the numbers
ε(v) are uniformly bounded away from 0 on the set ˆXT . We argue by contradiction,
assuming that we have no uniform W 1,p-bound on ˆXT , that we ﬁnd a sequence
(ρk, vk) ∈ˆXT satisfying ε(vk) →0. By the deﬁnition of ε(v) we ﬁnd a sequence
zk ∈ST such that with εk := ε(vk) we have
|∇vk|0,Bεk (z) ≤|∇vk|0,Bεk (zk)
for all z ∈ST . Moreover,
1 = ε
p−2
p
k
|∇vk|0,Bεk (zk) .
Since εk →0, and since we have C∞bounds away from ∂ZT , we deduce that dist
(zk, ∂ZT ) →0. Hence, after taking a subsequence, we can assume that zk →z0 ∈
∂ZT . The argument now is similar to the one used previously in the bubbling oﬀ
analysis. Namely we rescale near zk and obtain in this way a new sequence for which
we have a W 1,p
loc -bound. Therefore, arguing as above, the new sequence, uk, will be
W 1,p
loc -precompact. Hence taking a convenient subsequence we can pass to the limit
and obtain a solution v ∈W 1,p(C, M) of vs + J(v)vt = 0 on C, which is nonzero.
By ellitpic regularity theory v ∈C∞(C, M). Moreover,

R |∇v|2
Jdsdt < ∞; this
follows from (6.110) applied to our sequence uk, together with the following a
priori estimate for the caps:
|

D
u∗
k ω| ≤2C ,
which follows immediately from the estimate before Lemma 3. Arguing now as in
the proof of Theorem 8, we arrive at a contradiction to our topological assumption
[ω]|π2(M) = 0. The proof of Proposition 12, and therefore the proof of Theorem
9 is complete. ■

250
Chapter 6 The Arnold conjecture, Floer homology . . .
Remarks: We note that the torus (T 2n, ω) meets the assumption of Theorem 9 for
every symplectic structure ω.
Theorem 9 is due to A. Floer [86] and H. Hofer [115], 1987. They both derive the
result from a more general intersection result for compact Lagrangian manifolds.
M. Chaperon, in his Bourbaki lecture [42] 1982–83, had already noticed that the
variational approach is applicable to the global intersection problem of Lagrangian
manifolds suggested by V.I. Arnold in [9].
The cohomology in the above statement uses Z2 coeﬃcients and we would
like to point out that the statement actually holds for every coeﬃcient ﬁeld. The
proof, however, requires more intricate tools from Fredholm theory and algebraic
topology. The crucial point is to resolve a number of orientation questions for a
distinguished class of Fredholm operators. For the technology involved, we refer to
A. Floer and H. Hofer [89]. It turns out that XT has a natural orientation inherited
from the orientation of (M, ω) provided it is a manifold.
The above proof of the Arnold conjecture for a general symplectic manifold
(M, ω) crucially uses the restrictive assumption requiring [ω]|π2(M) = 0, and
we point out that without this assumption the conjecture is still open. However,
more can be said if one (a priori) requires that all the 1-periodic solutions of the
Hamiltonian vector ﬁeld under consideration are nondegenerate, as we shall see in
the next section.
6.5
Floer’s approach to Morse theory for the action functional
We shall sketch Floer’s seminal approach to solving the Arnold conjecture in the
nondegenerate case where one assumes that all the 1-periodic solutions of the
Hamiltonian system on (M, ω) are nondegenerate. Since M is compact, there are
only ﬁnitely many such 1-periodic solutions. Floer studies the set of bounded or-
bits of the unregularized gradient equation deﬁned by the action functional on the
space of contractible loops of M. The bounded orbits are special solutions of a dis-
tinguished system of ﬁrst order elliptic equations of Cauchy-Riemann type, as we
have shown above. But unlike the general case studied in the previous section, in
the nondegenerate case the bounded orbits tend in a strong sense asymptotically
to the 1-periodic solutions of the Hamiltonian equation. This additional structure
of the solution set is used by Floer in order to construct by means of Fredholm
theory a chain complex generated by the ﬁnitely many 1-periodic solutions. The
homology of this complex is called Floer homology; it is an invariant of the under-
lying manifold. By continuing the complex to the classical Morse complex deﬁned
by the gradient system ˙y = −∇H(y) of the Hamiltonian function on M, Floer ﬁ-
nally shows that his homology is a model of the singular homology of the manifold.
This then ﬁnishes the proof of the Arnold conjecture.

6.5 Floer’s appraoch to Morse theory . . .
251
We consider a compact symplectic manifold (M, ω) of dimension 2n restricted
by the requirement that [ω]|π2(M) = 0. This means that the integral of the sym-
plectic structure vanishes over every sphere

S2
u∗ω = 0 ,
u : S2 →M .
(6.112)
To the smooth time-dependent Hamiltonian function H : S1 × M →R, periodic
in time, H(t, x) = H(t + 1, x) for t ∈R and x ∈M we associate as usual the
Hamiltonian vector ﬁeld XH : R × M →TM by ω(XH, ·) = −dxH(t, x). The
solutions x(t) of the time-dependent Hamiltonian equation
˙x(t) = XH

t, x(t)

on M
(6.113)
deﬁne the ﬂow ψt by ψt(x(0)) = x(t). We are looking for periodic solutions x(t +
1) = x(t) which are contractible loops on M, x ≃0. We shall assume that all the
contractible periodic solutions x(t) are nondegenerate, requiring for the ﬂow map
ψ = ψ1 that
det

1 −dψ(x(0))

̸= 0 .
(6.114)
By PH we shall denote the set of these periodic solutions:
PH = {x : S1 →M | x(t + 1) = x(t), x solves (6.113) and (6.114),
and x ≃0} .
(6.115)
Note that this is a ﬁnite set, since M is compact and the nondegenerate 1-periodic
solutions are isolated in M. By Ωwe shall denote the set of smooth contractible
loops γ of M, where, as usual, S1 = R/Z. A loop is represented by its cover
γ : R →M satisfying γ(t + 1) = γ(t). The required 1-periodic solutions are
distinguished in Ωas the critical points of the action functional ϕH : Ω→R
deﬁned by
ϕH(γ) = −

D
¯γ∗ω +
1

0
H

t, γ(t)

dt .
(6.116)
Here D ⊂C denotes the closed unit disc and ¯γ : D →M is a smooth function
extending γ and hence satisfying ¯γ(e2πit) = γ(t). Such an extension exists since γ
is assumed to be contractible and it follows from the assumption (6.112) that the
ﬁrst integral on the right hand side of (6.116) does not depend on the choice of
the extension and hence depends only on the loop γ. With TγΩwe shall denote

252
Chapter 6 The Arnold conjecture, Floer homology . . .
the tangent space at γ ∈Ωconsisting of the smooth vector ﬁelds ξ ∈C∞(γ∗TM)
along γ satisfying ξ(t + 1) = ξ(t). Computing the derivative of ϕH at γ in the
direction of ξ, one ﬁnds readily that
dϕH(γ)ξ =
1

0
{ω(˙γ, ξ) + dH(t, γ)ξ } dt ,
(6.117)
which indeed vanishes for every ξ ∈TγΩif and only if the loop γ ∈Ωis a solution
of the Hamiltonian equation (6.113). It is convenient to choose an almost complex
structure J on M compatible with ω (see Chapter 1). This is an endomorphism
J ∈C∞(End TM), i.e., Jx ∈L(TxM, TxM) satisfying J2 = −1 such that
g(ξ, η) = ω

ξ, J(x)η

,
ξ, η ∈TxM
(6.118)
deﬁnes a Riemannian metric g on M. The Hamiltonian vector ﬁeld is then repre-
sented by
XH(t, x) = J(x)∇H(t, x) ,
(6.119)
where ∇denotes the gradient of a function on M with respect to the x-variable
in the metric g above. For the derivative we obtain
dϕH(γ)ξ =
1

0
g

J(γ)˙γ + ∇H(t, γ), ξ

dt ,
(6.120)
so that the gradient of ϕH with respect to an induced L2 metric on Ωis given by
grad ϕH(γ) = J(γ)˙γ + ∇H(γ) ∈TγΩ.
(6.121)
However, the gradient equation
d
ds x = −grad ϕH(x) ,
x ∈Ω
(6.122)
does not determine a ﬂow. As we have pointed out in the previous section, due to
a loss of derivatives there is no Banach space setup in which grad ϕH(x) can be
considered as a vector ﬁeld on a Banach manifold. Indeed the initial value problem
deﬁned by (6.122) on Ωis not well-posed. Floer views a solution x of (6.122) as a
map
u : R × S1 −→M , (s, t) →u(s, t) = u(s, t + 1)
(6.123)
which solves the partial diﬀerential equation
∂u
∂s + J(u)∂u
∂t + ∇H(t, u) = 0 .
(6.124)

6.5 Floer’s appraoch to Morse theory . . .
253
The crucial objects from now on, are therefore the solutions u : R × S1 →M of
the nonlinear partial diﬀerential equation (6.124), which are contractible so that
u(s, ·) ∈Ω. These solutions correspond to the ﬂow lines of the gradient equation
(6.122). The equation (6.124) is a perturbation of a Cauchy-Riemann equation. A
smooth map u : S2 →M solving the Cauchy-Riemann equation
∂u
∂s + J(u) ∂u
∂t = 0
(6.125)
is called a holomorphic sphere. It satisﬁes

S2
u∗ω = 1
2

S2
|∇u|2 ,
(6.126)
so that our assumption (6.112) excludes, in particular, nonconstant holomorphic
spheres.
From the torus case we know that not all solutions of (6.124) are relevant
and we are interested only in the set of “bounded orbits” which we denote by
M ≡M(H, J). This set is deﬁned as the set of smooth mappings u : R×S1 →M
which are contractible, solve the equation (6.124) and have, in addition, ﬁnite
“energy”
E(u) : = 1
2
∞

−∞
1

0
			∂u
∂s
			
2
+
			∂u
∂t −XH(t, u)
			
2 
ds dt < ∞.
(6.127)
Equivalently M is the space of contractible solutions u along which the decreasing
function ϕHu(s) remains bounded for all s ∈R, where u(s)(t) = u(s, t) ∈Ω.
Floer proves in [85] that the space M of bounded solutions of the partial
diﬀerential equation (6.124) has a structure which looks like that of a Morse-
Smale system on a smooth, compact, and ﬁnite dimensional manifold, as we now
describe.
Since M is compact and since [ω] vanishes over π2(M) according to the as-
sumption (6.112) it follows using elliptic regularity theory that the set of solutions
M is compact in the topology of uniform convergence with all derivatives on com-
pact sets. This is not easy to prove and we refer to A. Floer [85], D. Salamon [188],
and H. Hofer and D. Salamon [119]. Moreover, for every bounded orbit u ∈M
there exists a pair x, y ∈PH of periodic solutions, such that u is a connecting
orbit from y to x, i.e.,
lim
s→−∞u(s, t) = y(t) ,
lim
s→+∞u(s, t) = x(t) ,
(6.128)
the convergence being uniformly in t as |s| →∞and ∂u
∂s converging to zero again
uniformly in t. Given two periodic solutions x, y ∈PH we abbreviate by
M(y, x) = M(y, x; H, J)
(6.129)

254
Chapter 6 The Arnold conjecture, Floer homology . . .
the set of solutions u ∈M satisfying the asymptotic boundary conditions (6.128).
For the energy one computes
E(u) = ϕH(y) −ϕH(x) ,
if u ∈M(y, x) .
(6.130)
The energy is positive for nonconstant orbits. From the previous section we know
that the set M of solutions consists of the periodic solutions and the connecting
orbits
M =

y,x∈PH
M(y, x) .
(6.131)
The group R acts naturally on M by shifting u(s, t) in the s direction, hence
deﬁning a continuous ﬂow on the space M. Under this action the sets M(y, x) are
invariant subspaces. Their compactness properties can be formulated analogously
to the ﬁnite dimensional Morse theory as represented by M. Schwarz in his book
[191]:
Proposition 12. A sequence uν ∈M(y, x) possesses a subsequence with the fol-
lowing property: there is a sequence sj
ν ∈R of times, j = 1, 2, . . . , m, such that
uν(s + sj
ν, t) converges together with all its derivatives uniformly on compact sets
to solutions uj ∈M(xj, xj−1) where xj ∈PH for j = 0, 1, . . . m, with x0 = x and
xm = y.
x
uν
y
xj
uj
xj−1
Fig. 6.10
Using of Fredholm theory in the appropriate functional analytic setting, one
proves that for a generic choice of the pair (H, J) the sets M(y, x) are smooth,
ﬁnite dimensional manifolds. Linearizing the equation (6.124) in the direction of
a vector ﬁeld ξ ∈C∞(u∗TM) along u leads to the linear ﬁrst order diﬀerential
operator
F(u)ξ : = ∇s ξ + J(u) ∇t ξ + ∇ξ J(u) ∂u
∂t + ∇ξ ∇H(t, u) ,
(6.132)

6.5 Floer’s appraoch to Morse theory . . .
255
where ∇s, ∇t, ∇ξ denote the covariant derivatives with respect to the metric g
associated with J. If u : R × S1 →M is any smooth map connecting y with x,
hence satisfying (6.128) for two nondegenerate solutions y, x ∈PH, then F(u)
is a Fredholm operator between appropriate Sobolev spaces. A pair (H, J) with
an almost complex structure J satisfying (6.118) is called regular, if F(u) is a
surjective linear operator for every u ∈M. It can be proved that the set of regular
pairs is dense with respect to the C∞-topology, using of the Sard-Smale theorem.
It then follows by the implicit function theorem that M(y, x) is indeed a smooth
manifold whose local dimension near u ∈M(y, x) is
dim M(y, x) =
Index F(u) .
(6.133)
This index depends only on the boundary condition on u, i.e., on y, x ∈PH, if we
require, in addition to (6.112), that the ﬁrst Chern class of (TM, J) vanishes over
π2(M). Note that ω determines an almost complex structure J satisfying (6.118)
uniquely up to homotopy and we denote by c1 = c1(TM) ∈H2(M) the ﬁrst Chern
class of TM. We shall assume that [c1]|π2(M) = 0 requiring that the integral of
the 2-form c1 vanishes over every sphere

S2
u∗c1 = 0 ,
u : S2 →M .
(6.134)
Consider a nondegenerate periodic orbit x ∈PH. Since x : S1 →M is con-
tractible we can extend it to a map u : D →M of the closed disk D satisfying
u|∂D = x. Now we take a trivialization of u∗(TM); it determines a trivialization of
x∗(TM). Note that if we take another extension v : D →M of x, we ﬁnd another
trivialization of x∗(TM) which, however, is homotopic in view of the assumption
[c1]|π2(M) = 0. In the trivialized tangent bundle x∗(TM), the linearized ﬂow of
the Hamiltonian vector ﬁeld XH along x determines a unique Maslov-type index
µ(H, x) ∈Z associated with x. (The integers are in one-to-one correspondence
with the homotopy classes of linear Hamiltonian systems on (R2n, ω0) which are
periodic in time and nondegenerate). This gives
µH : PH −→Z ,
x →µ(H, x) .
(6.135)
If a smooth map u : R × S1 →M satisﬁes (6.128) for two nondegenerate periodic
solutions y, x ∈PH of the Hamiltonian vector ﬁeld, the Fredholm index of F(u) is
given by
Index F(u) = µ(H, y) −µ(H, x) .
(6.136)
We conclude for a generic pair (H, J) that dim M(y, x) = µH(y) −µH(x). For
the deﬁnition of the index µH and also for a proof of the above index formula, we
refer to D. Salamon and E. Zehnder [190]. We remark that if [c1]|π2(M) ̸= 0, the
index (6.135) would depend on the homotopy class of the chosen extension. The

256
Chapter 6 The Arnold conjecture, Floer homology . . .
ambiguity would be the integer 2N, where NZ = {(u∗c1)[S2] | u ∈π2(M)}. Hence
µ(H) is only well-deﬁned as a map µH : PH →Z/2NZ.
We are now prepared to deﬁne the Floer homology groups associated to a
regular pair (H, J) on (M, ω). With C = C(M, H) we shall denote the vector space
over Z2 generated by the ﬁnitely many elements of the set PH of nondegenerate
contractible periodic orbits of the Hamiltonian vector ﬁeld. This vector space comes
with a grading deﬁned by the index map µ : PH →Z:
C
=

k∈Z
Ck
Ck
=
Ck(M, H) = spanZ2 {x ∈PH | µ(x, H) = k} .
(6.137)
Consider now y, x ∈PH satisfying µ(y) −µ(x) = 1. Then the manifold M(y, x)
is one-dimensional dim M(y, x) = 1. In view of the compactness, combined with
the manifold structure, it can be shown [85] that this manifold has ﬁnitely many
components, each of which consists of a connecting orbit together with all its
translates by the time −s shift. This was used by Floer to construct a linear
boundary operator ∂: C →C respecting the grading by counting the connecting
orbits modulo 2. The map ∂k = ∂k(M, H, J) : Ck →Ck−1 is deﬁned by
∂ky =

{x∈PH | µ(x)=k−1}
⟨∂y, x⟩x ,
(6.138)
for y ∈PH satisfying µ(y) = k. The matrix element ⟨∂y, x⟩∈Z2 is the number
of components of M(y, x) counted modulo 2. Floer proves [85] that ∂◦∂= 0, so
that the pair (C, ∂) deﬁnes a chain complex. Its homology
H Fk(M, H, J) : = ker(∂: Ck →Ck−1)
im (∂: Ck+1 →Ck)
(6.139)
is called the Floer homology of the pair (H, J) on (M, ω).
In order to explain the relation ∂k ◦∂k+1 = 0 for the boundary operators
∂k+1 : Ck+1 →Ck, we pick x ∈Ck+1, y ∈Ck and z ∈Ck−1. Assume that there
exist connections u ∈M(x, y) and v ∈M(y, z). Then we may view the pair (u, v)
as a “broken trajectory” connecting x with z. By a perturbation argument, called
the gluing method, Floer established in [85] a unique 1-parameter family of as-
sociated true connections in M(x, z). Taking the quotient by the R-action of the
time-s shift, one ﬁnds this way a connected 1-dimensional manifold without bound-
aries of unparameterized orbits which represents one component of M(x, z). Such
1-dimensional manifolds are either circles or intervals with two ends. The compact-
ness argument in Proposition 12 shows that each end converges in a suitable sense
to a well-deﬁned broken trajectory (u′, v′) ∈M(x, y′)×M(y′, z) for some y′ ∈Ck.
The gluing construction shows in a reverse process that the broken trajectories
correspond uniquely to such an end. Thus, the 1-dimensional manifold M(x, z)/R

6.5 Floer’s appraoch to Morse theory . . .
257
has an even number of ends.
x
u
u′
y
y′
v
v′
z
m(x) = k + 1
m(y) = m(y′) = k
m(z) = k −1
dim M0(x, z)
= m(x) −m(z)
Consequently the “broken trajectories” (u, v) between x and z occur in pairs.
Since we use Z2 coeﬃcients, we ﬁnd for every x ∈Ck+1 that

m(z) = k−1



m(y) = k
⟨∂x, y⟩⟨∂y, z⟩

z = 0 .
For the intricate details of this gluing construction we refer to A. Floer [85] and
C. Taubes [210, 211] and in particular to the recent book by M. Schwarz [191].
The chain complex is deﬁned by the one dimensional components of the so-
lution space M of bounded orbits. It is obviously constructed analogously to the
familiar Morse complex for Morse-Smale gradient ﬂows on ﬁnite dimensional com-
pact manifolds. The transversality conditions of the Morse-Smale ﬂow correspond
to the assumption that the Fredholm operator F(u) is a surjective map which
is met only “generically” as in the ﬁnite dimensional situation. The role of the
Morse index of a nondegenerate critical point of the Morse-Smale ﬂow is played by
the integer µ(x, H) associated with the nondegenerate contractible periodic orbit
x ∈PH. The Morse index of x ∈PH is inﬁnite!
Up to now it is conceivable that the space M might be empty and the Floer
homology groups all trivial. At this point it is useful to recall a crucial aspect of
C. Conley’s index theory for ﬂows on compact spaces: it is designed in such a way
that it is invariant under continuation. Prompted by this theory, Floer established
an analogous homotopy invariance property for his homology groups, which can be
used to show that the groups are independent of (H, J) used for its construction.
A special choice of H and J then allowed him to compute the homology:
Theorem 10. (Floer continuation) For every two regular pairs (Hα, Jα) and
(Hβ, Jβ) there exists a natural isomorphism of the Floer homology respecting

258
Chapter 6 The Arnold conjecture, Floer homology . . .
the grading
ψβα : HF∗(M, Hα, Jα) −→HF∗(M, Hβ, Jβ) .
Moreover, if (Hγ, Jγ) is another regular pair, then
ψαβ ◦ψβγ = ψαγ and ψαα = id .
We see that the Floer homology FH∗(M, H, J) is independent of the regular
pair (H, J) used in the construction of the connecting orbits of PH; hence it is an
invariant of the underlying manifold (M, ω). We have a category whose objects
are the Floer homology groups associated with regular pairs (H, J) and whose
morphisms are the natural isomorphisms ψβα induced by regular homotopies as
explained below. In the terminology of C. Conley [54] such a category with unique
morphisms is called a connected simple system.
We shall sketch the ideas of the proof which is again based on special solutions
of a P.D.E. and Fredholm theory. We follow the presentation in D. Salamon and
E. Zehnder [190]. In order to construct a homomorphism ϕβα : C(M, Hα, Jα) →
C(M, Hβ, Jβ), we choose a smooth homotopy Hαβ : R × S1 × M →R of Hamil-
tonian functions together with a smooth homotopy of almost complex structures
Jαβ : R × M →End (TM) such that Hαβ(s, t, x) and Jαβ(s, x) are independent
of s for |s| suﬃciently large and satisfy
lim
s→−∞Hαβ (s, t, x)
=
Hα(t, x)
lim
s→+∞Hαβ (s, t, x)
=
Hβ(t, x)
(6.140)
and
lim
s→−∞Jαβ (s, x)
=
Jα(x)
lim
s→+∞Jαβ (s, t, x)
=
Jβ(x) .
(6.141)
Recall that the space of almost complex structures compatible with ω is con-
tractible. Given such a pair (Hαβ, Jαβ) of homotopies connecting the data one
studies the smooth solutions u(s, t), u : R × S1 →M of the P.D.E.
∂u
∂s + J(s, u)∂u
∂t + ∇H(s, t, u) = 0
(6.142)
which satisfy the asymptotic boundary conditions
lim
s→−∞u(s, t) = xα(t) ,
lim
s→+∞u(s, t) = xβ(t)
(6.143)
where xα ∈PHα and xβ ∈PHβ.
The solutions can be considered as ﬂow lines of a time-dependent gradient
ﬂow deﬁned by the action functional ϕHs, Hs(t, x) = Hαβ(s, t, x) with respect to
the time-dependent metric determined by the almost complex structure Js. As

6.5 Floer’s appraoch to Morse theory . . .
259
before, a solution of bounded energy satisﬁes the boundary conditions. We shall
abbreviate by
M(xα, xβ, Hαβ, Jαβ)
(6.144)
the set of smooth solutions u : R × S1 →M of (6.142) and (6.143). This set
is analyzed locally by linearizing the equation in the direction of a vector ﬁeld
ξ ∈C∞(u∗TM) along u which leads to a linear operator F βα(u) : W k,p(u∗TM) →
W k−1,p(u∗TM) between appropriate Sobolev spaces. For every smooth map u :
R×S1 →M satisfying the boundary conditions (6.143) with xα, xβ nondegenerate,
the operator F βα(u) is Fredholm and its index is computed as
Index F βα (u) = µ(xα, Hα) −µ(xβ, Hβ) .
(6.145)
Moreover, for a regular homotopy from (Hα, Jα) to (Hβ, Jβ) the operator is surjec-
tive. Here a pair (Hαβ, Jαβ) is called regular, if both pairs (Hα, Jα) and (Hβ, Jβ)
are regular and if the linear operator F βα(u) is surjective for every solution u
of (6.142) and (6.143) for every xα ∈PHα and xβ ∈PHβ. Floer proved [84, 85]
that the set of regular homotopies connecting regular pairs is dense in the set
of all smooth homotopies connecting (Hα, Jα) to (Hβ, Jα) with respect to the
C∞topology. (Floer carried out his proof for the analogous geometric problem of
Lagrangian intersections.) It then follows that the space M(xα, xβ, Hαβ, Jαβ) of
connecting orbits is a ﬁnite dimensional manifold and
dim M(xα, xβ, Hαβ, Jαβ) = µ(xα, Hα) −µ(xβ, Hβ) .
(6.146)
This allows us to construct a chain homomorphism
ϕβα = ϕ(Hαβ, Jαβ) : Ck(M, Hα) →Ck(M, Hβ)
by counting the connecting orbits modulo 2 between periodic solutions having the
same index
ϕβα (xα) =

µ(xβ,Hβ)=k
⟨ϕβα (xα), xβ⟩xβ ,
(6.147)
where µ(xα, Hα) = k and where ⟨ϕβαxα, xβ⟩is the number of solutions modulo 2.
One can show that for every regular homotopy this linear map ϕβα is a chain
homomorphisms, i.e., satisﬁes ∂βϕβα = ϕβα∂α. Moreover, it respects the grading.
It, therefore, induces a natural homomorphism ψβα of Floer homology, which
turns out to be independent of the choice of the homotopy (Hαβ, Jαβ). More
precisely one shows that for two regular homotopies (Hαβ
0 , Jαβ
0 ) and (Hαβ
1 , Jαβ
1 )
from (Hα, Jα) to (Hβ, Jβ), the associated chain homomorphisms ϕβα
0
and ϕβα
1
are
chain homotopy equivalent. This ﬁnishes our sketch of Theorem 10.
Finally, in order to compute the homology, Floer used the continuation theorem
and connected a regular pair (Hα, Jα) with a very special pair (H, J), whose Floer
homology agrees with the homology of the Morse complex deﬁned by the gradient
ﬂow of the function H : M →R on the underlying manifold M.

260
Chapter 6 The Arnold conjecture, Floer homology . . .
(Hα, Jα)
(Hβ, Jβ)
xα
u
xβ
µ(xα) = µ(xβ)
Fig. 6.11
Theorem 11. (Computation of the homology) For every regular pair (Hα, Jα) there
exists a natural isomorphism ψα : FH∗(M, Hα, Jα) →H∗(M, Z2) respecting the
grading
ψα
k : FHk(M, Hα, Jα) →Hk+n (M, Z2)
between the Floer homology of the pair (Hα, Jα) and the singular homology of M
with Z2 coeﬃcients. Moreover, if (Hβ, Jβ) is another regular pair, then
ψα = ψβ ◦ψβα .
In particular, the Floer homology vanishes for |k| > n.
We outline the idea of the proof of Theorem 11 following the presentation in
[190]. We choose a special Hamiltonian function H : M →R which is independent
of time t, and which is a Morse-function, such that all its critical points on M
are nondegenerate. Moreover, we assume that H is suﬃciently small in the C2
topology. Then, as we have seen above, the periodic solutions of period 1 of the
Hamiltonian system ˙x = XH(x) on M are constant and agree with the critical
points of H such that in this case
PH = { x(t) = x ∈M | dH(x) = 0 } .
(6.148)
In this situation of a “small” Hamiltonian H, the Morse index indH(x) of the
critical point x of H is related to the index µ(x, H) of the constant 1-periodic
solution x(t) = x of ˙x = XH(x) by
µ(x, H) =
indH(x) −n ,
x ∈PH ,
(6.149)
see [190]. We can choose an almost complex structure J such that (H, J) is a regular
pair. One then shows that the solutions u ∈M(y, x) for x, y ∈PH satisfying
µ(y, H) −µ(x, H) = 1 of the partial diﬀerential equation (6.124) and (6.128)

6.5 Floer’s appraoch to Morse theory . . .
261
are also independent of the time t. Hence setting u(s, t) = γ(s), they satisfy the
gradient equation
dγ
ds + ∇H

γ(s)

= 0 on M ,
(6.150)
and the boundary conditions γ(s) →y as s →−∞and γ(s) →x as s →+∞.
These solutions agree with the 1-dimensional connecting orbits of the Morse-Smale
gradient ﬂow ˙x = −∇H(x) for which
M(y, x) = W u(y) ∩W s(x) ,
(6.151)
whenever ind F(u) = indH(y)−indH(x) = 1. Hence, the chain complex C(M, H)
agrees with the familiar Morse complex, in which Ck(H) = {x ∈M|dH(x) = 0
and indH(x) = k} and where the boundary operator ∂k = ∂k(H, J) : Ck →Ck−1
deﬁned above counts the connecting orbits (mod 2) of the gradient ﬂow on M. It
is well-known, that its homology groups
H Mk(M, H, J) =
ker ∂k
im ∂k+1
(6.152)
agree with the singular homology of M
H Mk(M, H, J) ∼= Hk(M, Z2) .
(6.153)
For a proof we refer to D. Salamon [188] and to the recent monograph by M.
Schwarz [191] in which he develops a Morse homology theory on ﬁnite dimensional
manifolds based on the trajectory spaces of Morse functions. We see in view of
(6.149) that Floer’s chain complex for our special symplectic manifold (M, ω)
agrees with the familiar Morse complex of a gradient ﬂow of a function, the grading
being shifted by n:
H Fk(M, H, J) ∼= H Mk+n(M, H, J) ∼= Hn+k(M, Z2) .
(6.154)
Consequently, Floer’s connecting orbits of nondegenerate periodic solutions can
serve as a model for the homology of the underlying manifold. We conclude, in
particular, that

x∈PH
tµ(x,H) = P(t, M)t−n + (1 + t)Q(t) .
(6.155)
This Morse equation relates the nondegenerate contractible periodic solutions x ∈
PH having indices µ(x, H) ∈Z to the topology of M described by the Poincar´e
polynomial P(t, M). Recall that we posed the assumptions ω|π2 = 0 = c1|π2 on
(M, ω). In case of a time-independent and small Morse function H, the equation
(6.155) becomes the familiar Morse equation

∇H(x)=0
tm(x) = P(t, M) + (1 + t)Q(t)
(6.156)
which relates the critical points of the function H to the Poincar´e polynomial
P(t, M). In particular, we conclude from (6.155)

262
Chapter 6 The Arnold conjecture, Floer homology . . .
Theorem 12. (Floer) Assume the compact symplectic manifold (M, ω) satisﬁes
ω|π2(M) = 0 and c1|π2(M) = 0, assume the time periodic Hamiltonian vector
ﬁeld ˙x = XH(x) on M possesses nondegenerate 1-periodic solutions only. Then
their number is at least the sum of the Betti numbers SB(M, Z2) of M.
For example π2(T 2n) = 0 so that every symplectic torus (T 2n, ω) meets the
assumption of the theorem. Actually Floer proved in [85] a more general result,
assuming merely that (M, ω) a monotone in the sense that

S2
u∗c1 = λ

S2
u∗ω ,
(6.157)
for every sphere u : S2 →M, with a constant λ > 0.
More recently, H. Hofer and D. Salamon succeeded, [119], in deﬁning the Floer
homology groups under the assumption that
ω(A) ≤0 for every A ∈π2(M) satisfying 3 −n ≤c1(A) < 0 ,
(6.158)
and to compute them in the cases c1|π2(M) = 0 and N ≥
1
2 dim(M), where
NZ = c1(π2(M)) ⊂Z, proving the Arnold conjecture in these cases. They demon-
strate that the Floer groups form a module over Novikov’s ring of generalized
Laurent series. Such a ring was introduced by S. Novikov in his generalization of
Morse theory for closed one-forms [170]. Under the assumption (6.158) the ob-
tained theory is a Novikov type variant of Floer homology. Modifying the ideas of
Hofer and Salamon, K. Ono [172] gave a modiﬁed construction of Floer’s homology
theory, again under the assumption (6.158), which can be computed without addi-
tional hypothesis. It turns out that for a suitable coeﬃcient ﬁeld these Floer groups
are isomorphic to the singular homology groups of the manifold establishing, in
particular, the Arnold conjecture for the dimension 2, 4 and 6 in which (6.158) is
vacuous. Manifolds meeting the condition (6.158) have the property used in the
proof that, for a generic almost complex structure, there is no holomorphic sphere
of negative Chern number.
The Arnold conjecture for a general compact symplectic manifold with dim
M ≥8 is still open.
It should be mentioned that the Floer homology groups HF∗can be deﬁned
for integer coeﬃcients Z (instead of Z2) and, therefore, for every Abelian group.
In order to do this one has to assign an integer +1 or −1 to every connecting orbit
u ∈M(y, x) whenever µ(y) −µ(x) = 1. However, the determination of such an
orientation is quite subtle and requires a consistent orientation of the moduli spaces
M(y, x) for which we refer to A. Floer and H. Hofer [89]. Thus all the statements
described above are true not only for Z2 coeﬃcients but for Z coeﬃcients as well.
The 1-periodic solutions of ˙x = XH(x) on M correspond in a one-to-one way
to the ﬁxed points of the Hamiltonian map ψ1 which is the time-1 map of the
ﬂow generated by the Hamiltonian vector ﬁeld. Since M is compact one should

6.5 Floer’s appraoch to Morse theory . . .
263
expect, in view of Poincar´e’s recurrence theorem, in addition to these ﬁxed points
an abundance of periodic points having large periods. Indeed, if one of the ﬁxed
points is of general elliptic type as explained in the introduction, then it is a cluster
point of other periodic points whose prime periods tend to inﬁnity. This follows
simply by the Birkhoﬀ-Lewis theorem, a local theorem for the proof of which we
refer to J. Moser [164]. Unfortunately, our global approach to the existence of the
ﬁxed points gives only little information about their nature and, in particular,
no information about their nonlinear Birkhoﬀinvariants required to deduce the
periodic points nearby. We shall show next under additional assumptions on the
1-periodic solutions that inﬁnitely many periodic solutions are deduced from the
Floer homology. A 1-periodic solution x(t) = x(t + 1) can be considered as a τ-
periodic solutions x(t) = x(t + τ) for every integer τ ∈N, which is then called
the τ-iterated solution of x and denoted by xτ. We call a 1-periodic solution x
strongly nondegenerate if all its iterates xτ are nondegenerate, i.e., if
det

1 −ψτ(x(0))

̸= 0
for all positive integers τ, not only for τ = 1.
Theorem 13. Assume the compact symplectic manifold (M, ω) satisﬁes ω|π2 = 0
and c1|π2 = 0 and assume H : S1 × M →R is a smooth Hamiltonian so that all
the contractible 1-periodic solutions of the Hamiltonian system are strongly non-
degenerate. Then there are inﬁnitely many contractible periodic solutions having
large integer periods.
This is a special case of a more general statement proved by D. Salamon and
E. Zehnder in [190] which requires merely that the 1-periodic solutions x(t) =
x(t+1) are weakly nondegenerate, i.e., they possess at least one Floquet multiplier
not equal to 1 so that σ(dψ1(x(0))) ̸= {1}. The condition on π2(M) cannot be
removed as is demonstrated by the example of a rotation on M = S2 with irrational
frequency (Fig. 6.12).
This is a Hamiltonian map, but has only two periodic points, namely the
strongly nondegenerate ﬁxed points at the north and the south pole.
In sharp contrast to this example, an area preserving diﬀeomorphism of S2
having ≥3 ﬁxed points, has automatically inﬁnitely many periodic points. This
striking phenomenon has been discovered by J.M. Gamboudo and P. Le Calvez
[103] and J. Franks [96]. One is tempted to conjecture that every Hamiltonian
map on a compact symplectic manifold (M, ω) possessing more ﬁxed points than
necessarily required by the V. Arnold conjecture possesses always inﬁnitely many
periodic points. Similarly one could expect, that a compact and strictly convex
hypersurface S ⊂R4, carries either 2 or ∞many closed characteristics.
Theorem 13 is an easy consequence of the Floer homology. We make use of
the fact proved in [190], that for the index µ(x, H) of a strongly nondegenerate

264
Chapter 6 The Arnold conjecture, Floer homology . . .
N
Fig. 6.12
1-periodic solution x(t) = x(t + 1), the following iteration formula holds
µ(xτ) = 1
π

τ△(x) + rτ(x)

.
Here △(x) ∈R is a mean winding number associated with the 1-periodic solution
and |rτ(x)| < πn for every τ ∈N. We see that either |µ(xτ)| →∞as τ →∞or
|µ(xτ)| < n for every τ. Assume now, by contradiction, that there are only ﬁnitely
many periodic solutions of integer periods. Then they have a common period, say
τ0 ∈N, and we pick a prime number τ > τ0. Then all the τ-periodic solutions
of ˙x = XH(x) are iterated 1-periodic solutions and hence, are nondegenerate by
assumption. Considering the Floer complex for the τ periodic solutions x ∈PH(τ)
we conclude that
|µ(x)| ̸= n for all x ∈PH(τ)
if only τ is suﬃciently large. Hence we miss the highest and the lowest homology
groups, in contradiction to the Morse equation (6.155). Consequently there are
inﬁnitely many periodic solutions. Modifying this idea it is shown in [190] that
if there exists only ﬁnitely many contractible 1-periodic solutions x perhaps even
degenerate but satisfying △(x) ̸= 0 then, for every τ ∈N large and prime there
exists a τ-periodic solution which is contractible and has prime period τ.
Floer’s approach to the Morse theory in the loop space of a compact symplectic
manifold (M, ω) leads to an invariant of the underlying manifold which turned out
to be the familiar singular homology of M. However, Floer carried out his construc-
tion also for the Chern-Simons functional on the space of SU(2) connections on a
homology 3 sphere X, see [83]. Here the connecting orbits can be interpreted as
self-dual Yang-Mills connections on the manifold X × R with ﬁnite Yang-Mills ac-
tion. For this functional, the Floer homology groups are surprising new invariants
of the underlying homology 3-spheres reﬁning the Casson invariant. Indeed it turns
out that the Euler characteristic of Floer’s instanton homology of X agrees with

6.6 Symplectic homology
265
double the Casson invariant. We shall not discuss these developments in topology
here and refer instead to J.C. Sikorav’s S´eminaire Bourbaki [199] in 1990. Floer’s
instanton homology was extended to general oriented 3-manifolds by K. Fukaya
in [102]. Recent developments on instanton homology are presented in the Floer
memorial volumes [120].
6.6
Symplectic homology
In Chapter 3 we introduced the special symplectic capacity c0(M, ω) dynamically
in terms of Hamiltonian systems. The existence proof was based on a distinguished
critical point of the action functional. This critical point represents a particular
periodic orbit and the question arises whether the structure of all critical points
together with their connecting orbits leads to a more subtle symplectic invariant
which is not necessarily a number anymore. Indeed, combining the construction of
the capacity c0 with Floer’s homology construction in the loop space H. Hofer, and
A. Floer established in [90] a symplectic homology theory. Our aim is to sketch,
without proofs, this theory which is not yet in its ﬁnal form.
We ﬁrst recall the setting from the previous section and consider a symplectic
manifold (M, ω) satisfying π2(M) = 0, for simplicity. By Ω(M) we denote the
set of parameterized contractible loops x : S1 →M. If H : S1 × M →R is a
time-periodic Hamiltonian, the action functional ϕH : Ω(M) →R is deﬁned by
ϕH(x) = −

D
¯x∗ω +
1

0
H

t, x(t)

dt .
Here ¯x : D →M is an extension of x to the closed unit disc D satisfying ¯x|∂D = x.
The critical points of ϕH are the contractible 1-periodic solutions of the Hamilto-
nian vector ﬁeld ˙x = XH(x) on M. We shall assume that all of them are nonde-
generate and denote this ﬁnite set by PH. By C(M, H) we denote the vector space
over Z2 generated by PH to be
C = ⊕Ck , Ck(M, H) = spanZ2 {x ∈PH | µ(H, x) = k} .
The grading is determined by the index µ(H, x) ∈Z intrinsically associated to the
nondegenerate periodic solutions x ∈PH. For a generic almost complex structure J
associated with ω there exists a boundary operator ∂k = ∂k(M, H, J) : Ck →Ck−1.
It is deﬁned by counting (mod 2) the connecting orbits M(x−, x+, H, J) which
connect periodic solutions of index diﬀerence µ(H, x−) −µ(H, x+) = 1. The pair
(C, ∂) is a chain complex and we denote by
F∗(M, H, J) = ker ∂
im ∂
the Floer homology of the generic pair (H, J). Turning now to the construction
of the symplectic homology of (M, ω), we ﬁrst make the observation that for a

266
Chapter 6 The Arnold conjecture, Floer homology . . .
ﬁxed generic pair (H, J) there exists an additional ﬁltration of the Floer complex
deﬁned by the values of the functional ϕH on Ω(M). We deﬁne for a ∈R ∪{∞}
the graded free groups
Ca(M, H) = 
k∈Z
Ca
k
Ca
k =
spanZ2 {x ∈PH | µ(H, x) = k and ϕH(x) < a} .
Assume now that u is a connecting orbit in M(x−, x+, H, J) and denote by us ∈Ω
the loops us(t) = u(s, t). By the variational structure, ϕH(x+) ≤ϕH(us) ≤
ϕH(x−), hence the periodic orbits lying between two diﬀerent levels together with
their connecting orbits constitute a subcomplex of the Floer complex. More pre-
cisely ∂= ∂(H, J) satisﬁes
∂: Ca
k →Ca
k−1.
Therefore, deﬁning for −∞< a ≤b ≤∞, the quotient group by
C[a,b)(H, J) = Cb(H, J)
Ca(H, J),
(6.159)
then the boundary map induces a boundary operator ∂k : C[a,b)
k
→C[a,b)
k−1 , and we
can deﬁne
F [a,b)
k
(H, J) =
ker(∂k)
im (∂k+1).
(6.160)
Yet, this Floer homology group depends on the choice of a generic pair (H, J) and
is not an invariant of M. The aim is to construct a directed set of very special
generic pairs, so that the directed limit of the corresponding groups deﬁnes a
symplectic invariant of M. The class of admissible Hamiltonians in a generic pair
is prompted by the class used in the construction of c0(M, ω) in Chapter 3.
We sketch this construction for compact symplectic manifolds (M, ω) possibly
having a boundary ∂M. In the case that ∂M ̸= ∅we shall assume that ∂M is
of contact type as deﬁned above. Equivalently, this requires that there exists a
1-form λ on ∂M satisfying dλ = ω on ∂M and λ(x, ξ) ̸= 0 for all nonvanishing
ξ ∈Tx(∂M) for which ω(ξ, η) = 0 for all η ∈Tx(∂M). Moreover, we assume for
simplicity, as above, that π2(M) = 0. By H we denote the collection of all smooth
and time-periodic Hamiltonian functions H : S1 × M →R satisfying
supp(H) is compact in S1 × (M\∂M) and H(S1 × M) ⊂(−∞, 0].
(6.161)
Clearly this condition implies that there are many periodic solutions x of XH on M
which are degenerate and satisfy ϕH(x) = 0. In addition to (6.161) we, therefore,
require that all contractible periodic solutions x of XH satisfying ϕH(x) < 0
are nondegenerate. Consequently, if −∞≤a ≤b ≤0 we can deﬁne as above
the relative Floer groups F [a,b)(H, J). Here, however, not every J is admissible.

6.6 Symplectic homology
267
The J has to be chosen in such a way that every solution u : R × S1 →M in
M(x−, x+, H, J) stays away from the boundary, i.e., u(R×S1) ⊂M\∂M, provided
x−and x+ are contained in M\∂M. Such admissible J’s do exist; the boundary
∂M is then called J-pseudo convex in the sense of D. McDuﬀ[154]. We shall call
a pair (H, J) satisfying the above conditions admissible and introduce in the set
of admissible pairs a partial ordering, by deﬁning (this is not a typing error)
(H, J) ≤(K, ˜J) ⇐⇒H(t, x) ≥K(t, x)
for all (t, x) ∈S1 × M. For such pairs one can deﬁne a monotone homotopy. It
consists of a pair (L, ˆJ), where L : R×S1 ×M →R and where the almost complex
structure ˆJ(s, t, x) is adapted to the symplectic form ω. Moreover, L = H, ˆJ = J
for s →−∞while L = K, ˆJ = ˜J for s →+∞, and ∂L
∂s ≤0. Given a monotone
homotopy for (H, J) ≤(K, ˜J) one considers the partial diﬀerential equations for
u : R × S1 →M:
∂u
∂s + ˆJ(s, t, u) ∂u
∂t + (∇ˆ
JL) (s, t, u) = 0
u(s, ·)
→
x ∈PH
(s →−∞)
u(s, ·)
→
y ∈PK
(s →+∞).
Using the monotonicity assumption we conclude that ϕK(y) ≤ϕH(x). This im-
plies that the boundary operator ∂preserves the real ﬁltration; this was the reason
for the monotonicity assumption. Proceeding as in Floer’s construction, the com-
binatorics of the set of solutions is used to construct a natural homomorphism
F [a,b)(H, J) →F [a,b)(K, ˜J)
of Z2 vector spaces, which is independent of the chosen generic monotone homo-
topy. The partial ordering ≤turns the set of admissible pairs (H, J) into a directed
set, since given (H1, J1) and (H2, J2), there exists an admissible pair (H, J) satis-
fying
(Hj, Jj) ≤(H, J) for j = 1, 2.
Hence we may pass to the limit obtaining the symplectic homology group
SM
[a,b) = dir. lim F [a,b)(H, J).
In addition, if U ⊂M is an open subset, and if HU consists of those admissible
pairs (H, J) which are restricted by the requirement that supp(H) ⊂S1×(U\∂M),
we may take the directed limit over HU and obtain a symplectic homology group
of U deﬁned by
SM
[a,b) (U) : =
dir. lim
HU F [a,b) (H, J).
We next list some of the properties of these groups known so far. It can be shown
that there are natural homomorphisms of Z2 vector spaces
SM
[a,b) (U) →SM
[a,b).

268
Chapter 6 The Arnold conjecture, Floer homology . . .
Moreover, the short exact sequence 0
→
F [a,b)(H, J)
→F [a,c)(H, J)
→
F [b,c)(H, J) →0, for −∞≤a ≤b ≤c ≤0, gives rise to an exact triangle
△a,b,c(U) of symplectic homology groups:
S[a,b) (U)
−→
S[a,c) (U)
∂↖
↙
S[b,c) (U).
Given a symplectic diﬀeomorphism ψ : M →M we can deﬁne for any admissible
pair (H, J), with H ∈HU, a new admissible pair (Hψ, Jψ) as follows:
Hψ(t, x)
=
H

t, ψ−1(x)

Jψ(x)
=
Tψ

ψ−1(x)

J

ψ−1(x)

Tψ−1(x).
This is used to show that ψ induces a natural isomorphism
ψ# : SM
[a,b) (U)
∼
=
−→SM
[a,b)

ψ(U)

.
If U ⊂V then the inclusion map induces a homomorphism
σV,U : SM
[a,b) (U) →SM
[a,b) (V ) .
If ψ : M →M is a symplectic diﬀeomorphism satisfying ψ(U) ⊂V , we deﬁne the
induced map ψ∗by
ψ∗= σV,ψ(U) ◦ψ# : SM
[a,b) (U) →SM
[a,b) (V ).
Then if ϕ : M →M is another symplectic diﬀeomorphism satisfying ϕ(V ) ⊂W,
one can prove
(ϕ ◦ψ)∗
=
σW,ϕ◦ψ(U) ◦(ϕ ◦ψ)#
=

σW,ϕ(V ) ◦ϕ#

◦

σV,ψ(U) ◦ψ#

=
ϕ∗◦ψ∗.
Moreover, the identity map of M induces the identity map id: SM
[a,b)(U)→SM
[a,b)(U).
The most useful property is the isotopy invariance formulated as follows: if ψs :
M →M for 0 ≤s ≤1 is a smooth family of symplectic diﬀeomorphisms satisfying
ψs(U) ⊂V for all s, then (ψs)∗: SM
[a,b)(U) →SM
[a,b)(V ) is independent of s.
It is rather diﬃcult to compute the symplectic homology groups sketched above
and we refer to [50] for computations and applications. It is not surprising anymore
that the homology groups are related to distinguished periodic orbits, which sit
on or near the boundary of a domain. This is illustrated by the theorem below.

6.6 Symplectic homology
269
We consider a compact symplectic manifold (M, ω) with boundary ∂M ̸= ∅
which is exact symplectic, i.e., ω = dλ for a 1-form λ. We assume the boundary
to be of contact type with respect to λ. Then we can deﬁne the action spectrum
σ(∂M) ⊂R as follows: σ(∂M) = {| 
x
λ|, where x is a periodic solution of the Reeb
vector ﬁeld on ∂M}, note that iterated solutions are also considered, in particular,
k · σ(∂M) ⊂σ(∂M) for k ∈N.
Theorem 14. (K. Cieliebak, A. Floer, H. Hofer and K. Wysocki [52]) Consider two
exact symplectic and compact manifolds (M, dλ) and (N, dτ) with boundaries ∂M
and ∂N of contact type with respect to λ and τ. Assume there exists an exact
symplectic diﬀeomorphism
ϕ :
◦
M →
◦
N
(i.e., ϕ∗τ −λ = dF for a smooth function F :
◦
M →R). If the periodic solutions
on ∂M and ∂N and all their iterates are nondegenerate, then
σ(∂M) = σ(∂N).
Examples by Ya. Eliashberg and H. Hofer [75] demonstrate that under the as-
sumptions of the theorem, the ﬂows on ∂M and ∂N are not necessarily conjugated,
so that ϕ cannot be extended to a symplectic diﬀeomorphism M →N.
The proof of Theorem 14 is based on the following nontrivial fact [52]. Let
α < 0 and deﬁne
dM(α) = 1
2 lim
ε→0 dim S[α−ε,α+ε)
M
(
◦
M).
Then dM(α) = 0 if −α /∈σ(∂M) and
dM(α) = #

periodic solutions x on ∂M with action |

x
λ| = −α

.
Since S[a,b)
M
(
◦
M) = S[a,b)
N
(
◦
N) for all a < b, we conclude dM(α) = dN(α) so that the
theorem follows. For the intricate details of the proof and for applications of this
result, we refer to the forthcoming paper [52].
By computing the homology groups one also proves a conjecture by Gromov
on the symplectic classiﬁcation of open polydiscs. Deﬁne for r = (r1, r2, . . . , rn),
where 0 < r1 ≤r2 ≤· · · ≤rn, the polydisc D(r) = B2(r1) × · · · × B2(rn).
Theorem 15. The open polydiscs D(r) and D(r′) are symplectomorphic if and only
if r = r′, assuming r and r′ are ordered.
We recall that we have proved this statement in Chapter 2 for the special case
n = 2. The proof was based on two symplectic invariants: the volume and a ca-
pacity. The proof for n ≥2 follows with other applications, in [52]. The details of
the above construction of the symplectic homology are carried out in K. Cieliebak,

270
Chapter 6 The Arnold conjecture, Floer homology . . .
A. Floer and H. Hofer [51] where also possible extensions of this theory are out-
lined. The proof is based on the action principle in the loop space of symplectic
manifolds and combines the construction of the dynamical capacity of Chapter
3 and the construction of the Floer homology, with an additional real ﬁltration.
An alternate more recent construction of a symplectic homology theory for open
subsets of (R2n, ω0) can be found in L. Traynor [212]; the construction is based
on the generating function approach in a ﬁnite dimensional setting introduced in
[218] by C. Viterbo.
Concluding remarks. As already pointed out in the introduction we have selected
only a few and rather elementary topics in symplectic geometry and explained
them in detail. We would, therefore, like to mention some additional literature.
There is a whole sequence of relative symplectic capacities for subsets in (R2n, ω0)
in the framework of symplectic diﬀeomorphisms deﬁned on all of R2n constructed
by I. Ekeland and H. Hofer in [68]. These capacities have an outer regularity
property, in contrast to the intrinsically deﬁned dynamical capacity of Chapter
3 which has an inner regularity property. Quite recently S. Kuksin extended in
[130] the capacity concept to some special inﬁnite dimensional Hamiltonian sys-
tems deﬁned by partial diﬀerential equations, e.g. nonlinear string equation on
S1, some nonlinear Schr¨odinger equations on T n. He proved, in particular, a non
squeezing result for the ﬂows of such systems. The construction of the capacity is
based on a Galerkin approximation using the ﬁnite dimensional capacities intro-
duced in Chapter 3. Kuksin’s result prompted a non squeezing result for a very
special nonlinear Schr¨odinger equation on S1, whose ﬂow maps are not compact
perturbations of linear maps in the symplectic Hilbert space, see J. Bourgain [31].
Extending the embedding capacity, called the Gromov-width in Chapter 2, one
can deﬁne, for every integer k, a new capacity as follows: one takes k symplectic
embeddings of equal balls B(r) having disjoint images in (M, ω) and determines
an upper bound of the radius r. This leads to the symplectic packing problem
related to algebraic geometry studied by D. McDuﬀand L. Polterovich in [155];
for interesting packing constructions we point out L. Traynor [213]. The intrin-
sic L∞-geometry on the group of compactly supported Hamiltonian mappings of
(R2n, ω0) described in Chapter 5 has been extended to general symplectic mani-
folds by F. Lalonde and D. McDuﬀin [134] and [135]. It turns out that the corner
stone of this geometry, namely the energy-capacity inequality, is equivalent to the
non squeezing theorem. Conjugate points on geodesics in the Hofer metric have
in the meantime been investigated by I. Ustilovsky in [214]. For a survey on these
interesting developments we point out F. Lalonde [133].
As already emphasized, the V.I. Arnold conjecture about ﬁxed points of Hamil-
tonian mappings is open for general compact symplectic manifolds of dim M ≥8.
For a survey on Floer’s contributions to this problem we refer to D. McDuﬀ[153]
and to the Floer memorial volume [120]. Recently an analogue of the Arnold
conjecture for symplectic mappings ϕ which are not necessarily Hamiltonian but
isotopic to the identity through symplectic diﬀeomorphisms has been studied by

6.6 Symplectic homology
271
Lˆe Hˆong Vˆan and Kaoru Ono [137]. They prove for compact manifolds satisfying
c1|π2(M) = λω|π2(M) (λ ≥0) assuming that all the ﬁxed points are nondegener-
ate, that the number of ﬁxed points of ϕ is at least the sum of the Betti-numbers
of the Novikov homology over Z2 associated to the Calabi-invariant α of ϕ, Nov
(α). In the special case of the torus T 2n considered in Chapter 6, Nov (α) = 0 if
α ̸= 0, so that one obtains nothing new for the torus.
Finally, for an abundance of exciting developments and discoveries in sym-
plectic geometry not treated in our book, e.g. pseudo-holomorphic spheres, ﬁlling
techniques, Lagrangian intersections, contact geometry, examples of symplectic
manifolds, and so on, we refer to the forthcoming books by D. McDuﬀand D. Sala-
mon [156], M. Audin, J. Lafontaine [13], B. Aebischer, M. Borer, Ch. Leuenberger,
M. K¨alin, H.M. Reimann [3] and C. Abbas, H. Hofer [1].

Appendix
A.1
Generating functions of symplectic mappings in R2n
We shall start with the very useful observation that every symplectic map can
locally be represented in terms of a single scalar function, a so-called generating
function. This will be used in Appendix 2 to prove the Arnold-Jost theorem con-
cerning the construction of so-called action-angle coordinates in integrable systems.
Such Hamiltonian systems are characterized by the property of having suﬃciently
many integrals so that, as we shall show, the task of solving (or “integrating”) the
diﬀerential equations becomes trivial, after a global symplectic transformation.
All the considerations in section A.1 are local in nature. We consider a sym-
plectic mapping u : (ξ, η) →(x, y) in (R2n, ω0) represented by
x
=
a(ξ, η)
y
=
b(ξ, η) .
(A.1)
If we assume
det(aξ) ̸= 0 ,
(A.2)
then, locally, the ﬁrst equation in (A.1) can be solved for ξ = α(x, η) and inserting
this solution into the second equation in (A.1) we ﬁnd the following equivalent
representation of the map u:
ξ
=
α(x, η)
y
=
β(x, η) ,
where β(x, η) = b(α(x, η), η) and
det(αx) · det(aξ) = 1 .
The advantage of scrambling the variables in this seemingly ugly manner is that
the condition for u to be symplectic is much easier to express in terms of α and β
than in terms of a and b. We shall show that under the condition (A.2) the map
u is symplectic if and only if there exists a scalar function W = W(x, η) with
ξ
=
α(x, η)
=
∂
∂ηW(x, η)
y
=
β(x, η)
=
∂
∂xW(x, η) .
(A.3)
H. Hofer and E. Zehnder, Symplectic Invariants and Hamiltonian Dynamics,  
273
Modern Birkhäuser Classics, DOI 10.1007/978-3-0348-0104-1, © Springer Basel AG 2011

274
Appendix
Hence (β, α) is the gradient of a function. To prove this statement we consider on
R4n, having the coordinates (ξ, η, x, y) ∈R4n, the one-form,
σ =
n

j=1
yjdxj + ξjdηj,
whose exterior derivative is the two-form
dσ =
n

j=1
dyj ∧dxj −
n

j=1
dηj ∧dξj .
Introducing the embeddings i and j: R2n →R4n by
i
:
(x, η)
→

α(x, η), η, x, β(x, η)

j
:
(ξ, η)
→

ξ, η, a(ξ, η), b(ξ, η)

and deﬁning the local diﬀeomorphism ϕ : R2n →R2n by (x, η) →(ξ, η) =
(α(x, η), η), we have i = j ◦ϕ. Consequently,
d(i∗σ)
=
i∗dσ = ϕ∗(j∗dσ)
=
ϕ∗(u∗ω0 −ω0) .
If u is symplectic, that is u∗ω0 −ω0 = 0, then i∗σ is closed and, therefore, locally
exact, such that
i∗σ(x, η)
=
n
j=1
βj(x, η)dxj + αj(x, η)dηj
=
dW(x, η) =
n
j=1
Wxj(x, η)dxj + Wηj(x, η)dηj
for a function W = W(x, η). From this identity we read oﬀ(A.3). We can reverse
all the steps and hence have proved:
Proposition 1. Every symplectic mapping u as in (A.1) satisfying (A.2) can locally
be represented in the implicit form
ξ
=
Wη(x, η)
y
=
Wx(x, η) ,
(A.4)
where det(Wxη) ̸= 0. Conversely, any smooth function W = W(x, η) satisfying
this inequality deﬁnes implicitly by (A.4) a symplectic mapping u near a point.
The function W(x, η) is called a generating function of the symplectic map u.
The proposition shows that a symplectic map u satisfying (A.2) can locally be

A.1 Generating functions of symplectic mappings in R2n
275
described in terms of a single function. For example, the identity map corresponds
to W(x, η) = ⟨x, η⟩. Thus every function W,
W(x, η) = ⟨x, η⟩+ w(x, η) ,
w being small together with its ﬁrst two derivatives, deﬁnes a symplectic mapping
near the identity, and all such mappings can, locally, be parameterized by func-
tions. Of course, other generating functions can be constructed. If we single out
(x, ξ) as independent variables, where we assume
det(aη) ̸= 0,
(A.5)
instead of (A.2) we can represent the map u in (A.1) locally in the implicit form
η
=
−
Vξ(ξ, x)
y
=
Vx(ξ, x),
det(Vxξ) ̸= 0
(A.6)
with a generating function V (ξ, x). The proof proceeds as above, but starts with
the one-form on R4n given by σ = y dx −η dξ, in short notation. For example,
the identity map violates conditions (A.5) but satisﬁes (A.2) while the symplectic
rotation
x = η , y = −ξ
satisﬁes (A.5) but violates (A.2). However, for every symplectic mapping there
is some generating function representing it, as we shall prove next. The so-called
group of elementary symplectic transformations of (R2n, ω0) is generated by the
rotation
x1 = η1 ,
xk = ξk ,
k ≥2 .
y1 = −ξ1
yk = ηk
and the mappings
xj = ξπ(j) , yj = ηπ(j) ,
j = 1, 2, . . . , n,
with a permutation π of the integers (1, 2, . . . , n). All these mappings are sym-
plectic and can be represented by symplectic matrices which we abbreviate by
E.
Proposition 2. Let U be a linear symplectic map of (R2n, ω0). Then there exists an
elementary symplectic transformation E satisfying
U · E =
 A
B
C
D

and det A ̸= 0 .
With U and U T is a symplectic matrix, hence Proposition 2 follows immediately
from

276
Appendix
Lemma 1. Let A respectively B be two n × n matrices having column vectors
aj respectively bj ∈Rn for 1 ≤j ≤n. Assume that the rank of the 2n × n
matrix (A, B) is equal to r. If ABT = BAT then there are r diﬀerent indices
jp ∈{1, 2, . . . , n} such that there are column vectors vp = ajp or vp = bjp, which
are linearly independent.
Proof. The following argument is due to C. de Boor. Choose I ⊂{1, 2, . . . , n} such
that {aj}j∈I are linearly independent and Im(A) = span{aj|j ∈I}. It is suﬃcient
to show that
Im(B) ⊂Im(A) + span{bs | s /∈I} .
(A.7)
Pick a basis cj of Rn satisfying ⟨aj, ck⟩= δjk for j, k ∈I. Then one computes, for
j ∈I, that
BAT cj = bj +

s/∈I
dj(s)bs ,
where dj(s) is the s-th component of the vector AT cj. Since Im(BAT ) ⊂Im(A),
due to the assumption BAT = ABT , we conclude that bj, j ∈I, belongs to
Im(A)+ span {bs, s /∈I} and so the claim (A.7) follows and the lemma is proved. ■
Applying Proposition 2 to a symplectic map u with Jacobian U at some point,
we achieve the condition (A.2) to hold for u ◦E with some elementary symplectic
transformation E and thus ﬁnd a local representation in terms of a generating
function near this point. To illustrate the use of generating functions we shall
determine the most general symplectic map u in (A.1) for which
x = a(ξ)
(A.8)
is prescribed, satisﬁes det(aξ) ̸= 0, and is independent of η. Representing the
desired map u by a generating function V (ξ, y) in the form
x
=
Vy(ξ, y)
η
=
Vξ(ξ, y),
we ﬁnd Vy(ξ, y) = a(ξ) and hence V (ξ, y) = ⟨a(ξ), y⟩−v(ξ) or η = Vξ = aT
ξ y −vξ
and the explicit representation of u is
u :
x
=
a(ξ)
y
=
(aT
ξ )−1
η + vξ(ξ)

(A.9)
where v = v(ξ) is an arbitrary scalar function. This is the most general symplectic
map u compatible with (A.8). For the special case that a = id we ﬁnd
u :
x
=
ξ
y
=
η + vξ(ξ) .
(A.10)

A.1 Generating functions of symplectic mappings in R2n
277
In order to generalize these considerations we ﬁrst recall a deﬁnition. If (M, ω) is
any symplectic manifold, then the Poisson bracket of two functions F, G : M →R
is deﬁned to be the function
{F, G} = −ω(XF , XG)
(A.11)
where XF is the Hamiltonian vector ﬁeld associated to the function F. Clearly
{F, G} = −{G, F}, and, since ω(XF , ·) = −dF, we have
{F, G} = dF(XG) = −dG(XF ) .
(A.12)
A symplectic map u on M, i.e., u∗ω = ω, leaves the Poisson-bracket invariant:
{F, G} ◦u = {F ◦u, G ◦u} .
(A.13)
In order to verify this, recall the transformation formula for Hamiltonian vector
ﬁelds, u∗XG = (du)−1XG ◦u = XG◦u if u∗ω = ω. Therefore {F, G} ◦u
=
dF ◦u(XG ◦u) = d(F ◦u)(u∗XG) = d(F ◦u)(XG◦u) = {F ◦u, G ◦u} proving the
claim (A.13). Conversely, one veriﬁes readily that a map u satisfying (A.13) for all
functions F and G is necessarily a symplectic map. One veriﬁes, moreover, easily
that for all functions F, G and H on M
[XF , XG] = X{G,F }
(A.14)
and
{F, {G, H}} + {H, {F, G}} + {G, {H, F}} = 0 .
(A.15)
Actually, it can be shown for a nondegenerate 2-form ω on M that the condition
dω = 0 is equivalent to each of the conditions (A.14) and (A.15), see, e.g., [167].
Locally in a Darboux chart of M i.e., in (R2n, ω0) the Poisson-bracket of two
functions F = F(x, y) and G = G(x, y) is expressed as
{F, G} = ⟨Fx, Gy⟩−⟨Fy, Gx⟩.
(A.16)
The special coordinate functions (x, y) →xj, for example, satisfy {xi, xj} = 0.
Hence, if u : (ξ, η) →(x, y) = (a(ξ, y), b(ξ, y)) is a symplectic map we con-
clude from the invariance of the Possion brackets that {ai, aj} = 0, where xj =
aj(ξ, η), 1 ≤j ≤n. Our aim is to prove the converse:
Theorem 1. (Liouville) Consider n functions aj = aj(ξ, η), 1 ≤j ≤n satisfying
(i)
{ai, aj}
=
0
(ii)
rank (aξ, aη)
=
n.
Then there is a local symplectic diﬀeomeorphism u = (a, b),
x
=
a(ξ, η)
y
=
b(ξ, η) ,
extending the relation x = a(ξ, η).

278
Appendix
Proof. By applying an elementary symplectic transformation we may assume that
det(aξ) ̸= 0 and solve the equation x = a(ξ, η) for ξ = α(x, η). We shall prove
that αη is symmetric as a consequence of the condition (i). Indeed this condition
can be written as aξaT
η −aηaT
ξ = 0. Multiplying this equation by a−1
ξ
from the
left and its transpose from the right we ﬁnd aT
η (aT
ξ )−1 −a−1
ξ aη = 0, i.e., a−1
ξ aη is
symmetric. On the other hand, diﬀerentiating the identity ξ = α(a(ξ, η), η) yields
1l = αx aξ
and
0 = αx aη + αη ,
and consequently αη = −a−1
ξ aη which is symmetric, as claimed. Therefore, locally,
there is a function W = W(x, η) with
α(x, η) = Wη(x, η) .
Moreover, det(Wxη) = det(αx) = (det aξ)−1 ̸= 0, and hence W is a generating
function of the desired symplectic map u extending x = a(ξ, η). ■
Corollary. If a0, a1, . . . an are (n + 1) functions for which
(i)
{aj, ak} = 0 ,
j, k = 0, 1, . . . n
(ii)
rank

ajξ, ajη

j=1,2,...n = n ,
then a0 can be expressed as a function of a1, . . . an. In particular, there are at most
n independent functions satifying (i).
Proof. Extending the relation x = a(ξ, η) by the theorem, we ﬁnd a symplectic
map u for which a ◦u(x, y) = x . Now set a0 ◦u = f(x, y). Since the Poisson
bracket is preserved under u we have 0 = {aj, a0} = {xj, f} = fyj so that f is
independent of y. Hence a0 = f(a1, . . . an) proving the corollary. ■
For further examples of generating functions we refer to the Notes on Dynam-
ical Systems by J. Moser and E. Zehnder [167]. We turn now to a global version
of Liouville’s theorem.
A.2
Action-angle coordinates, the Theorem of Arnold and Jost
We consider a symplectic manifold (M, ω) of dim M = 2n.
Deﬁnition. A Hamiltonian vector ﬁeld XH on M is called integrable (in the sense
of Liouville) if there exist n functions Fj : M →R, 1 ≤j ≤n satisfying at every
point of M:
(i)
dF1, . . . dFn
are linearly independent
(ii)
{Fi, Fj} = 0
for all i, j .
(iii)
{H, Fj} = 0
for all j .

A.2 Action-angle coordinates, the Theorem of Arnold and Jost 279
Introducing the map
F : M −→Rn ,
F(x) =

F1(x), . . . Fn(x)

(A.17)
we conclude from (i) that the level sets
Nc = {x ∈M | F(x) = c} ,
c ∈Rn
(A.18)
are n-dimensional submanifolds of M. The Hamiltonian vector ﬁelds XFj are lin-
early independent and, since dFi(XFj) = 0 in view of (ii), they span the tangent
space of Nc:
TxNc = span{XFj(x) |
1 ≤j ≤n} ,
x ∈Nc. We remark, moreover, that in view of ω(XFj, XFi) = 0 we have ω(v, w) = 0
for all pairs v, w ∈TxNc. Hence Nc is a Lagrangian submanifold of M. By (iii),
the functions Fj are all integrals of XH which is therefore tangent to the level sets
Nc so that the ﬂow of XH leaves Nc invariant. Under an additional topological
assumption on Nc, the ﬂow can be determined explicitly for all times in view of the
following theorem which goes back to V. Arnold [12] in the special case M = R2n.
However, Arnold required an additional assumption which was removed by R. Jost
in [126] who proved it in the general case.
Theorem 2. (Arnold-Jost) Let (M, ω) be a symplectic manifold of dim M = 2n.
Assume there are n functions Fj satisfying (i) and (ii) at every point. Assume,
moreover, that one of the level sets, say N = F −1(0) ⊂M is compact and con-
nected. Then
1) N is an embedded n-dimensional torus T n.
2) There is an open neighborhood U of N in M which can be described by the
action and angle variables (x, y) in the following manner. If x = (x1, . . . , xn)
are the variables on the torus T n = Rn/Zn and y = (y1, . . . , yn) ∈D1, where
D1 and D2 are some domains in Rn containing y = 0, then there exists a
diﬀeomorphism
ψ : T n × D1 −→U =

c∈D2

F −1(c) ∩U

and a diﬀeomorphism µ : D2 →D1, with µ(0) = 0, such that
ψ∗ω =
n

j=1
dyj ∧dxj = ω0
(A.19)
µ ◦F ◦ψ(x, y) = y .
(A.20)
In particular, ψ maps the torus T n ×{0} diﬀeomorphically onto F −1(0) = N
and the torus T n × {y} onto Nc ∩U where y = µ(c).

280
Appendix
Corollary: Any integrable Hamiltonian system given by H having the integrals Fj
is by the symplectic diﬀeomorphism ψ transformed into the following system on
(T n × D1, ω0):
H ◦ψ(x, y) = h(y) ,
(A.21)
where the Hamiltonian h depends on the integrals only and not on the angle
variables x.
Proof of the Corollary: In view of (A.13) the functions Fj ◦ψ and therefore, by
(A.20) also the coordinate functions yj, are integrals of H ◦ψ, and hence
0 = {H ◦ψ, yj} = {h, yj} =
∂
∂xj
h
so that h(x, y) = H ◦ψ(x, y) does indeed not depend on the x variables. ■
Consequently, on ψ−1(U) the transformed Hamiltonian system looks extremely
simple:
Xh : ˙x = ∂h
∂y (y) ,
˙y = 0 .
It is easily “integrated” with the solutions
x(t) = x(0) + t∂h
∂y

y(0)

,
y(t) = y(0)
hence the name “integrable systems”. Geometrically, every torus T n ×{y} in T n ×
D2 is invariant under the ﬂow ϕt of Xh and the restriction onto such a torus is
linear:
ϕt | T n × {y} : (x, y) →(x + tω, y)
where ω = ∂h
∂y (y) ∈Rn are the frequencies of this particular torus. We see that in
the open set U ⊂M all the solutions of ˙x = XH(x) are quasi-periodic.
Proof of Theorem 2. The proof proceeds in several steps. First we show that N is
a torus. Second we introduce convenient coordinates (x, y) locally near a point p
on N by means of Liouville’s theorem. Thirdly, these coordinates are extended to
an open neighborhood of N by means of the ﬂows of the Hamiltonian vector ﬁelds
XFj. Finally, the normalization of the periods requires an additional symplectic
change of variables to conclude the proof.
a) In order to prove the ﬁrst statement of the theorem, we denote by ϕsj
j
the ﬂow of XFj. Since [XFj, XFi] is a Hamiltonian vector ﬁeld with Hamiltonian
function {Fi, Fj} = 0, the vector ﬁelds XFj and hence also their ﬂows do commute
and we abbreviate
ϕs = ϕs1
1 ◦ϕs2
2 ◦. . . ϕsn
n ,
s = (s1, . . . , sn) ∈Rn,
(A.22)

A.2 Action-angle coordinates, the Theorem of Arnold and Jost 281
wherever it is deﬁned. Since the Fj are integrals of XFi
F

ϕs(x)

= F(x) ,
x ∈M
and hence ϕs leaves all the level sets Nc ⊂M invariant. Fix now a point p ∈N.
Then the ﬂow ϕs(p) exists for all s ∈Rn, since N is compact, and we can deﬁne
the action of Rn on N by
A : Rn −→N,
s →ϕs(p) .
(A.23)
Clearly ϕs ◦ϕt = ϕs+t. The map A is an immersion, since the tangent map at t
maps ej ∈Rn onto XFj(ϕt(p)) ∈Tϕt(p)N and hence these vectors span the tangent
space. Consequently, A is a local diﬀeomorphisms and its image is both open and
closed and hence equal to N, since N is assumed to be connected. The map A,
however, is not injective. The isotropy group Γ = {s ∈Rn|ϕs(p) = p} is a discrete
subgroup of Rn, i.e., a lattice. Therefore Γ is generated by vectors γ1, . . . , γd ∈Rn
which are linearly independent over R and
Γ =

γ =
d

j=1
njγj | nj ∈Z
	
.
(A.24)
In view of ϕs+γ(p) = ϕs(p) for all s ∈Rn, the map A induces a diﬀemorphism
between Rn/Γ and N. Since N and hence Rn/Γ are compact, we necessarily have
d = n so that N is an n-dimensional torus as claimed.
b) We next introduce convenient local coordinates near the point p ∈N. By
the Darboux and Liouville theorems and its corollary we have
Lemma 2. (Liouville) If (M, ω) is a symplectic manifold of dim M = 2n, and if Fj
are n functions with {Fj, Fi} = 0 and dFj linearly independent everywhere, then
every point q ∈M has an open neighborhood W and a diﬀeomorphism ψ : V →W
where V is an open neighborhood of the origin in R2n such that
(i)
ψ(0) = q
(ii)
ψ∗ω =
n
j=1
dyj ∧dxj .
(iii)
F ◦ψ(x, y) = y ,
where (x, y) are the symplectic coordinates of (R2n, ω0).
Corollary. In the above “Liouville”-coordinates the ﬂow ϕs deﬁned in (A.22) looks
very simple, namely
ϕs ◦ψ(x, y) = ψ(x + s, y) ,
s ∈Rn
(A.25)
if (x, y) and (x + s, y) ∈V .

282
Appendix
Indeed, ψ−1 ◦ϕsj
j ◦ψ is the ﬂow of the Hamiltonian vector ﬁeld XFj◦ψ on V
for every 1 ≤j ≤n. Since Fj ◦ψ(x, y) = yj, it is indeed linear and given by
(x, y) →(x + sjej, y).
c) Going back to our point p ∈N, we choose by Lemma 2 the Liouville co-
ordinates ψ : V →U ⊂M, where V is an open neighborhood of 0 in R2n and
ψ(0) = p. In order to extend these coordinates to (x, y) ∈R2n we shall deﬁne a
map
ϑ :
Rn × D2 →M
(x, y) →ϑ(x, y) = ϕx ◦ψ(0, y)
(A.26)
where ϕx is the ﬂow of the integrals XFj deﬁned in (A.22), and where D2 ⊂Rn
is an open (and small) neighborhood of y = 0. For small x we have, in view of
the corollary ϑ(x, y) = ψ(x, y), for (x, y) ∈V . Geometrically, the deﬁnition (A.26)
says that we apply the ﬂow ϕx to the local section S = {ψ(0, y) ∈M : y ∈D2}
which is, in view of the corollary, transversal to the vector ﬁelds XFj.
y
R2n
O
x
P
M
N
Fig. A2.1
Moreover, since F ◦ϕx = F we conclude from Lemma 2 (iii) that F(ϑ(x, y)) =
F(ϕx ◦ψ(0, y)) = F(ψ(0, y)) = y and hence
ϑ : Rn × {y} −→Ny = F −1(y)
(A.27)
for y ∈D2, wherever the map is deﬁned. If y = 0 then by ψ(0, 0) = p, we have
ϑ(x, 0) = ϕx(p), and therefore by the considerations in a) the map is deﬁned for
all x ∈Rn and maps Rn × {0} onto N = F −1(0). It follows that ϑ is deﬁned
on K × D2 for a compact set K ⊂Rn containing the lattice Γ in its interior
provided D2 is small enough. We shall prove next that ϑ is in fact deﬁned on all
of Rn × D2. Recalling that if y = 0, then ϑ(x + γ, 0) = ϑ(x, 0) for x ∈Rn and
γ ∈Γ we shall ﬁrst construct, for y in a small neighborhood of 0, an n-dimensional

A.2 Action-angle coordinates, the Theorem of Arnold and Jost 283
lattice Γ(y) ⊂Rn close to Γ(0) = Γ such that ϑ(x + γ(y), y) = ϑ(x, y) for every
γ(y) ∈Γ(y).
Let γ = γj ∈Γ be an arbitrary basis vector of the lattice deﬁned in (A.24).
Then ϕγ(p) = p and p = ψ(0). Hence, in the Liouville coordinates V ⊂R2n
ψ−1 ◦ϕγ ◦ψ : (x, y) →(ξ, η)
(A.28)
deﬁnes a symplectic diﬀeomorphism locally near the ﬁxed point 0 in V .
Lemma 3. The symplectic map (A.28) in V is of the form
ξ
=
x −v(y) ,
v(y) =
∂
∂yQ(y),
η
=
y
(A.29)
for a smooth scalar function Q satisfying Q(0) = 0. Moreover, v(0) = 0.
Proof. Since, by deﬁnition, ϕγ ◦ψ(x, y) = ψ(ξ, η) we conclude from F ◦ϕx = F,
in view of Lemma 2 (ii), that
y = F ◦ψ(x, η) = F ◦ϕγ ◦ψ(x, η) = F ◦ψ(ξ, η) = η .
Every symplectic map extending the relation η = y is necessarily of the announced
form as we have seen in the previous section. That v(0) = 0 follows from ψ−1 ◦
ϕγ ◦ψ(0) = 0. ■
By deﬁnition (A.28), ϕγ ◦ψ(x, y) = ψ(ξ, η) and we conclude from Lemma 3
and Lemma 2 that
ψ(x, y) = ϕγ+v(y) ◦ψ(x, y)
(A.30)
for (x, y) ∈V ′ ⊂V . We can do this for every basis vector γj ∈Γ and ﬁnd
vj(y) =
∂
∂yQj(y) such that (A.30) holds true for γj +vj(y) replacing γ +v(y). We,
therefore, introduce the lattice Γ(y) ⊂Rn by
Γ(y) =

γ(y) =
n

j=1
njγj(y)



 nj ∈Z
	
(A.31)
where, in view of Lemma 3,
γj(y) = γj + vj(y) =
∂
∂yWj(y) ,
1 ≤j ≤n .
Here γj ∈Γ and Wj are scalar functions satisfying Wj(0) = 0. Moreover, since
vj(0) = 0 we have γj(0) = γj and hence
Γ(0) = Γ .
(A.32)
Consequently, for small y, the lattice vectors γj(y) are linearly independent and
satisfy, in view of (A.30)
ψ(x, y) = ϕγj(y) ◦ψ(x, y) ,
1 ≤j ≤n ,
(A.33)
if (x, y) ∈V ′ ⊂V .

284
Appendix
Lemma 4. The map ϑ : (Rn × D2, ω0) →(M, ω) deﬁned in (A.26) exists for all
(x, y) ∈Rn × D2 and satisﬁes
(i)
ϑ∗ω
=
ω0 .
(ii)
ϑ

x + γ(y), y

=
ϑ(x, y) ,
if γ(y) ∈Γ(y) .
Proof. The map ϑ exists for (x, y) ∈K×D2 with a compact set K ⊂Rn containing
Γ(0) in its interior, if D2 is small enough. Since, for x small, we have, in view of
(A.33),
ϑ

x + γj(y), y

=
ϕx+γj(y) ◦ψ(0, y)
=
ϕx ◦ϕγj(y) ◦ψ(0, y)
=
ϕx ◦ψ(0, y) = ϑ(x, y)
for every γj(y) ∈Γ(y), the ﬂow x →ϕx◦ψ(0, y) does indeed exist for all x ∈Rn by
the standard continuation theorem of solutions of ordinary diﬀerential equations.
It remains to prove (i). If (x, y) ∈Rn × D2 we choose x0 close to x such that
(x −x0, y) ∈V and represent the map ϑ in the form
ϑ(x, y)
=
ϕx0+(x−x0) ◦ψ(0, y)
=
ϕx0 ◦ψ(x −x0, y) = ϕx0 ◦ψ ◦σx0(x, y)
where σx0(x, y) = (x −x0, y) and where we have used the corollary to Lemma 2.
Hence, ϑ being locally a composition of symplectic mappings is indeed symplectic
and the lemma is proved. ■
Recall that ϑ(Rn × {y}) ⊂F −1(y). We claim that, for every y ∈D2, the map
ϑ induces a diﬀeomorphism
ϑ0 : Rn/Γ(y) −→F −1(y)
(A.34)
onto its image in F −1(y), which then is a torus T n. We only have to prove that
ϑ0 is injective provided y is suﬃciently small. Arguing by contradiction there are
sequences (xj, yj) and (x′
j, yj) satisfying
ϑ(xj, yj) = ϑ(x′
j, yj) , yj →0
xj −x′
j /∈Γ(yj) .
(A.35)
Taking a subsequence we may assume xj →x∗and x′
j →x′∗. Hence ϑ(x∗, 0) =
ϑ(x′∗, 0) and, therefore x∗−x′∗∈Γ(0) = Γ. Consequently, xj −x′
j is close to a
point in Γ(yj). Since Γ(y) is discrete with distances between points greater than a
positive constant uniformly in y, we conclude that xj−x′
j ∈Γ(yj). This contradicts
(A.35) and hence proves the claim (A.34).

A.2 Action-angle coordinates, the Theorem of Arnold and Jost 285
d) Finally, we normalize the lattices Γ(y) by means of another symplectic dif-
feomorphism
σ : Rn × D1
→
Rn × D2
(ξ, η)
→
(x, y) .
Recalling the deﬁnition of the lattice Γ(y) ⊂Rn in (A.31) the symplectic map σ
is implicitly deﬁned by the generating function
V (ξ, y) =
n

j=1
ξjWj(y) ;
(A.36)
hence,
ηj
=
∂
∂ξj V (ξ, y) = Wj(y)
xj
=
∂
∂yj V (ξ, y) =
n
s=1
ξs
∂
∂yj Ws(y) .
(A.37)
The ﬁrst relation η = W(y) in (A.37) deﬁnes a local diﬀeomorphism near the ﬁxed
point y = 0. In the statement of Theorem 2 it is denoted by µ : D2 →D1. This
follows since
∂
∂y W(y) =

γ1(y), . . . , γn(y)

is of rank n. Indeed the column vectors γj(y) are the n linearly independent gen-
erators of Γ(y). Hence det(Vξ) ̸= 0. Moreover, σ(ej, η) = (γj(y), y) for η = µ(y)
and therefore
σ : Zn × {η} −→Γ(y) × {y} ,
η = µ(y) .
The composition
Φ : = ϑ ◦σ : (Rn × D1, ω0) −→(M, ω)
is a symplectic map satisfying Φ(ξ + ej, η) = Φ(ξ, η). It induces a symplectic
diﬀeomorphism
Φ : Rn/Zn × D1 −→U ⊂M
which is the desired map deﬁning the action and angle variables denoted by (ξ, η) ∈
T n×D1. Indeed, using the deﬁnitions we compute µ◦F ◦Φ(ξ, η) = µ◦F ◦ϑ◦σ(ξ, η) =
µ ◦F ◦ϑ(x, y) = µ(y) = η as claimed in Theorem 2 whose proof is therefore
completed. ■
The symplectic manifold (M, ω) is not required to be exact (exact meaning that
ω = dϑ for a one-form ϑ on M). But it follows from the theorem that the restriction
of ω onto the image U = ψ(T n×D) in M of the action-angle coordinates is an exact
form. Indeed ω|U = dσ for the one-form σ = (ψ−1)∗λ, where λ = n
j=1 yjdxj on
T n × D satisﬁes dλ = ω0. This allows us to obtain the action variables y = µ ◦F
as “action integrals” of σ over closed curves on Nc ∩U whose homology classes
form a basis in H1(Nc ∩U, Z) with µ(x) = y. Hence the name action variables.

286
Appendix
The action-angle variables (x, y) we constructed are, of course, not unique. Given a
unimodular matrix M ∈GL(n, Z), a function w(y) and constants c ∈Rn, we ﬁnd
other action-angle variables (x′, y′) by means of the symplectic diﬀeomorphism of
T n × D:
x′
=
M

x + ∂w
∂y (y)

y′
=
(M T )−1y + c .
This corresponds to a change of the basis of the fundamental group of T n by the
matrix M and a phase shift ∂w
∂y (y) of the action variables. Straight lines on T n are
mapped into straight lines under this map.
We have constructed the action-angle coordinates near a torus and one can
ask how these local action-angle charts ﬁt together. We do not discuss this global
question and refer instead to N. Nekhoroshev [168] (1972), to A.S. Mishchenko and
A.T. Fomenko [158] (1978) and, in particular, to J.J. Duistermaat [64] (1980). In-
tegrable systems constitute a very restricted even exceptional class of Hamiltonian
systems. Examples are described in the Notes [167], from which this appendix is
taken with minor modiﬁcations. For interesting developments in the ﬁeld of inte-
grable systems we refer to J. Moser [166].
A.3
Embeddings of H1/2(S1) and smoothness of the action
In our proof of the smoothness of the action functional below the following em-
bedding properties of the space H1/2(S1) introduced in Chapter 3 will be crucial.
Formally they follow from Sobolev’s embedding theorem. However, for fractional
derivatives a separate proof is needed.
Theorem 3. If u ∈H1/2(S1) then u ∈Lp(S1) for every 1 ≤p < ∞and there are
constants Cp with
||u||Lp(S1) ≤Cp||u||H1/2(S1) ,
u ∈H1/2(S1) .
The embeddings are, moreover, compact.
Proof. It clearly suﬃces to ﬁnd constants Cp satisfying the estimates for smooth
functions u ∈C∞(S1) only, since they are dense in H1/2(S1). Assuming for sim-
plicity also the functions to have mean value zero we represent them as
u(e2πiϑ) =

j∈Z
cj e2πiϑj with c0 = 0 and c−j = ¯cj .
By deﬁnition,
||u||2
H1/2(S1) = 2π

j∈Z
|j| |cj|2 .

A.3 Embeddings of H1/2(S1) and smoothness of the action
287
Set z = re2πiϑ ∈C. Considering S1 = ∂D as the boundary of the disc D = {z ∈
C : |z| ≤1} we can extend the function u to the harmonic function u(z) on ˚
D by
setting
u(z) =

j̸=0
cjr|j|e2πiϑj = 1
2

f(z) + f(z)

where
f(z) = 2
∞

j=1
cj zj .
Since u(e2πiϑ) is in H1/2(S1) the function f is holomorphic in ˚
D and u(z) attains
the desired boundary values. We claim

D
|∇u|2 dx dy = ||u||2
H1/2(∂D) .
Indeed using f′(z) = ∂u
∂x −i ∂u
∂y and integrating over the angle variables ﬁrst, we
ﬁnd

D
|∇u|2dx dy =

D
|f′(z)|2rdr dϑ
=
8π
∞

j=1
j2|cj|2
1
0
r2j−1dr = 8π 
j≥1
|cj|2 j2
2j
=
2π 
j∈Z
|j| |cj|2 = ||u||2
H1/2(S1)
as claimed. A similar computation shows that ||u||L2(D) ≤||∇u||L2(D) using the
assumption c0 = 0. The desired estimate of Theorem 3 is now an immediate
consequence of
Proposition 3. For 2 ≤p < ∞there are constants Cp, such that
||u||Lp(∂D) ≤Cp

||u||L2(D) + ||∇u||L2(D)

.
for u ∈C1(D)
In order to prove this statement, which is a special case of a general ”trace”
theorem, we start with a lemma.
Lemma 5. For 2 ≤p < ∞there are constants Cp satisfying
||u||Lp(∂D) ≤Cp

||u||L2p−2(D) + ||∇u||L2(D)

for u ∈C1(D).

288
Appendix
Proof. Consider at ﬁrst the function u = u(r, ϑ) on the annulus A = {z|1/2 ≤
|z| ≤1}. By continuity of u we can ﬁnd a radius 1
2 < ρ < 1 with
||u||L1(A) =
1

1
2
2π

0
|u(r, ϑ)|r dr dϑ = ρ
2
2π

0
|u(ρ, ϑ)|dϑ ≥1
4
2π

0
|u(ρ, ϑ)|dϑ .
Hence integrating
u(1, ϑ) = u(ρ, ϑ) +
 1
ρ
∂u
∂r (r, ϑ)dr
over the angle variable, we get
1
4||u||L1(∂D) ≤||u||L1(A) +






∂u
∂r






L1(A) .
Replacing u by v = |u|p−1u, with p ≥2, using ∂v
∂r = p|u|p−1 ∂u
∂r and the Cauchy-
Schwarz inequality we ﬁnd
||u||Lp(∂D) ≤Cp

||u||Lp(A) + ||u||
p−1
p
L2p−2(A) ||∂u
∂r ||
1
p
L2(A)

,
with a constant Cp depending on p only. Using Young’s inequality (ab ≤ap
p + bq
q
if 1
p + 1
q = 1), we conclude
||u||Lp(∂D) ≤Cp

||u||L2p−2(A) + ||∂u
∂r ||L2(A)

,
from which the lemma follows. ■
In view of this lemma, Proposition 3 is a consequence of the next proposition
which is a special case of a more general Sobolev embedding theorem. It states
that H1,2(D) is continuously embedded in Lp(D), for every p < ∞.
Proposition 4. There are constants Cp, 2 ≤p < ∞such that
||u||Lp(D) ≤Cp

||u||L2(D) + ||∇u||L2(D)

for all u ∈C1(D).
Proof. First extend the functions u ∈C1(D) to C1-functions of compact support
in a neighborhood of D. This may be achieved as follows. Choose χ ∈C∞
c (R2)
such that χ = 1 on D and χ = 0 outside a disc of radius 5
4. Then deﬁne the
extension of u = u(r, ϑ) by
u(1 + r, ϑ) = {4u(1 −1
2r, ϑ) −3u(1 −r, ϑ)} · χ(1 + r, ϑ) .

A.3 Embeddings of H1/2(S1) and smoothness of the action
289
This deﬁnes a linear extension map E : C1(D) →C1
c (Q) which is bounded in the
W 1,2 norm, where Q is a bigger domain. In order to prove the proposition it is,
therefore, suﬃcient to ﬁnd constants Cp such that for all u ∈C1
c (Q)
||u||Lp(Q) ≤Cp

||u||L2(Q) + ||∇u||L2(Q)

.
(A.38)
If u ∈C1
c (Q), then
|u(x, y)| =



x

−∞
∂u
∂x(t, y)dt



 ≤
∞

−∞



∂u
∂x(t, y)



dt ,
and hence, with a similar estimate for the y-derivative:
|u(x, y)|2 ≤
∞

−∞



∂u
∂x(t, y)



dt ·
∞

−∞



∂u
∂y (x, t)



dt .
By integration,
u

2
L2(Q) ≤
∂u
∂x

L1(Q) ·
∂u
∂y

L1(Q) .
Replacing u by v = |u|t−1u, with t ≥2, we ﬁnd by the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality
||u||2t
L2t(Q)
≤
Ct||u||2t−2
L2t−2(Q) || ∂u
∂x||L2(Q)|| ∂u
∂y ||L2(Q)
≤
Ct||u||2t−2
L2t−2(Q) ||∇u||2
L2(Q) .
Hence by Young’s inequality,
||u||L2t(Q) ≤Ct

||u||L2t−2(Q) + ||∇u||L2(Q)

.
(A.39)
If t = 2, we have the W 1,2 norm on the right hand side and hence by iterating the
inequality (A.39) the desired estimate (A.38) follows for every 2 ≤p < ∞. This
completes the proof of Proposition 4 and the ﬁrst claim of Theorem 3.
Finally we shall show that the embeddings H1/2 →Lp are compact for p < ∞.
For the special case p = 2, this is proved in Chapter 3. Applying the Cauchy-
Schwarz inequality to |u| |u|q−1 = |u|q, we ﬁnd the following interpolation in-
equality
||u||Lq ≤||u||
1
q
L2 ||u||
1−1
q
L2q−2 ,
q > 2 .
Since H1/2 →L2q−2 is continuous by the ﬁrst part of Theorem 3 and H1/2 →L2 is
compact, we conclude from the above interpolation inequality that also H1/2 →Lq
is compact. This proves the second statement of Theorem 3. ■

290
Appendix
The case p = ∞is excluded in Theorem 3 and we give an example of an
unbounded function in H1/2(S1). If 0 < ε < 1
2 then the function
u(eiϑ) : = Re[log(1 −eiϑ)]
1
2 −ε
belongs to H1/2(S1), where the branch of log is chosen so that log 1 = 0. In order
to verify this it suﬃces, to prove for f(z) := [log(1 −z)]
1
2 −ε, that the integral

|z|<1
|f′(z)|2 dx dy
is ﬁnite. We would like to add that a function u ∈H1/2 not only belongs to Lp for
every 1 ≤p < ∞but even eαu2 is in L1 for every α ∈R, and there is a constant
C > 0 such that
2π

0
e[u(eiϑ)]2 dϑ ≤C
for every
u ∈H1/2(S1) satisfying
||u||H1/2(S1) ≤1
and
2π

0
u(eiϑ)dϑ = 0 .
This result, due to D.E. Marshall, sharpens an estimate of A. Beurling and we
refer to S.Y. Chang [40] and more recently W. Beckner [17].
Next we consider a smooth Hamiltonian H ∈C∞(R×R2n, R) which is periodic
in time, H(t, x) = H(t + 1, x) for all (t, x) ∈R × R2n. We assume that all the
derivatives of H have polynomial growth.
Theorem 4. The action a : H1/2(S1) →R, deﬁned by
a(x) : =
1

0
H

t, x(t)

dt ,
belongs to C∞(H1/2(S1), R).
Proof. Fixing an integer k we start with the Taylor formula for the function x →
H(t, x):
H(t, y + η) =
k

j=0
1
j!hj(t, y) · ηj + ok(η) ,
where
hj(t, y) · ηj : =

|α|=j
j!
α! Dα
xH(t, y)ηα
and y, η ∈R2n. If x, ξ ∈H1/2 we insert y = x(t) and η = ξ(t) and integrating over
t we ﬁnd the Taylor formula for a in the form
a(x + ξ) =
k

j=0
1
j! aj(x) · ξj + rk(x, ξ) ,

A.4 The Cauchy-Riemann operator on the sphere
291
with
aj(x) · ξj : =
1

0
hj

t, x(t)

· ξ(t)j dt .
Now aj(x) is a continuous j-linear form on H1/2 which, in addition, depends con-
tinuously on x ∈H1/2. This follows immediately from H¨older’s inequality applied
to the above integral, using Theorem 3 and the assumption that the derivatives of
H are polynomially bounded. Moreover |rk(x, ξ)| ≤Ck·|ξ|k+1
1/2 . Since this holds true
for every k we conclude by the converse to Taylor’s theorem (see e.g R. Abraham
and J. Robbin [2]) that a is smooth and, as formally expected, has the derivatives
Dja(x) = aj(x)
for j ≥1. The proof of Theorem 4 is ﬁnished. ■
A.4
The Cauchy-Riemann operator on the sphere
The Cauchy-Riemann operator is the linear operator deﬁned by
¯∂: C∞(C, Cn) →C∞(C, Cn) : u →us + iut.
We drop for convenience the factor 1
2 in the usual deﬁnition of ¯∂. Here s + it are
the coordinates on C. Our ﬁrst goal is to solve the equation
¯∂u = g
for given g ∈D, where D denotes the vector space of compactly supported Cn-
valued smooth functions on C. If ε > 0 and u ∈D we deﬁne the function Aεu :
C →Cn using the Green’s function of ¯∂by
(Aεu)(z) = −1
2π

|ξ|≥ε
1
ξ u(z + ξ)ds dt ,
where ξ = s + it, s, t ∈R. Since u has compact support there exists a constant
M > 0 depending on u, such that for all z1, z2 ∈C
|u(z1) −u(z2)| ≤M|z1 −z2|.
Using polar coordinates (r, θ) we can estimate
|(Aεu)(z2) −(Aεu)(z1)|
≤
1
2π

|ξ|≥ε



 u(z2+ξ)−u(z1+ξ)
ξ



ds dt
≤
1
2π
R
ε
2π

0
M|z1 −z2|drdθ
≤
MR|z2 −z1| ,

292
Appendix
where R > diameter ( suppu) + max{|z1|, |z2|}. The estimate implies that Aεu ∈
C0(C, Cn). Similarly one ﬁnds for ε1, ε2 > 0
|(Aε1u)(z) −(Aε2u)(z)| ≤∥u∥0 |ε2 −ε1| .
Here ∥.∥0 denotes the sup-norm. By the latter estimate the limit of Aεu for ε →0
exists uniformly and deﬁnes a continuous function Au : C →Cn.
If e ∈C is a vector of unit length, h ∈R \ {0} and u ∈D we denote by dhu
the diﬀerence quotient associated to h and e:
(dhu)(z) = u(z + he) −u(z)
h
.
It follows immediately from the deﬁnition of A that
Adh = dhA.
From the deﬁnition we deduce that for every compact K ⊂R2n there is a constant
M = MK such that |Aεu(z)| ≤M||u||0 for all u ∈D having supp(u) ⊂K. There-
fore, also |Au(z)| ≤M||u||0. Consequently, denoting by De the directional deriva-
tive associated to the vector e, we ﬁnd for ﬁxed z, that |(dhAu)(z)−(ADeu)(z)| =
|A(dhu −Deu)(z)| ≤M||dhu −Deu||0 →0 as h →0, where M depends only on
supp(u). Hence ADe = DeA and repeating the arguments
DαAu = ADαu .
We see that A deﬁnes a linear map from D into C∞, satisfying, in addition,
A ◦¯∂= ¯∂◦A .
In fact, even more is true and we claim that
¯∂◦A = Id on D .
In order to prove this we deﬁne v(s, t) = u(z + ξ) for a ﬁxed z ∈C and ξ = s + it.
We compute for ξ ̸= 0
1
ξ(¯∂v)ds ∧dt
=
1
ξ
 ∂v
∂s + i ∂v
∂t

ds ∧dt
=
1
ξ

∂v
∂s

ds +

∂v
∂t

dt

∧(dt −ids)
=
−i
ξ (dv) ∧(ds + idt)
=
d

v 1
ξ (ds + idt)

(−i) ,

A.4 The Cauchy-Riemann operator on the sphere
293
where we have used that d( 1
ξ) = −1
ξ2 (ds + idt). Because u has compact support
we infer by Stokes’ theorem for large R
Aε ¯∂u(z)
=
−1
2π

ε≤|ξ|≤R
1
ξ(¯∂u)(z + ξ)ds dt
=
i
2π

ε≤|ξ|≤R
d

u(z + ξ)( 1
ξ(ds + idt))

=
1
2πi

|ξ|=ε
u(z + ξ) 1
ξ (ds + idt)
=
1
2πi
2π

0
u(z + εeiθ) 1
εe−iθ(iε)eiθdθ
=
1
2π
2π

0
u(z + εeiθ)dθ .
The last expression tends to u(z) as ε →0. Thus we have proved A¯∂= Id and
hence ¯∂◦A = Id as claimed. Next we study the asymptotic behaviour of Au(z)
as z →∞.
Proposition 5.
(Au)(z) →0 as |z| →∞for u ∈D .
Proof. We choose R > 0 be so large that supp(u) ⊂BR(0) and ﬁrst observe that
(Au)(z)
=
−lim
ε→0
1
2π

|ξ|≥ε
u(z + ξ) 1
ξ ds dt
=
−lim
ε→0
1
2π
∞

ε
2π

0
u(z + reiθ)e−iθdr dθ
=
−1
2π
∞

0
2π

0
u(z + reiθ)e−iθ dr dθ .
For |z| > R consider the function v(r, θ) := u(z + reiθ)e−iθ. Pick (r0, θ0) in such a
way that z = −r0eiθ0. Then the support of v lies in a cone with vertex at 0 having
an angle σ so that
R
r0
= sin
σ
2

.
Moreover if (r, θ) is in this sector then v(r, θ) = 0 if
r ∈[0, r0 −R] ∪[r0 + R, +∞) .
This is illustrated by the following Fig. A4.1.
As r0 = |z| →∞we see that σ →0. More precisely for |z| large
0 ≤σ ≤4R
|z| .

294
Appendix
O
r0 −R
r0
r0 + R
Fig. A4.1
This implies for |z| large enough
|(Au)(z)|
≤
1
2π

supp(v)
|v(r, θ)|dr dθ
≤
1
2π
|z|+R

|z|−R
 
Γ
||u||∞dθ

dr ,
where Γ is an open set with measure (Γ) ≤σ. Hence
|(Au)(z)|
≤
1
2π 2R||u||∞σ
≤
4R2
π ||u||∞
1
|z|
≤
const (u) 1
|z|
for |z| large enough. ■
We shall use the proposition to extend the map A to the sphere and study next
the Cauchy-Riemann operator on the Riemann sphere S2 = C ∪{∞}. We equip
S2 with its structure of a complex manifold by deﬁning two charts as follows:
U
=
C
α
−→C : z −→z
V
=
(C\{0}) ∪{+∞}
β
−→C : z −→

1
z if
z
̸=
∞
0 if
z
=
∞.
(A.40)
Clearly α and β are homeomorphisms and α ◦β−1 : β(U ∩V ) →α(U ∩V ) is the
map z →1
z and hence holomorphic. We have a natural complex structure on S2

A.4 The Cauchy-Riemann operator on the sphere
295
denoted by i. Consider now the vector bundles
S2 × Cn
−→
S2
X
−→
S2
where the ﬁbre Xz over z ∈S2 consists of all complex anti-linear maps φ : TzS2 →
Cn. In order to deﬁne the Cauchy-Riemann operator ¯∂on the C∞-sections of these
bundles, we denote by C∞(S2×Cn) the space of smooth sections of S2×Cn →S2,
i.e., C∞(S2 × Cn) = C∞(S2, Cn), and with C∞(X) the space of smooth sections
of X →S2. We deﬁne ¯∂: C∞(S2 × Cn) →C∞(X) by
(¯∂f)(z) = Tu(z) + i Tu(z)i ,
(A.41)
where Tu(z) : TzS2 →Cn, z ∈S2 is the tangent map of u. Note that
(¯∂u)(z) ◦i = −i ◦(¯∂u)(z) ,
so that ¯∂is indeed well-deﬁned.
We now assume that g ∈C∞(X). Using a partition of unity subordinate to
our distinguished atlas (A.40), we have the splitting
g = gU + gV ,
where supp(gU) ⊂U, supp(gV ) ⊂V . The map gU(z) : C →Cn is complex anti-
linear for every z ∈U = C, and has compact support with respect to z. Hence
z →gU(z)(1)
belongs to D. We can solve
us + i ut = gU(·)(1) = : ˆgU ∈C∞(C, Cn)
for u ∈C∞(C, Cn) by
u = AˆgU .
We observe that
(¯∂u)(z)(1)
=

(Tu)(z) + i Tu(z)i

(1)
=
us(z) + i ut(z)
=
gU(z)(1) .
Because ¯∂u(z) is anti-linear we have ¯∂u = gU over U = C. By Proposition 5, we
have u(z) →0 as |z| →∞and, moreover, ¯∂u(z) = 0 outside the support of ˆgU so
that u is holomorphic for |z| large. Consider the map on V \{∞},
C\{0} −→Cn : z −→u(1
z ) = u ◦β−1(z) .

296
Appendix
This map is holomorphic in a punctured neighborhood of 0 and u( 1
z ) →0 for
z →0. Hence 0 is a removable singularity by the well-known classical result in the
theory of one complex variable. Therefore, u may be viewed as a smooth function
on S2 which vanishes at ∞. From Proposition 5 we conclude in particular
Proposition 6. The map A deﬁnes a linear operator from D into the subspace
{f ∈C∞(S2, Cn)|f(∞) = 0} of C∞(S2, Cn), satisfying
¯∂◦A = Id .
Back to our previous discussion, we have found u ∈C∞(S2 × Cn) solving
the equation ¯∂u = gU and since S2\{0} is biholomorphic to C, we ﬁnd by the
same reasoning a gv ∈C∞(S2 × Cn) satisfying ¯∂v = gV . Therefore, it follows that
¯∂(u+v) = gU +gV = g proving that ¯∂is surjective. On the other hand, if ¯∂u = 0 we
obtain a bounded holomorphic function u : C →Cn which by Liouville’s theorem
is a constant map. Summing up we have proved
Theorem 5. The map ¯∂: C∞(S2 × Cn) →C∞(X) is a surjective linear operator
whose kernel consists of all constant maps. As a real (respectively complex) linear
operator the kernel is of dimension 2n (respectively n).
Next we would like to study ¯∂as an operator in a Sobolev space setting based
on Lp-spaces 1 < p < ∞. We start with the following estimate from Douglis and
Nirenberg, [63]. Denote by D1 the subspace of D consisting of all functions in D
with support in the unit ball. We write | · |k,p for the norm deﬁned by
|u|p
k,p =

|α|≤k
|Dαu|p
Lp(B1(0)) .
Here k ∈N and 1 < p < ∞. The fundamental estimate given in [63] is the following
Theorem 6. For given k ∈N and 1 < p < ∞there exists a positive constant
c = c(k, p) satisfying
|¯∂u|k,p ≥c|u|k+1,p
for all u ∈D1.
In order to obtain some Sobolev type estimates for the section map ¯∂: C∞(S2×
Cn) →C∞(X) we take a ﬁnite covering U1, . . . , Um of S2 so that Uj is biholomor-
phic to the open unit disc B around 0. Let β1, . . . , βn be a subordinate partition
of unity. Denoting by ϕj : Uj →B suitable biholomorphic diﬀeomorphisms we
deﬁne a norm || ||k,p for k ∈N, 1 < p < ∞, by
||u||p
k,p =
m

j=1



(βj ◦ϕ−1
j )(u ◦ϕ−1
j )



p
k,p .
It is easy to show that all the norms on C∞(S2×Cn) obtained by this procedure are
equivalent. For the bundle X →S2 we take smooth complex linear trivialisations

A.4 The Cauchy-Riemann operator on the sphere
297
ψj : X|Uj →B × Cn covering ϕj. This means that the following diagramm is
commutative
X | Uj
ψj
−→
B × Cn

pr1
Uj
ϕj
−→
B .
If f is a section of X we deﬁne the norm ||f||k,p by
||f||p
k,p =
m

j=1



ψj(ϕ−1
j )

(βj ◦ϕ−1
j )(f ◦ϕ−1
j )



p
k,p .
Again all norms obtained this way are equivalent. Let us abbreviate ˆψj = ψj(ϕ−1
j )
and ˆβj = βj ◦ϕ−1
j . Then
ˆψj(z)

ˆβj(z)(¯∂u)(ϕ−1
j (z))

=
ˆβj(z) ˆψj(z)

(Tu)(ϕ−1
j (z)) + i(Tu)(ϕ−1
j (z))i

=
ˆβj(z) ˆψj(z)

T(u ◦ϕ−1
j )(z) + i(T(u ◦ϕ−1
j )(z)i

Tϕj(z)

=
ˆβj(z) ˆψj(z)

T ˆuj(z) + iT ˆuj(z))i

Tϕj(z)

,
where ˆuj = uj ◦ϕ−1
j . This gives immediately the estimate



 ˆψj

ˆβj(¯∂u)(ϕ−1
j )



p
0,p ≥dp
j



ˆβj
 ∂
∂s + i ∂
∂t

ˆuj



p
0,p ,
for a suitable constant dj independent of u. If d = inf{d1, . . . , dm}, then
||¯∂u||0,p
≥
d

m

j=1



ˆβj

∂
∂s + i ∂
∂t

ˆuj



p
0,p
1/p
=
d

m

j=1




∂
∂s + i ∂
∂t

(ˆβj ˆuj) −

∂
∂s + i ∂
∂t

ˆβj

ˆuj



p
0,p
1/p
≥
d

m

j=1




∂
∂s + i ∂
∂t

(ˆβj ˆuj)



p
0,p
1/p
−a

m

j=1



χjˆuj



p
0,p
1/p
for a suitable constant a > 0 independent on the choice of u. Here χj is the
characteristic function of the support of ˆβj. Hence employing Theorem 6
||¯∂u||0,p ≥
d

m

j=1
cp|ˆβj ˆuj|p
1,p
1/p
−a

m

j=1
|χj ˆuj|p
0,p
1/p
≥
c′||u||1,p −a′||u||0,p
for suitable constants a′, c′ > 0, independent of u. We have proved

298
Appendix
Theorem 7. There exist constants a, c > 0 such that for all u ∈C∞(S2 × Cn)
||¯∂u||0,p ≥c||u||1,p −a||u||0,p .
Deﬁne W 1,p(S2×Cn) and Lp(X) as the completions of the spaces C∞(S2×Cn)
and C∞(X) with respect to the norms || ||1,p and || ||0,p. By the compact embedding
of W 1,p →Lp we ﬁnd in view of Theorem 7 that ¯∂: W 1,p(S2 × Cn) →Lp(X) has
closed range. Since in view of Theorem 5 the range contains the dense set C∞(X)
we deduce ¯∂(W 1,p(S2 × Cn)) = Lp(X) and hence ¯∂is surjective.
On the other hand, by interior elliptic regularity theory or by the well-known
fact that a holomorphic distribution is a holomorphic function, we conclude from
¯∂u = 0 that u is holomorphic and bounded and consequently constant.
We have proved
Theorem 8. The operator ¯∂: W 1,p(S2 × Cn) →Lp(X) is a surjective Fredholm
operator whose kernel consists of the constant functions. Hence the index of ¯∂as
a real operator is 2n.
With some more eﬀorts and rudimentary functional analysis one can prove
Theorem 9. For every k ∈N and 1 < p < ∞there are positive constants c = c(k, p)
and a = a(k, p) such that
||¯∂u||k,p ≥c||u||k+1,p −a||u||0,p ,
for all u ∈C∞(S2 × Cn).
As an operator from W k+1,p(S2×Cn) to W k,p(X) the linear operator ¯∂is again
a surjective Fredholm operator whose kernel consists of the constant functions. For
a general treatment of ﬁrst order elliptic systems, we refer the reader to Vekua’s
book, [215], or its English translation.
A.5
Elliptic estimates near the boundary and an application
Denote by B+
ε the half ball given by
B+
ε
= {z ∈C | |z| < ε, Re(z) ≥0}
with boundary ∂B+
ε = (−ε, ε)i.
Let || · ||k,p,Ωfor k ∈N, 1 < p < ∞denote the usual Sobolev norms, i.e.,
||u||p
k,p,Ω=

|α|≤k
||Dαu||p
Lp(Ω) .
The classical estimate, which for example can be found in Vekua [215], for ¯∂=
∂
∂s + i ∂
∂t is

A.5 Elliptic estimates near the boundary and an application
299
Theorem 10. Given ε > 0, k ∈N, 1 < p < ∞, there exists a constant c = c(k, p, ε) >
0 such
||¯∂u||k,p,B+
ε
≥c||u||k+1,p,B+
ε
for all smooth u : B+
ε →Cn with compact support in B+
ε satisfying the boundary
condition
u(∂B+
ε ) ⊂Rn .
Using this estimate and the usual diﬀerential quotient technique from standard
elliptic regularity theory we obtain the following regularity result.
Let J be a smooth almost complex structure deﬁned on Cn (or at least near
0) such that J(0) = i. Assume
u : B+
ε →Cn
is of class W 1,p with p > 2 and satisﬁes
u(0)
=
0
u

(−ε, ε)i

⊂
Rn
∂u
∂s + J(u) ∂u
∂t
=
0 on ˚
B+
ε
where ˚
B+
ε = B+
ε \(−ε, ε)i. We have the following
Theorem 11. Under the above assumptions there exists δ ∈(0, ε) such that u|B+
δ
is smooth.
Our next aim is to give an application to a regularity question raised in Chapter
6. Let
w : [−ε, ε] × [−ε, ε] −→Cn
be of class W 1,p, 2 < p < ∞. Assume w(0) = 0, and J is an almost complex
structure deﬁned on a suﬃciently large neighborhood of zero such that J(0) = i.
Assume H : [−ε, ε] × U →Cn is a smooth map, where U is a suﬃciently large
neighborhood of 0 in Cn. Moreover, let H′(0, 0) = 0, where H′ is the gradient with
respect to the second variable for some Riemannian metric on U.
We consider the partial diﬀerential equation
∂w
∂s + J(w)∂w
∂t
+ χ[0,∞)(s)H′(t, w) = 0
(A.42)
on (−ε, ε)×(−ε, ε). Here χ[0,∞) is the characteristic function of [0, ∞). The amaz-
ing fact is that
w |

[−δ, 0] × [−δ, δ]

and
w |

[0, δ] × [−δ, δ]


300
Appendix
are smooth for some suﬃciently small δ ∈(0, ε). In particular,
w |

{0} × [−δ, δ]

−→Cn
is smooth. Note that w|([−δ, δ] × [−δ, δ]) is not smooth since the derivatives in
the s-direction do not match. The above proof of the smoothness assertion will be
reduced by a series of transformations to Theorem 11.
For simplicity of the argument we assume that all data H and J are deﬁned on
the whole of Cn. Deﬁne an almost complex structure ˆJ on [0, ε]×[−ε, ε]×Cn ×Cn
by
ˆJ(s, t, u, v)(a, b, h, k) =

−b, a, J(u)h + bH′(t, u) + aJ(u)H′(t, u), −J(v)k

,
The deﬁnition of ˆJ is motivated by Gromov’s trick and something that one could
call the “inverse reﬂection principle”. It will turn out that a solution w of (A.42)
gives a holomorphic map α on [0, ε) × [−ε, ε) for the structure ˆJ.
We leave it to the reader to verify that ˆJ2 = −Id. Let
j =
ˆJ(0, 0, 0, 0) .
We observe that
j(a, b, h, k) =

−b, a, ih + bH′(0, 0) + aiH′(0, 0), −ik

.
Deﬁne a linear real subspace of R × R × Cn × Cn by
T = {(0, b, h, h, ) | b ∈R, h ∈Cn} .
Clearly dimR(T) = 2n + 1 =: N. We note that
T ∩jT = {0} .
(A.43)
Indeed, if
(0, b1, h1, h1)
=
j(0, b2, h2, h2)
=

−b2, 0, ih2 + b2 H′(0, 0), −ih2

,
we ﬁnd b1 = b2 = 0 implying
i h2
=
h1
−i h2
=
h1,
and, therefore, h1 = h2 = 0. Deﬁne a map α : [0, ε] × [−ε, ε] →R × R × Cn × Cn
by
α(s, t) =

s, t, u(s, t), u(−s, t)

.

A.5 Elliptic estimates near the boundary and an application
301
Then
α(0, t) =

0, t, u(0, t), u(0, t)

∈T
for t ∈[−ε, ε]. Moreover α is in W 1,p([0, ε] × [−ε, ε], R × R × Cn × Cn), since u, by
assumption, belongs to this space. On (0, ε) × (−ε, ε) we compute
αs(s, t) + ˆJ

α(s, t)

αt(s, t)

=

1, 0, us(s, t), −us(−s, t)

+

−1, 0, J(u(s, t))ut(s, t) + H′(t, u(s, t)), −J(u(−s, t)ut(−s, t)

=
(0, 0, 0, 0) .
In view of (A.43) the set T is a totally real subspace of (R × R × Cn × Cn, j). It
is a simple exercise to ﬁnd a complex linear map
Φ : (R × R × Cn × Cn, j) −→(CN, i)
mapping T onto RN. Recall that N = 2n + 1. Deﬁne β = Φ ◦α and an almost
complex structure ˜J on CN by
˜J(A) = Φ ˆJ

Φ−1(A)

Φ−1 .
We ﬁnd that
˜J(0)
=
ΦjΦ−1
=
iΦΦ−1
=
i .
Moreover, on (0, ε) × (−ε, ε),
βs + ˜J(β)βt
=
Φαs + Φ ˆJ(Φ−1Φα)Φ−1Φαt
=
Φ[αs + ˆJ(α)αt]
=
0 .
Finally, we observe that
β(0, t) ∈RN
for t ∈(−ε, ε). Applying Theorem 11 we deduce, since β ∈W 1,p([0, ε]×[−ε, ε], CN )
and β(i(−ε, ε)) ⊂RN, that β is smooth on [0, δ]×[−δ, δ] for some δ ∈(0, ε). Hence
[0, δ] × [−δ, δ] →Cn : (s, t) →u(s, t)

302
Appendix
and
[0, δ] × [−δ, δ] →Cn : (s, t) →u(−s, t)
are smooth, as we wanted to prove.
We conclude with an observation used in Chapter 6. Recall the deﬁnition of
ST in Chapter 6 and assume w : ST →M solves
0 = ¯∂w + χ[−T,T ]×S1

H′(t, w)dt −J(u)H′(t, w)ds

.
(A.44)
Taking suitable complex coordinates near a point (T0, t0), respectively, (−T0, t0)
in ZT ⊂ST and suitable symplectic coordinates near w(T0, t0), respectively,
w(−T0, t0) in M, we see that (A.44) looks, in these coordinates, like (A.42). We
deduce, in particular, since T0 was arbitrary, that the loops t →w(−T, t) and
t →w(T, t) are smooth.
A.6
The generalized similarity principle
Let D be the closed unit disk D = {z ∈C| |z| ≤1}. We denote by A ∈
L∞(D, LR(Cn)) a mapping which associates with z ∈D a real linear map A(z) :
Cn →Cn, so that the assignment z →A(z) is essentially bounded. Let z →J(z) be
a smooth map associating with z ∈D a complex structure on Cn, i.e J(z)2 = −1,
and J(z) : Cn →Cn is a real linear map. We consider a solution w : ˚
D →Cn of
the ﬁrst order elliptic system
∂w
∂s + J(z)∂w
∂t
+ A(z)w = 0 and w(0) = 0 ,
(A.45)
where z = s + it. We shall show that w is represented locally near 0 by a holo-
morphic map. Deﬁne Dδ = {z ∈D| |z| ≤δ}. Generalizing a result of T. Carleman
[37] to systems we shall prove
Theorem 12. There exist 0 < δ < 1, a holomorphic map σ : Dδ →Cn and a
continuous map Φ : Dδ →GlR(Cn),
Φ ∈

2<p<∞
W 1,p
Dδ, GlR(Cn)

,
satisfying on Dδ,
J(z)Φ(z) = Φ(z)i
and
w(z) = Φ(z)σ(z) .
It follows, in particular, that if 0 is a cluster point of zeros of the solution w,
then it is also a cluster point of zeros of the holomorphic map σ, implying σ ≡0
and therefore w ≡0 on Dδ. This was used in the proof of the Arnold conjecture
(Lemma 2 in 6.4).

A.6 The generalized similarity principle
303
Proof. Reducing the local statement to a global one, the theorem will be obtained
as a corollary of Theorem 8 in A.4. We shall view the disk D as a subset of
C ⊂C ∪{∞} = S2 and begin by rewriting equation (A.45). We choose a smooth
map z →Ψ(z) from D into GlR(Cn) satisfying J(z)Ψ(z) = Ψ(z)i. Then we deﬁne
v : D →Cn by
w(z) = Ψ(z)v(z) ,
and compute:
0
=
∂w
∂s + J(z) ∂w
∂t + A(z)w
=
Ψ

∂v
∂s + i ∂v
∂t

+ AΨv +

∂Ψ
∂s + J ∂Ψ
∂t

v
=
Ψ

∂v
∂s + i ∂v
∂t + Ψ−1AΨv + Ψ−1
∂Ψ
∂s + J ∂Ψ
∂t

v

=
Ψ

∂v
∂s + i ∂v
∂t + Bv

.
We see that v solves on ˚
D the equation
∂v
∂s + i∂v
∂t + B(z)v = 0 and v(0) = 0 ,
(A.46)
where B ∈L∞(D, LR(Cn)). Now we represent B(z) as follows:
B(z) = Bl(z) + Ba(z) ,
where Bl(z) is complex linear and Ba(z) complex anti-linear. We denote by Γ :
Cn →Cn the anti-linear complex conjugation map h →¯h, and choose C ∈
L∞(D, LC(Cn)) in such a way that
C(z)v(z) = v(z) ,
z ∈D
where v is the given solutions of (A.46). Deﬁne E ∈L∞(D, LC(Cn)) by
E(z) = Bl(z) + Ba(z) ◦Γ ◦C(z) .
Then E(z) is complex linear and
E(z)v(z) = B(z)v(z) ,
z ∈D .
Therefore v satisﬁes on ˚
D,
∂v
∂s + i∂v
∂t + E(z)v = 0 and v(0) = 0 ,
(A.47)
where now E ∈L∞(D, LC(Cn)). Observe that LC(Cn) = L(Cn) ∼= Cn2. With the
notations introduced in Appendix 4, we consider, for 1 < p < ∞, the Cauchy-
Riemann operator between sections,
¯∂: W 1,p
S2 × L(Cn)

→Lp(X) ,

304
Appendix
where the ﬁbre Xz, z ∈S2 of the vector bundle X →S2 is the vector space con-
sisting of all complex anti-linear maps TzS2 →L(Cn). By Theorem 8 in Appendix
4, the mapping
G : W 1,p
S2 × L(Cn)

→Lp(X) × L(Cn)
G(Z) : =

¯∂Z, Z(0)

,
is a linear isomorphism if 2 < p < ∞. Note that in the case 2 < p < ∞we
can estimate the C0-norm in terms of the W 1,p-norms on 2-dimensional domains
(Sobolev embedding theorem). If G(Z) = (0, Id) we infer that Z(z) = Id for
z ∈S2. Hence if a linear map △: W 1,p(S2 × L(Cn)) →Lp(X) is small (in the
operator norm) then the perturbed map G△, deﬁned by
G△(Z) =

¯∂Z + △(Z) , Z(0)

,
is still an isomorphism, and Z = G−1(0, Id) is a map S2 →Gl(Cn) satisfying
Z(0) = Id. If z ∈S2 we deﬁne ˆE(z) : L(Cn) →Xz as follows. If z ∈D we set
ˆE(z)(Z) = E(z) ◦Zds −i E(z) ◦Z dt ,
and if z ∈S2\D we set ˆE(z) = 0. Then
ˆE(z) ∈L

L(Cn), Xz

;
moreover, z →ˆE(z) belongs to L∞. For 0 < ε < 1 we denote by χε the character-
istic function of the closed disk Dε, and deﬁne △ε ∈L(W 1,p(S2 × L(Cn)), Lp(X))
by
(△εZ)(z) : = χε(z) ˆE(z) Z(z) .
By the Sobolev embedding theorem we can estimate, if 2 < p < ∞,
||△εZ||0,p
≤
(πε2)
1
p || ˆE||L∞||Z||L∞
≤
c(ε)||Z||1,p ,
where c(ε) →0 if ε →0. Consider now the special perturbation Gε := G△ε and
deﬁne Z∗: S2 →L(Cn) by
Z∗= G−1
ε
(0, Id) .
(A.48)
If ε > 0 is suﬃciently small, then Z∗(z) ∈Gl(Cn) for all z ∈S2, hence is invertible;
moreover, Z∗(0) = Id. Finally we deﬁne σ : Dε →Cn by
v(z) = Z∗(z)σ(z) ,

A.7 The Brouwer degree
305
and compute, for z ∈Dε,
0
=
∂v
∂s + i ∂v
∂t + E(z)v
=

∂Z∗
∂s
+ i ∂Z∗
∂t
+ EZ∗
σ + Z∗
∂σ
∂s + i ∂σ
∂t

=

(¯∂+ ˆE)Z∗
(z)(1)

σ(z) + Z∗
∂σ
∂s + i ∂σ
∂t

=
Z∗
∂σ
∂s + i ∂σ
∂t

.
Here 1 is the obvious tangent vector in TzS2 = TzC ∼= C at z ∈Dε ⊂S2.
Since Z∗(z) is invertible if z ∈Dε, we conclude that the map σ : Dε →Cn
is holomorphic. Deﬁning Φ(z) := Ψ(z)Z∗(z), for z ∈Dε, we obtain, using the
deﬁnitions, the required representation:
w(z)
=
Ψ(z)v(z)
=
Ψ(z)Z∗(z)σ(z)
=
Φ(z)σ(z) .
From w(0) = 0 we deduce σ(0) = 0. In addition,
Φ(z)i
=
Ψ(z)Z∗(z)i
=
Ψ(z)iZ∗(z)
=
J(z)Ψ(z)Z∗(z)
=
J(z)Φ(z) ,
as desired.
So far, however, the δ constructed does depend on the p chosen. In order to
ﬁnd a δ independent of p we carry out the above procedure for a ﬁxed p0 to ﬁnd a
corresponding δ0 > 0. Then we employ inner elliptic regularity theory in order to
conclude that Z∗belongs to W 1,p
loc (Bδ0, LR(C)) for every p. Now we can take any
δ < δ0 and the proof of Theorem 12 is complete. ■
Related results and applications to the transversality questions involved in the
construction of Floer homology are contained in A. Floer, H. Hofer and D. Salamon
[87].
A.7
The Brouwer degree
In the following we shall describe the so called Brouwer degree or mapping de-
gree used in Chapter 2. It serves as a qualitative criterion for the solvability of a
nonlinear equation
f(x) = y

306
Appendix
for x. This degree is an integer which “algebraically counts” the number of solu-
tions. To be more precise we consider open bounded sets U ⊂Rn and continuous
maps f : ¯U →Rn. Given y ∈Rn, the triplet (f, U, y) is called admissible, if
y /∈f(∂U). The aim is to associate with every admissible triplet an integer, de-
noted by d(f, U, y) such that the assignment
(f, U, y) →d(f, U, y)
satisﬁes some natural properties formulated in the following axioms.
Axiom 1. (Solution property)
Assume (f, U, y) is admissible. If d(f, U, y) ̸= 0 then there exists a solution x ∈U
of f(x) = y.
The equations f(x) = y and f(x) −y = 0 have the same solutions x, and we
therefore require
Axiom 2. (Naturality)
If (f, U, y) is admissible, then
d(f, U, y) = d(f −y, U, 0).
Assume (f, U, y) is admissible and V ⊂U is an open set containing all the
solutions, i.e, (f|U)−1(y) ⊂V . Then (f, V, y) is also admissible and has the same
solutions, hence we postulate:
Axiom 3. (Excision)
If (f, U, y) is admissible and if the open set V ⊂U satisﬁes f−1(y) ⊂V , then
d(f, U, y) = d(f, V, y).
We wish the degree to “count” the solutions and hence require an additivity
property:
Axiom 4. (Additivity)
Assume (f, U, y) and (f, V, y) are admissible and ¯U ∩¯V = ∅. Then (clearly (f, U ∪
V, y) is admissible)
d(f, U ∪V, y) = d(f, U, y) + d(f, V, y) .
The next axiom is the most important one and crucial for the applications. We
want the solution criterion to be stable under perturbation and require that d is
invariant under continuous deformations:
Axiom 5. (Homotopy invariance)
Let t →(ft, U, y), 0 ≤t ≤1 be an admissible deformation, i.e, f : [0, 1] × ¯U →Rn
is continuous and (ft, U, y) is admissible for every 0 ≤t ≤1. Then
d(f0, U, y) = d(f1, U, y) .
Finally, we normalize using a simple model equation.

A.7 The Brouwer degree
307
Axiom 6. (Normalization)
d

Id, B1(0), 0

= 1 ,
where B1(0) is the open unit ball centered at the origin 0 in Rn.
For the moment, let us assume that such a d, satisfying these axioms exists.
We prove that the axioms uniquely determine d. It is called the Brouwer degree
or mapping degree.
Assume ﬁrst, that U is open and 0 /∈¯U. Then (Id, U, 0) is admissible. Since
there is no solution of Id(x) = 0 in U we conclude that d(Id, U, 0) = 0 in view of
Axiom 1. Next we consider the linear map f = T ∈Gl(Rn).
Lemma 6. Assume U is a bounded open neighborhood of 0 and T ∈Gl(Rn). Then
d(T, U, 0) =
sign det(T) .
Proof. Recall that Gl(Rn) = G+ ∪G−where G± = {T ∈Gl(Rn)| ± det(T) > 0};
G+ and G−are pathwise connected. Deﬁne ϑ±1 ∈Gl(Rn) by
ϑ±1 =
diag (±1, 1, . . . , 1) .
Then ϑ+ ∈G+ and ϑ−∈G−. Put ε = sig det (T) and choose a continuous path
t →Tt in Gε connecting T0 = ϑε with T1 = T. Then t →(Tt, U, 0) is an admissible
deformation and we obtain by Axiom 5
d(ϑε, U, 0) = d(T, U, 0) .
Since 0 is the unique solution we ﬁnd by applying the excision Axiom twice that
d(T, U, 0) = d(ϑε, U, 0) = d(ϑε, B1(0), 0). If ε = 1 we employ Axiom 6 to ﬁnd
d(T, U, 0)
=
d

Id, B1(0), 0

= 1
=
sign det(T) .
In order to deal with the case ε = −1, we deﬁne ϕτ : [−1, 1] →R by ϕτ(t) =
|t| −1
2 + τ, for all 0 ≤τ ≤1 and introduce fτ : [−1, 1] × Bn−1
1
(0) →Rn by
fτ(x1, . . . , xn) =

ϕτ(x1), x2, . . . , xn

.
Then (fτ, (−1, 1) × Bn−1
1
(0), 0) is an admissible homotopy. If τ = 1 the equation
f1(x) = 0
has no solutions in the associated open set. Hence by Axiom 5
d

fτ, (−1, 1) × Bn−1, 0

= 0 ,

308
Appendix
for every τ ∈[0, 1]. If τ = 0, then the equations |x1| −1
2 = 0, xj = 0 for 2 ≤j ≤n,
have precisely the two solutions
x−= (−1
2, 0, 0, · · · , 0),
x+ = (1
2, 0, . . . , 0)
where x−∈V−:= (−3
4, −1
4)×Bn−1 and x+ ∈V+ := ( 1
4, 3
4)×Bn−1. Consequently,
by excision and additivity we obtain
0 = d(f0, V−, 0) + d(f0, V+, 0) .
For x ∈¯V−we have f0(x) = (−x1 −1
2, x2, . . . , xn) and for x ∈¯V+ we have
f0(x) = (x1 −1
2, x2, . . . , xn), hence the previous equation is written
0 = d(ϑ−−x+, V−, 0) + d(ϑ+ −x+, V+, 0) ,
and by excision,
0 = d(ϑ−−x+, Bn, 0) + d(ϑ+ −x+, Bn, 0) .
Using the homotopy invariance we can get rid of the term x−to obtain
0
=
d(ϑ−, Bn, 0)
+
d(ϑ+, Bn, 0)
=
d(ϑ−, Bn, 0)
+
1 .
We deduce, that also for ε = −1,
d(T, U, 0)
=
d(ϑ−, Bn, 0) = −1
=
sign det(T) ,
and the proof of Lemma 6 is complete. ■
Assume now that (f, Bε(x0), 0) is admissible for some ε > 0. Assume, in addi-
tion that f is diﬀerentiable and satisﬁes
f−1(0) = {x0} and f′(x0) ∈Gl(Rn) .
Lemma 7.
d

f, Bε(x0), 0

=
sign det

f′(x0)

.
Proof. Deﬁne ft(x) := tf(x) + (1 −t)f′(x0)(x −x0). Since f′(x0) ∈Gl(Rn) we ﬁnd
a small 0 < δ ≤ε such that ft(x) ̸= 0 if |x| = δ, for all 0 ≤t ≤1. Using excision
and homotopy invariance we conclude that
d

f, Bε(x0), 0

= d

f, Bδ(x0), 0

=
d

f′(x0)(x −x0), Bδ(x0), 0

=
d

f′(x0)(x −x0), BR(0), 0

,

A.7 The Brouwer degree
309
where R > 0 is so large, that Bδ(x0) ⊂BR(0). Choosing R large enough we now
get rid of the term −f′(x0)x0 through an admissible homotopy and obtain
d

f, Bε(x0), 0

= d

f′(x0), BR(0), 0

.
But by excision the right hand side does not depend on the size of R; in view of
Lemma 6, the proof of Lemma 7 is therefore complete. ■
Now we appeal to two classical results in diﬀerential topology.
Lemma 8. Let Ω⊂Rn be a bounded open domain and f : ¯Ω→Rn a continuous
map. Given ε > 0 there exists a smooth map g : ¯Ω→Rn satisfying
|f(x) −g(x)| < ε for x ∈¯Ω.
Proof. In view of the classical Stone-Weierstrass theorem we can take for g a
polynomial approximation of f. ■
The second result we need is a version of the Morse-Sard theorem. Recall that
y ∈Rn is a regular value for f if f′(x) ∈Gl(Rn) for all x ∈f−1(y).
Lemma 9. Let U ⊂Rn be open and f : U →Rn a smooth map. Then the set of
regular values for f is residual in Rn and therefore dense.
A proof can be found in the book on diﬀerential topology by M. Hirsch [113].
If (f, U, y) is an admissible pair we deﬁne
σ : =
inf
x∈∂U |f(x) −y| ,
then σ > 0, and by Lemma 8 we can pick g smooth with |f(x) −g(x)| < ε
on U, where ε < σ/2. Then ft = (1 −t)f + tg deﬁnes an admissible homotopy
t →(ft, U, y). Hence by Axiom 5 and Axiom 2
d(f, U, y) = d(g, U, y) = d(g −y, U, 0) .
For every z ∈Bε(y) the homotopy t →gt := g −y + tz is admissible for (U, 0) and
hence
d(f, U, y) = d(g −z, U, 0) ,
for every z ∈Bε(y). In view of Lemma 4 we can pick z0 ∈Bε(y) which is a regular
value of g. Hence
d(f, U, y) = d(g, U, z0) .
Since ¯U is compact and z0 regular, the set g−1 = {x1, x2, . . . , xk} is ﬁnite. By
excision and additivity we, therefore, ﬁnd for τ > 0 suﬃciently small, that
d(f, U, y)
=
k
j=1
d

g, Bτ(xj), z0

=
k
j=1
d

g −z0, Bτ(xj), 0

=
k
j=1
sign det

g′(xj)

,

310
Appendix
where we have used Lemma 7. Summarizing, under the assumption that a degree
d satisfying the Axioms 1-6 exists we conclude
Proposition 7.
(i) Assume (f, U, y) is admissible, f is smooth and y a regular value. Then
d(f, U, y) =

x∈f −1(y)
sign det

f′(x)

.
(ii) If (f, U, y) is admissible, then there exists an admissible (g, U, y) homotopic
to (f, U, y), where g is smooth and y is a regular value for g. In particular,
d(f, U, y) =

x∈g−1(y)
sign det

g′(x)

.
Proposition 7 shows that the degree d is uniquely determined by the Axioms
1-6, and we shall establish its existence. The usual approach is to start with the
formula (i) as the deﬁnition of d(f, U, y) if f is smooth with regular value y. The
degree d(f, U, y) of a general admissible triplet is then deﬁned as d(g, U, y) for a
smooth g close to f having the regular value y. Then one veriﬁes the axioms. The
crucial step is to verify at ﬁrst that this deﬁnition is independent of the choice
of the approximation g. The argument is as follows. If g0 and g1 are two smooth
approximations of f one deﬁnes the admissible deformation G : [0, 1] × U →Rn
by G(t, x) = (1 −t)g0(x) + tg1(x). One can assume y to be a regular value for all
three maps g1, g2 and G. Since G is admissible, G−1(y) ⊂[0, 1] × U, and since y
is a regular value of G, the solution set G(t, x) = y is either empty or consists of
ﬁnitely many disjoint, compact, connected 1-dimensional manifolds. According to
the classiﬁcation of 1-dimensional manifolds, see J. Milnor [157], each component
is either a circle (if it has no boundary) or a closed interval in which case its two
boundaries belong to the faces {0} × U, {1} × U as illustrated in the following
ﬁgure:
{0} × U
{1} × U
x1
x2
xm
ξ1
ξ2
ξk
S1
Fig. A7.1

A.7 The Brouwer degree
311
If the boundaries of a component belong to the same face, the corresponding
solutions do not contribute to the degree in view of the orientation; also, a cir-
cle does not meet the boundary and hence does not contribute. Closed intervals
connecting one face with the other one do contribute and, indeed, by the same
amount again in view of the orientation, hence

x∈g−1
0
(y)
sign det g′
0(x) =

ξ∈g−1
1
(y)
sign det g′
1(ξ) .
We do not carry out the details of this argument, and refer to H. Amann [5] or
J. Milnor [157]. We shall establish the existence of the degree by an algebraic
approach using homology theory.
In order to deﬁne the degree of an admissible triplet (f, U, y) we recall that
U ⊂Rn is open and bounded, f : ¯U →Rn continuous and y ̸∈f(∂U). Viewing
the sphere Sn as the 1-point compactiﬁcation of Rn, i.e., Sn = Rn ∪{∞}, we
now consider f as a continuous map of the sphere, deﬁned on ¯U ⊂Sn. Denote by
U c = Sn\U the complement of U in Sn. Observing that Sn\{y} is homeomorphic
to Rn (e.g., by means of the stereographic projection) we consider the diagram
-
QQQQQ
Q
s
?
U c ⊃∂U
f|∂U
Sn\{y}
∼=
s
Rn
s ◦(f|∂U)
By the Tietze extension theorem we can extend the map s ◦(f|∂U) to a con-
tinuous map ˜f : U c →Rn. Since Rn is convex, all such extensions are homotopic.
Deﬁne now the continuous extension ˜F of f|∂U by ˜F := s−1 ◦˜f : U c →Sn\{y}.
Then any two such extensions of f|∂U are homotopic with boundary values ﬁxed.
Finally, we deﬁne the continuous map F : Sn →Sn extending f : U ⊂Sn →Sn
by
F(x) : =
 f(x)
if
x ∈U
˜F(x)
if
x ∈U c .
The homotopy class of F is independent of the choices involved in the construction.
Considering the homology of Sn with Z coeﬃcients we know that Hn(Sn) = Z.
Pick any generator of Hn(Sn), say oSn. Then there exists an integer d(F) ∈Z
deﬁned by
F∗oSn = d(F)oSn .
This integer is the homological degree of F : Sn →Sn, and we now deﬁne
d(f, U, y) : = d(F) ∈Z .

312
Appendix
Since the homotopy class of F only depends on (f, U, y) and not on the choices
involved, this integer is well-deﬁned and we shall verify that d(f, U, y) meets the
Axioms 1-6, by using homology theory.
Axiom 1: Assume d(f, U, y) ̸= 0. Then F is surjective, because otherwise its image
would be in a subset homeomorphic to Rn; hence F would be homotopic to a
constant map so that d(F) = 0. By construction y ̸∈F(U c) and therefore y ∈
F(U) = f(U) implying Axiom 1.
Axiom 2: The maps F associated with (f, U, y) and G associated with (f −y, U, 0)
are homotopic implying Axiom 2 by the homotopy axiom of homology.
Axiom 3: If F belongs to (f, U, y) then F|V = f|V and y ∈F(V c) implying
Axiom 3.
Axiom 6: For the triplet (Id, B2n(1), 0) we can take F = Id : Sn →Sn and hence
conclude d(IdSn) = 1 as desired.
Axiom 5: Let (ft, U, y), 0 ≤t ≤1 be an admissible homotopy. Then we can con-
struct an associated family Ft depending continuously on t. Hence t →d(Ft) is
constant by the homotopy invariance of the homology implying the assertion.
We conclude, in particular, that d(f, U, y) only depends on f|∂U. Indeed if
f : ¯U →Rn and g : ¯U →Rn agree on the boundary: f|∂U = g|∂U then tf(x)+(1−
t)g(x), 0 ≤t ≤1 deﬁnes an admissible homotopy implying d(f, U, y) = d(g, U, y).
Axiom 4: Consider ﬁrst any admissible triplet (f, U, y) with associated map F on
Sn. Then we have the following commutative diagram (assuming n > 0), with
S ≡Sn
Hn(S)
Hn(S)
?
F∗
-
i∗
-
k∗
Hn

S, S\f−1(y)

Hn(S, S\{y})
?
F∗
 j∗
Hn

U, U\f−1(y)










f∗
.
The maps j∗and k∗are isomorphisms: the ﬁrst one by the excision property of
homology and the second one as a consequence of the long exact sequence for the
pair (S, S\{y}). Hence we have
d(F)oS = k−1
∗f∗j−1
∗i∗(oS) .
(A.49)
In order now to prove Axiom 4 we assume that U = U1 ∪U2 with ¯U1 ∩¯U2 = ∅so
that fj = f| ¯Uj, j = 1, 2 give admissible triplets (fj, Uj, y). We have to prove that
d(f, U, y) = d(f1, U1, y) + d(f2, U2, y). We shall show that
f∗j−1
∗i∗(oS) = f1∗j−1
1∗i1∗(os) + f2∗j−1
2∗i2∗(oS) .
(A.50)

A.7 The Brouwer degree
313
This implies in view of (A.49) that d(F)oS = d(F1)oS + d(F2)os as desired. In
order to prove (A.50) we consider the commutative diagram
Hn(S)
i∗
−→
Hn

S, S\f−1(y)

j∗
←−
Hn

U, U\f−1(y)

△

a

b

Hn(S) ⊕Hn(S)
−→
2
i=1
Hn

S, S\f−1
i
(y)

←−
2
i=1
Hn

Ui, Ui\f−1(y)

and
Hn

U, U\f−1(y)

2
i=1
Hn

Ui, Ui\f−1(y)

6
-
Hn(S, S\{y})
b
f∗


3
(f1)∗+ (f2)∗
Here the maps j∗and j1∗⊕j2∗are isomorphisms by the excision in homology.
The map ∆: β →(β, β) is the diagonal map. Moreover, a(σ) = (a1∗(σ), a2∗(σ))
and b(σ1, σ2) = b1∗(σ1) + b2∗(σ2) where aj : (S, S\F −1(y)) →(S, S\f−1
j
(y)) and
bj : (Uj, Uj\f−1
j
(y)) →(U, U\f−1(y)). Note that f ◦bj = fj for j = 1, 2. If
β ∈Hn(S) we can therefore compute
f∗j−1
∗i∗(β)
=
f∗b(j−1
1∗⊕j−1
2∗)(i1∗⊕i2∗)△(β)
=
f∗

b1∗j−1
1∗i1∗(β) + b2∗j−1
2∗i2∗(β)

=
f1∗j−1
1∗i1∗(β) + f2∗j−1
2∗i2∗(β)
as claimed in (A.50). We have veriﬁed that Axiom 4 holds. To sum up: we have
demonstrated that d meets all the axioms, hence the existence proof of the mapping
degree is complete.
Remarks: The Brouwer degree can be extended to arbitrary normed vector spaces
E however, for a restricted class of continuous maps only. We call a triplet (f, Ω, y)
admissible, if Ω⊂E is a bounded open subset, f : ¯Ω→E is a continuous map of
the form f = id −k with a compact map k (i.e., the closure of k(¯Ω) is compact in
E), and y ∈E is a point satisfying y /∈f(∂Ω). There is a unique map associating
to every admissible triplet an integer d(f, Ω, y) ∈Z satisfying the Axioms 1-6. It
is called the Leray-Schauder degree; we made use of this degree in Chapter 3 in
order to establish the existence of the symplectic capacity c0.
The crucial observation in constructing this extension is the fact, that a com-
pact map can be approximated (in the uniform topology) by compact mappings

314
Appendix
having their image in ﬁnite dimensional subspaces of E. Take such a map k satis-
fying k(¯Ω) ⊂En ⊂E, where dim En = n. If x ∈E is a solution of
(id −k)(x) = 0 ,
then x ∈En and hence one deﬁnes
d(id −k, Ω, 0) = d(id −k, Ω∩En, 0) ,
where, on the right hand side, we have the Brouwer degree. This is well-deﬁned.
Indeed choosing a larger ﬁnite dimensional space Em ⊃En then d(id −k, Ω∩
En, 0) = d(id −k, Ω∩Em, 0). This follows by approximating (id −k)|Ω∩Em
by a smooth map having 0 as a regular value and simply computing the index
using the representation (i) of Proposition 1. Since the ﬁnite dimensional maps
are dense in the set of compact maps (in the uniform topology) the continuous
map (id −k, Ω, 0) →d(id −k, Ω, 0) ∈Z deﬁned above has a unique extension,
called the Leray-Schauder degree. For the details we refer the reader to H. Amann
[5], K. Deimling [60] and E. Zeidler [232], Chapter 12.
A.8
Continuity property of the Alexander-Spanier cohomology
The mathematical tools needed for Chapter 6 are becoming more sophisticated.
In particular, homology and cohomology theory is being used. Besides the basic
properties of a (co-) homology theory the reader needs to know cup products and
Poincar´e duality. All this can be found in standard texts on algebraic topology.
We suggest, for example, the book by J. Vick [216], which describes the standard
material with great care and also oﬀers an introduction to ﬁxed point theory intro-
ducing the ﬁxed point index closely related to degree theory. More comprehensive
treatments on algebraic topology are the books by A. Dold [62], W.S. Massey
[148, 149, 150], E. Spanier [203] and R. Switzer [209]. In particular the appendix
in [62] concerned with the Kan- and ˇCech-extension of homotopy invariant func-
tors is interesting for the following discussion of continuity properties of homotopy
invariant functors.
Nonlinear analysis is — somewhat exaggerated — the study of nonlinear equa-
tions of the form
F(x) = y .
If the map F : X →Y and the topological spaces X and Y have some nice prop-
erties, for example, there is some compactness and the solution set is generically
discrete, degree theory is a very powerful tool. Sometimes, however, the solution
sets are generically expected to be manifolds and one would like, of course, to know
what they are. This is in general a diﬃcult task. But, one can try to compute some
of their invariants, using, for example, homology theories. A situation which then
occurs quite frequently is the following. If we consider the equation F(x) = y we

A.8 Continuity property of the Alexander-Spanier cohomology 315
do not know whether F is generic so that the solution set might be quite badly
behaved, for example, it might not be a manifold. On the other hand, it might be
possible to approximate the solution set F −1(y) by solution sets F −1(yk) which are
generic, for example, manifolds. In this situation it is sometimes only possible to
study F −1(yk) by algebraic means (using homology theory) and the question then
is: under which circumstances are we able to conclude something about F −1(y)?
The important tool will be a continuity property for the homology theory,
which we discuss in the following. We begin with an abstract discussion which is
applicable in many circumstances and focus on the particular theory we need in
Chapter 6, namely the Alexander-Spanier cohomology theory, see E. Spanier [203].
Let X be a topological space and C the category of all subspaces, the morphisms
ϕ : A →B being the continuous maps. Let A be an algebraic category. We consider
one of the following cases: A is the category of Abelian groups, or the category
of commutative rings, or the category of modules over a ﬁxed ring. Assume a
contravariant functor h : C →A is given, i.e., to every A ∈C we associate an
algebraic object h(A) ∈A and to a continuous map ϕ : A →B a homomorphism
ϕ∗= h(ϕ) : h(B) →h(A). If A ⊂B we have a natural inclusion map and we
denote by iAB : h(B) →h(A) the induced map. Since h is a contravariant functor
we have
iABiBC
=
iAC
for A ⊂B ⊂C
iAA
=
Idh(A) .
Given A ⊂X we denote by OA the collection of all open neighborhoods of A.
We denote for U ∈OA the homomorphism induced by the inclusion A ⊂U by
iU : h(U) →h(A).
Deﬁnition 1. Let h be as described above and A ⊂X ﬁxed. We call h continuous
at A if the following conditions hold
(i) Given α ∈h(A) there exist U ∈OA and αU ∈h(U) such that iU(αU) = α
(ii) Given αU ∈h(U), with U ∈OA satisfying iU(αU) = 0, there exists V ∈OA
satisfying A ⊂V ⊂U and iV U(αU) = 0.
In other words any element α ∈h(A) lives already on a neighborhood of A and any
class α ∈h(U), U ∈OA which “dies” on A, “dies” already on some neighborhood.
As we shall see in the following we can reconstruct h(A) from the h(U), U ∈OA
provided h is continuous at A.
Observe that OA is a directed set in the following sense. We can deﬁne an order
structure ≤by
U ≤V :⇐⇒U ⊃V
(“smaller sets are larger”). Moreover given U, V ∈OA there exists W ∈OA
satisfying
W ≥U , W ≥V .

316
Appendix
Indeed, just take W = U ∩V . Hence we have the following structure. For U ≤V
we have a homomorphism
iV U : h(U) −→h(V )
and for every U ∈OA a homomorphism
iU : h(U) −→h(A) .
Moreover, the following holds: If U ≤V ≤W then
iWV iV U = iWU and iUU = Id .
Moreover, if U ≤V , then
iV iV U = iU .
We ﬁrst carry out a construction called the direct limit and then show that it is
isomorphic to h(A) provided h is continuous at A.
Deﬁne MA ∈A as the direct sum
MA =

U∈O(A)
h(U) .
If A consists of abelian groups, MA will be an abelian group, etc. Denote by ϕU
the homomorphism
ϕU : h(U) −→MA ,
which is the inclusion into the U-th factor.
Consider the subgroup, subring or submodule KA generated by elements of the
form
ϕU(αU) −ϕV iV U(αU)
where U, V ∈OA satisfy U ≤V and where αU ∈h(U). Deﬁne LA by
LA = MA/KA .
Depending on A this quotient is either an Abelian group, or a commutative ring
or a module.
Elements of LA are equivalence classes [(αU)] where (αU) ∈MA with αU = 0
up to ﬁnitely many. If αU1, . . . , αUk are the non zero elements, then
(αU) =
k

i=1
ϕUi(αUi) .
Let U∞= k
i=1 Ui. Pick any V ∈OA, V ≥U∞. Then for i = 1, . . . , k
βi := ϕUi(αUi) −ϕV iV Ui(αUi)

A.8 Continuity property of the Alexander-Spanier cohomology 317
belongs to KA. Consequently,
(αU)
=
k
i=1
βi + ϕV

k
i=1
iV Ui(αUi)

=:
β + ϕV (γ)
where β ∈KA and γ ∈h(V ). Hence for every class a ∈LA there exists Ua ∈OA
such that for every V ≥Ua, a is represented by ϕV (αV ) for a suitable element
αV ∈h(V ). For an element (αU) ∈MA we consider the element ˆΦ((αU)) :=

U∈OA iU(αU) ∈h(A). We note that the sum is ﬁnite. For the element
β = ϕU(αU) −ϕV iV U(αU) ,
with V ≥U we compute
ˆΦ(β)
=
iU(αU) −iV iV U(αU)
=
iU(αU) −iU(αU)
=
0 .
Clearly ˆΦ : MA →h(A) deﬁnes a homomorphism. By the preceding discussion its
kernel contains KA. Hence we obtain a homomorphism
Φ : LA −→h(A) .
In a precise sense Φ gives us what the h(U), U ∈OA, know about the h(A). The
above construction is the well-known direct limit denoted by
ˇh(A) := LA = dir
lim
U∈OA h(U) .
It is an algebraic measure of what the neighborhoods of A know about A with
respect to the contravariant functor h.
Theorem 13. Assume h is continuous at A. Then
Φ : ˇh(A) −→h(A)
is an isomorphism.
Proof. Assume Φ(a) = 0. We can represent a ∈ˇh(A) by an element ϕV (αV ) for
V ≥Ua where αV ∈h(V ) by the preceding discussion. Hence
0 = Φ(a) = iV (αV ) .
By property (ii) of the continuity deﬁnition we ﬁnd W ≥V such that
αW := iWV (αV ) = 0 .

318
Appendix
Note that
ϕV (αV )
=
ϕV (αV )
−
ϕW iWV (αV )
=
ϕV (αV )
−
ϕW (αW )
belongs to KA. Hence a = 0. Next let β ∈h(A). By property (i) there exists
U ∈OA and αU ∈h(U) with iU(αU) = β. Let a = [ϕU(αU)]. Then Φ(a) = β. ■
Assume next that h is a contravariant functor on the category of topological
spaces. Let X and A be as before and assume Y is another topological space. If
f : X →Y is a continuous map we would like to study f|A : A →Y and say
something about its properties once we are able to study them for f|U : U →Y ,
U ∈OA. We have the commutative diagram

3
HHHHH
j
-
Y
f|U
f|A
f|V
A
U
V

6

6
giving
iU(f|U)∗
=
(f|A)∗
iUV (f|V )∗
=
(f|U)∗.
We deﬁne a homomorphism
ˇf : h(Y ) −→ˇh(A)
by
ˇf(a) = [ϕXf∗(a)] .
We observe that
[ϕXf∗(a)]
=
[ϕU(f|U)∗(a)]
=
[ϕUiUXf∗(a)] ,
so that for all U ∈OA
ˇf(a) = [ϕU(f|U)∗(a)] .
We compute for a ∈h(U)
Φ ◦ˇf(a)
=
iU(f|U)∗(a)
=
(f|A)∗(a) ,

A.8 Continuity property of the Alexander-Spanier cohomology 319
so that we obtain the commutative diagram
S
S
S
S
SSw
-
?
h(Y )
ˇh(A)
h(A)
Φ
.
(f|A)∗
ˇf
Note also that we have the commutative diagram
S
S
S
S
SSw
-
?
h(Y )
h(U)
ˇh(A)
,
jU
ˇf
(f|U)∗
where jU(αU) = [ϕU(αU)].
Proposition 8. For every a ∈ˇh(A) there exists U ∈OA and αU ∈h(U) with
jU(αU) = a. Given αU ∈h(U) with jU(αU) = 0 there exists V
≥U with
iV U(αU) = 0.
Proof. By the previous discussion an element a ∈ˇh(A) can be written in the form
[ϕV (γ)] for some γ ∈h(V ) and some suitable V ∈OA. Hence
jV (γ) = a .
Assume jU(αU) = 0. Then we ﬁnd U1, . . . , Uk, V1, . . . , Vk, with Vi ≥Ui and αUi ∈
h(Ui) with
ϕU(αU) =
k

1=1
ϕUi(αUi) −ϕV

iV Ui(αUi)

.
(A.51)
Pick any W ∈OA with
W ≥U, U1, . . . , Uk, V1, . . . , Vk .
(A.52)
Then applying 
C≤W iWC to (A.51) we obtain
iWU(αU)
=
k
l=1
iWUi(αUi) −iWViiViUi(αUi)
=
k
1=1
iWUi(αUi) −iWUi(αUi)
= 0 .
This is true for every W satisfying (A.52) proving our result. ■

320
Appendix
Theorem 14. Let f : X →Y be continuous and A ⊂X. Assume for every U ∈OA
that (f|U)∗is injective. Then ˇf is injective.
Proof. Assume ˇf(a) = 0. This implies for every U ∈OA by the deﬁnition of ˇf,
0 = [ϕU(f|U)∗(a)] = jU

(f|U)∗(a)

.
By Proposition 8 there exists V ≥U such that
0 = iV U

(f|U)∗(a)

.
But iV U(f|U)∗(a) = (f|V )∗(a) implying that a = 0 since (f|V )∗is injective. ■
Corollary 1. Assume f : X →Y is continuous and A ⊂X. If h is continuous at A
and if for every U ∈OA the map (f|U)∗is injective, then (f|A)∗is injective.
Proof. We have the commutative diagram
S
S
S
S
SSw
-
6
h(Y )
h(A)
ˇh(A)
Φ
ˇf
(f|A)∗
By Theorem 14, the map ˇf is injective and, by Theorem 13, the map Φ is an
isomorphism. Hence (f|A)∗is injective. ■
Next we apply the previous discussion to the Alexander-Spanier cohomology
theory. We refer the reader to the original articles by E. Spanier [202], the book
by E. Spanier [203] and the excellent book by W.S. Massey [149].
Deﬁnition 2. (see also [202]) Let X be a topological space and A a subspace. We
say A is taut in X if for every coeﬃcient ring R the Alexander-Spanier cohomology
functors ¯Hi(·, R), for every i, are continuous at A.
The following very useful theorem is due to E. Spanier and we refer the reader
to [204]
Theorem 15. In each of the following cases A is taut in X
(i)
A is compact and X is Hausdorﬀ.
(ii)
A is closed and X is paracompact and Hausdorﬀ.
(iii) A is arbitrary and every open set in X is paracompact and Hausdorﬀ.
(iv) A is a neighborhood retract.
So we note that in a metrizable space every subset A is taut, and hence, by
Theorem 13,
¯H∗(A) ∼= dir
lim
U∈OA
¯H∗(U) .

Index
Abraham, R. and Robbin, J., 291
action, 7, 203, 228
action of a ﬁxed point, 151
action of a periodic solution, 99
action spectrum, 151, 152, 186, 269
action spectrum, compactness, 152
action, bifurcation diagram, 187
action-angle coordinates, 273, 278
admissible Hamiltonians, 70
Alexander-Spanier cohomology,
208, 212, 213, 219
almost complex structure, 13–15, 200,
242
Ambrosetti, A., 80
anti-holomorphic disc, 230
Arnold conjecture, 193, 198, 199
Arnold conjecture, torus, 202
Arnold, V.I., 48, 196, 198, 199, 216, 250,
279
Arnold-Jost theorem, 135, 273, 279
Arzel`a-Ascoli theorem, 235, 241
asymptotic boundary conditions, 258
auxiliary structures, 13
Avez, A., 48
Banach manifold W 1,p, 232
Bangert, V., 132
Banyaga, A., 198
Beckner, W., 290
Benci, V., 131, 133
Bennequin, D., 126
Betti numbers, 199, 222
bi-invariant metric, 149
bi-invariant pseudo-metrics, 150
Bialy, M., 186, 187, 190
Bialy-Polterovich theorem, 186
bifurcation diagram, 187
bifurcation diagram, simple, 187, 188
Birkhoﬀinvariants, 43, 263
Birkhoﬀnormal form, 42, 43, 46
Birkhoﬀ’s theorem, 43, 47
Birkhoﬀ, G., 42, 47, 131, 194
Birkhoﬀ-Lewis theorem, 263
Blanchard, P., 81
Bolotin, S.V., 131
Bordeaux bottle, 99
boundary operator, 256
bounded orbits, 205, 234, 236, 253
bounded solution, unregularized
ﬂow, 227
Br¨uning, E., 81
Brezis, H., 211
Brouwer, L., 195, 211
Brunella, M., 216
bubbling oﬀanalysis, 240
bundle of anti-linear maps, 232
Calabi invariant, 150
canonical basis, 3
canonical bi-invariant metric, 149
canonical one-form, 128
Cantor set, 48
cap product, 213
capacity preserving
homeomorphisms, 64
Cartan’s identity, 11, 13
Cauchy-Riemann operator,
224, 242, 253, 291
Cauchy-Riemann operator on sections,
295
celestial mechanics, 18
chain complex, 256, 261
chain homomorphism, 259, 267
chain homotopy, 259
Chang, K.C., 81
Chang, S.Y., 290
Chaperon, M., 215, 250
characteristic line bundle, 22, 113
Chekanov, Yu. V., 216
Chern-Simons functional, 264
Clarke, F., 24
classical Hamiltonian systems, 127
classical systems, 136
classiﬁcation of symplectic forms, 12
closed characteristic, 22, 23
closedness of D in C0, 59
321

322
Index
Closing lemma, 21, 105
Closing problem, 21
cohomology ring, 199
commutator, 148
compactness of the action spectrum, 152
compatible almost complex
structure, 227
compatible complex structure, 2
compatible inner product, 2
complementary symplectic subspaces, 2
complex structure, 2, 231
computation of Floer homology, 260
conﬁguration space, 127
conformality axiom, 51
conformality of c0, 70
Conley’s index theory, 257
Conley, C., 198, 200, 203, 215, 221, 258
Conley-index, 221
Conley-Morse equation, 221
Conley-Zehnder theorem, 203
connected simple system of C. Conley,
258
connecting orbit, 205, 206, 253, 254, 261
contact form, 125
contact structure, 119, 125
contact type, 269
contact type hypersurface, 119
continuity property of
A.-S. cohomology, 212, 220
convex energy surface, 23
Courant-Hilbert minimax principle, 39
critical points, 205
critical value, 79
Croke, C., 99
cup-length, 199, 216
cylinder, 231
Dacorogna-Moser theorem, 31
Darboux’s normal form, 12
Darboux’s theorem, 10
de Rham cohomology group, 12
de Rham, G., 12
deﬁnition of c0, 70
deﬁnition of c0-Lipschitz type, 116
deﬁnition of the universal minimax level
γ, 156
degree, homological deﬁnition, 213
determinant, 5
diﬀerential forms, 4
direct method in the calculus of varia-
tions, 23
directed set of admissible pairs, 267
displacement energy, 150
displacement energy as a special capac-
ity, 172
distinguished line bundle, 22
Dold, A., 213
Douglis, A., 296
dual action principle, 31
Duistermaat, J.J., 286
Ekeland, I., 31, 33, 51, 59, 61, 66, 99
elementary symplectic
transformation, 275
Eliashberg conjecture, 169
Eliashberg, Y., 59, 123, 126, 150, 201,
216, 269
Eliashberg-Gromov theorem, 59
Eliasson, H., 232
elliptic methods, 222
elliptic operator, ﬁrst order, 225
elliptic regularity theory, 227
energy, 253
energy estimate in C0, 173
energy of a symplectic map, 146, 165
energy surface, 19
energy-capacity inequality, 147, 165
Euler characteristic, 198
Euler equation, 25
Euler-Maupertuis-Jacobi principle, 130
existence problem for periodic solutions,
18, 21, 31, 41, 76, 98, 183
existence results on prescribed energy
surfaces, 105
Fet, A.I., 131
ﬁrst Chern class, 228, 255
ﬂat space, locally, 190
Floer complex, 77
Floer groups, 262
Floer homology, 193, 256, 257
Floer, A., 56, 77, 103, 200, 216, 250, 253,
257, 259, 265, 269
Floquet multipliers, 110, 111, 135
Fomenko, A.T., 286
Fortune, B., 201

Index
323
Fourier integral operators, 216
Franks, J., 132
Fredholm index, 209, 210
Fredholm map, 209
Fredholm map, proper, 210
Fredholm operator, 298
Fredholm theory, 254
Fukaya, K., 265
fundamental class, 213
Genecand, C., 49
generating function, 13, 189, 273
geodesic ﬂow, 130
geodesic path in D, 184
geodesic path, regular, 185
geodesic, length, 186
geodesic, minimal, 186, 190
Givental, A.B., 216
Gluck, H., 131
gluing construction, 256
gradient ﬂow, 204, 206
gradient-like ﬂow, 206, 217
Green’s function, 291
Gromov’s squeezing theorem, 33, 55
Gromov, M., 7, 17, 33, 59, 126, 144, 240
Gromov-width, 17, 56
group of compactly supported symplec-
tic diﬀeomorphism, 143
H¨ormander, L., 216
Hadamard, J., 131
Hamilton-Jacobi equation, 189, 190
Hamiltonian diﬀeomorphism, 198
Hamiltonian principle, 23
Hamiltonian vector ﬁeld, 1, 6, 8, 9, 13,
15
Hamiltonian, quasi autonomous, 186
Herman’s non-closing lemma, 137, 139
Herman, M., 105
higher order capacities, 66
Hilbert, D., 131
Hofer, H., 33, 51, 56, 59, 61, 66, 99, 102,
103, 106, 115, 119, 126, 132,
133, 150, 169, 174, 216, 228,
250, 253, 262, 265, 269
holomorphic disc, 229
holomorphic disc, area, 229
homotopy invariance of Floer
groups, 257
Hurewicz homomorphism, 228
hypersurface, 19
hypersurface of c0-Lipschitz type, 115
inner capacity, 57
inner regularity of c0, 70
inner regularity of a capacity, 57
integrable Hamiltonian system, 46, 134,
278
integrals in involution, 46
invariance of Hamiltonian vector ﬁelds,
13
invariance of the symplectic form, 13
invariant Lagrangian tori, 48
isolated invariant set, 222
isotropic subspace, 54
Jacobi metric, 130, 131
Jiang, M.Y., 136
Joker, 240
Jost, R., 279
K.A.M.-theory, 48, 135
K¨unzle, A., 99
kinetic energy, 129
Klingenberg, W., 131
Kolmogorov, A.N., 48
Koslov, V.V., 136
Kronecker ﬂow, 47, 48
Lagrangian mechanics, 127
Lagrangian submanifold, 216
Le Calvez, P., 263
Lefschetz ﬁxed point theory, 195
Lefschetz, S., 195
Legendre transformation, 25
length of a symplectic arc, 184
Leray-Schauder degree, 96
Lewis, D.C., 47
Lie derivative, 11
limit sets, 217, 218
linear canonical map, 4
linear symplectic group Sp(n), 5
linear symplectic map, 4, 6
Liouville form, 128
Liouville theorem, 277

324
Index
Liouville, J., 135
little trick, 236
Ljapunov function, 218, 219
Ljapunov-Schmidt reduction, 215
Ljusternik Schnirelman theory, 131
Ljusternik-Schnirelman, 197, 199, 206,
208, 218, 243
Ljusternik-Schnirelman theory, 77
localization of Sikorav’s estimate, 178
Loewner, C., 196
loop space, 203
Lutz, R., 126
Ma, R., 103
Martinet, J., 126
Mather set, 49
Mather, J., 49
Maupertuis-Jacobi principle, 136
Mawhin, J., 81
McDuﬀ, D., 267
Milnor, J., 211
minimax characterisation, 77
Minimax lemma, 79
Mishchenko, A.S., 286
mod 2-degree, 210
monotonicity axiom, 51
monotonicity of c0, 70
monotonicity of the Gromov width, 18
Morse complex, 261
Morse decomposition, 219, 221
Morse equation, 222, 261
Morse homology, 261
Morse index, 221
Morse theory, 31, 77, 131
Morse-Smale ﬂow, 257, 261
Moser’s deformation method, 12
Moser’s theorem, 16
Moser, J., 12, 42, 47–49, 135, 198, 263,
286
Mountain Pass Lemma, 80
Nekhoroshev, N., 286
Nikishin, N., 195
Nirenberg, L., 211, 296
non-ﬂatness of D, 185
nonresonant of order s, 43
nontriviality axiom, 51, 57
nontriviality of c0, 70
Novikov, S., 262
Oﬃn, D., 134
Ono, K., 228, 262
orbit of a point, 182
order structure on D, 149
orthogonal complement, 2
orthogonal sum, 3
orthogonality, 2
osc(H), 146
oscillation, 146
P.S.-condition, 78
P¨oschel, J., 48
Palais, R., 80
Palais-Smale condition, 78
parametrized family of energy surfaces,
106
parametrized family of
hypersurfaces, 114
partial diﬀerential equation, 252
partial ordering of admissible pairs, 267
period group, 228
periodic orbit, 18, 23
periodic solution, 18
perturbation methods, 47
perturbations of integrable systems, 47
phase function, 216
Poincar´e continuation method, 110
Poincar´e duality, 213
Poincar´e inequality, 27
Poincar´e lemma, 7, 11, 239
Poincar´e polynomial, 199, 221, 261
Poincar´e recurrence theorem, 1, 139
Poincar´e section map, 111
Poincar´e’s recurrence, 263
Poincar´e, H., 19, 21, 110, 194, 197
Poincar´e-Birkhoﬀﬁxed point theorem,
194
Poincar´e’s recurrence theorem, 20
Poincar´e, H., 194
Poincar´e-Birkhoﬀtwist theorem, 194
Poisson bracket, 43
Poisson bracket of two functions, 277
Polterovich, L., 150, 186, 187, 190
potential energy, 129
proper homotopy, 211
Pugh, C.C., 21, 139

Index
325
pullback of a form, 4, 6, 12
pullback of a vector ﬁeld, 8
quadratic form, 35
quasi autonomous, 186, 187, 190
quasi-autonomous, 188, 191
quasi-periodic solutions, 47, 48, 50, 135
Rabinowitz, P., 23, 24, 77, 80, 81, 123,
133
real ﬁltration of complex, 266
recurrence, 19
Reeb vector ﬁeld, 125, 127
regular pair (H, J), 255
regular value, 211, 212
regularity of critical points, 88
representation of the gradient ﬂow, 90
rescaling, 237
rest points, 208, 218
Riemannian metric, compatible, 14
Riemannian sphere, 231, 232, 294
Riesz’ theorem, 77
Riesz, F., 77
rigidity of symplectic diﬀeomorphisms,
58
rigidity of symplectic embeddings, 51
rigidity phenomena, 34
Robinson, C., 21, 112, 139
Rybakowski, K., 222
Salamon, D., 222, 228, 253, 255, 258,
261–263
Sard’s theorem, 119
Sard-Smale theorem, 211, 212, 255
Schwarz, M., 254, 257, 261
Seifert, H., 21, 131
set of compatible almost complex struc-
tures, 15
set of distinguished Hamiltonians, 70
Siburg, K.F., 52, 100
Siegel, C.L., 47
Sikorav’s estimate, 177
Sikorav’s estimate, localized form, 178
Sikorav’s theorem, 177, 178
Sikorav, J.C., 177, 200, 216, 265
Simon, C., 195
Smale degree, 210
Sobolev class, 232
Sobolev embedding theorem, 241
Sobolev space, 82, 203
space of compatible almost complex
structures, 15
special symplectic capacity, 172
standard symplectic space, 4
Stein, E., 242
Stokes’ theorem, 12, 240
Struwe, M., 81, 119
symplectic 2-form, 10
symplectic action, 7
symplectic atlas, 10
symplectic basis, 3
symplectic capacities of higher order, 66
symplectic capacity, 18, 51, 52, 56, 58,
66, 70
symplectic capacity c0(M, ω), 265
symplectic capacity, deﬁnition, 51
symplectic capacity, special, 172
symplectic classiﬁcation of open poly-
discs, 269
symplectic classiﬁcation of quadratic
forms, 35
symplectic coordinates, 4, 10
symplectic diﬀeomorphism, 6
symplectic embeddings, 31
symplectic energy, properties, 147
symplectic ﬁxed points, 222
symplectic group, 5
symplectic homeomorphisms, 51
symplectic homology, 193, 265
symplectic homology groups, 267
symplectic homology groups, exact tri-
angle, 268
symplectic homology theory, 56, 216
symplectic invariants, 18
symplectic manifolds, 1, 9
symplectic map, linear, 4
symplectic maps between manifolds, 12
symplectic polar coordinates, 46
symplectic structure, 9
symplectic structure on a cotangent
bundle, 128
symplectic subspace, 3
symplectic vector space, 1
Taubes, C., 257
Terng, C., 80

326
Index
three-body problem, 21
trace-theorem, 287
transformation formula for vector ﬁelds,
8
transformation of a Hamiltonian vector
ﬁeld, 9
transversally hyperbolic, 205
Traynor, L., 216
uniformization theorem, 231
universal minimax family F, 156
universal minimax level γ, 155
universal minimax set, 155
universal variational principle, 154
unparameterized periodic solution, 113
unregularized gradient ﬂow
equation, 224, 227
variation of constant formula, 214
Vekua, I.N., 298
Viterbo’s homological special symplec-
tic capacity, 183
Viterbo’s theorem, 123
Viterbo, C., 23, 102, 103, 123, 132, 169,
182, 216
volume form, 5
weak nontriviality axiom, 51, 66
Weierstrass, K., 35
Weinstein conjecture, 23, 119, 120, 123,
126, 132
Weinstein, A., 23, 24, 42, 99, 120, 123,
198, 201
Willem, M., 81
Wysocki, K., 269
Yang-Mills action, 264
Zehnder, E., 99, 106, 115, 119, 137, 198,
200, 203, 215, 255, 258, 263
Ziller, W., 131

Bibliography
[1] C. Abbas and H. Hofer. Holomorphic curves and global questions in contact
geometry. To appear in Birkh¨auser.
[2] R. Abraham and J. Robbin. Transversal mappings and ﬂows. W.A. Ben-
jamin, Inc., 1967.
[3] B. Aebischer, M. Borer, Ch. Leuenberger, M. K¨alin, and H.M. Reimann.
Symplectic geometry, an introduction based on the Seminar in Berne 1992.
Birkh¨auser, 1994.
[4] S. Alpern and V.S. Prasad. Combinatorial proofs of the Conley-Zehnder-
Franks theorem on a ﬁxed point for torus homeomorphisms. Advances in
Mathematics, 99:238–247, 1993.
[5] H. Amann.
Lectures on some ﬁxed point theorems.
Monograﬁas de
matem´atica IMPA, Rio de Janeiro.
[6] A. Ambrosetti and P. Rabinowitz. Dual variational methods in critical point
theory and applications. J. Funct. Anal., 14:349–381, 1973.
[7] V.I. Arnold. Proof of a theorem of A.N. Kolmogorov on the invariance of
quasiperiodic motions under small perturbations of the Hamiltonian. Uspeki
Mat. Nauk, 18:13–40, 1963. Russian Math. Surveys 18 (1963), 9–36.
[8] V.I. Arnold. Small denominators and problems of stability of motions in clas-
sical and celestial mechanics. Uspeki Mat. Nauk, 18:91–196, 1963. Russian
Math. Surveys 18 (1963), 85–193.
[9] V.I. Arnold.
Sur une propri´et´e topologique des applications globalement
canoniques de la m´echanique classique. C. R. Acad. Paris, 261:3719–3722,
1965.
[10] V.I. Arnold. Proceedings of Symposia in Pure Mathematics. Mathematical
developments arising from Hilbert problems. AMS, Providence, 28:66, 1976.
[11] V.I. Arnold. Mathematical methods of classical mechanics. Springer-Verlag,
Berlin und New York, 1978. In particular: Appendix 9.
[12] V.I. Arnold and A. Avez. Ergodic problems of classical mechanics. W.A.
Benjamin, Inc., 1968. In particular Appendix 26.
[13] M. Audin and J. Lafontaine. Holomorphic curves in symplectic geometry.
Birkh¨auser, 1994
327

328
Bibliography
[14] V. Bangert. Geod¨atische Linien auf Riemannschen Mannigfaltigkeiten. Jber.
d. Dt. Math.-Verein., 87:39–66, 1985.
[15] V. Bangert. On the existence of closed geodesics on two spheres. Intern.
Journal of Mathematics, 4:1:1–10, 1993.
[16] A. Banyaga. Sur la structure du groupe des diﬀ´eomorphismes qui pres´ervent
une forme symplectique. Comment. Math. Helvetici, 53:174–227, 1978.
[17] W. Beckner.
Sharp Sobolev inequalities on the sphere and the Moser-
Trudinger inequality. Annals of Mathematics, 138:213–242, 1993.
[18] V. Benci. Closed geodesic for the Jacobi metric and periodic solutions of
prescribed energy of natural Hamiltonian systems. Ann. Inst. H. Poincar´e,
Analyse non lin´eaire, 1:401–412, 1984.
[19] V. Benci, H. Hofer, and P. Rabinowitz. A remark on a-priori bounds and
existence for periodic solutions of Hamiltonian systems.
NATO ASI Se-
ries, Series C, In: Periodic Solutions of Hamiltonian Systems and Related
Topics,(209):85–88, 1987.
[20] D. Bennequin. Entrelacements et ´equations de Pfaﬀ. Ast´erisque, 107–108:83–
161, 1983.
[21] H. Berestycki, J.M. Lasry, G. Mancini, and B. Ruf. Existence of multiple
periodic orbits on star-shaped Hamiltonian surfaces.
Comm. Pure Appl.
Math., 38:253–289, 1985.
[22] M. Bialy and L. Polterovich. Geodesics of Hofer’s metric on the group of
Hamiltonian diﬀeomorphisms. To appear: Duke Math. Journal, 1993.
[23] G.D. Birkhoﬀ. Proof of Poincar´e’s geometric theorem. Trans. Amer. Math.
Soc., 14:14–22, 1913.
[24] G.D. Birkhoﬀ. The restricted problem of three bodies. Rend. Circ. Mat.
Palermo, 39:265–334, 1915.
[25] G.D. Birkhoﬀ. Dynamical Systems. Colloquium Publ. A.M.S., Vol. 9, 1927.
[26] G.D. Birkhoﬀ.
Stability and the equations of dynamics.
Am. J. Math.,
49:1–38, 1927.
[27] G.D. Birkhoﬀand D.C. Lewis. On the periodic motions near a given periodic
motion of a dynamical system. Annali di Math., 12:117–133, 1933.
[28] Ph. Blanchard and E. Br¨uning. Variational methods in mathematical physics.
Springer, 1992.

Bibliography
329
[29] S.V. Bolotin.
Libration motions of natural dynamical systems.
Moscow
University Bulletin, 3, 1978.
[30] Yu.G. Borisovich, V.G. Zvyagin, and Yu.I. Sapronov. Non-linear Fredholm
maps and the Leray-Schauder theory. Russian Math. Surveys, 32(4):1–54,
1977.
[31] J. Bourgain. Approximation of solutions of the cubic nonlinear Schr¨odinger
equations by ﬁnite-dimensional equations and nonsqueezing properties.
IMRN, 2:79–90, 1994.
[32] H. Brezis and L. Nirenberg. Nonlinear functional analysis. In preparation.
[33] L.E.J. Brouwer. Beweis des ebenen Translationssatzes. Math. Ann., 72:37–
54, 1912.
[34] M. Brown. A new proof of Brouwer’s lemma on translation arcs. Houston
J. of Math., 10:35–41, 1984.
[35] M. Brown and W.D. Neumann. Proof of the Poincar´e-Birkhoﬀﬁxed point
theorem. Michigan Math. J., 24:21–31, 1977.
[36] M. Brunella.
On a theorem of Sikorav.
L’Enseignement Math´ematique,
37:83–87, 1991.
[37] T. Carleman. Sur un probl`eme d’unicit´e pour les syst`emes d’´equations aux
d´eriv´ees partielles `a deux variables ind´ependantes. Ark. Mat. Asts. Fys.,
26B, No. 17:1–9, 1939.
[38] P.H. Carter.
An improvement of the Poincar´e-Birkhoﬀtheorem.
Trans.
Amer. Math. Soc., 269:285–299, 1982.
[39] K.-C. Chang. Inﬁnite dimensional Morse theory and multiple solution prob-
lems. Birkh¨auser, 1993.
[40] S-Y. A. Chang. Extremal functions in a sharp form of Sobolev inequality.
ICM Berkeley, 1:715–723, 1986.
[41] M. Chaperon.
Phases g´en´eratrices en g´eom´etrie symplectique.
In: D.
Bennequin, Rencontre entre physiciens th´eoriciens et math´ematiciens en
l’honneur de Ren´e Thom. Publication of the Universit´e de Strasbourg.
[42] M. Chaperon. Quelques questions de g´eom´etrie symplectique. S´eminaire
Bourbaki 1982–83, Ast´erisque, 105–106:231–249, 1983.
[43] M. Chaperon. Une id´ee du type “g´eod´esique bris´ee” pour les syst´emes Hamil-
toniens. C.R. Acad. Sci. Paris S´er. I Math., 298:293–296, 1984. S´erie I, no.
13.

330
Bibliography
[44] M. Chaperon. Lois de conservation et g´eom´etrie symplectique. C.R. Acad.
Sci. Paris, 312:345–348, 1991. S´erie I.
[45] M. Chaperon and B. D’Onofrio. Sur un th´eor`eme de Claude Viterbo. C.R.
Acad. Sci. Paris, 306:597–600, 1988. S´erie I.
[46] M. Chaperon and E. Zehnder.
Quelques r´esultat en g´eom´etrie symplec-
tique. In S´eminaire Sud-Rhodanien de G´eom´etrie III: Autour du Th´eor`eme
de Poincar´e-Birkhoﬀ, pages 51–121, 1984. Travaux en cours. Hermann Paris.
[47] Yu.V. Chekanov. Legandrova teorija morsa. Uspekhi Mat. Naul., 42:4:129–
141, 1987.
[48] A. Chenciner. Sur un ´enouc´e dissipatif du th´eor`eme g´eom´etrique de Poincar´e-
Birkhoﬀ. C.R. Acad. Sci. Paris, 294, I:243–245, 1982.
[49] A. Chenciner. La dynamique on voisinage d’un point ﬁxe elliptique con-
servatif: de Poincar´e et Birkhoﬀ`a Aubry et Mather. S´eminaire Bourbaki
Ast´erisque, 121/122:147–170, 1984.
[50] A. Floer, H. Hofer and K. Wysocki. Applications of symplectic homology I,
to appear in Math. Zeit.
[51] K. Cieliebak, A. Floer, and H. Hofer. Symplectic homology II: A general
construction. To appear in Math. Zeit.
[52] K. Cieliebak, A. Floer, H. Hofer, and K. Wysocki. Applications of symplectic
homology II. Preprint E.T.H. Z¨urich (1994).
[53] F. Clarke. A classical variational principle for periodic Hamiltonian trajec-
tories. Proc. Amer. Math. Soc., 76:186–188, 1979.
[54] C. Conley. Isolated invariant sets and Morse index. CBMS Reg. Conf. Series
in Math. 38. AMS, 1978.
[55] C. Conley and E. Zehnder. The Birkhoﬀ-Lewis ﬁxed point theorem and a
conjecture of V. I.Arnold. Invent. Math., 73:33–49, 1983.
[56] C. Conley and E. Zehnder. An index theory for periodic solutions of a Hamil-
tonian system, volume 1007 of Geometric Dynamics, Lecture Notes in Math-
ematics. Springer, 1983. 132–145.
[57] C. Conley and E. Zehnder. Morse type index theory for ﬂows and periodic
solutions of Hamiltonian equations. Comm. Pure Appl. Math., 37:207–253,
1984.
[58] C.B. Croke and A. Weinstein. Closed curves on convex hypersurfaces and
periods of nonlinear oscillations. Invent. Math., 64:199–202, 1981.

Bibliography
331
[59] B. Dacorogna and J. Moser.
On a partial diﬀerential equation involving
the Jacobian determinant. Ann. Inst. Henri Poincar´e, Analyse non lin´eaire,
7:1–26, 1990.
[60] K. Deimling. Nonlinear functional analysis. Springer-Verlag, Berlin Heidel-
berg, 1985.
[61] W.-Y. Ding. A generalization of the Poincar´e-Birkhoﬀtheorem. Proc. AMS,
88:341–346, 1983.
[62] A. Dold. Lectures on Algebraic Topology. Grundlagen der mathematischen
Wissenschaften 200, Springer 1980. second edition.
[63] A. Douglis and L. Nirenberg. Interior estimates for elliptic systems of partial
diﬀerential equations. Comm. Pure Appl. Math., 8:503–538, 1955.
[64] J.J. Duistermaat. On global action-angle coordinates. Commun. on Pure
and Appl. Math., 33:687–706, 1980.
[65] I. Ekeland. Une th´eorie de Morse pour les syst`emes hamiltoniens convexes.
Ann. Inst. Henri Poincar´e, Analyse non lin´eaire, 1:19–78, 1984.
[66] I. Ekeland. Convexity methods in Hamiltonian mechanics. Springer, 1990.
Ergebnisse der Mathematik und ihrer Grenzgebiete, 3. Folge.
[67] I. Ekeland and H. Hofer.
Convex Hamiltonian energy surfaces and their
closed trajectories. Comm. Math. Physics, 113:419–467, 1987.
[68] I. Ekeland and H. Hofer. Symplectic topology and Hamiltonian dynamics.
Math. Zeit., 200:355–378, 1990.
[69] I. Ekeland and H. Hofer. Symplectic topology and Hamiltonian dynamics
II. Math. Zeit., 203:553–567, 1990.
[70] I. Ekeland and J.M. Lasry. On the number of periodic trajectories for a
Hamiltonian ﬂow on a convex energy surface.
Ann. Math, 112:283–319,
1980.
[71] Y. Eliashberg. A theorem on the structure of wave fronts and its application
in symplectic topology. Funct. Anal. and its Appl., 21:227–232, 1987.
[72] Y. Eliashberg. Topological characterization of Stein manifolds of dimension
> 2. Intern. J. Math., 1:29–46, 1990.
[73] Y. Eliashberg. Filling by holomorphic discs and its applications. London
Math. Society Lecture Notes, pages 45–67, 1991. Series 151.
[74] Y. Eliashberg. Contact 3-manifolds, twenty year since J. Martinet’s work.
Ann. Inst. Fourier, 42:165–192, 1992.

332
Bibliography
[75] Y. Eliashberg and H. Hofer. Unseen symplectic boundaries. In Proceedings
of a Conference in honour of E. Calabi, 1991.
[76] Y. Eliashberg and L. Polterovich. Bi-invariant metrics on the group of Hamil-
tonian diﬀeomorphisms. International Journal of Mathematics Vol. 4, No. 5
(1993) 727–738.
[77] Y.M. Eliashberg. Estimates on the number of ﬁxed points of area preserving
transformations. Preprint Syktyvkar 1978 (Russian).
[78] Y.M. Eliashberg. Rigidity of symplectic and contact structures. Preprint,
1981.
[79] H. Eliasson. Geometry of manifolds of maps. J. Diﬀ. Geom., 1:169–194,
1967.
[80] A. Fahti. An orbit closing proof of Brouwer’s lemma on translation arcs.
Enseignement Math., 33:315–322, 1987.
[81] A.I. Fet and L.A. Lusternik. Variational problems on closed manifolds. Dokl.
Akad. Nauk. S.S.S.R., 81:17–18, 1951.
[82] A. Floer. Proof of the Arnold conjecture for surfaces and generalizations to
certain K¨ahler manifolds. Duke Math. J., 53:1–32, 1986.
[83] A. Floer.
An instanton invariant for 3-manifolds.
Comm. Math. Phys.,
118:215–240, 1988.
[84] A. Floer. Morse theory for Lagrangian intersection theory. J. Diﬀ. Geom.,
18:513–517, 1988.
[85] A. Floer. The unregularised gradient ﬂow of the symplectic action. Comm.
Pure Appl. Math., 41:775–813, 1988.
[86] A. Floer. Cuplength estimates on Lagrangian intersections. Comm. Pure
Appl. Math., 42:335–356, 1989.
[87] A. Floer, Hofer H., and D. Salamon. Transversality in the elliptic Morse
theory for the symplectic action. Preprint E.T.H. Z¨urich 1994.
[88] A. Floer, Hofer H., and C. Viterbo. The Weinstein conjecture in P × Cl.
Math. Zeit., 203:355–378, 1989.
[89] A. Floer and H. Hofer. Coherent orientations for periodic orbit problems in
symplectic geometry. Math. Zeit., 212:13–38, 1993.
[90] A. Floer and H. Hofer. Symplectic homology I: Open sets in Cn. Math.
Zeit., 215:37–88, 1994.

Bibliography
333
[91] M. Flucher.
Fixed points of measure preserving torus homeomorphisms.
manuscripta math., 68:271–293, 1990.
[92] O. Forster. Riemannsche Fl¨achen. Heidelberger Taschenb¨ucher. Springer,
1977.
[93] B. Fortune.
A symplectic ﬁxed point theorem for CP n.
Invent. Math.,
81:22–46, 1985.
[94] B. Fortune and A. Weinstein. A symplectic ﬁxed point theorem for complex
projective spaces. Bulletin AMS, 12:128–130, 1985.
[95] J. Franks. Periodic points and rotation numbers for area preserving diﬀeo-
morphisms of the plane. Preprint, Northwestern University.
[96] J. Franks. Generalizations of the Poincar´e-Birkhoﬀtheorem. Ann. of Math.,
128:139–151, 1988.
[97] J. Franks. Recurrence and ﬁxed points of surface homeomorphisms. Ergod.
Th. and Dynam. Sys., 8:99–107, 1988. Charles Conley Memorial Issue.
[98] J. Franks. A variation of the Poincar´e-Birkhoﬀtheorem. Amer. Math. Soc.,
Providence, 1988. Contemp. Math., 81.
[99] J. Franks. Periodic points and rotation numbers for area preserving diﬀeo-
morphisms of the plane. IHES-Publ.Math., 71:105–120, 1990.
[100] J. Franks. Geodesics on S2 and periodic points of annulus homeomorphisms.
Invent. Math., 108:403–418, 1992.
[101] J. Franks. A new proof of the Brouwer plane translation theorem. Ergod.
Th. and Dynam. Sys., 12:217–226, 1992.
[102] K. Fukaya. Floer homology for oriented 3-manifolds. Advanced Studies in
Pure Mathematics, 20:1–92, 1992.
[103] J.M. Gambaudo and P. Le Calvez. Inﬁnit´e d’orbites p´eriodiques pour les
diﬀ´eomorphismes conservatifs de l’anneau. Preprint, 1991.
[104] C. Genecand. Transversal homoclinic orbits near elliptic ﬁxed points of area
preserving diﬀeomorphisms of the plane. Dynamics Reported, New Series,
2:1–30, 1993.
[105] A.B. Givental. Global properties of Maslov index and Morse theory. Funct.
Anal. and its Appl., 22:141–142, 1988.
[106] H. Gluck and W. Ziller. Existence of periodic motions of conservative sys-
tems. Princeton University Press, 1983. In: Seminar on minimal submani-
folds, E. Bombieri, ed.

334
Bibliography
[107] M. Gromov. Pseudoholomorphic curves in symplectic manifolds. Invent.
Math., 82:307–347, 1985.
[108] M. Gromov.
Partial diﬀerential relations.
Ergebnisse der Mathematik.
Springer, 1986.
[109] L. Guillon. Le th´eor`eme de translation de Brouwer: une d´emonstration sim-
pliﬁ´ee menant `a une nouvelle preuve du th´eor`eme de Poincar´e-Birkhoﬀ. 1991.
[110] M.-R. Herman. Diﬀerentiabilite optimale et contre-exemples `a la fermeture
en topologie C∞des orbites recurrentes de ﬂots Hamiltoniens.
Comptes
Rendus de l’Acad´emie des Sciences. Serie-I.-Math´ematique, 313:49–51,
1991. No. 1.
[111] M.-R. Herman.
Exemples de ﬂots Hamiltoniens dont aucune perturba-
tion en topologie C∞n’a d’orbites periodiques sur un ouvert de sur-
faces d’energies. Comptes Rendus de l’Acad´emie des Sciences. Serie-I.-Ma-
th´ematique, 312:989–994, 1991. No. 13.
[112] D. Hilbert.
¨Uber das Dirichlet’sche Prinzip.
Jhrb. der Deutschen Math.
Vereinigung, VIII, Erstes Heft:184–188, 1900.
[113] M.W. Hirsch. Diﬀerential topology. Graduate Texts in Math. 33. Springer-
Verlag, 1976.
[114] H. Hofer. Lagrangian embeddings and critical point theory. Ann. Inst. H.
Poincar´e, Anal. Non Lin´eaire, 2:407–462, 1985.
[115] H. Hofer. Ljusternik-Schnirelman theory for Lagrangian intersections. Ann.
Inst. H. Poincar´e, 5(5):465–499, 1988.
[116] H. Hofer. On the topological properties of symplectic maps. Proceedings of
the Royal Society of Edinburgh, 115 A:25–38, 1990.
[117] H. Hofer. Estimates for the energy of a symplectic map. Comm. Math. Helv.,
68:48–72, 1993.
[118] H. Hofer. Pseudoholomorphic curves in symplectisations with application to
the Weinstein conjecture in dimension three. Invent. Math., 114:515–563,
1993.
[119] H. Hofer and D. Salamon. Floer homology and Novikov rings. To appear
A. Floer Memorial Volume.
[120] H. Hofer, C. Taubes, A. Weinstein, and E. Zehnder, editors. Floer Memorial
Volume. To appear, Birkh¨auser, 1994.

Bibliography
335
[121] H. Hofer and C. Viterbo. The Weinstein conjecture in cotangent bundles
and related results. Annali Sc. Norm. Sup. Pisa, 15:411–445, 1988. Serie
IV, Fasc III.
[122] H. Hofer and C. Viterbo. The Weinstein conjecture in the presence of holo-
morphic spheres. Comm. Pure Appl. Math., 45(5):583–622, 1992.
[123] H. Hofer and E. Zehnder. A new capacity for symplectic manifolds, pages
405–428. Analysis et cetera. Academic press, 1990. Edit: P. Rabinowitz and
E. Zehnder.
[124] L. H¨ormander. The analysis of linear partial diﬀerential operators, volume
I–IV. Springer, Grundlehren Edition, 1983–1985.
[125] M.-Y. Jiang. Hofer-Zehnder symplectic capacity for two dimensional mani-
folds. Proc. Royal Soc. Edinb., 123A:945–950, 1993.
[126] R. Jost. Winkel- und Wirkungsvariable f¨ur allgemeine mechanische Systeme.
Helvetica Physica Acta, 41:965–968, 1968.
[127] W. Klingenberg. Lectures on closed geodesics. Springer, Grundlehren Math.
Wiss. 230, 1978.
[128] A.N. Kolmogorov. The general theory of dynamical systems and classical
mechanics. Proc. Int. Congress of Math. Amsterdam 1954. W.A. Benjamin,
Inc., 1967. see Appendix D in R. Abraham: Foundations of mechanics.
[129] V.V. Koslov. Calculus of variations in the large and classical mechanics.
Russian Math. Survey, 40:2:37–71, 1985.
[130] S. Kuksin.
Inﬁnite-dimensional capacities and a squeezing theorem for
Hamiltonian PDE’s. Preprint F.I.M., ETH Z¨urich (1993).
[131] A. K¨unzle. The least characteristic action as symplectic capacity. F.I.M.
report, ETH Z¨urich (1991).
[132] K. Kuperberg.
A smooth counter example to the Seifert conjecture.
To
appear in Annals of Mathematics.
[133] F. Lalonde. Energy and capacities in symplectic topology. Preprint, 1994.
[134] F. Lalonde and D. McDuﬀ. The geometry of symplectic energy. Preprint,
1993.
[135] F. Lalonde and D. McDuﬀ. Hofer’s L∞-geometry: energy and stability of
Hamiltonian ﬂows I. Preprint, 1994.
[136] F. Laudenbach and J.C. Sikorav. Persistence d’intersections avec la section
nulle au cours d’une isotopie Hamiltonienne dans un ﬁbre cotangent. Invent.
Math., 82:349–357, 1985.

336
Bibliography
[137] H.V. Lˆe and Kaoru Ono.
Symplectic ﬁxed points, Calabi invariant and
Novikov homology. Max-Planck-Institut Bonn MPI/93–27.
[138] P. Le Calvez. Sur les diﬀeomorphismes de l’anneau et du tore. Preprint,
Universit´e Paris-Sud.
[139] P. Le Calvez.
Une g´en´eralisation du th´eor`eme de Conley-Zehnder
aux hom´eomorphismes du tore de dimension deux.
Pr´epublications
Math´ematiques de l’Universit´e Paris-Nord, 93–02, 1993.
[140] P. Le Calvez. Phases g´en´eratrices discr`etes de diﬀ´eomorphismes du tore ou
de l’anneau. Preprint, Unversit´e Paris-Sud, 1991.
[141] P. Le Calvez.
Un th´eor`eme de translations pour les diﬀ´eomorphismes
du tore ayant des points ﬁxes.
Pr´epublications Universit´e de Paris-Sud,
math´ematiques, 92–85 (1992), 1991.
[142] E. Lima.
Orientability of smooth hypersurfaces and the Jordan-Brouwer
separation theorem. Expo. Math., 5:283–286, 1987.
[143] L. Lusternik and L. Schnirelman. M´ethodes topologiques dans les probl`emes
variationnels. Herman, Paris, 1934.
[144] R. Lutz. Structures de contact sur les ﬁbr´es principaux en circles de dimen-
sion 3. Ann. Inst. Fourier, 3:1–15, 1977.
[145] A.M. Lyapunov. Probl`eme g´en´eral de la stabilit´e du movement. Ann. Fac.
Sci. Toulouse, 2:203–474, 1907.
[146] R. Ma. A remark on Hofer-Zehnder symplectic capacity in M × R2n, 1992.
Preprint, Tsinghua University.
[147] J. Martinet. Formes de contact sur les vari´et´es de dimension 3. Lecture Notes
in Math., 209:142–163, 1971.
[148] W.S. Massey. Algebraic topology: an introduction. Graduate Texts in Math-
ematics 56. Springer Verlag, 1967.
[149] W.S. Massey. Homology and cohomology theory. Marcel Dekker, Incl. New
York and Basel, 1978.
[150] W.S. Massey. Singular homology theory. Graduate Texts in Mathematics
70. Springer Verlag, 1980.
[151] J. Mather. Existence of quasiperiodic orbits for twist homeomorphisms of
the annulus. Topology, 21:457–467, 1982.
[152] J. Mawhin and M. Willem. Critical point theory and Hamiltonian systems.
Springer, 1989.

Bibliography
337
[153] D. McDuﬀ.
Elliptic methods in symplectic geometry.
Bulletin AMS,
23(2):311–358, 1990.
[154] D. McDuﬀ. Symplectic manifolds with contact type boundaries. Invent.
Math., 103:651–671, 1991.
[155] D. McDuﬀand L. Polterovich. Symplectic packings and algebraic geometry.
Preprint, 1993.
[156] D. McDuﬀand D. Salamon. Introduction to symplectic topology. To appear.
[157] J. Milnor. Topology from the diﬀerentiable viewpoint. The University Press
of Virginia, Charlottesville, 1972.
[158] A.S. Mishchenko and A.T. Fomenko. Generalized Liouville method of in-
tegration of Hamiltonian systems. Funct. Anal. and its Appl., 12:113–121,
1978.
[159] J. Moser. On invariant curves of area preserving mappings of the annulus.
Nachr. Akad. Wiss. G¨ottingen, Math. Phys. Kl., pages 1–20, 1962.
[160] J. Moser. On the volume elements on a manifold. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc.,
120:286–294, 1965.
[161] J. Moser.
A rapidly convergent iteration method and non-linear partial
diﬀerential equations I and II. Ann. Scuola Norm. Sup. Pisa, 20:265–315,
499–535, 1966.
[162] J. Moser.
Stable and random motions in dynamical systems.
Princeton
University Press, 1973. In: Annals of Math. Studies, Vol. 77.
[163] J. Moser. Periodic orbits near an equilibrium and a theorem of A. Weinstein.
Comm. Pure Appl. Math., 29:727–747, 1976.
[164] J. Moser. Proof of a generalized form of a ﬁxed point theorem due to G.D.
Birkhoﬀ. Geometry and Topology, Lecture Notes in Mathematics, 597:464–
494, 1977.
[165] J. Moser. A ﬁxed point theorem in symplectic geometry. Acta Mathematica,
141:17–34, 1978.
[166] J. Moser. Integrable Hamiltonian systems and spectral theory. In Lezioni
Fermiane, Accademia nazionale dei Lincai Scuola Normale Superiore, Pisa,
1981.
[167] J. Moser and E. Zehnder. Notes on Dynamical systems. Courant Institute,
1980.

338
Bibliography
[168] N. Nekhoroshev.
Action-angle variables and their generalization.
Trans.
Mosc. Math. Soc., 26:181–198, 1972.
[169] N. Nikishin. Fixed points of diﬀeomorphisms on the two sphere that preserve
area. Funkts. Anal. i Prilozhen, 8:84–85, 1974.
[170] S.P. Novikov. Multivalued functions and functionals — an analogue of the
Morse theory. Soviet Math. Dokl., 24:222–225, 1981.
[171] D. Oﬃn.
A class of periodic orbits in classical mechanics.
J. Diﬀ. Eq.,
66:90–116, 1987.
[172] K. Ono. On the Arnold conjecture for weakly monotone symplectic mani-
folds. Preprint Max-Planck-Institut f¨ur Mathematik MPI/93–4.
[173] R.S. Palais.
Critical point theory and the minimax principle. In: Global
Analysis. Proc. AMS, XV:185–212, 1970.
[174] R.S. Palais and Terng C.-L. Critical point theory and submanifold geometry,
volume 1353. Springer Lecture Notes in Mathematics, 1988.
[175] R.S. Palais and S. Smale. A generalized Morse theory. Bull. AMS, 70:165–
171, 1964.
[176] H. Poincar´e.
Methodes nouvelle de la m´echanique c´el`este, volume 3.
Gauthier-Villars, Paris, 1899.
[177] H. Poincar´e. Sur un th´eor`eme de g´eom´etrie. Rend. Circolo Math. Palermo,
33:375–407, 1912.
[178] J. P¨oschel. Integrability of Hamiltonian systems on Cantor sets. Comm.
Pure Appl. Math., 35:653–696, 1982.
[179] C.C. Pugh and R.C. Robinson. The C1-closing lemma, including Hamilto-
nians. Erg. Th. and Dynam. Sys., 3:261–313, 1983.
[180] P. Rabinowitz.
Periodic solutions of Hamiltonian systems.
Comm. Pure
Appl. Math., 31:157–184, 1978.
[181] P. Rabinowitz. Periodic solutions of Hamiltonian systems on a prescribed
energy surface. J. Diﬀ. Equ., 33:336–352, 1979.
[182] P. Rabinowitz. Minimax methods in critical point theory with applications to
diﬀerential equations. CBMS, Regional Conf. Ser. in Math. 65. AMS, 1986.
[183] C. Robinson.
A global approximation theorem for Hamiltonian systems.
Proc. Symposium in Pure Math., XIV:233–244, 1970. Global Analysis, AMS.
[184] K.P. Rybakowski. On the homotopy index for inﬁnite-dimensional semiﬂows.
Trans. Amer. Math. Soc., 269:351–382, 1982.

Bibliography
339
[185] K.P. Rybakowski. The homotopy index and partial diﬀerential equations.
Springer, 1987.
[186] K.P. Rybakowski and E. Zehnder. A Morse equation in Conley’s index theory
for semiﬂows on metric spaces. Ergod. Th. and Dynam. Sys., 5:123–143, 1985.
[187] D. Salamon.
Connected simple system and the Conley index of isolated
invariant sets. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc., 291:1–41, 1985.
[188] D. Salamon. Morse theory, the Conley index and Floer homology. Bull.
London Math. Soc., 22:113–140, 1990.
[189] D. Salamon and E. Zehnder. KAM theory in conﬁguration space. Comm.
Math. Helvetici, 64:84–132, 1989.
[190] D. Salamon and E. Zehnder. Morse theory for periodic solutions of Hamilto-
nian systems and the Maslov index. Comm. Pure Appl. Math., 45:1303–1360,
1992.
[191] M. Schwarz. Morse homology. Progress in Mathematics, 111. Birkh¨auser,
1993.
[192] P.A. Schweitzer. Counter examples to the Seifert conjecture and opening
closed leaves of foliations. Ann. Math., 100:386–400, 1974.
[193] H. Seifert.
Periodische Bewegungen mechanischer Systeme.
Math. Zeit.,
51:197–216, 1948.
[194] K.F. Siburg. Symplectic capacities in two dimensions. manuscripta math.,
78:149–163, 1993.
[195] C.L. Siegel. ¨uber die Existenz einer Normalform analytischer Hamiltonischer
Diﬀerentialgleichungen in der N¨ahe einer Gleichgewichtsl¨osung. Math. Ann.,
128:144–170, 1954.
[196] C.L. Siegel and J. Moser.
Lectures on Celestial Mechanics.
Springer
Grundlehren, Band 187, 1971.
[197] J.-C. Sikorav.
Probl`emes d’intersections et de points ﬁxes en g´eom´etrie
Hamiltonienne. Comm. Math. Helv., 62:62–73, 1987.
[198] J.-C. Sikorav. Syst`emes Hamiltoniens et topologie symplectique. Diparti-
mento di Matematica dell’ Universit`a di Pisa, 1990. ETS, EDITRICE PISA.
[199] J.-C. Sikorav.
Homologie associ´ee `a une fonctionelle (d’apr`es A. Floer).
S´eminaire Bourbaki Exp. 730–744 Ast´erisque, 201–202–203:115–143, 1991.
[200] C.P. Simon. A bound for the ﬁxed point index of an area preserving map
with applications in mechanics. Invent. Math., 26:187–200, 1974.

340
Bibliography
[201] S. Smale. An inﬁnite dimensional version of Sard’s theorem. Amer. J. Math.,
87:861–866, 1965.
[202] E. Spanier.
Cohomology theory for general spaces.
Ann. of Math. (2),
49:407–427, 1948.
[203] E. Spanier. Algebraic topology. Springer Verlag, New York, 1966.
[204] E. Spanier. Tautness for Alexander-Spanier cohomology. Paciﬁc Journal of
Mathematics, (75) 2:561–563, 1978.
[205] E.M. Stein. Singular integrals and diﬀerentiability properties of functions.
Princeton University Press, 1970.
[206] A. Stephen. On homeomorphisms of the plane which have no ﬁxed points.
Abh. Math. Seminar Univ. Hamburg, 30:61–74, 1967.
[207] M. Struwe. Existence of periodic solutions of Hamiltonian systems on almost
every energy surface. Bol. Soc. Bras. Mat., 20:49–58, 1990.
[208] M. Struwe. Variational methods. Springer, 1990.
[209] R. Switzer. Algebraic topology — homotopy and homology. Grundlehren,
212. Springer Verlag, Berlin, 1975.
[210] C.H. Taubes. Self-dual Yang-Mills connections on non-self-dual 4-manifolds.
J. Diﬀ. Geom., 17:139–170, 1982.
[211] C.H. Taubes. A framework for Morse theory for the Yang-Mills functionals.
Preprint Harvard University, 1986.
[212] L. Traynor. Symplectic homology via generating functions. Preprint Stanford
University, 1993.
[213] L. Traynor. Symplectic packing constructions. Preprint, 1993.
[214] I. Ustilovsky. Conjugate points on geodesics of Hofer’s metric. Preprint,
1993.
[215] I.N. Vekua.
Verallgemeinerte analytische Funktionen.
Akademie-Verlag,
Berlin, 1963.
[216] J. Vick. Homology theory, an introduction to algebraic topology. Academic
Press, 1973.
[217] C. Viterbo.
A proof of the Weinstein conjecture in R2n.
Ann. Inst. H.
Poincar´e, Anal. non lin´eaire, 4:337–357, 1987.
[218] C. Viterbo. Symplectic topology as the geometry of generating functions.
Math. Annalen, 292:685–710, 1992.

Bibliography
341
[219] F. Warner. Foundations of diﬀerentiable manifolds and Lie groups. Scott,
Foresman and Company, 1971.
[220] K. Weierstrass. Mathematische Werke. 1858. Berlin, Band I: 233–246, Band
II: 19–44, Nachtrag: 139–148.
[221] A. Weinstein. Contact surgery and symplectic handlebodies. Hokkaido Math.
Journal 20 (1990) 241–251.
[222] A. Weinstein.
Lagrangian submanifolds and Hamiltonian systems.
Ann.
Math., 98:377–410, 1973.
[223] A. Weinstein. Normal modes for nonlinear Hamiltonian systems. Invent.
Math., 20:47–57, 1973.
[224] A. Weinstein. Lectures on symplectic manifolds, volume 29 of CBMS, Reg.
Conf. Series in Math. AMS, 1977.
[225] A. Weinstein. Periodic orbits for convex Hamiltonian systems. Ann. Math.,
108:507–518, 1978.
[226] A. Weinstein. On the hypothesis of Rabinowitz’s periodic orbit theorems.
J. Diﬀ. Equ., 33:353–358, 1979.
[227] A. Weinstein. On extending the Conley-Zehnder ﬁxed point theorem to other
manifolds. Proc. Sympos. Pure Math., 45, part 2:541–544, 1986. AMS.
[228] F.W. Wilson. On the minimal sets of nonsingular vector ﬁelds. Ann. Math.,
84:529–536, 1966.
[229] J.C. Yoccoz. Travaux de Herman sur les tores invariants. Bourbaki Exp.
745–579, Ast´erisque, 206:311–345, 1992.
[230] E. Zehnder. Homoclinic points near elliptic ﬁxed points. Comm. Pure Appl.
Math., 26:131–182, 1973.
[231] E. Zehnder. Remarks on periodic solutions on hypersurfaces. NATO ASI
Series, Series C, In: Periodic Solutions of Hamiltonian Systems and Related
Topics,(209):267–279, 1987.
[232] E. Zeidler. Nonlinear functional analysis and its applications I. Springer-
Verlag, New York Inc., 1986.

