A Theory of 
Practical Reason
Julian Nida-Rümelin

A Theory of Practical Reason
“A Theory of Practical Reason lays out a comprehensive vision that speaks to peren­
nial problems in practical philosophy. Nida-Rümelin defends a version of what the 
ancients call the unity of reason. There is no deep distinction between moral and 
epistemic norms. Emotions are located in an agent’s “reason,” the state of mind 
relevant to deliberation and rational action. This research program is of great inter­
est to theorists from a wide range of traditions and disciplines.”
—Katja Maria Vogt, Professor of Philosophy at Columbia University
“Julian Nida-Ruemelin is in the very top rank of contemporary German philoso­
phers. This volume is the first extensive presentation in English of his conception 
of practical reason, or rationality in action. It deserves a place on the bookshelf of 
any philosopher interested in practical rationality, alongside the works of such 
authors as T.M. Scanlon and John Skorupski. Nida-Ruemelin’s approach is a form 
of ‘reasons realism’ in that it begins with the assumption that individuals can have 
good reason to do something apart from their current beliefs and preferences. But 
he then argues that what counts as a good reason is not independent of an indi­
vidual’s overall belief- and preference-structure and that of the larger collectivities 
with which the individual interacts. His model is thus a distinctive combination of 
realism and coherentism about reasons.”
—Paul Guyer, Jonathan Nelson Professor of Philosophy and 
Humanities, Brown University, USA
“A Theory of Practical Reason is a major contribution to philosophy, manifesting 
to the full the author’s immense scholarship in philosophy, economics and decision 
theory.”
—David Gordon, Mises Institute

Julian Nida-Rümelin
A Theory of Practical 
Reason

ISBN 978-3-031-17318-9        ISBN 978-3-031-17319-6  (eBook)
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-17319-6
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer 
Nature Switzerland AG 2023
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are solely and exclusively licensed by the 
Publisher, whether the whole or part of the material is concerned, specifically the rights of 
reprinting, reuse of illustrations, recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microfilms or in 
any other physical way, and transmission or information storage and retrieval, electronic 
adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dissimilar methodology now known or 
hereafter developed.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this 
publication does not imply, even in the absence of a specific statement, that such names are 
exempt from the relevant protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
The publisher, the authors, and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information 
in this book are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the 
publisher nor the authors or the editors give a warranty, expressed or implied, with respect to 
the material contained herein or for any errors or omissions that may have been made. The 
publisher remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.
This Palgrave Macmillan imprint is published by the registered company Springer Nature 
Switzerland AG.
The registered company address is: Gewerbestrasse 11, 6330 Cham, Switzerland
Julian Nida-Rümelin
Faculty of Philosophy
Ludwig-Maximilians Universität
Munich, Germany

One cannot say that others have no reason at all. If that were true, 
one need not talk to each other at all. Humans do not talk to bricks.
– The artist Ai Weiwei, when asked about his interaction 
with Chinese security forces

vii
In this book, I present a theory of practical reason. It can be rational to do 
something because it is part of a structure of action for which there are 
good reasons. The theory is based on our lifeworld practice of giving and 
taking reasons—it is a reasons’ account of rationality. Hence the expression 
structural rationality.
The theory of rationality (decision and game theory, collective 
choice) has developed into an independent discipline, but one that 
runs counter to the traditional faculties. Its main results have been 
elaborated by mathematicians (such as Frank P. Ramsey or John von 
Neumann), philosophers (such as Richard Jeffrey or Alan Gibbard), 
statisticians (such as Leonard Savage or Robert Luce), and economists 
(such as Kenneth Arrow or Amartya Sen); they form the background of 
some of the central arguments of this book, especially in Chap. 3, even 
though I rarely make this explicit. Indeed, it was the phenomenon of 
rational cooperation that motivated my change to a structural point of 
view. Cooperation is a paradigmatic example of the theory of structural 
rationality.
1
­
1 Handed in 1983 at the Faculty of Philosophy of the University of Munich, published in 
1987 and again in 2005 (D&E, see list of sigla at the end of the book, Appendix).
Preface

viii 
PREFACE
2
3
4
5
6
­
2 Braithwaite, Richard B. 2009. Theory of Games as a Tool for the Moral Philosopher. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
3 Kritik des Konsequentialismus (KdK), handed in 1988 at the Faculty of Philosophy of the 
University of Munich, published in 1993.
4 For a short exposition of the concept, see HandBook.
5 The Proceedings were published in 1997 by Percy Lehning and Albert Weale. In 
Citizenship, Democracy and Justice in the New Europe, 33–48. London and New  York: 
Routledge.
6 This paper was published in the Proceedings edited by David Gauthier and Robert 
Sugden. 1993. Rationality, Justice and the Social Contract, 53–74. New York et al.: Harvester. 
I compare cooperative rationality in prisoner’s dilemma situations with the dispositional 
structure of human action as presented by Gauthier.

ix
  PREFACE 
7
­
5
4
8
9
­
7 Sometime later, Thomas Scanlon sent me the manuscript of his book What We Owe to 
Each Other and I still regret that in the following months I did not find the time to read and 
comment on it as the author probably expected. In 2004 Scanlon accepted my invitation to 
Berlin as keynote speaker at a conference, Philosophy Meets Politics, in Berlin. The focus of the 
forum, however, was on the connection between political philosophy and political practice, 
so we did not again exchange views on philosophical questions of rationality. However, the 
differences between my conception of structural rationality (dating back to the 1990s; cf. 
StructR) and his, which he introduced in 2007, are obvious: mine is Ramsey-compatible (see 
the Appendix), his is not; his is instrumental, mine is not. We share some version of “realism 
about reasons,” but the two versions differ considerably, as becomes clear in the last two 
chapters of this book. Cf. Scanlon, Thomas. 1998. What We Owe to Each Other. Cambridge/
Mass.: Belknap Press; id. 2014. Being Realistic About Reasons. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press; id. 2007. Structural Irrationality. In Common Minds: Themes from the Philosophy of 
Philip Pettit, ed. Geoffrey Brennan, Robert Goodin, Frank Jackson and Michael Smith, 
84-103. Oxford: Clarendon Press, and id. 2005. Political Equality. Philosophy Meets Politics 
8, ed. Julian Nida-Rümelin and Wolfgang Thierse. Essen: Klartext; see also Gutwald, Rebecca 
and Niina Zuber. 2018. The Meaning(s) of Structural Rationality. ProtoSociology 35: 
314–321, and HandBook.
8 Jürgen Habermas speaks of being affected by reasons, which is more specific, since this is 
where the affective/motive dimension comes into play. I try to use a terminology that over­
comes the traditional dichotomies between reason and emotion as well as theoretical and 
practical reason.
9 Cf. HumR and HumB.

x 
Preface
­
10
­
­
11
12
­
Munich, Germany
Julian Nida-Rümelin
10 Prominent examples are Richard Hare (1981. Moral Thinking: Its Levels, Method, and 
Point. Oxford: Oxford University Press) and Peter Singer (2011. Practical Ethics. New York: 
Cambridge University Press).
11 StructR.
12 AngE.

xi
I thank my family—Nathalie, Juliette, Colette, and Noel—for being 
patient with me and allowing me to work even during holidays. I 
particularly thank my wife for our special form of cooperation which 
developed over the years.
For many philosophical discussions important to this book, I would like 
to thank the students of my courses, my colleagues at various faculties, my 
critics, and numerous participants from colloquia, conferences, and lectures.
I thank the University of Turin—especially Maurizio Ferraris and 
Tiziana Andina—which gave me the opportunity to present my theory of 
practical reason during the spring term of 2019 and to discuss it with 
advanced students and faculty as visiting scientist of Labont (laboratorio 
ontologico). I am grateful for the good working atmosphere at the 
Parmenides Foundation and the collaboration with Albrecht von Müller, 
its founder.
A special thank goes to Christian Zott for dedicating a grant to my chair 
for translations into English and to Nora Angleys, Adriano Mannino, Pia 
Morar, Samuel Pedziwiatr, and Martin Rechenauer for delivering or 
commenting first drafts of the English version; Elias Unger and Sarah 
Köglsperger for fine-tuning the Index and proofreading. But I bear the 
sole responsibility for the final version of the manuscript, including all 
remaining mistakes. Two anonymous reviewers of Palgrave Macmillan 
made important proposals that helped to improve the book. Christoph 
Schirmer from De Gruyter and Phil Getz from Palgrave Macmillan 
accompanied the project from the beginning. I am grateful for their 
engagement.
Acknowledgments

xii 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The German book version Eine Theorie praktischer Vernunft (De 
Gruyter) has more than 500 pages; this book has only half of it. It leaves 
out part of the broader contexts in which my philosophy is situated, but it 
keeps the essential argumentations unchanged.
This Theory of Practical Reason owes a lot to rational choice theory, with 
its three branches decision theory, game theory, and collective choice, even if 
this might not always be apparent, as well as to Kurt Baier, Stephen 
Toulmin, Karl Popper, Elisabeth Anscombe, Peter Strawson, Richard 
Hare, John Rawls, Robert Nozick, Bernard Williams, Christine Korsgaard, 
Onora O’Neill, Robert Brandom, and Jürgen Habermas.
I learned most, also about the limits of philosophy, from Aristotle and 
Kant, Dewey and Wittgenstein, from STOA and ZEN—gratitude, how­
ever, would be the wrong expression here.

xiii
Contents
	1	 Introduction and Overview
    1
	2	 Practical Philosophy
    7
	2.1	
Philosophy as Theory of Reason
    7
	2.2	
Practical Coherence
  11
	2.3	
What Kind of Theory?
  14
	3	 Structural Rationality
  15
	3.1	
Practical Reason and Rational Choice
  15
	3.2	
Instrumental Rationality
  18
	3.3	
Paradoxa of Cooperation
  23
	3.4	
The Structural Interpretation of Cooperative Decisions
  31
	3.5	
Rational Cooperation
  35
	3.6	
Collective Intentionality
  41
	4	 Structural Agency
  45
	4.1	
Prohairesis
  45
	4.2	
The Incoherence of Decision Theory
  47
	4.3	
Collective Irrationality
  52
	4.4	
Structural Intentions
  54
	4.5	
The Structural Concept of Action
  57
	4.6	
Structural Action and Causality
  61
	4.7	
Freedom and Determination in Structural Practice
  65

xiv 
Contents
	4.8	
The Role of Chance
  67
	4.9	
Token and Type
  72
	4.10	
Diachronic Structure
  77
	4.11	
Interpersonal Structure
  80
	5	 The Phenomenology of Structural Rationality
  85
	5.1	
Structural Practice
  85
	5.2	
Self-Control
  88
	5.3	
Self-Restraint
  93
	5.4	
Duties to Oneself
  95
	5.5	
Honesty
  99
	5.6	
Politeness
102
	5.7	
Appropriateness
105
	5.8	
Fairness
109
	5.9	
Equality
115
	5.10	
Relativity
121
	5.11	
Communication
127
	5.12	
Rules
132
	6	 Morality and Rationality
137
	6.1	
Critique of Consequentialism
137
	6.2	
Impartiality
140
	6.3	
Individuality
143
	6.4	
Individual Rights
146
	6.5	
Integrity
151
	6.6	
Irreducible Plurality
153
	6.7	
Quietism
157
	6.8	
Fragmentation
160
	6.9	
Moral Dilemmas
165
	6.10	
Rationality and Morality
173
	7	 The Efficacy of Reasons
177
	7.1	
Reasons
177
	7.2	
Normativity
179
	7.3	
Social Facts
183
	7.4	
Objectivity
187
	7.5	
Non-Algorithmicity
191

xv
  Contents 
	7.6	
Theoretical and Practical Reasons
196
	7.7	
Autonomy
201
	7.8	
Intertemporal and Interpersonal Coherence
204
	7.9	
Normative Beliefs
206
	7.10	
Emotive Attitudes
212
	8	 Metaphysical Aspects
217
	8.1	
Metaphysics
217
	8.2	
Freedom
218
	8.3	
Responsibility
225
	8.4	
Authorship
232
	8.5	
The Status of Reasons
236
Appendix
245
List of Sigla: Publications by the Author
263
Bibliography
265
Index
273

1
CHAPTER 1
Introduction and Overview
1
­
2
­
A philosophical theory that has this combination of characteristics seems 
implausible from the start. I cannot convince those who decide to stop 
reading at this point. To those who are more patient, however, I promise 
the following: You will see that the individual parts of the argument, as 
improbable as this may seem initially, fit well: objectivism and realism with 
immanentism and coherentism, anti-rationalism with trust in reason.
1 Using the German language in philosophical discourse sometimes allows to be more 
concise, since there exist different German terms for different concepts which do not exist in 
English. But this is also true the other way round: “reason,” “reasoning,” and “reasons” is a 
good example. In English the close connection between these three concepts is terminologi­
cally obvious, this is not the case in German: Between “Vernunft,” “abwägen (deliberieren),” 
and “Gründe” there is no terminological connection. That, what seems obvious in English, 
must be argued for in German.
2 KdK and “Why consequentialism fails” in StructR, part II.
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature 
Switzerland AG 2023
J. Nida-Rümelin, A Theory of Practical Reason, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-17319-6_1

2
3
­
4
First 
Building 
Block: 
Normative, 
Non-naturalistic 
Realism 
of 
Practical Reasons
Reasons, theoretical reasons for beliefs, practical reasons for actions, and 
emotive reasons for attitudes are normative, they speak in favor of (the 
belief, the action, the emotive attitude). Reasons are therefore not 
empirical, but normative. Reasons do not belong to the world of physics 
or psychology.
A person may have a good reason to do something without realizing it. 
One might say of a person that it is a (normative) fact that she ought to do 
that, even if she doesn’t realize that she ought to do it. Reasons are 
objective insofar as their existence is logically independent of the subjective 
preferences (more generally: prohairetic attitudes) of the acting person. 
This logical independence does not imply that her prohairetic attitudes 
(preferences, desires, hopes, and fears) are irrelevant for the reasons she 
has for doing something. For example, she has a good—prima facie—
reason to do x if x helps to avoid pain she would suffer otherwise.
Analogously: It is possible that I hold a belief without having good 
reasons for that belief. This belief then would be unjustified.
Or: Person A despises person B without being able to give a good rea­
son for this. An explanation of it might be, that this emotive attitude is 
unfounded; consequently, we can say that this is merely a case of 
ressentiment. If, however, B has behaved poorly, then A may have a good 
(emotive) reason for his contempt.
Reasons are not epistemic; they are not part of the epistemic state of an 
individual. Nor are reasons prohairetical, they are not part of the 
preferential state of an individual. Reasons are not emotional; they are not 
3 Cf. Nida-Rümelin, Julian. 2019. The Reasons Account of Free Will: A Compatibilist-­
Libertarian Hybrid. Archives for the Philosophy of Law and Social Philosophy 105: 3–10.
4 Wittgenstein, Ludwig. 1969. On Certainty. Oxford: Blackwell: § 248.
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

3
part of the emotional state of an individual. Reasons are objective. 
“Subjective” reasons refer to what a person regards as reasons. A subjective 
reason is not necessarily a reason, just as a subjective fact is not necessarily 
a fact. It would be better to speak of “opinions” or “motives” rather than 
to speak of “subjective facts” or “subjective reasons.”
Objective reasons play a causal role in that they can be recognized by 
rational beings, that is, by individuals who possess an ability to reason, and 
are affected by reasons they adopt.
Although the objects to which reasons refer can be differentiated 
according to the three categories, the form of deliberating theoretical, 
practical, and emotive reasons remains the same: We try to determine what 
speaks in favor of x, regardless of the category of objects to which x 
belongs: beliefs, actions, or emotive attitudes.
5
Second Building Block: Unity of Reason
Reasons form a complex whole. Having a pro tanto reason for x implies 
that there are no reasons that invalidate it. The description of reasons must 
therefore at least implicitly make use of ceteris paribus assumptions or of 
small worlds. We are familiar with this method from physics where it has 
proven itself time and again: Every explanation is based on a high degree 
of simplification; it rests on blending out determinants that must be 
assumed irrelevant in the specific case for the explanation in question to be 
successful.
6
­
5 For reasons, which we discuss later in the book, we do not discriminate between “ratio­
nal” and “reasonable,” “rationality” and “reason”; see Sect. 3.1.
6 This is presented particularly clearly by Richard Jeffrey. Cf. Jeffrey, Richard. 1990. The 
Logic of Decision. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
1  INTRODUCTION AND OVERVIEW 

4
­
The unity of reason does not reveal itself only in the mutual conditional­
ity of beliefs, actions, and emotive attitudes, but above all in the individual’s 
lifeform as a whole. Feelings of regret or remorse indicate incoherences. A 
coherent lifeform is characterized by the fact that these feelings rarely occur. 
Of course, it may turn out that a decision based on good reasons was unfa­
vorable or even disastrous, because circumstances occurred which were jus­
tifiably considered improbable. In this case, however, remorse would be an 
unjustified emotive attitude, because what qualifies as a good reason, that 
is, a reason that speaks for or against a certain decision, is dependent on the 
epistemic conditions at the time of decision.
The theory of practical reason developed here follows a specific heuris­
tic, that of the unity of ought: there are no area-specific rationalities, there 
is no economic vs. social vs. moral vs. technical and so on rationality, there 
is instead a multitude of reasons that are relevant to a different degree in 
different areas, but in the end, the practice of a person, of a society or of a 
collective must be reasonable as a whole. No one can be broken up into 
functionalities or sociological roles, rather, every person must integrate 
different normative aspects such that their practice is coherent in its 
entirety. Even the rationalities concerning certain areas, as postulated by 
scientific disciplines, focus at best on specific aspects of rational judgment, 
rational practice, or rational emotive attitudes. These specific aspects and 
criteria are often condensed into a rationality paradigm that claims to have 
grasped rationality as such. It would be an interesting project of interdis­
ciplinary comparative philosophy of science to systematize and integrate 
this diversity where possible. We will make our contribution to this project 
by occasionally looking at behavioral economics and the standard model 
of economic rationality.
Third Building Block: Cooperation
7
7 Cf. Appendix, Prisoner’s Dilemma.
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

5
Fourth Building Block: Diachronic Coherence
Agents who optimize their momentary inclinations and desires, including 
those that are directed toward the future, would disintegrate into 
incoherent, temporally disparate individual agents. Reasonable practice, in 
contrast, is characterized by coherence across different points in time. 
Although desires change over time, persons are able to structurally embed 
the expected changes of their prohairetic state into a coherent practice. 
The person then chooses the action regarding a diachronic structure of 
agency she desires. This does not mean that the desired diachronic 
structure determines the respective action, usually, there is a wide margin 
of under-determinedness. Diachronic coherence is another paradigmatic 
example of structural rationality.
Fifth Building Block: Ramsey Coherence
The traditional interpretation of the utility theorem of John von Neumann 
and Oskar Morgenstern, which had already been anticipated many years 
earlier by the mathematician and philosopher Frank P.  Ramsey, is 
consequentialist: it is assumed, at least when applied in economics, that 
the postulates of the utility theorem are fulfilled by rational agents because 
they want to maximize their utility, be that in terms of individual well-
being or preference fulfillment. However, none of the postulates presup­
poses a self-oriented optimization as a motive for action. Every type of 
preferences, even exclusively morally motivated ones, should be coherent. 
Ramsey compatibility, that is, the fulfillment of the postulates of the utility 
theorem by rational agents, should be interpreted coherentistically, that is, 
as a requirement for coherent preferences, regardless of how these are 
individually motivated. The concept of structural rationality is compatible 
with this version of a coherence theory of rationality and since structural 
1  INTRODUCTION AND OVERVIEW 

6
rationality is incompatible with pointwise consequentialist optimization, 
the theory of practical reason developed here offers a coherentist alterna­
tive to consequentialist theories of rationality.
Sixth Building Block: Suspending the Dichotomy of Instrumental and 
Substantive Rationality
The opposition of instrumental and substantive conceptions of rationality 
dissolves in this theory of practical reason. Instrumental conceptions of 
practical rationality understand actions as a means to achieve the goals of 
the acting individual. Substantive conceptions of rationality are traditionally 
understood to determine the goals. Instrumental conceptions seem to 
recognize individual freedom. Substantial theories seem to threaten it. 
The theory of structural rationality surmounts this opposition: We seek to 
determine what is reasonable (for us). We weigh them against each other 
to determine which one we should reasonably pursue. The freedom of 
human persons is expressed in the fact that they—as authors of their life—
are able to, and responsible for, practical deliberations. It is the adequate 
integration of good reasons that constitutes rational action.
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

7
CHAPTER 2
Practical Philosophy
2.1    Philosophy as Theory of Reason
I propose that we understand philosophy as the clarification of human 
reason. Philosophical activity aims at clarifying what qualifies beliefs and 
actions as reasonable. After its most successful sub-disciplines have become 
independent scientific endeavors, most of them empirical disciplines like 
physics or sociology, some a priori disciplines like formal logics and meta-­
mathematics, some normative disciplines like medical ethics, contempo­
rary philosophy is restricted to the theory of reason.
Philosophy, as theory of reason, is not a rationalist project, which 
deduces knowledge from axioms, nor a constructivist project, which 
“constructs” meaning and normativity, nor a search for certainty, which 
gives an answer to global skepticism. Instead, the theory of reason aligns 
with our lifeworld beliefs, which represent the theory’s inescapable justi­
ficatory benchmarks. This does not, however, make philosophy an uncriti­
cal, merely reconstructive project. Systematization and conceptual analysis 
of our beliefs and practices, debating the criteria and norms guiding these 
beliefs and practices is not l’art pour l’art, not a thought experiment only 
relevant for those working in philosophy and academia. It is an attempt 
for greater clarity and coherence, motivated by the observation of confu­
sion and inconsistencies. We should harness methodical doubt as one 
of philosophy’s guiding principles to identify common elements in our 
obvious misconceptions and wrong decisions, which should culminate in 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature 
Switzerland AG 2023
J. Nida-Rümelin, A Theory of Practical Reason, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-17319-6_2

8
a comprehensive fallibilistic account. We should acknowledge that all our 
beliefs and practices are potentially misguided. To be clear: I do not argue 
for a global skepticism that questions everything and thereby destroys that 
which must remain the touchstone for philosophical debate. Doubt must 
remain local for being reasonable.
Philosophy as theory of reason aims at continuity with lifeworld dis­
courses via which philosophy again exerts influence on our lifeform. It is 
continuous with the methods of the natural and the social sciences; it is 
not an alternative form of thinking. It does not oppose the methods and 
results of scientific disciplines, instead, it should contribute to merging 
them into a coherent worldview.
Since most of philosophy’s former sub-disciplines have developed into 
independent sciences such as physics, psychology, social sciences, or 
humanities, modern philosophy lacks the expertise for empirically oriented 
research programs, despite recent anti-analytical trends such as experimen­
tal philosophy. However, a merely aprioristic practical philosophy would 
remain stuck in postulates and their logical deductions, that is, remain 
attached to the rationalist program and thus forfeit every justificatory 
benchmark. In fact, many utilitarian and Kantian theories in contemporary 
ethics remain faithful to this rationalist program. The alternative of empiri­
cal ethics, the mere description of behavior, values, and judgments, would, 
however, make practical philosophy a part of social science and thereby 
strip it of its normative content.
What remains is a practical philosophy that ties in with and systematizes 
our shared practice of normative judgment. It derives its normative con­
tent from the reasons we give to justify our normative beliefs, actions, and 
emotive attitudes. Shared reasons, which are deemed indisputable, serve as 
a—of course always provisional—justificatory benchmark. We review and 
assess controversial normative beliefs and practices with reference to what, 
between us, are undisputed beliefs and practices.
The normative content of philosophical theory is not constructed by 
philosophy, but rather instilled, as it were, into philosophy by lifeworld 
communication practices. Philosophy does not stand outside our life­
world, but rather is continuous with it. It elucidates the practice of giving 
and taking reasons, that is, reasons for beliefs (theoretical reason/theoreti­
cal philosophy) and reasons for actions (practical reason/practical philoso­
phy). And if the reasoning and considerations in this book are not 
completely misguided, the intimate connection of these two realms is 
what guarantees the unity of philosophy as theory of reason.
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

9
It is confusing, however, that this practice, which we are all remarkably 
familiar with since it is the practice of our lifeworld, raises such serious 
problems regarding its explication. How can it be that there is such a 
broad spectrum of mutually incompatible philosophical concepts of rea­
son? We can explain this phenomenon with the rationalistic misconception 
about philosophy that emerged in the early modern era. It purports that 
philosophy alone is capable to generate true, unquestionable knowledge 
which exceeds mere belief. It is this misconception that paved the way for 
different philosophical theories of reason that all lack a justificatory bench­
mark, that is, a standard that would ensure convergence of theories and 
prevent theoretical overshooting. Only a philosophy that frees itself from 
its splendid isolation acknowledges the shared practices of giving and tak­
ing reasons and aims for continuity with these practices can prevent arbi­
trary philosophical theory construction on reason. Philosophy as I 
understand it is a mediator between science and lifeworld: It corrects the 
ideological exaggeration of successful scientific research programs, revises 
scientific conceptual frameworks, and aims for coherence between our 
worldviews and scientific findings. In this sense, it reclaims the role of a 
mother discipline and integrates scientific terminologies, paradigms, and 
findings into the everyday practice of reason.
Philosophy understood as a theory of reason is not an empirical disci­
pline; it does not describe how people deliberate; it is itself a form of 
deliberation. Philosophy is therefore neither an annex to the psychology of 
belief-formation nor an annex to physics, neurophysiology, or sociology. 
Science is a collection of different forms of reasoning. There are also dif­
ferent forms of lifeworld reasoning. Philosophy reflects on these uses of 
reasons, and on its own use of reasons as meta-philosophy.
It seems adequate to describe this epistemic situation as a continuum. 
In this continuum, the various areas of deliberation form an interdepen­
dent network: All disciplines are, in whatever intricate ways, intertwined 
and together they form a more or less coherent network. The idea of delib­
erative practices disintegrating into separate parts, as is sometimes sug­
gested by Wittgenstein’s language game metaphor and postmodern 
conceptions of our epistemic situation, is misguided. Our entire delibera­
tive practice ultimately forms one entity and philosophy is merely one little 
part of that practice. Philosophy does cover particularly fundamental and 
general aspects of that practice, but it is not separated from it. There is a 
continuum between philosophy, sciences, and lifeworld; the epistemic net­
work is not a collection of independent parts.
2  PRACTICAL PHILOSOPHY 

10
The deliberative practice itself cannot be transformed in processes that 
can be described by the means of physics and neurophysiology, epistemic 
unity is not brought about by sensory stimuli and their causal effects, it is 
created by the normativity and objectivity of good reasons. Not causes, 
but reasons are what binds our deliberative practice together. Likewise, it 
is not the rules of our linguistic behavior—disintegrating into different 
languages and lifeforms—that determine what is reasonable. It is the gen­
eral human ability to jointly direct our attention to objects of common 
interest, to develop a shared, cooperative practice in handling these 
objects, and to coordinate this practice in accordance with good reasons. 
Humans, having this ability to participate in the normativity and objectiv­
ity of good reasons, cannot be understood as stimulus-response mecha­
nisms or as optimizing homines oeconomici. They develop the ability to 
distance themselves from their own self-interest and egocentric perspec­
tive, and, at least to some extent, grasp what is justified by good reasons.
The logical realm of objectively good reasons impacts the mental and 
the physical world through our ability to deliberate and by affecting our 
beliefs, actions, and emotive attitudes. Human reason is the capacity for 
deliberation and the willingness to be influenced by its results.
1
­
Change always occurs within the large overall web of a discursive life­
form endowed with reasons, regardless of what the object of change may 
be, or what parts of this web are to be withdrawn. Change remains always 
embedded in our lifeworld, or else it becomes irrational. The assumptions 
established at different points of argumentation refer implicitly to 
1 Cf. Scanlon (2014).
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

11
uncountably many other assumptions, presuppositions, and implications, 
which are all interlinked inferentially and thus form a web of explicit and 
implicit beliefs. Every single part of this web is fallible, including its struc­
tural traits, for they can be questioned under certain conditions. But the 
web as a whole cannot be left, global skepticism is not possible. We remain 
embedded in the web that constitutes our lifeform with all its descriptive, 
prescriptive, inferential, and presuppositional traits. The Kantian invari­
ances of space and time have been called into question by modern physics, 
but this could not affect our lifeworld knowledge. There is no synthetic a 
priori, there are only gradual differences in epistemic robustness. Some 
things can only be questioned when many other things have already been 
questioned; the development of modern physics is an example of this. But 
the revolutions in the sciences occur at the periphery of our shared life­
form. That is to say, the center of our lifeform remains unaffected. There 
are no epistemic revolutions at the center. They only occur in the periph­
ery of our lifeform. Scientism seeks to make the periphery the center which 
is why it must fail. The robust realism of our lifeworld is not an ontological 
postulate, but a characteristic of the epistemic system in which we operate.
2.2    Practical Coherence
Our actions are determined by reasons. We decide based on a judgment or 
statement or pro-attitude, that, what the Stoics called synkatathesis: it con­
stitutes agency and discriminates agency from mere behavior. The transi­
tion from desires to actions is mediated by an element of rationality. A 
completely irrational action is inconceivable: We would not be able to 
understand it as such, and we would classify it as a reflex or an expression 
of some behavioral disposition. “Responsibility,” “rationality,” and 
“action” form a triad of concepts that cannot be resolved.
There is an obvious reductio ad absurdum for a simple dichotomous 
concept of rationality: every action would be rational, and if a behavioral 
component is considered irrational, then it is not an action, and the agent 
would be relieved of any responsibility. A gradualist and coherentist con­
ception of rationality escapes this reductio. There are degrees of practical 
rationality and degrees of responsibility. Our behavior is controlled to 
varying degrees, although it is guided by the agent’s synkatathesis, which 
is based on the evaluation of our own desires, hopes, and fears.
The a posteriori character of the theory of reason excludes a certain 
form of coherentism. Theories are usually called coherentist, when they 
2  PRACTICAL PHILOSOPHY 

12
make coherence the criterion of truth: a belief is true when it is perfectly 
coherent with other beliefs. Put differently: a proposition is true if and 
only if it is part of an ideally coherent system of propositions. If there were 
several systems of propositions, each of which were ideally coherent, this 
coherentist definition of truth would lead to the paradoxical conclusion 
that contradictory propositions could be equally true. Since this contra­
dicts any reasonable understanding of truth (even though such “pluralis­
tic” concepts of truth are common in postmodern discourses), this form 
of coherentism eradicates itself. Only with the bold additional assumption 
that there is only one ideally coherent system of propositions, is it possible 
to retain a certain initial plausibility.
But even if one abandons coherence as a theory of truth and moves on 
to coherence as a theory of justification, there is a danger of apriorism. 
Whoever tries to find a principle of all justification via a concept of coher­
ence is already following this wrong idea of an a priori. There is no con­
cept of coherence beyond all practices of justification. What and how 
things cohere, what types of reasons lead to what conflicts of beliefs, is 
revealed in the respective practices of justification and not outside these 
practices. Coherence is merely a regulatory idea that guides our 
deliberations.
­
­
2
­
Coherence is not much more than a metaphor for some kind of inter­
relation between different propositional attitudes. Likewise, system is a 
metaphor for there being something like a structure, that there is some­
thing more fundamental and less fundamental, that there are inferential 
relations between these elements. Those who emphasize the character of 
2 Cf. Appendix, Ramsey Compatibility.
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

13
the system tend to overstretch this metaphor and to postulate a founda­
tion that supports the superstructure in one way or another: a fundamen­
tum inconcussum, as it was called in the Middle Ages. The coherence 
metaphor, however, runs the risk of considering the different elements as 
equal, as denying asymmetrical supportive relations. It thus runs the risk 
of losing sight of the fact that the gradient of subjective certainty is what 
makes justification possible in the first place.
Justifications begin and end with beliefs. Justifications aim at making 
the uncertain more certain or at verifying its falseness by drawing on things 
that are certain, or things that appear certain. In this sense, justifications 
are always immanent, they remain in the epistemic system, they do not 
have an external starting point.
When beliefs are incompatible, when they directly contradict each 
other, we feel compelled to modify our beliefs such that this incoherence 
disappears. Not because we have chosen to be coherentists, but rather 
because this is our practice of justification. When people shrug off contra­
dictions in their statements, then we no longer understand them, we no 
longer know with whom we are dealing. If someone noticeably does not 
try to present his beliefs coherently, then this affects his status as a person.
Justifications do not go ad infinitum because we are satisfied when the 
doubt is removed. We have doubts when there are reasons to doubt. We 
do not have unfounded doubts in our lifeworld. We limit our doubt to 
cases where there are reasons to believe that something is wrong. We have 
reason to believe that something is wrong when something does not 
match up, when something is incoherent. When this incoherence is 
resolved, we have no longer reason to doubt and no reason for further 
justification. Justification has an end. It ends in the matter of facts of our 
lifeworld.
In the sciences there is an analogy to this; scientific justification ends 
where something is self-evident, unquestioned of the respective paradigm 
or the theory. However, while in the sciences it is possible to question the 
theory as a whole, this is not possible in the lifeworld: the epistemic system 
as a whole cannot be questioned in the lifeworld, because this would 
destroy the foundation for further justifications and doubts. In this respect, 
there is an obvious difference between scientific and lifeworld justification: 
The latter has its limits in the shared practice of giving and taking reasons, 
in the lifeform in which we participate.
Coherence encompasses the whole, not only the lifeworld practice of 
giving and taking reasons, but also that of “systems” of economics or 
2  PRACTICAL PHILOSOPHY 

14
politics or art, as well as of the sciences. The epistemic system is coherent 
only as a whole, not in its parts. This need for global coherence can best be 
explained by the fact that we interpret our beliefs realistically in the life­
world, in systems and in sciences. Coherentism, as I understand it, is not 
an alternative to realism, it is inseparably interwoven with it.
2.3    What Kind of Theory?
The theory presented here has pragmatist, Kantian, Stoicist, and 
Aristotelian traits. This combination is peculiar and therefore it might be 
easier to say first, what it is not: It is no Humean theory of rationality, that 
restricts practical reason to choosing the best means to reach our goals, 
which are determined by our given desires.
Humeans of different kinds are the implicit opponents of this theory: 
Humeans like Harry Frankfurt who insist that it is desire and not reason 
that constitutes rationality, Bernard Williams’ internalism, Donald 
Davidson’s anomal monism, David Broome’s consequentialism (“teleol­
ogy”), and Thomas Scanlon’s early form of contractualism and unnumer­
able other important Humean contributions to the theory of practical 
rationality.
The theory presented here has pragmatist traits, it relies on lifeworld 
practices of giving and taking reasons and it presents itself as an alternative 
to rationalism and principlism (as Jonathan Dancy calls it).
It has Kantian traits as it assumes that it is reason, not desire, that con­
stitutes rationality. It relies on the human capacity to act guided by reasons.
It has Stoicist traits as it extends the guidance and affection by reasons, 
the role of rational judgment (synkatathesis), from the moral sphere to 
agency in general.
And it has Aristotelian traits: the ideal type of rationality is not the 
sophos of Plato, but the phronimos of Aristotle. Practical rationality does 
not rely on scientific insights, but on phronesis, good judgment of ordinary 
people based on empirical and moral experience from everyday life.
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

15
CHAPTER 3
Structural Rationality
3.1    Practical Reason and Rational Choice
John Rawls, who originally presented his theory of justice as an application 
of the rational choice model, distinguished reason from rationality in his 
later writings. He defines rationality instrumentally, that is, choosing the 
adequate means to an end, while he links reasons to reasoning, that is, 
giving reasons. This juxtaposition results in a dichotomy within practical 
philosophy for which, I believe, there are no good reasons, but at best 
habitually established patterns of argumentation in economics, social 
sciences and practical philosophy. If reason and rationality, that is, practical 
reason and rationality, represented different assessment criteria, it would 
be possible that compelling reasons speak against a rational action. An 
action could be unreasonable but also rational.
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature 
Switzerland AG 2023
J. Nida-Rümelin, A Theory of Practical Reason, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-17319-6_3

16
1
­
The utility theorem, that is, the fundamental theorem of modern eco­
nomics, claims that if the preferences of a person fulfill certain coherence 
postulates, they can be represented by a quantitative, real-valued utility 
function. If all conditions are met, the utility function that represents a 
person’s preferences is uniquely determined up to positive linear 
transformations. Therefore, this conceptual set-up, per se, does not allow 
interpersonal comparisons. This means that even though we can now 
assign a utility value to the alternatives, this value is not uniquely 
determined because of positive linear transformations. Thus, we cannot 
say that realizing a certain alternative increases Bill’s utility more than 
Susan’s.
2
3
­
4
1 Marshak, Jacob. 1950. Rational Behaviour, Uncertain Prospects, and Measurable Utility. 
Econometrica 18: 111–141.
2 Harsanyi, John C. 1980. Rule Utilitarianism, Rights, Obligations and the Theory of 
Behavior. Theory and Decision 12: 115–133.
3 An interesting question is whether this interval is open, that is, does not include zero and 
one, or closed, that is, including zero and one, I find the first variant more attractive for dif­
ferent reasons; cf. D&E.
4 Cf. RatC.
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

17
The rationality criterion of expected utility maximization is not an addi­
tional postulate; it is an implication of the postulates grounding the utility 
theorem. Likewise, we can interpret the utility or probability function, 
which we can ascribe to persons if they fulfill the coherence conditions of 
the utility theorem, as representations of two types of propositional atti­
tudes: epistemic and prohairetic. Epistemic attitudes refer to the person’s 
expectations of what (with whatever subjective probability) will happen, 
while the utility function represents the person’s (coherent) preferences. 
The person is rational if and only if she fulfills the coherence conditions, 
that is, if the preference relation we ascribe to her fulfills the postulates of 
the utility theorem.
We must abstain from all mystification of this theorem. The utility the­
orem merely shows that the qualitative concept of preference can be con­
verted into a quantitative concept of utility. This “utility” is not what is 
usually associated with this term. The person might have altruistic motives 
and then we must not interpret this utility function as a representation of 
their own interests, but as an interpretation of the person’s assessment of 
the interests of others.
It gets even worse: Take the Kantian agent, that is, an agent who aligns 
his preferences or the maxims guiding his preferences with the Categorical 
Imperative. That is to say, he only adopts maxims that accord with the 
Categorical Imperative, that is, maxims that can be transformed into uni­
versal laws. Doesn’t this agent stand for the exact opposite of the homo 
oeconomicus? So, it seems: The majority of contemporary economists con­
sider the Kantian agent not as an example of economic rationality but of 
moral reason that cannot be integrated into the concept of economic 
rationality. I cannot see how and in what way the ideal Kantian agent, who 
consistently aligns his preferences with maxims that can be universalized, 
should violate any of the utility postulates. His action-guiding preferences, 
too, will be transitive, complete, monotonous, and continuous. Why 
should they violate any of these postulates? I fail to see any reasonable 
argument to back this claim. The Kantian agent (if sufficiently coherent) 
fulfills the postulates of the utility theorem. We can attribute to this agent 
a utility function and the agent will maximize expected utility (qua fulfill­
ing the conditions and only qua fulfilling these conditions).
3  STRUCTURAL RATIONALITY 

18
Does this mean that the Kantian agent is one who maximizes utility? 
The answer is: Yes, in the formal sense of the von Neumann-Morgenstern 
utility function (utility1). No, if utility is interpreted as the representation 
of the agent’s self-interest (utility2). The Kantian agent does maximize 
utility1, but not utility2. It is an obvious fallacy to assume that the utility 
theorem proves that a rational person optimizes her self-interest.
I find it, however, highly plausible that all reasonable agents ideally ful­
fill the coherence conditions of the utility theorem. Consequently, we can 
apply the entire conceptual apparatus of rational choice theory to morally 
or otherwise motivated decisions as well. The restriction to self-­interest 
optimization may be a useful heuristic principle for economic analysis 
(whether this principle is true may and must be doubted), but it should 
not prevent us from applying rational choice theory beyond this narrow 
economic application. We should understand rational choice as based on 
coherent preferences and the practice of giving and taking reasons helps to 
make our preferences coherent. This coherentist interpretation of rational 
choice theory is neutral regarding motivations and reasons.
There is no basis for a dichotomy between rationality and reason. 
Rational choice is to be understood as a set of minimal yet demanding 
conditions of epistemic and prohairetic coherence. It is based on the 
coherence of propositional attitudes. It is minimalist, lacks content and is, 
therefore, an incomplete theory of rationality. Yet, it represents an 
indispensable component of both practical and theoretical deliberation. 
Therefore, there cannot be any unreasonable practice that is still considered 
rational, and this is why we cannot separate the commandments of reason 
and the claims of rationality.
3.2    Instrumental Rationality
­
5
­
­
5 Cf. Weber, Max. 2012. The “Objectivity” of Knowledge in Social Science and Social 
Policy. In Collected Methodological Writings, 100–129. London and New York: Routledge, 
and id. 2012. The Meaning of “Value Freedom” in the Sociological and Economic Sciences. 
In Collected Methodological Writings, 304–334. London and New York: Routledge.
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

19
­
This modern, liberal version promotes indifference claiming that, ulti­
mately, it is irrelevant what provides orientation to the individual, as long 
as this orientation does not restrict others in finding their meaning of life 
and living by their own ideas. One small step further and we are at the 
onset of a minimalist deontological ethic that acknowledges that our lives 
follow to a large part pragmatic imperatives. Imperatives that focus on 
personal happiness or what confers meaning to our lives. Morality must be 
limited to rules that ensure that any individually chosen lifeform does not 
deny others the possibility to find a meaningful lifeform of their own. In 
other words: These rules must reflect the respect for the autonomy of 
others. If this were true, morality’s subject-matter would have to be 
limited to what can be validated by the Kantian compatibility test, that is, 
the Categorical Imperative.
At this point, and this may seem strange, the minimal conditions of 
(economic) rationality we discussed in the previous section interface with 
the Categorical Imperative as a formal principle of practical reason. Both 
focus on types of maxims or preference relations, not on their specific 
content or what motivates them. Pragmatic imperatives, on the other 
hand, are determined by their content, namely that of human happiness, 
or more precisely the happiness of the individual agents. This is where 
Kant exposes himself as a supporter of instrumental rationality. It seems 
that beyond the a priori synthetic condition of practical reason in the sense 
of respect for the Moral Law, that is, acting from duty (not only “in 
accordance with duty”), the practical philosophy of Kant is not only 
instrumentalist, but even reductionist in the sense of eudaemonism: Apart 
from the moral motive for acting from duty, that is, out of respect for the 
3  STRUCTURAL RATIONALITY 

20
Moral Law, the only priority is my own well-being—contrary to all life­
world experience.
­
6
7
­
8
6 Cf. Kohlberg, Lawrence. 1984. Psychology of Moral Development: The Nature and Validity 
of Moral Stages: Essays on Moral Development Series. New York: Joanna Cotler Books.
7 Cf. Chap. 5.
8 Cf. Plato. Gorgias.
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

21
9
10
11
Let us take an example that uses hypothetical imperatives: Sheila asks 
her friend Mary: “Should I keep my promise to go on holiday with him 
even though I have met another man?” Mary will inquire about the 
circumstances, for example, what role this new man plays in Sheila’s life, 
whether she believes this holiday to be some sort of a last resort to save the 
9 Cf. Chap. 5.
10 Cf. Foot, Philippa. 1972. Morality as a System of Hypothetical Imperatives. The 
Philosophical Review 81: 305–316.
11 The ethics of Immanuel Kant and his universal-deontological successors are paradig­
matic for this claim.
3  STRUCTURAL RATIONALITY 

22
existing relationship, how serious she was about the promise at that time 
and how seriously this promise was taken, and so on. In the end, Mary 
might say: “You should stand by your promise and go on holiday with 
him” or maybe “The conditions have changed which is why I would 
explain to him why you are unable to keep the promise you made.” Mary 
takes Sheila’s interests into account when giving her advice, but—if she is 
a responsible friend—she will also ensure that if Sheila followed her advice, 
nobody’s self-respect would be existentially harmed in the hypothetical 
scenario; no one would have reason to claim unfair treatment, and so on. 
Such advice is based on weighing reasons and takes place under certain 
empirical conditions that affect Sheila’s decision. In the end, there is an 
ought, a claim or assessment of what Sheila—let us use a realistic manner 
of speaking here—actually ought to do. The friend could insist and say: 
“Yes, I am convinced that Sheila ought to do this (under the given 
circumstances).” Maybe she adds, “I’m in favor of Sheila doing this.” This 
kind of “ought” is not purely descriptive. True, the conditions for the 
decision influenced the ultimate advice and one could therefore claim that 
this qualifies as a hypothetical imperative. Still, this ought cannot be 
reflected in its entirety in the description of an empirical fact.
Contrary to the first example, this sentence on what Sheila ought to do 
cannot be translated into a mere description of facts without a change of 
meaning. Mary may say: “I am actually convinced that Sheila should keep 
her promise.” The bank employee will most certainly abstain from such a 
normative statement. Probably he will evade the request for such a 
statement and say: “I don’t know what the customer ought to do” or “I 
don’t presume to judge what the customer ought to do, I limit myself to 
pointing out potential returns and possible risks”; maybe he has taken an 
ethics class during his business studies and adds “I refrain from making a 
normative judgment.”
If certain interests are morally acceptable, they provide good reasons 
for the person having those interests. A theory of rationality is normative, 
even if it gives normative advice on the condition of specific interests the 
acting person has, otherwise it is a misuse of title, because it merely 
describes causal or probabilistic interrelations.
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

23
3.3    Paradoxa of Cooperation
The most important red flag for rational choice traditionally understood is 
the phenomenon of cooperation. This phenomenon jeopardizes some of 
its characteristic features, such as methodological egoism, normative instru­
mentalism, radical consequentialism, and atomistic individualism. There 
have been many attempts to immunize the essence of the homo oeconomicus 
against criticism. Literature on this issue fills libraries and the debate in 
economic theory, social sciences, and practical philosophy reminds me of 
late baroque aesthetics—more and more embellishments have been made 
and it’s sometimes difficult to remain with the core elements.
12
­
­
­
Let us assume both prisoners do not have altruistic feelings for each 
other. In their current situation, all they want to do is save their own skin, 
that is, try to get the shortest sentence possible. Each of the two prisoners 
can choose to confess or to remain silent. This leaves us with four possible 
combinations: both confess (both get ten years in jail), both do not confess 
(both get one year in jail), one confesses and is released as a principal 
witness of the prosecution and the other does not confess and gets 
12 Cf. Appendix, Prisoner’s Dilemma.
3  STRUCTURAL RATIONALITY 

24
sentenced to eleven years in prison (in either combination). Thus, 
confessing is obviously the dominant strategy since it presents the criminal 
with the most favorable decision option under all possible conditions: 
Assuming the other prisoner confesses, it is better for him to confess as 
well, because otherwise he will face eleven years in prison instead of ten. 
Now suppose the other prisoner remains silent, then he can go free by 
confessing and become the prosecution’s principal witness and he thus 
does not even have to spend one year in prison for carrying an illegal 
weapon. Again, confessing is the dominant strategy for both prisoners. 
What could be a reason not to choose a strategy with which I can achieve 
my goals to a greater extent than with any other available strategy? Rational 
agents, it seems, should choose dominant strategies.
Unfortunately, however, the combination of the two dominant strate­
gies (or the n-dominant strategies for n-agents in n-person prisoner’s dilem­
mas) does worse in terms of the prisoner’s individual goals than if they had 
jointly chosen the non-dominant (dominated, suboptimal) strategy. In 
this specific case, both prisoners will unnecessarily spend nine years in 
prison (if they both had not confessed the crime, they would have faced 
one year in prison, since they both have now confessed, they are each sen­
tenced to ten years in prison). If each of the two prisoners consults a law­
yer, he will probably recommend confessing, since it seems unlikely that 
the first prisoner’s confession increases the probability of the other pris­
oner confessing as well.
13
13 Rapoport, Anatol and Albert M.  Chammah. 1965. Prisoner’s Dilemma. Ann Arbor: 
University of Michigan Press. For a more recent overview of experimental findings on the 
prisoner’s dilemma see Sally, David. 1995. Conversation and Cooperation in Social 
Dilemmas. Rationality and Society 7: 58–92, and on the (positive) relationship between 
intelligence and cooperation (groups of more intelligent people are more likely to cooper­
ate): Al-Ubaydli, Omar, Garett Jones and Jaap Weel. 2016. Average Player Traits as Predictors 
of Cooperation in a Repeated Prisoner’s Dilemma. Journal of Behavioral and Experimental 
Economics 64: 5–60; and for a compact presentation of the role of trust and reciprocity in 
solving social dilemma situations in collective, culturally embedded practice, see a lecture by 
2009 Nobel Laureate in Economics Ostrom, Elinor. 1998. A Behavioral Approach to the 
Rational Choice Theory of Collective Action: Presidential Address, American Political 
Science Association 1997. American Political Science Review 92: 1–22, and her major work: 
1990. Governing the Commons: The Evolution of Institutions for Collective Action. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. An interesting result: Dreber, Anna, David Rand, Drew 
Fudenberg and Martin Nowak. 2008. Winners Don’t Punish. Nature 425: 348–351.
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

25
­
The situation changes once we allow altruistic motives: Suppose the 
other prisoner does not confess which means that, if both prisoners do not 
confess, both face a prison sentence of only one year for criminal possession 
of a weapon. In this case, the decision to confess results in a decrease by 
one year for one prisoner (because the prisoner who confesses becomes 
the witness of the prosecution and is ultimately free to go). For the other 
prisoner, on the other hand, it results in an increase by ten years, that is, 
from one year (criminal possession of a weapon) to eleven years for robbery 
and lack of cooperation with the prosecution. If the altruistic share of the 
motivation for action is high enough to allocate a tenth of the weighting, 
the slightly altruistic criminal would be indifferent about confessing and 
not confessing on the condition that the other prisoner chooses not to 
confess. If the altruistic tendency intensifies and exceeds one-tenth, the 
altruistic thief prefers “not to confess” in this scenario. If the other prisoner 
confesses, the number of prison years for the (first) prisoner could also be 
decreased by one year (from eleven to ten), while for the other prisoner 
the number of prison years would again be reduced by ten years if the first 
prisoner did not confess (the other prisoner would then be released as a 
principal witness of the prosecution). Allocating one-tenth of the weighting 
is sufficient to generate a rational indifference between confessing and not 
confessing; and if the altruistic tendency of the thief were to exceed one-­
tenth, not confessing would become rational, although this means that the 
3  STRUCTURAL RATIONALITY 

26
one confessing would face eleven years in prison as the only convict. It 
goes without saying, that this is not a general solution for guaranteeing 
cooperation in prisoner’s dilemma cases, it depends on the distribution of 
outcomes, here years in prison.
However, characterizing altruism in terms of weighting factors is far 
too coarse. It is unlikely to assume that the willingness to take the other 
prisoner’s interests into account will remain the same regardless of how 
the other prisoner decides. Rather, we can assume that the other prisoner’s 
decision not to cooperate plus the fact that he would be the only one 
benefitting from his own cooperation, will drastically reduce the criminal’s 
willingness to consider the interests of the other prisoner. The altruistic 
thieves re-evaluate the consequences of their actions because they, at least 
to some extent, abandon minimizing their own prison stay as their only 
goal. They consider the negative consequences of one extra year in prison 
for the other prisoner.
In the following analysis, we drop the premise of methodological ego­
ism: We no longer assume that every rational decision exclusively serves 
the optimization of self-interest. In other words: We allow for the possibil­
ity of motives for action other than the optimization of self-interest. Let us 
assume, then, that even rational persons can have motives for action other 
than the optimization of their own interests. Although economic theory 
and its application is dominated by methodological egoism, some econo­
mists are willing to include altruistic motives for action as a supplement to 
egoistic motives in their analysis. Consequently, the complexity of practi­
cal reasons is reduced to two types: egoistic and altruistic. This reduction­
ist account averts increased complexity in the analysis of action motives 
and sustains the model of optimization of outcomes in the sense of subjec­
tive well-being. Now it is not only personal subjective well-being that is 
important, but also under certain circumstances (with a certain weighting 
factor) the subjective well-being of others. This assumption leaves meth­
odological egoism behind, but still excludes cooperation as a reason 
for action.
Economic rationality considers Pareto-inefficient distributions (includ­
ing outcomes of an interaction situation) as undesirable. After all, every­
body could be better off if they had only made a different decision. An 
instrumental conception of rationality is sufficient to arrive at this result: 
The participants strive for goals that they do not fully achieve. The two 
prisoners unnecessarily spent nine years in prison (the law enforcement 
authorities or the public which is interested in their prosecution certainly 
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

27
have a different take on the matter). The question is, then: Does a certain 
degree of altruism provide a plausible resolution of the dilemma? And can 
we then expect this form of altruism also in cases where we are uncooperative 
while the others involved in the interaction, that is, n-persons, are 
cooperative? These considerations may have prompted Amartya Sen, to 
distinguish between three levels of morality regarding the cooperation 
dilemma: The first level is egoism: All persons involved optimize their own 
interests, in this case, minimize their prison stay, and as a result, end up in 
prison for ten years. Mutual confession is an equilibrium point in dominant 
strategies.
­
14
­
­
At this point, it seems indeed adequate to speak of three levels of moral­
ity: The higher the level of morality, the stronger the willingness to coop­
erate. One condition for the willingness to cooperate is increased 
consideration for others. As plausible as this interpretation seems, it is 
spurious. Cooperation cannot be secured through altruistic motivations, 
as we have seen. What is more: The cooperation dilemma reveals the most 
fundamental flaw in traditional rational choice theory. Fixing this flaw 
requires a paradigm shift from a myopic and atomistic perspective to a 
14 Cf. Sen, Amartya. 1974. Choice, Ordering and Morality. In Practical Reason, ed. 
Stephan Körner. Oxford: Blackwell. See “Structural Rationality in Game Theory”, in 
StructR, part II.
3  STRUCTURAL RATIONALITY 

28
structural and holistic one. Structural rationality has at its core the thesis 
that genuine cooperation—in contrast to what traditional rational choice 
theory claims—is possible. Such a radical paradigm shift requires careful 
explanation, or better, preparation. I want to pave the way for abandoning 
one prevailing dogma in rational choice theory that fascinates even those 
who are aware of its problematic implications.
15
­
15 Cf. Saint’s Dilemma in Rescher, Nicholas. 1975. Unselfishness: The Role of the Vicarious 
Affects in Moral Philosophy and Social Theory. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press: 
41ff. Cf. Appendix, Saint’s Dilemma.
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

29
­
16
If we were to adhere to a concept of instrumental rationality and con­
sidered merely the interests of others, we would always have to choose the 
weighting factors in such a way that cooperation is possible to meet the 
requirements of all reasonable ethical theories. It seems implausible to 
determine the degree of altruism on a case-by-case basis and thereby 
ensure cooperation between all agents involved. In fact, there exists such 
a (sufficiently high) degree of altruism for every cooperation dilemma. It 
seems more plausible, however, to search for a universal degree of altruism 
that applies to all cooperation dilemmas and enables cooperation or, even 
better, guarantees it. This level of altruism exists: It is reached when the 
weighting factor for one’s own interests and the interests of others is 
exactly the same. Cooperation is guaranteed for any distribution of positive 
and negative outcomes in the form of consequences of collective decisions 
(here: combinations of individual decisions) if everyone allocated the same 
weight to their interest as to the interests of others. The same weighing of 
all interests excludes the possibility of insufficient altruism which would 
result in the original dilemma situation (i.e., the phenomenon that each 
person’s optimization leads to an overall worse result for each person). At 
the same time, it prevents a non-dilemma situation to transform into a 
dilemma situation via altruistic transfers of utility. There is a possibility, 
then, of maintaining cooperation based on altruistic motives for action 
and sustaining the instrumental conception of rationality.
This seems to prove that we can convincingly overcome the challenges 
of cooperation with instrumental rationality once we abandon 
methodological egoism. We could even go further and claim this result to 
be a justification of act-utilitarianism. A person who equally weighs the 
16 The Rawlsian Difference principle fulfills this condition, and so does the vast majority of 
its competitors, e. g. utilitarian theories of justice. Problems arise when we incorporate indi­
vidual rights and the historical genesis of distributions, as libertarian theories do, most prom­
inently Robert Nozick’s in Anarchy, State and Utopia. As Sen’s liberal paradox shows, this 
can result in an incompatibility between (the execution of) individual rights and 
Pareto-optimality.
3  STRUCTURAL RATIONALITY 

30
interests of all others involved acts according to the utilitarian criterion. 
The sum of utility allocates the same weight to each person, that is, the 
utility functions are summed all with the weighting factor. The 
maximization (in case of probabilistic scenarios, the optimization) of this 
sum, qualifies the same actions as instrumentally rational as the actions of 
an altruistically motivated agent who allocates the same weight to all 
individual interests. There seems to be no problem of cooperation in a 
utilitarian society.
So, cooperation is guaranteed concerning one specific form of altruistic 
motivation. The respective decision equally optimizes the interests of all, 
all are treated equally, and Pareto-inefficient distributions (as consequences 
of collective actions) no longer occur. This scenario, however, comes at a 
price. One that is too high, I believe: The incorporation of cooperation as 
an everyday phenomenon in rational theory is based on a prerequisite that 
never occurs in reality: All persons allocate the same weight to their own 
interests and the interests of others and choose an action that maximizes 
the sum of all interests involved. I consider the demand to equally consider 
my interests and the interests of others with whom I have no friendly or 
family relationship to be supererogatory, that is, beyond what can 
reasonably be asked for. The only explanation for the fact that so many 
ethicists (i.e., all those in the utilitarian camp) do not consider this demand 
to be absurd is, I believe, the unjustified equation of this implausible 
demand with that of equal treatment. It is plausible to demand that the 
rules restricting agents striving for individual optimization are designed 
such that they take the interests of all into account equally. This requirement 
is also plausible because reasonable rules should be acceptable to everybody. 
This claim for rules being acceptable to all and considering all interests 
equally, in turn, is not supererogatory only if these rules leave sufficient 
leeway for choosing a personal lifestyle, in other words: If they are 
perceived as deontological, not consequentialist rules.
We all have an equal interest in ensuring that the rule to keep promises 
is respected and that it restricts the optimization of self-interests: In many 
situations, I put my self-interest aside to adhere to this rule. This is not 
supererogatory because this rule leaves enough leeway to live my life the 
way I want and to prioritize my own interests. If these rules denied us such 
a leeway, that is, uniquely determined what to do in every situation, it 
would be incompatible with the autonomy, the authorship of one’s life, 
the prioritizing of personal interests and projects, as well as with interests 
and projects of those close to me. However, just from the fact that these 
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

31
rules are generally acceptable since they do not favor anyone and can 
therefore be supported by everyone, we cannot derive the utilitarian 
criterion of maximizing the sum of utility. The utilitarian criterion is 
consequentialist; that is, it requires acting in such a way that the utility 
sum is optimized. There is no leeway for one’s own way of life, for personal 
responsibility, for individual projects, for special interests. This approach 
cannot account for the asymmetry between what is personal and what is 
foreign that is deeply rooted in our lifeworld. There is no room for the 
separateness of persons, as John Rawls called his most fundamental objection 
to utilitarianism. This would mean too great a sacrifice for the sake of 
cooperation. It cannot be the case that cooperative behavior has such 
strong prerequisites, especially since empirical findings unambiguously 
prove how prevalent cooperation is. Within the framework of a theory of 
instrumental rationality, general cooperation proves to be impossible or only 
possible under conditions whose realization we cannot demand or expect.
3.4    The Structural Interpretation 
of Cooperative Decisions
No matter how you slice it, we cannot hope to solve the problem of coop­
eration and explain cooperative actions of persons, by tinkering with the 
assessment of the consequences. Indeed, these assessments and evalua­
tions may vary a great deal, but they are just one thing—the willingness to 
cooperate is another. The amalgamation of the assessment of consequences 
with willingness to cooperate is systematically misguided. Nevertheless, it 
dominated the literature on the prisoner’s dilemma for decades. The rea­
son for this is obvious: The rather dogmatic fixation on a consequentialist 
and at the same time radically individualistic (atomistic) conception of 
rationality. Thus, an adequate explication of the phenomenon of coopera­
tion requires giving up on this fixation. We must transition from a conse­
quentialist conception of individual (atomistic) rationality to a structural 
conception of rationality. Such a structural conception of rationality does 
not postulate the replacement of individual agents with collective agents. 
Neither does it advocate rule fetishism. Nevertheless, it is an alternative to 
the consequentialist conception as we will see.
We understand cooperation as a paradigmatic example of structural 
rationality. Suppose you go to your bank where you encounter a scrupulous 
financial advisor. She still vividly remembers how recklessly banks 
recommended seemingly bomb-proof investments that eventually turned 
3  STRUCTURAL RATIONALITY 

32
out to be unprofitable during the financial crisis. They offer two forms of 
investment, both with an investment sum of 10,000 euros over ten years. 
The best-case scenario for the first investment would be a total return of 
4000 euros. In the worst-case scenario of another financial crisis, however, 
interest income would be reduced by half. The second investment would, 
under the expected favorable conditions, generate an interest income of 
only 3000 euros; in the event of another financial crisis, however, the advi­
sor expects merely a return on investment of 1000 euros. It goes without 
saying that the investment decision has no impact whatsoever on the likeli­
hood of another global financial crisis. And since there are only two alter­
natives, the rational decision is obviously the first investment strategy since 
it has dominance over the second alternative: Whatever the circumstances, 
it is better to choose the first type of investment. Anyone who opts for the 
second investment strategy, despite the available information, is clearly 
acting irrationally, if we assume that there are no other relevant aspects to 
this assessment; for example, the second strategy would invest in a sustain­
able financial practice while the first one would not.
Now, let us assume the expected return on investment did not depend 
on the global economy and the occurrence of another financial crisis in 
particular, but on the decision of another person with the same conditions 
regarding the returns on investment. The actual payout depends exclusively 
on the other person choosing between the first and second investment 
strategy. If both agents choose the second alternative, they both receive a 
return of 3000 euros; if they both choose the first alternative, the return is 
only 2000 euros. If one person opts for the first investment strategy and 
the other for the second, the return for the person choosing the first 
strategy is 4000 euros while it is only 1000 euros for the person who chose 
the second strategy. The reader will have already recognized this example 
as a mere reformulation of the prisoner’s dilemma. In this case, however, 
a high percentage of people are willing to opt for the second investment 
strategy, even though the first strategy is dominant in the game-theoretic 
sense, that is, yields higher returns regardless of how the other person 
decides.
The decision situation, one might argue, has not changed between the 
first case (an uncontrollable event such as another financial crisis affecting 
payout) and the second case (the uncontrollable decision of another 
person affecting payout). If choosing the first strategy is rational (as we 
assumed) in the first case, this must apply to the second case as well. 
Nothing changed for the agent. It seems, then, that there is no difference 
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

33
between payout being affected by environmental conditions or another 
person’s decision. If this were true, we would have to admit that 
cooperation, that is, choosing the second investment strategy, is always 
irrational in interaction situations exhibiting such a payout structure. In 
fact, however, there is a fundamental difference and the fact that this 
difference is not captured (cannot be captured) by rational choice 
orthodoxy points to a fundamental flaw in this conception of rationality, 
which we can only overcome by taking a structural perspective.
The action-guiding intentions of agents are what links a person to a 
structural perspective. If agents in a prisoner’s dilemma situation cooperate 
and opt for the second investment strategy, knowing well that in both 
cases, that is, irrespective of how the other person decides, the first 
investment strategy yields higher returns, and are also aware that mutually 
deciding for the second investment strategy yields a higher return for both 
(3000 euros each) than both opting for the first investment strategy (2000 
euros each), we could justify their decisions as follows: “I wanted to do my 
part in us both (possibly) being successful together” (“While expecting 
the other person to do the same”). If the other person turns out to be 
non-cooperative, the person willing to cooperate is usually disappointed. 
This type of action-guiding intentionality is possible only in situations of 
interaction, that is, situations where persons interact with at least one 
other person and are not confronted with environmental factors alone. A 
cooperative attitude toward the weather or other natural events would be 
irrational, although such behavior is typical for animistic cultures and sur­
prisingly widespread in post-animistic cultures such as ours. We could—
admittedly cynically—say that animism is useful: Persons who believe that 
they can influence the behavior of others with their willingness to cooperate 
are—collectively, not distributively—better off. Indeed, a community of 
agents willing to cooperate achieves higher individual utility (utility here is 
understood as preference fulfillment) than communities of individually 
optimizing agents. We can demystify cooperative action if we take a 
structural perspective, if we take it to be possible that a rational person intends 
to contribute to a common cooperative practice, respectively if we consider 
such a motive for action as permissible for rational agents.
Contrary to what it claims, contemporary rational choice orthodoxy is 
not neutral regarding individual preferences: Persons are not free to deter­
mine their action-guiding preferences. The rational agent must choose the 
dominating strategy, and this means in an interaction of the prisoner’s 
dilemma type not to cooperate, because cooperation is dominated, not 
3  STRUCTURAL RATIONALITY 

34
dominating. But the preference for acting cooperatively is not inherently 
irrational, this should be part of any adequate theory of rationality.
Considering cooperative action as rationally permissible has far-reach­
ing consequences. It requires breaking with the exclusive orientation 
toward individual optimization of outcomes. Cooperative action has an 
irreducible structural aspect: It can only be grasped within a structure of 
interaction (prisoner’s dilemma); that is, information on outcomes for 
given alternatives alone is not enough, as we have seen in the investment 
example. We take cooperation as the paradigmatic example of structural 
rationality. Let me stress that I do not claim that non-cooperative behavior 
in prisoner’s dilemma situations is irrational. But I do claim that coopera­
tive behavior in prisoner’s dilemma situations can be rational and that this 
form of rationality has an irreducible structural character. We must take 
the interactive structure into account (which goes beyond outcome func­
tions), otherwise cooperation remains irrational.
17
17 Numerous empirical studies confirm this, for example, Sennett, Richard. 2012. Together: 
The Rituals, Pleasures and Politics of Co-Operation. London: Penguin Books; Henrich, 
Joseph and Natalie Henrich. 2007. Why Humans Cooperate: A Cultural and Evolutionary 
Explanation. Oxford: Oxford University Press; and Tomasello, Michael. 2009. Why We 
Cooperate. Cambridge/Mass.: MIT Press.
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

35
3.5    Rational Cooperation
­
­
­
­
18
As discussed in the previous section, the empirical findings on the coop­
eration problem reveal a clear tendency: Agents tend to cooperate if they 
expect cooperative behavior from others. According to rational choice 
orthodoxy, however, cooperation is always irrational. Behavioral economics 
usually objects: Since cooperation is an undeniable fact and the extent to 
which it occurs depends on the respective surrounding conditions 
(framing), these behavioral regularities must be incorporated in empirical 
analysis, even if it is irrational. This, however, implicitly concedes, that the 
model of homo oeconomicus in contemporary economics adequately 
characterizes rationality. If this were not the case, we would first need to 
analyze which behavioral regularities qualify as rational or irrational. We 
18 As will be exemplified in Chap. 5.
3  STRUCTURAL RATIONALITY 

36
would first have to determine whether empirical findings on the problem 
of cooperation indicate that agents are mostly irrational.
We thus choose a clearly different approach in discussing rational choice 
orthodoxy: We do not contrast empirical behavioral regularities with ideals 
of rationality theory, we examine two different ideals of rationality. One is 
virtually incompatible with our lifeworld and economic practice, while the 
other ties in closely with it. One rationality conception proceeds 
deductively, the other (predominantly) in an inductive or coherentist 
manner. One accepts optimizing consequences—in the case of 
methodological egoism, optimizing self-interest—as the only reason for 
action, the other acknowledges the irreducible plurality of practical 
reasons. We will argue for the latter and use our opponent’s arguments in 
doing so. What is more: We will not alter the theoretical core of the 
opposing approach (the utility theorem, as discussed above), and we do 
not claim that the economic theory of rationality (ideal economic agents 
optimizing their returns) is useless. Rational choice can prove itself quite 
useful in understanding certain areas of human practice, even in its most 
narrow interpretation of methodological egoism, atomism, and 
consequentialism. As a general concept of practical reason, however, it is 
inadequate. One major reason is that it does not account for the possibility 
of cooperation being rational.
­
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

37
19
­
­
­
­
We based our definition of cooperation on the prisoner’s dilemma as a 
specific type of interaction. When faced with it, cooperation means 
choosing a strategy that is Pareto-efficient—provided that the other 
participants also decide in favor of this collective strategy. According to 
this definition, agents cooperate if they refrain from optimizing the 
consequences of their actions to contribute to the realization of a 
combination of single actions that is Pareto-efficient. The negative 
definition would be a person cooperates if she decides against the dominant 
strategy in prisoner’s dilemma situations.
19 Virtually all ethical theories require cooperative decision-making in prisoner’s dilemma 
situations. From the vantage point of deontological Kantian ethics, the reason is obvious 
since willingness to cooperate is the only universalizable maxim. For pluralistic deontological 
Rossian ethics, willingness to cooperate is a prima facie duty. For act-utilitarian theories, 
cooperation is required when the individual cooperative action results in the optimization of 
the sum of utilities. Whether an action meets this requirement, depends on the specific pay­
outs in the prisoner’s dilemma, which we must assume to be interpersonally comparable. 
Also, rule-utilitarian theories demand cooperative behavior throughout.
3  STRUCTURAL RATIONALITY 

38
20
21
­
22
20 David Gauthier’s theory in Morals by Agreement presents an attempt to solve this prob­
lem by developing the criterion of relative maximum concession. Among all Pareto-­efficient 
results of a bargaining game, the criterion identifies exactly one result that should be accept­
able to all parties, because it accords the smallest possible concession to the person having to 
make the largest concession relative to their own optimum (compared to the available alter­
natives) and because the reference point for the relative concessions is not merely the random 
starting point of the distribution of goods, but respects a Lockean proviso according to 
which only those distributions count as legitimate starting points that have come about with­
out any violation of individual rights. Cf. Gauthier, David. 1986. Morals by Agreement. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
21 Here, “multiple” merely means “more than one”; this may also include “infinitely 
many”, for example in the case of the continuous distribution of a good.
22 Cf. Appendix, Battle of the Sexes.
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

39
Just as with the prisoner’s dilemma, our question is this: What is the 
rationally recommended mode of action? Assuming A not only knows 
that B considers the consequences of her actions, but that she optimizes 
them as well. Then A can simply win the conflict of interest by announcing 
that he chooses his first strategy. He can be sure that B will accordingly 
choose her first strategy over the second one, since the second strategy 
would be better only if A chose his second strategy as well. The order in 
which agents choose seems to be pivotal in this scenario: Who is first in 
announcing his or her strategy and places the other in a tight spot? For B 
to give in it is sufficient for her to know that A (being a Vabanque player) 
aims at his own advantage and loves the risks. It seems, then, that the 
proverb “The wiser head gives in” is true—and stupidity wins the day? If 
one understands rationality as the guarantee for increasing the success of 
an action or at least the probability of success, this result is confusing.
The structural dimension at play is even more obvious in another ver­
sion of this game format: A tells B: “If you don’t do what I want (choose 
the first column), I will make sure that you suffer significant damage—
regardless of the fact that my action will also damage my self-­interest 
(<0.0>).” The one who is not intimidated by the threat of considerable 
damage and still does what she thinks is right, even if it is to her disadvan­
tage, deserves our respect—the stubborn player in the battle of the sexes 
does not. The form of interaction remains the same, but the normative 
assessment changes. In both cases, however, considering the structural 
dimension results in a more refined and plausible analysis. The person not 
giving in to extortion has a certain disposition to act, and if others are 
aware of this disposition, they will not even try to blackmail this person.
The interpretation of such behavior as (postmodern) “staging” or 
attempts to influence the actions of others may be beside the point. It 
overlooks the structural character of being immune to blackmailing. The 
causalist alternative, according to which structural characteristics are 
effects of socialization, which restrict the person’s alternatives for action, 
that is, causally affect their behavior, is misguided. Character traits do not 
limit a person’s autonomy, they are, ideally, an expression of autonomy. 
Aristotle was aware of this connection: In his Nicomachean Ethics, he 
describes virtues as being a hexis (attitude) as well as a prohairesis (expression 
of a decision or individual preference). Virtues (character traits) are not 
just results of a process of socialization that forces us to overcome the 
3  STRUCTURAL RATIONALITY 

40
natural order and to enter a social order, they are expressions of the 
authorship of our lives, of our ability to give life structure and meaning. 
The individual optimizer would disintegrate, only the structurally rational 
agent can preserve his identity over time.
The respective preferences reflect not only instantaneous propositional 
attitudes, but they also reflect general attitudes, virtues, and preferences, 
that is, that which provides structure to a person’s life. Introducing 
stubbornness into a battle of the sexes means attributing a structural 
element. This is extremely relevant for the analysis, for if this structural 
characteristic did not exist, A announcing his strategy would make little 
impression on B. The second interpretation of the battle of the sexes involves 
a reinterpretation of the ordinal numbers, which now represent evaluations 
that transcend individual interests. The person insusceptible to extortion 
not only aims to optimize her own interests, but she also aims at doing 
what she believes is right despite (illegitimate) threats.
The person willing to cooperate usually reveals a structural attitude as 
well, namely an evaluation that applies to situations like the prisoner’s 
dilemma in general, not just to specific realizations of it. This does not 
amount to abandoning the conditionality of a person’s willingness to 
cooperate. I am willing to cooperate if I can expect others to cooperate. If 
I cannot expect the cooperation of the other person involved, I do not opt 
for the cooperative alternative and instead optimize my individual 
outcome.
The Kantian agent, too, has made a structural decision: He tests his 
maxims for their suitability to become a general rule of action. If a maxim 
fails the test, he does not adhere to it. In prisoner’s dilemma situations, 
however, the results of this test are quite ambivalent: Our prisoners, testing 
their maxim, might each conclude the following: “I cannot wish to live in 
a society (of thieves) who, when under pressure, rat out their accomplices. 
The maxim of blowing the whistle on my accomplice whenever it serves 
my own interests cannot be universalized (in a society of thieves).” If we 
provide an index for the decision situation (“thief practice”), cooperation 
is a moral duty for Kantian thieves. The question “Can I wish to live in a 
society in which thieves remain silent in such situations?” may lead, 
however, to the maxim’s rejection. This implies that the index for thief 
practice has been revoked. The claim that such an index is inadmissible 
according to Kantian ethics is invalid since Kant’s own examples permit 
such indices. Whatever the result of the Kantian maxim test, it seems 
obvious to me that even unconditional cooperation (as a possible result of 
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

41
the test) can be rational. Why shouldn’t a person identify with this 
structural feature of her behavior and accordingly make a structurally 
rational decision? This would give her life a structure and possibly make 
her prone to exploitation by others (the decent becomes the stupid), but 
this need not concern the rational Kantian person. The neutrality 
requirement still applies: We should regard such motives for action as 
possibly rational (we should not, however, make cooperative motive a 
rule). Cooperation can be rational even if one cannot expect others to 
cooperate and even if one should expect others to refuse cooperation. 
Even the rigid moral agent is not necessarily irrational.
3.6    Collective Intentionality
Cooperation is realized when each participant wants to contribute to a 
common practice that he knows is desirable or at least acceptable to all 
participants and which would be preferable (from each person’s perspective) 
to the collective practice which would result from the optimization of 
individual consequences of action. This is a form of collective intentionality: 
I want us to do something, and I am willing to do my part. Collective 
intentionality is constituted by the reciprocal individual assessments, 
which determine whether collective intentions are at hand.
All participants having the same intentions is not enough for collective 
intentions. All children in a class wanting the rest of the day off because of 
hot weather is merely a collective desire. Collective intentions, however, 
require all participants to be aware that others have the same desire as they 
do. This desire transforms into a collective intention if it becomes the 
motivation for an action (motivating collective intention) or is directed at 
the execution of a collective action (prior collective intention or collective 
decision).
The simplest form of collective intention is thus:
	1.	 All persons want a collective action (i.e., nothing other than a com­
bination of single actions) to be executed.
	2.	 Every person knows that (1).
3  STRUCTURAL RATIONALITY 

42
	 	
23
Everybody not only has an intention to act (which is directed at the 
realization of the same collective action), all participants also have a 
collective knowledge about everybody’s individual intention to act. An 
important characteristic of collective intentionality is thus the willingness 
to contribute to a reasonable collective practice as well as the epistemic 
situation of collective intentionality, that is, the common knowledge about 
the individual willingness to act. In this case, however, prohairetic attitudes 
interlock with epistemic attitudes: My willingness to act does not simply 
occur at the individual level, it is conditional upon the expectation that 
others share this willingness to act. My intention to act (to contribute 
to cooperation) therefore depends on me expecting (assuming or even 
knowing) others to be willing to cooperate. Collective intentionality in 
the paradigmatic case of cooperation is thus based on two inextricably 
linked propositional attitudes: action-guiding desires (intentions) and 
expectations (knowledge) about the intentions of others.
We already established that cooperation is not defined by the assess­
ment and evaluation of consequences alone. The information about con­
sequences and the assessment of possible combinations of single actions is 
insufficient to adequately describe a situation in which cooperative actions 
are possible. An adequate description must consider the (conceptual!) 
interdependence between the epistemic and prohairetic propositional atti­
tudes. This conceptual (analytical) link is constitutive of cooperation.
Collective intentionality does not presuppose collective agents. It does not 
assume, in addition to individual agents, a type of collective agent to 
whom we could ascribe mental states such as intentions or knowledge. 
Collective intentionality is grounded in individual persons and the relations 
that hold between them. Cooperation is constituted by individual persons 
and their epistemic as well as prohairetic propositional attitudes. Individual 
persons are not functions of a collective will as is claimed by collectivist 
approaches such as Marxism, Hegelianism, Systems Theory (Luhmann) or 
Social Darwinism. Individuals are not the puppets or executive body of a 
collective will. The collective will (i.e., the intentionality pertaining to 
23 These replications can be continued indefinitely. It is obvious that, in reality, they have 
to end somewhere. This endpoint will vary for each participant: A knows that B knows that 
A desires, A knows that B knows that A knows that B knows that A knows that B knows that 
A desires, ... but also A knows that B knows that C knows that B desires ….
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

43
collective actions) is rather composed, as it were, of individual 
intentionalities. The collective will represent individual intentions to act.
This concept of collective intentionality differs significantly from the 
atomistic view, which regards other agents participating in interaction as 
part of the environment, as environmental conditions. My willingness to 
cooperate does not make the cooperation of others more likely; my 
cooperative action does not influence the behavior of others interacting 
with me. That is why, for the proponent of atomism, the behavior of 
others is merely an environmental condition rather than a part of the 
world I am interacting with. The concept of collective intentionality, as 
introduced here, differs crucially from this atomistic version of 
individualism. It remains individualistic insofar as collective intentionality 
is constituted by individual intentionalities.
24
24 Cf. Tuomela, Raimo. 2013. Social Ontology: Collective Intentionality and Group Agents. 
New York: Oxford University Press.
3  STRUCTURAL RATIONALITY 

45
CHAPTER 4
Structural Agency
4.1    Prohairesis
Action theory in classical antiquity undoubtedly had in mind what we in 
this book have called “structural rationality”: How does the single action 
fit into a larger context of a practice or mode of action? Aristotle claimed 
that each action is an expression of a certain attitude (hexis), preference 
(prohairesis), or virtue (arete). Contemporary Aristotelian interpretations 
define arete either as a form of capability or leaning toward the behavioristic 
tradition, as a behavioral habit or disposition. Both interpretations are a 
watered-down version of Aristotelian virtue ethics. In his Nicomachean 
Ethics, Aristotle explicitly states that while arete is formed by habits it is 
also (an expression of) hexis and prohairesis. This characterization refutes 
the objection that virtue ethics has no adequate understanding of persons 
because what is morally essential is determined by upbringing and 
belonging to a community. Virtue properly understood, however, is in fact 
that which we are responsible for, not our parents or other factors 
influencing upbringing. According to our conception, this means that 
virtues are also guided by reasons. It is always my reasons that determine 
my (evaluative) attitudes. And since my reasons are a decisive factor, I am 
responsible for their effects.
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature 
Switzerland AG 2023
J. Nida-Rümelin, A Theory of Practical Reason, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-17319-6_4

46
1
2
1 In German, I use the term “punktuell,” meaning something like “restricted to a point in 
time and social agency,” but there seems to be no perfect English translation. Therefore, in 
most cases “single act” or “individual action” might suffice, to make clear, what is meant, in 
other cases, as here, I use “pointwise” for “punktuell.”
2 What cannot be thought of cannot be desired. However, some things that can be thought 
of cannot be desired. The desirability criterion on which Kant himself bases the application 
of the Categorical Imperative is therefore an even stronger version of the categorical impera­
tive. Of course, we can think of a society whose people commit prudential suicide. If Kant is 
right, however, a society in which people commit prudential suicide is not desirable. 
Therefore, I am morally forbidden to commit prudential suicide.
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

47
3
Another possible interpretation of the belief-desire-theory is to con­
ceive it as a justificatory scheme of single acts. The first interpretation is 
empirical and causal, the second normative and non-causal. Both versions 
face the problem of structural rationality, that is, how to embed an indi­
vidual, pointwise act in a broader practice. We demonstrated this difficulty 
within the conceptual framework of a game theory before (the problem of 
cooperation). In the following, I discuss some essential traits of a structural 
theory of action in general.
4.2    The Incoherence of Decision Theory
Contrary to a popular misconception, it is precisely rational decision the­
ory, the mathematical apparatus of modern economics, which strikingly 
displays the deficits of the paradigm of individual optimization. The 
criterion of practical rationality that commonly underlies the various 
models of decision theory, that is, the maximization of expected utility, is 
abandoned in the transition to game theory (the theory of rational 
interactions). Many who work with the conceptual apparatus of decision 
theory and game theory are unaware of this. In the Bayesian interpretation, 
which is the most universally applicable, the agent’s subjective expectations 
(probabilities) and subjective desirabilities (preferences) can always be 
assumed to be given. Subjective preferences can be ascribed based on 
manifest or potential choices between probabilistic alternatives, and 
subjective desirabilities can be ascribed in terms of the specific maximum 
odds that the person is willing to accept in a bet. Obviously, it is necessary 
for this practice of ascription to likewise assume certain temporal 
invariances. For if we had to assume that the preferences and subjective 
probabilities of the acting person changed within seconds, it would only 
be possible to determine specific decisions made, but it would not be 
3 Cf. Davidson, Donald. 1963. Actions, Reasons, and Causes. Journal of Philosophy 60: 
685–700, and id. 2001. Essays on Actions and Events. Oxford: Oxford University Press: 3–20. 
In Chaps. 7 and 8 of this book, we reject the first assumption (1): Reasons are not causes in 
a naturalist understanding; that is, they cannot be described within the conceptual frames of 
physics or neurophysiology. And the second assumption (2) illustrates that (1) cannot be 
upheld; see also Sect. 4.6.
4  STRUCTURAL AGENCY 

48
possible to determine their coherence with both kinds of propositional 
attitudes (desires and expectations). The assessment of the decision 
situation, that is, of all the aspects of the current and future state of the 
world that are potentially relevant for the decision, condenses to the 
respective agent’s subjective probabilities. What is appealing about the 
Bayesian interpretation is precisely that it renders itself independent from 
the availability of objective probabilities and thereby secures its universal 
applicability. If the so-called utility function is interpreted merely as a 
representation of subjective preferences irrespective of their motivation, 
this model of rationality seems limitless in terms of application. The 
coupling of the probability and utility function ensures that there is always 
at least one course of action available that maximizes expected utility. If 
there are several courses of action that maximize expected utility, the 
person is indifferent between them. In this respect, there is always a 
rational recommendation for action. At least one course of action can be 
considered to be rational, and if there are several, then what arises is not a 
dilemma but merely a situation of indifference.
Some consider this harmonic picture to be boring because of its exces­
sive simplicity; others find it fascinating precisely for the same reason. This 
picture, however, cannot, in any case, be applied to rationality in interac­
tion situations, that is, to game theory, because game theory cannot pro­
vide rational recommendations for many cases in a sense that can be made 
mathematically precise. This has to do with the fact that most game for­
mats do not have a Nash equilibrium or have several Nash equilibria that 
are not realizable for the individual agent if she cannot coordinate with 
other agents; or because the interests regarding the various equilibria 
diverge between the parties involved in the interaction.
How can we explain this incoherence between decision theory in the 
narrower sense, that is, the theory of a person’s rational decisions given a 
specific uncertain environment, and game theory, which deals with 
rationality in interactions? Equilibria are an indispensable condition for 
rationality in game theory because its rationality recommendation is 
potentially directed at all agents, including the participants of an 
interaction. In more philosophical terms: The radical atomistic 
individualism of decision theory in the narrower sense is given up in the 
transition to game theory. The other agents involved in an interaction are 
not merely part of the environment. They are part of a shared world and 
are themselves potential addressees of game theory’s recommendation.
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

49
Nevertheless, game theory remains an individualistic theory of rational­
ity. It does not appeal to a collective of agents because in this case only 
Pareto-efficient combinations of individual strategies would qualify as 
rationality recommendations. However, the framework of game theory 
does not exclude equilibria that are not Pareto-efficient as rationality 
recommendations. Game theory does not provide recommendations for 
action to a collective, but merely recommendations for action to 
individuals, under the condition that the simultaneous recommendation 
of a practice to different persons participating in the interaction is 
compatible with the fact that all persons are informed about this 
recommendation. An equilibrium is nothing other than a combination of 
individual strategies for which it is the case that none of the agents involved 
in the interaction have a reason to individually deviate from this 
combination of strategies provided they assume that the other participants 
of the interaction adhere to their respective strategies. It is obvious that 
there is an epistemic coherence condition involved, namely that the 
respective rationality recommendation is compatible with shared 
knowledge of all rationality recommendations in this situation.
4
­
­
4 In the following “decision theory” means “decision theory in the narrower sense.”
4  STRUCTURAL AGENCY 

50
5
­
­
5 Cf. RatC.
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

51
6
One might think that mutual information is enough to determine 
which of the two equilibria in this game format (battle of the sexes) is 
realized by rational agents. This is not the case, however. In fact, the 
person, let us assume it’s A, who informs the other person B that she 
chooses according to her interest (a1), expecting the other person to stick 
to the equilibrium point <a1,b1>, forces B to choose between a total loss 
(O), in case he chooses b2 or accepting an inferior outcome (1). Those 
who stick to the maximizing model of rational choice would claim that it 
is obvious how the other person decides. That this is not the case can be 
seen from the fact that the other person B could react and communicate 
to A that he would stick to the equilibrium that is more advantageous for 
him. B on his turn is then forcing A to choose between complete loss or 
an inferior outcome. The temporal sequence of the mutual information 
loses its relevance precisely under the assumption that we are dealing with 
rational persons. For such persons, there is no self-restriction that takes all 
options out of the game. However, the empirical analysis of negotiation 
strategies knows a multitude of self-restricting behavior to force others 
into the defensive. For example, a public commitment of a public agent 
who must make sure not to lose credibility looks like a self-restricting 
commitment, which has to appear like an externally determined 
commitment for the others involved in the negotiation. The consequence 
is then that the different participants of the negotiation make different 
commitments that are mutually incompatible and that lead to the infamous 
rationality traps.
The ethification of game theory, in particular the theory of negotiation 
games, has tried to address this problem from a theoretical standpoint. 
The success was moderate because the criteria were limited to equilibrium 
solutions and thus were too restrictive for ethification from the outset. 
Without making the transition to a structural understanding of the 
rationality of action, the aporias of rational interaction cannot be resolved. 
The fact that many interaction situations do not contain equilibria and 
that there is therefore no rational recommendation from a game-theoretic 
perspective should be motivation enough to follow this path. In its current 
version that gears toward individual rationality, game theory simultaneously 
suffers from an over-determination of its rationality recommendations in 
6 Cf. Appendix, Battle of the Sexes.
4  STRUCTURAL AGENCY 

52
the case of multiple equilibria and from under-determination in cases 
when there are no equilibrium points. But even if there is a unique 
equilibrium point, there is no guarantee that it complies with minimal 
requirements for structural rationality.
4.3    Collective Irrationality
Single optimizing actions pose problems not only in interaction situations 
for game theory, as we saw in the previous section, but also for collective 
decisions. Collective choice theory generated important insights in this 
regard which we will briefly discuss here to lay the foundation for a 
structural theory of action.
7
­
8
7 Cf. LkE, Chap. 5.
8 Cf. Nida-Rümelin, Julian, Thomas Schmidt, and Axel Munk. 1996. Interpersonal depen­
dency of preferences. Theory and Decision 41: 257–280.
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

53
This problem in its most generalized form, that is, transferring indi­
vidual rationality to collective rationality, represents the key motivation for 
a conception of structural rationality and highlights the importance of 
normative rules in general: Individual rationality cannot be merged into 
an overall reasonable practice—this applies to persons and their individual 
way of life as well as to collectives, societies, or the humanity as a whole. 
We might assume, from a perspective of evolutionary biology, that family 
cohesion, empathy among loved ones, willingness to cooperate in larger 
groups, and other similar phenomena are consequences of an adaptive 
evolutionary, process as a driver for competition. This is at least true for 
competition among different human cultures. While kin selection has 
remained controversial in Darwinian evolutionary biology, its cultural 
analog cannot be denied: Human communities framed by mutual trust 
and willingness to cooperate face more favorable conditions for their 
development than communities struggling with mutual mistrust and lack 
of cooperation. Smaller communities with close cooperation offer more 
favorable conditions for the convergence of an individually optimizing, yet 
collectively rational, practice. In larger communities, divergence is 
increasing, which in turn raises the cost for behavioral control through 
incentives and sanctions to counteract collective irrationality and instability.
Communication plays a crucial role in this context. Communication 
itself depends on demanding ethical conditions since truthfulness and 
trust are necessary conditions for successful communication. In fact, all 
cultures ethically require some degree of truthfulness, although this degree 
varies between different cultures: People expect each other to only claim 
what the speaker believes to be true. The ostracism from closer social 
networks for violating this rule is stronger than in cases of sporadic 
interaction between people that are basically strangers. Some archaic 
cultures limit the scope of truthfulness and trust to family or ethnicity. 
This, however, means that reliable communication is also limited to these 
specific networks within a culture.
According to the Gibbard-Satterthwaite theorem, truthfulness, and 
trust are not only moral rules that enable communicative acts and sustain 
meanings of linguistic expressions, but they also help to safeguard collective 
rationality. If we assume incorporating individual preference as a public 
process, that is, accessible to all involved in a collective decision, truthfulness 
and trust as constitutive rules for communication make manipulative and 
4  STRUCTURAL AGENCY 

54
strategic behavior impossible or at least restrict it depending on the 
respective level of conformity with these rules and the severity of 
sanctioning in case of non-compliance. Ethical rules such as truthfulness 
and trust are stabilizers that counteract the chaotic tendencies of individual 
optimizing behavior. They safeguard one aspect of structural rationality: 
reliable communication and deliberative (political) practice.
4.4    Structural Intentions
If the action of a person is understood as a causal intervention, guided by 
motivational intentions, taking into account the consequences of the 
action, and if the criteria of rationality are limited to the consequences to 
be expected, then the adherence to rules such as truthfulness and trust is 
only rational if this ensures the success of this causal intervention, or more 
precisely, optimizes the action’s consequences. In this understanding, 
compliance with rules is either contingent or the consequence of incentives 
and sanctions that make compliance with rules individually optimizing. 
Insight into the reasonableness of a rule alone is insufficient here. One 
could say that modern theory of action has devoted itself to the Hobbesian 
paradigm. Hobbes has impressively argued that people’s insight into the 
reasonableness of certain rules of action is insufficient to render compliance 
with these rules rational. Leges naturales which would secure civil peace 
are advocated by all rational agents. That is to say, all rational agents desire 
that everyone would adhere to these leges naturales, yet, at the same time, 
it is individually irrational to adhere to them. The reasonableness of a rule 
does not guarantee that its observance is reasonable. In modern economic 
theory and its practical applications, this understanding has coagulated 
into a dogma. This explains the extensive and detailed incentive programs 
of present-day companies.
However, if we shift the focus from the extremes to lifeworld practice, 
it becomes evident that individual optimization and structural conformity 
go hand in hand. Single actions form smaller and larger units that only 
make sense as a whole. If each of these single actions were chosen to 
optimize the given options for action and possible consequences of action, 
it would almost be impossible that the sequence of the entirety of these 
single actions would produce a coherent picture. The attempt to capture 
this in the paradigm of pointwise optimization, in which the single action 
determines the conditions of subsequent actions, misses the lifeworld 
practice of behavioral control. We perform a single action because it fits 
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

55
into a desired structure of action. Almost every choice of action (pragma) 
is motivated by the fact that it is part of a temporally extended behavior or 
practice (praxis) which we intend to realize. We perform an action as part 
of a more comprehensive practice. The intentions that are decisive in the 
particular case are to be understood as part of more comprehensive 
intentions that guide the respective practice. We need to know what 
function the single action has within a larger structural framework in order 
to be able to judge whether this action is reasonable.
9
10
9 Cf. Simon, Herbert A. 1955. A Behavioral Model of Rational Choice. Quarterly Journal 
of Economics 69: 99–118, and id. 1972. Theories of Bounded Rationality. Decision and 
Organization 1: 161–176; Gigerenzer, Gerd. 2010. Moral Satisficing: Rethinking Moral 
Behavior as Bounded Rationality. Topics in Cognitive Science 2: 528–554.
10 The plural of praxis.
4  STRUCTURAL AGENCY 

56
There is no action without a decision. Actions always precede inten­
tions which are met by the respective actions in the sense of the act-token. 
This is the difference between motivating and preceding intentions: moti­
vating intentions guide actions, but they are not realized by the action 
itself, whereas preceding intentions (decisions) are realized by the action 
itself: The decision is realized in acting and the seriousness of decision is 
expressed in acting, this, in turn, occurs both as pragma and praxis. The 
structural praxis determines the rationality of the single acts from which it 
is composed. It is not possible to characterize the act as rational or irrational 
in isolation from the intended praxis. It is only the structural context of a 
practice that makes an act appear more or less rational as part of this 
practice.
For the sake of argument, we shall compare two extremes: the radical 
optimizing theory and the radical structural theory. The first theory 
requires the agent to optimize given the circumstances of every single act, 
that is, choose the alternative that maximizes expected value given utility 
and subjective probability. The obvious problem with this radical 
optimizing theory of action is not only that it is far removed from the 
lifeworld practice in which we all partake, but also that no sensible practice 
generally results from the sequence of optimizing actions. The problems 
of interpersonal coordination of action present themselves analogously to 
people in an interpersonal shape in the temporal sequence of different 
optimizing acts.
The radical alternative would be the structurally rational wise, who 
makes only one single decision, namely, the one concerning the choice of 
her own lifeform. She chooses all individual decisions as instrumentally 
rational with regard to this comprehensive existential decision for one 
specific form of life. The objection that one cannot make such an existential 
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

57
overall decision because one does not yet know the future and thus the 
concrete conditions for action is correct, practically speaking. Yet in theory, 
it is irrelevant. The choice of an overall strategy, the choice of a lifeform 
can consist in the determination of a strategy. This strategy determines 
those acts for all possible decision situations, which would establish the 
desired lifeform. Only once does the structurally rational wise person 
decide for this super-strategy of her life.
Both extremes are far removed from the reality of life: that of the struc­
turally rational sage which resembles Far Eastern wisdom, and that of the 
optimizer, who lives mostly in economic textbooks. The conception of 
structural rationality of action avoids both extremes. Behavioral control 
through intentions is only possible and only makes sense in a medium 
range. We control our practice and direct the individual sections of this 
practice accordingly. At the same time, we remain open to revisions and 
change decisions in favor of a structurally more coherent agency. Pointwise 
optimization has its place in structural agency, if it respects the limits, set 
by structures that we are not prepared to abandon. Rational optimization 
takes place within the framework of established and desired structures 
of agency.
As agents we are effective in the world, we influence how this world 
develops, we intervene in and change causal chains. This active role is an 
expression of our special ability to be guided by reasons. Being affected by 
reasons gives us this freedom and makes us agents. As optimizing monads 
we would not be effective, instead, we would be confronted with a chaotic 
scenario of unintended effects, we would become witnesses of an 
incoherent individual and collective practice.
4.5    The Structural Concept of Action
11
11 Anscombe, Elizabeth. 1957. Intention. Oxford: Blackwell.
4  STRUCTURAL AGENCY 

58
12
13
­
14
The list of activities mentioned in the example above is determined by 
causal processes, not by the intentions of the acting person. Let us assume 
the person operating the lever thought it was pure water that he filled into 
the tank, when in fact the water was poisoned. Then we can say “the 
person poisoned the contents of the tank” or, focusing on the negative 
consequences, of the agent’s action, “he poisoned a house inhabitant” 
(thereby referring to the causal effects of the person’s action). However, if 
the person undoubtedly did not know that the water was poisoned and we 
cannot blame him for his ignorance (perhaps he should have informed 
himself, but failed to do so, perhaps there were ways to check if the water 
is clean...), we won’t hold him responsible for the unintended and 
unforeseeable consequences of his actions. In other words: We do not 
actually ascribe the act of poisoning to that person, although, causally 
speaking, he poisoned the inhabitants. Actions are intentional behavior, 
that is, a practice controlled by motivating, preceding, and concomitant 
intentions, and responsibility only extends to activities characterized 
12 Cf. Hart, H.L.A. 1948. The Ascription of Responsibility and Rights. Proceedings of the 
Aristotelian Society 49: 171–194.
13 Cf. Pitcher, George. 1960. Hart on Action and Responsibility. Philosophical Review 69: 
226–235; and most prominent: Feinberg, Joel. 1970. Action and Responsibility. In Doing 
and Deserving. Essays in the Theory of Responsibility. Princeton: University Press.
14 Cf. Nida-Rümelin, Julian. 2018. Responsibility in Philosophy and Law. Keynote on the 
Symposium Rights, Responsibility and Justice. 24th World Congress of Philosophy in Beijing 
August 2018 (published in the Proceedings).
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

59
accordingly. Responsibility does not extend to all causal effects of an 
action, if those effects weren’t known and could not have been foreseen by 
the person executing the action.
The easiest way to grasp this is to hold a person responsible for their 
actions, that is, to characterize actions as those aspects of a person’s 
behavior for which the person is responsible and to derive all ascription of 
responsibility from this primary responsibility. Thus, people would be 
exclusively responsible for their actions (in the realm of practice, not in the 
realm of emotions and beliefs). Further ascriptions of responsibility, for 
example damaging third parties, must be reduced to, or rather, be derived 
from this primary responsibility for actions.
We can use the example above to verify the plausibility of this approach. 
Suppose the person in question did what he does every day during dry 
season, that is, fill the cistern with water from an emergency tank and 
operate a lever to do so. The motivating intention is to supply the house 
inhabitants with water and to fill the tank with water in order to do so. A 
preceding intention could be: This morning at 6:30 a.m. I am going to 
climb the roof of the house and refill the tank. The person performs this 
action (refilling the tank) by operating a lever. Both actions, operating the 
lever and refilling the tank, can be ascribed to the person as actions; these 
actions fulfill previous intentions or decisions that were already made. 
Both decisions are linked by the person’s belief that operating the lever 
will refill the tank. In this example, refilling the tank is a structurally 
framing action and repeatedly pulling the lever back and forth is a single 
action. We can assume that the single action does not segment into more 
single actions. That is to say, the person moves the lever once and again 
and again and again and again and each time she can decide to leave it at 
that and the consequence of these single actions results in a structural 
action because of the causal process that is triggered by the single actions 
refilling the tank. The framing intention is directed at refilling the tank, 
the individual intentions—resulting from or motivated by the framing 
intention—are directed at the repeated operation of the lever. The details 
of realizing this framing intention are irrelevant. The single activities are 
motivated by structural activities—provided a person can justify their 
structural intentions. The opposite, however, does not apply: Individual 
intentions do not motivate structural intentions.
The extent to which we ascribe actions depends on the epistemic state 
of the acting person. Thus, responsibility is limited to an agent’s epistemic 
and prohairetic state at the time of action. Ascribing responsibility requires 
4  STRUCTURAL AGENCY 

60
a certain behavior to exhibit action character, that is, the prerequisite for 
responsibility ascription is that the behavior was intentionally controlled 
and guided by reasons, not just mere behavior.
Intentional control as a condition for the action character of behavior is 
widely accepted, linking the character of actions to reasons, however, 
requires justification. This connection is established as follows: No decisions 
without motives (previous intentions), no motives without reasons. If you 
have a motive, you can justify your action upon questioning. Motives are 
nothing other than what can be cited as a reason for an action. Reasons 
that are irrelevant for motives are not action-guiding reasons and therefore 
have no justificatory role. Only intentionally controlled behavior has 
action character. Intentional control has three dimensions: Motives, 
decisions, and behavior-concomitant intentionality.
The difference between an intentionally controlled action and decisions 
can be characterized via the role of reasons: Decisions are fulfilled by actions 
and decisions conclude the process of deliberation. The time passed between 
a decision and its corresponding action may vary, during this time, 
however, reasons are no longer effective. Decisions terminate the 
effectiveness of reasons, the transition from decision to action is no longer 
guided by the reasons that motivated the action. We will discuss further 
necessary differentiations in the next section.
It is important to emphasize that the justificatory relations cascade 
from a framing action down to the component actions (i.e., actions that 
make up a framing action), not vice versa: The operation of the lever 
would be incomprehensible without the person’s intention of supplying 
the house inhabitants with water. The framing intention to refill the water 
tank in order to supply the house inhabitants with water justifies the partial 
intentions such as climbing the roof and repeatedly operating the lever. 
The motive for operating the lever is refilling the water tank, not the other 
way around: My wanting to operate the lever is not the motive for refilling 
the tank. The causal relation extends from parts to the whole, the justificatory 
relation from the whole to its parts. The motivating intention that controls 
my behavior is refilling the tank to supply the house inhabitants with water 
and the single actions that my behavior is composed of do not require 
additional motivation. In fact, they have no motives of their own. The 
motive for single actions is derived exclusively from the motive for the 
overall action. The ascription of action is limited by the scope of 
expectations and intentions that a person associates with a certain action.
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

61
In this example, the structural action is the primary action in so far as it 
is guided by preceding, motivating, and concomitant intentions, which 
makes it an intentionally structured action. My framing (structural) actions 
impact the world, I am responsible for those actions. The reasons I can 
give for a certain action always refer to structural actions while single 
actions make sense only as a means for realizing a structural action. Their 
motivation derives from the motives for a structural action. In other 
words: The structural action is the logically primary action and single 
actions are its derivative. This means the action character of single actions 
is secondary. Their character is expressed in the intentional control of 
these actions. Single actions become less action-like in an increasingly 
routine practice; they become automatisms and eventually turn into mere 
behavioral components lacking any action character. This does not weaken 
the intentional control I have over my practice; it increases it. The more 
automated single actions become, the less prone a structural practice is to 
error. More automated behavioral components that are not subject to 
individual intentional control do usually not result in a loss of authorship. 
On the contrary, routine practice can limit itself to the interventions 
essential for intentional control of behavior; it relieves the author of 
annoying detailed control that makes structural actions cumbersome and 
prone to error.
4.6    Structural Action and Causality
When people speak of causality, it is usually assumed that this concept is 
clearly defined in natural science. However, in the most advanced of the 
natural sciences, theoretical physics, causality plays no prominent role. In 
classical physics (classical mechanics, thermodynamics, and electro­
dynamics) it is laws that are postulated and empirically tested. Regardless 
of the emergence of relativistic physics in the beginning of the twentieth 
century and of quantum physics some years later, these classical laws are 
extremely precise and reliable. The regularities of classical physics establish 
links between physical units of measurement, for example, mass and accel­
eration according to the Newtonian law that force is the product of mass 
and acceleration, or between the forces acting on a current-carrying con­
ductor and the strength of a magnetic field, or between thermal conduc­
tivity, depending on the material and its thickness, and the quantity of heat 
that is transferred. Or between the position and the velocity of a body in a 
gravitational field at a given point in time and the position and velocity of 
4  STRUCTURAL AGENCY 

62
the same body at a later moment in time after it has passed through the 
gravitational field and so on. Physical units of measurement are set into 
relation; the mathematical form utilizes different real-valued functions. 
Talk of causality becomes superfluous.
Our intuitive understanding of causality forms a connection between 
events. One event happens, another event happens, and if the event of the 
latter type follows the event of the former type regularly, we assume a 
causal link. Classical physics, however, does not speak of events. It describes 
processes and systematically captures the relations between different 
processes. Systematically here means in mathematical language that the 
empirically determinable processes are approximately depictable in the 
mathematical model. The angle at which the moon stands relative to a 
given point on the Earth’s surface at a given point in time can be derived 
mathematically in this form of description from the moon’s angle and 
angular velocity at an earlier moment in time. But this connection is not a 
causal one. Of course, one can interpret a law of behavior as a sequence of 
individual events, but that does not add anything substantial to what we 
already know, namely the law. This interpretation of causality appears out 
of place due to the lack of intervening events.
The canonical place to speak of causation is not physics, but human 
action. It is our experience as free agents that we intervene in the course of 
the world with our decisions. The world would look different if I had 
decided differently. Actions causally affect the world. It is our experience 
as agents that determines our understanding of causality: I had the oppor­
tunity to decide differently. I could have assured myself that the water in 
the reservoir was clean and nobody would have died. My actions are caus­
ally effective in the world because there were other options, because I 
could have acted differently. Without alternative possibilities, without real 
choice, there is no decision and no action, no authorship. We are the 
authors of our life insofar as we decide to act one way and not another 
even though we could have decided differently. This is the paradigm of 
causality: Having decided one way and not the other, even though there 
were other options, and thus having exerted a causal effect in the world.
15
15 For more on this, see Chap. 5.
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

63
16
The ability to integrate single actions into a desired structural context 
of practice as a whole comprises the core of what we call willpower. The 
more structured our practice is, the freer and more self-determined we are. 
The seemingly paradoxical thesis of Immanuel Kant, which says that 
reasonableness and freedom are two sides of the same coin, is, perhaps 
somewhat unexpectedly, supported by the structural theory of action.
Let us assume for the sake of argument that we had a value function 
that we use to determine the choice of the respective action. That is to say 
that we try to decide in such a manner that the consequences of the 
16 Davidson’s anomalous monism seems to be a version of the causal efficacy of reasons, but 
this is not the case. In fact, it is explaining away the causal efficacy of reasons. If the epistemic 
states of the agents are the causal effects of their genetic make-up and their epigenetic and 
sensory history, and if the respective action-guiding motives can be reduced to given desires 
that are themselves not the result of deliberations, the causal role of reasons vanishes in the 
sequence of causally determined natural events. Davidson assumes, that the respective com­
binations of epistemic and prohairetic states (belief/desire) are causally effective for the 
action that follows, but that there is no law that describes this relation. I agree that the regu­
larity account of causality does not apply to human agency. I also agree that accepted reasons, 
that is, mental states, are causally relevant for what I do. But contrary to Davidson I am 
convinced that this speaks against monism: The efficacy of reasons cannot be described 
within the conceptual frames of natural science, and the fact that there are no lawful relations 
between propositional attitudes and acts (the anomaly) speaks against monism. The combi­
nation of anomaly and monism does not work. Either there are natural laws that causally 
explain how propositional attitudes result in acts, or monism has to be given up regarding 
the causal role of reasons. I opt for the latter. Cf. Davidson (2001).
4  STRUCTURAL AGENCY 

64
respective action optimize this value function. It cannot be assumed that 
the individually optimizing actions constitute a structural action that 
optimizes this value function. Usually, these two optimization procedures 
will diverge. Correspondingly, we act structurally rationally to the extent 
that we refrain from optimization through single actions if this optimization 
is incompatible with structural optimization. Weakness of the will expresses 
itself in the optimization of single actions that are incompatible with the 
respective structures. Even if every single action is causally effective, 
provided that it realizes a specific option despite other options being 
available, the effectiveness of my practice is larger if I act structurally 
rational. This “larger” expresses itself in the fact that the results correspond 
to my own evaluation to a greater extent.
My prohairetic (propositional) attitudes are more effective in the case 
of structurally rational action than in the case of individual optimizing 
action. Without alternative possibilities, there is no causality (of actions). 
This action-theoretic understanding of causality is also visible in scientific 
contexts: We ascribe causality to a natural event if it was decisive for the 
event whose cause we are looking for. This factor of being “decisive” is 
determined by what is considered normal and what is considered surprising, 
but also by the degree of change that would have been to be expected if 
the event had not happened. What is a trivial condition in the context of 
action, namely the existence of alternative possibilities, becomes dubious 
when it is transferred to the scientific domain. Here, alternative possibilities 
are not real but only counterfactual and hypothetical (at least in the 
context of deterministic theories). A person who decides to get up even 
though she could have remained seated had the real possibility of staying 
seated. The moon, by contrast, would assume a different angle relative to 
a respective point on the Earth’s surface if it had had a different position 
beforehand, but this possibility did not exist. The moon’s motion was 
determined by the preceding natural history. As an agent, I am not 
completely determined by my previous life history whenever I intervene 
by acting. As a structurally rational agent, I am causally effective because 
my action-guiding intentions, my prohairetic attitudes, my subjective 
assessments, determine the course of events. I choose between options 
that are real alternatives and I have no reason for regret if my assessments 
were correct and the consequences of my chosen actions are structurally 
rational: My life as a whole represents the reasons that guide my practice. 
Ideally, these reasons are coherent and the practice as a whole is structur­
ally rational.
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

65
4.7    Freedom and Determination 
in Structural Practice
17
In rational choice theory, a single action is rational if it optimizes the 
agent’s subjective value (the utility function) given his epistemic state at 
the moment of the decision (i.e., if it optimized expected utility). The 
rational choice account freezes the decision situation at this moment in 
time, so to speak: The epistemic state comprises the agent’s expectations 
regarding the consequences of his actions, including the possible actions 
of other persons (from a decision-theoretic perspective) and it turns his 
own future decisions into environmental factors. This is highly 
counterintuitive for the simple reason that this aspect of the circumstances 
is under the agent’s intentional control, which is why he cannot form 
expectations concerning them. It does not make sense to have subjective 
probabilities concerning one’s own future decisions/actions.
In the structural view, by contrast, the pragma is part of a praxis and 
both are in the control of the acting person. We do not choose a single 
action under a given (fixed) praxis, but rather move back and forth, 
consider which single action fits well with other single actions at a later 
point in time in order to form a coherent praxis. The pragmata later in 
time are not the subject of guesswork, but of decisions and prohairetic 
attitudes. My freedom as an agent is not limited to the single act of 
choosing between two options that are given at a respective moment in 
time, but rather extends—diachronically and interpersonally—to a 
temporal perspective that is open with regard to the future and to other 
persons. The person’s freedom expresses itself in the ability to shape the 
17 Cf. Arendt, Hannah. 1958. The Human Condition. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
4  STRUCTURAL AGENCY 

66
future and social interactions (within the bounds of their own efficacy as 
an agent). It is not limited to choosing one of the options that exist in the 
given moment and to treating this choice as an environmental factor in the 
next moment, and future choices as more or less probable states of affairs 
in the decision’s environment.
Even without Jean-Paul Sartre’s existentialist exaggerations (prior to 
his Marxist self-disciplining), the extent of freedom that rational agents 
have reaches beyond the moment of decision into one’s own future praxis. 
The reasonable person chooses the single act as a constitutive part of a 
practice she endorses. Since this practice cannot be fixed in advance, she 
constrains her options act by act as a causally intervening agent. Her biog­
raphy solidifies as the years go by, it becomes less fluid and increasingly 
crystallized, accompanied by a change in cognitive capacities, which psy­
chologists call the transition from fluid to crystallized intelligence. Those 
who are in harmony with their own biography need not lament the loss of 
this fluidity and need not excessively give in to the sentimental moods that 
often affect those who age even in young years. After all, the non-deter­
minedness and the openness of one’s own biography in an initially seem­
ingly unlimited future perspective can also give rise to insecurities and 
fears. It is not only Plato’s praise of seniority which sets this against the 
calmness of decisions already made and that which is already clarified—of 
the static. The kalè psychè, the beautiful soul, has come to rest, whereas the 
unfinished souls need dynamic change permanently.
18
Determination through structural rationality is self-imposed; it is a 
form of determination that makes freedom itself possible in the first place. 
18 Cf. Plato. Politeia, book 10.
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

67
The freedom of arbitrary or even optimizing choice of every single act 
would end in chaos and in an unstructured life full of regrets and self-­
deception. The freedom of a structurally rational person consists in 
determining her form of life by herself, in adopting structures that give her 
life meaning.
The fact that these choices—of the pragmata and praxeis—are an 
expression of accepted reasons is incompatible with existentialism’s radical 
subjectivity. The freedom of choice is framed within the knowledge of the 
good. But it is my knowledge and my reasons. The determination of 
structural rationality does not impede my freedom because it is self-­
imposed. Relinquishing freedom of choice does not weaken but rather 
strengthens authorship. The pragmata are now not only mere instruments 
of a machinery of optimization, but are rather coherent parts of a 
meaningful praxis, a lifeform that is not only coherent in and of itself, but 
that is also guided by good reasons that provide value and meaning and 
enable interaction and communication.
4.8    The Role of Chance
In rational choice theory, every decision is allocated to a certain point in 
time when it is made. Preferences are ascribed, based on choices for 
actions. Choice and preference are amalgamated through the ascription of 
preferences on the basis of manifest behavior (revealed preference). The 
rationality of a decision/an action is measured according to the preferences 
given at this temporal moment (represented by the utility function) and 
the empirical beliefs and expectations (represented by the subjective 
probability function). A decision/an action is rational if it maximizes the 
expected value of the utility function given the subjective probabilities at 
that moment in time.
In the structural theory of action, actions are expanded over time and 
space: Structural actions are not realized in one moment in one specific 
situation but are rather realized over a period of time or over a series of 
points in time over different situations, including interaction and 
communication, because structural agency (praxis) is realized by a 
multitude of single acts (pragmata). When we transition from an individual 
to a structural understanding, we have to preserve an element of the 
rational choice doctrine, namely the indexing of rationality criteria with 
the point in time at which the respective decision is made.
4  STRUCTURAL AGENCY 

68
Our lifeworld practice of ascribing responsibility does not hold persons 
responsible for things that happen by chance or things other persons 
decided on. Chance can become effective in various ways. It can prevent 
an evil deed from happening. This, however, does not morally exonerate 
the agent. Chance might cause a good deed to have terrible consequences. 
In existential cases, we speak of “tragic” actions.
19
20
21
Moral responsibility is based on three sources of information:
	1.	 The intentions (which motives did the agent have and which reasons 
guided these motives?)
	2.	 The beliefs (which descriptive and normative beliefs governed the 
decision?)
	3.	 The act itself (which is composed by an outer, behavioral part in 
time and space, and an inner part, which is mental, especially 
intentional)
19 Cf. Williams, Bernard. 1981. Moral Luck. In Moral Luck Philosophical Papers 1973–1980, 
20–39. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
20 Cf. Nagel, Thomas. 2013. Moral Luck. In The Philosophy of Free Will, ed. Paul Russell 
and Oisin Deery, 31–42. New York: Oxford University Press.
21 Cf. Nida-Rümelin (2018).
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

69
These three sources of information are not separate but interwoven, 
and it is the job of philosophical action and decision theory, but also of 
psychology, sociology, jurisprudence, and other disciplines, to systematically 
clarify this interrelation. The theory of practical reason presented in this 
book is intended as a contribution to this endeavor. It maintains a central 
element of the rational choice interpretation of rationality, albeit modified, 
namely the relativization of rationality (and responsibility) to the epistemic 
and prohairetic state of the agent at the moment of decision.
In line with lifeworld and juridical practices, however, there are addi­
tional conditions: Could it reasonably be expected from the person that 
she forms a more comprehensive idea (of the consequences of their action) 
before deciding? Or to put it in a different and popular formulation: 
“Could the person have known that p?” The rationality of a person is not 
merely assessed by the desires and beliefs that she actually has at the 
moment of the decision, but also by the objective reasons involved. Not-­
knowing alone does not absolve from moral culpability, it does so only in 
the case of not-being-able-to-know. The same holds for the prohairetic 
aspect of the action: Are the goals that the person was pursuing at least 
acceptable, ideally well-justified? The sniper’s goals of hindering or 
sabotaging the evacuation by killing innocent people do not justify the 
action; they are unacceptable. The motives are evil, the will guiding the 
action is evil and the deed is a crime, regardless of the respective 
consequences of each shot.
The acting person is not only responsible to ensure that the action is an 
appropriate means for reaching subjective goals, she is also responsible for 
the appropriateness of her motives and (empirical and normative) beliefs. 
This double appropriateness is assessed according to (objective) reasons. 
Disputes about what is and what is not appropriate speak in favor of a 
realist interpretation of the guiding theoretical and practical reasons. In 
such assessments, we grant agents a lot of leeway in making judgments and 
consider the acting person’s own interests to be an important determining 
factor of good (i.e., objectively good) reasons for action. It is legitimate to 
fulfill one’s own interests as long as certain conditions are met, for example, 
the condition that others are not harmed in the process. The mere 
intention of harming an innocent person makes the action morally bad, in 
the case of the sniper, it makes it a crime even if the realization of the 
sniper’s intention is thwarted by chance.
4  STRUCTURAL AGENCY 

70
22
The epistemic optimism that our theoretical deliberation rests on—the 
weighing of pro and con arguments to find out which beliefs are justified 
and which are not, in order to find out the actual facts of the matter, which 
beliefs are mistaken and which are correct—has a practical counterpart: 
the trust that it is worthwhile to make an effort to follow better reasons in 
order to realize a successful life both on an individual level and in 
interaction with others. If good arguments and bad arguments both spoke 
in favor of correct beliefs with the same probability, epistemic optimism 
would be untenable. If good intentions led to good consequences and bad 
consequences with the same probability, then there would be nothing that 
would speak in favor of being guided by practical reason.
23
22 Cf. Nagel (2013).
23 Rawls, John. 1971. A Theory of Justice. Cambridge/Mass.: Harvard University Press.
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

71
24
Lifeworld morality demands of responsible agents that they avoid 
actions where they have to worry that the action’s result might be the 
opposite of what was originally intended. In other words: We expect a 
kind of practical reason in which the action-guiding intentions and the 
expected consequences of the action are sufficiently closely correlated. 
The ethical asymmetry between the duty not to harm others, whereas 
there is no moral duty to provide advantages to others, extends into the 
theory of practical reason: Avoiding unintended harm has priority over the 
realization of good intentions. The deontological structure of moral practice 
results in the risk aversion of practical reason.
Within the context of the theory of structural rationality, the decision 
has a point in time that can be just as clearly defined, namely as the 
conclusion of deliberation. Beyond this point in time, there is no more 
weighing of action-guiding reasons: Structurally rational persons have 
committed themselves and realize this commitment through a desired 
praxis, regardless of how long it takes, which in turn still needs to be 
realized by various pragmata. Other options for action prevail, but a 
strong-willed, structurally rational person will not be tempted by these 
alternatives to restart deliberation on a decision she has already made.
24 Jonas, Hans. 1984. The Imperative of Responsibility. In Search for an Ethics of the 
Technological Age. Chicago: Chicago University Press.
4  STRUCTURAL AGENCY 

72
4.9    Token and Type
A specific action is a token, that is, a spatiotemporal process, controlled by 
motivating, preceding, and concomitant intentionality, as we described it 
in the previous section. The motivating and relevant intentions, however, 
are not directed at one specific action token, that is, one particular action 
as an individually occurring spatiotemporal process, but at a type, that is, 
an action of a certain kind. We may decide to get married next year but not 
decide on the date of the marriage, what wedding procedure we’ll have; 
maybe we haven’t even decided on a wedding location or made a list of 
everybody involved (the civil registry office, best man or woman...). The 
decision of two people to get married next year, however, has a clearly 
specified content: This preceding intention of getting married will be 
realized by a marriage next year, no matter the actual date or form. The 
marriage between two people planned for next year is an action type which 
is somewhat complex and whose realization requires certain institutional 
conditions to be fulfilled and institutional agents (registrars) to get 
involved. The two people who are now engaged cannot perform this act 
alone although their active consent is a constituent of getting married.
If the engaged couple suddenly has doubts and they want to postpone 
the marriage for another year or give it up altogether, these doubts nullify 
the seemingly already made decision. It means that both have not yet 
actually decided although they might have thought they did. Since a deci­
sion terminates the phase of deliberation and is realized by an action of a 
certain type (getting married next year).
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

73
25
­
­
­
­
­
25 Cf. Libet, Benjamin. 1999. Do we have free will? Journal of Consciousness Studies 6: 
47–57; Libet, Benjamin. 2005. Mind Time. The Temporal Factor in Consciousness. 
Cambridge/Mass.: Harvard University Press.
4  STRUCTURAL AGENCY 

74
­
26
27
26 I’m alluding here to Sophia Thomalla’s marriage in Georgia, USA: “I don’t really 
remember that anymore,” said Thomalla, asked how it happened that she got married to 
Andy La Plegua, “Sometimes you do things in life without thinking them through.” Cf. 
Gala, June 11, 2016.
27 It is not entirely clear whether the time of the decision really corresponds to the point in 
time the test person indicates. There might still be a difference between the time a person 
decided to move their hand and what they say about the position of the flying spot while they 
were making the decision.
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

75
­
28
However, let us assume for argument’s sake that the decision for the 
practice to move the right hand within the next thirty seconds is enough 
to execute a hand movement that fulfills this decision (to move the hand 
during the next thirty seconds) according to a purely stochastic process. 
The single action, which ultimately realizes the structural action, would be 
intentionally controlled in the usual way because only then can we follow 
the request of the researcher and decide to move our hand in the next 
28 Libet’s experiment has numerous follow-up experiments, which either make the same 
mistake with regard to action theory or contradict Libet’s original findings. Cf. Henz, Sonja, 
Julian Nida-Rümelin et al. 2015. Stimulus-dependent deliberation process leading to a spe­
cific motor action demonstrated via a multi-channel EEG analysis. Frontiers in Human 
Neuroscience 9: 1–14: A plausible explanation for the anomaly in Libet’s findings is that the 
negative potentiality that can be observed in the run-up to the hand movement actually 
represents a kind of readiness, just as Kornhuber originally assumed. The negative potential 
would then be the neurophysiological correlate to the readiness to move the hand and not 
the beginning of the causal process that determines the hand movement. Libet’s findings on 
a person’s veto option support this assumption. However, such anomalies no longer exist in 
normal scenarios where the choice of action is controlled by prior deliberations and deci­
sions; that is, the neurophysiological correlates occur after the perception that determines a 
specific decision.
4  STRUCTURAL AGENCY 

76
thirty seconds. In fact, I am then doing exactly what I intended, even if the 
hand movement fulfilling this intention follows a stochastic process that is 
no longer intentionally controlled in detail.
In a previous section, we discussed routine actions as those actions 
which are determined by the guiding intentionality of structural actions. 
Take experienced drivers for example: Unlike beginners, they don’t have 
to decide every time on the sequence of actions to make a turn, that is, 
operating the pointer, checking the mirror, disengaging the clutch, shifting 
to a smaller gear, and so on. Novice drivers, on the other hand, have to 
make all these decisions consciously in close succession which is why their 
driving seems cumbersome. They have to re-think again and again about 
which decision they have to make at which point in time. Not so 
experienced drivers: They merely decide to turn right at the next street 
corner and the specific behavioral components, via which they realize a 
token that fulfills their intention, need not be under their intentional 
control. To be clear: They do of course intentionally control their structural 
action of turning right, the concrete steps, however, through which the 
structural action of turning right is realized are no longer intentionally 
controlled. This does not weaken the experienced drivers’ control, it 
strengthens it! The realization of their intentions, to turn right at the next 
intersection, for instance, is more reliable than that of a novice driver who 
may realize too late that he has overlooked a cyclist and therefore cannot 
turn right.
Action-guiding intentionality is always directed at types, never at tokens. 
The verbal representation of such intentions is a strong indicator for that: 
Their level of detail is never specific enough so that we could single out 
individual tokens. There is always a multitude of tokens, one could even say 
an infinite multitude (at least if we use real-valued functions for description), 
which fulfill the respective guiding intentions (preceding intentions, 
decisions). What we have called “concomitant intentionality” is no 
exception in this context. It depends on an agent remaining aware of their 
behavior as a whole realizing a certain action type and therefore corresponds 
in its concrete form to the action-guiding overall intention. However, this 
concomitant intentionality, which, if neurophysiology is right, precedes 
concrete behavior by at least 0.1  seconds, can again be realized by a 
plurality of tokens. At this point, at the latest, it seems plausible to speak 
of complex stochastic processes which, as tokens, are not controlled by the 
acting person. This obvious, phenomenological description of human 
practice counters the widespread irrationalism in philosophy of 
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

77
neuroscience while it is perfectly compatible with empirical findings, 
including those of Libet’s experiment. It emphasizes the intentional 
control, but it acknowledges the stochastic and deterministic, that is, 
automated aspects of human action.
4.10    Diachronic Structure
29
Rational choice orthodoxy must believe in the miracle that individual 
optimizing behavior (pragmata) in a temporal sequence will add up to a 
coherent praxis. Our everyday experience, however, counters such a belief. 
If I optimize my well-being today, tomorrow, and so on, there will soon 
come a time when I will face great difficulties because of numerous 
unpleasant and therefore uncompleted tasks. Young children seem to 
know that they harm themselves in following their inclination to follow 
their momentary desires and therefore want somebody to “take care” of 
them. Growing up and becoming more mature means learning to take 
care of oneself, that is, to act structurally rational.
29 I am alluding to a 1950s Catholic relic presented in a large modern building in Syracuse, 
Sicily, whose authenticity has been confirmed by a scientific commission of the Vatican.
4  STRUCTURAL AGENCY 

78
30
A first attempt to explain the miracle: The future disadvantages become 
already noticeable in sanctions at the point in time of the pragma. This 
could be explained for instance by recourse to Hobbesian prospectus 
theory: Since humans, unlike all other living beings, have the ability of 
prospectus, that is, foresight: Human beings fear things other living beings 
do not; for example, their own death. These fears motivate us to avoid 
anything that increases the probability of the unwanted event occurring. 
According to the miracle interpretation, the mental anticipation of possible 
future experiences—positive and negative—translates into reliable 
incentives and sanctions at the time of the decision.
Virtually everybody, and students in particular, knows that this is not 
how it works. The fear of failing your final exams after three years is too 
little a motivation for people to devote more than an hour and a half to 
study today. However, people, even the young, are capable of intending 
and realizing structures of their practice. Why shouldn’t I be able to decide 
to spend at least an hour and a half studying every day? It is hard to deny 
the fact that humans are capable of this. Why, then, should we deny this in 
theory? Committing oneself does not require any sanctions, neither those 
which allegedly entail reliable behavioral control via the Hobbesian 
prospectus, nor those which I impose on myself in form of systems of 
sanctions and incentives. It goes without saying that this assessment is 
compatible with the fact that people, especially akratic people, resort to 
such self-sanctioning and self-incentivizing as an emergency solution. But 
why shouldn’t I be able to decide to spend an hour and a half studying 
every afternoon?
As we have seen, individual intentions depend on structural ones and 
not vice versa. The decision to sit at my desk for an hour and a half every 
day has the consequence that I must make do without the second 
cappuccino in order to have enough time to sit at my desk, even though I 
would have very much liked a second cappuccino. In such cases, we say 
30 I use the term “structural rationality” in the sense exposed in this book. But there are 
different usages, too. For an overview see HandBook.
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

79
that we must make do without the second cappuccino to express a kind of 
commitment to ourselves. The obvious interpretation of this obligation is 
structural: I have chosen a specific practice which I can only realize if I 
align my individual decisions to correspond with this practice. Respect for 
the interests and rights of others generates duties that have their equivalent 
in the respect for those structures I have decided to realize. One could say, 
I am considerate about these structures, or in Kantian terms: There are 
obligations against oneself.
In Aristotelian-inspired exalted terms, I have a duty to be virtuous, not 
in the sense of anxious self-restraint against mental and physical pleasures, 
rather as fully developing my abilities—I have a duty to develop these 
abilities, a duty to myself. Even if one rejects this ethical exaltation, the 
experience prevails that we live our lives by explicitly and implicitly 
imposing structures on our practice that are intentionally controlled, that 
realize decisions, and that secure a rational lifeform.
Since self-imposed and externally introduced sanctions and incentives 
are usually insufficient to secure structural rationality, the miraculous belief 
of rational choice orthodoxy needs stronger support which it finds, again, 
in the Hobbesian idea of sanctions in foro interno: The idea is to assume 
sanctions even if there are none (a tested tool to support superstitious 
beliefs). These sanctions are not manifest, but rather are assumed as a kind 
of punishment that only works internally and not externally. Thus, people 
behave structurally conform, not because they want to, that is, because 
they have decided to behave accordingly, but because they want to avoid 
virtual punishment in form of a bad conscience. It may look like they 
behave structurally rational, in fact, however, they merely optimize the 
state of their conscience. It remains a mystery, however, why people with 
a strong character who cannot be easily upset and neither have a propensity 
for anxiety (Hobbesian prospectus) nor for a bad conscience (in foro 
interno) are particularly suitable for structurally rational action. The 
fallback option of fears and remorse exhibits all the traits of an ad hoc 
hypothesis à la Popper in order to immunize a theory.
The question we must ask rational choice orthodoxy is: Why should it 
not be possible to choose a certain practice? The answer that we can only 
opt for single actions (pragmata) and that mode of actions, that is, 
structurally conforming practices, are not a possible subject-matter of 
motivating and preceding intentions has been nullified by our analysis in 
the previous sections. Actions are always complex, they always have 
4  STRUCTURAL AGENCY 

80
structural features, so to speak, which is why a restriction to pragmata as 
the only possible subject-matter of rational decision is unfounded, 
arbitrary, and counterintuitive.
­
31
4.11    Interpersonal Structure
We discussed in detail the paradigmatic example of interpersonal struc­
tural rationality, that is, of cooperation. We concluded that the individual­
istic characterization of rationality by means of optimization strategies is 
not an adequate interpretation of cooperative practice. Again, the starting 
point of the analysis is the fact of cooperation, that is, the capability of 
persons to cooperate with other persons. We were not convinced by the 
responses of rational choice orthodoxy to regard these phenomena either 
as a symptom of widespread irrationality or to explain their plausibility 
with iteration or altruistic motives. The popular explanation of a seem­
ingly cooperative practice actually being an individually optimizing prac­
tice in iterative prisoner’s dilemma games did not concern us for long 
since it cannot grasp the phenomenon of cooperation in One-Shot 
Prisoner’s Dilemmas. We can find the same extent of rational choice ortho­
doxy’s belief in miracles, which we discussed in the previous section, with 
all its ad hoc hypotheses and excuses in the context of diachronic struc­
tural rationality of the individual person. The claim that, contrary to 
everyday experience and numerous empirical studies in psychology and 
sociology, including political science, there can be no genuine coopera­
tion and the widespread phenomenon of cooperation is miraculously to 
arise solely from individually optimizing behavior requires some interpre­
tative efforts.
31 An example that shows that the sequence of rational individual optimization may have 
detrimental results for a person is presented in the Appendix, The Smoking Example.
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

81
Cooperation, however, is not an extraordinary phenomenon, but the 
core of structural rationality in interpersonal contexts. This claim can be 
justified: Every adherence to normative rules constitutes an n-person 
prisoner’s dilemma. That is to say, for rational choice orthodoxy, the high 
degree of conformity appears as an enigma in need of explanation in face 
of the high incidence of individual non-conformity being in the interest of 
individual agents. The obvious explanation, that interpersonal structural 
rationality can be explained with the acknowledgment of normative rules, 
is not available for rational choice orthodoxy. The diachronic and 
interpersonal cases are completely analogous. Why shouldn’t people 
individually decide that they want to participate in a cooperative practice, 
usually expecting that other people are also willing to participate in that 
cooperative practice? I can choose this cooperative practice, even if I alone 
cannot guarantee the success of this cooperative practice. I decide on a 
cooperative practice because I want to contribute to an interpersonal 
structure of action that I and others (at least that is the belief I hold) 
consider justified.
Persons are not optimizing monads, they stand in social relations to 
each other, they see themselves as part of forms of interaction and 
communication, of social practices and cultural communities. However, 
we should not take the path of communitarianism and reduce phenomena 
of cooperation to community building and convergence of values. The 
willingness to cooperate is indeed facilitated by experiences of common 
practice and common values. However, these are not a necessary condition 
for the willingness to cooperate. Cooperation is also possible among 
persons who have no experiences of common practice and diverge 
regarding cultural and moral values. The difference with diachronic 
structural rationality is that interpersonal structural rationality is enabled 
by shared intentionality, that is, an intentionality that is only brought 
about by unlimited reciprocal replications: “I expect you to be willing to 
cooperate if you can expect me to be also willing to cooperate and you 
expect that I expect that etc.”
32
32 Cf. Appendix, The Smoking Example.
4  STRUCTURAL AGENCY 

82
Interactions are guided by giving and taking reasons. This is not to say 
that they are based exclusively on the exchange of reasons. This exchange, 
however, plays an important role in enabling and promoting structural 
action. Shared reasons are choice-determining reasons in the following 
sense: In the abstract description of interpersonal practice (which can be 
specified in terms of game theory), a choice function is required on the set 
of collective options for action. This choice function has the character of a 
normative value: Given a certain structure of interests, preferences, and 
assessments, a specific combination of individual pragmata appears 
reasonable, appropriate, just, that is, structurally rational.
The lifeworld practice of communication about reasons is more effec­
tive, more flexible, and more complex than contractarian models of justice 
and justification. It allocates to a person a certain latitude for individual 
arbitrariness which, within its scope, cannot be made subject to criticism. 
Kantian ethics has tried to capture this formally, albeit inadequately, 
through the criterion of the Categorical Imperative. Deontological ethics 
is more continuous with our lifeworld practice of giving and taking rea­
sons, because, unlike consequentialist ethics, it does not judge interactions 
in terms of optimization criteria but in terms of compliance with mini­
mum normative conditions.
Consequentialist ethics is based on an optimization criterion and thus 
allows only one collective practice except for the case of indifference. In 
contrast, deontological social ethics establish a choice function that, in 
principle, assigns to each constellation of interests and moral values a set 
of options for viable collective action that mark a latitude for individual 
and collective arbitrariness.
However, deontological social ethics also falls short of the complexity 
of established lifeworld communicative practices. The form of this 
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

83
communicative practice provides the basis for the concept of practical 
reason developed in this book. The starting points are individual contexts: 
What interests, mutual expectations, claims, rights, and obligations are at 
play? In many cases, individual contexts do not have to be explicitly 
discussed because they are undisputedly taken as given. In other cases, 
diverging normative judgments or rejections of those involved indicate a 
need for clarification. This is where the practice of giving and taking 
reasons comes into play. A characterization of one’s own situation can be 
doubted by others; in fact, characterizing only makes sense on the 
assumption of such doubts. We assert and contest things in the empirical 
as well as the normative mode and these modi cannot be differentiated 
with respect to their grammatical form. In this respect, this distinction is 
an import from philosophy and an example of the impregnation of 
lifeworld practice by theory.
“Are you denying that I have the right to choose the person I want to 
marry?” says the adult daughter of a Hindu family living in London. She 
is convinced that she has this right, while her parents think that she does 
not. She is not talking about a legal right here, which, living in Great 
Britain, she obviously has. She is talking about her rights in a moral sense. 
She believes it to be a moral fact that she can decide for herself who she 
marries and that she does not have to leave this decision to her parents. 
Maybe, this conflict represents a clash of two cultures that lack a shared 
basis of understanding. The reasons put forward by both sides remain 
ineffective because they are not supported by shared normative beliefs. 
However, justifying arguments are aimed at resolving differences of belief 
and this can only succeed if they are convincing. This, in turn, presup­
poses, that reasons are based on normative beliefs that are shared by the 
addressee. Successful justifications, therefore, presuppose a large overlap 
in empirical and normative beliefs; they are effective only against the 
background of shared empirical and moral experiences and descriptive as 
well as normative beliefs. Therefore, people who take part in a practice of 
communication position themselves with every reason they bring for­
ward, that something is such-and-such—empirically and normatively. A 
relativistic attitude is, at best, possible only from the distance, that is, from 
the perspective of an impartial person, who does not take part in a specific 
lifeform.
4  STRUCTURAL AGENCY 

84
33
33 Cf. Wittgenstein, Ludwig. Philosophical Investigations. Part 2, XI: “If a lion could talk, 
we would not understand him.”
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

85
CHAPTER 5
The Phenomenology of Structural Rationality
5.1    Structural Practice
The phenomenology of structural practice is inexhaustible. All we can do 
in this part of the book is single out some exemplary cases and hope that 
they can be interpreted as pieces of a more comprehensive picture of ratio­
nal human practice. Hence, we do not intend to create a mosaic or paint a 
complete picture. We will provide a few brushstrokes here and there, and 
if we are successful, it will allow the reader to continue working on the 
picture on their own. Different pictures would result, but they would 
share something in common: the structural embeddedness of the single 
action, if rational, within a broader context.
­
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature 
Switzerland AG 2023
J. Nida-Rümelin, A Theory of Practical Reason, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-17319-6_5

86
­
­
­
1
The structural account of practical reason is skeptical toward the big, 
systematizing and principle-oriented accounts of ethics and rationality. 
After all, it has turned out again and again that these cannot be reconciled 
with the complexity of our practice of normative assessment, or with the 
variety of human action. However, the theory of structural rationality does 
not oppose ethical theory formation in principle. What it comes down to 
is the appropriate form: we are not searching for the hidden principle or 
the Ten Commandments. We usually know pretty well what ought to be 
done even before all theorizing and principles. Mostly it is not principles 
(which in the most favorable case are the result of ethical theory develop­
ment) which give us normative orientation— the criticism of principlism 
and generalism is justified. Nevertheless, rules which prevail within the 
lifeworld practice of normative assessment can help resolve doubtful cases 
and moral conflicts.
1 Cf. Jonathan Dancy. 2004. Ethics without Principles. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

87
2
­
­
­
­
­
­
­
The phenomenology of structural practice suggests a different perspec­
tive, namely that in many cases the behavioral phenomena, which deviate 
from the rational choice model, are not irrational. They are forms of struc­
tural embeddedness of pragmata in praxis. This embedding does not 
make the respective pragmata irrational; on the contrary, it is what secures 
their rationality. A special form of this tension between optimization in 
terms of the rational choice model and structural embeddedness is the 
relation between rationality and morality, which we will address in this 
chapter.
2 When we speak of the phenomenology of structural practice, we do not mean the specific 
philosophical method of phenomenology, even if the basic intuitions of the theory of practi­
cal reason—to engage with the things themselves, not to allow one’s view to be distorted by 
hasty interpretations and systematizations, to refrain from theory at first— are certainly 
related to those of philosophical phenomenology.
5  THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF STRUCTURAL RATIONALITY 

88
5.2    Self-Control
­
3
­
­
­
­
­
­
4
A more decisive point here is this: If the desires of a rational person 
always anticipate the respective desire fulfillment, then practical rationality 
is integrated into a psychological theory of the genesis of desires. This 
would mean a highly implausible shift from the normative theory of 
3 Cf. Nagel, Thomas. 1970. The Possibility of Altruism. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
4 Cf. Appendix, Ramsey Compatibility.
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

89
rationality to empirical psychology. This is not how the genesis of desires 
works. Practical rationality precisely consists of evaluating particular 
momentary desires, forming a judgment on them, even if only implicitly 
and rudimentarily, in order to then align our actions with those momen­
tary desires which pass this test. Much speaks in favor of distancing oneself 
even further from the belief-desire model. Desires are not merely subjected 
to a test of rationality or at least permissibility. Rather, this practice is an 
expression of a normative judgment, into which not only own desires 
enter, but also the desires of others, expectations for the future, and nor­
mative judgments of different types. It is the judgment which constitutes 
the decision. The decision is not an expression of a desire, but rather an 
expression of a normative judgment: it is reasonable (for me) to do 
this now.
The complex relation between our own desires and reasons for action 
can be illustrated with an everyday example: the decision-making of some­
body who is unsure whether or not to quit smoking. Let us assume the 
smoker has reached the conclusion that, all things considered, it would be 
rational for her to quit smoking. She can base this conclusion on the advice 
of her primary care physician, medical studies, or on her own interest in 
sports and a long life. Given the same information from medical science, 
other smokers might reach a different conclusion. They might, for 
instance, regard a certain shortening of their life as subordinate to the 
pleasure of smoking and the supposed or real increase in concentration, 
possibly even the meditative aspect of lighting a cigarette. From a life­
world perspective, the situation seems clear: The smoker who considers 
the impact of her habit to be net negative has every reason to quit smok­
ing. Not quitting would be irrational or rather a sign of weakness of will. 
In theory, however, the situation is far more complex.
Refuting the Humean interpretation is relatively easy: according to the 
Humean view, it would not be irrational to continue smoking, despite 
what our smoker has concluded, because what is decisive is the fulfillment 
of the momentary desire and the corresponding instrumentally rational 
choice of lighting the next cigarette. The simple form of Humeanism is 
not convincing.
5
­
5 Like Harry Frankfurt, 1971. Freedom of the Will and the Concept of a Person. Journal 
of Philosophy 68: 5–20.
5  THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF STRUCTURAL RATIONALITY 

90
­
This process described above undoubtedly happens: Persons who have 
strong volitions but reject their practical consequences, develop meta-­
preferences, just like in the example of the reasonable smoker. They desire 
to have other desires than they actually have. However, this interpretation, 
despite its popularity in the contemporary, predominantly analytical phi­
losophy of action, is implausible: The strong-willed person is characterized 
precisely by not needing to have other desires than the ones that she has, 
because she follows her rational insight and quits smoking despite having 
the strong desire to light her next cigarette. Willpower – and this is some­
thing that Aristotle observed much more acutely than Harry Frankfurt—
consists in following rational insight and not momentary desires. If this 
insight is itself determined by the expected desire fulfillment over time, 
then one can also say that the strong-willed person makes the desire fulfill­
ment over time (more precisely, the temporal integral of desire fulfillment) 
the standard of her actions and uses momentary desires merely as param­
eters of this integral. The strong-willed smoker quits smoking because of 
the insight that smoking is harmful to her. There is no need for a detour 
via the change of desires. It does, however, make it easier for the strong-­
willed smoker to make rational insight and not momentary desires the 
standard of her decisions, if she knows that the strong desire to light 
another cigarette will most likely decrease in the course of the following 
days and weeks without nicotine consumption and will completely vanish 
eventually.
The natural interpretation of willpower is obvious: It is nothing other 
than structural rationality. The smoker has reached the insight that a life­
style without tobacco consumption is better for her and she does what 
fulfills this structure (in this case: continued non-smoking). The fact that 
weaker-willed smokers choose coping strategies and develop competing 
desires in order to suppress the desire to light the next cigarette, for exam­
ple by doing sports and wanting to perform particularly well there, in no 
way contradicts this interpretation of willpower. Such coping strategies are 
reasonable—they can help implement rational insights—but they should 
not be considered the signum of personhood.
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

91
Freedom of the will consists in following rational insights and not in 
developing second-order volitions whose practical relevance only becomes 
manifest once they have changed the existing desires. Frankfurt is wrong 
to think that it is desire, not reason, that constitutes rationality. The oppo­
site holds: It is reason, not desire, that constitutes rationality. Note that we 
do not deny the phenomenon of meta-preferences; we even grant them an 
important role in the formation of prohairetic attitudes. However, we 
should not make an expression of weakness of the will the hallmark of 
personhood. To put it differently and more positively: What Frankfurt is 
aiming at is in fact a deficit of the traditional Humean model of action, 
namely diachronic incoherence. He illustrates this with the example of a 
drug addict and, by introducing second-order volitions, that is, meta-desires, 
hopes to secure sufficient structural rationality without having to depart 
from the primacy of desires.
But wouldn’t it be enough to depart from the traditional Humean 
model, that is, not taking the momentary desire fulfillment as the criterion 
of rationality, but rather the long-term optimization of desire fulfillment? 
Let us make an assumption favorable to this, namely that only the fulfill­
ment of one’s own desires is normatively relevant. So, the agent can ignore 
all other aspects, such as the desire fulfillment of others or respect for their 
rights. For the sake of the argument, we would then assume a temporal 
discount rate of 0 for one’s own desire fulfillment and would hope that, 
under this strong premise of rationality, the insight that it would be best 
for the smoker to quit smoking can be realized by the optimization of the 
temporal integral of desire fulfillment.
­
­
­
5  THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF STRUCTURAL RATIONALITY 

92
6
­
­
A different possibility of securing the rationality of continuing to 
smoke, despite one’s better judgment, consists in the assumption of 
thresholds. Empirical studies show that we have perceptual thresholds, 
that is, that we do not perceive minimal changes, that there is a Δ which 
needs to be passed for us to perceive a change in temperature, for instance. 
Applied to our example, it would certainly be plausible to assume that, in 
the long run, it is completely irrelevant for the health condition and the 
preference fulfillment of the smoker whether she quits smoking on the 1st 
of January or the 2nd of January 2020. The positive effects differ so mini­
mally that they are not perceptible to them. If we also assume this to be 
the case for the postponement of the date on which the reasonable smoker 
quits her habit, from the 2nd to the 3rd of January, from the 3rd to the 
4th, and so on, then it is modulo preference thresholds rational for the 
reasonable smoker to keep on smoking.
In reality, the situation is of course precisely the other way around: It is 
not rational to continue smoking; rather it is the irrationality of conse­
quentialist individual optimization which becomes apparent here. The 
transition to structural rationality is obvious: The smoker favors a life with­
out smoking for good reasons and, therefore, quits smoking—starting 
today. Perhaps we will generously allow that it can be rational to continue 
smoking under specific conditions, but we should under no circumstances 
exclude that this decision is irrational, even if the preference threshold 
theory or the previously performed cost-benefit analysis is correct. The 
move to structural rationality can guarantee that a manifestly rational prac­
tice is also considered rational in theory.
6 For a more mathematical analysis, see Appendix, The Smoking Example.
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

93
5.3    Self-Restraint
Behavioral economists consider it proof of our irrationality that we strongly 
prefer avoiding certain amounts of monetary losses to obtaining profits of 
the same amount. But there is a very plausible explanation for loss-­aversion 
which speaks against considering it irrational. We are not just individual 
optimizers; we settle into our life. We plan our expenses, for example, and 
adjust to situations in which we have certain resources available, including 
monetary resources. It is not important to us as structurally rational beings 
to obtain the optimum at every given moment, but rather that we can 
arrange our life in a predictable fashion. This requires that we know 
approximately which resources are at our disposal. Reasonable people do 
not plan according to what they could obtain under favorable circum­
stances, but according to what they will have available even under unfavor­
able circumstances. Losses, therefore, affect our life planning. Gains are 
just an additum which one can use one way or another affording addi­
tional freedom—which reasonable persons do not count on in their plan­
ning. The priority of avoiding losses serves the plannability of our conduct 
of life and is reasonable.
Economists also find it strange that we ascribe more value to what we 
already own than to what we could have. This asymmetry can be seen as a 
version of gain–loss asymmetry. We are reluctant to hand over something 
we own, even if we receive something more valuable in return. Imagine a 
society which did not have this bias in favor of own possessions. It would 
permanently be preoccupied with comparing the things others have to 
one’s own possessions and it would do everything to obtain what is more 
valuable, but belongs to others, in exchange for what is less valuable, but 
is in one’s own possession. A society which is driven by constant compari­
son of relative possessions is not characterized by an especially highly 
developed rationality, but is rather the consequence of a widespread char­
acter deformation which tempted Aristotle to characterize a life which is 
directed at accumulating wealth as unworthy of human beings. Indeed, 
Aristotle would have had a lot to observe in modern capitalist society 
which is unworthy of humans.
The bias in favor of one’s own possessions, as opposed to what one 
does not have or what others have, is actually a sign of human rationality: 
Rational persons value what they have and do not strive toward what they 
do not. The practice of constant comparison and the permanent search for 
betterment which economists often demand insofar as they consider it to 
5  THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF STRUCTURAL RATIONALITY 

94
be rational is structurally irrational. It is incompatible with what used to be 
the focus of economic analysis, namely contributing to human content­
ment. Modern economic theory has distanced itself too far from its origins 
in moral philosophy.
Some people are willing to pay a high price for keeping their “options” 
open. In the extreme case, they become incapable of making decisions. 
Now, it is undoubtedly irrational to forgo a decision because two options 
appear equally attractive. This is the old story of Buridan’s Ass, which 
starves to death standing between two equally large stacks of hay, because 
it does not have a reason to favor one over the other. But this is not the 
normal case. The normal case is characterized by people not knowing 
exactly about the properties, advantages, and disadvantages of the various 
available options, and hoping to find out more by postponing their deci­
sion. Sometimes it is surely the inability to forfeit one of the options, 
regardless of how small the probability that the person would ultimately 
choose said option. If the evaluative standards are clear, but the properties 
which allow an evaluation are not, this situation can be rationally con­
trolled and there are neat decision-theoretical models which allow a pre­
cise mathematical formulation. How much time should one spend on 
gathering better information? That depends on how much it “costs” to 
postpone the decision and how many possible benefits we expect from 
better information.
This kind of rationalization, however, is not available to us when we are 
faced with existential decisions, that is, decisions which co-determine our 
evaluative standards. Existential or great decisions differ from non-­
existential, small, or everyday decisions in that they entail a structural 
change of our lifeform so significant that they render the evaluations of the 
differing lifeforms that would result from such a decision incompatible. Of 
course, the lines between those extremes are blurry. For some, the nar­
rowing of the scope of existential decisions as life goes on is quite a bitter 
pill to swallow. A career has been chosen, or perhaps one’s professional life 
has already come to an end. Children were born and have established 
forms of obligation over decades, and so forth. For others, this is precisely 
what makes the advantage of getting older. The soul calms down as it is 
not torn between completely different life projects. In fact, empirical stud­
ies show that the temporal development of life satisfaction follows a 
U-shape. During the age of early adolescence and the rush hour of life, we 
are at a low point. Life satisfaction is higher in younger years, usually, 
when there are not yet existential options available to choose from, as well 
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

95
as in older years—it increases with temporal distance to young adulthood. 
Surprisingly, even the narrowing of the temporal horizon toward the end 
of life does not change anything about this: Seniors become more content, 
as long as they do not suffer from illness. Contentment is certainly a cen­
tral value for the shaping of one’s life, but it is only one among many. Still, 
with regard to this value it indeed seems irrational to try to keep as many 
options as possible open for as long as possible.
7
Even in a world characterized by the pursuit of profit and consumerism, 
people protect themselves from becoming optimizing nomads in a uni­
verse of unlimited possibilities by creating structures in their life and by 
turning to these structures for orientation. They do not question what 
they have decided to do, even if there are potentially better alternatives. 
They adhere to what they have integrated into their life, even if possibili­
ties exist to purchase different goods or services, perhaps more valuable 
ones. In this way, one could certainly say that they remain true to them­
selves and restrain their self-externalization in a boundless world of con­
sumption and profit.
5.4    Duties to Oneself
Modern ethics and political philosophy, but also legal practice in liberal 
constitutional states, restrict duties (almost) exclusively to the class of 
other-regarding duties. I do wrong by infringing the rights of others or if 
I do not fulfill my duties to aid and duties of solidarity. In Kantian terms: 
7 Cf. Dan Ariely. 2010. Predictably Irrational: The Hidden Forces That Shape Our Decisions. 
New York: Harper, chapter 9.
5  THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF STRUCTURAL RATIONALITY 

96
If I treat persons as a mere means to an end and not as end-in-themselves. 
The radical branch of liberalism, called libertarianism, postulates the prin­
ciple of self-ownership, which means that every person can do unto them­
selves whatever they want and however they see fit; there are no moral or 
juridical restrictions.
This is a quite attractive position that emphasizes the self-responsibility 
of adult, accountable persons. I am responsible for myself and others do 
not have a say here, not even the legislator. It is legitimate, however, that 
what I do unto others is subjected to moral and juridical appraisal. Even in 
our social proximity, we must not cross the boundaries that guarantee 
individual self-determination and account for individual needs for help. 
However, the implementation of this libertarian foundation of modern, 
democratic constitutional states is not applied consistently. Counter-­
examples include the obligation to wear seat belts or helmets, legal sanc­
tions against drug use, and also the shaping of family relations, for instance 
in the form of legal monogamy.
Libertarian ethics and political philosophy is an extreme form of nor­
mative minimalism, which has become increasingly dominant in modern 
times. Even Kantian liberalism is minimalistic as it focuses on the univer­
salizability of maxims for action. These maxims should be embeddable in 
a general regularity (“law”) of agency that is possible or that—more 
strictly—rational beings could will. In the examples of how to apply said 
maxims that Kant himself develops, it turns out that, in his interpretation, 
there arise duties to oneself after all, for example that prudential suicide is 
morally unacceptable. Libertarians would object that the body is part of 
the person’s property and that they can do with it whatever they want. 
John Locke, the founding father of libertarianism, took a different stance, 
because he saw God as the ultimate owner; hence there is no unlimited 
self-ownership: suicide destroys something that is God’s property.
The Stoics with their broad conception of responsibility were also not 
far away from a theory of self-ownership. This is reflected, for example, in 
their approval, even their recommendation, of committing prudential sui­
cide. Their ideas concerning the role of duties to oneself, however, are 
completely different. As for other ancient conceptions of ethics, duties to 
oneself were central to the Stoic concept of responsibility. The close con­
nection of dikaiosyne and eudaimonia in Plato, his appeal in the Apology to 
take care primarily of one’s own soul (epimeleiea tès psychès), the concep­
tion of virtue as a property of a great soul in Aristotle (megalopsychia), and 
especially the goal of ataraxia, the imperturbability of the soul, in Epicurus 
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

97
point to a common core of ancient conceptions of ethics: to determine 
what makes for the good life of the person—within a community of oth­
ers, the polis, and later in Hellenism within the cosmopolitan human com­
munity as the Stoics perceived it.
If we direct our attention to the decisions that determine humans’ 
everyday lives, the traces of these different theoretical systematizations are 
noticeable to varying degrees. It is obvious, however, that modern norma­
tive minimalism is not reflected in our everyday practice. The question of 
what we are required to do in a certain situation, which action is sup­
ported by the strongest reasons, is usually answered by referring to the 
commitments that we have entered (commissiva), to one’s own rights and 
the rights of others (libertates), and to duties (officia) that emerge from 
certain social roles, for example as a parent. In some rather rare cases, it is 
about the optimization of our self-interest, and in others, it is about 
respecting (invariance) principles (principia), such as equal treatment and 
non-discrimination.
In the end, the normative judgments that guide our everyday practice 
determine the chosen lifeform—one could even say that our lifeform rep­
resents the totality of our normative assessments. The respective commit­
ments that are a part of the structural whole that makes up the chosen 
lifeform arise from this evaluative practice. In this perspective, all duties 
are also duties to myself, to what I value and what I detest, to that which 
makes up my moral identity. Even the duties that I have toward others can 
be violated only at the cost of subverting the lifeform I am living, provided 
I have accepted these duties as my own and have the willpower to organize 
my life accordingly. According to the realist interpretation that underlies 
this book, this is about normative insight and knowledge and not a posit­
ing in the sense of radical or Kantian constructivism. However, this insight 
remains my insight. I arrived at this insight by weighing reasons. It deter­
mines a rational practice, a practice that is compatible with this insight, 
that is, my life. If I act against this normative insight and knowledge, I do 
not only violate, for example, the rights of others, but also my integrity as 
a moral person. Put more pointedly: The duties to others I have recog­
nized determine duties to myself. Remaining true to oneself is an appropri­
ate formulation to express this interrelation.
I cannot arbitrarily decide what is a duty to myself. Rather, my duties to 
myself are determined by the existing good reasons that govern a morally 
knowledgeable, reasonable person. There is, however, sufficient room to 
give life meaning through one’s own decisions, values, and goals. To take 
5  THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF STRUCTURAL RATIONALITY 

98
another trivial everyday example: My decision to learn Chinese within the 
next two years generates duties; duties that I have to myself as the person 
who has made this decision. This is how we feel from a lifeworld perspec­
tive. If I have skipped Chinese class several times, I am right to have a 
guilty consciousness. In a sense, I did not meet my own standards, I have 
become unfaithful to myself, I have not followed through on my deci­
sions. To put it in the terminology we have developed here: The decision 
to skip class does not fit with the structural practice I aim for, which I have 
committed to by deciding to learn Chinese within the next two years. I 
divide, so to speak, into the person who decides according to the respec­
tive circumstances whether or not they sufficiently feel like attending the 
Chinese course or find other things more attractive, and the person who 
has made the structural decision to learn Chinese within the next two 
years. My identity as the author of my life is challenged here. Things do 
not add up and this in turn becomes manifest in feelings of guilt, self-­
reproach. I wish for different action-guiding desires than those that I had 
in that moment. The structurally rational person does not constantly 
reconsider her emotional state, which other options she might have, what 
seems to be more attractive in the moment. The rational person adheres 
to her structural decision of regularly attending the Chinese course and 
goes to class. The person then has no reason for regret; she has fulfilled her 
duty toward herself. The structural decision generates duties to oneself.
8
­
­
­
­
8 Immanuel Kant. 1785. Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals (Grundlegung zur 
Metaphysik der Sitten), chapter IV.
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

99
­
­
In his discussion of prudential suicide, Kant rightly points to this 
dimension as a duty to others. He is incorrect, however, to conclude that 
any form of prudential suicide is morally impermissible—a fallacy of the 
type pars pro toto. The things that a person who commits prudential sui­
cide could—of course only virtually—posthumously blame themselves for, 
such as the harm caused to related persons, the lasting perplexity, because 
there was no opportunity to deal with the tragic situation, are an indica­
tion that even in existential borderline situations, the postulates of struc­
tural rationality remain relevant.
In a similar way, this holds for the long-term consequences and assess­
ments beyond death. The carrying out of a dead person’s testamentary 
will establishes structural rationality beyond her death, and it entails obli­
gations for those who can carry it out, without the previous author of her 
life still being able to exert influence.
In many countries, suicide used to be liable to legal persecution. Since 
the respective person cannot be punished if the suicide is successful, it was 
attempted suicide that was a criminal offense. The legislator rightfully 
decided in many cases to abolish this criminal provision. This does not 
mean, however, that the moral judgment on suicide is solely up to the act­
ing person and arbitrary. It is a fallacy to think that everything that is not 
sanctioned under criminal law is morally neutral. There is much that speaks 
in favor of designing criminal laws minimalistically, that is, on the basis of 
libertarian normative criteria: It is unacceptable to infringe on the rights of 
another person. But many things that should not be normed and sanc­
tioned under criminal law play an important role for the moral assessment 
of our practice. Duties to oneself are one of these things.
5.5    Honesty
We—usually—agree on what constitutes dishonest behavior. It is far more 
difficult to provide universally valid ethical criteria for this. One example 
of dishonest behavior is when a cashier takes advantage of a customer’s 
ignorance by giving back too little change. The optimizing standard the­
ory holds that persons act irrationally if they forgo advantages that they 
could have at no cost. According to this view, persons who are honest and 
5  THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF STRUCTURAL RATIONALITY 

100
give out the correct amount of change, even if they do not have to worry 
about being exposed and punished, are acting irrationally. Now it could be 
the case that somebody desired to act honestly and that the best way to 
fulfill this desire would be to give back the correct amount of change. This 
phenomenon—honest behavior without incentives and sanctions—is 
widespread and is interpreted within behavioral economics as a conflict 
between social norms and market norms. According to this view, there 
exists the social norm of being honest and the market norm of seizing 
every opportunity to gain advantages, even when this conflicts with 
social norms.
Sometimes economists attempt to integrate adherence to social rules 
into market norms. They claim, for example, that a person who behaves in 
accordance with a social rule does this because non-conforming behavior 
is tied to a sanction in foro interno, that is, it leads to a guilty conscience 
that correspondingly decreases the level of utility. In the reverse case, it 
provides gratification, for example the gratification of persons praising 
themselves for their honest behavior and of experiencing this praise as 
pleasant. Some behavioral economists talk of the super-ego intervening 
and taking over so to speak, which is to say that the person loses control. 
It is then the super-ego that is acting.
Both of these are, in my belief, far-fetched strategies for immunizing 
the standard theory of optimizing rationality. Of course, it can be the case 
that a person is motivated to act honestly because they are afraid of the 
guilty conscience that they might have had if they had been dishonest, but 
these are exotic exceptions. The super-ego does not take over and start 
controlling my action only because I repeatedly ride the train with a ticket. 
The far more plausible and direct explanation of honest behavior is that 
there are persons who want to act honestly in many situations and some 
who want to act honestly in all situations. But there may also be some 
persons who only sometimes feel the desire to act honestly, and rarely 
there are individuals who never feel the desire to act honestly. Such per­
sons tend to end up as criminals.
­
­
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

101
9
­
10
This interpretation is of course complete nonsense that serves merely to 
immunize a preconceived theory of optimizing rationality against empiri­
cal findings. It results in the erroneous conclusion that the desire to behave 
honestly is irrational. My counter-thesis is not that any behavior that is 
honest is ipso facto rational, but that the intrinsic desire to behave honestly 
and an action that fulfills this desire are not necessarily irrational. Rational 
choice orthodoxy claims that a behavior that is led by the intrinsic desire to 
be honest is irrational as such. Honest behavior counts as rational if and 
only if this behavior fulfills other desires than the desire to be honest. For 
example, the desire of maximizing one’s well-being, or in this case obtain­
ing monetary advantages through honest behavior.
Not every honest behavior is an expression of structural rationality. My 
thesis is far weaker: Honest behavior can be an expression of structural 
rationality. I will even go one step further: Structural rationality is the 
most natural interpretation of the lifeworld justification for honest behav­
ior. Honest persons are not necessarily plagued by pangs of a guilty 
9 Cf. Maurice Schweitzer and Christopher Hsee. 2002. Stretching the Truth: Elastic 
Justification and Motivated Communication of Uncertain Information. Journal of Risk and 
Uncertainty 25: 185–201; Nina Mazar and Dan Ariely. 2006. Dishonesty in Everyday Life 
and its Policy Implications. Journal of Public Policy and Marketing 25: 117–126; and id. 
2008. The Dishonesty of Honest People: A Theory of Self-Concept Maintenance. Journal of 
Marketing Research 45: 633–644.
10 Cf. Ariely (2010), chapters 13 and 14.
5  THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF STRUCTURAL RATIONALITY 

102
conscience if they are not being honest in the artificial situation of a behav­
ioral economic experiment. Because of the interpersonal setup of the test 
series, there is not even a reason to be considerate of others or to feel 
embarrassed in front of others. Rather, the surprisingly high percentage of 
honest behavior without any conformity incentives (between 70% and 
more than 80%) can be most naturally explained as the participants of the 
experiment practicing honesty as a constraint. They each behave honestly, 
because they expect this behavior from all participants in the test series—
“expect” in the two-fold sense of subjective probability and normative 
attitude. This double—normative and practical—expectation toward the 
general honest practice leads to a formatting of one’s own practice. As an 
honest practice, it is embedded in an interpersonal structure of action, 
which is an expression of the acceptance of general honesty as a constraint. 
The honest behavior of the person in particular cases is an expression of 
her structural rationality. In these cases, honesty is indeed not optimizing; 
it is irrational according to the standard model, but it is rational in the 
sense of structural rationality. This speaks against the standard model and 
in favor of the conception of structural rationality.
5.6    Politeness
Politeness is an attitude toward other persons that is directed at the respec­
tive person feeling comfortable. The sympathetic message is that polite­
ness does not manifest itself in complying with certain conventional rules 
but rather in assuming a specific attitude toward other persons and acting 
accordingly. Now there can be very different ways of assuring that another 
person feels comfortable in our presence. Politeness is only one of them. 
But one can rightly say that politeness would lose its substance if it were 
merely understood as following certain rules of convention. And if the 
respective persons realize that the rules of politeness are being observed 
only for their own sake, so to speak, they may even perceive this kind of 
behavior as unpleasant.
However, this personal aspect of politeness is lost, at least to a large 
extent, if the interactions remain anonymous. Let us consider an example 
related to traffic. A few years ago, the rule was added to Germany’s road 
traffic regulations that one has to give vehicles coming from a road merg­
ing on the right-hand side the possibility to drive onto the main road 
according to the zipper method. Before the introduction, the situation 
was handled by a colorful mixture of considerateness, inconsiderateness, 
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

103
and diverging rule applications. The vehicles on the main road had the 
right of way. It was therefore an expression of goodwill when drivers gave 
a vehicle coming from a side street the opportunity to merge. Providing 
this opportunity meant in many cases that others, who had potentially 
waited for quite some time, would try to cut in as well. Furthermore, there 
was the question of why one should let only one vehicle and not two or 
three, or five, vehicles go first, seeing as one had already braked anyway.
Typically, there were a number of signals that were not determined by 
traffic regulations, for instance briefly flashing the lights in order to signal 
that one was allowing another vehicle to go first, or a longer flashing signal 
in order to warn that one was not willing to let the other vehicle go first, 
raising one’s hand visibly in the windshield as a sign of gratitude if one had 
been let in, and so on. Since in such a situation it is impossible that the 
practice of politeness is an expression of an interpersonal relation or even 
of the desire to do something good for a specific person, the question of 
motivation arises. Typically, the motivation seems to me to be character­
ized by an effort toward structural rationality. We all find ourselves in traf­
fic situations in which we are, again and again, dependent on the 
considerateness of others, which they are not compelled to. In such cases, 
we consider the practice of being considerate toward others to be desir­
able. And even when we are not in the role of someone who is compelled 
by law, we follow this rule and let others in.
However, this is where the problems begin: How far should consider­
ateness go? Should consideration be shown at each and every intersection? 
Should it extend to one vehicle or to several? Do we inconvenience the 
drivers behind us on the main road if we are over-considerate? Above all, 
what about the equal treatment of all traffic participants? Which rule is 
desirable: Allowing the vehicle to enter only if a line has formed on the 
merging street? Allowing only one vehicle to enter, hoping that the fol­
lowing driver, or at least the one after the driver behind me, on the main 
road will also allow others in? Is this form of consideration not unfair 
toward the vehicles that use the main road, because they have already been 
stuck in traffic for 15 minutes, whereas the vehicles on the side street have 
probably only just arrived? And so forth.
There are two interesting aspects about this example. First, the fact that 
the motivation for a specific action, that is, allowing a vehicle to go first in 
a concrete traffic situation, has a structural justification, that is, which kind 
of general traffic situation one desires to exist for such situations. Second, 
the fact that the underdetermination of individual cases raises problems 
5  THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF STRUCTURAL RATIONALITY 

104
that can lead to helplessness, or erratic or arbitrary behavior. Establishing 
a conventional or juridical rule solves the problem of underdetermination. 
It ends the need to constantly renegotiate among the persons involved, 
since they have mutual expectations that are replicable (I know that he 
knows that I know…) and all participants, therefore, have shared knowl­
edge. But this also makes gestures of politeness or gratitude superfluous. 
One could say that establishing a rule not only coordinates behavior inter­
personally, but also de-moralizes it. This vivid example of everyday life 
provides an illustration of the rule of law’s general function of reducing 
responsibility through standardization and of reducing the need for moral 
decision-making.
While politeness can be explained as a special type of altruism, this 
model cannot be expanded to anonymous interactions, as they occur in 
traffic for example. Here we cannot do without the application of some 
form of embedding rule, that is, the rule that guarantees structural ratio­
nality. If these rules are underdetermined and are therefore not applied 
coherently but rather erratically and in varying shapes, this is not evidence 
against the role of rules in general, but merely against the thesis that the 
universalization requirement removes normative underdetermination, as 
traditional Kantians and contemporary Kantian constructivists assume. 
The underdetermination of rules does not mean that no rule-guided prac­
tice exists.
­
­
11
­
11 Cf. Dancy (2004).
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

105
Even when faced with the anonymity of a traffic situation, we attach 
great importance to the equal treatment of road users, unless there are 
reasons for unequal treatment. Indeed, it is even a kind of insult if indi­
vidual drivers have reason to assume that they are being discriminated 
against, that they are being treated worse than others. Modern society is 
characterized by countless situations in everyday life that show a more or 
less strong degree of anonymity. Meeting managers of another company 
that one wants to reach an agreement with usually does not establish an 
interpersonal relationship; the contemporary professional ethos even tends 
to forbid this. Hence, it is all the more important for all parties involved 
that the rules of equal treatment, equal respect, and equal recognition are 
followed. It would be a massive affront with dramatic consequences if 
someone were not to greet women or black people at such a meeting. This 
type of invariance condition (equal treatment) calls for evaluation criteria, 
however, and, as we have seen, these are underdetermined in many cases. 
Typically, this underdetermination is resolved either by convention or 
legal provisions – a part of lawmaking as a form of conventional conflict 
resolution. Deviations from the respectively established and conventional 
(because not clearly specified in their content) rules would be impolite, 
even in cases where deviations from this rule would not have counted as 
impolite before. From the perspective of structural rationality, conven­
tions gain normative power and the traditional dichotomy between prag­
matic and moral imperatives dissolves.
5.7    Appropriateness
There are many phenomena that appear unexplainable from an economic 
perspective, for example the practice of tipping. Indeed, there is quite an 
extensive amount of economic literature on this topic, but the essence of 
this practice has been grotesquely misunderstood: internal gratification in 
the shape of feeling better after having left a tip; altruism toward the 
server; the expectation to be continually treated well in the future, which 
fails in the case of one-time restaurant visits that are common in the world 
of tourism; the irrationality of restaurant visitors who might believe that 
leaving a generous tip in this restaurant will lead to their being treated 
better in other restaurants, and so on. No, restaurant visitors leave tips 
because they consider it appropriate to do so in the respective situation. 
5  THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF STRUCTURAL RATIONALITY 

106
What counts as appropriate is influenced by customary practices. Tips that 
are significantly higher than what is generally expected are just as inappro­
priate as tips that are far too small. It even leaves a bad aftertaste if a guest 
varies how much he tips according to how satisfied he was. One may do so 
in individual cases, but normally one would not; it would not be appropri­
ate, at least not in most countries in the world. In some countries, the 
practice of tipping does not exist. A server in Beijing will come running 
down the street to bring you the change that you have left on your plate 
for him as a tip. He perceives it as inappropriate to be tipped, possibly even 
as degrading (he would have provided friendly service in any event, regard­
less of any expectation of gratification). One misinterprets the actual moti­
vation for action as soon as one tries to pseudo-rationalize such a practice 
by interpreting it as the fulfillment of specific desires. The respective deci­
sion to tip corresponds to the endorsement of a general practice, namely 
to tip according to the respective country’s customs. There is not much 
more to say about this and there is no explanatory gap that needs to 
be filled.
As rational agents, humans are free to have such reasons and to follow 
them. If they want to participate in a practice that is generally considered 
appropriate, it is not irrational to do so, even if they do not personally 
benefit from doing so; even if there are no desires that would be fulfilled 
by this, apart from the desire to participate in an appropriate practice; even 
if gratifications do not play a role in foro interno or as an incentive. The 
preference-neutrality which economic analysis lays such an emphasis on 
should be extended to the choice of pragmata as part of an adequate 
practice.
San Pellegrino, which is perhaps the most famous European brand of 
mineral water, is widespread not only in Italy, but also in many other 
countries, including Germany. An average-price restaurant in Italy will 
charge about 2 € for a large bottle of San Pellegrino. North of the Italian 
border, the price rises considerably, up to 7,50 €, for example. The prices 
of food by no means diverge to the same extent; they are still quite similar 
to Italian prices – it is only the price of mineral water that increases. We can 
observe a similar phenomenon for the Italian espresso. In most Italian 
bars, you can still get an espresso for about 1 €, which has become highly 
uncommon in Germany. It would be misleading to try to explain this in 
terms of tariffs levied on these products or in terms of transportation costs, 
since there are no toll charges within the European Union and because 
transportation costs are irrelevant for these price differences. The only 
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

107
plausible explanation is cultural: Italians consider having mineral water for 
a meal a staple. One needs a lot of hydration, particularly in the summer 
months, and any restaurant that charged 7,50 € for this as restaurants do 
in Germany would be judged as indecent by Italian customers. It is similar 
in the case of espresso: It is not a luxury drink in Italy. It is part of the 
social cement of everyday Italian life, so to speak. One goes out with oth­
ers or meets regularly for coffee, in order to take breaks from working, to 
exchange some words, in order to have a pretense for meeting. A bar 
charging 2,80 € or 3,50 € would seem indecent – even in the Veneto 
region where incomes are considerably higher than in Germany. The most 
plausible explanation is not that economic optimization processes play a 
role here, but rather it is the role that appropriateness considerations and 
expectations play in our everyday practice. There are cultural standards of 
appropriateness, and in some cases they impact economic practice. The 
interpretation according to which these criteria are the sign of a wide­
spread irrationality is wrong. The customers’ expectation to receive an 
espresso for only 1 € is completely rational, that is, it rests on the fact that 
everybody has this expectation. The market of rational consumers does 
not wipe out normative expectations based on cultural norms of 
appropriateness.
Structural rationality becomes concrete in the form of appropriateness 
conditions that determine our practice. It seems quite obvious to me that 
the criteria of appropriateness determine our behavior as consumers to a 
far greater extent than optimization in the sense of maximizing the 
expected value of one’s personal utility function, given subjective proba­
bilities. Most decisions as a consumer, as a buyer of a product or service, 
take place under extremely restrictive conditions: The price is not high 
enough to warrant a comparison with competing offers, the time that is 
available makes only the spatial arrangement of offers relevant, an inten­
tionally utility-optimizing behavior for each purchasing decision would 
call into question our everyday practice. I accept offers that provide appro­
priate value for money and I realize everyday purchasing and consumption 
decisions within chosen structures that I do not question for the sake of 
optimization. In Italy, I would instantly leave a bar again that offers 
espresso for 2,50 €, not because I have a lower budget when traveling in 
Italy, but simply because it is inappropriate there to sell espresso for that 
much money. I would in a sense feel unwelcomed by a bar that did this 
anyway. I do not have any motivation to optimize my expected utility 
given how small the amount of money is and given that this act of 
5  THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF STRUCTURAL RATIONALITY 

108
consumption is more or less irrelevant. I choose a different bar, even if this 
entails a certain inconvenience or at least a temporal delay, an additional 
short or long walk, since such a price seems inappropriate to me and I do 
not wish to support such inappropriate behavior on the market through 
my buying decision. The (pseudo-)rationalization of this practice accord­
ing to which I intend a causal effect, in this case, to influence the respec­
tive bars to adopt adequate pricing, is not my motive for action. If it were 
the motive for action, it would be irrational: My decision does not play a 
causal role in pricing policies within this specific market.
These trivial examples—tipping and the price of espresso—are not 
about the weighing of complex normative reasons which are decisive for 
the respective appropriateness. One could say with Wittgenstein that the 
explanations come to an end in the practiced (economic) lifeform. We 
participate in this lifeform, we have corresponding mutual expectations 
(concerning the appropriate amount for a tip, the appropriate price of an 
espresso, or a bottle of San Pellegrino), and we use this for orientation in 
our practice. Pronounced deviations from the respective established crite­
ria of appropriateness cause astonishment or anger. It is not that we are 
accustomed to this respective practice and therefore cannot do anything 
but participate in this practice ourselves. It was pointed out above that this 
practice can vary greatly from one country to the next and that we adapt 
to the change in the criteria of appropriateness even before we are used to 
them, that is, shortly after crossing the border. Rather, the respective 
established economic practice sets the normative standards that we tend to 
accept. In order for us to be able to do so, certain conditions must be met. 
But insofar as these conditions are met, we criticize deviations and try 
ourselves to follow the norms.
To state it more generally: The criteria of appropriateness that deter­
mine a lifeform do not have to be shared by somebody who does not 
partake in this lifeform or participates in it only ephemerally. There are 
several empirical studies that show, however, that it is difficult for persons 
to continuously distance themselves from the appropriateness criteria of 
established lifeforms and particular interactive patterns within groups. To 
put it in the terminology developed in this book, one could say that the 
structures that make up individual rationality must be embeddable within 
the structures of interactive practice, and therefore entail the acceptance of 
a coherent normative perspective. As we have seen above, this coherence 
is not just an intrapersonal diachronic coherence but also an interpersonal 
collective coherence. Distancing oneself is only possible within certain 
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

109
limits since this presents the single person with the challenge of making 
oneself understood despite widely diverging normative judgments in order 
to be able to justify one’s own practice toward others. Seen pragmatically, 
a successful justification requires that we have a lot in common with our 
conversation partners, including the majority of our normative assessment 
of the shared social and cultural practices.
­
­
­
12
5.8    Fairness
People attach great importance to things going fairly. The term origi­
nated in the English language and fairness plays a particularly important 
role in Anglo-Saxon cultures. John Rawls developed his comprehensive 
theory of justice based on an operationalization of the principle of fairness. 
This operationalization has the advantage that one need not specify in 
detail what is to be subsumed under fairness or rather which criteria can 
guarantee fairness depending on the decision situation. Instead, it limits 
itself to characterizing a decision situation that, because of its special prop­
erties, guarantees that the resulting contract is fair. Rawls claims that if the 
situation prevents persons who are involved in the decision from prioritiz­
ing their own interests over the interests of others, the result is fair. The 
veil of ignorance excludes all knowledge of one’s own interests and thereby 
12 Cf. Michael Walzer. 1987. Interpretation and Social Criticism. Cambridge/Mass.: 
Harvard University Press.
5  THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF STRUCTURAL RATIONALITY 

110
guarantees fairness. Political justice, justice of the institutional basic struc­
ture, can then be derived from the optimization of the respective self-­
interests under conditions that guarantee fairness – the veil of ignorance. 
At least this is what the theory claims. According to this interpretation, 
fairness is guaranteed if no person can give her own interests special prior­
ity and if the decisions are rational.
However, not every kind of equal treatment of interests leads to fair 
distributions or rules. It is true for all versions of utilitarianism that they 
provide an equal weighting of individual interests, regardless of how these 
are exactly specified. But utilitarian optimization disadvantages those, for 
instance, who can only derive little benefit from a resource in terms of 
preference fulfillment or well-being. And it advantages those for whom 
the opposite holds. The utilitarian is confronted with the problem of the 
utility monster, that is, persons who gain great advantages from minimal 
resources. If, contrary to the standard economic view, one assumes linear 
utility functions, the utilitarian imperative would be to concentrate 
resources on the person with the steepest utility function. All resources 
would then have to be allocated to this one person, because this would 
result in the highest aggregate of utility. But even if one assumes standard 
monotonically increasing utility functions with monotonically decreasing 
marginal utility, the utilitarian principles yield distributions that cannot be 
considered fair. John Rawls’ answer, which he shares with other new con­
tractarians, is that the general consentability under fair conditions makes 
for (political) justice, and not some kind of aggregation of interests.
Rawls derives the first principle of justice, a system of maximal liberties 
from fairness and individual rationality. This derivation, however, only 
works under extremely specific socio-cultural conditions. Rawls does not 
realize that the priority of equal maximal liberties can only be convincing 
if one assumes the fact of plurality—the plurality of religions, lifeforms, 
and cultures—and the fact of individuality—every person wishes to live 
according to their ideas on what makes a good life. These conditions are 
fulfilled in modern Western societies, but generally not in non-Western 
and traditional societies. The supposedly universal validity of the principles 
of political justice fails for two reasons: first, the specific, multi-cultural 
conditions of Western societies are implicitly taken for granted as empiri­
cally given and, second, the conception of rationality as a mutually disin­
terested optimization of the respective self-interests is by no means 
incontestable even though it corresponds to the standard model of con­
temporary economics.
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

111
Irrespective of these provisos, we can, at any rate, assume that persons 
in their concrete practice in our Western society orient themselves toward 
the norm of fairness to a significant degree. Normative theories that make 
the bringing about or the historical genesis of distributions their criterion 
are purely deontological, for example the entitlement theory of justice 
that Robert Nozick presents in Anarchy, State, and Utopia. They cannot 
ethically assess distributions as such without knowledge of how they have 
come about. Other—egalitarian—theories by contrast develop criteria 
that allow the assessment of distributions as fair or unfair without any 
knowledge of their coming about. This in turn allows a teleological nor­
mative assessment directed at the consequences of actions.
But even within Western societies, the criteria for the theory of justice 
diverge widely, as do the political intuitions regarding justice that shape 
public discourses and philosophical conflicts. The space of these diverging 
intuitions is hard to categorize in light of the impressive variety of norma­
tive attitudes. In any event, the comparison of social justice norms and 
market justice that is common in behavioral economics – that is, a dichot­
omy between social and economic criteria – is insufficient. Even beyond 
behavioral economics, a variety of completely different practices unfolds 
that correspond to the variety of community formations and patterns of 
interaction.
13
14
­
15
­
13 Cf. Johann G. Hamann. 2007. Writings on Philosophy and Language. Edited and trans­
lated by Kenneth Haynes. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press; Johann G. von Herder: 
Understanding and Experience. A Metacritique of the Critique of Pure Reason [1799]; Georg 
W. F. Hegel: The Phenomenology of Spirit [1807].
14 Cf. Michael Walzer. 1983. Spheres of Justice: A Defense of Pluralism and Equality. 
New York: Basic Books; Charles Taylor. 1991. The Malaise of Modernity. Toronto: House 
of Anansi.
15 Cf. Bernhard Williams. 1985. Ethics and the Limits of Philosophy. Cambridge/Mass.: 
Harvard University Press.
5  THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF STRUCTURAL RATIONALITY 

112
­
­
­
A particularly interesting example is the diversity of fairness rules in the 
social sphere. What do parents owe to their children and children to their 
parents, or siblings to each other, or grandparents to their grandchildren 
and vice versa? What is considered fair or unfair in each case is not mea­
sured by criteria of equal consideration of interests alone but correlates 
with the respective status or role a person has. The expectation of reci­
procity in earlier times, according to which what parents did for their chil­
dren was at least partially compensated for by the fact that old parents 
could rely on the solidarity of their children, has largely, if not yet legally, 
disappeared at the latest in the course of the individualization of Western 
cultures in the 1960s and 1970s. These conditions are not without para­
doxes: An example of such a paradox would be the lowering of the age of 
maturity from 21 to 18 years while extending adolescence and prolonging 
the phase of economic dependence, often well beyond the age of 25 or 
even 30, as is the case in Southern European societies in particular. Another 
example: In Western societies, the special relationship of closeness between 
siblings does not usually constitute mutual expectations of support. Even 
if one of the siblings becomes very wealthy and the other one earns only a 
fraction of the income of the other, no expectations of compensation arise 
from this. On the other hand, it is expected that parents, depending on 
their economic capacity, are materially committed to their children. 
Strangely enough, family law also deviates from the equal treatment crite­
rion here, according to which all persons are owed the same under the 
same conditions. Maintenance payments are scaled according to the ability 
to pay, while the state pays the maintenance compensation without such a 
scale, just as the earlier alimony payments were independent of the wealth 
of the person liable to pay. In more traditional cultures, the expectations 
of solidarity within the family are much higher and lead to a widespread 
practice of nepotism, also in the economic and administrative sphere. 
There also seems to be a stratum-specific variance, according to which 
intra-family, mutual obligations of solidarity are more pronounced in the 
working-class milieus than in the bourgeois middle classes.
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

113
­
­
­
16
17
18
19
16 Cf. Amos Tversky. 2004. Preference, Belief, and Similarity: Selected Writings. Cambridge/
Mass.: MIT Press. Behavioral economics is also more strongly committed to the standard 
model of individually and individually optimizing rationality than some critics of homo oeco­
nomicus seem to be aware of. Part of this problem is probably due to the fact that behavioral 
economics operates at the interface between empirical social psychology and neo-classical 
economics, while practical philosophy with its different normative models of rationality is 
almost completely ignored. Contemporary practical philosophy, in turn, is either itself com­
mitted to the neo-classical economic standard model of individual advantage optimization or 
is indifferent to economic practice.
17 A good overview is provided by Werner Güth and Reinhard Tietz. 1990. Ultimatum 
Bargaining Behavior. A Survey and Comparison of Experimental Results. Journal of Economic 
Psychology 11: 417–449.
18 Interesting contributions: Werner Güth et  al. 1982. An Experimental Analysis of 
Ultimatum Bargaining. Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 3: 367–388; Daniel 
Kahneman et  al. 1986. Fairness and Assumption of Economics. Journal of Business 59: 
285–300; as well as Daniel Kahneman et al. 1986. Fairness as a Constraint on Profit Seeking: 
Entitlements in the Market. The American Economic Review: 728–741.
19 Cf. Appendix, The Ultimatum Game.
5  THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF STRUCTURAL RATIONALITY 

114
­
­
­
It is a commonplace in behavioral economics literature to point out 
that rejection is of course to be seen as a form of irrationality, since the 
person renounces a possible gain. This commonplace, however, is based 
on a theory of rationality that is inadequate. According to this theory, only 
the optimization of one’s own advantage is a rational motive for action. If, 
on the other hand, one allows a person to have a legitimate interest in 
other things than her own advantage, this interpretation collapses. In the 
two-person variant of the ultimatum game, the second person, who 
decides to accept or reject the offer, also decides on the distribution of a 
good in this two-person world of the two players. If a fair distribution in 
this two-person world is important to her, she weighs this evaluative aspect 
against that of personal advantage. The preference sovereignty so highly 
held in economic theory also applies here: It must be left to persons to 
decide for themselves what is important to them. If fair distributions are 
important to a person, this aspect of evaluation may of course play a role 
in her choices of action, without rendering these choices irrational.
­
­
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

115
­
20
These findings are interesting from the perspective of structural ratio­
nality because they prove a clear difference depending on whether the 
acting person in making a decision determines a structure of action (as in 
the two-person ultimatum game the reacting person does) or not (in the 
extension of the ultimatum game to competitive situations). The more 
irrelevant the own decision for the structure desired, the more dominant 
becomes the orientation toward own interest. This explains why structur­
ally rational action is more manifest in smaller interaction communities 
than in larger anonymous groups. Therefore, one may consider it one of 
the most important goals of normative ethics to extend the reference 
parameters of structural rationality a limine to all agents.
5.9    Equality
­
21
­
­
­
20 Cf. Werner Güth et al. 1997. On the Reliability of Reciprocal Fairness – An Experimental 
Study. Berlin: Humboldt University; Ernst Fehr and Urs Fischbacher. 2003. The Nature of 
Human Altruism. Nature 425: 785–791.
21 Cf. the collections of important behavioral economics contributions, for example Colin 
Camerer, George Loewenstein, and Matthew Rabin, eds. 2011. Advances in Behavioral 
Economics. Princeton: University Press 2011.
5  THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF STRUCTURAL RATIONALITY 

116
­
­
22
­
23
24
­
­
­
22 Cf. Ariely (2010) and Dan Ariely. 2013. The Upside of Irrationality. New York: Harper. 
The results of a dense series of empirical studies, in a different constellation of authors around 
Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman, are also presented as deviations from rationality, but 
with the interpretation, more radical than Ariely, that the standard model of economics is 
rarely meaningful. A psychologically informed economic theory should therefore assume 
that people generally behave irrationally.
23 Cf. Gert Gigerenzer and Reinhard Selten, eds. 2002. Bounded Rationality: The Adaptive 
Toolbox. Cambridge/Mass.: MIT Press.
24 On the thesis of the duality of fast, automatic, and intuitive thinking on the one hand 
and slow, unreliable, ex post rationalizing thinking on the other, cf. Jonathan Evans. 1989. 
Bias in Human Reasoning: Causes and Consequences. New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum 
Associates; and—particularly influencing—Daniel Kahneman. 2011. Thinking, Fast and 
Slow. New York: Farrar, Straus & Giroux. Hugo Mercier and Dan Sperber develop a convinc­
ing critique of this duality thesis based on psychological findings, cf. Hugo Mercier and Dan 
Sperber. 2017. The Enigma of Reason: A New Theory of Human Understanding. Cambridge/
Mass: Harvard University Press.
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

117
As we have seen, it is not irrational to do something in order to honor 
a request for help (the category of exhortationes), to keep a promise (the 
category of commisiva), to fulfill one’s duties within a specific social role 
(the category of officia), or to comply with the postulates of equal treat­
ment (the category of principia). It can be rational to do something in 
order to avoid violating the rights of others, even if the violation was not 
sanctioned (the category of libertates) and, above all, it can be rational to 
do something because one wants to cooperate with other persons.
­
­
25
26
25 Cf. OPT.
26 Ernst Fehr and Klaus Schmidt. 2011. A Theory of Fairness, Competition and 
Cooperation. In Advances in Behavioral Economics, Colin Camerer, George Loewenstein 
and Matthew Rabin, eds., 271–296. Princeton: Princeton University Press, cf. Appendix, 
Equality and Utility.
5  THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF STRUCTURAL RATIONALITY 

118
­
This interpretation is doubly arbitrary: (1) because the linear measures 
of inequality – seemingly – model the observable behavior only for the 
reason that both factors α and β have been chosen as fixed but relative to 
the behavior of a person, in order to guarantee that the hypothesis cannot 
be refuted; and (2) because the possibility that a normative judgment – 
and not the own utility decrease – is what guides observable behavior is 
conceptually excluded, as the inequality aversion is interpreted as a decrease 
in utility.
­
­
­
­
27
27 Cf. Judy Bethwaite and Paul Tompkinson. 1996. The Ultimatum Game and Non-Selfish 
Utility Functions. Journal of Economic Psychology 17: 259–271; Vernon Smith and Arlington 
Williams. 1990. The Boundaries of Competitive Price Theory: Convergence, Expectations, 
and Transaction Costs. Advances in Behavioral Economics 2: 31–53; and Werner Güth, 
Nadège Marchand, and Jean-Louis Rullière. 1998. Equilibration et dépendance du contexte. 
Une évaluation expérimentale du jeu de négociation sous ultimatum. Revue économique 49: 
785–794.
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

119
­
Economic theory, including behavioral economics, seems to be able to 
accept deontological constraints only if they are tied to incentives or sanc­
tions. If this is not the case, then these incentives and sanctions are artifi­
cially brought about by interpreting the decision behavior as an expression 
of a changed utility function. The sanctions are, as it were, conjured up 
through a terminological magic trick. Now, there are persons who indeed 
feel bad if they break a moral rule that they consider important. But even 
in these cases, it is implausible to interpret their decision as an expression 
of the attempt to maximize their own utility. It is the other way around, 
and this is something that Joseph Butler pointed out some time ago in 
Fifteen Sermons Preached at the Rolls Chapel (1729): Altruists feel better if 
they can help somebody, but they do not help because it makes them feel 
better. We are dealing here with a reversal of the justificatory relation. 
Altruists want to help and they feel better when they realize this help. But 
it is not wanting to feel better that motivates the altruist, but rather want­
ing to help. The terminology and the analytic toolkit should not be based 
on a conceptual confusion. And such a conceptual confusion emerges 
when the criteria of equality are translated into utility modifications.
You can see how grotesque this reinterpretation is because it apparently 
is acceptable for economic analysts only if it is self-centered, that is, if it 
takes the differences of one’s own situation to the situation of others as the 
measure of inequality. This too is highly implausible. Persons normally 
place great value on equal treatment and fair distributions. They do not 
only value these because they are keeping an eye on differences between 
their share and the share of others, but because they prefer a just world to 
an unjust world. It is the equal moral status of all that gives such normative 
judgments their practical relevance and effectiveness.
What Rawls has called a shared “sense of justice” obviously does not 
refer to criteria of just distribution of income or wealth. Here the norma­
tive beliefs of citizens are widely divergent. To infer from this that equality 
is a high value to some and nearly irrelevant to others would, however, be 
a fallacy. It is far more plausible to assume that these differences are not 
founded in fundamental normative dissent but result merely from differ­
ing empirical assessments. The contemporary theory of justice in philoso­
phy has developed the conceptual tools to analyze this more exactly. 
Egalitarians, for instance Ronald Dworkin, are not in favor of equal distri­
butions, but rather in favor of an ideal equalization of what is called 
5  THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF STRUCTURAL RATIONALITY 

120
natural or social luck. Natural luck comprises, for instance, the genetic 
constitution, and social luck comprises social origins and their effects on 
the opportunities of a person. Correspondingly, a central criticism of egali­
tarianism consists in criticizing the hypertrophic measures that would be 
necessary in order to equalize natural and/or social luck. Not even the 
most radical egalitarians would demand, however, that goods, income, 
and wealth should be equally distributed. They merely require persons not 
to be unfairly disadvantaged and the state (within left-wing egalitarianism) 
to do everything it can using educational and social measures in order to 
minimize unfair, that is, undeserved, inequalities.
Further differences in assessment and behavior are probably ascribable 
to the extent to which persons are ready to act structurally rational, which 
varies from case to case. Some billionaires have followed the appeal to 
donate 99% of their wealth to charitable causes; others have not. Some 
persons are only ready to a limited extent to adjust their individual practice 
to the structure of social practice they support; for others these are largely 
congruent. But even in the case of those for whom a strong divergence is 
noticeable, one should not hastily conclude that there is a lack of moral 
motivation. For instance, it seems to me neither irrational nor immoral to 
completely abstain from charitable acts despite considering the existing 
poverty in economically highly developed nations unacceptable. One may 
not be willing to contribute individually to poverty reduction, even though 
one would support a measure that would, for example, raise taxes on top 
earners in order to fight poverty in society more effectively – even if one 
belongs to these top earners oneself. If the economic analyst concludes 
from this that the utility of the person increases more because of such a 
sociopolitical measure than through the loss of income that results from 
increased taxes, this is again a clear non sequitur. The person supports a 
social and tax-political measure, knowing well that this limits her own 
advantage, because she believes that poverty should be fought effectively 
in highly developed economic societies. It could even be that she does not 
care at all about the individual fate of the poor, but primarily cares about 
society as a whole being shaped in a sufficiently just manner. In particular, 
the ratio of her own income compared to that of the poor is completely 
irrelevant to her, because this is not what is at issue in questions of justice. 
Feelings of envy are always irrational and so are feelings of guilt, at least in 
those instances where one has not personally contributed to the poverty of 
others. The remedy of integrating distributive, fairness, or cooperative 
aspects into the individual utility function goes astray from the outset. Its 
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

121
terminology excludes empirical phenomena such as consideration of nor­
mative assessment criteria, which means that it ignores obvious and empir­
ically well-proven phenomena of moral motivation and structural 
rationality that are well recorded in behavioral economics.
5.10    Relativity
The normative principle of non-offsettability is of central importance for 
humane practices. It shapes the moral practice of a civil society, and also 
characterizes its legal system. For instance, violations of individual rights 
cannot be offset by economic advantages. It is quite possible to hold the 
view that all deontological norms need to be restricted consequentialisti­
cally under extreme conditions, and yet to maintain that individual rights 
must not be offset against economic advantages under normal conditions.
For example, the ban on torture is absolute, possibly loosened conse­
quentialistically in extreme cases where there is the imminent danger of a 
global catastrophe, but this does not make complying with the ban on 
torture irrational. Moreover, complying with the ban on torture in no way 
implies that the right of the offender not to be tortured weighs more than 
the life of a child that could be saved by threatening torture, for example.
For economic theory, by contrast, the completeness axiom is of great 
importance. This, however, seems to be irreconcilable with the principle 
of normative non-offsettability. However, this is only a seeming incompat­
ibility. For if one takes the concept of revealed preferences seriously, it 
merely requires the completeness of the preferences that are action-­
guiding. One can adhere to this requirement without abandoning deon­
tological norms and their absolute validity, with or without a consequentialist 
weakening. If a deontological norm prohibits a certain kind of action, the 
corresponding alternatives drop out of the set of options. This is a more 
appropriate modeling than one that takes a detour over the individual 
preference relation. It is more appropriate because the deontological agent 
is characterized precisely by the fact that he does not consider certain 
options; their inclusion would distort his preference relation, that is, the 
agent’s motives. Immanuel Kant does not have a preference for actions 
whose maxims pass the test of the Categorical Imperative; rather he rules 
out actions whose maxims do not pass this test – these options are not 
feasible.
5  THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF STRUCTURAL RATIONALITY 

122
­
­
­
28
Admittedly, the interpretation of deontological practice as Ramsey-­
compatible regarding the probabilistic postulates of monotonicity and con­
tinuity turns out to be somewhat artificial. Naturally, it holds for a Kantian 
that an action that is compatible with moral law should be preferred over 
an action that is not compatible with moral law. One might further con­
clude from this that the more probable the morally permissible outcome, 
moral persons in the Kantian sense would value a lottery with both of 
these possible outcomes. But this would mean stretching things consider­
ably, since consistent moral persons would never accept such a lottery as 
an option for action. They would not be willing to commit a morally 
impermissible action, no matter how low its probability.
This problem comes to light even more clearly in the case of the conti­
nuity axiom, as the following consideration shows: Let us assume that we 
have two morally acceptable options for action, one of which is preferable 
over the other for pragmatic reasons (it is either easier to do or promotes 
the well-being of the agent). According to the continuity axiom, there has 
to exist exactly one probability at which the lottery between this morally 
and pragmatically opportune action and the morally impermissible action 
is indifferent toward the morally permissible but pragmatically less oppor­
tune action. The Kantian agent, however, would reject this. He will in any 
case prefer the morally permissible albeit pragmatically unfavorable action 
to a lottery that could entail a morally impermissible action, regardless of 
how low its probability is.
28 Cf. Appendix, Ramsey Compatibility.
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

123
­
­
­
29
­
­
­
­
John Rawls has, I believe rightly so, characterized envy as an irrational 
emotion. Rational humans are free from envy. This is important for the 
theory of justice, because the Pareto-inclusivity of criteria of justice can 
only be upheld if we assume that all persons are envy-free. Pareto-inclusivity 
requires that a state or distribution is preferred over another if at least one 
person is better off in the former than in the latter, without any other 
person being worse off in the former than in the latter. If it is possible to 
do somebody good, we should do it, even if the person is already better 
off to begin with. In the public political and economic discourse, those 
who criticize the injustice of distributions are usually accused of being 
guided by envy in their judgment. But this is an insinuation. Even persons 
who are completely free from envy can criticize injustice and unequal 
distributions.
Anti-egalitarians or non-egalitarians object that equality is not a value 
in and of itself. They say that it is irrelevant how equal or unequal a distri­
bution is. The argumentation is as follows: Let us assume that we have an 
29 Cf. Appendix, Ramsey Compatibility.
5  THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF STRUCTURAL RATIONALITY 

124
unequal distribution, for example of income. If we take something away 
from a person who is above the median level, without pushing her income 
below the median, the Gini coefficient as a measure of inequality decreases. 
However, the sum of all incomes, ceteris paribus conditions provided, has 
decreased. Does this improve the situation? The non-egalitarians’ answer 
is: “No.” The objection that this is connected to the fact that we are off­
setting the total welfare with inequality is not convincing, since it is hard 
to understand why a distribution should be evaluated as better or more 
just simply because something is taken away from a well-off person. It 
seems that the decisive factor here is not the offsetting of welfare with 
justice, but rather the inadequacy of the egalitarian criterion of justice.
I consider this anti- or non-egalitarian argument to be correct, but I do 
not share the fundamental criticism of egalitarianism that is derived from 
this argument. Correctly understood, equality is a high value. This can be 
seen from the simple fact that the unequal distribution of a good to vari­
ous recipients requires justification. The institutionalization of solidarity 
within the welfare state precisely faces this challenge of being able to jus­
tify any form of unequal distribution. A correctly understood egalitarian­
ism focuses on the dignity that belongs to each person and on the equal 
respect that they deserve. A host who has five guests and is distributing a 
cake to them needs to have reasons if he does not serve his guests equal-­
size pieces. A person who greets five people and shakes hands with four of 
them but not with one should have a good reason for this. Unequal treat­
ment stands in need of an explanation; equal treatment does not. Insofar 
as distributions are the result of unequal treatment, they are unjust. It is 
the act of distributing which must respect the equality of each human 
being under deontological criteria, and not the distribution itself that 
must be equal. But to the extent that equal treatment within the act of 
distribution leads to an equal distribution, an equal distribution is morally 
required.
­
­
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

125
­
­
30
Liberal and humane theories of justice do not rely on the sanctioning 
power of the state. They appeal to the common sense of justice (Rawls), 
commonly accepted individual rights and liberties (Locke), or the ratio­
nality of the participants of political consultation (Habermas). This 
explains why the state as a coercive order plays a subordinate role in these 
theories, as its critics, both on the right and on the left, have bemoaned 
again and again. The willingness to act structurally rationally is an implicit 
precondition for liberal and humane political theories.
­
31
­
­
30 Cf. Rawls (1971), chapter 7.
31 Cf. Appendix, Equality and Utility.
5  THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF STRUCTURAL RATIONALITY 

126
­
32
Furthermore, such a modification of the individual utility functions 
leads to an infinite regress, at least if one adheres to the concept of revealed 
preference. It is far more plausible to model deviations from egoistic utility 
optimizing as an expression of respect or equal dignity. These attitudes or 
virtues do not weigh the advantages that are to be expected for equal 
treatment against the personal utility decrease. Instead they—hypotheti­
cally—embed the decision into a more or less egalitarian practice. A limine 
the agent appropriates the Kantian universalization test for maxims, which 
is here varied as follows: Act in such a way that the maxim of your action 
is compatible with a universal rule to treat all persons as equals.
33
­
­
­
­
­
32 This, of course, entails a high degree of complexity and it is, therefore, implausible to 
assume that the determining elements of this benefit modification are mathematically as 
simple (namely linear) as Fehr and Schmidt assume; cf. Appendix, Equality and Utility.
33 Michael Sandel. 2012. What Money Can’t Buy: The Moral Limits of Markets. New York: 
Farrar, Straus and Giroux.
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

127
­
34
5.11    Communication
The phenomenon of linguistic communication has always been consid­
ered a distinctive feature of the human species. It seems to have taken 
quite some time, however, until the members of other cultures were 
equally acknowledged as rational. The Hellenes called non-Greeks barba­
roi, that is, those who babbled but did not speak. In the practice of colo­
nialism, the subjected peoples’ lack of ability to speak the new rulers’ 
language played an important role in the constant infantilization of those 
being colonized. This attitude has not been completely overcome in times 
of English being the new globalized lingua franca.
­
35
­
­
­
­
­
34 For an opposing view cf. Ariely (2010), chapter 1 “The Truth about Relativity.”
35 Cf. Donald Davidson. 1982. Rational Animals. Dialectica 36: 317–327.
5  THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF STRUCTURAL RATIONALITY 

128
36
­
­
­
37
­
The first insight of intentionalist semantics is this: Without intentions, 
there is no (linguistic) communication. If we assume that bees do not pos­
sess intentionality, or at least not sufficiently complex intentionality, there 
is no language of bees but rather a coordination of behavior that happens 
through causal, genetically determined mechanisms and that works with­
out communicative acts. The reverse also holds: If certain behavioral pat­
terns between persons appear together with verbal expressions, this does 
not prove that communication has taken place.
38
­
­
36 Cf. HumR, part IV “Humanist Semantics.”
37 Cf. Michael Tomasello. 2009. The Cultural Origins of Human Cognition. Cambridge/
Mass.: Harvard University Press.
38 Cf. Paul Grice. 1989. Studies in the Way of Words. Cambridge/Mass.: Harvard 
University Press.
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

129
39
­
If successfully influencing the addressee were the decisive criterion for 
successful communication, the distinction between consequentialist opti­
mization and successful communication would be blurred. The crucial 
point is the intertwining of the prohairetic and epistemic attitudes of the 
transmitter and the receiver: The meaning of an expression then results 
from the reasons that a person wants to convey with the expression: theo­
retical reasons for beliefs, practical reasons for actions, and also emotive 
reasons for emotions. Since in cases of successful communication, persons 
acknowledge each other as full-fledged agents, the addressee is not an 
object that is being influenced but rather a subject. This subject is accept­
ing reasons and may or may not let themselves be affected by these reasons.
Epistemic reasons: A person gives reasons that speak in favor of a cer­
tain scientific hypothesis. She is understood if the recipients can compre­
hend which beliefs the person holds, and which reasons she has for 
believing these beliefs (the scientific hypothesis) to be true. It is not the 
case that the communicative act is successful only if those listening to the 
talk are convinced by the hypothesis (let us assume that the reasons are 
being presented in a talk at a conference). Epistemic reasons may be 
directed at convincing persons of that which they justify, but the commu­
nicative act is not successful only if this intention is fulfilled. The mutual 
acknowledgment of each other as beings capable of judgment presupposes 
that we do not make the act of communication dependent on a success 
criterion of influencing others.
39 According to Grice, the success of a communicative act consists in the sender of a sign 
(the speaker of an utterance) achieving his goals in influencing the addressee to change his 
behavior or belief. Regardless of whether or not this interpretation is adequate, it appears to 
me to be obviously false: What is important is not success in the sense of efficacy, but merely 
success in the sense of perceiving an intention and thereby conveying reasons to do some­
thing or believe something; cf. HumR, part IV on “Humanist Semantics.”
5  THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF STRUCTURAL RATIONALITY 

130
The ethos of epistemic rationality requires that we regard reasons for 
beliefs as self-sufficient insofar as we let ourselves be guided by these rea­
sons regardless of the consequences and side effects that the act of being 
convinced entails. Both neo-classically influenced liberal economists and 
Marxist intellectuals like to direct the question “Cui bono?” at beliefs and 
theories. Who is it of any use to that one considers this theory or this belief 
to be correct? This is an interesting question, but it does not have any­
thing at all to do with the correctness or falsity and the rationality of a 
belief or theory. It is surely possible that a correct, well-justified belief has 
undesirable consequences on a political or social level. To give a current 
example: Most of the refugees from sub-Saharan Africa who are making 
their way to Europe do not belong to the poorest one-third of the world’s 
population, but rather recruit themselves out of the local middle classes. It 
may be true that acknowledging this fact could lead to more resentment 
toward immigrants or boost right-wing parties. However, this does not 
change anything about the fact that there are good (epistemic) reasons for 
this belief and not adopting it would therefore be irrational. It is a hall­
mark of enlightened, open societies that their members do not only let 
themselves be affected by theoretical reasons, but that they also participate 
in public discourses that are about finding out what is in the common 
interest, and about simultaneously developing a coherent worldview that 
is compatible with differing interests and perspectives.
Dissociating from beliefs that one holds after being affected by good 
theoretical reasons and expressing beliefs, or keeping them secret, for 
pragmatic reasons (e.g., political reasons) is what characterizes a closed 
society, if not a dictatorship or totalitarian system. Open societies are 
dependent on an ethos of epistemic rationality, which took centuries to 
develop.
If we now categorize the appropriation of a belief or at least the expres­
sion of a belief as an action, the ethos of epistemic rationality requires 
actions that are not an appropriate means for optimizing a person’s subjec­
tive, individual preferences. A person who makes her beliefs subject to her 
interests lacks the power of judgment. As widespread as this phenomenon 
is, it is a form of irrationality.
6
­
­
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

131
40
For us to be able to communicate, it is necessary that we share a large 
number of prohairetic and epistemic attitudes. We can only identify differ­
ences of belief against the background of shared beliefs and practices. If 
the latter diverge too strongly, communication becomes impossible and 
attempts at communication fail. It is a consensus that expresses itself in the 
fact that we consider many things to be self-explanatory and thus not in 
need of any further justification. It is a consensus that consists in mutually 
accepting certain reasons and keeping doubts local. Communication is 
incompatible with global skepticism. The Pyrrhonian skeptic, and likewise 
the constant ironist, exits all social relationships. Skepticism and irony, 
sarcasm and cynicism are only possible as a form of distancing oneself from 
a practice that one otherwise accepts to a large extent. Without this accep­
tance, there could be no membership in a community and no communica­
tion. We are, as one could also put it, always embedded in the structures 
of a shared practice, of a social lifeform. Reason does not just consist in the 
ability to criticize and to doubt, but also in the ability to accept, to embed 
one’s own practice in the practices of the lifeform of which we are a part.
40 Cf. Martha Nussbaum. 1988. Non-Relative Virtues: An Aristotelian Approach. Midwest 
Studies in Philosophy 13: 32–53; and id. 2006. Frontiers of Justice: Disability, Nationality, 
Species Membership. Cambridge/Mass.: Harvard University Press.
5  THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF STRUCTURAL RATIONALITY 

132
5.12    Rules
Rules are always normative. Deviations from a rule violate, so to say, an 
imperative. Rules must not be confused with regularities. Regularities are 
observable structures of the behavior of agents or of objects, for example 
in physics. The dominant conception of causality is that of regularity. 
According to this, a causal relation holds between an event x and an event 
y if y follows after x due to a regularity, ideally a universal natural law. If 
this regularity is described precisely enough in mathematical form and the 
conditions of the events can be described sufficiently precisely, then it 
holds that y is caused by x if y can be derived deductively from the assumed 
law of regularity together with those statements that describe the events’ 
circumstances. The relation of causality turns into a logical inference.
­
41
­
41 Cf. Saul Kripke. 1982. Wittgenstein on Rules and Private Language. Cambridge/Mass.: 
Harvard University Press.
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

133
However, Wittgenstein was unquestionably a skeptic regarding ethics 
and aesthetics. He considered moral and aesthetical judgments as some­
thing ineffable. This is not plausible, however, since the lifeform that sup­
ports our linguistic practice and that is supported by it is constituted 
normatively: We know much more reliably when a rule has been violated 
than we can ensure to speak in conformity with it. Grasping normative 
rules then expresses itself less in consistent conformity and more in judg­
ments saying that this or that linguistic behavior is incorrect.
­
­
­
42
­
­
42 David Lewis. 1969. Convention: A Philosophical Study. Cambridge/Mass.: Harvard 
University Press.
5  THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF STRUCTURAL RATIONALITY 

134
­
­
­
­
43
44
­
43 What is being suggested here can be seen as a reformulation (or rational reconstruction) 
of what Jürgen Habermas calls the “difference between communicative and strategic ratio­
nality”; cf. The Theory of Communicative Action, chapter 3. The critical disagreement I have 
with Lewis and other proponents of intentionalist semantics lies in the difference between 
coordination and cooperative games. An intentionalist semantics that was adjusted in this 
manner would be a natural “ally” of Habermas’ theory of communicative action; cf. the part 
on “Humanist Semantics” in HumR.
44 Robert Brandom. 1994. Making it Explicit. Cambridge/Mass.: Harvard University Press.
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

135
­
­
45
45 Cf. OPT.
5  THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF STRUCTURAL RATIONALITY 

137
CHAPTER 6
Morality and Rationality
6.1    Critique of Consequentialism
The theory of structural rationality represents an alternative to consequen­
tial conceptions of practical reason. If we classify deontological theories as 
those which are not consequentialist, structural rationality is a deontologi­
cal conception. However, this beguiling and seemingly simple dichotomy 
between consequentialist and deontological approaches cannot do justice 
to the complexity of the problem. In general, the fact that incompatible 
paradigms in a scientific discipline, in this case, practical philosophy, have 
existed side by side and in competition with each other for many decades 
prompts us to assume that neither the one nor the other paradigm con­
tains the whole truth and that getting past this opposition of paradigms by 
including elements from both theories is the only way to live up to the 
existing state of affairs. The theory of structural rationality does indeed 
contain essential elements of each of these two paradigms. In Hegelian 
terminology, it sublates both, the consequentialist and the deontological 
paradigm. To put it even more radically: Consequentialist and deontologi­
cal conceptions each capture indispensable aspects of practical reason. 
These aspects, however, can only be brought together in the conceptual 
framework of structural rationality.
Generally speaking, deontological theories usually suffer from absolut­
ism: Either an action is in conformity with a rule or it is not. Deontological 
theories do not do justice to the normative gradualism of our practice. In 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature 
Switzerland AG 2023
J. Nida-Rümelin, A Theory of Practical Reason, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-17319-6_6

138
contrast, the theory of structural rationality is gradualist. Deontological 
theories are usually aprioristic. Kantian ethics is paradigmatic for this. A 
theory of structural rationality, on the other hand, determines what is rea­
sonable in the light of empirical conditions.
­
­
1
Let us start with a simple and everyday example. You bought some 
sausages at a snack bar which you have been served on a paper plate. You 
have eaten the sausages and there is currently no waste bin in sight. You 
would like to get rid of your paper plate, especially since it is decorated 
with mustard residue. You are thus faced with the alternative of continu­
ing to walk down the street with the paper plate until, ideally, you come 
across a rubbish bin, or inconspicuously dropping your paper plate. We 
probably all agree that it would not be right to dispose of your paper plate 
this way. That is why you refrain from doing so. You realize you are not 
the first who does not know what to do with the remains of their lunch 
because you see two paper plates on the sidewalk in front of you. You 
could pick them up and dispose of them together with your own paper 
plate at the next opportunity. However, there is no obligation for you to 
do so. For a consequentialist, the situation is clear: not picking up and 
disposing of two paper plates leads to a more serious deterioration of the 
state of the world than dropping one paper plate. In this example, conse­
quentialist ethics come into—banal, but symptomatic—conflict with our 
lifeworld practice of judgment. According to consequentialism, our judg­
ment is incoherent when we deem it an obligation for the sausage enthu­
siast to dispose of his paper plate, but not an obligation to pick up and 
dispose of the two paper plates on the sidewalk. In more technical words: 
It is inconceivable that there exists a plausible evaluative function over 
1 Cf. Ross, William D. 1930. The Right and the Good. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

139
world states, which results in an improvement (given the decision alterna­
tives, even an optimization) of the state of the world by disposing of our 
own paper plate and a simultaneous improvement (exact optimization) by 
not picking up the other two paper plates. Utilitarian theories, as a special 
version of consequentialist ethics, would establish a connection between 
human well-being and clean sidewalks, whereby it can be assumed that 
ceteris paribus the well-being of the pavement users increases monotoni­
cally with the cleanliness of the pavement. The state of the world is 
improved more by the proper disposal of two paper plates than by the 
proper disposal of one paper plate.
2
­
­
­
­
At this point, consequentialist rationalists tend to assert a comprehen­
sive skepticism toward our lifeworld power of moral judgment. They 
regard the widespread attitude (that everyone is responsible for their own 
paper plates, but not for the paper plates of others) as an example of a lack 
of power of moral judgment. Accordingly, we should judge actions solely 
by their causal consequences for the state of the world, especially when it 
comes to humanity’s well-being. However, it would be misleading to con­
strue such a dichotomy: The consequentialist principle of action versus the 
2 Cf. Hare (1981).
6  MORALITY AND RATIONALITY 

140
everyday rule (everyone takes care of their paper plates). The following 
juxtaposition seems more adequate: The moral evaluation of an action 
should regard this action as an instrument for making the world better 
(optimization of world states) versus the responsibility for one’s own prac­
tice is not limited to its causal effects on the world. It is the unboundedness 
of responsibility that brings consequentialism into conflict with our life­
world morality. This unbound responsibility in consequentialism goes 
hand in hand with the minimization of the role of the individual. The 
individual person becomes a small cog in a gigantic global gear whose 
relevance consists in a minimal contribution to the state of the world. 
Responsibility for one’s own life while considering the responsibility of 
others—this essentially deontological understanding represents conse­
quentialism’s opponent.
­
3
6.2    Impartiality
4
­
3 Cf. Williams (1985).
4 Cf. Sidgwick, Henry. 1874. The Methods of Ethics. London: Macmillan.
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

141
Consequentialist ethics can be interpreted as a form of hypertrophic 
impartiality: People have goals, and these goals guide their practice. It is 
moral if it considers all individual goals equally. If we assume, in agree­
ment with Jeremy Bentham, that the goal of all humans is to increase 
pleasure and to avoid pain, a moral practice aims at increasing the pleasure 
and reducing the pain of everyone. This is what the principle of maximiz­
ing total utility suggests: Moral practice is aimed at maximizing the sum of 
pleasure, minus the sum of pain, that is, optimizing total utility while tak­
ing into account the probabilities with which the respective practice 
impacts total utility.
This form of impartiality is hypertrophic because, strictly speaking, it 
eclipses what it claims to take into account (impartiality): the goals of 
human individuals. As moral agents, all individuals have to pursue only 
one goal, namely the optimization of aggregated total utility. As moral 
agents, they do not have any additional goals beyond that. And if they 
have such goals, they are not relevant for guiding their moral agency. But 
a form of impartiality that erases all that which is individual or partial, loses 
its subject matter. Traditional utilitarianism obscures this problem of any 
consequentialist ethics with a hedonistic anthropology. It assumes it as an 
anthropological fact that people have the superior goal to maximize their 
well-being (interestingly enough, Kant shared this assumption). Moral 
motivation is a necessary adjunct (in which way it is added remains chroni­
cally unexplained) which does not, however, displace this fundamental 
anthropologically rooted goal of action. So, the question on the nature of 
the ideal moral person persists in the classical version of hedonistic utili­
tarianism: Is this moral person’s entire life characterized by permanently 
sacrificing her real aspirations except for the rare cases where her self-­
interest in optimizing her well-being converges with optimizing total 
aggregated well-being? One might assume that our private life makes up 
such as large share of our life in general that total utility is optimized when 
all persons pursue solely their self-interest. This assumption, however, pre­
supposes what is a subject-matter of human decisions itself. How much 
time we devote to our private goals, that is, goals that aim at realizing our 
own interests and, at best, do not conflict with the others pursuing their 
interests, depends on the form of our individual life. It seems obvious that 
the moral duty to maximize total utility renders individual lifeforms, which 
give leeway for pursuing personal interests, morally inadmissible. Lifeforms 
6  MORALITY AND RATIONALITY 

142
are not rigid; they result from human agency. When living in cooperation 
and interdependence with others, the available options for action will only 
rarely optimize personal and overall well-being at the same time. Utilitarian 
ethics as the paradigm of consequentialism presents itself as true-to-life 
and pragmatic. Ultimately, however, its definition of the ideal moral per­
son is a saint, that is, a person who has no personal goals. Ethical conse­
quentialism erases the essence of individuals, that is, their specific goals, 
desires, hopes. The hypertrophic impartiality of ethical consequentialism 
marginalizes what it set out to—impartially—promote: individual interest.
5
6
­
­
­
­
­
7
5 Cf. Harsanyi, John C. 1977. Rational Behavior and Bargaining Equilibrium in Games 
and Social Situations. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press; Harsanyi (1980).
6 Cf. Appendix, Ramsey Compatibility.
7 Harsanyi is not fully consistent with regard to neutrality of content as he refuses to factor 
clearly anti-social preferences into the aggregation. In fact, this entails some conceptual diffi­
culties since the exclusion of specific preferences from an individual preference relation 
results in incoherences; cf. Harsanyi, John C. 1977. Morality and the Theory of Rational 
Behavior. Social Research: 623–656.
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

143
­
­
­
­
­
8
6.3    Individuality
­
8 This is a prominent example of the problems that result from the interdependence of 
preferences in rational choice theory, a further analysis is presented in the Appendix, 
Preference Interdependence.
6  MORALITY AND RATIONALITY 

144
­
­
­
9
­
­
Let us take the example of a two-person world to illustrate this: In this 
world, one person is doing twice as well as the other. Suppose it were pos­
sible to double the well-being of the already twice as well-off person by 
halving the well-being of the worse-off person. The consequentialist prin­
ciple of optimizing the sum of well-being requires the transfer (of utility) 
from the worse-off person to the better-off since this optimizes the sum of 
well-being. Assuming that persons would actually try to optimize the inte­
gral of their well-being over their lifetime, they often would forego the 
realization of certain benefits at a certain point in time to make greater 
utility possible at a later point in time. They do not go skiing on a weekend 
and study for an exam instead so that they won’t have to take the course 
again. Let us assume that this benefit outweighs the drawback of the lost 
ski weekend. Ethical consequentialism treats this intrapersonal case analo­
gously to the interpersonal case illustrated above. This is incompatible 
9 Cf. Arrow, Kenneth. 1963. Social Choice and Individual Value. New Haven: Yale 
University Press; and Sen, Amartya. 1970. The Impossibility of a Paretian liberal. Journal of 
Political Economy 78: 152–157. Cf. LKE, chapter 11.
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

145
with the separateness of persons and their individual responsibility as 
authors of their lives. The metaphor of the separateness of persons requires 
philosophical explanation.
What is it, then, that separates persons, apart from them being physi­
cally discrete? That persons are separate is ethically relevant, independently 
of interpersonal differences. Even if all had the same desires and beliefs, 
pursued the same goals and were in comparable emotive states in similar 
situations, each person would still be the author of her life. What separates 
persons is their individual subjective perspective on the world and the 
pragmatic perspective of responsibility for one’s own actions, the ability to 
have one’s own reasons for judgment, action, and emotion. This author­
ship does not refer to others, even if they might be affected by my author­
ship in one way or another. My self-expression and behavior might make a 
difference to them. I have genuine responsibility for my actions, as long as 
I can be held accountable. Young children do not yet have this genuine 
responsibility, or at least not to a full extent. This genuine personal respon­
sibility is deeply embedded in our modern understanding of law and 
reflected in our everyday interactions as well as our evaluative judgments 
of our own actions and those of others. Interventions that threaten or 
even limit this personal responsibility are considered problematic, regard­
less of their legal relevance. This also applies to interventions that serve a 
person’s well-being if the person has no choice but to accept these inter­
ventions. Even if it were perfectly evident which dietary changes would 
improve the health of Jack, it is by no means admissible to force him to 
actually change his diet.
Interventions are impermissible, even if the intervener and the person 
affected by this intervention agree that the respective intervention would 
be for their own good. This key element of our lifeworld assessment is 
incompatible with the consequentialist optimization of the Good in the 
world. We accept that, in many cases, the state of the world is not improved 
precisely because interventions are morally (and sometimes legally) imper­
missible. Even non-coercive interventions, which merely consist of issuing 
an evaluative judgment, require justification. I may find a person’s behav­
ior toward his partner unacceptable. This does not, however, legitimize 
me to criticize him. Such criticism is only permissible under very specific 
conditions, such as a particularly trusting relationship characterized by a 
practice of mutual compassion. We do not want to jeopardize our ability 
to live our life according to our ideas by the influence of evaluative judg­
ments of others. The separateness of persons, which is violated by ethical 
6  MORALITY AND RATIONALITY 

146
consequentialism is not rooted in individual differences, but in the deeper 
dimension of personal responsibility for a chosen form of life. I am the 
author of my life, nobody else. An ethical theory that undermines this 
deeply rooted lifeworld practice of personal responsibility, or stands in 
insoluble conflict with it, is per se inadequate.
One immediate objection to the individuality argument is that valuing 
personal responsibility is merely a specific cultural phenomenon that did 
not exist in other cultures and at other times. Why should we base ethical 
theory on an, albeit established, practice of judgment, which may change 
again within a few decades and which, even today, is limited to only one 
particular cultural region of the world? But I consider the claim of modern 
European (or Western) culture that it sets itself apart from all other cul­
tures in terms of individual responsibility a self-stylization. The question of 
who is responsible for what, who can or should be criticized for specific 
actions, who is legitimized to intervene in the lives of others, who has the 
right to criticize as well as define the limits of pursuing self-interest, per­
vades the whole of world literature from different times and cultures. 
Ancient Greek tragedies deal with existential situations in human life that 
seem to challenge everything that is considered a matter of course, which 
in turn makes questions of moral evaluation even more pressing.
One could argue Greek Classicism and the European Enlightenment 
have a common cultural context: What they share is precisely this feature 
of individual responsibility. However, even a cursory assessment of litera­
ture from cultures, such as Confucianism or Buddhism, invalidates this 
objection. All cultures, at least those with a written tradition, seem to 
share the quest for responsibility, what people are responsible for, what 
respect they owe to others, how much they ought to be concerned for 
themselves, and so on. Although the linguistic terms for responsibility 
emerged in European languages only about 300 years ago, the normative 
idea of being responsible for actions, for beliefs, for attitudes and emotions 
seems to be familiar to many cultures, possibly to all cultures.
6.4    Individual Rights
Philosophical and political liberalism together with the idea of the welfare 
state form the normative foundation of modern—liberal and social—
democracy. Political liberalism that developed in Europe in the nineteenth 
century has several philosophical sources: One source are human rights, as 
powerfully postulated by Locke. According to this postulate, every human 
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

147
person is born with individual rights, in particular the right to life, the 
right to physical integrity and the right to legally acquired property. For 
Locke and his contemporary followers, these individual rights are indubi­
table and require no further justification. Contemporary libertarianism 
takes Lockean individual rights as a normative foundation, often interprets 
them realistically as indubitable, ethical insight and derives political legiti­
macy exclusively from these individual rights. Libertarianism does not rec­
ognize moral obligations, such as the moral obligation to help others, 
beyond these individual rights. It does, however, grant each person sub­
jective moral attitudes of this kind. Since these moral attitudes are subjec­
tive in nature, they must not influence the normative order as it is reflected 
in a legally constituted statehood.
10
­
­
­
­
­
­
11
10 Cf. Mill, John S. 1863. Utilitarianism. London: Parker, Son and Bourn; and id. 1864. 
On Liberty. London: Parker, Son and Bourn.
11 For example, Hermann Cohen, Leonard Nelson and Paul Natorp.
6  MORALITY AND RATIONALITY 

148
­
12
­
­
­
The plurality of philosophical sources for political liberalism explains, at 
least in part, the internal tensions that still characterize this political move­
ment today. Civil rights liberalism conflicts with economic liberalism: the 
policy of equal individual freedom conflicts with the sometimes grossly 
unequal distributions in free markets. The liberalism of the welfare state 
conflicts with the policy of individual responsibility of economic subjects. 
The state as a guarantor for individual equal freedom conflicts with the 
liberal idea of a minimal state.
13
12 Continental political liberalism is rather located to the right of the center while in the US 
many republicans use “liberal” to demean a left-wing political program.
13 Cf. Sen, Amartya. 1970. Collective Choice and Social Welfare. London: Penguin Books, 
chapters 6 and 6*.
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

149
­
­
­
­
­
14
One can interpret Sen’s theorem also as a conflict between liberalism 
and utilitarianism. Utilitarianism without interpersonal comparability 
results in the normative criterion of Pareto-optimality: Even if there is only 
one counter-preference it is no longer possible to claim that one particular 
state is better than another, even if all others involved share this view. After 
all, it is possible the person having a counter-preference suffers such a 
great loss of utility that this loss would outweigh all gains in utility of oth­
ers. Whatever the result of aggregating subjective evaluations or prefer­
ences, consequentialist theories must acknowledge that social states are 
preferable if these are considered an improvement from every individual 
evaluative perspective. Pareto-inclusion is a minimal condition in conse­
quentialist theories.
Now, Sen’s theorem shows that this minimal condition for consequen­
tialist evaluation P collides with liberalism’s minimal condition L. It seems 
we have to choose between liberalism and consequentialism. The harmony 
14 Cf. EcR.
6  MORALITY AND RATIONALITY 

150
between welfare and freedom is an illusion. This harmony between free­
dom and welfare, however, was the core message of traditional political 
liberalism of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. I believe that faced 
with the conflict between liberalism and efficiency, we should opt for the 
primacy of freedom. We should recognize that a sound interpretation of 
liberalism that takes individuality seriously in the sense of the preceding 
paragraph comes at a price. One cannot have both, respect for persons, 
expressed in the reciprocal granting of individual rights and liberties, and 
overall fulfillment of preferences. Freedom has its price and demands wel­
fare losses in individual cases.
Individual rights generally take precedence over economic advantages. 
The libertarian position is: Once all individual rights have been exercised, 
there is no leeway for collective decisions: Persons who exercise their indi­
vidual rights determine which states of society are realized. Sen’s illustra­
tion of the Liberal Paradox shows—intuitively convincing—that it is 
Lewd’s individual right to decide to read Lady Chatterley’s Lover, provided 
that Prude is not affected. Thus, Lewd chooses between the two “states”: 
(1) L reads the book or (2) no one reads the book. The same applies to 
Prude: P decides freely based on the Liberal Condition, whether he reads 
the book or not, provided again that Lewd is not affected; that is, Lewd 
does not read the book in both states. Once both have made their choice 
which is legitimate given their individual rights, there is no more room for 
maneuver. The common preference that Prude reads Lady Chatterley’s 
Lover because Lewd thought it would do him well and Prude thought that 
it would not be good for Lewd to read this book does not come into 
play at all.
The political philosophy of libertarianism suggests that all collective 
decisions correspond to this pattern. This, however, is its key fallacy. There 
is a large scope for collective decisions without violating individual rights. 
The greater the motives for solidarity, joint action, and social cohesion, 
the larger this scope. Nevertheless, individual rights remain trumps; that 
is, they must not be violated even if their violation promotes the overall 
well-being. It is the essence of individual rights that they cannot be sub­
jected to any optimization calculation: They cannot be instrumentalized 
for optimizing social well-being. Genuine individual rights are incompat­
ible with consequentialist ethics and politics.
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

151
6.5    Integrity
15
­
If we think it through, this argument goes even further than that. The 
criticism based on this argument is quite comprehensive; it attacks not 
only consequentialist ethical theories, but ethical rationalism in general. 
Let us focus on utilitarianism for now. The rational utilitarian does noth­
ing that, in his view, does not maximize the sum of well-being in the 
world. Such an attitude would undoubtedly collide not only with the pur­
suit of individual projects, but also with friendships, special obligations 
toward other people, and even with the person’s professional and social 
roles. In this sense, this attitude would not only threaten one’s integrity 
(regardless of how integrity is characterized), but also one’s life-­authorship 
(Lebensautorschaft). They would lose their ability to be partners in 
interaction.
Now, we can imagine one exception: the utilitarian saint. This person 
had no personal projects to pursue, no friendships and other personal rela­
tions, no specific social role. She would see herself and appear to others 
exclusively as an instrument for optimizing overall well-being. The utili­
tarian saint—like other saints—would detach herself from all social refer­
ences, appear unapproachable, possibly even mentally ill. Those who dealt 
with the saint would probably not be able to decide between a feeling of 
disgust and admiration. They would fail to understand why it is impossible 
to establish a normal relation with this person, why this person seems so 
distant and unapproachable. At the same time, it may be that the saint’s 
self-sacrifice deserves respect. This respect, however, could be misguided. 
Genuine utilitarian saints sacrifice nothing, they are merely an instrument 
15 Cf. Williams, Bernard. 1973. Utilitarianism: For and Against. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
6  MORALITY AND RATIONALITY 

152
for realizing a greater plan (maximize the overall well-being). Non-­
utilitarian saints are quite more common in spiritual and political religions. 
They often pay a high price for their holiness, namely the loss of interper­
sonal relationships, participation, commitment, and responsibility. The 
utilitarian saint, however, sacrifices nothing, this person knows only one 
form of evaluative assessment, namely that of evaluating practices in terms 
of them being instruments to achieve overall well-being. This saint has no 
concept of things being personal, the sole driver is the duty to act as ser­
vant of the common good, overall enlightenment, religious or political 
liberation, class struggle, or the will of God. Saints serve the higher pur­
pose by sacrificing their own. Once, however, they made the higher pur­
pose their own, they sacrifice nothing. Thus, it seems unlikely that true 
saints ever existed.
The saints exclude themselves from the human lifeform; that is, they no 
longer participate in interactions and communications. We as others, on 
the other hand, remain involved in it through practices of giving and tak­
ing reasons that enable us to interact and communicate in the first place. 
We are immersed in our lifeform through the attribution of reason, free­
dom, and responsibility; through particular bonds that make individual 
people special people for us because we have a closer relationship with 
them than with others; through our voluntary commitments, through our 
commitments linked to our social roles, through principles claiming the 
same respect for all that we (ideally) all accept. An ethical theory should 
not make us depart from this web of relations, that is, should not make us 
radically lonely. That is to say, it should be compatible with the fact that 
we participate in a specific lifeform, that we interact and communicate. 
Subordinating everything we do and say to the principle of maximizing 
the common good would strip us of our ability to participate in interaction 
and communication. Ethical theory should not require us to make this 
sacrifice. Any ethical theory stipulating such a requirement is ipso facto 
inadequate. In short: Ethical practice must be compatible with personal 
integrity.
This requirement introduces the entire spectrum of lifeworld relation­
ships, obligations, duties, the lifeworld practice of epistemic and pro­
hairetic reasons which limit the scope of ethical theory formation. This 
limitation applies not only to ethics, but also to a theory of rationality that, 
too, must be compatible with the practice of taking and giving reasons. 
Rationality being compatible with personal integrity leads to a concept of 
structural rationality. This rationality is impregnated with structures such 
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

153
as the practice of giving and taking reasons, of interacting and communi­
cating. This rationality does not—in a rationalist spirit—attempt to replace 
these practices and structures by normative theory, but merely to system­
atize and, in case of incoherence, modify them. As always with theory 
formation, there is under-determination: It is not a foregone conclusion 
that only one systematization is compatible with such an understanding of 
personal integrity. However, I find the fact that the structures established 
by our practice of giving and taking reasons, interaction and communica­
tion, are modifiable but not replaceable by theories of rationality and eth­
ics, to be a central insight that cannot be abandoned under any 
circumstance. It is the basis for the theory of practical reason outlined in 
this book.
6.6    Irreducible Plurality
The individually practiced lifeform is characterized by a more or less dense 
sequence of decisions. We decide to leave the house at a certain time in 
order to be in the office on time. We decide against the third cup of coffee 
during breakfast, although there still would have been time, because we 
intend to have a coffee break later in the morning and more than three 
cups of coffee are supposedly unhealthy. Once we arrive at the office, we 
decide to prioritize tasks that are not urgent, but important enough not to 
be left aside for too long. Looking at the process of accomplishing the 
individual tasks, it disintegrates into a dense sequence of individual deci­
sions that we have to make. The phone rings and I decide to answer it, 
although the text I am working on should definitely be completed by 
eleven o’clock and the telephone call means taking the risk of losing time 
because I suspect the call to be about an important and unresolved issue 
from yesterday. The myriads of decisions that we make are structured by 
routines, including self-imposed rules, prioritizations, and evaluations. 
None of these decisions can be considered in isolation from the wider 
context in which we make them.
The same applies to acts of communication: the sequence of decisions 
to say something or not to say it, to say it in a certain way, to articulate 
beliefs or to refrain from it—all this is an expression of evaluations. Only 
very little is predetermined externally, most is subject to our discretion. 
Psychological studies show that this high degree of freedom of choice can 
also be a burden. Some people are happy to receive clear step-by-step 
6  MORALITY AND RATIONALITY 

154
instructions. However, even strictly following instructions expresses a 
decision.
I find the dispute between psychology and philosophy (as well as eco­
nomics) about the importance of rationality for the individually practiced 
lifeform to be futile. This dispute is largely based on conceptual confu­
sions. If I regard everything that is not predetermined before all delibera­
tion, before all weighing of reasons, as a decision, it is indubitable that our 
everyday life is marked by a dense sequence of decisions. Even the routines 
and automatisms that psychology often refers to are not absolute. They 
free up deliberative capacities but lose their effectiveness as soon as we 
focus on them, because they prove to be problematic. The “automatism” 
of turning right when leaving the house which I have followed for over 
twenty  years can be corrected at any time, for example, if, for several 
weeks, there has been a construction site on the right of the entrance door. 
I may still make a right a couple of times (because I was “engrossed in 
thought,” for example). Eventually, however, the “automatism” will be 
gone, and I now turn left because I am aware of the new construction site.
Confusions arise when a certain, namely reductionist and consequen­
tialist understanding of rationality is juxtaposed with lifeworld practice of 
justified action. In direct comparison, so to speak, “rationality theory” 
performs poorly. If, however, we characterize rationality as the ability for 
adequate deliberation of reasons and the effectiveness of the resulting 
evaluations, then practical and theoretical reason shape our everyday life 
to a great extent. We think about what we should do, deliberate whether 
a certain belief is justified and decide accordingly. These deliberations can 
be quite rudimentary; that is, they can be limited to seconds or in some 
cases even fractions of seconds. But they take place whenever we are aware 
that we can act in one way or another. Interestingly, neither the optimiza­
tion of personal well-being nor the maximization of total utility plays an 
important role in our practical deliberations of everyday life. What we do, 
how we decide in each case, which beliefs we make our own—we always 
react to those reasons we consider adequate.
A scientist makes a number of decisions in her work in order to make 
progress in her research. She has certain hypotheses and experimental pos­
sibilities, she assesses the tools she can use in view of her limited budget, 
consult relevant literature, discuss with colleagues and, in case of particu­
larly far-reaching decisions, perhaps even with her partner. When asked 
why she has decided as she did, she will be able to give her motives guided 
by reasons that speak in favor of them. The motive to optimize the 
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

155
time-integral of her hedonic level or the aggregated well-being of human­
ity will probably be irrelevant. Likewise, the Categorical Imperative or 
respect for human rights will be relevant in exceptional cases only. Her 
actions are neither aimed at complying with certain principles of an ethical 
theory nor at optimizing her individual well-being. In fact, she could 
imagine other, more comfortable lifeforms than that of a scientist.
Perhaps we can characterize her general attitude as follows: She wants 
to do a good job as a scientist. She has certain ideas about what distin­
guishes good and careful from negligent and bad research. Maybe she 
pursues this goal although it does not lead to any other far-reaching career 
goals. Maybe she has already made so much progress that she can neither 
expect sanctions nor advantages for her career. For many centuries, the 
ethos of academic life excluded even such career considerations. Some suc­
cessful scientists held a chair from early on, they had no supervisor to sanc­
tion or reward them, and there was no way to further improve their 
personal socio-economic status for decades. This led economistic univer­
sity reformers to lower the basic salaries of academics and to introduce a 
variable performance-related component of salary. The result, however, 
did not increase academic performance. It is an immature concept of 
human motivation that it is primarily driven by monetary expectations. 
The repeated claim that high salaries are necessary to get people to deliver 
peak performances is disrespectful to all those to whom this claim is sup­
posed to apply. If we look at those who made some of the greatest achieve­
ments in history, in our culture beginning with the philosophers Socrates 
and Plato, the brilliant scientist and technician Archimedes, later on, 
Galileo Galilei, Johannes Kepler, and Isaac Newton or Marie Curie, the 
artists of classical modernity, and so on—probably none of whom created 
scientific or artistic masterpieces because they expected monetary advan­
tages from them. They had what is best described as “intrinsic motiva­
tion.” This motivation is about doing a good job, oeuvre, work, research 
project and the respective criteria of good are not subjective. The fallback 
option of reputation, which is sometimes used to save an inadequate, ego­
istic theory of rationality is, ultimately, unrealistic. Vincent van Gogh was 
unhappy almost the entire time of his artistic career, Ludwig Wittgenstein 
a philosophical broody, or take Bertrand Russell as a supposedly unscrupu­
lous libertine. For most of the leading figures of intellectual life, focusing 
on excellent personal achievement did not contribute in any way—not to 
say was counterproductive—to their mental balance and lasting sense of 
well-being. Ludwig Wittgenstein, the billionaire son of a steel producer, 
6  MORALITY AND RATIONALITY 

156
could have chosen a more comfortable life, like his sister Margarethe 
Stonborough-Wittgenstein for example, than that of a lonely and destitute 
philosophical broody. The argumentative stopgap strategy that those who 
sacrifice themselves for art or science did so because they had no choice, 
seems too ad hoc and therefore unconvincing.
Most people know that they can distance themselves from that which 
requires all their attention, what torments them, and what also encourages 
them to perform at their best. They can put the pen down and devote 
themselves to something else, and, after a few weeks, the once so torment­
ing self-imposed obligations fade away. No, it is not a lack of alternatives, 
it is a belief, the judgment, that I should contribute to a certain cause. It is 
the belief that I am doing something meaningful, for example, creating an 
artistic masterpiece, providing philosophical clarification, designing a spe­
cial chair, developing a brilliant software, building a perfectly shaped, but 
also habitable house, supporting people at the end of their lives so that 
they can die in peace, giving joy to children, saving a little corner shop 
from economic decline, contributing to my football club to keep playing 
regional league, doing a good job with my daily tasks, and so on. However, 
what is meaningful, that is, that which gives meaning to my practice, is not 
necessarily beneficial to myself. And that which gives meaning to a prac­
tice, that is, makes it a meaningful practice for me, is not subjectively 
constituted. It is not my desires that generate meaning in my life and in the 
world. Rather, my desires are a reaction to what I consider to be meaning­
ful. I can always ask myself whether this wish is appropriate, that is, whether 
it is justified, whether it is directed at something that is truly desirable.
The criteria we apply to judge whether something is meaningful, valu­
able, desirable, significant are diverse and relate to the respective contexts 
of judgment and action. The practice of the researcher is characterized by 
standards of excellent research. These are not fixed or determined from 
the outside, they are themselves subject to evaluation, but they do not 
merely express subjective preferences. A father’s interaction with his child 
is also subject to criteria of what is adequate or appropriate. There is prob­
ably no one who considers it irrelevant what makes for good or bad paren­
tal practice. Parents, like teachers or nurses, want to do things right in the 
context of their respective role, and once again, the criteria are not prede­
termined or imposed, they are the subject to deliberation. We have to 
determine what is a nurse’s good behavior toward her patients, what we 
can recommend to parents, how teachers should behave. The attempt to 
reduce everything to the interests of nurses, teachers, and parents is as 
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

157
inadequate as the reduction to the principle of maximizing overall well-­
being. In many cases focusing on the well-being of others, that is, of the 
pupils, children, patients, one is entrusted to care for, would constitute a 
criminal act. Some health care professionals have been brought to justice 
because they have administered drugs to old, sick people that led to their 
premature death. Even if the nurse had been in the right by arguing before 
the court that they only cared for the well-being of the elderly, such a 
practice would still be wrong. For it is not only about maximizing well-­
being but complying with the criteria for adequate care. Of course, the 
well-being of the patient is one relevant factor, but it is not the ultimate 
and only normative criterion. The patient’s self-determination plays just as 
an important role. This applies even more to the sum of well-being. Killing 
the motorcyclist who has been seriously injured in an accident in the oper­
ating room in order to donate his organs to a number of moribund patients 
would be murder and is ethically inadmissible.
The reasons speaking for the appropriateness (or meaningfulness, rea­
sonableness) of a certain practice are manifold. In view of their plurality, 
the naive notion of modern ethics and rationality theory that these reasons 
can be reduced to a single principle is misguided. We do not have to accept 
this plurality as a given since it leads to numerous uncertainties and con­
flicts of evaluations. Lifeworld deliberation aims at enabling a coherent 
practice of judgment, but it regularly reaches its limits. However, the 
method of substituting lifeworld and scientific deliberation with ethical 
postulates or postulates of rationality cannot go well. It is in this sense, 
that the rationalist and reductionist mainstream of modern practical phi­
losophy has failed.
6.7    Quietism
­
­
­
­
6  MORALITY AND RATIONALITY 

158
­
16
­
­
­
16 Particularist quietism is mostly relativistic, sometimes of a system-theoretical structure 
(inspired by Niklas Luhmann), often postmodern; the most elaborated and realistic version, 
however, is that of Jonathan Dancy. Dancy assumes that there are (objective) moral facts that 
are independent of the perceiving and acting subject; that is, these facts are not epistemically 
constituted. He does, however, not provide any further justification for this interpretation to 
which I am quite sympathetic; cf. Dancy (2004); cf. REAL.
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

159
­
Let us go back to the example of a motorcyclist who had an accident. 
We agree that the motorcyclist must not be killed, even if this may save the 
lives of several patients. Although we have no doubt about the adequacy 
of our evaluative assessment, it is conceivable, legitimate, even obvious, to 
ask why we arrive at this conclusion. Thus, it is not the specific judgment 
or the reason we provide as justification which is questionable (in this case 
we could claim, for example, that one should not kill innocent people, 
even if others benefit greatly from their death: they would survive). We 
can rephrase this phenomenon as follows: Every justification points 
beyond itself; that is, it is admissible to ask why something counts as a 
justification, even if one has no doubts about what and how it is justified. 
In other words: The lifeworld practice of giving and taking reasons points 
beyond its own scope. Its modification is driven by its inherent dynamic. 
The justificatory benchmarks prevail (albeit in varying degrees). We can 
thus consider an ethical theory that legitimizes the killing of the seriously 
injured motorcyclist as failed. The more particular the reasons put for­
ward, the more urgently deliberation demands more fundamental reasons 
and thereby pushes beyond the boundaries of established lifeworld prac­
tices of reasoning. The systematization of epistemic and normative evalu­
ations is not only an achievement of scientific theories but is already 
embedded in the everyday practice of giving and taking reasons. Theories 
of ethics and rationality extend this practice and, ideally, provide it with a 
coherent conceptual and methodological framework.
At this point, one may distinguish between more or less rationalistic or 
quietist cultures. Some are satisfied with what is obvious and its particular 
justifications, while others continue to ask questions and demand the sys­
tematization of judgments. We can find both approaches in human cul­
tural history and the demarcation lines do not run between high culture 
and folk culture, between modernity and antiquity, between the 
Enlightenment and the Middle Ages. The highly developed casuistry of 
medieval theology is opposed by a rather sentimental contemporary 
Protestant social ethic. Judaism and Islam differ clearly from religions 
focused on the subjects’ attitude such as Hinduism and Buddhism. There 
are approaches of virtue ethics not only in European antiquity and 
Confucianism, but also in modernity in form of moralism or in late 
twentieth-­century communitarianism. European Enlightenment produces 
6  MORALITY AND RATIONALITY 

160
differentiated moral sense theories, such as those of Earl of Shaftesbury and 
Joseph Butler, and even the pluralistic theory of intrinsic values by the 
British founding father of analytical philosophy, Moore (together with 
Russell), ultimately relies on moral intuition. Moore limits the rationalist 
element to the instrumental choice of an action to promote the good. The 
good itself is accessible by direct intuition, just like colors to our senses.
Structural rationality defines the framework for the systematization of 
our normative assessments. It is not a predetermination of the extent to 
which the surface (the quietist view) is abandoned in favor of a systematiz­
ing analysis (the rationalist one). The degree of rationalization of our eval­
uative judgments is not predetermined by the conception of structural 
rationality. This conception does, however, advocate a gradualist, coher­
ent, and holistic understanding of practical judgment and therefore equally 
rejects the two extremes of quietism and rationalism.
6.8    Fragmentation
Systematizing evaluative judgments fails in the comprehensive reduction­
ist forms of utilitarianism or Kantianism but it remedies an essential task of 
ethical theory, which extends on lifeworld deliberations. Ethical systemati­
zation is then confronted with the fragmentation of values. If we, for 
example, consider it an undeniable fact that we are more committed to 
friends than strangers, ethical systematization must reflect this phenome­
non. There are different ways to fulfill this requirement. Communitarianism 
for instance claims that belonging to a community is essentially what con­
stitutes a moral person, that is, community ties and belonging to a com­
munity frame and should frame our moral judgments.
A radical communitarian interpretation of this moral—and I believe 
undeniable—phenomenon necessarily leads to cultural relativism. 
Although communitarians have devised different strategies to escape this 
verdict, the united front against realistic and universalist interpretations is 
characteristic of communitarianism as a whole. Thus, communitarianism 
loses an essential element of our normative discourses. We might even say 
it loses the very subject-matter of morality, namely the core question of 
which moral state of affairs actually holds, which reasons objectively speak 
for or against a specific theory of justice, and so on. The radical communi­
tarian interpretation fails to live up to the particular, lifeworld discourse 
practices of which it claims to be the guidelines, for these discourse 
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

161
practices are clearly objectivistic and realistic and incompatible with a rela­
tivistic reinterpretation.
­
17
The same applies to duties associated with social roles. We can recon­
struct the specific duties of parents or teachers, of employees toward their 
company, and so on as universal principles. We could argue—according to 
contractualism, for example—that from an impartial perspective it seems 
reasonable to agree that the respective parents primarily look after their 
own children, regardless of whether this agreement leads to the most pref­
erable consequences in the individual case. The universal normative per­
spective is by no means incompatible with its particularist application to 
family members.
­
­
­
18
­
17 Cf. Chap. 3.
18 The Trolley Examples are ethical thought experiments originally introduced by Philippa 
Foot and present for example the following scenario: The agent sees a trolley rolling toward 
a group of five people lying on the tracks. They will die if hit by the trolley. The agent stands 
at a switch that would divert the trolley to another track. There is only one person lying on 
this track, so the trolley would kill one person. The question is now: what is the morally 
superior option for action for the agent: Do nothing and let five people die, or move the 
switch and kill one person? Cf. Foot, Philippa. 1978. The Problem of Abortion and the 
Doctrine of the Double Effect. In Virtues and Vices and Other Essays, 19–33. Berkeley: 
University of California Press.
6  MORALITY AND RATIONALITY 

162
The lifeworld practice of giving and taking reasons, the deliberation of 
beliefs and decisions (which are closely interwoven), is, so to speak, push­
ing the limits of its own scope. There is no endpoint of lifeworld reason­
ing. Justifications do not come to an end in the unquestioned acceptance 
of a lifeform, as Wittgenstein postulates in On Certainty. Lifeform is not 
fundamental and ultimate, it can be, at least partially and selectively, chal­
lenged. There is of course a gradient of certainty, of centrality and periph­
ery, and of the revisable or—virtually—non-abandonable. Theologically 
influenced ethicists speak of unavailabilities, which, from a theological per­
spective are connected to the will of God. In the deontological or Kantian 
view, they are connected to the aprioristic features of moral judgments. 
The problem with ultimate justifications (Letztbegründung), however, is 
their undetermined content which remains unrelated to concrete practices 
of discourse. There are presuppositions of such practices and these presup­
positions are ineluctable insofar as we participate in these practices. The 
recourse to an a priori and fundamentalist concept of justification, how­
ever, is not convincing. These a priori, radical, attempts at systematization 
must be distinguished from the cautious, experience-driven attempts at 
systematization that are guided by moral judgment. The latter do not 
claim any fundamentalist or even a priori status. They merely try to 
improve the already accepted practice of normative judgments, eliminate 
vagueness, expand areas of application, and circumvent contradictions and 
dilemmas as far as possible. It is these particular attempts at systematiza­
tion that can give the impression of a fragmentation of morals.
It is indeed obvious to distinguish different categories of moral judg­
ment: Judgments that relate to the practice of granting individual rights, 
that is, judgments based on the assumption that persons have rights that 
impose restrictions on others and prohibit interventions. An individual 
right to self-determination restricts permissible interventions. This con­
cerns not only interventions of violence but also of judgment. If a doctor, 
for good reasons, recommends that an already ailing person stop smoking, 
the normative fact that it would be better for that person to stop smoking 
does not give anyone the right to force her to do so, even if effective coer­
cive measures were available. We attribute personal responsibility to 
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

163
people which is protected by individual rights and this includes that each 
adult person who can be held accountable is the master of her own health. 
Of course, I have to distinguish between the possible effects my behavior 
has on me and the effects it can have on others. My smoking may affect 
others in some way, but that is not what we are talking about here.
The attribution of individual rights restricts the permission for inter­
vention and even makes some interventions inadmissible. The mutual rec­
ognition of individual rights is therefore a precaution against violence. 
The unanimity of this attribution is the basis of a civil, humane culture of 
coexistence. Nevertheless, the violation of individual rights through inad­
missible interventions can also spark the escalation of conflicts—as we 
observed in the abovementioned example of the Iliad. Violations of indi­
vidual rights are existential: they can shake a person’s self-esteem, they can 
be a reason to feel harmed in one’s self-respect, which is why a coherent 
and generally acceptable attribution of individual rights is of such great 
importance.
We not only have individual rights, but also, for example, the duty to 
help those in need and whom we can help without it causing us too much 
personal disadvantage. Those passing by must help, or at least offer help, 
to an old lady falling in front of them on the sidewalk unable of getting up 
on her own. Persons walking by fail to do so, they are guilty of a manifest 
and thoroughly serious breach of duty. In this case, their negligence has 
even legal consequences: Failure to render assistance is a criminal offense. 
Libertarianism rejects moral (and even more so juridical) duties to aid. It 
only recognizes individual rights (of defense). Libertarianism declares a 
specific category of moral judgments absolute and subsumes everything 
else under this category or explains away anything that is in fact of norma­
tive relevance but cannot be subsumed under said category. Anyone who 
acknowledges the duty to help or more generally the duty to promote not 
only personal well-being but the well-being of others recognizes at least 
one further category of normative judgment. Individual rights on one 
hand, duties to aid on the other.
If we additionally acknowledge duties we take on in certain social roles, 
as it corresponds to our lifeworld practice of normative judgment, another 
category emerges which we refer to as communitarian duties. 
Communitarians believe that all normative judgments can be reduced to 
communitarian duties. Obviously, they are mistaken: We have universal, 
duties—one might call them duties of humanity—toward every person, 
regardless of which social or cultural community they belong to. We must 
6  MORALITY AND RATIONALITY 

164
not, for example, use anyone as a mere instrument for meeting certain 
ends, even if those ends are considered a great priority such as saving 
human life. People as such have individual dignity and those cultural prac­
tices that disregard this dignity are based on an erroneous normative belief.
The principle of equal treatment, human rights egalitarianism in the 
sense of every person having the same normative weight, belongs to 
another category of normative judgment, which we can describe as prin­
ciples of equal treatment. These principles are similar to invariance princi­
ples in physics: Whatever the concrete objects of normative judgment look 
like, they must be compatible with these invariance or equal treatment 
principles. I am not outlining a particular view that is popular at certain 
times and in some cultures. I am pointing to an indispensable element of 
adequate normative judgment. The fact that the insight that every human 
possesses the same dignity is still considered controversial and has failed to 
establish itself over centuries is not an argument against this insight’s uni­
versal and objective validity.
This fragmentation of moral values into those that refer to the attribu­
tion of individual rights, duties to aid, community affiliations, principles of 
fair treatment, and so on is not a reason to abandon the project of a coher­
ent and comprehensive practice of overall ethical judgment. The justifica­
tions of a certain duty already conflict with each other within the same 
category, this is especially true for communitarian duties. At least in mod­
ern society, persons usually belong to different communities, different cul­
tural, social, regional, ideological, political, and so on communities. And 
these communities are held together by common normative beliefs that 
are often not—fully—in concordance with normative beliefs of other 
communities. Within the category of communitarian duties, normative 
conflicts occur simply because of the diversity of different communities 
and people belonging to more than one community.
In this context, I have occasionally used the image of navigation: 
Persons are navigators between a variety of normative demands and they 
must ensure that they stay true to themselves vis-à-vis different expecta­
tions and affiliations. The ability to meet these different normative expec­
tations is not predetermined by any shared practice of a community. 
Personal normative ideas take priority over the constitutive norms and 
values of any community to which a person belongs. The navigators dis­
tance themselves from the communities they occasionally belong to. 
Detachment, at least to a certain extent, is especially necessary in multicul­
tural societies. In individual cases, it enables navigators to choose not to 
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

165
comply with the expectations of a community to which they belong along­
side other communities. Ego-strength is a prerequisite for moral integrity 
in a pluralistic modern society.
The fact that some conflicts of duties are rooted in different categories 
of normative judgment does not imply that these conflicts are insoluble. 
In many cases, duties of different categories allow for an easy resolution of 
conflicts in the form of a commonly accepted prioritization. The obliga­
tion to keep a given promise belongs to the category of commissives, that 
is, duties which emerge from a personal decision and which, in turn, can 
be interpreted as an expression of a form of cooperation. The institution 
of promise is a form of rule-based cooperation. If a given promise, for 
example, to be on time for the cinema, collides with duties to help, it 
seems obvious that the duties to help take priority. This primacy is also 
expressed in the fact that the person to whom I am breaking my promise 
will of course acknowledge my reasons for doing so. This other person 
might even blame me if I had not met my duty to help in order to keep my 
promise. In this scenario it is irrelevant whether the sources of the duty 
belong to different categories, what is relevant is that they can be ranked 
according to a normatively justifiable prioritization. What prevents a 
coherent practice is therefore not the fragmentation of values as such, but 
normative conflicts that are insoluble, conflicts which we call moral 
dilemmas.
    M
D
19
A moral dilemma is a situation where an agent is morally obliged to do A 
and to do B but cannot do both at the same time. He cannot do both (A 
and B), because some contingent fact, an empirical fact of the world he 
lives in, prevents him from doing both A and B.
­
19 An earlier version of this section titled “Moral Dilemma and Practical Reason” was pub­
lished in the proceedings of the congress and presented at the International Wittgenstein 
Symposium 2012; cf. Nida-Rümelin, Julian. 2012. Moral Dilemmas and Practical Reason. 
Ethics, Society, Politics. Proceedings of  the  35th International Wittgenstein Symposium, ed. 
Hajo Greif and Martin Weiss. Berlin: De Gruyter.
6  MORALITY AND RATIONALITY 

166
20
21
	1.	There are no meta-criteria that resolve it
	2.	The respective decision changes the deciding agent’s way of life
	3.	Regardless of the decision, there remain feelings of guilt, remorse, 
and restlessness
Now, the existence of moral dilemmas (MD) seems to collide with the 
principles of deontic logic:
	1.	□A (“One ought to do A,” a normative fact)
	2.	□B (“One ought to do B,” a normative fact)
	3.	¬ ◊(A ⋀ B) (“Doing A and B is impossible,” an empirical fact)
Those who assert the existence of genuine moral dilemmas believe that 
(1), (2), and (3) are compatible, while those who deny the existence of 
genuine moral dilemmas are convinced that (1), (2), and (3) are incom­
patible. If one ought to do A and ought to do B at the same time, one also 
ought to do the conjunction of the two actions. If, however, I cannot do 
something, in this case A and B, at the same time, I am not obliged to do it.
20 This is where I object to Frankfurt’s thesis that whether or not alternative possibilities 
exist (i.e., the principle of alternate possibilities (PAP) applies) is irrelevant for responsible 
action; a thesis that initiated semi-compatibilism, which asserts the possibility of decoupling 
freedom from responsibility. In the last part of this book, we will argue for a close link 
between rationality, freedom, and responsibility (Sects. 8.2, 8.3, 8.4, and 8.5).
21 Cf. Nussbaum, Martha. 1983. The Fragility of Goodness: Luck and Ethics in Greek Tragedy 
and Philosophy. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

167
	I.	 Principle of agglomeration: (1) and (2) imply □(A ⋀ B)
II.	 Ultra posse nemo obligatur: (3) implies ¬□(A ⋀ B)
Considering (I) and (II) we deduce from (1), (2), (3) a logical 
contradiction:
(3) and (II) implies ¬□(A ⋀ B)
¬□(A ⋀ B) implies (¬□A or ¬□B), in contradiction to the premises 
(1) respectively (2).
There are no moral dilemmas within consequentialist ethics. In other 
words: moral dilemmas dissolve within a consequentialist framework of 
practical reason. The explanation for this is simple: Consequentialist theo­
ries of ethics or rationality derive—via optimization—the criterion of 
“ought” from weighing the consequences of actions. Consequentialist 
rationality presupposes the existence of a value function over consequences 
of action. Utilitarian versions of consequentialism allocate a certain value 
to subjective states of human beings (or all beings capable of perception), 
but consequentialism is not based on subjectivism of values. A consequen­
tialist can also consider world facts that are independent of subjective 
states. Consequentialism can therefore be characterized by two elements:
	1.	A value function over world states
	2.	Determining actions as obligatory if and only if they optimize the 
current world state (given the value function and considering 
probabilities)
Consequentialism is an attractive representation of practical reason 
because it fits well with our self-perception as agents. Our actions shape 
the world. The world would be different if we acted differently. And it is 
this feature of the capacity to act, that is, the intervening character of 
actions, that is decisive for our moral judgment of what is right and wrong. 
We cannot judge an action as right or wrong without considering its 
consequences.
A real-valued function representing the evaluation of world states 
induces a binary relation of betterness. If the value of one state is numeri­
cally higher than that of another state, the first state is preferable to the 
other. This induced relation of betterness superiority introduces an order 
that is complete, reflexive (if we assume a weak relation of superiority, i.e., 
6  MORALITY AND RATIONALITY 

168
“at least as good as”), and transitive. Real-valued evaluation functions can­
not result in cyclical or incomplete relations of betterness. In a situation 
where the consequences of possible actions are determined, the relation of 
betterness of states induces a relation of betterness of actions. There is 
only one form of aporia, namely when several actions have the same maxi­
mum value. In this case, the rational person is indifferent toward these 
actions. However, one of these acts must be executed. Consequentialism 
is a radical solution to practical conflicts in general and moral dilemmas in 
particular. Consequentialism in ethics and practical rationality would be a 
good solution if it could adequately integrate moral reasons. However, as 
we have seen, this is not the case: individual rights, social duties, and com­
mitments are indispensable categories of moral reasons that cannot be 
reconstructed by consequentialism.
­
­
22
One impressive example of the fact that ancient cultures also faced 
moral dilemmas is the tragedy of Antigone: From a communitarian per­
spective, Antigone’s dilemma originates in her being a member of two 
communities. On the one hand, she is a citizen of Thebes and the corre­
sponding authorities have command over her as a citizen; on the other 
hand, she belongs to the spiritual order of the Greek world of gods. It 
might seem more adequate to describe her dilemma as a conflict of family 
duties (toward her brother) and civic duties. These two different commu­
nities, however, cannot be distinguished in terms of their cultural differ­
ences. Antigone’s family is part of the city; conflicts of being loyal to family 
22 Alasdair McIntyre presents a fascinating reflection of this attitude in his critique inspired 
by Aristotelianism and Thomism. However, if we were to adopt this critique, the only way 
out of the putative ruins of modern normativity would be the reversion to a common reli­
gious, monotheistic faith and spiritually guided everyday practice; cf. MacIntyre, Alasdair. 
2013. After Virtue: A Study in Moral Theory. London: A&C Black.
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

169
or country are not rooted in multicultural diversity, they are endemic in 
traditional cultures as well.
It is the fragmentation of values that is incompatible with the reduction 
of all moral aspects to a single normative criterion. Practical conflicts and 
especially moral dilemmas cannot be solved in this way. The fragmentation 
of values represents the normative power of our lifeworld reason. No the­
ory can replace lifeworld rationality with principles (whatever their con­
tent). The criteria of philosophical ethics must prove themselves in the 
tribunal of lifeworld reason.
There is a conflict between Agamemnon’s right to make decisions that 
are binding for all Greek soldiers and Achilles’ right to decide which girl 
he makes his companion. It seems, that for Homer this conflict represents 
a moral dilemma. Achilles has no moral right to oppose Agamemnon’s 
decision and Agamemnon’s authority seems to be limited in a way that 
allows Achilles to withdraw from the battlefield. Agamemnon and Achilles 
both think they are right. Both face a dilemma: Agamemnon has demon­
strated his power to all, but he risks losing the war as a consequence of his 
demonstration of power. Achilles on the other hand, demonstrates that his 
honor forbids him to take part in the battle after Agamemnon’s decision. 
However, Achilles risks causing a defeat of the Greek army—which means 
losing many of his friends. The interpersonal practical conflict results in 
the two intrapersonal moral dilemmas of Agamemnon and Achilles. It is 
not the fragmentation of values into different categories, but the plurality 
of practical reasons that leads to practical conflicts and, in some existen­
tially threatening scenarios, to dilemmas. No adequate criteria of philo­
sophical ethics could exclude this possibility from the outset.
This also applies to commitments. I can commit myself to doing A, 
and, at the same time, I can commit myself to doing B. In some cases, I 
cannot do both. If the resulting practical conflict is existential, I face a 
moral dilemma: I can do neither A nor B and be satisfied with the result. 
There is a feeling of guilt or remorse and it seems to me that deciding for 
either A or B means settling for a specific lifeform at the same time.
23
­
23 Cf. Gilligan, Carol. 1993. In a Different Voice. Harvard: Harvard University Press; Held, 
Virginia. 1993. Feminist Morality: Transforming Culture, Society, and Politics. Chicago: 
Chicago University Press.
6  MORALITY AND RATIONALITY 

170
24
25
Let us imagine a person facing a moral dilemma between a and b. How 
can it be that the person exhibits coherent preferences when choosing in 
favor of a or in favor of b? If we assume that the postulates for coherent 
preferences are fulfilled, this is only possible if a and b have the same sub­
jective value. This, however, seems to be a misdescription. Moral dilem­
mas are not a special case of indifference they are a special case of conflict. 
Therefore, indifference seems not a viable solution. Moral dilemmas, as 
we have described them, exhibit a special feature that we have called “exis­
tential.” This feature points to a solution. When deciding for a or for b, 
the agent chooses not only between actions, but also between proposi­
tional attitudes. Existential decisions are not only an expression of propo­
sitional attitudes they in fact change propositional attitudes.
The juxtaposition of two types of decisions, existential and non-­
existential, would, however, be an inadmissible and coarse simplification. 
There exists a spectrum of gradual transitions between these two types. A 
complete rationalization is only possible if all propositional attitudes are 
24 Sen, Amartya. 1977. Rational Fool: A Critique of Behavioral Foundations of Economic 
Theory. Philosophy and Public Affairs 6: 317–344; cf. Nida-Rümelin, Julian. 1991. Practical 
reason or meta-preferences? An undogmatic defense of Kantian morality. Theory and Decision 
30: 133–162.
25 As explicated in Sects. 3.1, 3.2, and 3.3.
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

171
given and the outcome of the decision is open. This is usually only the case 
with small decisions, that is, decisions that do not change much. Big deci­
sions change our behavior, evaluations, and expectations. In the extreme 
case of existential decisions, they change our entire lifeform. A dilemmatic 
situation marks the beginning of a new time span in which we can apply 
evaluation standards based on coherent preferences. How long this period 
is, depends on the stability of the chosen lifeform. In any case, everything 
is gradual; that is, most decisions change propositional attitudes at least to 
a small extent. Completely rationalizable decisions are borderline cases, 
and so are dilemmatic decisions.
An elaborated theory of practical reason integrates three types of pos­
tulates: (1) postulates of deontic logic, (2) postulates of preference consis­
tency, and (3) postulates of coherence of reasons. The relation of these 
three categories of postulates is concentric: logic of decision presupposes 
deontic logic and the logic of reasons presupposes both, logic of decision 
and deontic logic. Therefore, one could say that deontic logic is a mini­
mum condition of practical reason. However, only the combination of 
these three types of coherence, including the postulates of coherent rea­
sons, together is sufficient to characterize the capacity to act rationally. In 
this sense, one can characterize the rules of deontic logic or the postulates 
of preference consistency as minimal conditions of practical reason. They 
represent minimal requirements for the ability to act rationally. I believe it 
is an attractive feature of our theory of practical reason to combine 
Platonism (in terms of the coherence conditions) with Aristotelianism (in 
terms of the content of practical judgment).
Moral dilemmas exist because the plurality of lifeworld moral reasons 
includes situations in which some reasons speak in favor of a and some 
reasons speak in favor of b and in which I cannot do both simultaneously. 
We have no criteria of lifeworld rationality at hand to solve this conflict. 
The systematization of lifeworld moral reasons has—to date—not led to 
an adequate theory of philosophical ethics that resolves moral dilemmas. 
Theories that seem to provide a solution to moral dilemmas are inade­
quate if they are incompatible with ineluctable elements of lifeworld 
morality. Contrary to what a good part of the literature about moral 
dilemmas suggests, however, this does not challenge the first and second 
parts of practical coherence, that is, deontic logic and preference logic. 
The fact that there is no systematic account of practical coherence does 
not justify giving up the other two categories. Instead, it is the task of 
normative ethics to integrate practical reasons as far as possible and in such 
6  MORALITY AND RATIONALITY 

172
a way contribute to practical coherence. The incoherences of practical life­
world judgment is what motivates ethical analysis and ethical theory for­
mation. If there was no incoherence in our lifeworld practice of moral 
judgment, we would all remain what one might call traditionalists or qui­
etists; that is, we would leave everything as it is. Any kind of moral criti­
cism begins with conflicting moral reasons—interpersonal or intrapersonal. 
Ethical theory can do nothing more than solve some of these practical 
conflicts. The goal of solving all practical conflicts has led to reductionist 
and rationalist theories in philosophical ethics that are completely detached 
from our practice of lifeworld judgment. However, the fact that we can­
not, once and for all, solve all practical conflicts, including all moral dilem­
mas gives us no reason to abandon the idea of practical reason in general. 
We should preserve as much of the idea of practical reason as possible. 
Moral dilemmas do not question the idea of practical reason but simply 
limit its scope.
The rules of deontic logic are applicable only at the level of action-­
guiding normative reasons and are valid despite the existence of moral 
dilemmas.
Moral dilemmas:
	1.	□A (“One ought to do A”)
	2.	□B (“One ought to do B”)
	3.	¬◊(A ⋀ B) (“Doing A and B are not possible at the same time”)
Moral dilemmas are possible at the level of practical, action-guiding 
reasons (“reasons for acting out of duty” within Kantian value theory); 
those asserting the existence of moral dilemmas are right: (1), (2), and (3) 
are compatible.
This scheme, however, is not valid at the level of normative action-­
guiding beliefs. Consequently, the opponents of moral dilemmas are right 
at this level: (1), (2), and (3) are incompatible. Recall:
	I.	 Principle of agglomeration: (1) and (2) imply □(A ⋀ B)
II.	 Ultra posse nemo obligatur: (3) implies ¬□(A ⋀ B)
Taking into account (I) and (II), we deduce a logical contradiction 
from (1), (2), (3). The embedding of reasons in the normative institutions 
of our lifeworld practice brings about dilemmatic conflicts between practi­
cal reasons. These conflicts manifest themselves in existential decision 
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

173
situations, the dissolution of which restores the coherence (structural 
rationality) of our practice. The price of this restoration of coherent prac­
tice is the more or less radical abandonment of a possible way of life, the 
re-formation of one’s own personal identity.
6.10    Rationality and Morality
In this last section of Chap. 6, we bring together our different lines of 
reasoning. We rejected the distinction between rationality and reason from 
the outset. Rationality (or reason) is determined by adequate theoretical 
and practical reasons. A belief is rational when good reasons speak for it. A 
decision is rational if good reasons speak for it. A belief is reasonable if 
good reasons speak for it. A decision is reasonable if good reasons speak 
for it. The distinction between rationality and reason makes sense only for 
those theories that assume a concept of rationality that runs counter to the 
practice of taking and giving reasons, that is, is inadequate according to 
our understanding of the concept.
Something is rational because good reasons speak for it (e.g., belief, 
emotive attitude, decision/action). Being reasonable consists in being 
able to adequately deliberate on reasons. Rationality does not have a crite­
rion of its own apart from the practice of justification. By the same token, 
a distinction between rationality and morality seems misguided since it 
cannot be that a decision is moral but unreasonable, or reasonable but 
immoral. What matters is the weighing of reasons and, if properly done, 
the beliefs and actions expressing the acknowledgment of these reasons 
(and their appropriate deliberation) are reasonable. And if they are reason­
able, they cannot be irrational or immoral at the same time. The dichot­
omy of rationality and morality, which is an invention of modernity, is 
systematically misleading.
Desires are never given, they express reasons accepted by us, they result 
from deliberation and normative judgment, and thus constitute the (prag­
matic) identity of an agent. Action-guiding desires express a normative 
judgment about what is desirable. We desire something because we believe 
that it is desirable. Of course, a person’s desire or belief is part of what can 
be called the person’s subjective state. However, if we have reasons for a 
desire or a belief, we claim that these reasons render them objectively justi­
fied or adequate. There are reasons that are only applicable in some par­
ticular cases and contexts, because they relate to my specific situation, my 
qualities, my practice of life. This, however, does not make the justification 
6  MORALITY AND RATIONALITY 

174
of my desires in these cases subjective. A justification always “claims valid­
ity”; that is, others should be able to understand these reasons, they should 
then be able to say: yes, considering the specific circumstances this person 
is in, I consider her desire or belief, and the behavior that rests on them, 
justified. Objective justifications can take into account the particular, 
“subjective,” aspects of a person in a specific situation.
26
In this context, what is occasionally called self-interest does not play a 
prominent, fundamental, or ultimately justifying role. Reducing rational­
ity to self-interest denies the diversity of established lifeworld practice of 
justification. Everything we do on an everyday basis is affected by epis­
temic and normative judgments. The justification of a certain action, for 
example, to leave my apartment now to go to the library, does not end 
with predetermined or preset desires, but with the complex of reasons that 
I have and that, from my perspective, speak in favor of this decision. On 
closer inspection, the notion of self-interest dissolves. The basic desires 
that are thought to ultimately constitute self-interest do not exist. What 
exists, however, and what is factually relevant is everyday deliberation on 
26 The old-Stoic version reads: ta pathè kriseis einai (i.e., even emotions are normative 
judgments, though ones that stand in close temporal connection to the occurrence of the 
respective emotions); cf. von Arnim, Hands (ed.). 1903. Stoicorum veterum fragmenta: 
Volume III: Chrysippi fragmenta moralia. Leipzig: Teubner. Prohairesis krisis estin is more 
straightforwardly embeddable in our analysis: Preference does not, contrary to the Humean 
dogma, have the character of a desire, but, ideally, contains a well-considered, reasonable 
judgment. The judgment being well-justified is itself reflected in the internal and external 
validity of guiding reasons, with which ancient Stoicism dealt intensively: the reasonable 
human being as a unity (cf. SVF Volume II: Chrysippi fragmenta logica et physica): mia hè tès 
psychès dynamis. In Verantwortung (Stuttgart: Reclam 2011, chapter 5) I equated the iden­
tity of a person with the theoretical and practical reasons that guide this person.
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

175
various reasons for action, that express normative and empirical judg­
ments. The mode is that of an assertion: This reason speaks for that, and 
this reason for something else, and when weighing both reasons, the first 
prevails over the latter. So, the information I give is not about my subjec­
tive state, rather I make a certain statement, I say how I believe things are 
or ought to be.
Justification neither ends in a given, non-revisable lifeform that is 
immune to criticism, nor in a person’s given basic desires that represent 
personal interests. Quietism and Humeanism create a false picture of 
human deliberative practice. If something is morally necessary after weigh­
ing all relevant reasons, it is also reasonable or rational. If, after weighing 
all relevant reasons, something is considered rational or reasonable, it is 
not immoral. We should abandon this dichotomy between rationality and 
morality, even if it has shaped modern thought over centuries. This dichot­
omy is based on a misconception of human practice and leads practical 
philosophy to the disjunction between theories of rationality and morality, 
which has proven to be theoretically fruitless and practically dangerous.
­
­
­
27
­
­
27 Wittgenstein, Ludwig. Tractatus logico-philosophicus, 6.54.
6  MORALITY AND RATIONALITY 

176
­
­
­
28
­
­
­
28 Cf. Appendix, Ramsey Compatibility.
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

177
CHAPTER 7
The Efficacy of Reasons
7.1    Reasons
Our account of practical reason is corroborated by the lifeworld practice 
of giving and taking reasons and claims to systematize this practice. Our 
preliminary clausula salvatoria was that an appropriate philosophical 
theory of practical reason cannot claim to replace the practice of giving 
and taking reasons with an ethical criterion or principle. Rather, it 
contributes to interpreting and partly systematizing the practice of 
weighing reasons. We rejected the common distinction between formal 
and substantive rationality theory in the contemporary debate on 
rationality, as this distinction is misleading, if only because invariance 
conditions are likewise normatively substantive. These include, among 
other things, bans on discrimination. Equal treatment of persons is a 
normative criterion of proper practice, just institutions, and appropriate 
politics. Even if this criterion appears formal, it is substantial in the sense 
that it is based on a largely implicit egalitarian anthropology.
Despite all the criticism of naturalistic tendencies in contemporary phi­
losophy (not only in analytical philosophy) there is a remarkable similarity 
between the approach of physics and that of practical philosophy: Neither 
discipline overrides the lifeworld practice of reasoning; everyday physics, 
“folk physics,” remains (largely) untouched, just as an adequate practical phi­
losophy does not suspend everyday intuitions, “folk morality,” in toto. 
However, the theory itself  – both the physical and the ethical 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature 
Switzerland AG 2023
J. Nida-Rümelin, A Theory of Practical Reason, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-17319-6_7

178
theory—examines more general qualities, which allow the diversity of life­
world justifications to be systematized to a certain degree. In this way, incon­
sistencies in the lifeworld practice of justification can ideally be eliminated in 
both areas, that is, in empirical as well as in normative knowledge, in folk 
physics and folk morals.
We have, so far, gotten involved with the practice of reasoning; we have 
undertaken a cautious systematization, cautious especially in contrast to 
contemporary rational-choice orthodoxy and utilitarian ethics. Nonetheless, 
we have not yet clarified the question of what status reasons have and what 
philosophical implications result from this. Now we seek to clarify this 
question. We will structure this clarification along three features of reasons: 
normativity, objectivity, and non-algorithmicity. I am convinced that none 
of these three features can be seriously disputed. Nevertheless, it is striking 
that much of contemporary practical philosophy usually denies these three 
characteristics altogether, or attempts to interpret them as prima facie 
characteristics, which turn out to be superfluous on closer analysis. This is 
an astonishing phenomenon and the only explanation I can offer is that 
the vast majority of contemporary philosophers find it difficult to detach 
themselves from naturalistic metaphysics. For it is so deeply embedded in 
contemporary philosophical thinking that central elements of our lifeworld 
beliefs are put up for discussion as soon as they clash with this metaphysics.
­
1
­
2
­
3
­
1 Thomas Nagel. 1974. What Is it Like to Be a Bat? The Philosophical Review 83: 435–450.
2 Frank Jackson. 1986. What Mary Didn’t Know. The Journal of Philosophy 83: 291–295.
3 Frank Jackson. 2003. Mind and Illusion. Royal Institute of Philosophy Supplements 53: 
251–271.
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

179
­
4
Ideological biases, metaphysical positings, and ideological ties inter­
vene in the epistemic order of propositions; they isolate insufficiently justi­
fied elements from criticism, “immunize” these elements, and re-group 
other elements that interfere with the former in such a way that they pose 
no threat to these isolated elements. I do not criticize those who attempt 
to argue for a reductionist natural science, for the identity theory of the 
mental and the physical, or for a naturalistic epistemology that attempts to 
invalidate the qualia arguments. I do not even criticize those who believe 
that mental language can be completely dispensed with in a distant, 
scientifically enlightened future. I criticize naturalism as an ideology, as a 
metaphysical positing, as an ideological bias. In the following, I am going 
to elaborate on the reasons for this criticism.
7.2    Normativity
Even most die-hard naturalists present reasons for their beliefs. They 
argue, for example, that one should assume that all objects and events in 
the world can be completely described through natural science. They give 
reasons which speak against the idea that mental states are different from 
neurophysiological states. They try to convince their opponents with 
reasons. They participate in the practice of giving and taking reasons. They 
thus become entangled in a performative contradiction: They participate 
in a practice that is meaningless according to their own belief, because, 
according to them, there is nothing normative in the world. There is only 
that which is descriptive, that is, things that can be described as empirical 
facts. Yet reasons are—irreducibly—normative. If they take their own 
practice seriously, they argue for a belief. They present arguments for why 
this belief is true and why it should be adopted. This practice, however, 
4 The renowned physicist Roger Penrose developed a demanding criticism of the naturalistic 
worldview that has earned him many opponents within his discipline and outside. Cf. Roger 
Penrose. 1989. The Emperor’s New Mind: Concerning Computers, Minds, and the Laws of Physics. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press and id. 1994. Shadows of the Mind: A Search for the Missing 
Science of Consciousness. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
7  THE EFFICACY OF REASONS 

180
only makes sense if arguments are relevant for the formation of beliefs. 
Arguments represent reasons that have been accepted as such. Perhaps 
naturalists may answer that reasons were nothing more than certain aspects 
of causal processes, and their participation in the game of giving and tak­
ing reasons meant nothing more than being a link in such a causal chain. 
Yet this reinterpretation cannot be convincing, for if naturalists conceive 
their participation in this practice as a part of a large causally determined 
structure of the world, then any striving, such as the striving for the better 
argument, for a better theory, for a more appropriate hypothesis, for the 
right view of the world, would be rendered meaningless. Why make an 
effort when everything already takes its course anyway? Indeed, the self-­
interpretation of belief-formation is in fundamental conflict with this nat­
uralistic-deterministic, causalist view. The naturalist, too, weighs reasons 
against each other, examines the pros and cons, considers what speaks for 
and against a certain hypothesis, even if he may no longer weigh the argu­
ments that speak for or against the naturalistic worldview itself. Yet delib­
eration, the practice of weighing pros and cons, seems pointless if it has no 
effect. Indeed, the most influential form of contemporary naturalism—the 
one grounded in neuroscience—made use of this argument: Any form of 
reasoning is ex post, that is, after the causal processes of an action or of the 
formation of a belief have taken place.
5
5 Karl Popper. 1972. Objective Knowledge: An Evolutionary Approach. Oxford: 
Clarendon Press.
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

181
Theoretical reasons speak for beliefs. Even naturalists will typically be 
annoyed when (what they believe to be) a compelling argument for 
naturalism does not convince their opponent, when they are not impressed 
by this argument, when they continue to cling steadfastly to their previous 
belief, despite being confronted with a convincing counter-argument from 
the point of view of the naturalist. This reaction of indignation, this 
expectation that the other person ought to react to a good argument 
either by changing her beliefs or by means of a counter-argument, is 
thoroughly— irreducibly—normative: The only appropriate interpretation 
is that the naturalist is convinced that the argument speaks for his point of 
view and that this point of view should therefore be adopted, unless 
convincing counter-arguments are found. If we were to remove normativity 
as a characteristic of the practice of giving and taking reasons, we would be 
confronted with a puzzle; we would no longer understand this practice.
Here a potentially illustrative analogy comes to mind: The early emotiv­
ists in analytical philosophy tried to dispense with the normative element in 
ethics by interpreting moral language as describing emotive attitudes or 
later (in the form of expressivism) as expressions of one’s own emotive atti­
tudes. According to this interpretation, the statement “You shouldn’t do 
X,” for example, means “I have a preference that you refrain from doing X.” 
But then the answer would be adequate; “Thank you for informing me 
about your preference,” respectively “Thank you for expressing your pro-
attitude.” Such reactions, however, run counter to our lifeworld moral com­
munication. We do not accept such a reaction; we consider it inadequate 
because it would rest on a misunderstanding of what has been said. Thus, 
the emotivist or expressivist reinterpretation of moral language itself is 
inadequate.
Analogously, the naturalistic project fails in bringing forward reasons 
while adhering to naturalistic metaphysics which claims that there is no 
normativity in the world. The cheap excuse that one only participates in a 
useful illusion, knowing full well that there is no such thing as normativity 
and therefore no such thing as reasons, is not credible, because the entire 
lifeform of the person concerned would morph into a mere theater of 
illusion. It would mean that the person would behave untruthfully, and we 
want to refrain from accusing the naturalistic opponent of such behavior.
7  THE EFFICACY OF REASONS 

182
6
Reasons are inferential relationships between empirical and normative 
facts, between the empirical fact that the knife is sharp and the normative 
fact that one should not give it to a child. The reason allows us to deduce 
from the empirical fact (the sharpness of the knife) the (normative) 
obligation (not to give this knife to a child). It is this conclusion which 
makes the reason inferential. We can further differentiate this explication 
by naming the criterion that characterizes the inferential transition in 
more detail. As shown in this example: The sharpness of the knife (a 
natural fact) speaks against giving the knife to children (a normative fact) 
because children could injure themselves (inference) and everything 
should be done so that children do not injure themselves unintentionally 
(normative criterion). Yet the danger with this completion is a 
misinterpretation, which I labored under for many years, namely that it is 
only this criterion which bestows the normativity of reasons. That is to say, 
that normative criteria or principles are the basis of the normative force of 
practical reasons, or: that it is theory which gives empirical facts their 
normative relevance within the framework of practical reasons. Yet this 
promptly leads to the problems of ethical rationalism. The transition from 
empirical, natural, and social facts to normative facts (especially obligations) 
is not generated from a normative principle; rather it describes—or better 
yet systematizes—this transition for a multitude of concrete situations. 
Ideally, there is only one principle that describes these transitions for all 
situations (the bold hope of consequentialist ethics). More realistically 
speaking, however, a variety of further irreducible criteria is required that 
can come into conflict with each other and then require a resolution 
6 Cf. Scanlon (2014).
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

183
procedure, whereby this process can probably never be completed. In this 
respect, any ethical theory, any compilation of normative criteria describing 
this transition, would be incomplete.
7.3    Social Facts
There is an important difference between natural and social facts: Natural 
facts are not normatively constituted, while social facts are. Social facts 
only come into the world through the involvements of agents who are 
bound to normativity.
Institutional facts are a special case of social facts. All institutional facts 
are social facts. There are, however, social facts that are not institutional 
facts. Monica has promised Florian to take him to the only movie theater 
in town tomorrow at seven. Florian had asked Monica, “Will you go to 
the movies with me tomorrow at seven?” and Monica replied: “Yes, I 
would love to, so let us meet there at seven.” Monica promised Florian to 
go, and she would break said promise if she would not be at the movies at 
seven. It would not be a promise if Monica said to Florian: “Yes, I would 
love to, but I don’t know whether I can make it.” She could be even more 
explicit in saying: “Yes, I’d love to, but I can’t promise it, because I don’t 
know if my little sister can stay home alone.” Whether Monica promises 
something or not is largely determined by linguistic conventions. There 
are, however, some gray areas, for example when Monica answers: “Yes, I 
would love to, I hope I can make it.” In this case, Florian will not 
understand Monica as having promised to come, but perhaps that she 
promises to try to make it to the movies. If Monica decides to pursue 
another leisure activity and Florian finds out about it, he will feel betrayed. 
However, if Monica is not at the movies and justifies her not being there 
to Florian the next day by saying that she could not leave her little sister 
alone, Florian will understand. If Monica stresses: “I didn’t promise 
anything,” Florian will answer: “But you said you hoped you could come, 
from which I had concluded that you intended to come, unless you had a 
good reason not to come.”
One can certainly speak of an institution of promising, in the sense that 
the question of whether a promise has been made is determined by fixed, 
generally accepted normative rules. Institutionalists, therefore, conclude 
that there are no obligations outside of institutions and that obligations 
come into the world only through institutions. Pushed to the extreme, 
ethics is understood as a convention, that is, as a description of established 
7  THE EFFICACY OF REASONS 

184
social (institutional) conventions. Accordingly, there would be no moral 
obligations outside conventionally established institutions, and ethics 
would be limited to describing the respective conformities to the rules that 
are expected within a social context. Ethics would become descriptive.
­
­
7
8
9
7 Cf., for example, Mary Douglas. 1986. How Institutions Think. Syracuse: Syracuse 
University Press. Niklas Luhmann’s systems theory can also be understood as a version of 
institutionalism. Cf. Niklas Luhmann. 2012. Theory of Society, Volume 1. Translated by 
Rhodes Barrett. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
8 Cf. Max Weber. 2012. The “Objectivity” of Knowledge in Social Science and Social 
Policy. In Collected Methodological Writings, 100–129. London and New York: Routledge.
9 Cf. Hilary Putnam. 1981. Reason, Truth and History. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

185
10
What makes things even more complicated is that understanding a 
social practice, a specific action, a general behavior, an institution, can only 
succeed if the identified practice-guiding intentions are sufficiently 
10 See empirical findings on structurally rational behavior of animals: Joan B. Silk “The 
Evolution of Cooperation in Primate Groups”; Hillard Kaplan and Michael Gurven. “The 
Natural History of Human Food Sharing and Cooperation”; Rajiv Sethi and E. Somanathan. 
“Norm Compliance and Strong Reciprocity”; Robert Boyd et al. “The Evolution of Altruistic 
Punishment.” All published in: 2005. Moral Sentiments and Material Interests: The 
Foundations of Cooperation in Economic Life, Herbert Gintis et al., eds. Cambridge/Mass.: 
MIT Press.
7  THE EFFICACY OF REASONS 

186
coherent. Understanding in the sense of reconstructing a sufficiently 
coherent intentionality, which makes the observable behavior explainable, 
invariably assumes a certain degree of rationality. This somewhat tacit 
assumption of rationality leads to conflict with radical critics, whose radical 
rejection of a behavior expresses itself in a radical lack of understanding. It 
is these critics who insinuate that all those who seek to explain a certain 
behavior are, in so doing, providing its justification at the same time.
The only way out of this emergent dilemma is a realistic interpretation 
of theoretical and practical reasons. The understanding of a social practice, 
an action, an institution, must refer to the reasons accepted by the agents 
involved, otherwise it remains incomplete. However, these reasons are not 
to be identified with objective reasons that speak for or against a certain 
behavior. The accepted reasons may be erroneous. Those who understand 
a certain behavior, by reconstructing the reasons for the action accepted 
by the respective people involved, need not necessarily share these reasons. 
The interpretation of participatory understanding is a minimalistic one: 
What is required is merely necessary commonalities of empirical and 
normative experience. This is what enables the attribution of the respective 
intentions on the basis of the observed behavior. Persons who practice 
radically different lifeforms cannot adequately assign intentions to 
observed behavior and thus cannot understand one another. But the 
assumption that cultural differences within the human species are so great 
that they result in such a radical lack of understanding is questionable. 
There is much to suggest that our genetic and cultural similarities are 
already sufficient for allowing a mutual understanding of social practices, 
across different human cultures.
Normativity and sociality are not independent of each other. What is 
normative in the world is there qua sociality. We cannot understand the 
social dimension of human existence without including its normative 
constitution. However, this fact itself does not make the social sciences 
normative disciplines. Observation focused on understanding does not 
require identification with the motives of action of the observed person. 
At the same time, there is no external point of view from which the 
normative judgment can be justified. Justifications originate in shared 
social practices. Herein lies the most important difference to 
conventionalism and institutionalism: Normative judgments result from 
participation in social practices and evaluate those practices at the same 
time. In a gradualist understanding, this is compatible: The normative 
judgment originates in the normative constituents of a social practice and 
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

187
this practice in turn functions as the judgment’s benchmark. At the same 
time, however, this judgment contributes to the systematization of the 
practice of justification, thereby influencing the practice itself. The 
normative judgment is therefore not merely a result of social practices in 
which we participate, nor is there an external normative point of view 
from which lifeworld normativity can be judged in its entirety. The 
Normative and the Social are interwoven insofar as normative and social 
facts are inferentially connected. This connection, however, is not simply 
derivative. Mere deduction in one direction reduces the normative position 
to the empiricism of social practices, whereas deduction in the other 
direction results in rationalism of practical reason.
7.4    Objectivity
Philosophical tradition is shaped by sharp alternatives: Rationalists believe 
that all knowledge is based on reason. The rationalist program identified 
truths of pure reason that seemed indisputable and attempted to derive the 
remainder of all knowledge from these principles. This project can be 
considered a failure at least in the field of our empirical knowledge. The 
opposing view claims that the source of all knowledge lies in our experience, 
that is, that all knowledge can be generated from our sensory perceptions 
and observations. The combination of empiricism and inductivism, that is, 
deriving comprehensive theories from observations, can likewise be 
regarded as a failure.
If two philosophical views oppose each other for decades, even centuries, 
and appear to be mutually exclusive alternatives without one of them per­
manently displacing the other, it may be reasonably assumed that both are 
correct in some regard. Consequently, it is reasonable to assume that this 
dichotomy is not overcome by proving one view to be wrong and the other 
to be right, but by a philosophical view that integrates insights from both 
opposing alternatives. At least for the general philosophy of science, it seems 
quite clear that the vehement opposition between rationalism and empiri­
cism has become obsolete. Empiricism has certainly not prevailed against 
rationalism in toto, or the other way round: The most advanced contempo­
rary forms of general philosophy of science incorporated elements of both 
epistemological paradigms. This stage of transcending traditional opposi­
tions has not yet been reached in practical philosophy, especially in meta-
ethics. Here, traditional oppositions remain untouched. Yet, one feature of 
overcoming traditional opposition is the partial preservation of the 
7  THE EFFICACY OF REASONS 

188
opposing sides, while the majority of the arguments within the respective 
opposing paradigms seem hopelessly outdated from the newly gained per­
spective. Interestingly enough, earlier opposing views are usually not 
replaced by new, self-contained, sharply defined theory constructions, but 
by careful analyses of different areas of justificatory practice, combined with 
the insight that these cannot be reduced to one of the two schemes. The 
clear-cut meta-physical or epistemological program is replaced by a certain 
plurality of arguments and a diversification of the objects of analysis.
In this regard, this book is a plea for overcoming traditional oppositions 
and opening up the field of ethics and rationality to more adequate, careful 
analyses and reconstructions. Accordingly, in the two preceding chapters 
on the phenomenology of structural rationality and on the relationship 
between morality and rationality, we argued that there can be no 
normative perspective outside of social practices. We also established that 
this insight is not a regression to conventionalism or empirical ethics. 
Hence, we already went beyond the common philosophical oppositions at 
this point. What follows in our investigation are additional steps toward 
overcoming misleading, traditional oppositions in practical philosophy. 
This section on objectivity will explain the compatibility of the immanentist 
approach, that is, that the radically epistemic perspective for which we 
argued in the first chapter is compatible with normative objectivism.
For us, the dispute concerning whether something is a good reason for 
an action, a belief, an emotive attitude or not is a matter of course. A 
philosophical theory that declares such a dispute inadmissible would fail 
ipso facto. A philosophical theory is only adequate if it acknowledges the 
phenomena of our lifeworld practice of giving and taking reasons. This is 
not a philosophical postulate, but rather an indisputable characteristic of 
our practice of reasoning which we follow in our lifeworld communication 
as well as our scientific and philosophical discourses. The objectivist 
interpretation of reasons is the only viable option if we want to preserve 
this commonplace form of communication in philosophical analysis, that 
is, the attempt to clarify whether something is or is not a good reason for 
a belief, an action, an emotive attitude.
“I am of the belief that g speaks for doing h and you are of the belief 
that g speaks against doing h. You think I have a good reason to do h; I 
think that I do not have a good reason to do h, indeed that I should refrain 
from doing h.” Even if we allow for significant leeway when it comes to 
the relativization of reasons with regard to the person (e.g., in terms of 
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

189
their interests, or any decisions made previously) or situations (including 
cultural context), an objectivist interpretation of reasons seems 
indispensable in order to grasp and legitimize this practice of giving and 
taking reasons in philosophical reconstruction. For what else should we 
dispute than what reason speaks for an action, for a belief, or for an emotive 
attitude? Merely describing a person’s preferences (which some Humeans 
consider to be the ultimate source of all practical reasons) is not a viable 
alternative.
This becomes immediately evident when we look at individual rights: A 
person has individual rights if her desires alone are normatively relevant to 
what she is doing, not the desires of other people. Individual rights form 
an inference pattern from the social fact that I have a preference all the way 
to the permission to realize this preference. Even in non-moral contexts, 
one’s own decisions, that is, intentions that bring a deliberation process to 
a conclusion, give reasons to do that which makes the realization of these 
decisions possible. I may be mistaken, I may think I have to do x to realize 
my decision, while in actuality it would not have been necessary. I may be 
mistaken that a particular desire gives me the right to do something. The 
fact that subjective elements such as desires or decisions play a role in 
determining what would be rational for me to do is not indicative of the 
subjectivity of reasons. It is objectively right that I alone decide whether to 
enter into a particular partnership, provided that the other person is also 
willing to do so. The beliefs of others on this matter are normatively 
irrelevant under normal circumstances. The fact that what is rational for 
me to do also depends on my personal desires doesn’t render the reason, 
which suggests that I am free to decide according to my desires, subjective. 
Here, too, I can be mistaken. Perhaps the person is otherwise committed 
such that there are good reasons not to realize my desire, even though it 
aligns with this person’s desire. Perhaps it would tear the person’s family 
apart. Perhaps the person is committed to her family and entering another 
partnership would be the end of her family. Maybe the family could stay 
intact, despite the new relationship. Subjective desires do pertain to these 
difficult and challenging normative questions, especially in multi-cultural 
societies. The form of the particular reason is what makes them inferentially 
relevant and enables the transition from social facts, which include the 
preferences of those concerned, to normative facts. Yet the reason as such 
remains objective.
There are, strictly speaking, no subjective reasons, just as there are no 
subjective facts. There are beliefs about reasons, some of which are true. 
7  THE EFFICACY OF REASONS 

190
In this case, I have adopted an objectively good reason. Some beliefs are 
not true, in which case I have adopted a seemingly good reason that is in 
fact not a good reason. Just like subjective facts, subjective reasons are 
Oxymora. Indeed, we should jettison this use of language, which to some 
extent has become established, partially in the language of jurisprudence. 
It is misleading and incompatible with the rest of the practice of 
deliberation. The form of our lifeworld as well as scientific, economic, or 
political deliberation clearly shows: Reasons are objective. We argue about 
who truly (i.e., objectively) has which reasons for something and who is 
mistaken with regard to his reasons. A subjectivist interpretation of reasons 
would make the practice of deliberation as a whole seem to be nothing but 
a great theater of illusion.
Those who want to expose the entirety of deliberation, the entirety of 
our lifeworld experience, our self-image as responsible subjects, the 
practice of giving and taking reasons as illusory, pull the rug out from 
under their feet. They destroy the justificatory benchmark of all (including 
philosophical) arguments. They position themselves outside of a lifeform 
in which reasons are exchanged. Taken seriously, the price for seeing this 
through would be radical isolation, the exit from social practice. Reasons 
are objective, as is evidenced by this practice. Appropriating reasons for 
oneself is akin to assuming that these are objectively good reasons. It 
entails aligning one’s own judgments and actions, one’s own lifeform, 
with these reasons.
If reasons are objective and normative, they are not psychological, or 
mental qualities, states, processes; they are a fortiori nothing physical, or 
material qualities, states, processes that can be described by means of the 
natural sciences. Reasons, properly understood, cannot be embedded in a 
naturalistic worldview; they are not compatible with naturalistic 
metaphysics. They are, as we have seen above, not even compatible with a 
descriptivist view that takes social facts into consideration, because 
although social facts contain normative constituents, their apprehension 
does not presuppose or imply a normative perspective, a normative 
judgment. The practice of giving and taking reasons is, however, both 
normative and objective; its interpretation can only be normativist and 
objectivist. Moral realism is nothing other than the meta-ethical version of 
this insight.
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

191
7.5    Non-Algorithmicity
The question of whether or not our theoretical and practical deliberations 
have an algorithmic form seems to be more of a technical interest. In fact, 
this question has a dimension of philosophical depth that also has 
implications for the theory of practical reason. As it is easier to clarify this 
problem using the example of theoretical deliberations, we will begin 
there and subsequently explain to what extent this is relevant for our 
understanding of practical reason.
Theoretical deliberations focus on clarifying theoretical questions, that 
is, which descriptive facts hold, and which descriptive states of affairs are 
correct. If we are confronted with an argument that shows that p (a 
descriptive fact) is the case, then we should believe p to be the case. This 
is true even if this belief comes with disadvantages. In other words: A 
good argument for a (descriptive) fact, a good theoretical reason for p, 
speaks in favor of adopting this belief. The argument for p is at the same 
time an argument in favor of changing a belief in case p did not previously 
belong to the class of descriptive facts that the respective person held to 
be true.
This distinction between reasons for p and reasons for believing p seems 
to exemplify the tendency of philosophy to discuss irrelevant subtleties. 
That this indissoluble connection between reasons for p and reasons for 
believing p is not self-evident (at least in the case of practical deliberation) 
becomes manifest only through the analogy in the field of practical reasons.
The distinction between theoretical and practical deliberations, theoreti­
cal and practical reasons, as well as theory and practice, must not lead to the 
misunderstanding that there is no theory in practice. On the contrary, it is a 
central aspect of the theory of practical reason presented here that the role 
of reasoning, of justifying, of systematizing, is highly analogous in both 
areas. The distinction between the “descriptive” and the “normative” area 
can likewise lead to misunderstandings: Not everything that falls within the 
scope of the normative is normative in the sense that it guides actions. 
Claims that the current tax system is unfair do not necessarily imply practical 
imperatives. It is conceivable that the injustices of the tax system may have 
been undeniably demonstrated through arguments, while it would remain 
unclear which actions are necessary to make the system more just. One 
might say that the evidence of an unfair tax system is sufficient for the 
demand (the normative, moral, political imperative): “It ought to be 
changed.” This, however, is a very vague form of normativity which does 
7  THE EFFICACY OF REASONS 

192
not cover all of the, perhaps extraordinarily complex, arguments that expli­
cate the injustice of the existing tax system. The tax system’s injustice can be 
laid out without implying concrete imperatives. Even that which philoso­
phers like to call “description” is usually much more than this: a mere 
description. It is a scientific explanation, for instance, or a hypothesis, that 
is, an assumption, which cannot be formulated directly through the “descrip­
tion” of empirical facts, but only through recourse to sophisticated scientific 
theories. Take the question of whether Marcel Proust was plagued by 
depression while writing his famous novel. This is undoubtedly a “descrip­
tive” question, but it cannot be answered by observation, because we no 
longer live at the time when Proust wrote his work. Similarly, the formula­
tion that is so popular in analytical philosophy, Theoretical reasons speak in 
favor of beliefs, practical reasons speak in favor of actions, covers at most a 
partial aspect of this juxtaposition. In what follows, we will limit ourselves to 
simple examples and will come back to the more complicated questions 
concerning this distinction later on.
You want to determine how many chairs there are in the lecture hall. 
One possibility is to count the chairs. Direct observation (i.e., simply 
looking at the number of chairs) is not possible given the large number of 
chairs in the lecture hall. So, you start counting the first row on the front 
left and then continue on to the second row on the front right and so on 
until each chair has been counted once and only once. This is an algorithmic 
procedure: The next step to be taken in the counting process, as well as 
when the count comes to an end, is clearly defined. The count ends when 
no chair is left uncounted. Let us assume you count 472 chairs in the 
auditorium. It is not 100% certain that you did not miscount; perhaps you 
were careless for a moment and when changing rows you remembered the 
last number of chairs incorrectly, such that the result of the count differs 
from the actual number of chairs in that room. No one would think to 
identify the result of the count with the actual number of chairs in the 
auditorium. We are all lifeworld realists. If different people report a 
different total of chairs after they have counted (and no one has removed 
or added chairs in the meantime), we are all, regardless of our 
epistemological or metaphysical positions, of the belief that despite five 
mutually conflicting results at most one of them is correct.
Counting is a procedure to clarify descriptive facts, in this case natural 
facts. The actual number of chairs in the lecture hall is a natural fact. The 
objection that the counting of chairs only becomes meaningful once the 
concept of chair is brought into the world by human beings is misguided. 
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

193
If a language community does not have the concept of a chair, it will, 
presumably, perceive such objects to be quite irrelevant. Consequently, 
this community will never, or at least very rarely, carry out such counts. If 
someone from the community nevertheless performs a count, they will do 
so without describing the objects, for example in the form of “this one and 
this one and this one…,” 472 times. The pebble that has come into the 
lecture hall through a dirty shoe will not be counted even by those who do 
not have the concept of “chair” at their disposal. The pebble seems to 
belong to a different kind, regardless of whether the person in question is 
familiar with the concept “pebble.” Differences such as these belong to a 
realm of pre-linguistic quality which can be grasped by mature members 
of the homo sapiens species regardless of their linguistic expertise. This 
shared accessibility is a prerequisite for a realistic interpretation of our 
descriptive beliefs.
However, some properties of the natural world cannot be captured 
through simple counting. They are not apparent from direct observation, 
nor do they become clear through a simple algorithmic procedure. The 
more complicated it is to access certain natural facts, including generic, 
that is, general relationships, in terms of, for example, the laws of physics, 
the more likely it is that serious differences of belief can arise even among 
relatively intelligent people. This phenomenon keeps modern science on 
its toes. Disagreements are not eliminated by one single clever argument; 
they continue to exist, are modified, and they are overcome in some cases 
only by new shared beliefs, hypotheses, and theories. This is the course of 
modern science. If everything were as simple as counting chairs in the 
lecture hall, there would be no science. If there were differences of belief, 
we would count together and—hopefully—arrive at the same result at 
some point in the near future. All doubts would be resolved. It is in no 
way certain that there exists an algorithmic procedure for resolving 
sufficiently complicated disagreements, that is, complicated enough to 
evoke disagreements between relatively intelligent and competent people. 
Sometimes these algorithmic procedures, if they exist, might be significantly 
more complicated than counting the number of chairs in the lecture hall 
where different people would consistently still arrive at different results. 
The question is whether some facts, in principle, elude algorithmic 
verification.
7  THE EFFICACY OF REASONS 

194
11
Formal logic is a systematization of certain aspects of our inferential 
practice. In other words: Different systems of logic, including the 
philosophical logics (modal logic, deontic logic…), characterize forms of 
adequate deliberation. Now given that we know that already intra-logical 
inferences of these systems cannot be reconstructed algorithmically, then 
all of this suggests that the inferential system as a whole, that is, the 
adequate form of theoretical (as well as practical) deliberation, does not 
constitute a mechanism which can be represented by a Turing machine. In 
short: As beings who think, deliberate, weigh reasons, who are affected by 
reasons, we, and all beings who are capable of deliberation, are not 
(mechanistic) machines. Deliberation is in toto not a causal process. This 
is compatible with the fact that deliberation is causally effective—which is 
a condition of human authorship.
11 Cf. Kurt Gödel. 1992. On Formally Undecidable Propositions of Principia Mathematica 
and Related Systems, Mineola: Dover Publications; Raymond M. Smullyan 1992. Gödel’s 
Incompleteness Theorems. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

195
12
The human capacity for deliberation is at the core of human freedom. 
In the area of theoretical reason this seems to me to be less controversial 
than it is in the area of practical reason. Hardly anyone actually believes in 
the thesis that our theoretical deliberation, especially within the scientific 
disciplines, produces results that were always fixed, that is, established 
before all deliberation takes place. Hardly anyone believes that there is a 
mechanism that produces an epistemic state from the preceding state with 
the necessity of natural law, or that science is simply a great Turing machine 
that brings about one successive state from the preceding one, incrementally, 
according to rules, which we cannot comprehend. Freedom of judgment 
does not consist in the fact that we can decide which beliefs we have. 
Rather it consists in the fact that we are able to deliberate and that our 
decisions can be guided by the results of this deliberation. We are the ones 
who accept certain reasons as our own. This means that the influence of 
reasons on our own actions is (in Kantian words) autonomous and not 
heteronomous. It is not something that is imposed on us externally, but 
rather something that constitutes our personal identity, whose sources lie 
within us, in our own deliberation, in the concrete consideration of 
reasons, that speak for or against a belief or an action. Since our experiences 
12 In philosophy a peculiar phenomenon reoccurs, namely that essential advances in knowl­
edge are buried over the course of time. They are not forgotten, but they no longer play a role 
in the philosophical debate. Occasionally they are brought back to life decades later and influ­
ence the philosophical discourse once again. The most recent example is the astounding renais­
sance of the American pragmatist John Dewey, who already seemed to become an icon during 
his lifetime but then appeared hopelessly vague and outdated in the USA as a result of the 
stormy development of analytical philosophy, which was also ignited by emigrants from Austria 
and Germany. Karl Popper likewise underwent a similar fate. Partly for political reasons, promi­
nent students of his turned away from him. Additionally, Thomas S. Kuhn’s radical counter-
position seemed to make Popper’s theory of science obsolete. Beyond all philosophical 
schooling, including personal aversions and sympathies, I think much suggests that Karl 
Popper’s central arguments, including his critique of the ideologies of a closed society, his criti­
cal epistemology, and his plea for a dualistic understanding of the relationship between mind 
and body, the three-world ontology that was already advocated by Kurt Gödel and precisely 
this argument against mechanistic theories of the mind, represent genuine philosophical 
advances in knowledge, which must be taken into account for an adequate theory of reason, 
however modified. Cf. Karl Popper. 1972. Of Clouds and Clocks: An Approach to the Problem 
of Rationality and the Freedom of Man. In Objective Knowledge: An Evolutionary Approach. 
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
7  THE EFFICACY OF REASONS 

196
and emotive attitudes enter into deliberation and are, in turn, modified by 
it, this—still provisional—characterization of authorship and identity is 
not a rationalist distortion. It is not deliberation as such, but the content 
of theoretical and practical reasons that guide our beliefs and actions.
Even if sensory perceptions as such are usually interpreted as given 
(which can be doubted), our way of dealing with these perceptions is our 
responsibility as beings capable of deliberation. If the logic of reasons were 
mechanistic, if weighing reasons abided by algorithms, however 
complicated they might be, if there was no leeway to escape the determinacy 
associated with mechanistic form, we could not be considered authors of 
our beliefs. It is the non-algorithmic nature of theoretical reasons that 
paves the way for freedom.
7.6    Theoretical and Practical Reasons
Suppose a mathematician has succeeded in proving a new theorem. Does 
this give them reason to believe that the theorem is true? Does he have 
reason to be convinced of this theorem? Both questions can undoubtedly 
be answered in the affirmative. A successful proof speaks for the truth of 
the theorem. We are walking a fine terminological line here: Strictly 
speaking, the claims just stated are merely reformulations for what is a 
proof. A proof speaks in favor of the truth of a theorem, or else the 
sequence of lines that the mathematician has put on paper could not be 
called a proof. If a “proof” turns out to be false, it is not a proof. One 
could say that there is a realistic interpretation in the very concept of 
proof: A proof is not that which a language community or the scientists of 
a discipline consider it to be; rather it is that which objectively speaks for 
the truth of a proposition (here a theorem). Whether this proposition is 
mathematical in nature, or whether it concerns physical, economic, legal, 
or ethical facts, is irrelevant. A successful proof can be so complicated that 
most people who attempt to understand it fail to do so. This may lead to 
the outcome that many people doubt whether this proof can count as a 
good proof. However, if it can be shown that the individual steps of the 
proof align with certain mathematical inferences (reasons), then the 
relevant sequence of lines that the mathematician has put on paper does 
constitute a proof. A proof remains a proof, regardless of how the epistemic 
conditions change.
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

197
13
Our theoretical freedom, our autonomy of thinking, does not consist in 
inventing or constructing mathematical, social, and possibly also natural 
facts, that is, in bringing them into the world only through the processes 
of reasoning (that would be a regression into epistemological idealism). 
Rather, it consists in the freedom to deliberate, to weigh reasons in favor 
of a belief, and ultimately to adopt the belief that seems to be the most 
justified. It would be an exaggeration, a hypertrophy of theoretical 
freedom, to interpret the objects of theoretical deliberation (if only in 
certain areas, e.g., mathematics, ethics, or social science) as the result of a 
construction. Even if there are differences between natural, mathematical, 
social, and normative facts, even if some of these facts come into the world 
only through cultural practices, it is not the reasoning process itself that 
constitutes these facts. Truth is not epistemically constituted in any area of 
our knowledge.
13 See, for example, Felix Mühlhölzer. 2019. Language-games and Forms of Life in 
Mathematics. In Language, Form(s) of Life, and Logic, ed. Christian Martin, 193–218. 
Berlin: De Gruyter.
7  THE EFFICACY OF REASONS 

198
The practice of justification is always contextual in the broadest sense: 
It refers to shared background knowledge, to shared doubts, and to, at 
least in some substantial parts, a shared spectrum of subjective certainties. 
A justification is successful if it makes a controversial proposition seem 
plausible to a person doubting said proposition by providing a good 
reason for it. A “justification” that is factually inaccurate is not a justification 
even if it results in the desired change of belief. Realism is also inscribed in 
our concept of justification.
In my view, there is nothing to suggest that the role of reasons changes 
fundamentally when they relate to actions instead of beliefs. Theoretical 
reasons that speak in favor of a (descriptive) proposition ipso facto are 
usually a sufficient “motive” to adjust one’s beliefs accordingly, that is, to 
integrate that which is well justified into one’s own epistemic system, that 
is, into the system of descriptive beliefs. Likewise, practical reasons, that is, 
reasons for decisions, speak in favor of making the respective decision. 
Practical reasons, just like theoretical reasons, are always also motives for 
the rational person. A person for whom reasons generally do not function 
as motives would be inconceivable for us. We could not include this person 
in our lifeworld interactions and communications, she could not participate 
in any form of social practice, she would no longer be part of the social 
dimension, and to some extent we would have no access to her. Persons 
who cannot be affected either by theoretical or practical reasons are 
incomprehensible to us who share in the practice of giving and taking 
reasons and ascribe corresponding intentions and beliefs. This does not 
necessarily imply that the behavior of such a person becomes inexplicable. 
However, the form of the explanation would be quite different. We would 
turn into ethologists, so to speak, who describe patterns of behavior and 
try to determine certain regularities in order to be able to predict future 
behavior. One may even attempt to infer mental states from observable 
behavior, and it is not improbable that analogies to familiar ascriptions 
may occur. Behavioral patterns, which previously seemed inexplicable, 
suddenly appear as expressions of, for example, dissatisfaction. Based on 
these correlations, recommendations can be developed as to how one may 
deal with such a person. The loss of intelligibility in the usual sense of 
sharing reasons, background and orientational knowledge, the form of 
conflict resolution, willingness to cooperate, can be subsequently replaced 
by careful observations and interpretation of behavioral patterns and 
attempts to improve the life situation of the particular person.
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

199
14
­
15
­
16
­
­
­
­
14 In the sense established in Chap. 3 of this book.
15 As shown in the film The Talented Mr. Ripley based on the novel of the same title by 
Patricia Highsmith (cf. Anthony Minghella (director). 1999. The Talented Mr. Ripley. USA: 
Paramount).
16 The NS era offers well-known examples hereof.
7  THE EFFICACY OF REASONS 

200
­
However, is it not possible that good reasons are determined solely by 
my self-interest, that is, that which is in my self-interest is precisely that 
which is well justified? Similarly, could it not be that the best reasons speak 
precisely for that which corresponds to the expectations of conformity of 
the respective authority? It might not be very likely; still, both options are 
possible. We cannot rule out that the best reasons speak precisely for that 
which is in my own interest—or that best reasons speak precisely for a 
practice that meets the expectations of conformity of the respective 
authority. However, if this is the case, it is not because the practice in 
question is in my own interest or because it meets the respective 
expectations of conformity. This concordance would be contingent. 
Acknowledging that something is in my own interest is insufficient for it 
to be well justified. To say that something meets the expectations of 
conformity is insufficient for it to be well justified. In order to clarify what 
is well justified, I must engage in deliberation, weighing the reasons that 
speak for and against it.
17
18
17 Cf. HumR.
18 In contrast to the normative-ontological approach of the political theory, cf. Eric 
Voegelin. 1956–1987. Order and History: Vol. I-V. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State 
University Press.
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

201
­
19
7.7    Autonomy
20
People are autonomous insofar as they are guided by reasons they 
accept as their own. Given that action differs from mere behavior in that it 
is guided by reasons, an appropriate understanding of autonomy cannot 
be limited to moral actions. Autonomy does not concur with morality as 
Kant assumed. In order to understand human practice as a whole, we must 
interpret it as guided by reason. Responsibility for the entirety of one’s 
own practice is nothing other than an aspect of the human capacity to be 
guided by reasons. Since both normative and descriptive beliefs are 
relevant to practice, it is an expression of a dual freedom, a dual autonomy, 
namely the freedom to be guided by theoretical reasons in one’s beliefs, 
and the freedom to be guided by practical reasons. Theoretical autonomy 
is widely, even if only implicitly, accepted. This form of autonomy has to 
be completed by the ability to weigh reasons in favor of actions and to 
19 Cf. Ludwig Wittgenstein. On Certainty, especially §§ 192, 204, 212, 563.
20 A large part of contemporary practical philosophy draws crucial inspiration through 
recourse to and updating of older approaches. For example, John McDowell and Robert 
Brandom draw from the Hegelian theory of reason, John Rawls from the Kantian theory of 
justice, Eric Voegelin and Leo Strauss from the philosophy of Plato, and Martha Nussbaum 
and Amartya Sen from the Aristotelian anthropology, and so on.
7  THE EFFICACY OF REASONS 

202
make those decisions that correspond to the best practical reasons. The 
practice as a whole represents the acceptance of a complex of reasons. We 
are autonomous in the theoretical sense because we are beings who have 
beliefs that are guided by theoretical reasons. We are autonomous in the 
practical sense because we are beings who act that are guided by practical 
reasons. We are not autonomous only when we have the best theory or an 
all-inclusive normative ethics. The weighing of reasons gives us freedom: 
It is at the core of self-determination.
In Kantian terminology: Pragmatic or technical imperatives are, on 
their own, insufficient to guide actions (contra Kant). A behavior that is 
nothing more than the optimization of one’s own interests or other 
normatively undesignated reasons (regardless of how they are determined) 
does not have action character. However, the moral imperative to act out 
of respect for the Moral Law cannot adequately grasp the great complexity 
of the deliberation of practical reasons. This dichotomy between orienting 
oneself toward one’s own happiness within the limits of deontological 
obligations defined by the Categorical Imperative, on the one hand, and 
morally motivated actions as rational beings, on the other hand, is 
misguided. One’s own happiness is only one motive for action among 
many others; it is not suited to carry the burden of justification as a whole, 
not even if one limits pragmatic imperatives to the realm of what is morally 
permissible. In order to achieve an adequate understanding of human 
autonomy, we have to abandon the dichotomy of self-interest versus 
morality in a reductionist sense of optimizing one’s own happiness versus 
the universalizability requirement.
Human autonomy is comprehensive, that is, it concerns the entire field 
of judgment and action, not just specific areas, such as moral action or 
scientific judgment. Wherever reasons are involved, there is the possibility 
of changing one’s beliefs and making one’s decisions by weighing them 
against each other. This is the human form of self-determination. An 
adequate understanding of autonomy is holistic.
This holism has its price, namely the gradualism of autonomy: If every 
action, even every belief, reveals a minimum of autonomy, then there is 
such a thing as more or less autonomy. The degree of autonomy equals the 
degree of deliberation. The more judiciously the reasons are weighed 
against each other, the more autonomous the acting or judging person 
becomes. Theoretical freedom expresses itself in refusing to follow the 
respective prejudices, but instead forming one’s own judgment, in a way 
that is not influenced by the possible reactions of others. Practical 
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

203
autonomy shows itself as the ability to act according to the best (practical) 
reasons, regardless of what others think of the matter and independent of 
sanctions and gratifications.
The Stoic goes a step further and demands of autonomous agents to be 
independent from their own passions, inclinations, desires, fears, and so 
on. The Stoic demands apatheia. Taken literally, this would go far beyond 
human abilities. As a rule, however, to be guided by reasons and not by 
one’s own inclinations, momentary desires, habits, and so on, apatheia 
seems to me to be an essential component of practical reason: It is the 
ability to take a normative stand toward one’s own inclinations, or pathé 
in the Stoicist sense.
If actions merely revealed inclinations, there could be no decoupling of 
inclination and action. However, the Humean position fails, if only because 
the phenomenon of intertemporal coordination of action would remain a 
mystery. It is only the subordination of current inclinations for the sake of 
delayed gratification which allows for a diachronically coherent practice. 
Indeed, a large part of education and culturalization as a whole is directed 
toward this form of subordination. No one can act on an inclination alone. 
Even the hungry person, who orders the first thing to satisfy his hunger, 
regardless of health consequences, has reasons to act. He can explain why 
he made a specific decision. In contrast, the person who follows only 
momentary inclinations and transforms these into action-guiding reasons 
has rudimentary autonomy only. The highest degree of autonomy is 
achieved by the structurally rational sage, who only makes a single decision 
for one lifeform and embeds the respective practices and decisions 
coherently into this structure. In light of the conditio humana, this fictional 
sage is excessive, even as a regulative idea. We learn, we make experiences, 
we acquire what Aristotle calls phronesis. We are rising to the challenge, as 
we say in common parlance. We modify our goals based on frustrating 
experiences, we even change—ideally with good reason— previously 
accepted and therefore action-guiding reasons. Life is in flux, that is, we 
cannot imagine life being a frozen, determined, structured lifeform.
The individual lifeforms of the human species are somewhere in between 
Frankfurtian Wanton “rationally” following their momentary inclination 
and the structurally rational Stoic. Their degree of self-determination 
increases the further away they move from the Wanton and approach the 
structurally rational sage. The rational members of homo sapiens, however, 
make sure to stay far away from both extremes. They are far removed from 
the Wanton insofar as they strive for coherence in their lifeform, because 
7  THE EFFICACY OF REASONS 

204
things should be coherent in themselves, because weighing reasons reduces 
conflict and remorse. They are far removed from the structurally rational 
sage because they are aware of the limitations of human capabilities, and 
because they consider the continually new, pragmatic adaptations to experi­
ences and conditions of action to be indispensable.
7.8    Intertemporal and Interpersonal Coherence
The allure of the belief-desire theory lies in its radical reductionism: The 
entire complexity of practical reasons is replaced by a single fundamental 
concept, namely that of desire. Desires as such, however, do not impart 
rationality. Rationality is imparted by that which guides these desires: 
practical reasons. The fact that I have the desire to take revenge because I 
was offended does not make my revenge rational. In fact, there is much to 
suggest that acts of revenge are never rational. A rational practice is 
determined by the motives we put forward for our actions and which we 
justify through the reasons. The information that a certain action is suited 
for fulfilling an individual’s desires has no normative relevance whatsoever. 
It is a descriptive statement that determines the appropriate means to 
fulfill certain ends. This does not make these means rational; it does not 
create good reasons for a practice. Theories and concepts that continue to 
be influential, in spite of all objections, should be integrated into the new 
theory as far as possible. This usually requires reinterpretations. However, 
these should be as moderate as possible. The theory of practical reason 
should contribute to this attempt at integration.
The fact that I have a desire does not in and of itself justify an action. 
In order to satisfy my thirst for revenge, I would like to cause permanent 
harm to another individual. The crucial question that arises here is not 
whether I might harm myself in doing so, but whether the desire is worth 
pursuing. An ethically educated person will come to a negative conclusion. 
They will not transform this desire into an action-guiding reason. They 
pass critical judgment on their own desire if they decide not to comply 
with it. Conversely, the decision to act and cause permanent harm to the 
person concerned would be an implicit evaluation: This desire is worth 
realizing. This endorsement would be inadequate, and the normative 
belief which represents it would be incorrect. It is a moral fact that this 
desire is not worth being realized by action.
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

205
21
­
The more reasonable interpretation is obvious: We try to be interperson­
ally and intrapersonally coherent in our practice. Interpersonally, because we 
want to show consideration for others and cooperate (this is again an expres­
sion of normative insight); intrapersonally in that we want to avoid situa­
tions in which we have reason to regret our own actions of the past. In this 
respect, our decisions create good reasons for action, namely those which 
aim at allowing the decisions to succeed. In some cases, we may recognize 
that our decisions were wrong; then we have reason to regret them and 
reject the reasons directed at the success of that decision. In this case, it 
seems to us like we acted or judged incoherently.
Interpersonal coherence is achieved, or at least sought, through the 
practice of giving and taking reasons. It is not always necessary to establish 
a consensus of normative judgments. Often it is sufficient to be considerate 
of one another and to identify dissenting beliefs. In these cases, there is a 
21 Cf. Frankfurt (1971).
7  THE EFFICACY OF REASONS 

206
consensus of higher order: We do not agree on what is true, but we do agree 
on how to deal with the dissent. In a democracy based on the rule of law, 
it is this higher-order consensus that ensures the stability of democratic 
institutions and the pragmatic success of political action. In the end, it is 
always a consensus that makes collective knowledge and collective action 
possible, even if it only ensues in the third or fourth order. In this way, the 
normative belief as such, even if it seems erroneous to me, becomes a 
relevant determinant of good practice.
Interpersonal cooperation through the exchange of reasons for action is 
analogous to intrapersonal coordination of diachronic actions: The desires 
I assume I will have soon (e.g., the desire to satisfy my hunger if I haven’t 
eaten for a while) constitute—long before they occur—good reasons for 
action (e.g., to go shopping before the store closes), provided they are 
desires worth realizing. Rational persons do not wait for their first-order 
desires to be modified by second-order desires—they are not the pawn of 
an arational (internal) struggle for influence. They evaluate current and 
expected personal and foreign desires, circumstances, and probabilities, 
and develop, based on their evaluation, an interpersonally and 
intrapersonally coherent strategy. They are the authors of their lives and 
not the executive organ of their desire-economy.
7.9    Normative Beliefs
So far, we have proceeded from the traditional categories of theoretical 
reasons (for beliefs) and practical reasons (for actions). This is unproblematic 
insofar as this distinction was not metaphysically loaded, especially with 
the thesis that practical reasons can be reduced to individual interests or 
desires. We have applied this categorization to theoretical and practical 
reason heuristically, in order to connect the investigation to that which is 
familiar and to keep it as clearly structured as possible. Now, however, is 
the time to shake off the metaphysical ballast that almost always 
accompanies this categorization of reasons.
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

207
22
There are different ways, or versions, to speak of justification and 
accordingly different forms of philosophical systematization. In fact, it is 
not unusual to speak of a certain (natural) fact being justified. Strictly 
speaking, however, a fact is not a possible subject matter of justification, 
but only the truth of that fact or the belief that this fact is true, or even the 
subjective inclination to assume that this fact is true or the subjective 
(high) probability regarding this fact. The inferential relations that create 
reasons remain immanent; they link different elements of the epistemic 
system with each other. They do not originate outside this epistemic 
system (there is no Archimedean point of justification), nor do justifications 
end outside the epistemic system, for example in facts. However, the only 
adequate interpretation of the contents of our beliefs is a realist one. That 
is to say, having a belief means being convinced that something is the case. 
The relations of justification remain immanent; the content (i.e., the 
object of justification) is transcendent: It refers to facts that are not 
epistemically constituted.
Here we investigate the role of normative beliefs from different perspec­
tives: When they begin with action, when they lead to action, and, finally, 
when they have no direct bearing on action. Suppose I consider changing 
my profession. There are various reasons that are relevant here: Perhaps I no 
longer see any opportunities for development, maybe I find the job too 
stressful, maybe the income is insufficient to adequately provide for my fam­
ily, perhaps I am experiencing an identity crisis and want to “reinvent” 
myself, maybe I am drawn to another location where I cannot execute this 
job, perhaps I am newly in love and would like to impress my partner with 
this courageous decision, perhaps I have moral concerns about this profes­
sion, perhaps I feel obliged to make a contribution to alleviating world pov­
erty through my professional activity, perhaps I see too many of my own 
22 Peter Strawson carried this out with wonderful sensitivity, albeit with a sentimentalist 
slant in Freedom and Resentment (1962), which initiated an entire philosophical research 
program, one of whose most fascinating late results is the work of R. Jay Wallace. Cf. Peter 
Strawson. 2008. Freedom and Resentment and Other Essays. London: Routledge; R.  Jay 
Wallace. 1994. Responsibility and the Moral Sentiments. Cambridge/Mass.: Harvard 
University Press.
7  THE EFFICACY OF REASONS 

208
abilities lying fallow, and so on. I cannot see that this variety of reasons could 
be reduced in such a manner that I would be able to carry out estimations 
of my expected temporal integral of satisfaction (i.e., hedonic level). How 
can reasons, such as consideration for the interests of one’s family or moral 
concerns about one’s current job, be translated into an assessment of this 
nature? In all cultures, people care for things, other than their own well-
being. There is no—philosophical or non-philosophical—argument that 
could speak against caring for things other than one’s own well-being. On 
the contrary, it seems that a person who only cares about her own well-
being and considers everything else unimportant is severely mentally dis­
turbed. Why should we base rationality on a pathological disorder? Let us, 
therefore, be wary of a premature reductionism. Let us take seriously the 
variety of relevant reasons for action.
Since this is potentially an existential decision, there are limits to its 
rationalization. These limits are due to the fact that weighing reasons is 
always related to certain lifeforms that themselves contain intrinsically 
evaluative positions. The lifeform consists of specific judgments. If, 
however, in extremis, the lifeform as a whole is affected by a decision, it is 
no longer possible to judge the action in terms of whether it fits into the 
chosen and endorsed structure of a life practice in general. So, even when 
it comes to existential decisions, the result of the (possibly dilemmatic) 
consideration will still be a valuation: By my decision, this is the lifeform 
that I appreciate and want. This betterness relation brings no new aspect 
of judgment, no new reasons, into play. Rather, the old deliberations have 
completely or at least partially lost their ability to function as an orienting 
force in view of the existential character of the decision. The deliberation, 
even in the case of an underdetermined result, does not lead to a certain 
quality (such as one’s own well-being or global aggregate utility) being 
realized to a greater extent through one decision than another. Whoever 
wants to know in which sense one decision is better than another is referred 
back to the entirety of the deliberation.
Compare this to a utilitarian consideration: The utilitarian, too, will 
have to include various aspects in order to determine which of the decisions 
will entail the greatest aggregate utility in the universe. This deliberation 
can be at least as complicated as the sort of lifeworld deliberations we just 
discussed. The utilitarian result, however, is a hypothesis about the 
expected development of the aggregate utility in the universe. The 
deliberation would deliver (theoretical) reasons to assume that one 
decision would generate a higher aggregate utility in the universe than the 
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

209
other. The betterness relation would be defined by a quantitative aggregate 
utility. The reductionism is not manifest in a simplification of deliberation, 
but rather in the (fundamentalist) positing of a single aspect of evaluation. 
To put it differently: This reductionism replaces the whole variety of 
evaluations that are expressed in practical deliberations by one single 
aspect, aggregate utility. The substitution procedure, for which 
utilitarianism stands as an example here, would undoubtedly merge 
previous deliberations into a descriptive judgment, namely that one action 
results in a higher aggregate utility than the other. Combined with the 
utilitarian criterion, that is, choose the action that will result in the higher 
aggregate utility, one can derive the practical conclusion: Do X.  This 
reductionism manifests itself in the fact that the whole of deliberation is 
initially descriptive. This means that it serves to justify descriptive beliefs 
which are then to be transformed via a principle (here the utilitarian 
principle) into a normative judgment.
In both cases, however, these are beliefs that are justified or generated 
through deliberation (we arrive at this belief through deliberation or: 
deliberation leads us to this belief). In both cases, descriptive facts are 
largely, possibly exclusively, relevant. One reason for this may be, for 
example, because the (normative) evaluative aspects are clear and 
undisputed, while the descriptive facts that are normatively relevant may 
be controversial. Even without a reductionist transformation, there is 
much to suggest that the normative properties supervene on the descriptive 
ones. The inferential role of practical reasons links descriptive facts (natural 
and social) with normative facts—that is how we introduced the realistic 
interpretation of practical reasons. Supervenience, however, does not 
imply that the normative aspects are trivial. Just because we know all things 
descriptive, we certainly do not know all things normative: The criteria of 
normative judgment may be unclear, controversial, or only determinable 
through deliberation. We should be skeptical about such a simple 
relationship between empirical and normative facts, as postulated by 
utilitarian ethics. If the connection between empirical and normative facts 
were that simple, it would be a mystery why lifeworld practical deliberation 
is so complex. Indeed, utilitarian ethics fails in its simplicity due to the 
demands made by good practical reasons.
If I want to determine whether one decision is better than another, I 
have no choice but to weigh practical reasons to reach a normative 
judgment, that is, the justification of a normative belief. Answering the 
question what I should do is preceded (in a logically necessary manner) by 
7  THE EFFICACY OF REASONS 

210
answering the question which normative beliefs are true. I cannot arrive at 
the practice directly, immediately, or, put differently: Every practice reveals 
normative beliefs.
23
­
23 I believe this translation of aretē as “disposition” to be misleading, since Aristotle empha­
sizes in the Nicomachean Ethics that the aretai are not merely hexeis, but also prohaireseis. This 
means that virtues represent choices and preferences; cf. Nicomachean Ethics, book II. Neo-
Aristotelian virtue ethics is inspired by Aristotle. It takes virtues, enduring dispositions of 
character, and intellect as essential to live a good (flourishing) life, in accordance with our 
nature as rational beings. Virtue ethics is naturalistic in the sense that to live a virtuous life is 
to live a life of natural goodness. There are natural endowments of the human species that 
determine, in good part, what is good for us humans; cf. Nancy E.  Snow 2018. Neo-
Aristotelian Virtue Ethics. In The Oxford Handbook of Virtue, 321–342. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. This kind of Aristotelian naturalism is different from scientist naturalism, as 
it is based on a teleological understanding of nature and as it does not follow the project of 
reducing ethical, social, and mental facts to natural facts that can in principle be described by 
the natural sciences. When I argued against naturalism above, this critique did not include 
Neo-Aristotelian ethics. In fact, one might even say that Aristotelian naturalism is transformed 
here into an account of objective reasons, based on a shared human lifeform. Our critique of 
ethical rationalism is certainly influenced by Aristotle’s Nicomachean Ethics, but also by 
Dewey, Wittgenstein, and Steven Toulmin’s good reason approach, and less by ethical Neo-
Aristotelianism. But there are some resemblances between Footian anti-­rationalist ethical 
objectivism and my account; cf. Philippa Foot. 2001. Natural Goodness. New York: Oxford 
University Press.
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

211
Once the normative belief—however it may be conveyed—is established 
and speaks for the rightness, the imperative character, and rationality of a 
decision, one should usually not have to worry about one’s motivation for 
the action. If persons are convinced that a specific decision is the right thing 
to do, they will do it. All other reactions equal pathological exceptions, 
signs of a weakness of the will, of amorality, and of irrationality. However, 
there are cases in which a normative judgment has no practical implica­
tions. We can, for example, imagine a highly elaborate theory of justice that 
has no practical implications whatsoever. Even if it is obvious which tax 
system is just and which one is unjust, it can still be utterly unclear which 
decisions in terms of fiscal policy are the right ones. Even if justice is the 
supreme virtue, as assumed by Plato as well as the contemporary theoreti­
cian of the theory of justice, John Rawls, it is doubtful that the normative 
content of a theory of justice can be made fully apparent in its practical 
implications.
Practical deliberation is no less complex than theoretical deliberation. 
Both have the same inferential form. I do not see any serious differences; 
at most there are marginal disparities. In both cases, it is about justification 
and generation of beliefs—descriptive in one case, normative in the other. 
That which is normative should not be limited to that which provides 
practical guidance. The normative is not determined by direct or indirect 
practical implications, as the dominant Humean view of contemporary 
philosophy assumes. Nor does the grammatical form enable us to 
distinguish between normative and descriptive beliefs, normative and 
descriptive reasons, or theoretical and practical deliberation. This 
distinction cannot be established at the linguistic surface, as generations of 
analytically oriented meta-ethicists believed. Nevertheless, it stands the 
test of our lifeworld practices of reasoning. This distinction, too, has its 
justificatory benchmark in the lifeworld practice of giving and taking 
reasons.
7  THE EFFICACY OF REASONS 

212
24
­
7.10    Emotive Attitudes
Does the thesis of an extensive analogy between theoretical and practical 
deliberation, the thesis of grammatical and inferential indistinguishability, 
fail, at the latest in face of the third category of reasoning regarding the 
emotive attitudes?
Before this question can be answered, we must first address the more 
fundamental question as to whether emotive attitudes even qualify as a 
possible object of justification. The emotivist theories of the early days of 
analytical meta-ethics implied the exact opposite: That which is presented 
as ethical justification is nothing other than a description or an expression 
24 Cf. Anscombe (1957); there this expression direction of fit does not yet appear, but the 
distinction is made very precisely. J. L. Austin is probably the first to use the term (in the 
analysis of speech acts). Cf. J.L. Austin 1975. How to Do Things with Words. Cambridge/
Mass.: Harvard University Press; cf. Lloyd I. Humberstone. 1992. Direction of Fit. Mind 
101: 59–83. Eventually, John Searle systematizes this distinction in his classification “A 
Taxonomy of Illocutionary Acts”; cf. id. 1985. In Expression and Meaning: Studies in the 
Theory of Speech Acts, 1–19. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Thus, we are here 
problematizing a venerable and well-established view with prominent representatives. The 
locus classicus, however, is Michael Smith. 1994. The Moral Problem. Oxford: Blackwell; cf. 
also his edited volume 2004. Ethics and the A Priori: Selected Essays on Moral Psychology and 
Meta-Ethics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

213
of emotive attitudes. Emotions are given and not justifiable, and what is 
presented as a moral argument, or simply as a moral evaluation, is an 
expression of an emotive attitude. This approach was the attempt to rid 
philosophical ethics of its traditional cognitivism and realism. It was, 
however, difficult to reconcile it with the practice of lifeworld moral 
justification. Since this practice of justification manifests itself linguistically, 
we can reword this as follows: The emotivist/expressive concepts, 
presented as an analysis of the everyday use of moral language, were 
incompatible with the everyday use of moral language.
We go way beyond the traditional critique of ethical subjectivism when 
we claim that emotive attitudes themselves are justifiable and in need of 
justification. Accordingly, ethical subjectivism is not only characterized as 
inadequate with regard to normative judgments. It is even more 
fundamentally inadequate as it is impracticable already from the get-go 
because these presumably arational emotions, inaccessible to any 
justification, do not exist. Once again, we could return to one of the 
central concepts of the Greek Stoa: The impressions (phantasiai) are 
examined for their rationality, and in the case of an endorsement 
(synkatathesis), they are transformed into an impulse that guides action 
(hormè). Stoic sages observe their own phantasiai as they observe the 
surrounding nature and then align their practice with reason after 
evaluating the possibilities for action and weighing the practical reasons. 
Stoics are sage insofar as they have the ability to make an evaluative 
judgment regarding their own phantasiai and hormai and are able not to 
be carried away (the attitude of apatheia) by their passions (pathē). It is 
interesting from a cultural-historical point of view that Stoicism emerged 
from Cynicism, a variation of Socratics, which advocated a life in harmony 
with nature against the norms, against the customs and moral concepts of 
the respective polis. This evoked a similar sensation and resentment as in 
the hippie movement of the 1960s with its idea of free love, promiscuity, 
and physical closeness to nature. Rationality through attunement to nature 
is a motif that has lost none of its topicality to this day. In regular episodes, 
it seems, civilizations are challenged by a counter-movement that seeks 
proximity to nature in order to be able to withdraw from conventions, 
which are perceived as constricting. Trace elements of this origin can still 
be found in the late Stoa: Roman Stoic ethics is not concerned with 
adapting to conventions either. It is rather concerned with the ability to 
create a rational lifeform that is appropriate for the whole, for the cosmic 
7  THE EFFICACY OF REASONS 

214
order. While the Cynics tried to free themselves by searching for the true 
child of nature within themselves, the late Stoics see the good life in self-­
control, in fulfilling one’s duty, and in embedding one’s own practice in 
the ordered whole. They are not against—justified—emotions, but against 
the lack of freedom as a result of impulsive action. They search for the 
coherence of their own lifeform in the coherence of the human lifeform as 
such, as part of an ordered cosmos.
­
25
25 Cf. Susan Neiman’s praise of Odysseus as a modern hero in Susan Neiman. 2009. Moral 
Clarity: A Guide for Grown-Up Idealists. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

215
26
I find the idea to separate emotions and reasons simply absurd. Possibly, 
the entire lifeworld practice of giving and taking reasons aims first and 
foremost at harmonizing one’s own emotions with those of others, at 
making sure that certain emotions are justified, and at criticizing one’s 
own emotions and those of others. These justifications and criticisms are 
normative through and through and it is a question of clarifying what 
speaks for or against a certain emotive attitude. People are very responsive 
to insults as a reaction to being offended. It is not in vain that the term 
respect frames the normative vocabulary in so-called urban cultures in the 
US.  The concern that one is not treated respectfully or discriminated 
against on the basis of one’s skin color or religion, the struggle for 
recognition, is particularly formative where the civility of human contact is 
endangered. It is a matter of mutual perceptions of emotive attitudes, 
their appropriateness or inappropriateness, of justificatory and criticizing 
reasons. Those who claim that emotive attitudes are simply given and 
inaccessible to argument must be blind to the practice in which they 
participate.
Of course, the affection of emotive attitudes by reasons presupposes 
that the deliberating persons are able to distance themselves sufficiently 
26 Cf., for example, Michael Slote. 2010. Moral Sentimentalism. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
7  THE EFFICACY OF REASONS 

216
not only from impulsive actions, but also from impulsive emotionality. 
They are able to take a critical perspective toward themselves. Here, too, 
it is the reasons that one adopts and the way in which one deliberates that 
constitute one’s own personality and make other things, such as memories, 
actions, emotions, secondary in nature. I am not what I feel or remember. 
Rather, I am the person whose beliefs, actions, and emotive attitudes are 
guided by reasons, by my reasons, by that which I take to be a good reason, 
and which constitute my identity.
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

217
CHAPTER 8
Metaphysical Aspects
8.1    Metaphysics
Metaphysics is not a foundational discipline. It does not precede other 
investigations but follows them. Metaphysics is tentative because it describes 
general characteristics of our practice of judgment and action that are gen­
erally not apparent. Metaphysical investigations in our sense are remote 
from observation but they are not independent of experience. Metaphysics 
occupies an extreme position in the gradual spectrum that covers empiri­
cally immediately supported individual judgments (which I as an ethical 
realist also consider moral experiences to belong to) all the way to abstract 
generalizations that need to prevail in the system of beliefs (both descrip­
tive and normative). This sub-discipline of philosophy has no role of ulti­
mate justification but rather is something that needs to prevail in the totality 
of the practice of judgment, and action must not be misunderstood as a 
reversal of the justificatory relation: Even judgments that are close to expe­
rience, both descriptive and normative, do not stand for themselves and 
play no epistemically foundational role, not even in their entirety. Usually, 
even empirical data are not given but are the result of interpretations that 
rest on implicit and explicit background assumptions. This is what we mean 
when we refer to the theory-ladenness of observation, which applies to 
exact natural sciences such as physics as well.
From a holistic and coherentist perspective, the dispute between par­
ticularism and principlism in meta-ethics becomes obsolete. Principles, like 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature 
Switzerland AG 2023
J. Nida-Rümelin, A Theory of Practical Reason, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-17319-6_8

218
invariance assumptions such as the isotropy of space in physics or equal 
treatment in ethics, systematize a good deal of reasoning in physics respec­
tively in ethics, but should not be understood as ultimate foundations. In 
everyday discourses, and also in the sciences, we go back and forth and try 
to make the entirety of our practice of judgments and action more coher­
ent. We revise individual judgments that are close to our experience if they 
come into conflict with well-established principles, and we give up princi­
ples if they conflict with central individual judgments that are close to expe­
rience. We interpret experiences in light of structuring rules and modify the 
rules in light of experience.
This last part of the book is nothing but the clarification of the more 
general, more abstract aspects of practical rationality that are remote from 
experience. Any theory of practical rationality must prove itself in concrete 
cases, and we interpret them on the basis of more abstract presuppositions. 
The metaphysical reflections in this final section are not aimed at merely 
describing the presuppositions of our communicative practice, but rather 
at uncovering and reconstructing the normative and descriptive beliefs 
that are expressed by this communicative practice. Metaphysics is to be 
understood as a form of Socratic maieutikè, as the uncovering of knowledge 
we already have, but that is not yet explicit, and that we usually do not 
articulate. The status of this metaphysical undertaking is not relational; it 
is not about identifying specific presuppositions of our linguistic usage. 
Rather, the interpretation of these presuppositions is realist and in 
accordance with the general realist interpretation of reasons. At the same 
time, there is no external authority that provides us access to these 
propositions, no standpoint outside of our practice of communication and 
interaction, no fundamentum inconcussum. In this regard, metaphysics is 
understood as immanentist, a metaphysics from an epistemic perspective.
8.2    Freedom
In what follows, human freedom is characterized as a metaphysical proposi­
tion. Freedom is a complex of presuppositions, of implicit conditions for 
our practice of communication and action, which will be gauged against 
this practice. Freedom is not merely the existence of alternative possibili­
ties. The availability of alternative possibilities, the option to decide differ­
ently, is inextricably interwoven with communicative practice and action, 
and is itself in turn only an element of a greater complex of concrete and 
abstract propositions. These have a metaphysical status insofar as they 
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

219
cannot be confirmed or disproved by individual experiences. In other 
words: Human freedom (even in the traditional distinction between free­
dom of action and freedom of the will) is a structural and implicit charac­
teristic of human practice. In his Critique of Practical Reason, Kant is right 
to say that from a first-person perspective, we have to understand ourselves 
as free because this is what constitutes our character as rational beings. 
However, he is wrong in claiming that this first-person perspective is iso­
lated in the sense that from a third-person perspective the principle of cau­
sality renders the laws of freedom irrelevant. Indeed, this form of naturalist 
integration of our experiences of freedom, our self-efficacy, our responsibil­
ity, is non-abandonable since, without this implicit characteristic feature of 
our practice, the exchange of reasons would be incomprehensible. Freedom 
is not merely a feature of the subjective perspective but also of the objective 
perspective. It cannot be a subjective feature, that is, be limited to the first-
person perspective, to the noumenal I, because the practice of giving and 
taking reasons refers to (objective) propositions that should be interpreted 
realistically. A realist account of reasons is incompatible with a subjectivist 
interpretation of human freedom. The realist account conceives of freedom 
as nothing other than the capability of being affected by reasons. In other 
words: The efficacy of reasons presupposes human freedom. Reasons that 
are objective and normative but play no affective role would be limited to 
the realm of ideas.
The close conceptual connection between freedom, responsibility, and 
reason shows that the phenomenon of human freedom is not merely an 
isolated phenomenon. As a first approximation, we are dealing merely 
with different aspects of the same phenomenon, namely the capability of 
being affected by reasons. This, in any event, is the guiding thesis of the 
following paragraphs. At first blush, this thesis appears somewhat eccentric, 
possibly counter-intuitive. Does freedom not simply consist in the 
possibility of acting one way or another, independently of the reasons one 
might have for acting a certain way? Indeed, freedom of choice 
(Willkürfreiheit), that is, the simple possibility of remaining seated or of 
getting up, lighting the next cigarette or not (for non-addicts), leaving a 
soiree now or in an hour, once the concert is over, and so on is what seems 
to be at the center of our experience as free, or perhaps one should here 
say autarkic, beings. Independently of whether or not I have my reasons 
for what I do, I can decide how I behave. There is an interesting linguistic 
parallel between Ancient Greek and English, namely the characterization 
8  METAPHYSICAL ASPECTS 

220
of this phenomenon as eph hemin, which corresponds almost exactly to the 
English phrases up to me, or up to us, it’s up to me, it’s up to us. For the 
Stoics it was of central importance to grasp precisely what eph hemin 
encompasses, since one’s responsibility extended only as far as the realm of 
eph hemin. The demanded attitude toward everything else, that is, the 
adiaphora, was indifference. It is Stoic thinking that initially linked reason 
to freedom, namely with the idea that humans are only free to the extent 
that they define what is eph hemin according to rational insight.
There is a direct line leading from the Stoics to Kant. Mere freedom of 
choice is not the freedom of rational beings. Those who arbitrarily act in 
one way or another are still part of a “heteronomous” order. Indeed, 
arbitrary action is like a random mechanism; it does not have the character 
of a reasonable practice guided by maxims. This close connection between 
reason and freedom, both in Stoicism and in Kant, can be criticized with 
reference to the tradition of understanding human freedom as autarky. 
The ancient heroes in the Iliad and the Odyssey, the most likely exception 
being Odysseus, seem to be guided by impulse rather than reason—they 
act on the spur of the moment and often regret what they have done. 
Achilles is considered the greatest hero of Greek mythology, but he is 
unable to give his life practice as a whole a coherent structure. Fully aware 
of what he is doing, he watches the Greeks rush headlong into disaster, 
with hundreds and thousands of deaths, until a new, existential experience 
gives his life a new direction, namely the death of Patroclus, his closest 
friend. His grief incites his disproportionate revenge against the greatest 
hero of the opposing side, Hector: He slaughters him like a butcher would 
kill a beast and desecrates his corpse by dragging it all the way back to the 
Greek camp. According to the greatest hero, autarky is having the 
possibility to yield to one’s momentary impulses and not letting anyone 
tell him what to do. He is free, but only in the reduced form of the 
realization of momentary impulses. The whole of this life practice makes 
no sense; Achilles stumbles from one regret to the next and ultimately pays 
the price for this lifeform with an untimely death and the dirges in Hades, 
with which Odysseus is later confronted. Odysseus, by contrast, the smart 
and thoughtful person who is guided by reasons, prefers to spend a long 
life in the light, although Odysseus’ sophistries and cunningness were 
considered a problematic character trait in Greek Classics. Indeed, his 
tactical and strategic moves throughout his Odyssey were self-interested; 
the motive for his actions was his own advantage, his cunning way of 
overcoming unexpected challenges. It is the embedding of practical reason 
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

221
in the structures of human coexistence and the cosmic order of the logos 
within Stoicism that breaks up this egocentrism. This applies to the 
egocentrism of Achilles, who follows his momentary impulses, and the 
egocentrism of Odysseus, who follows a calculus of self-interest throughout 
his lifespan. Now, the person has to stand accountable for what she has 
done; she has to weigh the reasons that speak for or against a certain 
action; she might even become melancholic or depressive in the process, 
as did Marcus Aurelius, but the main goal of action remains the embedding 
of one’s own practice within the greater, rational, and insightful context of 
the logos. The ideal of autarky is superseded by the ideal of autonomy 
brought forward by the European Enlightenment. Arbitrary freedom of 
choice is pushed from the center to the periphery.
We can now systematically characterize the relation between autarky and 
autonomy: Autarky is the condition for autonomy. It is the possibility of 
choosing between different options that enables practice to be affected by 
reasons. The control of my own action has to take place through some­
thing that I can identify with, because otherwise it is not I who is acting; 
my behavior would then merely be the causal consequence of external 
influences.
This is the basic idea that led Kant to juxtapose heteronomy and auton­
omy. We identify with the reasons that we have for beliefs, actions, and 
emotive attitudes. Typically, we likewise have reasons for dispensing other 
reasons. However—and this makes our analysis more complicated—our 
own decisions belong to the conditionality of our reasons for action. A 
decision is based on reasons, but it also generates reasons, and therefore the 
decision affects my practice beyond the respective temporal moment at 
which I make a particular decision. It generates reasons that reach beyond 
the temporal moment of the decision and that structure my practice. Let us 
consider the example of a person being indifferent to a certain outcome 
after having evaluated the pertinent reasons: Let us further assume that 
even after careful consideration the reasons in favor of a short trip to Rome 
are about the same as the reasons in favor of a short trip to Madrid. In 
order to avoid being forced into inactivity like Buridan’s Ass, the person 
makes a decision. My decision to go to Madrid would in turn create a cas­
cade of good reasons for certain actions. Ranking among these might be 
that I search for a hotel in Madrid and make a reservation, that I book a 
flight from Munich to Madrid, and so on. Once I opt for Madrid, the rea­
sons that previously spoke in favor of Rome as another potential destina­
tion for my trip have become obsolete. There is no irrationality at play, but 
8  METAPHYSICAL ASPECTS 

222
rather autarky; the freedom of choice to arbitrarily decide between options 
that I am indifferent about entails a cascade of reasons for action. Freedom 
of choice generates reasons.
This example shows that freedom of choice is relevant in two regards: 
On the one hand, it is a condition of autonomy (or in short: autonomy 
requires autarky), and on the other hand, it is a structuring and reason-­
generating factor within practice. Without freedom of choice at its center, 
the conception of autonomy as the freedom or ability to be affected by 
reasons, as it is defended here, would run into difficulties, at least in 
connection with a realist interpretation of reasons. If reasons were 
characterized as normative facts for which subjective features such as 
preferences, hopes, fears, and consideration of others are irrelevant, then 
individuality, what is unique and what is special about a person, would be 
dissolved in the objective demands of practical reason. If Kant’s Categorical 
Imperative always resulted in only one generalizable option, the 
commandments of morality would be detached from any individuality. 
And since we do not reduce autonomy to morality, as Kant did, but rather 
expand it to the entirety of practical reasons, this loss of individuality 
would be unacceptable.
The commitment to certain projects, that is, the structuring of one’s 
own life through endeavors that I myself have chosen, is a special aspect of 
freedom of choice: It characterizes the structuring of autonomous practice 
through autarkic decisions. Now, we can reformulate more precisely and 
adequately modernity’s idea that there is a categorical difference between 
theoretical and practical reasons, that ultimately there are either only 
theoretical reasons, as claimed by David Hume; or that practical reasons 
can be reduced to the desire-belief scheme, as contemporary Humeans 
assume; or that practical reasons are nothing but cultural characteristics of 
a respective established lifeform (in communitarianism); or, perhaps the 
most prevalent idea, that there are only two kinds of practical reasons, 
namely those generated by self-interest and those generated by moral 
obligations, for example the utilitarian principle to maximize utility: It is 
autarky (or freedom of choice) which constitutes the difference between 
theoretical and practical reasons. One could also say that it is merely the 
phenomenon of freedom of choice that marks this difference, and not the 
mode of justification, not the logic of justification, not the direction of fit, 
which marks the supposedly categorial difference between theoretical and 
practical reasons.
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

223
1
If I am accosted by a person wielding a knife on a lonely street late at 
night and this person demands that I hand over my wallet, I will probably 
decide to do this immediately. This is not behavior that follows a stimulus-­
response pattern, it is a well-considered action. I have weighed the pros and 
cons and have reached the conclusion that a refusal would entail a high risk 
for my health, perhaps even for my life, and that this possible damage is 
grossly disproportionate to losing my wallet. Perhaps moral reasons may 
factor into my decision, for instance the consideration that it would be 
irresponsible to risk my life if my family would suffer from this loss. But 
even if moral motives were completely irrelevant for my decision, handing 
over my wallet is guided by reasons; it is reasonable and it is an expression 
of my freedom.
There is an obvious objection to this example: I was not free in my deci­
sion since I was forced to hand over my wallet. This type of coercion is a 
specific condition of the situation in which I acted, and which generated 
reasons for which I acted, in this case reasons that speak in favor of handing 
over the wallet. This coercion does not belong to the natural order; it is not 
an expression of a law of nature. Action presupposes freedom. The coercion 
in this example has no impact on my status as an agent. I am still capable of 
1 Cf. Immanuel Kant. 1781. Critique of Pure Reason (Kritik der reinen Vernunft).
8  METAPHYSICAL ASPECTS 

224
considering and choosing between different options. The drug addict, whose 
urges for the next shot are so strong that he loses his ability to weigh the pros 
and cons of various options and to be guided by the subjectively best reasons, 
has lost his freedom and a limine his agency. He appears to us as being unac­
countable. The notion of criminal responsibility requires the awareness of 
different options as well as the ability to evaluate them. The capacity to 
appreciate the unlawfulness of an action as a criterion of legal liability implic­
itly requires us to use these capabilities for evaluating reasons. The mere fact 
that this evaluation does not happen even though one would have been capa­
ble of performing it does not preclude liability in the legal sense.
Human freedom, then, is constitutive for responsibility for own actions 
in a two-fold sense. Firstly, insofar as behavior without freedom of choice, 
without the possibility of choosing from different options, without being 
able to weigh reasons for or against one or the other option, cannot be 
ascribed to the respective person as an action and thus fails to be an object 
of criteria of responsibility. Behavior that cannot be characterized as action 
is outside the control of the acting person and the person can therefore not 
be made responsible. The scope of freedom delimits the scope of what is 
ascribable to a person and thus the area for which the subject bears respon­
sibility. The person chooses an action from a set of possible actions (the 
scope of her freedom is determined by what is possible) and is therefore 
responsible for having preferred one particular action over every other pos­
sible action. She can be held accountable for not having chosen different 
options of action, but she cannot be held accountable for failing to perform 
actions that are not part of the set of possible options. We are responsible 
precisely for that which is under our control, that is, for that which falls in 
the scope of what we could have realized. We are thus—by derivation—also 
responsible for all foreseeable consequences that result from the decision 
for a particular option as well as for all the foreseeable consequences not 
realized because of us refraining from choosing other options. Secondly, 
responsibility for actions requires theoretical freedom, the ability to delib­
erate reasons for normative beliefs that guide our actions. Human respon­
sibility is based on practical and theoretical freedom.
Interestingly enough, almost nobody contests the existence of theoreti­
cal freedom. Those who would deny the existence of theoretical freedom 
would on their part expose themselves to the criticism of getting tangled 
up in a performative contradiction, because arguments are brought for­
ward with the expectation that reasons are relevant for the beliefs a person 
holds—which is precisely what they would be denying. So, there is much 
that speaks in favor of theoretical freedom as the core of human freedom.
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

225
8.3    Responsibility
The close relation between responsibility and freedom in the conceptual 
framework outlined here results from the role that reasons have; they 
constitute both responsibility and freedom: I am free insofar as it is my 
reasons that guide my action (my beliefs, my emotive attitudes). I am 
responsible for that which is affected by the reasons I make my own and 
that which is a consequence of my being affected by reasons. This is the 
indicative wording. In some situations, the grammatical form of the 
potential mood is more adequate for characterizing (human) freedom and 
(human) responsibility, respectively: I am free if it is possible for me to 
follow the better reasons. I am responsible insofar as I had the possibility 
to weigh reasons and be affected by reasons. Responsibility and freedom 
are extensionally identical: Those who can be held responsible are also free 
and vice versa. Are the predicates free and responsible extensionally identical 
in all possible worlds, which would make them intensionally identical? I 
am inclined to answer this question in the affirmative.
A specific aspect of responsibility is culpability. I am culpable if I have 
done something wrong even though I had the opportunity, based on an 
insight of better reasons, for a different and better action. Interestingly 
enough, this is true not only with regard to practical reasons but theoretical 
reasons as well: Ignorance does not relieve me of my responsibility if I 
could have known what spoke against this wrong action. This capability is 
normative, not empirical: It is not to be interpreted in the sense that one 
can imagine a different empirical world in which I would have known this. 
It was reasonable to expect of me that I familiarize myself with the 
momentarily relevant state of affairs, that I inform myself accordingly, that 
I actualize my power of judgment, and so on.
The scope of responsibility depends on normative and empirical condi­
tions. These conditions have an objective character; they do not exclu­
sively refer to the subjective, epistemic, or prohairetic state of the respective 
person. A person walks up to a riverbank at a certain moment and sees a 
human body in the water. She does not jump into the river and try to save 
the person, despite being a strong swimmer. Instead, she goes to a nearby 
intersection and informs a police officer standing there about her observa­
tion. The police officer requests help by making an emergency call. The 
emergency responders determine that the person drowned at least an hour 
ago, which means that the passerby would not have been able to help 
when she noticed the body in the water. Nevertheless, she can be 
8  METAPHYSICAL ASPECTS 

226
subjected to criticism: She should have at least tried to save the person in 
the river since she could not have known at this moment whether he was 
still fighting for his life or had already drowned. If she did not think she 
was up to the task, she should have called the emergency hotline right 
away instead of wasting precious time by walking to the next intersection. 
She had alternative options for actions available and we blame her for not 
having made a better choice. She is responsible for what she did.
Provided we are talking about an adult and not a child, we will probably 
not accept the excuse that she was so confused and that is why she did 
what was wrong. In this case, a rescue attempt or at least an immediate 
emergency call would have been the right thing to do, and this is what we 
can expect of a grown-up, fully accountable person who, in addition, is a 
strong swimmer. At the same time, however, we will not hold her 
responsible for the other person dying, since he was already dead when the 
passerby noticed the body in the water. It is important to note that this 
state of affairs determines the scope of responsibility, although the passerby 
had no epistemic access to it (she could not have known). Nevertheless, 
this state of affairs limits her responsibility. The limitations of the domain 
for which we are responsible depend not only on the epistemic state of the 
acting person and the normative criteria for assuming responsibility, but 
also on objective possibilities for intervention. It was no longer possible 
for the passerby to prevent the death of the person in the water, and we 
therefore cannot make her responsible for his death. However, if the 
person in the water had in fact still been fighting for his life, the passerby 
would have been at least partially responsible for his death. Perhaps other 
agents are also responsible: the drowning person, who knew of his poor 
bodily constitution, the local authorities, because they did not provide 
sufficient information about the dangers of bathing in this stretch of the 
river, the primary care physician, because he did not inform his patient 
about risks after a recent cardiovascular checkup, and so on.
At this point, one might be tempted to divide the concept of responsi­
bility into a subjective and an objective part. Accordingly, the scope of an 
agent’s objective responsibility would cover her options for intervention, 
given the empirical conditions. In our example, this would correspond to 
the limitation of the scope of responsibility by the empirical state of affairs 
that the respective person was already dead at the moment of observation. 
They could then—de facto—no longer have been saved and therefore the 
passerby cannot be held responsible for the death of the person in the 
water. Even if the subjective epistemic situation presents itself unchanged, 
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

227
we would have made the passerby (partly) responsible for the death of the 
drowning person if he had not been dead at the moment of observation. 
Subjective responsibility would then be relativized to the epistemic and pro­
hairetic states of the acting person, whereas objective—genuine—responsi­
bility takes into account the factual possibilities of intervening and the 
factual options. This solution, however, would be too simple; it does not 
lead to a coherent conception of responsibility. We should speak of “subjec­
tive responsibility” only in the sense of an epistemic characterization: A 
person was subjectively not responsible if she assumed that she had no pos­
sibilities at all of intervening in the course of events. Or if she assumed that 
was not her responsibility or duty to act in a certain way. In both cases, it is 
a belief that the person holds, an empirical one in the first case and a nor­
mative one in the second case. In the first case, she was convinced that 
there was empirically no possibility of intervening; in the second case she 
was convinced that she had no duty to intervene. Such beliefs can turn out 
to be false. And we inspect whether they are correct or false based on objec­
tive conditions that are either empirical or normative. We verify whether it 
was actually the case that she could not intervene or that it was not her duty 
to do so. Just as subjective facts are not facts, but rather beliefs about facts, 
subjective responsibility is not responsibility, but rather a belief about 
responsibility. Both, facts as well as responsibilities, are objective.
The same holds for freedom. Subjectively free persons think that they are 
free. Persons are free in terms of their beliefs (theoretical freedom), if they 
are able to deliberate reasons for beliefs adequately. They are unfree if they 
are unable to do this. We call beliefs pathological if they remain unaffected 
by reasons. These beliefs are resistant to any form of revision and are upheld 
even in the face of unequivocal evidence of them being wrong. Actions are 
pathological if they cannot be affected by reasons. This is what psycholo­
gists call compulsive behavior or neurotic disorders. Persons that perform 
such actions frequently suffer from pronounced neuroticism. Emotions are 
pathological if they cannot be affected by reasons.
Zeno, the founder of the Stoic school, did not want to eliminate any 
form of practice that promoted comfort or pleasure; he rather wanted to 
distinguish between impulses that can be well justified, for example, with 
reference to human nature, and such impulses that cannot be well justified, 
for example, because they go against nature. For the former, Zeno uses 
the expression hormai logikai, that is, rational strivings that are guided by 
reasons. Early Stoicism was not about eradicating all passions, but rather 
8  METAPHYSICAL ASPECTS 

228
about developing a practice based on evaluative approval. And the criteria 
of this appraisal are not subjective; their ultimate determinants are neither 
a pleasant life nor, in contemporary utilitarian terminology, the 
optimization of subjective states. That which is rational respects what is 
natural, but it is not subsumed by it. The Stoic apatheia refers to the 
ability to evaluate reasons sine ira et studio—this seems to me to be the 
most plausible interpretation.
Interestingly, the existence of human freedom has been doubted time 
and again since antiquity. More precisely, what has been doubted is the 
thesis that we can choose between alternatives, that alternatives that 
constitute our freedom of action truly exist. It has been less disputed that 
we are able to evaluate which beliefs are well justified. Theoretical freedom 
is far less controversial than practical freedom. One possible explanation 
for this asymmetry could be the materialist conception of causality, which 
was already prevalent in antiquity. This conception purports that it is the 
transmission of physical effects or even substances that constitutes causality. 
This—materialist— causality is hardly reconcilable with the causal role of 
deliberation, that is, the weighing of reasons. It seems, then, that the effect 
of theoretical reasons is compatible with a materialist conception of 
causality as long as reasons have no effect on or for material events. 
However, the asymmetry between theoretical freedom, which is considered 
unproblematic if it is discussed at all, and practical freedom, which is 
considered problematic because it seems to be incompatible with the 
materialist principle of causality, rests on a prerequisite that is highly 
counter-intuitive, namely that beliefs play no role for actions. My 
conception of practical reason assumes exactly the opposite: It is beliefs 
that determine our actions—the empirical and normative beliefs of the 
acting person. As the final instance, it is this evaluative approval (i.e., the 
belief that it is reasonable to do X which is the result of deliberation) that 
determines our action. Without this approval, without the action-guiding 
belief, actions do not occur, for actions are always the expression of 
normative beliefs. Behavior that does not represent a normative belief, an 
endorsement of the respective person, does not have the character of 
action. Stoicism’s demand is embedded in the terminology of human 
practice or is subsumed by it. However, the categorical distinction between 
mere behavior and action must not obscure the fact that deliberation, that 
is, the weighing of reasons, is decisive for the determination of human 
practice to a varying degree. In contrast to Stoic radicalism, a theory of 
structural rationality seeks to grasp this aspect more adequately. We have 
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

229
already characterized it more closely with the gradual concept of a more or 
less strongly pronounced coherence.
I am responsible for everything that is under my control. We have char­
acterized the phenomenon of having-something-under-one’s-control as 
the possibility of it being affected by one’s own reasons. If I adopt the 
arguments of a person that speak in favor of a certain action, then these 
arguments become my own reasons. This does not mean that this has any 
power over me, but rather that I have my reasons for deciding one way and 
not the other. This undermines the interpretation that has shaped post-­
structuralist discourses which claims that any form of influence that one 
person has on another is a form of exertion of power. Pointing out a fact 
is not a form of exertion of power, even if the person was not familiar with 
the fact beforehand. Those who make reality disappear in discourse 
practices by characterizing knowledge as having no reference to reality 
forfeit the possibility of distinguishing. Exertion of power is always about 
asserting vested interests against other interests. Pointing out states of 
affairs might sometimes serve one’s own interests; sometimes it might not; 
in any event, strengthening a person’s power of judgment is eo ipso not a 
form of exertion of power. Quite the contrary. This is the central postulate 
of the Enlightenment, that is, the core of the Enlightenment project: 
Empowering humans to form their own judgment and to act on their own 
reasons bestows upon them authorship and ego-strength and enables 
them to come to their own judgments and be responsible agents instead 
of being driven by forces, dependent and ignorant. Enlightenment is not 
a form of exertion of power. The project of Enlightenment is never 
completed. It empowers humans instead of making them powerless. 
However, enlightenment presupposes that there is something which one 
can be enlightened about, that is to say: Without justified truth claims, the 
project of the Enlightenment becomes vacuous. If it loses its subject 
matter, the only thing that remains is the caricature of all discourse as a 
form of influencing others. The paradigm shifts from knowledge to power.
We say that small children cannot take responsibility for their actions 
and what we mean by that is precisely the fact that their practice as a whole 
is not yet coherent, because it is not sufficiently affected by the deliberation 
of reasons. Small children are exposed to a multitude of impulses for 
actions that they can only coordinate insufficiently. One could say that 
they react to them in an individual manner, that they develop more or less 
rational strategies, which are devised as short-term measures and which 
often enough harm their own interests. It is the behavior of the akrates. 
8  METAPHYSICAL ASPECTS 

230
The akrates is acting with only one specific goal in mind which was evoked 
by a sensory impression, and, without thinking too much about it, he 
utilizes all means available in order to reach this goal. The question 
whether obtaining this goal ends up facilitating or impeding him in 
reaching other goals that he is currently unaware of does not even enter 
his mind. It is this specific kind of irrationality that we observe with 
unrestrained and inconsiderate people who follow their respective 
momentary impulses, which is overcome only by the practice of having 
one’s own reasons for a lifeform that is consistent overall. This ought is not 
external to this practice, but rather inherent to the deliberation of reasons, 
even for those whose practice as a whole is not coherent yet. The reasons 
themselves are already aimed at ensuring coherence. We do not induce the 
philosophical idea of a coherent lifeform into the normative discourses of 
the everyday world; rather, it is constituted by our lifeworld practice of 
giving and taking reasons.
This conception of responsibility differs markedly from the two philo­
sophical positions most prevalent today: Humeanism, most dominant in the 
Anglo-Saxon debate, considers rationality to be a means to realize desires. If 
we take this literally, we must ask whether there can be responsible decision-
making within Humeanism at all. Indeed, the contemporary decision-theo­
retical transformation of Humeanism reduces the individual agent to an 
optimization machine that optimizes any desires, preferences, represented 
by a utility function.
My position also differs substantially from Kantianism. After all, for Kant 
and in contemporary Kantianism there are alternatives to choose from (real 
alternatives that make a difference). This is because the Categorical 
Imperative only determines the domain of impermissible maxims and thus 
allows, if interpreted plausibly, some leeway in the decision-making of the 
respective moral agent. The test of the Categorical Imperative, the test of 
whether certain maxims are suitable candidates for a universal rule of 
action, excludes certain maxims and allows others, and it is up to the person 
which maxims to adopt. This means that there is room for individuality, for 
particularities, for what characterizes the individual person. A decision that 
is made out of respect for the Moral Law usually still requires the agent to 
choose between genuine alternatives. In other words: In Kantianism, the 
individual is still a genuine agent, whereas in Humeanism, the individual 
vanishes in the optimization calculus. However, even Kant and contempo­
rary Kantianism are, as it were, somewhat infected by Humeanism. In Kant 
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

231
this takes the form of “pragmatic imperatives” that determine the condi­
tions that lead to an improvement of my own well-being. Kant retraces the 
increasingly hedonistic subjectivism that had characterized the transition 
from Greek Classics to Roman Imperialism: He reduces eudaimonia to 
subjective well-being. Indeed, divine retributive justice is supposed to 
guarantee that moral obligations do not entail disadvantages for the well-
being of the person in the long run. The reverent tone of morality, the 
demand to act out of respect for the Moral Law, is ultimately tempered by 
the promise of divine retributive justice, with the consequence that prag­
matic and categorical imperatives converge. It seems that Kant was unable 
to withstand the small-minded entrepreneurial spirit of the dawning 
Bourgeois Epoch.
My own position is distinct from the Kantian position in two ways. 
Firstly, it is not only about moral reasons, but about reasons in general, 
and, secondly, agents are characterized by making certain reasons their 
own, by letting themselves be affected by reasons and thereby taking 
responsibility for their practice as a whole. Reasons cannot be divided into 
two categories, objective (moral) and subjective (pragmatic), but rather, 
they are all objective, albeit dependent on preceding decisions of the 
respective agent. The respective practice is an expression of the result of 
this deliberation. We not only depart from classical and contemporary 
Humeanism, but also from semi-Humeanism in Kant.
Historically speaking, one could say that we return to Greek Stoicism, 
whose central thesis is that a reasonable, acting agent is characterized by 
(evaluative) approval. It is not the hormai, that is, the respective impulses 
or desires, that constitute rationality but the agent’s evaluative judgment 
(synkatathesis). It is the practice of weighing reasons: to develop an evalua­
tive judgment that ultimately determines the concrete practice. The objec­
tivity of reasons does not jeopardize the agent’s individuality because it is 
the agent who determines through evaluative judgment which of these 
reasons determine action. This comes close to the position of the founder 
of Stoicism, Zeno— as far as it can be re-traced. It is the evaluative endorse­
ment that leads a reasonable agent to act— and not the mere satisfaction of 
momentary impulses and desires. Desires that correspond to the natural 
constitution of the human body deserve this endorsement and are there­
fore not irrational. Stoicism is not about cauterizing these desires, but 
about the agents being their own masters at every given moment.
The ethical implications are obvious: the radical restriction of responsi­
bility to that which is under our control, that is, our attitudes which the 
8  METAPHYSICAL ASPECTS 

232
Stoics called virtues (aretai). Stoic virtues are precisely not what are con­
sidered Aristotelian virtues, namely behavioral dispositions that are formed 
through habit and nurture; rather, Stoic virtues are what is at our disposi­
tion, that is, that which we can freely decide over. In my transformation, 
authorship is determined by normative attitudes, the respective endorse­
ment of specific reasons that we believe to have acknowledged, and the 
insight which results from acknowledging these reasons which provides 
the foundation of our practice. Our practice exhibits our evaluative 
endorsements. The respective momentary impulses that “seize” us are, for 
us as reasonable agents, external conditions of our practice, to which we 
respond as we would to current weather conditions; we decide based on 
how they are given. They are not the moventes of our behavior as reason­
able agents. If they were, we would be weak-willed, potentially even 
behaving like non-agents. This slipping into an other-­directed order would 
threaten our status as an agent.
8.4    Authorship
We can summarize the results of the preceding paragraphs as follows: 
Practical reason, freedom, and responsibility are all different aspects of 
authorship. Authorship in turn is founded on affection by reasons. The 
form of this affection by reasons, however, requires clarification.
In the Humean tradition the solution seems simple and unambiguous: 
The deliberation of reasons, the role of rationality, is limited to choosing the 
means for goals which are ultimately dictated by the acting person’s desires. 
According to Hedonism, the final indubitable goal is the optimization of 
the subjective well-being of the agent. However, if (basal) desires are con­
sidered a given, in the sense that they are not themselves the result of the 
deliberation of reasons, then authorship within naturalistic Humeanism is 
limited to the choice of the respective optimization strategy. Human action 
as a whole is no longer an expression of practical reason, but rather the result 
of an optimization calculus whose utility function is prescribed by basal 
desires and whose result, except for the case of indifference, is predeter­
mined before any deliberation sets in. If the agents deviate from this prede­
termined outcome, they are deemed to be irrational, albeit only in the weak 
sense of having failed as a ratiocinator: They miscalculated.
At variance with the classical David Hume, the contemporary radically 
naturalist version of Humeanism dissolves this already reduced form of 
theoretical rationality in a causal theory of knowledge. If the respective 
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

233
empirical judgments are merely the result of a causal process and the 
deliberation of theoretical reasons is reconstructed as a causal process, 
what remains of the human agent is not even this atrophied form of the 
empirical power of judgment. Strictly speaking, this framework leaves no 
room for good reasons; there are only causal processes that can, in 
principle, be described by science.
The problem we thus face is to come up with a better description of the 
active role that constitutes authorship. Apparently, the Greek Stoics faced a 
similar problem. They wanted to capture something philosophically that is 
in fact obvious, but Greek vernacular lacked the necessary words for 
expressing it. They reverted to creative word inventions and did not scare 
away from more and less dramatic reinterpretations of common expres­
sions. The German or English translations of these Stoic neologisms are 
themselves interpretations that require justification, which means that they 
are a second-level interpretation of first-level philosophical terminology 
that itself requires interpretation since these first-level concepts are not cov­
ered by ordinary ancient Greek language. I will develop a terminological 
framework that will allow us to characterize authorship further, and which 
I believe converges for the most part with the insights of Greek Stoicism. 
However, whether or not it actually does is ultimately irrelevant for this 
systematic clarification.
­
­
8  METAPHYSICAL ASPECTS 

234
2
­
­
­
­
3
I am not claiming that these expressions are largely interchangeable, but 
they accentuate the same central phenomenon of human authorship within 
different categorizations. In the first version, reasonable practice is aligned 
with (theoretical) judgment or at least it is claimed that the former rests on 
the latter. The decision (or preference) is the expression of an evaluative 
judgment. The action-guiding decision is not the result of a causal process 
that leads from given desires (hormai) to a behavior that realizes them. The 
second version emphasizes the decisional character of attitudes. Attitudes 
are not something that we simply have; they are subject to our will, some­
thing that includes an act of approval. The third version finally traces 
authorship back to the ability to distinguish reasonable from unreasonable 
impulses and desires (hormai). We, in a sense, acknowledge our impulses, 
desires, inclinations, and our lust, just as we acknowledge other processes 
in the world, external or internal, that is, processes that refer to our own 
mental states or to the empirical world, and we form an attitude toward 
them. We distinguish those that withstand reasonable critique from those 
that do not, and we align our practice with the former. It is then the act of 
endorsement (synkatathesis) or the ability to distinguish reasonable from 
2 “Aequam memento rebus in arduis servare mentem,” Horatio, Odes II, 3.
3 Cf. asthenês kai pseudês synkatathesis from Stoicorum Veterum Fragmenta I 67 and III 380.
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

235
unreasonable hormai, it is the (evaluative, normative) judgment that con­
stitutes authorship. This holds in general, not just for moral reasons out of 
respect of the Moral Law, as is the case in the reductionist Kantian view. As 
agents, as authors of our lives, we are inextricably linked to this power of 
judgment and ability to differentiate. We are always judging whether we 
want to or not. With every decision we make, we pass a judgment on 
whether or not something is valuable, whether or not it is reasonable to act 
accordingly. It is this power of judgment and decision-making that makes 
us the authors of our life and that makes up practical reason.
We find the use of certain expressions of everyday language with altered 
meanings or the introduction of new terms in order to articulate what is 
meant already in Ancient practical philosophy. In today’s European 
languages, “reason” and “cause” are used more or less interchangeably, 
but a careful distinction between these terms is necessary in order to reach 
further clarification. It is only the conceptual distinction between reasons 
and causes that makes such a philosophical theory substantial. We have 
characterized authorship with recourse to an endorsement that is guided 
by reasons. We assume that this endorsement is practically relevant, at least 
in many cases. In other words: Without this endorsement, we would act 
differently. The making-one’s-own of normative attitudes guided by 
reasons plays a role for our practice. This endorsement, or (normative) 
attitude, is guided by deliberation and differs from a merely arbitrary act 
of the will in that it is the result of practical deliberation. However, there 
is no categorical difference here between theoretical and practical 
deliberation: In both cases, there is this act of endorsement, for example 
the acceptance of a theory after one has convinced oneself of the good 
arguments speaking in its favor. At this point, the gradualism defended 
throughout this book comes into tension with the understanding of 
human authorship. How do we characterize this act of endorsement, the 
making-one’s-own of a reason, the acceptance of a theory, the decision to 
do something, within a gradualist framework?
8  METAPHYSICAL ASPECTS 

236
4
5
8.5    The Status of Reasons
6
­
4 This compatibility of gradualism and authorship (author in the sense of the author of an 
action, but also in the sense of the author of a belief) can therefore be reconciled with 
Bayesian terminology; cf. Stephan Hartmann and Luc Bovens. 2014. Bayesian Epistemology. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press, and Andrés Perea. 2012. Epistemic Game Theory. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, especially chapter 8.
5 The criticism of decisionism is therefore only justified in this way: Deliberation should 
play a sufficiently large role in private decisions, and especially in public, political decisions, 
to guarantee the coherence and comprehensibility of practice. But the decisionist is correct 
to emphasize that decisions require that deliberation comes to an end.
6 This became apparent in the continuing dissent with Charles Larmore, which could not 
be resolved despite an intensive exchange of ideas and although our philosophical views are 
otherwise surprisingly close: realism and anti-reductionism with regard to reasons, non-­
naturalism, pluralism of values…. For Larmore, reasons are causes, and their effect would 
remain a mystery if deliberations were not understood as causal phenomena; cf. Charles 
Larmore. 2012. Frankfurt Lectures. Research Centre Normative Orders. Berlin: Suhrkamp.
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

237
7
Authorship presupposes something that contemporary philosophy and 
science predominantly deny, namely the causal role of one’s own evaluative 
judgments. This is true for the theoretical and the practical realm. It is me 
who forms a belief myself; it is not the circumstances that, in the shape of 
causal processes, entail this belief as a consequence. It is me who decides 
in a certain way, not the circumstances that lead to this decision as the 
result of a causal process. This self-efficacy, as we want to call it, cannot be 
reasonably doubted.
How can this be true, given that so many respectable scientists and 
philosophers deny it? As agents and communicators, we (have to) assume 
our own self-efficacy and the self-efficacy of other agents. To doubt this 
would amount to calling into question the entire practice of communication 
and interaction. I give the promise that I will come by tomorrow. The 
addressee of this promise assumes that I am capable of bringing about my 
coming tomorrow. He assumes the self-efficacy of the person that has 
entered into this obligation. I bring forward an argument, in the 
expectation that my conversation partner revises his previous belief. I have 
this expectation because I assume that my conversation partner has 
something that one might call theoretical freedom, that is, the ability to 
align his judgments with the better reasons he has recognized. If I do not 
have this expectation, I am implicitly denying the authorship of my 
interlocutor. In science fiction movies, such a denial might be linked to the 
fact that I consider the opposite person a humanoid robot whose reactions 
are governed by algorithms and his authorship only a simulation and not 
an actual practice. This does not mean that I give up the “subjective” 
7 However, even psychological or ethnological research is hard to imagine without a high 
degree of shared experience (shared with regard to the experiences of the researcher and the 
research object). The absolutely external standpoint of a pure observer can only be assumed 
at the price of a loss of interpretational competency. For example, the ascription of actions, 
that is, the interpretation of behavior as an action, presupposes an interpretation that refers 
to mental and special intentional states. The purely behavioristic kind of description would 
deprive the cultural and social sciences, history, psychology, and even political science of its 
methodological basis. Cf. Peter Winch. 1958. The Idea of a Social Science and its Relation to 
Philosophy. London: Routledge 1958, and id. 1987. Trying to Make Sense. Oxford: Blackwell.
8  METAPHYSICAL ASPECTS 

238
perspective in favor of an “objective” perspective (in Strawson’s sense); it 
means that I depersonalize my counterpart. And in doing so I question 
the mutual recognition as agents, as authors of our life, as interaction 
partners, as interlocutors, as fellow human beings. What is pivotal here is 
not any feelings that might be involved but the mutual recognition as 
authors. This mutual recognition, however, entails certain normative 
expectations, mutual trust, and expectations. If this trust and these 
expectations are disappointed, we react with criticism and by discontinuing 
the interaction or at least by changing our mode of interaction. The 
mutual expectations then seem inadequate; the other side appears only 
partially accountable or not accountable at all, which is certainly compatible 
with a feeling of sympathy, empathy, or antipathy. In this understanding, 
the alternative is not taking a subjective as opposed to an objective stance 
regarding the human counterpart, but rather the full recognition as an 
author of her own life, or, to use a philosophically highly contested but 
more common expression, as a person.
8
8 P&L, part I.
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

239
9
10
9 Among them the analytic philosopher Roderick Chisholm; cf. Roderick Chisholm. 1982. 
The First Person: An Essay on Reference and Intentionality. Minneapolis: University of 
Minnesota Press.
10 Cf. James Jordan. 1969. Determinism’s Dilemma. The Review of Metaphysics 23: 48–66.
8  METAPHYSICAL ASPECTS 

240
11
Years later Scanlon presented a version of contractualism in his 1998 
book What We Owe to Each Other, which is unchanged in its substantive 
criteria, but is no longer based on desire, but rather on reason, which he 
treats as a fundamental concept. Everybody understands what a reason is. 
We all agree that reasons tend to motivate us, lead us to certain beliefs, 
emotive attitudes, or actions. Reasons are normative and refer to empirical 
conditions. This does not call into question the supervenience of normative 
features on empirical features.
However, when it comes to the question of the status of reasons, 
Scanlon seems to shy away from conflict with the naturalistic worldview. 
He, therefore, characterizes reasons as empirical states of affairs, which 
raises the question about the origin of their normativity and leaves causal 
relevance unexplained. The common feature of those who either call 
themselves or are called Kantian Constructivists is precisely that they seek 
to fulfill the universalistic expectations toward a normative ethics or 
political philosophy but want to exclude objective moral facts because 
these are incompatible with the naturalistic worldview. In the case of John 
11 Cf. Thomas Scanlon. 1982. Contractualism and Utilitarianism. In Utilitarianism and 
Beyond, Amartya Sen and Bernard Williams, eds. 103–128. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

241
Rawls, this is realized in the form of constructing shared rules, which 
represent the common sense of justice. We invent certain rules that seem 
obligatory to us because we perceive ourselves as part of a broader social 
cooperative relation. It is a characteristic of this framework that it fails to 
legitimize central duties of solidarity toward the most vulnerable, that is, 
those whose willingness to cooperate presents no benefit to those who are 
better off.
To meet the contractualist framework, however, Scanlon, purports rea­
sons as fundamental, meaning they are not the result of construction, but 
are presupposed as reasons shared by all. The notion of “a rule that cannot 
be reasonably rejected” presupposes the availability of normative practical 
reasons. One could therefore interpret Scanlonian contractualism as a kind 
of second-order normative ethics that integrates the various normative 
standpoints into a minimal-ethics. It is the factual acceptance of certain 
practical reasons that enables the contractualist justification of actions. 
The fundamental role of reasons changes nothing about the fact that the 
ethical justification itself has its foundation in an empirical fact, namely the 
shared acceptance or non-acceptance of reasons.
­
­
­
12
­
­
­
12 In this respect, there are strictly speaking no subjective reasons, just as there are no sub­
jective facts. “Subjective reasons” means a person’s assumptions about what reasons there 
are. However, we have also repeatedly made use of this lax, naturalized way of speaking in 
this passage, even in the formulation “giving reasons and taking reasons”
8  METAPHYSICAL ASPECTS 

242
13
­
­
­
However, it can be the case that the sensory stimuli and beliefs that are 
close to experience diverge just as the moral feelings in the face of a con­
crete action and its moral assessment do. This is typically the case if I have 
reasons to mistrust my senses or my moral feelings. Our sensory perception 
makes a stick immersed into water at an angle appear bent when viewed 
from the side. This sensory impression is not corrected even if I have con­
vinced myself that the stick is not actually bent, but my empirical judgment 
considers that the stick is not actually bent at the interface between water 
and air when submerged under water at various positions. The belief that is 
distilled from other observations is then reflected in individual cases, that 
13 Cf. Morton White. 1983. What Is and What Ought to be Done. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press; and id. 2009. A Philosophy of Culture: The Scope of Holistic Pragmatism. Princeton: 
Princeton University Press.
 
J. NIDA-RÜMELIN

243
is, I do not integrate the sensory impression of the stick being bent into my 
epistemic system as a belief that the stick is actually bent. Think of persons 
who may still associate homosexual acts with feelings of disgust because of 
their traditional upbringing, but also have become convinced that discrimi­
nation against homosexuals is an injustice and consequently don’t integrate 
their revulsion into their epistemic system in the form of a negative moral 
evaluative judgment. We could say: The deliberation of reasons plays an 
active role in that it blocks the transformation of disgust into normative 
judgment. In the best case, disgust would disappear then, too—as a result 
of deliberating reasons.
The causal role of deliberation becomes manifest in reasonable beings 
letting themselves be affected by reasons by virtue of their theoretical, prac­
tical, and emotive ability to generate insights. Reasons are entities that do 
not belong to the physical inventory of the world, nor are they epistemically 
constituted; they are real in the following sense: Reasons can be recognized, 
or not recognized. The fact that reasons are sometimes not recognized does 
not mean that they do not exist. It is in this sense that reasons are objective 
and non-epistemic, normative (theoretical, practical, and normative reasons 
always speak for something), and inferential, that is, they establish a connec­
tion between epistemic conditions and a normative assessment (this is 
equally true for theoretical, practical, and emotive reasons).
14
­
14 Cf. John Mackie. 1990. Ethics. Inventing Right and Wrong. London: Penguin Books, 
chapter 1.
8  METAPHYSICAL ASPECTS 

245
In the Appendix, I specify some concepts and arguments of this book 
using formal means.
a
a
1
­
2
­
­
1 This text is based on my article “Rational Choice – Extensions and Revisions” (RatC).
2 “Weak” here stands for “at least as good as—from the point of view of the person acting”; 
or to put it more neutrally: The person has a weak preference for a over b, exactly when they 
prefer a over b or are indifferent between a and b.
Appendix
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature 
Switzerland AG 2023
J. Nida-Rümelin, A Theory of Practical Reason, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-17319-6

246 
Appendix
­
However, the three above-mentioned (ordering) conditions are insuf­
ficient to shift from the qualitative concept of preference to the quantita­
tive concept of utility. To do so it is necessary to extend the set of 
alternatives X probabilistically to X*. The preferences of a person are thus 
not only defined for the alternatives of the set X, but also for arbitrary 
probability distributions (lotteries) on X. Now, it is also necessary that the 
preferences of a rational person are reflexive, complete, and transitive on 
the probabilistically extended set of alternatives X*. In addition, the fol­
lowing four coherence axioms are postulated:
Reduction  A rational person is indifferent between two probability distri­
butions over X, if one can be transformed into the other according to the 
probability calculus.
Substitution  If a rational person is indifferent between a probability dis­
tribution x* and a certain alternative x of X, then x* and x are inter­
changeable in any given context without the preferences changing.
Continuity  If xa is the best and xz the worst alternative in X, then for 
each alternative x of X, there is a probability p for xa such that the rational 
person is indifferent between the probability distribution [p xa & (1 − p) 
xz] and x.
 
­
3
3 In the literature there are different axiomatizations of the utility theorem: cf. Ramsey, 
Frank P. 1931. Theories. In The Foundations of Mathematics, 212–236. London: Routledge; 
von Neumann, John and Oskar Morgenstern. 1944. Theory of Games and Economic Behavior. 
Princeton: Princeton University Press; Marschak (1950); Luce, R.  Duncan and Howard 
Raiffa. 1989. Games and Decisions. Introduction and Critical Survey. New  York: Dover 
Publications. Here we present only the essential postulates, based on Luce and Raiffa’s chap­
ter 2, §5: An Axiomatic Treatment of Utility.

247
  Appendix 
None of these axioms refer to the content of the specific motivations of 
the agent, nor do any of them make assumptions about what is subjec­
tively valuable for the individual in question. The plausibility of these axioms 
is not only independent of any determination of the content, such as economic 
or egoistic goals, but also independent of whether rational actions optimize 
subjective goals of the acting individual. There seems to be no logical connec­
tion between the initial theory of instrumental egoism and the coherence 
theory of practical rationality.
Now, it can be proven that a preference relation R, which fulfills the coher­
ence axioms listed above, can be represented by a real-valued function: There 
is a real-valued function u over X*, which is unique up to increasing linear 
transformations and for which applies: ∀ x, y ∈ X*: u(x) ≥ u(y) ⇔ x R y. 
This so-called utility theorem is initially nothing more than an innocuous 
metrization theorem, which transforms the qualitative concept of prefer­
ence into a quantitative concept, namely a real-valued function u. The 
representability of preferences by a real-valued function is a necessary and 
sufficient condition for the coherence axioms to be fulfilled by a given 
preference relation R. Initially, we have no reason to assume that this func­
tion u has anything to do with the personal interests of the individual, as 
was assumed by traditional economic theory. Nor do we have any reason 
to suspect (more generally) that the function represents or has anything to 
do with the subjective goals of the individual (consequentialist 
interpretation).
Thus far we have left it open what an individual’s preferences are, or 
how they can be empirically determined. The so-called revealed preference 
model of rational decision theory identifies actions with the manifest pref­
erence for certain elements of X* (in light of the existing options for 
action). If one understands X to refer to a set of states or possible worlds, 
then it makes sense to interpret u over X as a representation of the subjec­
tive evaluation of world states and u over X*\X as expected value, since it 
can be shown that u is linear with respect to the probability distribution, 
that is, that the following applies:
	
u x
u x
u x
x
x



 
  




 







p
p
where
p
p
1
1
,
&
.	
The metrization theorem can be derived in a logically deductive man­
ner from the axioms for which we provided a non-formal description of 
their essential content above. Therefore, anyone who regards the axioms 

248 
Appendix
of coherence as adequate conditions for the preferences of a rational indi­
vidual must also acknowledge that the decision-making behavior of a 
rational person maximizes the so constituted real-valued function u (“util­
ity function”) over X (or X*).
The consequentialist interpretation of the utility theorem states that 
rational individuals evaluate states of affairs and decide such that these 
states of affairs as consequences of actions are optimized. This evaluation 
need not be explicit, it can also be implicitly expressed by the individual’s 
decision-making behavior. The consequentialist interpretation claims fur­
ther that rational individuals choose their actions in such a way that they 
maximize the expected value of this evaluation of states under the assign­
ment of the probability distribution (over states of affairs) constituted by 
the action. The additional assumption that this maximization of the expec­
tation value is the motive for action for rational individuals completes the 
transition from a coherence theory of practical rationality to a consequen­
tialist theory. From the original theory that individuals are rational if their 
preferences are coherent, another theory has emerged, which claims that indi­
viduals are rational if they maximize the expected value of their subjective 
assessment of states of the world. However, this transition is not logically 
necessary as we will see.
Let us imagine an ideal Kantian agent who orientates her preferences 
for action—at least insofar as they pertain to moral and not pragmatic 
questions—such that they comply with the Moral Law (the Categorical 
Imperative). The question then is: Can the preferences of Kantian agents 
comply with the postulates of the utility theorem?
If X is the set of world states and the preferences about actions are identi­
fied with preferences about the probability distributions assigned to the 
actions, then the decision behavior of the Kantian agent is not in accor­
dance with postulates of the utility theorem. This becomes clear in the 
following: An action h and an action h′ can entail the same probability 
distribution over world states and yet, according to the Categorical 
Imperative, h may be allowed and h′ prohibited. The ranking of an action 
within the preference relation of the Kantian agent is not solely deter­
mined on the basis of the probability distributions over consequences (or 
over world states) induced by the actions, but also on the basis of con­
formity or defectiveness to a specific deontological criterion (the 
Categorical Imperative).

249
  Appendix 
However, this seeming incompatibility is eliminated if we reinterpret 
the set of alternatives, between which the Kantian agent chooses. The 
alternatives to be ordered concern options for action. In a first step, one 
can identify X with a set of options for action and X* with lotteries over 
such options: Depending on the circumstances, I perform an action h or 
an action h′ or, if another circumstance occurs, an action h″, and so on. 
The preferences of the Kantian agent over an alternative set X* inter­
preted this way should be coherently representable by a simultaneous 
combination of corresponding belief and desirability functions. However, 
this approach excludes the transition from the coherence model to the 
optimization model. The two decisive steps of this transition are not real­
izable: Firstly, the actions cannot be assigned to probability distributions over 
states of the world in the usual sense, and secondly, u—understood here as the 
quantitative representation of the action preferences—cannot be interpreted 
as a representation of the motives for action. The assignment of quantitative 
values to the elements of X* represents only the coherent preference relation 
over actions and does not represent the subjective desirability of states of 
affairs. A strictly coherentist interpretation of the postulates of the utility 
theorem allows us to assign a subjective value function, which is optimized by 
the agency of a rational deontological (Kantian) agent.
The extension of the scope of the rational choice model from subjectiv­
ist consequentialism to coherence theory involves a fundamental revision 
of our understanding of practical rationality. The consequentialist and 
coherentist conceptions of practical rationality are logically independent of 
each other. Nobody who accepts the coherence postulates of the utility 
theorem as conditions of rationality must subscribe to consequentialism 
as well.
B Pr
r
D
a4
B
C
D
A
C
3/3
1/4
D
4/1
2/2
A’s preferences: DC > CC > DD > CD
B’s preferences: CD > CC > DD > DC
4 The prisoner’s dilemma plays an important role in Sects. 3.3, 3.4, and 3.5 and was also 
referred to in Sects. 4.11 and 5.12.

250 
Appendix
Sa
D
a5
6
­
Y
y1
y2
X
x1
−100/−100
−101/+6
x2
+6/−101
+5/+5
By switching the payoffs of X and Y, the following “selflessly benevo­
lent” transform of the situation is obtained:
Y
y1
y2
X
x1
−100/−100
+6/−101
x2
−101/+6
+5/+5
The game-theoretic solution for the altruists here is x1y1; thus, in cases 
like this, altruism produces the least favorable result overall.
D Ba
S
7
B
b1
b2
A
a1
2/1
0/0
a2
0/0
1/2
A’s preferences: a1b1 > a2b2 > a1b2 ~ a2b1
B’s preferences: a2b2 > a1b1 > a1b2 ~ a2b1
E T
a u
a
8
The structure of this interaction is quickly explained: The first person 
divides a good, say, one hundred dollars, arbitrarily between herself and 
another person. For simplicity’s sake, let us assume the distribution to be 
5 The saint’s dilemma is mentioned in Sect. 3.3.
6 Rescher (1975), chapter 3, 41–43.
7 The battle of the sexes is mentioned in Sects. 3.5 and 4.2.
8 The ultimatum game plays an important role in Chap. 5 “Phenomenology of Structural 
Rationality,” especially in Sect. 5.9.

251
  Appendix 
in ten-dollar increments. Therefore, they have exactly eleven possibilities: 
one hundred to zero, ninety to ten, eighty to twenty, and so on. They then 
offer their distribution to the second player. If the second player accepts, 
both receive the share outlined by the first player. If the second player does 
not accept, neither of them receives anything. If the first player intends 
one hundred euros for themselves and zero for the second player, the lat­
ter will refuse, and both will receive nothing. If, on the other hand, the 
first player distributes ninety to herself and ten to the second player, then 
if rational choice orthodoxy was right, it would be rational for the second 
player to accept this distribution, since receiving ten dollar is better than 
zero. In fact, however, many people reject such an offer because they con­
sider it unfair.
The ultimatum game has undergone intensive empirical testing in dif­
ferent versions with different payoff options and the findings are—largely 
across cultures—unambiguous: Most people base their decisions not only 
on their own interests (here the optimization of monetary payoffs), but 
also on justice. That which is regarded as irrational for rational choice 
orthodoxy (the rejection of an offer in the ultimatum game) can very well 
be seen as rational within the framework of our structural theory of ratio­
nality. Structural rationality is characterized by the fact that the individual 
person chooses her action in such a way that it can be regarded as part of 
an (interpersonal or intrapersonal) structure that is desired by this person. 
This motive for action forms the paradigmatic core of the theory of struc­
tural rationality: One acts in such a way that one’s own action can be 
interpreted as a contribution to a desirable common practice in certain 
interaction situations.
F Pr
r
c I
r
c 9
Preference interdependence exists when individuals make their prefer­
ences dependent on the preferences of others. Let us assume that a couple, 
A and B, are traveling together. One day the question arises whether to 
either visit the National Museum in Naples together (p1) or go to a beach 
on the nearby costa amalfitana (p2). There are two collective choices for 
the couple: p1 > p2 or p2 > p1. Let us assume that the liaison is so young that 
we do not have to add p3 (A to the beach, B to the museum) and p4 (A to 
the museum, B to the beach) to the alternative set P. If the love is great, 
the following can happen: A would rather go to the museum with B if B 
9 Preference interdependence plays a role in Sect. 6.2, Impartiality.

252 
Appendix
wants to go to the museum and vice versa: A would rather go to the beach 
if B wants to go to the beach. Symmetrically this applies to B. This situa­
tion can formally be described as follows:
	1.	p1 >2 p2 ⇒ p1>1p2
	2.	p2 >2 p1 ⇒ p2>1p1
	3.	p1 >1 p2 ⇒ p1>2p2
	4.	p2 >1 p1 ⇒ p2>2p1
This case is what we call a circular determination of preferences. 
Generalized to a group of persons K, K is {Ri| i ∈ K0}, K0 ⊂ K, k0 =  # K0 
a set of circularly determined preference relations exactly when:
	


 





U
U
S
k
K
0
0
0
12
:
.
:
Bij
, ,
,
,
	
	








T
k
U
U
Bij
, ,
,
,
.
:
12
0
0
0
	
 




 










 




v
k
T v
R
T v
R
T k
R
S v
S v
S k
12
1
1
0
1
0
0
, ,
,
:
^

 

 


T
RS
1
1
At the end of the holiday, when the feeling of love has already cooled 
down considerably and periods of mutual dislike begin to occur, a similar 
situation may arise in Rome: Here again, the question arises whether the 
couple should go to Ostia today (p1) or visit the Sistine Chapel (p2). Now 
A wants to go to Ostia just if B prefers to visit the Sistine Chapel. On the 
other hand, A is particularly interested in the Sistine Chapel exactly when 
B wants to go to Ostia. If B’s preferences are symmetrically dependent on 
A’s preferences, the following preference interdependence results:
	5.	p1 >2 p2 ⇒ p2>1p1
	6.	p2 >2 p1 ⇒ p1>1p2
	7.	p1 >1 p2 ⇒ p2>2p1
	8.	p2 >1 p1 ⇒ p1>2p2
Depending on the initial mutual assessment of the preferences, they 
remain stable but in opposition to each other.
If, on the other hand, the dependence of the preferences of B has not 
changed since the beginning of the holiday; that is, if (3), (4), (5), and (6) 

253
  Appendix 
apply, the preference structure is logically contradictory. Accordingly, we 
are here talking about preferences that are determined by contradictions.
{Ri | i ∈ K0} is a set of contradictorily determined preference relations 
exactly when:
	


 





U
U
S
k
K
0
0
0
12
:
.
:
Bij
, ,
,
,
	
	








T
k
U
U
Bij
, ,
,
,
.
:
12
0
0
0
	
	
 




 










 




v
k
T v
R
T v
R
T k
R
S v
S v
S k
12
1
1
0
1
0
0
, ,
,
:
^

 

 


~ T
RS
1
1 	
P
10
States u ∈ U are worlds that are possible for us. Two possible worlds u, 
u′ are already different if in u a person A has one preference and in u′ they 
have another preference. U is an n-tuple of propositions. Let u be u = <z, 
Ri>; that is, characteristics of u are summed up in z. If u′ = <z, Ri′ >, then 
R1 ≠ R2 ⇒ u ≠ u′.
The above example can thus be represented in the following way:
	1.	< < p1, p1>2p2 > , < p2, p1>2p1 >  >  ∈ R1
	2.	< < p2, p2>1p1 > , < p1, p2>2p1 >  >  ∈ R1
	3.	< < p1, p1>1p2 > , < p2, p1>1p1 >  >  ∈ R2
	4.	< < p2, p2>2p1 > , < p1, p2>1p1 >  >  ∈ R2
Here we are referring to propositions. However, the actual situation 
could only be described very roughly in this manner, because one can 
assume that u1 ∈ p1, u2 ∈ p2 does not apply to any u1 > 2 u2 ⇒ u1 > 1 u2, 
and so on.
10 See the mathematical proof in Nida-Rümelin et al. (1996).

254 
Appendix
Let us, therefore, imagine that the world was to consist of only two 
possible states: “both on the beach” and “both in the museum.” If the 
conditions for a cardinal representation of preference relations are met, we 
can 
treat 
interpersonal 
preference 
interdependence 
as 
utility 
interdependence.
However, the conditional utility functions corresponding to the condi­
tional preference relations do not refer to elements from U. It is useful to 
think of splitting the elements of the set of possible worlds U into a por­
tion that indicates the utility values and a portion that contains all infor­
mation apart from the preference relations and hence utility values. In the 
following, the usual symbols describing states z1, z2 exclusively indicate 
this second portion. Z is the set of states in this sense. We shall also call Z 
the set of anax states (“states without evaluations”). States in the broader 
sense, that is, including subjective evaluations, we shall continue to call u. 
U is the corresponding set of alternatives.
The set of states Z can thus be understood as a set of ordered pairs. The 
symbol for the respective state of Z stands in the first place of the set and 
in the second place stands an n-tuple, n: = #K, of utility values of this state:
	
U
z
v
z
v
z
v
z
v
z
v
z
v
z
z
n
n
 

 
  
  




 


{
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
1
1
1
2
1
1
1
2
2
2
2
2
 





 

 
 z
v
z
v
z
v
z
k
k
k
n
k
,
,
,
,
}
1
2
	
	
Z
z z
z
Z
k
k





1
2
, ,
,
,#
	
Previously, the domain of the individual evaluation functions was ui, 
that is, the set of possible worlds U. This can stay just the same: There are 
unconditional subjective evaluation functions ui over U and conditional 
subjective evaluation functions vi over Z.
11
11 Cardinal representability presupposes that, in addition to vi over Z, there is also a subjec­
tive evaluation function ui over the lotteries of Z with certain properties, and that the rela­
tionship between vi and ui is determined by Bayesian rule.

255
  Appendix 
In our two-person-two-states-world—the two states are now elements 
of Z, no longer of U—there are 2 × 22 = 8 possible states of u in U:
	
U
z z
z z
z
z z
z z
z
z z
z z
z
 










{
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
1
1
1
2
1
2
2
1
1
1
2
1
2
1
1
1
2
1
2
2
2












,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
z z
z z
z
z z
z z
z
z z
z z
z
1
1
1
2
1
2
2
2
1
1
2
1
2
2
2
1
1
2
1
2
2 








,
,
,
,
,
,
}
z z
z z
z
z z
z z
z
2
1
1
2
1
2
2
2
1
1
2
1
2
2
	
	
U
z z
z
z z
z
z z
z
z z
z
1
1
1
2
2
1
1
2
2
2
1
2
2
2
1
2
2













{
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
} 	
	
U
z z
z
z z
z
z z
z
z z
z
2
1
1
1
2
1
1
1
2
1
1
2
2
1
1
2
2













{
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
} 	
The conditional preference relations vi of the individuals pertain to the 
interpersonally same set Z. Their unconditional preference relations ui, 
however, are defined on a set of possible worlds Ui, which differ slightly 
from U: one’s own preferences are not included in u ∈ Ui.
The decision-theoretical conceptual system introduced thus far must 
therefore, for the time being, be extended as follows:
	1.	The set of anax states Z.
	2.	Each personi has a (conditional) evaluation function vi with 
the domain Z.
Let Ni be the set of possible individual evaluation functions vi from Z in ℝ.
	3.	The non-conditional evaluation function ui has as domain 
Ui = Z × Ni, where
	
N
N
N
N
N
i
i
i
K







1
2
1
1
# .	
	4.	u
p
p
e
r
 
U
 
e
q
u
als upper Z times product Underscript i equals 1 Overscript number sign upper K Endscripts upper N Subscript i
.
In the two-person case the following results: Ul = Z × N2; U2 = Z × N1; 
u1: u ∈ U1, u → x ∈ ℝ; u2: u ∈ U2, u → x ∈ ℝ; vl: z ∈ Z, z → x ∈ ℝ; v2: 
z ∈ Z, z → x ∈ ℝ.

256 
Appendix
­
12
13
For each individual, a cardinal utility function vi results from their pref­
erence relation Ri over Z, the set of states, (and from their coherent pref­
erences over the set of lotteries of Z). Ethical Bayesianism determines the 
individual morally required preferences on the basis of this subjective car­
dinal evaluation function (which are here fully comparable on an interper­
sonal level) through the following normative recommendation of 
interdependence (*):
	



  







z z
R
v
z
v
z
i
k
K
k
k
K
k
1
2
1
1
1
2
,
#
#
	
D
­
14
The individual subjective consequences of evaluation that result from 
this type of preference interdependence have an interpersonally identical 
12 Cf. D&E, 94ff and 281–286.
13 Cf. Harsanyi, John C. 1955. Cardinal Welfare, Individualistic Ethics, and Interpersonal 
Comparison. Journal of Political Economy 63: 309–321. Stegmüller suggested that the term 
“ethical Bayesianism” be used for this form of utilitarianism; cf. Stegmüller, Wolfgang. 1977. 
On the Interrelations between Ethics and other Fields of Philosophy and Science. Erkenntnis 
11: 55–80.
14 Akrasia here is meant here in contrast to sophrosyne rather than enkrateia. The former is 
present if someone is convinced that better reasons speak for action a than for action a′, 
however, he still deliberately and consciously (and not by mistake or lack of information) 
decides for a′. Cf. Aristotle. Nicomachean Ethics, Book 7.

257
  Appendix 
threshold value. This threshold value, however, depends exclusively on the 
initial assessments, which makes them inadequate as a required moral 
evaluation.
The individual morally required evaluation function is determined by 
everyone’s (including one’s own) evaluation functions. In this respect, the 
individual evaluation function has a twofold role: firstly, as a component of 
the (subjectivist) extra-moral empirical basis for determining what is mor­
ally required, and, secondly, as the object of moral evaluation.
­
­
15
We can also represent the relation z brings i more pleasure than z′ as one 
that is cardinalizable up to a completely comparable, standardized numeri­
cal evaluation function wi, such that the morally required preferences can 
be summarized in the evaluation function m  
l
e
f
t
 
p
a r e
n t
h
e
s
i
s
 z right parenthesis equals StartFraction 1 Over number sign upper K EndFraction sigma summation Underscript i equals 1 Overscript number sign upper K Endscripts w Subscript i Baseline left parenthesis z right parenthesis
, which is 
the same for everybody.
­
­
16
­
The consequence of this is that ethical Bayesianism can no longer offer 
recommendations for action, or determine ethical preferences, when there 
is complete information of everybody and a complete lack of akrasia prob­
lems. In other words: It can no longer offer recommendations in the ideal 
case of complete information and no akrasia. Yet it is precisely this ideal 
15 One could object that utilitarian theories are about actions or in the rule-utilitarian ver­
sion about rules of action, not state preferences. Harsanyi’s version of utilitarianism seeks the 
connection to rational decision theory and therefore assigns the determination of the evalu­
ation function (ethical utility function) to ethical theory, while the criterion of rational 
behavior may determine the morally required action by means of a maximization of the 
expected value.
16 For a theory on ideal utilitarianism, see Moore, George E. 1903. Principia Ethica. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, especially chapter 6.

258 
Appendix
case, which should make it possible to determine the content of a norma­
tive theory, since it is free of all “pragmatic” restrictions due to a lack of 
knowledge and character weakness. Thus, the preference interdependence 
of ethical Bayesianism leads to aporia. This result can be generalized as 
follows: Preferences based on or influenced by normative judgments can­
not be the basis of a normative principle of interest aggregation without 
them resulting in an evaluation circle.
T
S
g E a
17
Let us assume that the reasonable smoker considers quitting smoking 
because of the expected positive effects on health. Now, the rationality of 
the decision to quit or continue smoking depends on whether the person 
will actually be able to quit smoking long term or whether they will relapse 
into smoking. The following graph shows the possible empirical relations 
between smoking and health over time:
(c)
(c’)
(b)
Health
Time
(a)
(b’)
x
x’
y’
y
(a): Development of health with ongoing smoking
x: Beginning of the smoke-free state, (b): Development of health, if this is 
maintained
17 The decision-making situation of a smoker was cited in Chap. 5 to illustrate the phe­
nomenology of structural rationality, especially the role of self-control.

259
  Appendix 
x′: Beginning of the smoke-free state, (b′): Development of health, if this 
is maintained
y: Starting to smoke again, (c): Development of health, if this is maintained
y′: Starting to smoke again, (c′): Development of health, if this is maintained
Lines (a), (b, b′), and (c, c′) each describe the expected health of the 
reasonable smoker as a function of the time when a decision is made at 
time x: In case (a), the smoker decides that he does not want to forego the 
pleasure of smoking in the future and therefore continue to smoke consis­
tently. His health thus deteriorates continuously over the course of time. 
In cases (b) and (b′), however, the smoker decides to quit smoking with 
immediate effect. This leads to a short-term deterioration of his health. 
The decisive factor now is whether or not the smoker can maintain his 
decision to quit. If the smoker manages to quit smoking long term, his 
health will improve significantly (as shown in (b, b′)). However, if he has a 
relapse at time y or y′ and starts smoking again, his health will change 
according to c and c′.
If one examines the decision to quit smoking pointwise, for example on 
a day-to-day basis, then the decision to quit smoking leads to a deteriora­
tion of one’s health and is therefore irrational. Only from a structural, 
diachronic perspective does this decision—as part of the structural deci­
sion to quit smoking—become rational (as shown in (a) and (a′)). If, 
however, the decision to quit smoking remains short-term (i.e., it is not 
repeated frequently enough without interruption; cf. (c′)), then the indi­
vidual decisions are not embedded in a structurally rational agency and are 
therefore irrational. Even with a longer interruption as in (c), the positive 
effect on the health is equalized in the long term: (c) approaches (a) 
asymptotically (from above).
Whether it actually works this way or not, is not essential here. In any 
case, this is a plausible possibility and it illustrates the irrationality of 
pointwise optimization: Continued smoking is rational under these con­
ditions, the decision to quit smoking only becomes rational upon struc­
tural consideration. The structurally rational decision to quit smoking, 
however, is realized by a combination of numerous individual decisions 
(not to resume smoking in this moment, and the next …). The structur­
ally rational decision is not realized by a causally effective self-binding, 
but by willpower.

260 
Appendix
H E
ua
a
18
Ernst Fehr and Klaus Schmidt suggest considering the empirically ascer­
tainable preference for more even distributions in the form of a modifica­
tion of the individual utility functions. This would then have the 
following form:
	
U
x
x
x
x
x
x
i
j
i
i
i
j
i
i
j
i
  











,
,
0
0 ,
	
19
­
The utility function is assumed to be identical with the monetary pay­
offs (xi, xj), if there is no inequality aversion, which conceals the assump­
tion of decreasing marginal utility, which is common in economics and 
confirmed by numerous empirical findings. The aversion to inequality is 
interpreted as an egoistically motivated avoidance of suffering, the norma­
tive judgment that inequality should be avoided is thus transformed into a 
strategy to avoid suffering. In the first correction term, all differences are 
counted that exist between the monetary payoffs of another person and 
the agent. However, in this term, only the higher payoffs are counted 
regarding their difference to the payoff to the agent. In the second correc­
tion term, only the lower payoffs are counted.
Individuals who, in practice, want to contribute to minimizing inequal­
ities in general, not just inequalities with respect to their own income, 
cannot be represented in this model. The same applies to non-linear egali­
tarianism, according to which inequalities are not weighted proportionally 
to the arithmetic difference, but rather to the square of this difference for 
instance. This model also fails to be able to represent the Rawlsian 
18 In Sect. 5.8, I discussed the treatment of fairness in behavioral economics; this appendix 
adds some formal details.
19 Cf. Fehr and Schmidt (2011).

261
  Appendix 
difference principle, which was mentioned in the section on fairness 
(Sect. 5.7).
The fact that Fehr and Schmidt’s theory allows a variety of empirical 
findings to be systematized should not tempt us to consider this theory to 
be empirically confirmed. The theory introduces two weighting factors α 
and β that have yet to be determined, which, considering the manageable 
precision of the empirical economic findings, allow the theory to be 
adapted to the data. The empirical content is limited to the thesis that 
people who benefit from inequality have a lower inequality aversion than 
those who are put at a disadvantage due to inequality. This thesis is exam­
ined by comparing the variables α and β: This thesis holds true only if β is 
smaller than α in the modeling of the empirical data. I want to point out 
that my criticism is not directed against an attempt at mathematical sys­
tematization, but against a normatively inadequate and psychologically 
naive interpretation of concrete individual behavioral patterns. I have 
selected this theory, not because it is particularly absurd, but because it 
connects the positive quality of mathematical elegance and simplicity with 
the negative quality of a drastic misinterpretation of human motives for 
action quite characteristically.

263
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature 
Switzerland AG 2023
J. Nida-Rümelin, A Theory of Practical Reason, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-17319-6
AngE 2005. Handbuch Angewandte Ethik: Die Bereichsethiken und ihre philoso­
phische Begründung [Handbook of Applied Ethics]. Stuttgart: Kröner.
D&E 2005. Decision Theory and Ethics. Munich: Utz.
EcR 1997. Economic Rationality and Practical Reason. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
EpistR 2010. Reasons Against Naturalizing Epistemic Reasons. In Causality, 
Meaningful Complexity and Embodied Cognition, ed. A. Carsetti, 203–210. 
New York: Springer.
HandBook 2021. Structural Rationality. In Handbook of Rationality, ed. Markus 
Knauff and Wolfgang Spohn, 625–632. Cambridge/Mass: MIT Press.
HumB 2013. Philosophie einer humanen Bildung [Philosophy of a Humane Educa­
tion]. Hamburg: Körber.
HumR 2016. Humanistische Reflexionen [Humanistic Reflections]. Ber­
lin: Suhrkamp.
KdK 1995. Kritik des Konsequentialismus. [Critique of Consequentialism]. 
Munich: Oldenburg.
LkE 2015. Logik kollektiver Entscheidungen [Logic of Collective Decisions] (together 
with Lucian Kern). Berlin: De Gruyter.
Metapref 1991. Practical Reason or Metapreferences. An Undogmatic Defense of 
Kantian Morality. Theory and Decision: 133–162.
OPT 2011. Die Optimierungsfalle: Philosophie einer humanen Ökonomie. 
Munich: Irisiana.
P&L 2009. Philosophie und Lebensform [Philosophy and Lifeform]. Ber­
lin: Suhrkamp.
List of Sigla: Publications by the Author

264 
List of Sigla: Publications by the Author
RatC 1994. Rational Choice – Extensions and Revisions. Ratio 7: 122–144.
REAL 2018. Unaufgeregter Realismus. Eine philosophische Streitschrift. Pader­
born: Mentis.
StructR 2019. Structural Rationality and Other Essays on Practical Reason. Ber­
lin/New York: Springer.

265
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature 
Switzerland AG 2023
J. Nida-Rümelin, A Theory of Practical Reason, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-17319-6
Al-Ubaydli, Omar, Garett Jones and Jaap Weel. 2016. Average Player Traits as 
Predictors of Cooperation in a Repeated Prisoner’s Dilemma. Journal of 
Behavioral and Experimental Economics 64: 5–60.
Anscombe, Elizabeth. 1957. Intention. Oxford: Blackwell.
Arendt, Hannah. 1958. The Human Condition. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press.
Ariely, Dan. 2010. Predictably Irrational: The Hidden Forces That Shape Our 
Decisions. New York: Harper.
Arrow, Kenneth. 1963. Social Choice and Individual Value. New Haven: Yale 
University Press.
Austin, J.L. 1975. How to Do Things with Words. Cambridge/Mass.: Harvard 
University Press.
Bethwaite, Judy and Paul Tompkinson. 1996. The Ultimatum Game and Non-
Selfish Utility Functions. Journal of Economic Psychology 17: 259–271.
Braithwaite, Richard B. 2009. Theory of Games as a Tool for the Moral Philosopher. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Brandom, Robert. 1994. Making it Explicit. Cambridge/Mass.: Harvard 
University Press.
Camerer, Colin, George Loewenstein and Matthew Rabin (ed.). 2011. Advances 
in Behavioral Economics. Princeton: University Press 2011.
Chisholm, Roderick. 1982. The First Person. An Essay on Reference and 
Intentionality. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Dancy, Jonathan. 2004. Ethics without Principles. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Bibliography

266 
Bibliography
Davidson, Donald. 1963. Actions, Reasons, and Causes. Journal of Philosophy 
60: 685–700.
Davidson, Donald. 1982. Rational Animals. Dialectica 36: 317–327.
Davidson, Donald. 2001. Essays on Actions and Events. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Douglas, Mary. 1986. How Institutions Think. Syracuse: Syracuse University Press.
Dreber, Anna, David Rand, Drew Fudenberg and Martin Nowak. 2008. Winners 
Don’t Punish. Nature 425: 348–351.
Evans, Jonathan. 1989. Bias in Human Reasoning: Causes and Consequences. New 
Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Fehr, Ernst and Urs Fischbacher. 2003. The Nature of Human Altruism. Nature 
425: 785–791.
Fehr, Ernst and Klaus Schmidt. 2011. A Theory of Fairness, Competition and 
Cooperation. In Advances in Behavioral Economics, ed. Colin Camerer, George 
Loewenstein 
and 
Matthew 
Rabin, 
271–296. 
Princeton: 
Princeton 
University Press.
Feinberg, Joel. 1970. Action and Responsibility. In Doing and Deserving. Essays in 
the Theory of Responsibility. Princeton: University Press.
Foot, Philippa. 1972. Morality as a System of Hypothetical Imperatives. The 
Philosophical Review 81: 305–316.
Foot, Philippa. 1978. The Problem of Abortion and the Doctrine of the Double 
Effect. In Virtues and Vices and Other Essays, 19–33. Berkeley: University of 
California Press.
Foot, Philippa. 2001. Natural Goodness. New York: Oxford University Press.
Frankfurt, Harry. 1971. Freedom of the Will and the Concept of a Person. Journal 
of Philosophy 68: 5–20.
Gauthier, David. 1986. Morals by Agreement. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Gigerenzer, Gerd. 2010. Moral Satisficing: Rethinking Moral Behavior as Bounded 
Rationality. Topics in Cognitive Science 2: 528–554.
Gigerenzer, Gert and Reinhard Selten (ed.). 2002. Bounded Rationality: The 
Adaptive Toolbox. Cambridge/Mass.: MIT Press.
Gilligan, Carol. 1993. In a Different Voice. Harvard: Harvard University Press.
Gintis, Herbert et al. (ed.). 2005. Moral Sentiments and Material Interests: The 
Foundations of Cooperation in Economic Life. Cambridge/Mass.: MIT Press.
Gödel, Kurt. 1992. On Formally Undecidable Propositions of Principia Mathematica 
and Related Systems, Mineola: Dover Publications.
Grice, Paul. 1989. Studies in the Way of Words. Cambridge/Mass.: Harvard 
University Press.
Güth, Werner et al. 1982. An Experimental Analysis of Ultimatum Bargaining. 
Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 3: 367–388.
Güth, Werner and Reinhard Tietz. 1990. Ultimatum Bargaining Behavior. A 
Survey and Comparison of Experimental Results. Journal of Economic Psychology 
11: 417–449.

267
  Bibliography 
Güth, Werner et  al. 1997. On the Reliability of Reciprocal Fairness  – An 
Experimental Study. Berlin: Humboldt University.
Güth, Werner, Nadège Marchand and Jean-Louis Rullière. 1998. Equilibration et 
dépendance du contexte. Une évaluation expérimentale du jeu de négociation 
sous ultimatum. Revue économique 49: 785–794.
Gutwald, Rebecca and Niina Zuber. 2018. The Meaning(s) of Structural 
Rationality. ProtoSociology 35: 314–321.
Habermas, Jürgen. 1984–1987. The Theory of Communicative Action. Translated 
by Thomas McCarthy. Boston: Beacon.
Hamann, Johann G. 2007. Writings on Philosophy and Language. Edited and 
translated by Kenneth Haynes. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hare, Richard. 1981. Moral Thinking: Its Levels, Method, and Point. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.
Harsanyi, John C. 1955. Cardinal Welfare, Individualistic Ethics, and Interpersonal 
Comparison. Journal of Political Economy 63: 309–321.
Harsanyi, John C. 1977a. Morality and the Theory of Rational Behavior. Social 
Research: 623– 656.
Harsanyi, John C. 1977b. Rational Behavior and Bargaining Equilibrium in 
Games and Social Situations. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Harsanyi, John C. 1980. Rule Utilitarianism, Rights, Obligations and the Theory 
of Behavior. Theory and Decision 12: 115–133.
Hart, H.L.A. 1948. The Ascription of Responsibility and Rights. Proceedings of the 
Aristotelian Society 49: 171–194.
Hartmann, Stephan and Luc Bovens. 2014. Bayesian Epistemology. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.
Held, Virginia. 1993. Feminist Morality: Transforming Culture, Society, and 
Politics. Chicago: Chicago University Press.
Henrich, Joseph and Natalie Henrich. 2007. Why Humans Cooperate: A Cultural 
and Evolutionary Explanation. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Henz, Sonja, Julian Nida-Rümelin et al. 2015. Stimulus-dependent deliberation 
process leading to a specific motor action demonstrated via a multi-channel 
EEG analysis. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience 9: 1–14.
Humberstone, I. Lloyd. 1992. Direction of Fit. Mind 101: 59–83.
Jackson, Frank. 1986. What Mary Didn’t Know. The Journal of Philosophy 
83: 291–295.
Jackson, Frank. 2003. Mind and Illusion. Royal Institute of Philosophy Supplements 
53: 251–271.
Jeffrey, Richard. 1990. The Logic of Decision. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Jonas, Hans. 1984. The Imperative of Responsibility. In Search for an Ethics of the 
Technological Age. Chicago: Chicago University Press.
Jordan, James. 1969. Determinism’s Dilemma. The Review of Metaphysics 
23: 48–66.

268 
Bibliography
Kahneman, Daniel et al. 1986a. Fairness and Assumption of Economics. Journal 
of Business 59: 285–300.
Kahneman, Daniel et  al. 1986b. Fairness as a Constraint on Profit Seeking: 
Entitlements in the Market. The American Economic Review: 728–741.
Kahneman, Daniel. 2011. Thinking, Fast and Slow. New  York: Farrar, Strauss 
and Giroux.
Kohlberg, Lawrence. 1984. Psychology of Moral Development: The Nature and 
Validity of Moral Stages: Essays on Moral Development Series. New York: Joanna 
Cotler Books.
Kripke, Saul. 1982. Wittgenstein on Rules and Private Language. Cambridge/
Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Larmore, Charles. 2012. Frankfurt Lectures. Research Centre Normative Orders. 
Berlin: Suhrkamp.
Lewis, David. 1969. Convention: A Philosophical Study. Cambridge/Mass.: 
Harvard University Press.
Libet, Benjamin. 1999. Do we have free will? Journal of Consciousness 
Studies 6: 47–57.
Libet, Benjamin. 2005. Mind Time. The Temporal Factor in Consciousness. 
Cambridge/Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Luce, R. Duncan and Howard Raiffa. 1989. Games and Decisions. Introduction 
and Critical Survey. New York: Dover Publications.
Luhmann, Niklas. 2012. Theory of Society, Volume 1. Translated by Rhodes Barrett. 
Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Mackie, John. 1990. Ethics. Inventing Right and Wrong. London: Penguin Books.
Marshak, Jacob. 1950. Rational Behaviour, Uncertain Prospects, and Measurable 
Utility. Econometrica 18: 111–141.
Mazar, Nina and Dan Ariely. 2006. Dishonesty in Everyday Life and its Policy 
Implications. Journal of Public Policy and Marketing 25: 117–126.
Mazar, Nina and Dan Ariely. 2008. The Dishonesty of Honest People: A Theory 
of Self-Concept Maintenance. Journal of Marketing Research 45: 633–644.
MacIntyre, Alasdair. 2013. After Virtue: A Study in Moral Theory. London: 
A&C Black.
Mercier, Hugo and Dan Sperber. 2017. The Enigma of Reason: A New Theory of 
Human Understanding. Cambridge/Mass: Harvard University Press.
Mill, John S. 1863. Utilitarianism. London: Parker, Son and Bourn.
Mill, John S. 1864. On Liberty. London: Parker, Son and Bourn.
Moore, George E. 1903. Principia Ethica. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Mühlhölzer, Felix. 2019. Language-games and Forms of Life in Mathematics. In 
Language, Form(s) of Life, and Logic, ed. Christian Martin, 193–218. Berlin: 
De Gruyter.
Nagel, Thomas. 1970. The Possibility of Altruism. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

269
  Bibliography 
Nagel, Thomas. 1974. What Is it Like to Be a Bat? The Philosophical Review 
83: 435–450.
Nagel, Thomas. 2013. Moral Luck. In The Philosophy of Free Will, ed. Paul Russell 
and Oisin Deery, 31–42. New York: Oxford University Press.
Neiman, Susan. 2009. Moral Clarity: A Guide for Grown-Up Idealists. Princeton: 
Princeton University Press.
Nida-Rümelin, Julian. 1991. Practical reason or meta-preferences? An undogmatic 
defense of Kantian morality. Theory and Decision 30: 133–162.
Nida-Rümelin, Julian. 1993. Practical Reason, Collective Rationality and 
Contractarianism. In Rationality, Justice and the Social Contract, ed. David 
Gauthier and Robert Sugden, 53–74. New York et al.: Harvester.
Nida-Rümelin, Julian. 1997. Structural Rationality, Democratic Citizenship and 
the New Europe. In Citizenship, Democracy and Justice in the New Europe, ed. 
Percy Lehning and Albert Weale, 33–48. London and New York: Routledge.
Nida-Rümelin, Julian. 2012. Moral Dilemmas and Practical Reason. Ethics, Society, 
Politics. Proceedings of the 35th International Wittgenstein Symposium, ed. Hajo 
Greif and Martin Weiss. Berlin: De Gruyter.
Nida-Rümelin, Julian. 2018. Responsibility in Philosophy and Law. Keynote on 
the Symposium Rights, Responsibility and Justice. 24th World Congress of 
Philosophy in Beijing August 2018 (published in the Proceedings).
Nida-Rümelin, Julian. 2019. The Reasons Account of Free Will: A Compatibilist-
Libertarian Hybrid. Archives for the Philosophy of Law and Social Philosophy 
105: 3–10.
Nida-Rümelin, Julian, Thomas Schmidt and Axel Munk. 1996. Interpersonal 
dependency of preferences. Theory and Decision 41: 257–280.
Nussbaum, Martha. 1983. The Fragility of Goodness: Luck and Ethics in Greek 
Tragedy and Philosophy. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Nussbaum, Martha. 1988. Non-Relative Virtues: An Aristotelian Approach. 
Midwest Studies in Philosophy 13: 32–53.
Nussbaum, Martha. 2006. Frontiers of Justice: Disability, Nationality, Species 
Membership. Cambridge/Mass.: Harvard University Press
Ostrom, Elinor. 1998. A Behavioral Approach to the Rational Choice Theory of 
Collective Action: Presidential Address, American Political Science Association 
1997. American Political Science Review 92: 1–22.
Ostrom, Elinor. 1990. Governing the Commons: The Evolution of Institutions for 
Collective Action. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Penrose, Roger. 1989. The Emperor’s New Mind: Concerning Computers, Minds, 
and the Laws of Physics. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Penrose, Roger. 1994. Shadows of the Mind: A Search for the Missing Science of 
Consciousness. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Perea, Andrés. 2012. Epistemic Game Theory. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press

270 
Bibliography
Pitcher, George. 1960. Hart on Action and Responsibility. Philosophical Review 
69: 226–235.
Popper, Karl. 1972. Objective Knowledge. An Evolutionary Approach. Oxford: 
Clarendon Press.
Putnam, Hilary. 1981. Reason, Truth and History. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Ramsey, Frank P. 1931a. Theories. The Foundations of Mathematics: 212–236.
Rapoport, Anatol and Albert M.  Chammah. 1965. Prisoner’s Dilemma. Ann 
Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Ramsey, Frank P. 1931b. Theories. In The Foundations of Mathematics, 212–236. 
London: Routledge.
Rawls, John. 1971. A Theory of Justice. Cambridge/Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Rescher, Nicholas. 1975. Unselfishness: The Role of the Vicarious Affects in Moral 
Philosophy and Social Theory. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press.
Ross, William D. 1930. The Right and the Good. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Sally, David. 1995. Conversation and Cooperation in Social Dilemmas. Rationality 
and Society 7: 58–92.
Sandel, Michael. 2012. What Money Can’t Buy: The Moral Limits of Markets. 
New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux.
Scanlon, Thomas. 1982. Contractualism and Utilitarianism. In Utilitarianism 
and Beyond, ed. Amartya Sen and Bernard Williams, 103–128. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Scanlon, Thomas. 1998. What We Owe to Each Other. Cambridge/Mass.: 
Belknap Press.
Scanlon, Thomas. 2005. Political Equality. Philosophy Meets Politics 8, ed. Julian 
Nida-Rümelin and Wolfgang Thierse. Essen: Klartext.
Scanlon, Thomas. 2007. Structural Irrationality. In Common Minds: Essays in 
Honor of Philip Pettit, ed. Geoffrey Brennan, Robert Goodin, Frank Jackson 
and Michael Smith, 84–103. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Scanlon, Thomas. 2014. Being Realistic About Reasons. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Schweitzer, Maurice and Christopher Hsee. 2002. Stretching the Truth: Elastic 
Justification and Motivated Communication of Uncertain Information. Journal 
of Risk and Uncertainty 25: 185–201.
Searle, John. 1985. Expression and Meaning: Studies in the Theory of Speech Acts. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Sen, Amartya. 1970a. Collective Choice and Social Welfare. London: Penguin Books.
Sen, Amartya. 1970b. The Impossibility of a Paretian liberal. Journal of Political 
Economy 78: 152–157.
Sen, Amartya. 1974. Choice, Ordering and Morality. In Practical Reason, ed. 
Stephan Körner. Oxford: Blackwell.

271
  Bibliography 
Sen, Amartya. 1977. Rational Fool: A Critique of Behavioral Foundations of 
Economic Theory. Philosophy and Public Affairs 6: 317–344.
Sennett, Richard. 2012. Together: The Rituals, Pleasures and Politics of 
Co-Operation. London: Penguin Books.
Sidgwick, Henry. 1874. The Methods of Ethics. London: Macmillan.
Simon, Herbert A. 1955. A Behavioral Model of Rational Choice. Quarterly 
Journal of Economics 69: 99–118.
Simon, Herbert A. 1972. Theories of Bounded Rationality. Decision and 
Organization 1: 161–176
Singer, Peter. 2011. Practical Ethics. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Slote, Michael. 2010. Moral Sentimentalism. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Smith, Michael. 1994. The Moral Problem. Oxford: Blackwell.
Smith, Michael (ed.). 2004. Ethics and the A Priori: Selected Essays on Moral 
Psychology and Meta-Ethics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Smith, Vernon and Arlington Williams. 1990. The Boundaries of Competitive 
Price Theory: Convergence, Expectations, and Transaction Costs. Advances in 
Behavioral Economics 2: 31–53.
Smullyan, Raymond M. 1992. Gödel’s Incompleteness Theorems. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Snow, Nancy E. 2018. Neo-Aristotelian Virtue Ethics. In The Oxford Handbook of 
Virtue, 321–342. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Stegmüller, Wolfgang. 1977. On the Interrelations between Ethics and other 
Fields of Philosophy and Science. Erkenntnis 11: 55–80.
Strawson, Peter. 2008. Freedom and Resentment and Other Essays. London: 
Routledge.
Taylor, Charles. 1991. The Malaise of Modernity. Toronto: House of Anansi.
Tversky, Amos. 2004. Preference, Belief, and Similarity: Selected Writings. 
Cambridge/Mass.: MIT Press.
Tomasello, Michael. 2009a. The Cultural Origins of Human Cognition. 
Cambridge/Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Tomasello, Michael. 2009b. Why We Cooperate. Cambridge/Mass.: MIT Press.
Tuomela, Raimo. 2013. Social Ontology: Collective Intentionality and Group 
Agents. New York: Oxford University Press.
Voegelin, Eric. 1956–1987. Order and History: Vol. I-V. Baton Rouge: Louisiana 
State University Press.
von Arnim, Hands (ed.). 1903. Stoicorum veterum fragmenta. Leipzig: Teubner.
von Neumann, John and Oskar Morgenstern. 1944. Theory of Games and Economic 
Behavior. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Wallace, R. Jay. 1994. Responsibility and the Moral Sentiments. Cambridge/Mass.: 
Harvard University Press.
Walzer, Michael. 1983. Spheres of Justice: A Defense of Pluralism and Equality. 
New York: Basic Books.

272 
Bibliography
Walzer, Michael. 1987. Interpretation and Social Criticism. Cambridge/Mass.: 
Harvard University Press.
Weber, Max. 2012. Collected Methodological Writings. London and New  York: 
Routledge.
White, Morton. 1983. What Is and What Ought to be Done. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
White, Morton. 2009. A Philosophy of Culture: The Scope of Holistic Pragmatism. 
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Williams, Bernard. 1973. Utilitarianism: For and Against. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Williams, Bernard. 1981. Moral Luck. In Moral Luck Philosophical Papers 
1973-1980, 20–39. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Williams, Bernhard. 1985. Ethics and the Limits of Philosophy. Cambridge/Mass.: 
Harvard University Press.
Winch, Peter. 1958. The Idea of a Social Science and its Relation to Philosophy. 
London: Routledge 1958.
Winch, Peter. 1987. Trying to Make Sense. Oxford: Blackwell.

273
1
1 Note: Page numbers followed by ‘n’ refer to notes.
A
Achilles, 169, 214, 220, 221
Action
collective action, 5, 30, 41–43, 82, 206
consequences of action, 41, 54, 87, 
111, 167, 248
motivation for action, 25, 106
single action, 37, 41, 42, 45, 54, 
55, 59–61, 63–65, 75, 
79, 85, 113
structural action, 59, 61–64, 67, 
75, 76, 82
Adiaphora, 220, 233
Agamemnon, 169
Agglomeration, principle of, 167, 172
Akrasia, 256, 256n14, 257
Altruism, 26–29, 104, 105, 250
Anonymity, 105, 144
Anscombe, Elizabeth, 57
Antigone, 168
Anti-theory, 111, 158
Aporia, 51, 168, 258
Appropriateness, 69, 105–109, 157, 215
Apriorism, 12
A priori, synthetic, 11, 19
Arendt, Hannah, 65n17
Ariely, Dan, 95, 101, 116n22
Aristotelianism, 140, 168n22, 171
Aristotle, 39, 45, 65, 90, 93, 96, 131, 
203, 210, 210n23, 215
Assurance Game, 27
Atomism, 36, 43
Attitude
emotive attitude, 2–4, 8, 10, 58, 
173, 181, 188, 189, 196, 206, 
207, 212–216, 221, 225, 240
epistemic attitude, 17, 42, 86, 
129, 131
normative attitude, 102, 111, 
232, 235
prohairetic attitude, 2, 42, 64, 65, 91
propositional attitude, 4, 12, 17, 18, 
40, 42, 48, 63n16, 64, 170, 
171, 176
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature 
Switzerland AG 2023
J. Nida-Rümelin, A Theory of Practical Reason, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-17319-6

274 
INDEX
Austin, John Langshaw, 212n24
Authorship, 30, 40, 61, 62, 67, 131, 
139, 145, 158, 169, 194, 196, 
229, 232–239, 236n4
Autonomy, 19, 30, 39, 147, 197, 
201–204, 221, 222, 239
B
Battle of the sexes, 38–40, 51, 250
Bayesianism
Bayesian decision theory, 175
ethical Bayesianism, 142, 
256–258, 256n13
Behavioral economics, 4, 35, 87, 100, 
102, 111, 113–117, 113n16, 
119, 121, 260n18
Behavior control, 53–55, 57, 78
Belief
descriptive belief, 193, 198, 201, 
209, 211, 212, 218
empirical belief, 67
normative belief, 8, 68, 69, 83, 119, 
164, 204, 206–212, 228, 242
Belief-desire model, 88, 89
Bentham, Jeremy, 141, 147
Bethwaite, Judy, 118n27
Bovens, Luc, 236n4
Boyd, Robert, 185n10
Brandom, Robert, 134, 201n20
Buddha, 215
Buddhism, 146, 158, 159
Butler, Joseph, 119, 160
C
Carsetti, Arturo, 261
Casuistry, 158, 159
Categories of moral judgment, 162
Causality, principle of, 219, 223, 228
Chammah, Albert M., 24n13
Chance, 46, 67–71
Chisholm, Roderick, 239n9
Closed society, 130, 195n12
Cognitivism, 213
Coherence
conditions, 16–18, 49, 88, 171
coherence theory of practical 
rationality, 5, 245, 247, 248
diachronic coherence, 5, 108
interpersonal coherence, 204–206
intertemporal coherence, 204–206
practical coherence, 11–14, 
171, 172
Common good, 152
Communication, 53, 54, 67, 81–83, 
127–131, 133–135, 152, 153, 
181, 188, 198, 200, 218, 
236–238, 243
Communication practice, lifeworld, 8
Communitarianism, 43, 46, 81, 109, 
111, 159, 160, 222
Communities, 33, 43, 45, 53, 
81, 97, 104, 111, 115, 
131, 133, 160, 163–165, 
168, 193, 196
Completeness, 121, 122, 245, 246
Completeness axiom, 121
Compliance, 54, 82
Comprehensibility, 236n5
Conditio humana, 131, 203
Conflict, existential, 166
Conformity with the rules (rule-­
conformity), 133, 134
Confucius, 215
Conscience, bad, 79
Consensus, higher-order, 205, 206
Consequentialism, viii, 1, 14, 21, 23, 
36, 37, 137–140, 142, 144, 146, 
149, 167, 168, 249
Contextual, 198
Continuity, 8, 9, 122, 246
Contractualism, viii, 14, 161, 
240, 241

275
  INDEX 
Control, intentional, 60, 61, 
65, 76, 77
Convention, 102, 105, 133, 183, 
184, 213
Conventionalism, 186, 188
Cooperation, vii, 4–5, 23–31, 33–43, 
47, 53, 80, 81, 128, 133, 135, 
142, 161, 165, 184, 199, 
206, 214
Cooperation dilemma, 24, 25, 27–29
Coordination
game, 50, 133, 134
interpersonal coordination, 56
intrapersonal coordination, 206
Cynics, 149, 214
D
Dancy, Jonathan, 14, 86, 104, 158n16
Davidson, Donald, 14, 46, 47, 63n16
Decision
big decision, 171
existential decision, 18, 56, 94, 
170–172, 208
small decision, 171
Decisionism, 236n5
Decision theory, vii, 3, 12, 47–52, 69, 
70, 149, 176, 247, 257n15
Deliberation, practical, 6, 154, 191, 
194, 209, 211, 212, 235, 236
Deontic logic, 12, 166, 171, 172, 194
Deontological structure of moral 
practice, 71
Descartes, René, x
Desirability
function, 3, 249
subjective desirability, 3, 47, 249
Desires
first-order desires, 206
second-order desires, 205, 206
Dewey, John, 195n12, 210n23
Dikaiosyne, 96
Dilemmas, moral, 165–173
Discourse Ethics, 200
Discrimination, 118, 148, 177, 243
Distribution, 26, 28–30, 29n16, 
38n20, 38n21, 110, 111, 114, 
117–119, 123–125, 148, 149, 
246–251, 260
Douglas, Mary, 184n7
Duty
to aid, 95, 163, 164
to be virtuous, 79
to oneself, 95–99
Dworkin, Ronald, 119
E
Egalitarianism, 120, 124, 
164, 260
ethical egalitarianism, 147
Egoism, 27, 247
methodological egoism, 23, 25, 26, 
28, 29, 35, 36
Egoist, 20, 28, 149, 199, 200
Ego-strength, 165, 229
Emotion, ixn8, 59, 123, 129, 
145, 146, 174n26, 
213–216, 227
Empathy, 53, 199, 238
Empiricism, 187
Energeia, 65
Entitlement-conception, 134
Entitlement theory, 111
Envy, 120, 123, 125
Epicureanism, 234
Epistemically constituted, 158n16, 
197, 207, 243
Equality, 115–121, 123, 124, 
148, 260–261
Equal opportunities, 148
Equilibrium point, 27, 51, 52, 253

276 
INDEX
Ethics
deontological ethics, 19, 82, 
123, 140
empirical ethics, 8, 188
libertarian ethics, 96
utilitarian ethics, 142, 178, 209
virtue ethics, 45, 159, 210, 210n23, 
211, 215
Ethification of game theory, 51
Ethos of epistemic rationality, 
130, 131
Eudaemonism, 19
Eudaimonia, 96, 231
Exhortationes, 117
Experience, lifeworld, 20, 46, 190, 
205, 237, 238
F
Fact
empirical fact, 10, 22, 83, 165, 166, 
179, 182, 192, 241
institutional fact, 183
logical facts, 193
mathematical fact, 197
moral fact, 83, 104, 158n16, 
204, 240
natural fact, 181–183, 185, 192, 
193, 197, 207, 210n23, 239
normative fact, 2, 84, 162, 166, 
182, 189, 197, 209, 212, 222
physical facts, 104
social fact, 182–187, 189, 190
Fairness, 109–115, 120, 125, 
260n18, 261
Fehr, Ernst, 117, 126n32, 260, 261
Feinberg, Joel, 58n13
Foot, Philippa, 161, 161n18
Fragmentation of values, 126, 127, 
160, 165, 169, 170
Frankfurt, Harry, 14, 90, 91, 166n20
Wanton, 90, 203
Freedom
of choice, 67, 153, 219–222, 224
human freedom, 195, 201, 
218–220, 223–225, 228
practical freedom, 228
primacy of freedom, 150
theoretical freedom, 197, 202, 224, 
227, 228, 237
Fundamentalist, 162, 209
Fundamentum inconcussum, 13, 218
G
Game metaphor, 9
Game theory, vii, viii, 1, 23, 
47–52, 82, 176
Gauthier, David, viii, viiin6, 38n20
Gibbard, Alan, vii
Gibbard-Satterthwaite 
theorem, 52, 53
Gigerenzer, Gerd, 116
Gödel, Kurt, 180, 194, 195n12
Gradualism, 86, 137, 202, 235, 236n4
Grice, Paul, 127, 128, 129n39
Gurven, Michael, 185n10
Güth, Werner, 113n17, 113n18, 
115n20, 118n27
H
Habermas, Jürgen, ixn8, 125, 134n43
Hamann, Johann G., 111n13
Happiness, 19, 140, 202
Hare, Richard Mervyn, 139, 142
Harsanyi, John C., 16, 142, 142n7, 
143, 256, 257n15
Hart, H.L.A., 58
Hartmann, Stephan, 236n4
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm 
Friedrich, 111n13
Henrich, Joseph, 34n17
Henrich, Natalie, 34n17
Henz, Sonja, 75n28
Heroism, ethical, 68, 70

277
  INDEX 
Hinduism, 159
Hobbes, Thomas, 45, 54
leges naturales, 54
prospectus, 78, 79
Holism, 3, 202
Homo oeconomicus, 17, 23, 35, 87, 
113n16, 176, 199
Honesty, 99–102
Hsee, Christopher, 101n9
Humanism, ix, 159
Human rights, 146, 155, 161, 164
Humberstone, I. L., 212n24
Hume, David, 222, 232
Humeanism, 89, 175, 230–232
I
Idealism, 197
Idea, regulative, 203
Identity, personal, 170, 173, 195
Immanentism, 1
Impartiality, 140–143
Imperative, pragmatic, 19, 46, 
202, 231
Incentives, 53, 54, 78, 79, 100, 102, 
106, 119, 126
Incoherence, diachronic, 91
Individualism, atomistic, 23, 48, 49
Individuality, 110, 143–146, 150, 
222, 230, 231
Inequality, 117–120, 124, 260, 261
Inequality aversion, 118, 260, 261
I, noumenal, 219
Institutionalism, 184, 184n7, 186
Institution of promise, 165
Integrity, 97, 98, 147, 151–153, 165
Intention
action-guiding intention, 33, 71, 75
concomitant intention, 58, 61
motivating intention, 55, 56, 
58–62, 79
preceding intention, 56, 58, 59, 61, 
72, 76, 79
structural intention, 54–57, 59, 63
Intentionality
collective intentionality, 41–43
shared intentionality, 81
Interaction situation, 26–28, 33, 38, 
48, 51, 52, 251
Intuition, moral, 160
Invariance condition, 105, 177
Invariance principles, 97, 164
Invariances, 10, 11, 47, 218
Irrationality, 39, 46, 80, 87, 
92, 93, 95, 105, 107, 
114–117, 127, 130, 211, 
221, 230, 259
collective irrationality, 34, 52–54
Islam, 158, 159
J
Jackson, Frank, 178
Jeffrey, Richard, vii
Jones, Garett, 24n13
Jordan, James, 239n10
Judaism, 158, 159
Judgment
empirical judgment, 175, 176, 
233, 242
epistemic judgment, 174–176
evaluative judgement, 145, 160, 
175, 213, 231, 234, 235, 237, 
238, 241, 243
moral judgment, 99, 139–141, 
160, 162, 163, 167, 
172, 257
normative judgment, 8, 22, 83, 89, 
97, 109, 118, 119, 125, 
161–165, 173–176, 174n26, 
186, 187, 190, 205, 209, 211, 
213, 235, 238, 241–243, 
258, 260
practical judgment, 130, 160, 171
prohairetic judgment, 174, 176
theoretical judgment, 130, 234

278 
INDEX
Justice, 15, 28, 29n16, 82, 109–111, 
119, 120, 123–125, 137, 144, 
157, 160, 169, 201n20, 211, 
212, 231, 251
sense of justice, 119, 125, 241
Justification, 10, 12, 13, 29, 60, 82, 
83, 101, 103, 104, 109, 124, 
131, 145, 147, 158, 158n16, 
159, 162, 164, 173–175, 178, 
186, 187, 198, 202, 206, 207, 
209–213, 215, 217, 222, 
233, 241
ethical justification, 212, 241
K
Kahneman, Daniel, 116, 116n22
Kant, Immanuel, 19, 21n11, 40, 46, 
46n2, 63, 96, 98, 99, 121, 138, 
141, 147, 201, 202, 219–223, 
230, 231
Categorical Imperative (moral law), 
17, 19–21, 46, 46n2, 82, 121, 
138, 202, 222, 230, 248
Kantian agent, 17, 18, 40, 122, 
123, 248, 249
Kantian liberalism, 96
Kantian Constructivism, 97, 200
Kantianism, 29, 140, 160, 223, 230
Kaplan, Hillard, 185n10
Knowledge
background knowledge, 198
causal theory of knowledge, 232
knowledge of the good, 67
Kohlberg, Lawrence, 20n6
Kripke, Saul, 132
Kuhn, Thomas, 195n12
L
Language community, 133, 193, 196
Language game, 9, 158, 184
Language of bees, 128
Larmore, Charles, 236n6
Laws of behavior, 62
Legal system, 23, 113, 121
Lewis, David, 133, 134, 134n43
Liability, 224
Liberalism, 96, 146–150, 148n12
Liberal Paradox, 29n16, 148–150
Libertarianism, 96, 147, 150, 163
Libertates, 97, 117
Liberties, 110, 125, 148, 150
Libet, Benjamin, 72–75, 75n28, 77
Lifeform
individual lifeform, 141, 203
shared lifeform, 11, 109, 158
Lifeworld, vii, x, 7–11, 13, 14, 20, 31, 
36, 46, 54–56, 68, 69, 71, 82, 
83, 86, 89, 98, 101, 104, 
138–140, 145, 146, 152, 154, 
157–160, 162, 163, 169, 171, 
172, 174, 175, 177, 178, 181, 
187, 188, 190, 192, 198, 200, 
205, 206, 208, 209, 211, 213, 
215, 230, 236–238
Lingualism, 127
Locke, John, 96, 125, 146, 147
Luce, Robert Duncan, vii, 246n3
Luce, Robert Duncan, vii, 246n3
Luhmann, Niklas, 42, 158n16, 184n7
M
MacIntyre, Alasdair, 168n22
Mackie, John, 243n14
Marchand, Nadège, 118n27
Marshak, Jacob, 15–16
Marxism, 42
Maximin criterion, 70
Mazar, Nina, 101n9
McDowell, John, 201n20
Meaning of life, 19
Metaphysics, 178, 217–218, 236

279
  INDEX 
naturalistic metaphysics, 178, 181, 
182, 190
Metrization theorem, 247
Mill, John Stuart, 147
Minimalism, normative, 96, 97
Model, mathematical, 62, 117
Mohammed, 215
Monism, anomalous, 46, 47, 63n16
Monotonicity, 122, 246
Moore, George Edward, 160
Morgenstern, Oskar, 5, 15
Moses, 215
Motivation
intrinsic motivation, 126, 155
moral motivation, 120, 121, 
141, 149
Mühlhölzer, Felix, 197n13
N
Nagel, Thomas, 68, 88, 178
Nash equilibrium point, 48
Naturalism, 178, 179, 181, 210n23
Neiman, Susan, 214n25
Network, epistemic, 9
Neutrality postulate, 36
New contractarians, 110, 111
Newton, Isaac, 155
Non-algorithmicity, 191–196
Non-offsettability, 121, 122
Normativity, 7, 10, 20, 109, 158, 
168n22, 178–184, 186, 187, 
191, 200, 240
source of normativity, 184
Nozick, Robert, 29n16, 111
Nussbaum, Martha, 201n20
O
Objectivism, 1, 188, 210n23
Objectivity, 10, 178, 187–190, 231
Odysseus, 220, 221
Officia, 97, 117
Ontology, 195n12, 200, 211, 243
Optimism, epistemic, 70
Optimization criteria, 82, 127
Optimization, individual, 30, 34, 37, 
47, 52, 54, 77, 80n31, 92
Orientation knowledge, 198
Ostrom, Elinor, 24n13
P
Pareto-efficient, 28, 38n20, 49, 149
Pareto-inclusivity, 123
Pareto-inefficient, 26, 28, 30, 36, 124
Pareto-optimality, 29n16, 36, 148
Particularism, 86, 104, 158, 217
Passions, 203, 213, 214, 227
Penrose, Roger, 179n4
Perception, 75n28, 167, 187, 196, 
215, 242
Perea, Andrés, 236n4
Person
moral person, 97, 122, 141, 
142, 160
status of a person, 205
Perspective, epistemic, 188, 218
Phenomenology of structural practice, 
85, 87, 87n2
Philosophy
analytical philosophy, 58, 90, 160, 
177, 181, 192, 195n12, 201
experimental philosophy, 8
Phronesis, 14, 203
Physics
Newtonian physics, 239
quantum physics, 61, 239
Pitcher, George, 58n13
Plato, 14, 20, 66, 96, 155, 201n20, 
211, 215
Platonism, 171
Plurality, 36, 76, 110, 148, 153–157, 
169, 171, 188

280 
INDEX
Poiesis, 65
Politeness, 102–105
Popper, Karl, 180, 195n12
Postmodernism, 127
postmodern ideology, 75
Post-structuralism, 127
Practice
deliberative practice, 9, 10, 
175, 238
inferential practice, 194
social practices, ix, 81, 113, 120, 
184–188, 190, 198
structural practice, 61, 65–67, 
85–87, 98
Pragma, 55, 56, 65, 67, 70, 
71, 74, 78
Pragmatist, 14, 195n12, 242
Predicate logic, 194
Preference
circular determination of 
preference, 252
fulfillment of preferences, 5, 33, 92, 
110, 126, 142, 149
interdependence, 143n8, 251–258
revealed preference, 67, 88, 121, 
123, 126, 170, 247
structures, 149, 253
Principia, 97, 117
Principle, ethical, 105, 113, 241
Principles of equal treatment, 164
Prisoner’s dilemma, viiin6, 4, 23–26, 
24n13, 31–34, 36, 37, 37n19, 
39, 40, 80, 81, 249n4
One-Shot Prisoner’s Dilemma, 80
Probability
distribution, 246–249
function, 3, 4, 17, 67, 170
subjective probability, 3–4, 17, 47, 
48, 50, 56, 65, 67, 102, 107, 
123, 170, 175, 235, 236
Prohairesis, 39, 45–47
Propositions, 12, 52, 133, 179, 
196–198, 218, 219, 253
Psychology, 2, 8, 9, 69, 80, 89, 
113n16, 115, 154, 199, 237n7
Puritanical ethos, 214
Putnam, Hilary, 184
Q
Qualia, 178, 179
Quietism, 157–160, 158n16, 175
Quine, Willard Van Orman, 242
R
Raiffa, Howard, 246n3
Ramsey, Frank P., vii, 5, 
245–249, 246n3
coherence, 5–6
compatibility, 5, 245–249
Rapoport, Anatol, 24, 25
Rational beings, 3, 93, 96, 147, 202, 
210n23, 219, 220
Rational choice, 15–18, 23, 27, 28, 
33, 35–37, 51, 65, 67, 69, 77, 
79–81, 87, 89, 101, 115, 143n8, 
178, 249, 251
orthodoxy, 33, 35, 36, 77, 79–81, 
101, 178, 251
Rationalism, 1, 14, 151, 158, 160, 
182, 187, 210n23
ethical rationalism, 151, 158, 
182, 210n23
Rationality
collective rationality, 36, 53, 
148, 149
economic rationality, 4, 12, 15, 17, 
19, 26, 35
epistemic rationality, 86, 130, 131
instrumental rationality, 18–22, 28, 
29, 31, 88
optimizing rationality, 100, 101, 
113n16, 135
structural rationality, vii–ix, ixn7, 
5–6, 15–43, 45, 47, 52–54, 57, 

281
  INDEX 
66, 67, 71, 77–82, 78n30, 
84–135, 137, 138, 140, 152, 
158, 160, 161, 170, 173, 175, 
228, 251, 258n17
Rawls, John, 15, 31, 70, 109, 110, 
119, 123, 125, 201n20, 
211, 240–242
difference principle, 29n16, 70, 
124, 125, 261
original position, 125
separateness of persons, 31, 145
Realism
moral realism, 190
non-naturalistic realism, 2–3
robust realism, 11
Reason(s)
author of reasons, 131, 235
descriptive reasons, 10, 181, 182, 
198, 211
emotive reasons, 2–4, 10, 129, 131, 
188, 189, 215, 216, 221, 225, 
240, 243
epistemic reasons, 2, 4, 129, 130, 
152, 158, 207
holism of reasons, 3
logical realm of objectively good 
reasons, 10
normative reasons, 2–3, 8, 10, 83, 
84, 108, 113, 132, 138, 158, 
169, 172, 175, 179, 181, 182, 
190, 209, 211, 222, 235, 240, 
241, 243
objective reasons, 2, 3, 69, 160, 
173, 186, 189, 190, 210n23, 
219, 222, 231, 243
practical reasons, vii, ix, ixn8, x, 1–4, 
6, 8, 14–20, 26, 35, 36, 46, 
69–71, 83, 86, 87n2, 98–99, 
129–132, 137, 153, 157, 166, 
167, 169, 171–173, 174n26, 
177, 182, 184, 186, 187, 189, 
191, 192, 195–204, 206, 209, 
213, 220, 222, 225, 228, 232, 
235, 241
reasons account, vii, 2, 86, 140, 
177, 195n12, 210n23, 219
shared reasons, 8, 82, 84, 186, 241
status of reasons, 178, 236–243
subjective reasons, 3, 189, 190, 222, 
231, 241n12
theoretical reasons, ixn8, 2, 3, 8, 69, 
109, 129–131, 154, 173, 
174n26, 181, 186, 191, 192, 
194–202, 206, 208, 211, 222, 
225, 228, 233, 238, 243
unity of reason, 3–4
Reductionism, 113, 178, 204, 
208, 209
radical reductionism, 204
Reflexivity, 245
Relativity, 121–127
Religion, 19, 110, 140, 152, 158, 
159, 184, 215
Replication, 42n23, 52, 53, 81
Responsibility
objective responsibility, 226
personal responsibility, 31, 140, 
145, 146, 162
primary responsibility, 59
subjective responsibility, 227
Rights, individual, 29n16, 38, 38n20, 
121, 125, 146–150, 161–164, 
168, 189
Risk aversion, 71
Rule of law, 104, 206
Rules, 10, 12, 19, 20, 30, 31, 40, 41, 
46, 52–54, 78, 81, 86, 87, 100, 
102–105, 110, 112, 113, 119, 
121, 126, 132–135, 137–140, 
144, 153, 161, 165, 171, 172, 
175, 183, 184, 195, 197, 200, 
203, 206, 218, 230, 240–242, 
254n11, 257n15
Rullière, Jean-Louis, 118n27

282 
INDEX
S
Sally, David, 24n13
Sanctioning power, 125
Sanctions, 53, 54, 77–80, 96, 100, 
119, 155, 203
Sandel, Michael, 126
Sartre, Jean-Paul, 66
Scanlon, Thomas, viii, ixn7, 10, 14, 
182, 240, 241
Schmidt, Klaus, 117, 126n32, 
260, 261
Schweitzer, Maurice, 101n9
Scientism, 11
Searle, John, 212n24
Self-commitment, 51
Self-control, 88–92, 214, 258n17
Self-efficacy, 219, 237
Self-interest, 10, 18, 26, 30, 36, 39, 
46, 52, 97, 110, 123, 134, 135, 
141, 146, 174, 176, 199, 200, 
202, 221, 222
Self-ownership, 96
Self-restriction, 51
Selten, Reinhard, 116
Sen, Amartya, vii, ix, 27, 29n16, 
148–150, 170, 201n20
Sennett, Richard, 34n17
Sethi, Rajiv, 185n10
Sidgwick, Henry, 140n4
Silk, Joan B., 185n10
Simon, Herbert A., 87, 116
Skepticism, 77, 131, 139, 168, 178, 
239, 243
global skepticism, 7, 8, 11, 131
Slote, Michael, ix
Smith, Michael, 212n24
Smith, Vernon, 118n27
Smoking Example, 80n31, 258–259
Smullyan, Raymond, 194n11
Social Darwinism, 42
Social dilemma, 24, 24n13
Social ethic, protestant, 159
Sociality, 186
Socrates, 155
Solidarity, 95, 112, 124, 126, 150, 241
Solipsism, 49
Somanathan, E., 185n10
Spaemann, Robert, 71
Splendid isolation, 9
State
epistemic state, 2, 50, 59, 63, 
63n16, 65, 69, 176, 180, 194, 
195, 197, 225–227
of the world, 48, 50, 138–140, 145, 
167, 170, 247, 248
State of affairs
descriptive state of affairs, 191
empirical state of affairs, 226, 240
moral state of affairs, 160
Stegmüller, Wolfgang, 256n13
Step function, 123
Stoa, 201, 213
Stoicism, 158, 174n26, 201, 213, 
220, 221, 227, 228, 231, 
233, 234
Stoics, 11, 96, 97, 203, 213, 214, 
220, 227, 228, 232–234
Strauss, Leo, 201n20
Strawson, Peter, 207n22, 238
Structurally rational sage, 57, 66, 
203, 204
Structure
diachronic structure, 5, 77–82
interpersonal structure, 80–84, 
102, 175
Subjectivism, 167, 213, 231
Suicide, 46n2, 96, 98, 99
Supervene, 209
Surface grammar, 185
System
epistemic system, 11, 13, 14, 198, 
207, 242, 243
inferential system, 194
Systems theory, 42, 184n7

283
  INDEX 
T
Taylor, Charles, 111n14
Theory
deontological theory, 137, 138
economic theory, 23, 26, 36, 45, 
46, 54, 87, 94, 114, 116n22, 
119, 121, 123, 199, 247
ethical theory, 28, 37n19, 86, 146, 
151, 152, 155, 159, 160, 172, 
177–178, 183, 200, 
242, 257n15
moral sense theories, 160
phenomenological theories, 85
Token, 72–77, 173
action token, 56, 72
Tomasello, Michael, 128
Tompkinson, Paul, 118n27
Toulmin, Stephen, 210n23
Tradition, philosophical, 187
Tragedy, 27, 146, 158, 168
Transitivity, 127, 245, 246
Trust, 1, 24n13, 53, 54, 70, 134, 238
Truth
claim, 229
definition of truth, 12
Truthfulness, 53, 54, 134
Tuomela, Raimo, 43n24
Turing machine, 194, 195
Tversky, Amos, 116n22
Type, 4, 5, 12, 14, 17, 19, 25–27, 
32–34, 37, 38, 42, 46, 62, 
72–77, 89, 99, 104, 105, 140, 
166, 170, 171, 175, 212, 223, 
243, 256
U
Al-Ubaydli, Omar, 24n13
Ultimatum game, 113–115, 250–251
Ultra posse nemo obligatur, 167, 172
Unequal distribution, 123–125, 
148, 260
Unmoved mover, 239
Utilitarianism
hedonistic utilitarianism, 141
preference utilitarianism, 142, 144
Utility
function, 3, 16–18, 30, 48, 65, 67, 
91, 107, 110, 119, 120, 123, 
126, 142, 143, 176, 230, 232, 
248, 254, 256, 257n15, 260
interdependence, 254
theorem, 5, 12, 15–18, 36, 37, 88, 
116, 117, 122, 123, 142, 
246n3, 247–249
Utopianism, 109
V
Voegelin, Eric, 201n20
Volitions, 90, 91, 205
Von Neumann, John, vii, 5, 15
W
Wallace, Jay, 207n22
Walzer, Michael, 109n12, 111n14
Weakness of will, 89
Weber, Max, 18
Weel, Jaap, 24n13
Welfare, total, 124
White, Morton, 242
Williams, Arlington, 118n27
Williams, Bernard, 14, 68, 151
Willpower, 63, 80, 90, 97, 205, 259
Winch, Peter, 237n7
Wittgenstein, Ludwig, 9, 84, 108, 
132, 133, 155, 156, 158, 162, 
196, 210n23
Worlds, possible, 225, 247, 253–255

