84
Bub–Clifton Theorem
7. M. J. Nye: Molecular Reality (Elsevier Publishing Company, Amsterdam 1972)
8. G. Pohl: The theory of Brownian motion – one hundred years old. In: The Global and the Local:
The History of Science and the Cultural Integration of Europe, ed. by M. Kokowski (Cracow
2007, 419–424). Online as: http://www.2iceshs.cyfronet.pl/proceedings.html
Bub–Clifton Theorem
Jeffrey Bub
The two fundamental ‘no go’ theorems for hidden variable reconstructions of the
 quantum statistics, the  Kochen-Specker theorem [4] and  Bell’s theorem
[1], can be formulated as results about the impossibility of associating a classical
probability space (X, F, Pρ) with a quantum system in the state ρ, when certain con-
straints are placed on the probability measure Pρ. The Bub–Clifton theorem [2,3],
by contrast, is a ‘go’ theorem: a positive result about the possibility of associating a
classical probability space with a quantum system in a given state.
If Pρ is required to satisfy the conditions:
(a) Pρ(a, b, . . .|A, B, . . .) is a classical probability measure deﬁned for all eigen-
values a, b, . . . of the  observables A, B, . . . in some set of observables E.
(b) If A, A′, . . . ∈E commute, then Pρ(a, a′, . . . |A, A′, . . .) coincides with the
quantum mechanical probability assigned by ρ.
then the existence of Pρ is equivalent to the requirement that the set of numbers:
{Pρ(a, a′, . . . |A, A′, . . .); A, A′ ∈E commute}
should satisfy a ﬁnite family of inequalities (Boole’s ‘conditions of possible expe-
rience’), so the non-existence of Pρ entails a violation of at least one inequality
(see Pitowsky [6, 7]). If Pρ exists, then it is a weighted average of pure states
(characteristic functions onto 1-element subsets of X or 2-valued (0,1) probability
measures).
The Kochen-Specker and Bell theorems can be formulated (following Pitowsky)
as follows:
The Kochen-Specker Theorem. There is a set of observables E such that for all ρ
the classical probability measure Pρ does not exist.
Bell’s Theorem. There is a set of local observables E on H ⊗H and a state ρ ∈
H ⊗H such that the classical probability measure Pρ does not exist.

Bub–Clifton Theorem
85
B
The Bub–Clifton is the positive result:
The Bub–Clifton Theorem. For every pure state ρ = |ψ⟩⟨ψ| and every observ-
able R, there is a maximal extension E of {R} for which there exists a classical
probability measure Pρ. The extension E is unique if we require invariance with re-
spect to automorphisms of the subspace structure of H (the projective geometry of
H) that preserve ρ and R.
The pure state ρ can be expressed as a linear  superposition of orthogonal
1-dimensional projection operators ( projection) ρr onto the non-null eigenspaces
{Vr} of R: ρ = !
r ρr = 
r ρr. The theorem shows that the set of observables E
contains all the maximal observables whose spectral measures comprise:
(i) The 1-dimensional projection operators ρr,
(ii) The 1-dimensional projection operators onto any orthogonal basis in the ortho-
complement of the subspace spanned by the projections ρr, i.e., the ‘null space’
Vnull that is the range of the projection operator I −
r ρr,
and all the non-maximal observables which are functions of these maximal
observables.
Equivalently, E consists of all the observables whose eigenspaces are spanned by
the rays deﬁned by (i) and (ii) above.
According to the theorem, even though the set E contains non-commuting
observables, there exists a classical probability measure Pρ for the observables
in E, i.e., a measure space (X, F, Pρ), where the elements of the space X are
the projection operators ρr, which are in 1-1 correspondence with the 2-valued
homomorphisms—representing bivalent truth-value assignments—on the lattice of
subspaces generated by the 1-dimensional projectors in (i) and (ii) above, and hence
in 1-1 correspondence with the 2-valued homomorphisms on the ranges of values of
the observables in E.
Nakayama [5] has constructed a topos-theoretic extension of the theorem.
A quantum measurement interaction can be represented schematically as follows:
|s⟩|r⟩
U(t)
−→

i
ci|si⟩|ri⟩
where |s⟩= 
i ci|si⟩is the initial state of the measured system expressed as a
linear superposition of the eigenstates |si⟩of the measured observable S, |r⟩is the
initial state of the measuring instrument with indicator or ‘pointer’ observable R,
and U(t) is the unitary transformation implementing the measurement interaction
between the system and the measuring instrument that sets up a correlation be-
tween eigenvalues of S and pointer positions. (Note that for the systems we use
as measuring instruments, the pointer observable R commutes with the instrument-
environment interaction Hamiltonian, so the correlation between eigenvalues of S
and pointer positions R induced by the system-instrument Hamiltonian is preserved
under the instrument-environment interaction.) If we take the pointer observable R
as ‘preferred,’ in the sense that it always has a deﬁnite (determinate) value, then

86
Bub–Clifton Theorem
the set of deﬁnite-valued observables E for the state |ψ⟩= 
i cr|si⟩|ri⟩after the
measurement interaction includes the observables whose spectral measures contain
the projection operators onto the states |ψi⟩= |si⟩|ri⟩. It follows that E contains the
measured observable S and the pointer observable R. For this state ρ = |ψ⟩⟨ψ|,
there exists a classical measure space (X, F, Pρ), where the elements of X are the
projection operators ρi = |ψi⟩⟨ψi|, in 1-1 correspondence with the 2-valued homo-
morphisms on the ranges of values of the observables in E. So the elements of X
can be identiﬁed with the alternative possible states of affairs that are the outcomes
of the quantum measurement process.
This observation underlies the demonstration in [2, 3] that various ‘no col-
lapse’ interpretations, including Bohr’s  complementarity principle interpretation,
 modal interpretations, and  Bohm’s hidden variable theory, can all be repre-
sented as ‘preferred observable’ interpretations, for different choices of the preferred
observable (e.g., in the case of Bohm’s theory, the preferred observable is position
in the conﬁguration space of all the Bohmian particles).
Literature
1. J. S. Bell: On the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen Paradox. Physics. 1:195–200, 1964. Reprinted in
John Stuart Bell, Speakable and Unspeakable in Quantum Mechanics, Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, 1989.
2. J. Bub: Interpreting the Quantum World. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1997.
3. J. Bub, R. Clifton: A uniqueness theorem for no collapse interpretations of quantum mechanics.
Studies in the History and Philosophy of Modern Physics. 27:181–219, 1996.
4. S. Kochen, E. P. Specker: On the problem of hidden variables in quantum mechanics. Journal of
Mathematics and Mechanics. 17:59–87, 1967.
5. K. Nakayama: Topos-theoretic extension of a modal interpretation of quantum mechanics. arXiv
e-print quant-ph/0711.2200, 2007.
6. I. Pitowsky: Quantum Probability, Quantum Logic. Springer, Berlin, 1989.
7. I. Pitowsky: George Boole’s ‘conditions of possible experience’ and the quantum puzzle. British
Journal for the Philosophy of Science. 45:95–125, 1994.

