Organic Bioelectronics
Anastasios G. Polyravas, Christopher M. Proctor, Vincenzo F. Curto,
Alejandro Carnicer-Lombarte, George G. Malliaras,
and Damiano G. Barone
Contents
1
Introduction. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
442
2
Conducting Polymer Electrodes (PEDOT:PSS). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
445
3
Organic Electrochemical Transistors (OECTs). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
449
4
Organic Electronic Ion Pumps (OEIPs). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
456
5
Discussion. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
459
6
Conclusions and Future Directions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
461
References. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
462
Abstract
Organic Bioelectronics is an emerging ﬁeld that leverages identifying charac-
teristics of organic electronic materials to deliver neural interface devices with
unique properties. Organic electronic materials have a lower Young’s modulus
than typical inorganic materials used in bioelectronics, making them compatible
with ﬂexible substrates. As a result, devices with novel form factors that elicit
a smaller foreign body response have been demonstrated. More importantly,
some organic electronic materials can uptake ions from electrolytes, resulting
in a mixed electronic/ionic conductivity. This property has been leveraged to
enhance the interaction between ionic and electronic currents and decrease the
impedance of electrodes, allowing their scaling to smaller dimensions. It has also
A. G. Polyravas · C. M. Proctor · V. F. Curto · A. Carnicer-Lombarte · G. G. Malliaras
Electrical Engineering Division, Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge, UK
D. G. Barone ()
Division of Neurosurgery, Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge, UK
e-mail: dgb36@cam.ac.uk
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2023
N. V. Thakor (ed.), Handbook of Neuroengineering,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-16-5540-1_106
441

442
A. G. Polyravas et al.
been leveraged in the design of transistors with high transconductance that lead
to local signal ampliﬁcation and hence neural recordings of high signal-to-noise
ratio. Finally, ionic conductivity is leveraged in ion pumps to enable solvent-
free delivery of drugs with precise spatiotemporal control. Here we discuss
the principle of operation of these devices and showcase examples of use that
highlight their advantages and limitations.
Keywords
Bioelectronics · Neuroscience · Neurotechnology · Brain-computer
interfaces · Organic electrochemical transistors · Conducting polymer
electrodes · Ion pumps
Abbreviations
CP
Conducting Polymer
ECG
Electrocardiography
ECoG
Electrocorticography
EEG
Electroencephalography
EGOFET
Electrolyte-Gated Field-Effect Transistor
EMG
Electromyography
FET
Field-Effect Transistor
GABA
Gamma Amino-Butyric Acid
IEM
Ion Exchange Membrane
MOSFET
Metal-Oxide Field-Effect Transistor
OECT
Organic Electrochemical Transistor
OEIP
Organic Electronic Ion Pump
PaC
Parylene C
PEDOT:PSS
Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) doped with polystyrene sulfonate
PI
Polyimide
PLGA
Poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid)
PVA
Poly(vinyl alcohol)
SNR
Signal-to-Noise Ratio
μFIP
Microﬂuidic Ion Pump
1
Introduction
Ever since Luigi Galvani discovered that the muscles of dead frogs were able to
contract when stimulated with electricity [1], the concept of bioelectricity inﬂuenced
disparate ﬁelds from neuroscience, to electrophysiology, to medicine. Nowadays,
bioelectronic devices, including cardiac pacemakers, cochlear implants, brain, and
spinal cord stimulators, are routinely being implanted in patients. These devices
modulate the response of a tissue or an organ with direct electrical stimulation. The
opposite is also possible, with electrodes implanted on people to study their heart
or brain functions. Moreover, bioelectronics has expanded beyond tissue electrical
activity to provide electrical reading of biological markers, such as glucose [2] or

Organic Bioelectronics
443
lactate [3, 4]. Using similar principles, bioelectronics can also be used to release
drugs for disease treatment [5].
Despite several key innovations in bioelectronics over the recent years, many
constraints remain and prevent the broad translation of these devices to the clinic.
A stable and long-lasting interface between electrodes and tissue (abiotic/biotic
interface), requires electronics that are biocompatible, mechanically matched to the
tissue and able to communicate with biological signals [6]. Most current electrodes
are bulky and stiff and therefore elicit a foreign body response [7]. Additionally,
they are wide, and hence able to stimulate or record from numerous cells at a time,
precluding a more discrete interaction required for some applications, such as brain-
computer interfaces.
An understanding of how the brain and, similarly, all electroactive tissues work
is important to recognize how bioelectronics needs to adapt and evolve to meet the
clinical and scientiﬁc needs. There are billions of individual nerve cells responsible
for receiving and decoding sensory signals from the environment, for storing this
information in memories and producing thoughts and behaviors. All these functions
are achieved by the interconnections of these cells and their organization into
circuits. Nonetheless, signaling is organized in the same way in all nerve cells:
there is a receptive component, receiving signals (neurotransmitters or electrical
stimulation from other cells/environment); followed by an integrative component,
which sums all the signals into a single one; then a long-range component (usually
axons) transmitting this signal from one location to another; and ﬁnally a secre-
tory component, releasing signals to other cells. The generation and propagation
of signals are possible thanks to electrical potentials generated across the cell
membrane. Cells can control the ﬂow of ions through their membrane, creating
a so-called resting membrane potential (approx. −65 mV). Once enough signals
reach a neuron, the membrane potential changes to an action potential (+40 mV)
which then propagates down the axon, leading to the secretion of neurotransmitters
that stimulate (or inhibit) other cells. These waves of ions around cells can be
recorded using electrodes. Electrodes measure the spatiotemporal summation of the
activity of multiple cells, which is called the local ﬁeld potential. Small electrodes
(diameter of tens of micrometers) allow the recording of the activity of individual
cells. Figure 1 shows how an electrode can be used to record neural activity.
Organic electronics are being increasingly considered in neurotechnologies, as
they offer novel solutions in interfacing with nerve cells and can overcome some
of the bottlenecks traditional (inorganic) electronic materials encounter. Traditional
electrodes, made from metals such as Pt, Ir and Au, face signiﬁcant compatibility
issues caused by the mechanical mismatch (mostly referred to the stiffness) at the
interface with tissue [6]. To alleviate this limitation, organic coatings have been used
to buffer this mismatch whilst reducing the electrochemical impedance at the same
time. The latter arises from the fact that ions from the brain are freely transported
inside organic ﬁlms, and this leads to stronger coupling with electronic carriers
[8]. Due to this volumetric interaction between ions and electronic carriers, organic
electronic materials can be viewed as a bridge between the world of electronics and
the world of biology.

444
A. G. Polyravas et al.
Fig. 1 Action potential generation and propagation in neural tissue, and signal recording in
electrodes. Neurons establish a resting potential across their cell membrane by regulating ion
concentrations across it. When a neuron is chemically activated—by neurotransmitters—ion
channels in the membrane open and cause a spike in the membrane potential. This transient
spike—the action potential—propagates down the neuron by brieﬂy opening voltage-gated ion
channels. Upon reaching the synapse, the action potential causes the release of neurotransmitters
into the extracellular space, potentially activating a subsequent neuron or neuronal target. Small
microelectrodes (100–10 um) can detect the action potentials from individual neurons. Larger
electrodes lack the resolution to do this and instead average action potentials of a population of
neurons ﬁring in synchrony—referred to as a local ﬁeld potential (LFP). Note that voltage values
and graphs are given for intracellular membrane voltage. The corresponding extracellular voltage
transients, which electrodes have to record, have the reverse polarity and are typically much smaller
in amplitude
In this chapter, we discuss three organic bioelectronic technologies used for in
vivo applications: conducting polymer electrodes (PEDOT:PSS), organic electro-
chemical transistors and organic electronic ion pumps. These technologies have the
ability to interface with the brain and allow the recording and stimulation of neurons
as well as be in direct contact with the skin and operate as biosensors. They can also
be used to deliver sufﬁcient quantities of chemical substances (drugs) in speciﬁc
areas of the body. The focus will be on a few examples that highlight the merits of
organic materials in bioelectronics.

Organic Bioelectronics
445
2
Conducting Polymer Electrodes (PEDOT:PSS)
To successfully record signals coming from neural activity, a communication path
between the electrode and the ﬁring population of neurons needs to be established.
This communication is achieved using the ﬂow of ions in the electrolyte inside the
brain, surrounding both neurons and electrodes. Neurons communicate with each
other through an electrochemical process, in which a signal is carried in the form
of an electrical pulse. In this process, the cell membrane becomes depolarized,
leading to a release of neurotransmitters into the synaptic cleft, establishing con-
nection between the presynaptic and the postsynaptic neuron, corresponding to the
transmitting and receiving cells, respectively. Through this process, the information
is transmitted to its ﬁnal destination by repeating this electrical-to-chemical signal
translation process. The resulting changes caused by ﬁring neurons in the electrolyte
can be thus, described as an ionic current that can be sensed by electrodes.
Typically, ﬂuctuations in the ionic current near the electrode are transduced into
voltage ﬂuctuations through the charging/discharging of the capacitor formed at
the electrolyte/electrode interface. Conversely, the application of a voltage at an
electrode can induce ionic currents in the electrolyte that will stimulate neurons.
This ability of electrodes to bidirectionally interface with neurons makes them
useful devices for neuroscience and medicine [9].
In order to have a better understanding of the mechanism of operation of elec-
trodes and highlight their advantages/limitations, models describing their working
principle have been previously reported [9, 10]. Figure 2 illustrates an equivalent
circuit of a recording system. It should be noted that a similar concept is applied
Vsig
Rs
Ce
Re
Rm
Vin
Cs
Za
Vrec
Amplifier
I
Fig. 2 Equivalent circuit of a microelectrode recording device (general set up), used to interface
with neurons. Vsig corresponds to the electrical signal (generated from a population of neurons),
Rs is the resistance of the electrolyte (consisting of ions such as Na + and K+), Re resembles the
resistance of the double layer that is created in the electrode interface (leakage resistance), Ce is
the double layer capacitance, Rm is the actual resistance of the microelectrode, Vin is the input
signal containing the recorded potential, Cs is the total shunt capacitance to the ground, Za is the
input impedance of the ampliﬁer, Vrec is the ﬁnal ampliﬁed signal, and I corresponds to the current
that ﬂows from the population of neurons to the recording site. (Reproduced with permission [10].
Copyright 2015, IOP Publishing)

446
A. G. Polyravas et al.
for stimulation. Although an extensive discussion of the actual model is beyond
the scope of this chapter, we describe here some of the key elements of the
circuit [10] (for more information about the equivalent circuit of an electrode-
electrolyte interface, the reader is directed to reference [11]). According to this
model, the total impedance appearing in an electrode interface consists of four
different elements: the resistances Rs, Re, Rm (see caption for deﬁnitions) and the
double layer capacitance Ce. Reducing the impedance of electrodes is beneﬁcial as it
enhances recorded signal quality [9]. This means that larger area electrodes would
be preferable as they offer smaller electrolyte resistance (Rs) and larger electrode
capacitance (Ce).
However, for improved spatial resolution, smaller electrodes (typically the size
of the soma of a neuron) would be required, and this results in high electrode
impedances. Materials-based approaches that reduce the impedance of micro-
electrodes are needed. Recent work on conducting polymers (CPs) has shown
that materials such as poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) doped with polystyrene
sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS) can signiﬁcantly reduce impedance and improve signal-to-
noise ratio (SNR) of neural recordings [12–14]. CPs utilize a volumetric capacitance
to provide a higher effective surface area for coupling electronic and ionic currents
[9, 15]. Moreover, CPs can be incorporated with ﬂexible substrates with the greater
aim of reducing the mechanical mismatch between a metal electrode and the
neural tissue [9, 10]. Minimizing this mismatch is of paramount importance as it
reduces the foreign body response, which initiates the encapsulation of the device.
This process consists of the formation of a dense tissue around the electrode that
decreases the quality of the recorded signal overtime due to an increase in the
total impedance. As a result, a wide variety of materials such as parylene C (PaC),
polyimide (PI) and SU-8 have been employed as substrates, rendering the fabricated
devices ﬂexible and conformal [9]. It should be mentioned that other factors such as
the implantation technique and tissue micromotion affect the formation of the glial
scar and, subsequently, the long-term performance of electrodes. However, these
parameters originate from the biology of the human body and fall beyond the scope
of this chapter (more information in reference [6]).
Characteristics such as low impedance [16, 17], ease of material processing
[18], low toxicity level [19–21] and commercial availability made PEDOT:PSS a
great candidate for microelectrode applications [22]. PEDOT:PSS has the important
property of being able to form ﬁlms with enhanced electrical conductivity, long-
term stability and uniform formation. This is achieved by mixing it with materials
such as ethylene glycol [23], dimethyl sulfoxide [24], sorbitol [25], dodecyl benzene
sulfonic acid (DBSA) [26] and (3-glycidoxypropyltrimethoxysilane) GOPS [18].
The working mechanism of CP electrodes can be understood by considering the
fact that ionic currents resulting from neural activity can enter the ﬁlm and change
its conductivity. This change, which occurs due to the doping/de-doping of the
ﬁlm, leads to a reduction in the impedance and further enhances the quality of
the recorded signal. Although PEDOT is a conjugated polymer and is not soluble
in water, the polymerization with PSS creates an aqueous dispersion that can be
exploited to spin-coat PEDOT:PSS on the surface of a substrate or use it as an ink to

Organic Bioelectronics
447
print multiple layers. PEDOT:PSS is a degenerately-doped p-type semiconductor
(conducting polymer), where mobile holes on the PEDOT are compensated by
anions on the PSS. When cations are injected from an electrolyte into a PEDOT:PSS
ﬁlm, they compensate the PSS anions. This leads to the extraction of holes and
de-doping of the ﬁlm [27]. Conversely, an anionic current will lead to doping of
the ﬁlm. These phenomena can be described as the charging/discharging of a 3D
network of capacitors, leading to lower impedance [28, 29].
Figure 3 shows how impedance scales as a function of frequency for an Au and
a PEDOT:PSS electrode; both electrodes have the same nominal dimensions. As
can be seen from the graph, the PEDOT:PSS electrode shows a signiﬁcantly lower
impedance in the range of neural recordings (up to 1 kHz, the frequency of single
units). The PEDOT:PSS data can be understood by a simple RC circuit, in which the
resistor corresponds to the electrolyte resistance (Rs) and the capacitor corresponds
to the volumetric capacitance of the PEDOT:PSS ﬁlm (Ce) [30], a simpler equivalent
circuit than the one of Fig. 2.
The enhanced characteristics of PEDOT:PSS-coated electrodes make them an
excellent candidate for a variety of applications. Khodagholy and colleagues
107
106
105
104
103
10-2
10-1
100
101
Frequency (Hz)
Gold electrode
PEDOT:PSS-coated electrode
Impedance (Ω)
102
103
104
105
Fig. 3 Impedance spectroscopy of a Au (red line) and a PEDOT:PSS-coated (blue line) electrode.
The tested electrodes had the same nominal dimensions (500 × 500 μm [2]), and the PEDOT:PSS
ﬁlm had an approximate thickness of 350 nm. (Reproduced with permission [30]. Copyright 2017,
John Wiley & Sons)

448
A. G. Polyravas et al.
leveraged the properties of PEDOT:PSS to fabricate a highly conformable array of
electrodes to record signals rising from brain activity from the cortex of rats (Fig. 4a)
[14]. In their experimental setup, PEDOT:PSS electrodes were incorporated on top
of a 4 μm thick PaC substrate and were placed above the somatosensory cortex, after
a craniotomy was performed. An array of Ir electrodes placed on a rigid probe was
implanted in the cortex to allow for comparisons between the two conﬁgurations
(Fig. 4b). The results showed that PEDOT:PSS electrodes recorded brain activity
with a higher SNR compared to their Ir counterparts while employing a less invasive
approach. This demonstration paved the way for clinical translation [14]. Further
device development led to the implementation of the NeuroGrid, a 256 PEDOT:PSS
microelectrode array (Fig. 4c) [31]. The NeuroGrid is fabricated from biocompatible
materials and has the ability of recording single units from the cortex, in addition
to local ﬁeld potentials. It also employs a less invasive implantation method,
which allows signals to be recorded from the top of the cortical surface (Fig. 4d).
Fig. 4 (a) Optical microscopy image of a PEDOT:PSS electrode array showing the conﬁguration
of the recording electrodes. (b) Schematic representation of the electrode array and the penetrating
probe (top) used to record brain activity from a mouse (bottom). (Reproduced with permission
[14]. Copyright 2011, Wiley-VCH) (c) Image showing the high conformability of a NeuroGrid
array; a 256 electrode array is illustrated in the inset. (d) Photograph of a NeuroGrid array placed
on the surface of the somatosensory cortex of a rat. (Adapted with permission [31]. Copyright
2015, Nature Publishing Group)

Organic Bioelectronics
449
Recordings of single units from rats were collected up to a period of 10 days,
laying the foundations for chronic applications. An intraoperatively demonstration
in human patients was also performed, showing NeuroGrid’s potential for clinical
use in high-resolution brain mapping [31].
The high conformability of PEDOT:PSS electrodes makes the insertion of
intracortical probes problematic. To overcome this challenge, recent work has
demonstrated the fabrication of a bioresorbable shuttle consisting of poly(vinyl
alcohol) (PVA) and poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA) [32]. The rigidity of PVA
allowed for the probes to be inserted into rodent brains, with PLGA acting as a
protecting layer that controls dissolution time. It is important to mention that the
neural probes showed similar electrical characteristics before and after the insertion
process. This work paves the way for enhancing the quality of electrophysiology
recordings by selectively delivering compliant neural probes into the brain without
affecting their properties.
Another, non-invasive, area in which PEDOT:PSS electrodes have found fertile
ground is in the cutaneous applications. Leleux et al. showed that polyimide (Kap-
ton) substrates could facilitate the fabrication of highly conformable PEDOT:PSS
electrodes to interface with the human skin (Fig. 5a) [33]. When used to record
electroencephalography (EEG) signals on volunteers, PEDOT:PSS-coated elec-
trodes were found to provide higher resolution compared to dry Au electrodes
and similar performance to gel-assisted Ag/AgCl electrodes (Fig. 5b). Furthermore,
inkjet-printed PEDOT:PSS electrodes have been demonstrated to record electro-
cardiography (ECG) signals [34, 36]. Figure 5c shows ECG recordings from a
volunteer at different periods of time and under different conditions. In this study,
PEDOT:PSS was directly printed on a textile and its properties were enhanced by
the addition of an ionic liquid gel. A comparison between commercially available
electrodes and the inkjet-printed PEDOT:PSS electrodes revealed that despite a
slight degradation observed after 40 days in the PEDOT:PSS electrodes, the quality
of the recorded signals was similar. An alternative approach incorporating a tattoo
paper substrate on a textile wristband to record electromyography (EMG) signals
has also been developed (Fig. 5d) [35]. The tattoo/textile system was used to
record EMG signals for 7 consecutive hours without any signiﬁcant changes in its
performance. These examples suggest that PEDOT:PSS electrodes can be used for
long-term electrophysiology recordings, assisting in a variety of health monitoring
and diagnostics applications.
3
Organic Electrochemical Transistors (OECTs)
Microelectrode arrays have been widely used to record signals from neurons;
however, the low-amplitude nature of brain signals makes the use of ampliﬁcation
necessary. In a standard electrode conﬁguration, additional circuitry elements are
used to achieve pre-ampliﬁcation. However, this approach is quite vulnerable to
any additional noise that is picked up by the cables and interconnects between the
recording electrode and the ampliﬁer. To minimize this effect, the ampliﬁer should

450
A. G. Polyravas et al.
Fig. 5 (a) Schematic representation (top) and photograph (bottom) of PEDOT:PSS electrodes
fabricated on a Kapton substrate. (b) Time-frequency analysis of EEG recordings from a gel-
assisted Ag/AgCl electrode (top), a Au electrode (middle) and a PEDOT:PSS electrode (bottom).
PEDOT:PSS electrodes were shown to outperform their Au counterparts. (Adapted from [33].
Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH) (c) ECG recordings using commercial electrodes and inkjet-printed
PEDOT:PSS electrodes. The recordings were acquired under static and dynamic conditions (hand
motion) to test the impact of artifacts, introduced by movement. (Reproduced with permission [34].
Copyright 2017, John Wiley & Sons) (d) Schematic representation (left) and photograph (right)
of tattoo/textile PEDOT:PSS electrodes. (Reproduced with permission [35]. Copyright 2018, IOP
Publishing)
be placed as close as possible to the recording site. Hence, a recording device with
the inherent ability to amplify the recorded signal at the recording site can reduce
the complexity of the acquisition circuit and enhance the quality of the collected
information.
The organic electrochemical transistor (OECT), ﬁrstly developed by White and
colleagues [37] in 1984, is a device able to transduce voltage ﬂuctuations to
a modulation in the output current while amplifying the recorded signal at the
site of acquisition. This is achieved by combining the coupling of electronic and
ionic transport arising from the use of a semiconducting polymer [38, 39]. The
necessity to push towards a technology that provides higher sensitivity than passive
recording electrodes allowed OECTs to ﬁnd fertile ground in a variety of biological
applications [8, 38]. In this section, we discuss the mechanism of operation of
OECTs and some of their characteristic applications in bioelectronics.
Figure 6 shows the typical planar structure of an OECT. An OECT consists of
two metal contacts (source and drain), a semiconducting material that establishes
connection between them, and a gate electrode. The organic semiconductor ﬁlm

Organic Bioelectronics
451
Fig. 6 Typical OECT structure. The two Au contacts source (S) and drain (D) communicate
through the semiconducting polymer. The gate electrode (Ag/AgCl) is immersed into the elec-
trolyte, which makes contact with the conducting polymer (PEDOT:PSS). In a typical measuring
conﬁguration, the bias voltages (Vd, Vg) are applied between the gate, drain contact and the ground,
as shown in the ﬁgure. The source contact is connected to the ground and is used as a reference
point, not shown in the ﬁgure for simplicity. (Adapted from [40]. Copyright 2019, IOP Publishing)
is in direct contact with an electrolyte, in which the gate electrode is submerged
[38]. OECTs use ions injected from the electrolyte to change the doping state,
hence, the conductivity of the semiconductor ﬁlm [39]. Their operation is controlled
by the voltage applied between drain and source (VD) and gate and source (VG),
respectively. VD creates a ﬂow of electronic current in the semiconductor channel,
which is proportional to the number of charge carriers (typically holes), whereas
VG controls the amount of ions that are injected into the channel [38]. Depending
on the organic semiconductor material, OECTs can be designed to operate in two
different modes, accumulation or depletion. In accumulation mode, the drain current
(ID) is small at zero gate voltage, and the transistor is switched OFF. When a
negative voltage is applied, holes accumulate in the semiconductor (p-type channel),
compensating the injected anions, and the transistor reaches the ON state [41]. In
contrast, depletion mode OECTs (such as the ones based on PEDOT:PSS) are ON at
zero gate voltage. The application of a positive voltage at the gate electrode injects
cations that replace the holes ﬂowing in the channel, signiﬁcantly reducing the drain
current and thus, switching OFF the device [42]. In this section, we focused mostly
on OECTs that used PEDOT:PSS as the semiconducting material due to its high
carrier mobility and channel capacitance per unit volume [43].
The high conductivity of the electrolyte allows the gate electrode to be placed
some distance away from the channel (typically a few millimeters). This so-called
planar architecture greatly simpliﬁes fabrication compared to solid state ﬁeld-
effect transistors, where the thickness of the gate dielectric needs to be carefully
controlled. Vertical OECT architectures have also been demonstrated [44]. Vertical
OECTs have a smaller footprint and pave the way for higher density transistor
arrays.
A key factor that differentiates OECTs from other types of electrolyte-gated
transistors is the doping/de-doping of the conducting polymer, which is performed
across the entire volume (bulk) of the channel [15]. In ﬁeld-effect transistors (FETs)

452
A. G. Polyravas et al.
the application of a voltage at the gate creates accumulation of charge carriers in the
transistor channel, near the gate dielectric. Electrolyte-gated ﬁeld-effect transistors
(EGOFETs) operate in the same principle as FETs, but with the dielectric material
replaced by an electrolyte. In this conﬁguration, the application of a voltage leads to
the accumulation of ions near the interface between the electrolyte and the channel,
compensated by an opposite electronic charge sheet inside the channel [38]. In
contrast to FETs, OECTs permit ions to freely move in and out of the semiconductor
ﬁlm under the application of a voltage, leading to a capacitance that depends on
the volume of the polymer ﬁlm [15, 45]. This coupling of ionic and electronic
charges in the entire volume of the semiconductor ﬁlm endows OECTs with the
highest transconductance observed among different types of transistors, making
them excellent candidates for electrophysiology [46].
The ﬁgure of merit that characterizes the ability of transistors to transduce a
voltage applied on the gate electrode to a modulation in the drain current is the
transconductance (gm), deﬁned as the ﬁrst derivative of the drain current over the
gate voltage, gm = ∂ID
∂VG . A higher transconductance translates into a higher gain
in the output, rendering the device more sensitive to low voltage signals. Figure 7
shows the transfer curve of an OECT, exhibiting a 100 nm thick PEDOT:PSS ﬁlm
as the semiconducting material. The data indicates how the drain current decreases,
in absolute value, as the gate voltage increases (blue dotted line); this reduction is
caused by the injection of cations from the electrolyte into the transistor channel.
The variation of transconductance as a function of the applied gate voltage is also
presented (red dotted line). The transconductance exhibits a bell-shaped curve,
which arises from the inﬂuence of disorder on the electronic transport in the channel
of the semiconducting polymer [47].
Understanding how to tune the geometry of OECTs to achieve the maximum
transconductance at certain bias conditions [48] is important in electrophysiology,
as it can signiﬁcantly enhance the quality of the recorded signal. Recent studies
Fig. 7 Transfer curve of a depletion mode OECT. The blue line shows how the drain current varies
as a function of the gate voltage with the red line highlighting the shape of the transconductance
curve

Organic Bioelectronics
453
Table 1 Transconductance
values of different transistor
technologies
Active material
gm (mS)
gm/Vd (mS/V)
Aqueous electrolyte
PEDOT:PSS (∼400 nm thick)
8
13.33
PEDOT:PSS (∼100 nm thick)
2
3.33
Graphene [52, 53]
0.42
4.2
Silicon nanowire [54]
0.005
0.167
Solid state
ZnO [55, 56]
1.4
0.35
Graphene [57–59]
1.863
0.932
Silicon nanowire [60]
0.002
Not reported
revealed that the peak transconductance depends on the channel dimensions and
the thickness of the semiconducting polymer [45, 48]. The volumetric dependence
of the capacitance of OECTs which endows them with such high transconductance
comes, however, with the drawback of a long response time. OECTs that employ a
thick layer of semiconductor ﬁlm exhibit slow ON/OFF operation ratio, rendering
their usage at high frequencies inadequate. Despite being limited by their volumetric
capacitance, OECTs with a response time in the range of hundreds of μs have
already been engineered [49, 50]. This paves the way for a variety of electrophys-
iology applications, as the fastest brain rhythms observed are single units (with a
frequency < 1 kHz) [51]. Table 1 shows how transconductance over bias voltage,
which can be used as a ﬁgure of merit to compare between different technologies,
varies for OECTs and some of their organic/inorganic counterparts (more detailed
information can be found in reference [46]).
The great potential of OECTs as biopotential transducers, their ability to be fab-
ricated on ﬂexible substrates from biocompatible materials and their low operating
voltage (<1 V to prevent electrolysis) makes them ideal candidates for biosensing
[2, 3], interfacing with cells [61, 62], electrophysiology [63–66], neuromorphic
applications [67–69] and logic circuits [70, 71]. Here we present some of the most
common applications of OECTs. Starting with metabolite sensing, OECT arrays
have been integrated with microﬂuidics to perform simultaneous measurements of
three different analytes (glucose, lactate and cholesterol) from human saliva [2]
(Fig. 8a, b). This is an example of a versatile non-invasive biosensing platform that
can be applied in health care monitoring and provide fast and accurate diagnostics.
In another example, OECTs have been employed to measure the metabolic activity
of lactate in tumor cells [3]. Their high sensitivity allowed to detect increased levels
of lactate in tumor cells compared to non-tumor cells.
In addition, OECTs have been extensively used to interface with cells and
provide multi-parametric cell monitoring such as optical imaging and metabolite
sensing, with potential applications in drug discovery and toxicology [73]. They
have also been employed as ion-selective transducers to characterize interactions
between biological molecules and a cell membrane. It has been demonstrated that
the formation of a lipid membrane on the interface of an OECT prohibits ion

454
A. G. Polyravas et al.
Fig. 8 (a) Schematic representation of a biosensing platform that uses OECT arrays embedded
with microﬂuidics. (b) Photograph of the actual device. A red-colored solution was applied to
the array to measure the levels of glucose, cholesterol and lactate. (Reproduced with permission
[2]. Copyright 2016, John Wiley & Sons—Books) (c) Schematic illustration of the “tubistor.” The
device consists of two ﬂexible electrodes (Drain and Source) and a PEDOT:PSS scaffold as the
channel. (d) Photograph of a tubistor with the conducting scaffold inside the tube. (Reproduced
with permission [72]. Copyright 2018, AAAS)
transport and thus, can be detected by measuring the reduction in the drain current
[62]. Moreover, the rising demands of the biomedical community for tools that can
be applied to mimic in vivo phenomena by studying cell culture has led to the
implementation of a conﬁguration that integrates a conducting polymer scaffold and
an OECT (“tubistor”) [72]. This newly developed platform promises to assist in the
implementation of organoid-based in vitro systems and provides a new platform for
understanding various diseases [72] (Fig. 8c, d).
Furthermore, the ability of PEDOT:PSS to be sterilized has paved the way for a
variety of clinical applications [74]. PEDOT:PSS OECTs have been used to record
brain activity in “genetic absence epilepsy rat from Strasbourg”’ (GAERS) rats that
were induced with chemicals in order to trigger epilepsy [63]. Electrocorticography
(ECoG) arrays of OECTs integrated with surface electrodes were placed on top of
the somatosensory cortex, and simultaneous recordings were performed. OECTs
have been shown to provide a signal-to-noise ratio higher than 20 dB compared
to PEDOT:PSS electrodes, laying the foundations for enhanced recordings while
minimizing the invasiveness of the recording method [63] (Fig. 9a, b). Moreover,
it has been illustrated that OECTs can be employed to stimulate neurons in the
hippocampus [65]. A probe with a temporary insertion shuttle was placed in the
brain and delivered targeted stimuli to speciﬁc populations of neurons, highlighting
the potential of OECTs to record and stimulate at the same time using multiple
OECTs.

Organic Bioelectronics
455
Fig. 9 (a) Optical micrograph of an ECoG probe placed on the cortex of a GAERS rat. Dashed
lines highlight the craniotomy area. (b) Signals of brain activity recorded by an OECT (pink),
a PEDOT:PSS surface electrode (blue) and an Ir-penetrating electrode (black). The quality of
the signals recorded by an OECT show a much higher SNR, surpassing the ones measured by
surface electrodes. (Reproduced with permission [63]. Copyright 2013, Nature Publishing Group)
(c) Recording of ECG activity with a bioresorbable OECT. Red traces illustrate signals measured
by an OECT, and black traces show the recordings from commercially available electrodes.
The recordings obtained by OECTs are comparable with the ones from the Faradaic electrodes.
(Reproduced with permission [64]. Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH) (d) Recording of EEG activity
using an OECT conﬁguration. Bottom image shows the acquired time-frequency spectrogram.
(Reproduced with permission [66]. Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH)
Although implantable devices provide the highest quality of brain signals,
cutaneous application of OECTs has also been demonstrated. OECTs fabricated on
a bioscaffold were able to record electrocardiography (ECG) signals with a sensing
accuracy of tens of μVs, showing comparable results to commercially available
Faradaic electrodes [64] (Fig. 9c). Following that study, OECTs were used to record
eye movement and electroencephalography (EEG) signals by utilizing a low power
consumption conﬁguration [66] (Fig. 9d). These results indicate the potential of
OECTs for near-term applications in the clinic.
Another emerging ﬁeld that has attracted a great deal of attention due to its
applicability in information processing involves the development of neuromorphic
devices [75]. These devices mimic/replicate information processing functions of
real neuronal networks, including short or long-term memory, by actively changing
their electrical properties [38]. OECTs have been used to simulate synaptic func-

456
A. G. Polyravas et al.
Fig. 10 (a) Schematic of an OECT used to replicate neuromorphic functions. (b) Representation
of the OECT conﬁguration, resembling a biological synapse. (c) Characteristic curve of presynaptic
pulses. (Reproduced with permission [67]. Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH)
tions such as dynamic ﬁltering and adaption functions with great success [67, 68]
(Fig. 10). Two different approaches, one that uses a multi-gate to control a single
OECT channel and a complementary one that employs a single gate and multiple
OECT channels, provide good examples of what is possible [69, 76]. The ﬁrst one
aimed to imitate the orientation selectivity of the visual cortex [69], whereas the
latter one was used to show how globally stimuli can control large device networks
[76].
Finally, it should be noted that despite their slow response compared to metal-
oxide ﬁeld-effect transistors (MOSFETs), OECTs have been used to implement
large area-electronics including logic circuits and display drivers, as well as voltage
ampliﬁers and Wheatstone bridges sensing applications [3, 38, 70].
4
Organic Electronic Ion Pumps (OEIPs)
In addition to electrical recording and stimulation, the ionic conductivity of organic
electronic materials presents unique possibilities for electronically controlled drug
delivery. The most notable example of this is the organic electronic ion pump
(OEIP) [5, 77, 78]. The OEIP is in its most basic form is a two terminal device
that electrophoretically drives drugs across an ion exchange membrane (IEM) from
a source reservoir to the target (e.g., surrounding brain tissue) (Fig. 11). For in vivo
applications, the electrodes are typically coated with PEDOT:PSS to increase the
capacitance, thereby allowing for signiﬁcantly more drugs to be delivered for a given

Organic Bioelectronics
457
Fig. 11 (a) Cross-section of original OIEP design showing Source and Target reservoirs with
PEDOT:PSS electrodes in each and an IEM connecting the two reservoirs. (Reproduced with
permission [79]. Copyright 2018, John Wiley & Sons—Books) (b) Cross-section of vertical-
three-terminal OIEP design. (Reproduced with permission [80]. Copyright 2016, AAAS) (c)
Cross-section of microﬂuidic ion pump. (Reproduced with permission [81]. Copyright 2017, John
Wiley & Sons—Books)
applied voltage. The use of an IEM, which is either a polyanion or polycation, to
bridge the space between source and target reservoirs allows for selective delivery
of ions of a given charge (e.g. polyanions allow for selective transport of cations).
This is particularly important for drug delivery applications as the inherently high
salt concentrations in the target tissue may otherwise lead to an ionic current
that is dominated by the transport of ions from target to source. Electrophoresis
across the IEM also confers the advantage of a so-called “dry” drug delivery as
drug molecules are transported across the IEM without solvent (aside from a few
molecules that create the hydration sphere). This dry drug delivery is ideal for local
delivery inside tissue as the pressure increase at the outlet is negligible—a stark
contrast to the ﬂuidic injection of drugs which is known to cause tissue-damaging
edema.
The OEIP offers the beneﬁt of precise spatial and temporal resolution of drug
delivery as drugs are only delivered where the outlet of the device is implanted
and only when an electric ﬁeld is applied. In the OFF state, the passive diffusion
of drugs from source to target is largely hindered by the IEM. When a voltage
is applied across the IEM, the current between the electrodes can be directly
related to the amount of drug pumped from source to target. In the ideal case

458
A. G. Polyravas et al.
of a perfectly selective IEM, using monovalent drug ions and operating below
electrolysis thresholds, each electron passing in the circuit can be attributed to a
single drug molecule delivered from source to target.
Initial designs for OEIPs had a horizontal device architecture with ions pumped
across mm to cm length scales of patterned IEMs. This was effective, however, it
required applied potentials up to tens of volts to achieve physiologically relevant
ﬂuxes of drug from source to target due to relatively low ion mobilities in the
IEM. Subsequent OEIP designs have reduced the voltage needed to deliver drugs
to less than one volt by reducing the transport length across the IEM. Jonsson et al.
demonstrated an array of vertical OEIP structures with a third terminal below the
delivery outlet could allow millisecond delivery of neurotransmitters [80]. Likewise,
Uguz et al. presented an alternative design called the microﬂuidic ion pump (μFIP)
that uses microﬂuidics to transport drugs in solution up to the drug delivery outlet
over which a sub 10 μm IEM ﬁlm is patterned [81]. The μFIP design has been
adapted into multiple form factors, including those suitable for delivery on the
surface of the brain [82] as well as deep inside the brain [83] (Fig. 12).
The electronic control of drug delivery is particularly well-suited for treating
intermittent pathologies such as pain and epilepsy. In 2015, Jonsson et al. presented
an implantable OEIP that was used to deliver gamma amino-butyric acid (GABA),
an inhibitory neurotransmitter, inside the spinal column of a rodent model [84]. The
local delivery of GABA was shown to signiﬁcant increase pain tolerance compared
to control experiments. Around the same time, a series of studies hinted at the
potential of using an OEIP to deliver GABA to control seizure-like activity. This was
ﬁrst shown in vitro, including with a device that had sensing electrodes in parallel to
the OEIP, allowing for real-time monitoring of cellular activity at the drug delivery
outlet [85, 86]. The in vitro work as well as the advent of the μFIP design enabled
the ﬁrst in vivo demonstration of seizure control with an OEIP [83]. In this study,
seizure-like activity was stopped and prevented by delivering GABA directly to the
Fig. 12 (a) Image and schematic of OEIP device designed for implantation in spine of rat. (b)
Measured withdraw threshold in terms of force applied to rat paw as a function of charge (drug)
pumped by the OEIP. (Reproduced with permission [84]. Copyright 2015, AAAS)

Organic Bioelectronics
459
Fig. 13 (a) Image of microﬂuidic ion pump probe for deep brain therapy in rodent models.
(b) Electrophysiology recordings from the hippocampus of the rodent model following injection
of seizure-inducing drug with and without GABA delivery from the μFIP. (Reproduced with
permission [83]. Copyright 2018, AAAS)
seizure source in an anesthetized rodent model. Altogether these results indicate that
OEIPs could one day be the cornerstone technology for the treatment of neurological
disorders (Fig. 13).
5
Discussion
The developments described above highlight the potential of devices that use
organic materials to interface with the neural tissue. A large amount of work,
including ours, has focused on using PEDOT:PSS, a p-type conjugated polymer, due
to the advantages it provides. Low impedance [16, 17], low toxicity levels [19–21]
and commercial availability are some of the main reasons that allowed PEDOT:PSS
to become a champion material for bioelectronics. In addition, recent work showed

460
A. G. Polyravas et al.
that autoclaving does not affect the morphology of PEDOT:PSS ﬁlms, while causing
only slight degradation to its electrical properties, paving the way for its clinical
translation [74].
In the last decades CP materials, such as PEDOT:PSS, have been widely used
to coat the surface of metal electrodes, with the greater aim of using them in
applications to interface with the biological milieu. A good example of how
PEDOT:PSS electrodes can be applied as a neural interface to record signals from
the cortical surface of the brain is the NeuroGrid [31]. The main advantage CPs
offer comes from an increase in the effective surface area of the metal electrode,
which greatly enhances the ionic-electronic transduction for both recording and
stimulation purposes [87, 88]. PEDOT:PSS electrodes have been applied to a variety
of electrophysiology applications [88] and have exhibited solid short-term stability
(i.e., weeks) [89, 90]. The need, however, for chronic implantations of CP electrodes
has recently increased, as more and more applications require devices to maintain
their characteristics for the lifetime of the patient. Important progress towards that
direction has been published recently, demonstrating the stability of PEDOT:PSS
electrodes in cell culture media for 4 months [91]. Such results illustrate the
potential of PEDOT:PSS electrodes to be used for long-term in tissue and cell
cultures as well as chronic implantable devices.
On the other hand, transistors have been attracting attention due to their ability
to amplify the recorded signal at the acquisition site. This signiﬁcant advantage
over electrodes has made OECTs a key player in bioelectronics. OECTs have been
used to record a variety of electrophysiology signals (e.g., ECoGs). They have been
shown to have a much higher SNR compared to commercial electrodes [63] as well
as to be superior in transducing biological signals [62] and stimulating neurons
[65]. Their remarkable capabilities arise from the use of CPs, such as PEDOT:PSS,
as the semiconducting material, which bestow them with high transconductance
[46] (and thus, high signal ampliﬁcation) and a low noise level [40] (and thus,
great sensitivity). PEDOT:PSS OECTs have the capability of recording any type
of electrophysiology signal (LFPs, action potentials, etc.), with the only limiting
factor being the frequency response. However, OECTs with a response time of μs
have been demonstrated [49, 50], allowing for OECTs to be used as a viable clinical
device.
OEIPs offer the advantage of targeted drug delivery with high spatial and
temporal resolution. This process is controlled by the application of an external
electric ﬁeld, with the amount of drug being injected being linked with the current
ﬂowing from the source to the target electrode. A good balance needs to be stricken
between sufﬁcient delivery of the drug and maintenance of low voltage in order to
avoid electrolysis and reduce power consumption. Recent progress in the ﬁeld has
decreased the applied voltage to values less than one volt. This is possible by tuning
the length between the source/target electrodes. Such progress allowed for OEIPs to
be tested in the treatment of epilepsy and pain, so paving the way for the application
in a variety of neurological disorders (Table 2).

Organic Bioelectronics
461
Table 2 Different applications of bioelectronic technologies
Technology
Type of application
Description
PaC PEDOT:PSS electrodes
[14]
Cortical
ECoG recording
NeuroGrid [31]
Cortical
LFP, ECoG, action potential
recording
Polyimide PEDOT:PSS
electrodes [33]
Cutaneous
EEG recording
Inkjet-printed PEDOT:PSS
electrodes on paper [36]
Cutaneous
ECG recording
Inkjet-printed PEDOT:PSS
electrodes on stretchable
textile [34]
Cutaneous
ECG recording
Tattoo/textile PEDOT:PSS
electrodes [35]
Cutaneous
EMG recording
OECTs on glass slide [2, 67,
70]
In vitro biosensing,
neuromorphic, logic circuits
Glucose, lactate, cholesterol
sensing, simulation of
synaptic functions, voltage
ampliﬁer
OECTs integrated with a
microﬂuidic platform [61]
In vitro cell monitoring
Real-time parametric
information on cell integrity
Tubistor [72]
In vitro 3D cell growth and
monitoring
Real-time cell monitoring
Pac OECTs [63, 66]
Cortical, cutaneous
ECoG recording, EEG
recording
OECTs on delaminating
depth probes [65]
Brain implantation
Neuron stimulation
OECTs on a bioscaffold [64]
Cutaneous
ECG recording
OEIPs on glass slide, wafer
[85, 86]
In vitro cell monitoring, in
vitro tissue slice
Cell monitoring and drug
delivery on a brain slice
model, control of epileptiform
activity
PaC OEIPs [81–83]
Cortical, cortical,
implantable probe
Drug delivery, simultaneous
neural recording and drug
delivery, seizure control
Implantable OEIPs [84]
Spine implantation
Drug delivery
6
Conclusions and Future Directions
In this chapter, we explored three different types of electronic devices: conducting
polymer electrodes that offer low impedance even at small size, organic electro-
chemical transistors that locally amplify recorded signals, and organic electronic ion
pumps that electronically control the delivery of drugs with spatiotemporal control.

462
A. G. Polyravas et al.
The identifying property of the active materials in these devices is their mixed
electronic/ionic conductivity and their compatibility with mechanically ﬂexible
substrates. We discussed the principle of operation of these devices and overviewed
some applications to highlight their advantages and limitations.
During this last decade, our understanding on the device physics of electrodes
and OECTs has greatly improved and their clinical translation has begun. For
electrodes, one of the main challenges remains the reduction of their size, so that
more recording sites can be implemented in implantable arrays. This necessitates the
development of more efﬁcient organic materials that further decrease impedance.
Such materials will also be useful for OECTs. OECTs properties make them an
excellent candidate for Brain-Computer Interfaces, a newly evolving ﬁeld, which
aims in restoring lost neurological functionality. Integrated circuits that utilize
OECTs and other elements to perform more complex functions without the need of
external devices are already being envisioned. For ion pumps, a better understanding
of how device architecture affects performance is still in the works. Due to their
ability to locally inject speciﬁc amounts of chemical substances, ion pumps have
already shown the potential to provide effective solutions for targeted drug delivery
in occasions where a surgical operation would not be considered a viable option.
References
1. Verkhratsky, A., Krishtal, O.A., Petersen, O.H.: From Galvani to patch clamp: the development
of electrophysiology. Pﬂugers Arch–Eur J Physiol. 453, 233–247 (2006)
2. Pappa, A.-M., et al.: Organic transistor arrays integrated with ﬁnger-powered microﬂuidics for
Multianalyte saliva testing. Adv. Healthc. Mater. 5, 2295–2302 (2016)
3. Braendlein, M., et al.: Lactate detection in tumor cell cultures using organic transistor circuits.
Adv. Mater. 29, 1605744 (2017)
4. Pappa, A.M., et al.: Direct metabolite detection with an n-type accumulation mode organic
electrochemical transistor. Science. Advances. 4, eaat0911 (2018)
5. Isaksson, J., et al.: Electronic control of ca 2+ signalling in neuronal cells using an organic
electronic ion pump. Nature Mater. 6, 673–679 (2007)
6. Chen, R., Canales, A., Anikeeva, P.: Neural recording and modulation technologies. Nature
Reviews Materials. 2, 16093 (2017)
7. Di Pino, G., et al.: ODEs model of foreign body reaction around peripheral nerve implanted
electrode. In: 2010 Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and
Biology, pp. 1543–1546 (2010). https://doi.org/10.1109/IEMBS.2010.5626825
8. Rivnay, J., Owens, R.M., Malliaras, G.G.: The rise of organic bioelectronics. Chem. Mater. 26,
679–685 (2014)
9. Rivnay, J., Wang, H., Fenno, L., Deisseroth, K., Malliaras, G.G.: Next-generation probes,
particles, and proteins for neural interfacing. Sci. Adv. 3, e1601649 (2017)
10. Jorﬁ, M., Skousen, J.L., Weder, C., Capadona, J.R.: Progress towards biocompatible intracor-
tical microelectrodes for neural interfacing applications. J. Neural Eng. 12, 011001 (2015)
11. Robinson, D.A.: The electrical properties of metal microelectrodes. Proc. IEEE. 56, 1065–1071
(1968)
12. Ludwig, K.A., Uram, J.D., Yang, J., Martin, D.C., Kipke, D.R.: Chronic neural record-
ings using silicon microelectrode arrays electrochemically deposited with a poly(3,4-
ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT) ﬁlm. J. Neural Eng. 3, 59 (2006)

Organic Bioelectronics
463
13. Ludwig, K.A., et al.: Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT) polymer coatings facilitate
smaller neural recording electrodes. J. Neural Eng. 8, 014001 (2011)
14. Khodagholy, D., et al.: Highly conformable conducting polymer electrodes for in vivo
recordings. Adv. Mater. 23, H268–H272 (2011)
15. Proctor, C.M., Rivnay, J., Malliaras, G.G.: Understanding volumetric capacitance in conduct-
ing polymers. J. Polym. Sci. B Polym. Phys. 54, 1433–1436 (2016)
16. Cui, X., Martin, D.C.: Electrochemical deposition and characterization of poly(3,4-
ethylenedioxythiophene) on neural microelectrode arrays. Sensors Actuators B Chem. 89,
92–102 (2003)
17. Martin, D.C., Malliaras, G.G.: Interfacing electronic and ionic charge transport in bioelectron-
ics. ChemElectroChem. 3, 686–688 (2016)
18. Strakosas, X., Wei, B., Martin, C., D. & M. Owens, R.: Biofunctionalization of polydioxythio-
phene derivatives for biomedical applications. J. Mater. Chem. B. 4, 4952–4968 (2016)
19. Ramuz, M., et al.: Combined optical and electronic sensing of epithelial cells using planar
organic transistors. Adv. Mater. 26, 7083–7090 (2014)
20. Marzocchi, M., et al.: Physical and electrochemical properties of PEDOT:PSS as a tool for
controlling cell growth. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces. 7, 17993–18003 (2015)
21. Inal, S., et al.: Conducting polymer scaffolds for hosting and monitoring 3D cell culture.
Advanced Biosystems. 1, 1700052 (2017)
22. Sanchez-Sanchez, A., del Agua, I., Malliaras, G.G., Mecerreyes, D.: Chapter 6–conductive
poly(3,4-Ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT)-based polymers and their applications in bio-
electronics. In: Aguilar, M.R., San Román, J. (eds.) Smart Polymers and their Applications
(Second Edition), pp. 191–218. Woodhead Publishing (2019). https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-
08-102416-4.00006-5
23. Crispin, X., et al.: The origin of the high conductivity of poly(3,4-ethylenedioxy
thiophene)−poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT−PSS) plastic electrodes. Chem. Mater. 18, 4354–
4360 (2006)
24. Yan, F., Parrott, E.P.J., Ung, B.S.-Y., Pickwell-MacPherson, E.: Solvent doping of
PEDOT/PSS: effect on terahertz optoelectronic properties and utilization in terahertz devices.
J. Phys. Chem. C. 119, 6813–6818 (2015)
25. Nardes, A.M., et al.: Conductivity, work function, and environmental stability of PEDOT:PSS
thin ﬁlms treated with sorbitol. Org. Electron. 9, 727–734 (2008)
26. Zhang, S., et al.: Solvent-induced changes in PEDOT:PSS ﬁlms for organic electrochemical
transistors. APL Materials. 3, 014911 (2014)
27. Stavrinidou, E., Sessolo, M., Winther-Jensen, B., Sanaur, S., Malliaras, G.G.: A physical
interpretation of impedance at conducting polymer/electrolyte junctions. AIP Adv. 4, 017127
(2014)
28. Stavrinidou, E., et al.: A simple model for ion injection and transport in conducting polymers.
J. Appl. Phys. 113, 244501 (2013)
29. Stavrinidou, E., et al.: Direct measurement of ion mobility in a conducting polymer. Adv.
Mater. 25, 4488–4493 (2013)
30. Koutsouras, D.A., et al.: Impedance spectroscopy of spin-cast and electrochemically deposited
PEDOT:PSS ﬁlms on microfabricated electrodes with various areas. ChemElectroChem. 4,
2321–2327 (2017)
31. Khodagholy, D., et al.: NeuroGrid: recording action potentials from the surface of the brain.
Nat. Neurosci. 18, 310–315 (2015)
32. Pas, J., et al.: A bilayered PVA/PLGA-bioresorbable shuttle to improve the implantation of
ﬂexible neural probes. J. Neural Eng. 15, 065001 (2018)
33. Leleux, P., et al.: Conducting polymer electrodes for electroencephalography. Adv. Healthc.
Mater. 3, 490–493 (2014)
34. Bihar, E., et al.: Fully printed electrodes on stretchable textiles for long-term electrophysiology.
Advanced Materials Technologies. 2, 1600251 (2017)
35. Bihar, E., et al.: Fully printed all-polymer tattoo/textile electronics for electromyography. Flex.
Print. Electron. 3, 034004 (2018)

464
A. G. Polyravas et al.
36. Bihar, E., et al.: Inkjet-printed PEDOT:PSS electrodes on paper for electrocardiography. Adv.
Healthc. Mater. 6, 1601167 (2017)
37. White, H.S., Kittlesen, G.P., Wrighton, M.S.: Chemical derivatization of an array of three gold
microelectrodes with polypyrrole: fabrication of a molecule-based transistor. J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 106, 5375–5377 (1984)
38. Rivnay, J., et al.: Organic electrochemical transistors. Nat. Rev. Mater. 3, 17086 (2018)
39. Bernards, D.A., Malliaras, G.G.: Steady-state and transient behavior of organic electrochemical
transistors. Adv. Funct. Mater. 17, 3538–3544 (2007)
40. Polyravas, A.G., et al.: Impact of contact overlap on transconductance and noise in organic
electrochemical transistors. Flex. Print. Electron. 4, 044003 (2019)
41. Inal, S., et al.: A high transconductance accumulation mode electrochemical transistor. Adv.
Mater. Weinheim. 26, 7450–7455 (2014)
42. Nilsson, D., et al.: Bi-stable and dynamic current modulation in electrochemical organic
transistors. Adv. Mater. 14, 51–54 (2002)
43. Inal, S., Malliaras, G.G., Rivnay, J.: Benchmarking organic mixed conductors for transistors.
Nat. Commun. 8, 1767 (2017)
44. Donahue, M.J., et al.: High-performance vertical organic electrochemical transistors. Adv.
Mater. 30, n/a-n/a (2018)
45. Rivnay, J., et al.: High-performance transistors for bioelectronics through tuning of channel
thickness. Sci. Adv. 1, e1400251 (2015)
46. Khodagholy, D., et al.: High transconductance organic electrochemical transistors. Nat.
Commun. 4, 2133 (2013)
47. Friedlein, J.T., et al.: Inﬂuence of disorder on transfer characteristics of organic electrochemical
transistors. Appl. Phys. Lett. 111, 023301 (2017)
48. Rivnay, J., et al.: Organic electrochemical transistors with maximum transconductance at zero
gate bias. Adv. Mater. Weinheim. 25, 7010–7014 (2013)
49. Khodagholy, D., et al.: High speed and high density organic electrochemical transistor arrays.
Appl. Phys. Lett. 99, 163304 (2011)
50. Cea, C., et al.: Enhancement-mode ion-based transistor as a comprehensive interface and real-
time processing unit for in vivo electrophysiology. Nat. Mater. 1–8 (2020). https://doi.org/
10.1038/s41563-020-0638-3
51. Buzsaki, G.: Rhythms of the Brain. Oxford University Press, U.S.A. (2011)
52. Hess, L.H., et al.: High-Transconductance graphene solution-gated ﬁeld effect transistors.
Appl. Phys. Lett. 99, 033503 (2011)
53. Ohno, Y., Maehashi, K., Yamashiro, Y., Matsumoto, K.: Electrolyte-gated graphene ﬁeld-effect
transistors for detecting pH and protein adsorption. Nano Lett. 9, 3318–3322 (2009)
54. Li, B.-R., et al.: Biomolecular recognition with a sensitivity-enhanced nanowire transistor
biosensor. Biosens. Bioelectron. 45, 252–259 (2013)
55. Sasa, S., Ozaki, M., Koike, K., Yano, M., Inoue, M.: High-performance ZnO/ZnMgO ﬁeld-
effect transistors using a hetero-metal-insulator-semiconductor structure. Appl. Phys. Lett. 89,
053502 (2006)
56. Siddiqui, J., Cagin, E., Chen, D., Phillips, J.D.: ZnO thin-ﬁlm transistors with polycrystalline
(Ba,Sr)TiO3 gate insulators. Appl. Phys. Lett. 88, 212903 (2006)
57. Xu, H., et al.: Top-gated graphene ﬁeld-effect transistors with high normalized transconduc-
tance and designable dirac point voltage. ACS Nano. 5, 5031–5037 (2011)
58. Moon, J.S., et al.: Top-gated epitaxial graphene FETs on Si-face SiC wafers with a peak
Transconductance of 600 mS/mm. IEEE Electron Device Letters. 31, 260–262 (2010)
59. Meric, I., et al.: Current saturation in zero-bandgap, top-gated graphene ﬁeld-effect transistors.
Nat. Nanotechnol. 3, 654–659 (2008)
60. Cui, Y., Zhong, Z., Wang, D., Wang, W.U., Lieber, C.M.: High performance silicon nanowire
ﬁeld effect transistors. Nano Lett. 3, 149–152 (2003)
61. Curto, V.F., et al.: Organic transistor platform with integrated microﬂuidics for in-line multi-
parametric in vitro cell monitoring. Microsystems & Nanoengineering. 3, 1–12 (2017)

Organic Bioelectronics
465
62. Pitsalidis, C., et al.: Biomimetic electronic devices for measuring bacterial membrane disrup-
tion. Adv. Mater. 30, 1803130 (2018)
63. Khodagholy, D., et al.: In vivo recordings of brain activity using organic transistors. Nat.
Commun. 4, 1575 (2013)
64. Campana, A., Cramer, T., Simon, D.T., Berggren, M., Biscarini, F.: Electrocardiographic
recording with conformable organic electrochemical transistor fabricated on Resorbable
bioscaffold. Adv. Mater. 26, 3874–3878 (2014)
65. Williamson, A., et al.: Localized neuron stimulation with organic electrochemical transistors
on delaminating depth probes. Adv. Mater. 27, 4405–4410 (2015)
66. Pierre, L., et al.: Organic electrochemical transistors for clinical applications. Adv. Healthc.
Mater. 4, 142–147 (2015)
67. Gkoupidenis, P., Schaefer, N., Garlan, B., Malliaras, G.G.: Neuromorphic functions in
PEDOT:PSS organic electrochemical transistors. Adv. Mater. 27, 7176–7180 (2015)
68. Gkoupidenis, P., Schaefer, N., Strakosas, X., Fairﬁeld, J.A., Malliaras, G.G.: Synaptic plasticity
functions in an organic electrochemical transistor. Appl. Phys. Lett. 107, 263302 (2015)
69. Gkoupidenis, P., Koutsouras, D.A., Lonjaret, T., Fairﬁeld, J.A., Malliaras, G.G.: Orientation
selectivity in a multi-gated organic electrochemical transistor. Sci. Rep. 6, 27007 (2016)
70. Braendlein, M., Lonjaret, T., Leleux, P., Badier, J., Malliaras, G.G.: Voltage ampliﬁer based on
organic electrochemical transistor. Adv Sci (Weinh). 4 (2016)
71. Andersson Ersman, P., et al.: All-printed large-scale integrated circuits based on organic
electrochemical transistors. Nature. Communications. 10, 1–9 (2019)
72. Pitsalidis, C., et al.: Transistor in a tube: a route to three-dimensional bioelectronics. Science.
Advances. 4, eaat4253 (2018)
73. Curto, V.F., et al.: Organic transistor platform with integrated microﬂuidics for in-line multi-
parametric in vitro cell monitoring. Microsystems & Nanoengineering. 3, 17028 (2017)
74. Uguz, I., et al.: Autoclave sterilization of PEDOT:PSS electrophysiology devices. Adv.
Healthc. Mater. 5, 3094–3098 (2016)
75. van de Burgt, Y., Melianas, A., Keene, S.T., Malliaras, G., Salleo, A.: Organic electronics for
neuromorphic computing. Nat. Electronics. 1, 386–397 (2018)
76. Gkoupidenis, P., Koutsouras, D.A., Malliaras, G.G.: Neuromorphic device architectures with
global connectivity through electrolyte gating. Nat. Commun. 8, 15448 (2017)
77. Berggren, M. et al. Electrically Controlled Ion Transport Device. (2012)
78. Simon, D.T., et al.: Organic electronics for precise delivery of neurotransmitters to modulate
mammalian sensory function. Nat. Mater. 8, 742–746 (2009)
79. Sjöström, T.A., et al.: A decade of Iontronic delivery devices. Advanced Materials Technolo-
gies. 3, 1700360 (2018)
80. Jonsson, A., Sjöström, T.A., Tybrandt, K., Berggren, M., Simon, D.T.: Chemical delivery array
with millisecond neurotransmitter release. Sci. Adv. 2, e1601340 (2016)
81. Uguz, I., et al.: A microﬂuidic ion pump for in vivo drug delivery. Adv. Mater. 29, 1701217
(2017)
82. Proctor, C.M., et al.: An Electrocorticography device with an integrated microﬂuidic ion
pump for simultaneous neural recording and electrophoretic drug delivery in vivo. Advanced
Biosystems. 3, 1800270 (2019)
83. Proctor, C.M., et al.: Electrophoretic drug delivery for seizure control. Science. Advances. 4,
eaau1291 (2018)
84. Jonsson, A., et al.: Therapy using implanted organic bioelectronics. Sci. Adv. 1, e1500039
(2015)
85. Jonsson, A., et al.: Bioelectronic neural pixel: chemical stimulation and electrical sensing at
the same site. PNAS. 113, 9440–9445 (2016)
86. Williamson, A., et al.: Controlling epileptiform activity with organic electronic ion pumps.
Adv. Mater. 27, 3138–3144 (2015)
87. Simon, D.T., Gabrielsson, E.O., Tybrandt, K., Berggren, M.: Organic bioelectronics: bridging
the signaling gap between biology and technology. Chem. Rev. 116, 13009–13041 (2016)

466
A. G. Polyravas et al.
88. Zeglio, E., Rutz, A.L., Winkler, T.E., Malliaras, G.G., Herland, A.: Conjugated polymers for
assessing and controlling biological functions. Adv. Mater. 31, 1806712 (2019)
89. Venkatraman, S., et al.: In vitro and in vivo evaluation of PEDOT microelectrodes for neural
stimulation and recording. IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 19, 307–316 (2011)
90. Boehler, C., Oberueber, F., Schlabach, S., Stieglitz, T., Asplund, M.: Long-term stable adhesion
for conducting polymers in biomedical applications: IrOx and nanostructured platinum solve
the chronic challenge. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces. 9, 189–197 (2017)
91. Dijk, G., Rutz, A.L., Malliaras, G.G.: Stability of PEDOT:PSS-coated gold electrodes in cell
culture conditions. Adv. Mater. Tech. 5, 1900662 (2020)

