D
Damian, Peter
▶Peter Damian
Dante Alighieri
TERESA RUPP
Department of History
Mount Saint Mary’s University
Emmitsburg, MD
USA
Abstract
Dante Alighieri (1265–1321) was a poet whose work was
inﬂuenced both by his political experiences and by his
study of philosophy. Born in Florence, he was educated
in grammar and rhetoric and reports in his Convivio that
he studied philosophy at the ‘‘schools of the religious,’’
probably the studia at Florence’s Franciscan and Domin-
ican houses. Until his exile, he was an active participant in
civic life, as a guild member, communal councilor, and
prior. He was exiled in early 1302 after his faction, the
Whites, was replaced by the Blacks (with the not-so-covert
support of Boniface VIII). He never returned to Florence,
dying in Ravenna in 1321.
Except for the early collection of lyric poems, the Vita
nuova, most of his works were composed during his exile.
Convivio is an unﬁnished encyclopedic work on human
knowledge. Monarchia argues for a single universal ruler,
who should be the Roman emperor and not the pope. The
Divine Comedy brings together many of these philosoph-
ical and political themes, transformed into a masterpiece
of imaginative literature.
Dante Alighieri (1265–1321) was a poet whose work was
inﬂuenced both by his political experiences and by his
study of philosophy. He was born in 1265 in Florence to
Alighiero Alighieri, possibly a moneylender, and Bella
degli Abati. He was educated in grammar and rhetoric
and began his literary career by composing lyric poems in
the dolce stil nuovo (‘‘sweet new style’’), many of them
inspired by his beloved Beatrice, thought to be Beatrice
Portinari, although he contracted marriage to Gemma
Donati in 1277, with whom he had four children. After
Beatrice’s death in 1290, Dante compiled 31 of his lyric
poems into the collection La vita nuova, interspersing
them with a prose commentary that narrates the transfor-
mation of his relationship with Beatrice from conven-
tional courtly love of the earthly Beatrice to a purely
intellectual love of her blessed spirit. Also in the 1290s,
Dante tells us in the unﬁnished Convivio (Banquet) of
1304–1307, he turned for consolation to the study of
philosophy ne le scuole de li religiosi e a le disputazioni de
li ﬁlosofanti (‘‘in the schools of the religious and the
disputations of the philosophers’’; Conv. 2.12.7.). These
‘‘schools of the religious’’ would have been the studia
attached to the mendicant orders in Florence. His teacher
at the Franciscan house, Santa Croce, was probably Peter
Olivi, who exposed him to the Spiritual Franciscans’ crit-
icism of church property, while the Dominican teacher at
Santa Maria Novella, Remigio dei Girolami, familiarized
him with Aristotelian ideas.
In addition to his early poetic efforts and philosoph-
ical explorations, Dante also participated in Florentine
civic life. He fought in the battle of Campaldino against
Arezzo in 1289 and joined the guild of Medici e speziali
(doctors and pharmacists) in 1295, making him eligible to
hold political ofﬁce under the recently passed (1293) Ordi-
nances of Justice. Dante sat on communal advisory bodies,
including the Consiglio dei Trentasei del Capitano del
Popolo (Council of the Thirty-six of the Captain of the
People) from November 1295 to April 1296, and the
Consiglio del Cento (Council of the Hundred) twice, in
1296 and 1301. He served a two-month term as one of the
seven priors, the executive body in the Florentine com-
mune, from June 15 to August 15, 1300. In a failed attempt
to defuse factional tensions in Florence, Dante and his
fellow priors exiled the leaders of both the Black and
White parties. The subsequent priorate recalled the
Whites, and the still-exiled Blacks turned for help to
Pope Boniface VIII, who arranged with Charles of Valois,
brother of King Philip IV of France, to intervene in
Henrik Lagerlund (ed.), Encyclopedia of Medieval Philosophy, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4020-9729-4,
# Springer Science+Business Media B.V., 2011

Florentine politics as ‘‘Peacemaker’’ between the warring
factions. In October 1301, Dante was one of three
ambassadors sent by the commune to Rome to negotiate
with Boniface to keep Charles out. Their efforts were
unsuccessful, and Charles of Valois entered Florence on
November 1, 1301. A few days later, the supposed
peacemaker opened the gates to the Black exiles, who
took over the government and condemned their enemies
to punishments ranging from ﬁnes to exile to death.
Dante, still in Rome on his embassy, was sentenced ﬁrst
to exile on January 27, 1302, and then to death, should
he return to Florence, on March 10, 1302. He spent
the rest of his life in exile, dying in Ravenna on
September 13, 1321.
Most of Dante’s works, both literary and philosophi-
cal, were composed during his exile and in many cases
were informed by that experience. The Convivio, for exam-
ple, is modeled on Boethius’ Consolation of Philosophy,
both in form – a mixture of prose and poetry – and in
content – how the study of philosophy offers comfort to
one in difﬁcult circumstances (prison for Boethius, exile
for Dante). Originally projected to have 14 books, the
Convivio, which Dante worked on from 1304 to 1307,
was left unﬁnished and never made public during his
lifetime. Each of the four competed books opens with
one of Dante’s canzone, followed by a prose commentary.
It opens with a statement drawn from Aristotle’s Meta-
physics, tutti li uomini naturalmente desiderano di sapere
(‘‘all men naturally desire to know’’). Knowledge is there-
fore necessary for humans to realize their souls’ potential
and thereby achieve earthly happiness. The Convivio was
meant to present that knowledge in the vernacular for the
beneﬁt of those without Latin. The completed books dis-
cuss cosmology and the moral virtues whose cultivation
results in true nobility.
While the Convivio was conceived as encyclopedic in
scope, the Monarchia (On Monarchy) focuses on a single
topic – the necessity for a single universal ruler. The dating
of the treatise is disputed; it may have been composed as
early as 1309–1313, the period of the emperor Henry VII’s
ultimately unsuccessful expedition to Italy to establish
imperial rule, or, if the reference to Paradiso in Monarchia
1.12 is taken as part of Dante’s original text, as late as 1317.
The
three
books
of
Monarchia
each
demonstrate
a proposition: Book 1 asserts the need for a universal
ruler; Book 2 explains why such a ruler must be
a Roman emperor; and Book 3 argues that the authority
of the Roman emperor derives directly from God and is
not subordinate to the papacy.
Dante’s most famous work, the Divine Comedy, brings
together many of the philosophical themes from these
other works. The dating of the composition of the Divine
Comedy is also imprecise, but Dante probably worked on
Inferno from 1306 to 1309 and on Purgatorio from 1308 to
1312, publishing them in 1314 and 1315, respectively; he
had completed cantos one through seventeen of Paradiso
by 1316 and ﬁnished it in 1321. Setting the action at Easter
time 1300 allows Dante to have several of the ﬁgures he
meets on his journey through hell, purgatory, and paradise
prophesy his coming exile. Other ﬁgures are the mouth-
pieces for his criticisms of papal policy and conduct and
his exaltation of the Roman Empire. Beatrice returns as his
spiritual and intellectual guide, explaining cosmological
concepts as she leads him through the heavenly spheres of
paradise.
See also: ▶Boethius ▶Peter John Olivi ▶Political Philos-
ophy ▶Poverty ▶Remigio
dei
Girolami
▶Roman
Empire
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Alighieri Dante (1980) The divine comedy, trans. with commentary
Singleton CS, 3 vols. Princeton University Press, Princeton
Alighieri Dante (1984) Vita Nuova, ed. de Robertis D. In: Alighieri Dante,
Opere minori, vol 1, part 1. Ricciardi, Milan/Naples, pp 3–247
Alighieri Dante (1988) Convivio, ed. Vasoli C, de Robertis D. In: Alighieri
Dante, Opere minori, vol 1, part 2. Ricciardi, Milan/Naples
Alighieri Dante (1990) Dante’s Il Convivio (The Banquet), trans. Lansing
RH. Garland library of medieval literature, vol 65, series B. Garland,
New York/London
Alighieri Dante (1994) La Commedia secondo l’antica vulgata, ed.
Petrocchi G, 4 vols. Le Lettere, Florence
Alighieri Dante (1995a) Convivio, ed. Ageno FB, 3 vols. Le Lettere,
Florence
Alighieri Dante (1995b) Monarchia, ed. and trans. Shaw P. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge
Alighieri Dante (1998) Dante’s ‘‘Monarchia’’, trans. with commentary:
Kay R. Studies and texts, vol 131. Pontiﬁcal Institute of Mediaeval
Studies, Toronto
Secondary Sources
Bosco U, Petrocchi G (eds) (1970–1978) Enciclopedia dantesca, 6 vols.
Istituto dell’Enciclopedia italiana, Rome
Boyde P (1981) Dante philomythes and philosopher: man in the cosmos.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Davis CT (1957) Dante and the idea of Rome. Clarendon, Oxford
d’Entre`ves P (1952) Dante as a political thinker. Clarendon, Oxford
Dronke P (1986) Dante and medieval Latin traditions. Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, Cambridge
Ferrrante JM (1984) The political vision of the divine comedy. Princeton
University Press, Princeton
Gilson E (1963) Dante and philosophy, trans. Moore D. Harper, New York
Jacoff R (ed) (1993) The Cambridge companion to Dante. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge
Lansing RH (ed) (2000) The Dante encyclopedia. Garland, New York/
London
246 D
Dante Alighieri

Maccarrone M (1955) Il terzo libro della Monarchia. Studi danteschi
33:5–142
Maccarrone M (1976) Papato e impero nella Monarchia. Nuove letture
dantesche 8:259–332
Mazzota G (1993) Dante’s vision and the circle of knowledge. Princeton
University Press, Princeton
Nardi B (1942/1983) Dante e la cultura medievale: Nuovi saggi di ﬁlosoﬁa
dantesca. Laterza, Bari
Scott JA (1996) Dante’s political purgatory. University of Pennsylvania
Press, Philadelphia
Scott JA (2004) Understanding Dante. University of Notre Dame Press,
Notre Dame
De caelo, Commentaries on
Aristotle’s
EDWARD GRANT
Department of History and Philosophy of Science
Indiana University
Bloomington, IN
USA
Abstract
Aristotle’s De caelo was his major contribution to cosmol-
ogy, embracing the celestial and terrestrial regions into
which he divided the cosmos. By translations, it passed
from Greek to Arabic, and was ﬁnally translated from
Arabic, and then from Greek into Latin in the twelfth
century. Numerous commentaries and treatises known as
Questions were written on the De caelo from the thirteenth
to the seventeenth century. One of the most problematic
questions deriving from De caelo was whether the world is
eternal, as Aristotle argued, or whether it was created as
Christians insisted. This difﬁcult question, and others,
produced a theological reaction in the form of a Church
condemnation of 219 articles in 1277. The central issue
that emerged was about God’s absolute power. Scholastic
natural philosophers assumed that God could do anything
short of a logical contradiction. By His supernatural
powers, it was therefore assumed that God could do
anything that Aristotle had regarded as naturally impossi-
ble. This gave rise to numerous hypothetical discussions
about what things would be like if God created other
worlds and what form that might take, or if He moved
our world with a rectilinear motion, or if He made matter
disappear and created a vacuum, and so on. In commen-
taries and Questions on De caelo in the sixteenth and
seventeenth
centuries
–
following
the
momentous
contributions by Copernicus, Tycho Brahe, and Galileo
that had completely subverted Aristotle’s physical
cosmos – scholastics sought, as best they could, to adjust
to the new cosmology.
In his basic works on natural philosophy, Aristotle
devoted De caelo (On the Heavens) to cosmology. Of the
four books comprising the treatise, Aristotle devotes the
ﬁrst two to the celestial region, which includes all the stars
and planets. Because celestial bodies are incapable of self-
motion, they are carried around the heavens by spheres
that are concentric with the earth’s center. The celestial
region extends downward from the outermost sphere of
the celestial region – the sphere of the ﬁxed stars – to the
innermost sphere of the moon. Aristotle regarded the
celestial region as eternal and therefore assumed it to be
composed of an ether that was eternal and incorruptible.
The third and fourth books treat of the terrestrial region
that ranges from just below the moon to the geometric
center of the earth. Here we ﬁnd four terrestrial elements
in descending concentric circles of ﬁre, air, water, and
earth, the last mentioned constituting a sphere that lies
at the center of our spherical universe.
The ﬁrst signiﬁcant commentaries on De caelo were
written in Byzantium. In the fourth century CE,
Themistius (ﬂ. late 340s–c. 385), a Peripatetic philosopher,
wrote a commentary on De caelo, as did Simplicius (ﬂ. ﬁrst
half of sixth century CE), a Neoplatonic philosopher.
Aristotle’s natural philosophical works were virtually
unknown in the Latin West until the twelfth century. But
they were known east of Byzantium, in Syria and Persia,
brought there by Nestorian and Monophysite Christians
who had been driven from the Byzantine Empire as here-
tics. Nestorian Christians translated Aristotle’s treatises on
natural philosophy into Syriac and from the latter they
were often translated into Arabic.
Aristotle’s works played a signiﬁcant role in Islamic
science and natural philosophy. By far the most important
Islamic natural philosopher to comment on Aristotle’s
works was Averroes (1126–1198), in the twelfth century,
who usually made three different types of commentaries
on most of Aristotle’s natural philosophical works, includ-
ing De caelo. There was the short commentary, which was
really a paraphrase or summary, of Aristotle’s text. The
second, or middle commentary, was also not a direct
translation, but gave the meaning of a brief segment of
Aristotle’s text intermingled with comments by Averroes.
The third and last type of commentary was the Long
Commentary, which included all of Aristotle’s text
presented sequentially section by section, with each sec-
tion followed by Averroes’ commentary on that section. In
the short and middle commentaries, it was often difﬁcult
to distinguish Aristotle’s text from Averroes’ comments.
De caelo, Commentaries on Aristotle’s D
247
D

During the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, Aristotle’s
De caelo ﬁnally reached the West in Latin translation.
Gerard of Cremona (c. 1114–1187), the greatest medieval
translator of Aristotelian texts from Arabic to Latin, trans-
lated De caelo, while in the thirteenth century William of
Moerbeke (c. 1215–c. 1286) translated some 49 works
from Greek into Latin, including De caelo and virtually
all works attributed to Aristotle (Grant 1974). Two impor-
tant commentaries on Aristotle’s De caelo were also avail-
able to medieval authors, namely Michael Scot’s (d. c.
1235) translation from Arabic to Latin of Averroes’ (Ibn
Rushd) Long Commentary on De caelo, which was popu-
lar between the thirteenth and sixteenth centuries (as
evidenced by 30–40 extant manuscripts), and William of
Moerbeke’s translation from Greek to Latin of Simplicius’
Commentary on De caelo.
In the thirteenth century, Albert the Great (c. 1200–
1280) and Thomas Aquinas (c. 1224/1225–1274) followed
Averroes in their commentaries on De caelo. Albert wrote
a paraphrase and Thomas an Exposition, although instead
of including the whole relevant text, he substituted a few
words – known as cue-words – from the beginning of the
passage that would presumably enable the reader to iden-
tify the proper text in Aristotle’s De caelo.
In the fourteenth and ﬁfteenth centuries, the most
popular form of commentary on De caelo, and other of
Aristotle’s texts, was the Questiones. The questions format
was developed at the medieval universities from a type of
classroom disputation known as the ‘‘ordinary disputa-
tion.’’ In such a disputation, the teaching master proposed
a question and then selected one student to defend the
afﬁrmative side and another to defend the negative side.
After both sides had presented their arguments, the master
proposed a solution, thus resolving or ‘‘determining’’ the
question. This formed the basis for the written questions
on Aristotle’s books on natural philosophy. They all bore
the title Questions on [title of Aristotle’s treatise].
In the fourteenth century, Nicholas Oresme (c. 1320–
1382) performed an extraordinary feat that was never
duplicated. He produced two strikingly different interpre-
tations of De caelo. In his earlier career, as a master of arts
at the University of Paris, he wrote a questions treatise on
De caelo between 1346 and 1356. Around 1370, King
Charles V of France requested Oresme to translate four
of Aristotle’s treatises from Latin into French. The fourth
treatise was De caelo, which Oresme translated around
1376 with the title Le Livre du ciel et du monde. Oresme
not only translated Aristotle’s text into French, though
usually by paraphrasing the text, but added a section-by-
section French commentary. Each commentary was pre-
ceded by the entire relevant Aristotelian passage. It was
Oresme’s ﬁnal treatise and was undoubtedly the most
brilliant Commentary on De caelo in the whole of the
Middle Ages. As recognition for his four French trans-
lations, King Charles made Oresme the Bishop of Lisieux
in 1377.
To arrive at some idea of the number of extant com-
mentaries on De caelo between the years 1200 and 1650,
one should consult the indispensable catalogs compiled by
Charles Lohr (Lohr 1967–1974, 1988). A count reveals 278
authors who commented on De caelo treatises. Of these, 40
are known only from manuscript catalogs or were men-
tioned by other authors, which leaves 238 authors
represented by a manuscript or a printed edition, or
both; 139 are only in manuscript form; 76 are only in
printed editions; 21 exist in both manuscript form and
printed editions. If we add 76 and 21, we obtain 97 printed
editions of De caelo (Grant 1994:29–30). Of the 278
authors who commented on De caelo, a total of 71 wrote
between the thirteenth and ﬁfteenth centuries (18 in the
thirteenth, 21 in the fourteenth, and 32 in the ﬁfteenth
centuries), while a total of 207 composed their commen-
taries during the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries (108
in the sixteenth and 99 in the seventeenth century). It is
obvious that De caelo was still frequently commented
upon well into the seventeenth century. Its popularity
may have derived from the impact of Nicholas Coperni-
cus’ (1473–1543) heliocentric theory published in 1543
(On the Revolutions of the Heavenly Bodies).
Commentaries and Questions on De caelo ranged over
numerous cosmological issues. Of great signiﬁcance was
Aristotle’s argument that the world is eternal, having nei-
ther beginning nor end. Here Aristotle was in direct con-
ﬂict with the Christian faith, which assumed that God had
created the world from nothing and would eventually
destroy it. In the Condemnation of 1277, of the 219
articles condemned, some 27 denounced the eternity of
the world in many contexts. In their Questions on De caelo,
natural philosophers such as John of Jandun (1285/1289–
1328), John Buridan (d. 1361), and Nicholas Oresme
argued that the world could not have been brought into
being by natural means, because no natural means could
be identiﬁed. Hence, they argued that in terms of natural
causation, the world should indeed be eternal, as Aristotle
had argued. Nevertheless, almost all commentators on De
caelo believed on faith that the world is not eternal, but
was created by God (Grant 1994:76).
A number of comments on De caelo were inﬂuenced by
the Condemnation of 1277. In his De caelo, and in many of
his treatises, Aristotle had argued that certain phenomena
were naturally impossible, as, for example: an inﬁnite
world, the existence of other worlds, the existence of
248 D
De caelo, Commentaries on Aristotle’s

anything beyond our world, and so on. Christian theolo-
gians viewed Aristotle’s claims as effectively denying God
the power to perform any of these acts, even if He chose to
do so. Thus, they viewed Aristotle’s arguments as a denial
of God’s absolute power to do anything short of a logical
contradiction. Thereafter, scholastics allowed that God
could do all the things Aristotle had said were impossible.
They showed this by hypothetically assuming that these
naturally impossible conditions were real and arguing
accordingly. Many De caelo commentaries included
a number of hypothetical questions and many arguments
were thereafter formulated ‘‘according to the imagination’’
(secundum imaginationem). Although God could do nat-
urally impossible things, none believed that He had actu-
ally done any of them, or would do them. But since they
were possible by God’s absolute power, scholastics
envisioned worlds that were radically different from
Aristotle’s, even though they agreed with him that these
hypothetical phenomena were indeed naturally impossi-
ble. The alternative was to abandon Aristotle’s cosmos,
a possibility that was never seriously entertained during
the Middle Ages.
De caelo commentators often asked whether a body
moved circularly could be inﬁnite, and similarly for
a body moved rectilinearly. If an inﬁnite body moved
circularly and completed one circulation in a ﬁnite time,
it would follow that an inﬁnite body traversed an inﬁnite
space in a ﬁnite time, which is absurd (Grant 1994:109). It
was also usual to inquire whether an inﬁnite body could
move rectilinearly. Buridan denied that it could, because
many inﬁnite places would have to exist as the body
moved into and out of them successively. Moreover, all
bodies moving rectilinearly must be in a place. But an
inﬁnite body cannot be in a place, because no body
could contain it (Grant 1994:109–110). These were
Aristotle’s
arguments.
But
Buridan
concedes
that,
according to article 49 of those condemned in 1277, it is
an error to say that God could not move the whole world
with a rectilinear motion. Thus, God could move the
entire world rectilinearly even though the world is not in
a place, because nothing lies outside of it to serve as
a place.
In a question asking whether an inﬁnite body is pos-
sible, Buridan denies that it is naturally possible, and also
denies that God could create an inﬁnite body, because
then He could not create a body greater than that inﬁnite
body, since there is nothing greater than an inﬁnite body.
Thus would God’s absolute power be limited (Grant
1994:111) A number of scholastic theologians – for exam-
ple, William of Ockham (c. 1285–1347), Gregory of
Rimini (c. 1300–1358), Robert Holkot (c. 1290–1349),
Henry of Harclay (. . .), and others – argued the opposite:
God could indeed create an actual inﬁnite, although none
believed he had done so. Those who adopted this inter-
pretation were called ‘‘Inﬁnitists.’’
Article 34 of the 219 articles condemned in 1277
declared, ‘‘That the ﬁrst cause could not make several
worlds’’ (Grant 1974:48). This was Aristotle’s opinion
and was condemned because it denied to God the absolute
power to create as many worlds as He wished. In the
fourteenth century, Questions on De caelo always included
a question as to whether God could create other worlds.
Although medieval scholastics did not really believe that
God had created other worlds, or would ever do so, they
routinely argued that God could indeed create other
worlds. Many assumed hypothetically that God did indeed
create other worlds and then raised questions about the
characteristics of those worlds. In refuting the existence of
other worlds, Aristotle had assumed they were all alike and
were somehow distant from one another. But medieval
natural philosophers posed questions that probably never
occurred to Aristotle. If other worlds existed, did they exist
simultaneously? Or did they exist successively, one world
at a time? If simultaneously, were they all distinct and
independent of one another? Or were they concentric,
with one spherical world inside another?
Aristotle had claimed that if other worlds existed
simultaneously, the earth of one world would move
toward the earth of another world. This implied that an
earth would have to rise up against its natural inclinations
and somehow get through space and enter another world
where it would seek to join the earth at the center of that
world. To avoid this absurd consequence, Buridan and
Albert of Saxony (c. 1316–1390) insisted, as did others,
that each earth would remain at the center of its own world
and have no inclination to join the earth of another world.
In their view, each world is independent of every other
world.
In his French commentary on De caelo, Nicholas
Oresme used a plurality of worlds to introduce the sub-
ject of void space lying beyond our world. On the
assumption of a plurality of spherical worlds, Oresme
insisted that a void space would exist between any two
of them. Thus did Oresme reject Aristotle’s arguments
that it was impossible that anything – place, plenum,
void, or time – exist beyond our world. It was supernat-
urally possible. Indeed, Oresme argued that the void
space beyond our ﬁnite world is inﬁnite and is God’s
inﬁnite immensity, although God is not an extended
being (Oresme 1968:177). Oresme’s identiﬁcation of
God with inﬁnite void space would be repeated in the
seventeenth
century
by
such
ﬁgures
as
Nicolas
De caelo, Commentaries on Aristotle’s D
249
D

Malebranche (1638–1715), John Locke (1632–1704)
(Grant 1981:239), Henry More (1614–1687) – although
More viewed God as extended in His inﬁnite space – and
Samuel Clarke (1675–1729) (Grant 1981:248).
Article 49 of the Condemnation of 1277 denied that
God
could
move the
entire
spherical world with
a rectilinear motion because a vacuum would be left in
the place vacated by the world. This was a common ques-
tion in De caelo commentaries. Buridan and Oresme
insisted that by his supernatural power, God could indeed
move the world with a rectilinear motion even though the
world is not in a place and would be moved through
a vacuum, leaving a vacuum behind in its former location.
Because there is nothing outside of our world, Oresme
regarded the rectilinear motion of the world as an absolute
motion, a concept that made no sense in Aristotle’s world.
Indeed such a motion would deny Aristotle’s concept of
place and motion.
Long before Copernicus, medieval natural philoso-
phers were discussing whether or not the earth lies immo-
bile in the geometric center of the world, as Aristotle
argued. Indeed, it was one of the most popular questions
in medieval cosmology. One form of the question inquired
whether the earth rotates daily on its axis. Although
numerous scholastic commentators posed this question,
none accepted the earth’s daily axial rotation as physically
true. In his French commentary on De caelo, after exten-
sive arguments in favor of the earth’s rotation, Oresme
rejected it, insisting, however, that it was nonetheless
a viable hypothesis, because neither reason nor experience
could resolve the issue.
Another aspect concerning the earth’s motion was
whether it might move slightly in the position it occupied
at the center of the world. On this issue, John Buridan
departed radically from Aristotle. Buridan agreed that if
the earth were homogeneous and spherical, its center of
magnitude and its center of gravity would coincide with
the geometric center of the world. But the earth is obvi-
ously not homogeneous and therefore its center of mag-
nitude does not coincide with the center of the world.
However, the earth’s center of gravity coincides with the
true center of the world. But it does so in a very strange
manner. Continual geological processes throughout the
earth cause its center of gravity to change incessantly as
it seeks to coincide with the geometric center of the world.
Buridan concluded that the earth continually moves with
small rectilinear motions that never cease because the
earth incessantly undergoes geologic changes. Albert of
Saxony and John Major (1467/1468–1550) adopted this
position in the fourteenth and sixteenth centuries respec-
tively. After the Copernican theory was condemned in
1616, very few commentators on De caelo adopted
Buridan’s idea of a slightly moving earth.
When commenting on De caelo medieval scholars
overwhelmingly emphasized the ﬁrst two cosmological
books, paying much less attention to the third and fourth
books that were devoted to the heaviness and lightness of
bodies and their motions. Some, like John Buridan, for-
mulated a question in the third book that was concerned
with whether the motive force that projects a stone, or
continues the motion of an arrow, are moved by an exter-
nal force or by an internal force that was usually called
impetus.
Commentaries on De caelo continued to the end of the
seventeenth century. The Catholic Church’s condemna-
tion of the Copernican theory in 1616, and of Galileo in
1633, made the heliocentric system unacceptable to Cath-
olic commentators. But the geoheliocentric theory pro-
posed by Tycho Brahe (1546–1601) in the sixteenth
century was adopted by some scholastics. Brahe denied
the daily rotation of the earth and retained its position in
the center of the world. However, he assumed that all the
planets – except the earth – moved with circular motions
around the sun as their geometric center. The Jesuit nat-
ural
philosopher,
Melchior
Cornaeus
(1598–1665),
adopted Brahe’s geoheliocenric system in his De caelo
commentary and thus made a dramatic departure from
the traditional Aristotelian medieval system.
Tycho Brahe caused another major change in De caelo
commentaries. By his observation of the comet of 1577,
Brahe concluded that the comet moved in the celestial
region and that the heavenly region was composed of
a ﬂuid substance, not hard celestial orbs, as had been
generally assumed since the Middle Ages. If the orbs
were hard, the comet would have smashed through them
in ways that would have been detectable, which, of course,
did not happen. As a consequence of Brahe’s rejection of
hard orbs, at least ten scholastic authors in the seventeenth
century added a question to their De caelo commentaries
that had never been discussed in the Middle Ages:
‘‘Whether
the
heavens
are ﬂuid or
solid’’ (Grant
1994:705). Those who opted for a ﬂuid heaven also aban-
doned Aristotle’s fundamental concept that the celestial
ether was incorruptible and unchangeable.
The new questions that were incorporated into early
modern scholastic Questions on De caelo as a result of the
cosmological changes proposed by Copernicus and Brahe
were quite dramatic. Many scholastics, especially among
the Jesuits, adopted Tycho’s system in which the earth
remained stationary in the center of the world, while the
other planets moved around the Sun as their center of
motion.
Thus,
Questions
on
De
caelo
underwent
250 D
De caelo, Commentaries on Aristotle’s

signiﬁcant changes. But this should not obscure the fact
that the great majority of questions ﬁrst presented during
the late Middle Ages, continued to be discussed to the end
of the seventeenth century. We may conclude, therefore,
that although traditional questions continued to domi-
nate among De caelo authors, there was a genuine attempt
to take cognizance of the revolutionary cosmological
changes of the early modern era.
See also: ▶Albert of Saxony ▶Albert the Great ▶Gerard
of Cremona ▶Ibn Rushd (Averroes), Latin Translations of
▶Impetus ▶John Buridan ▶John of Jandun ▶Nicholas
Oresme ▶Parisian Condemnation of 1277 ▶Thomas
Aquinas
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Albert of Saxony (1518) Questiones et decisiones physicales insignium
virorum: Alberti de Saxonia in octo libros Physicorum; tres Libros De
celo et mundo; duos libros De generatione et corruptione. Paris.
Aquinas Thomas (1952) S. Thomae Aquinatis in Aristotelis Libros De
caelo et mundo, De generatione et corruptione, Meteorologicorum
Expositio, ed. Spiazzi RM. Marietti, Turin
Aristotle (1984) On the heavens. The complete works of Aristotle: the
revised Oxford translation, ed. Barnes J, vol 1. Princeton University
Press, Princeton
Buridan John (1942) Ioannis Buridani Quaestiones super libris quattuor
De caelo et mundo, ed. Moody EA. The Mediaeval Academy of
America, Cambridge
Oresme Nicole (1965) The ‘‘Questiones super De celo’’ of Nicole Oresme,
ed. and trans. Kren C. Ph.D. dissertation, University of Wisconsin,
Madison.
Oresme Nicole (1968) Nicole Oresme: Le Livre du ciel et du monde, ed.
Menut AD, Denomy AJ, trans. with an introduction by Menut AD.
University of Wisconsin Press, Madison
Secondary Sources
Grant E (1974) A source book in medieval science. Harvard University
Press, Cambridge
Grant E (1979) The condemnation of 1277, God’s absolute power, and
physical thought in the late Middle Ages. Viator 10:211–244
Grant E (1981) Much ado about nothing. Theories of space and vacuum
from the Middle Ages to the Scientiﬁc Revolution. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge
Grant E (1991) The unusual structure and organization of Albert of
Saxony’s Questions on De caelo. In: Biard J (ed) Itine´raires d’Albert
de Saxe Paris-Vienne au XIVe Sie`cle. Librairies Philosophique J. Vrin,
Paris, pp 205–217
Grant E (1994) Planets, stars, and orbs: the medieval cosmos, 1200–1687.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Lohr CH (1967) Medieval Latin Aristotle commentaries. Traditio 23:313–
413; (1968) 24:149–245; (1970), 26:135–216; (1971), 27:251–351;
(1972), 28:281–396; (1973), 29:93–197; (1974), 30:119–144
Lohr CH (1988) Latin Aristotle commentaries, II: Renaissance authors.
Olschki, Florence
Thoren VE (1979) The comet of 1577 and Tycho Brahe’s system of the
world. Arch Int d’Histoire des Sci 29:53–67
De generatione et corruptione,
Commentaries on Aristotle’s
STEFANO CAROTI
Dipartimento di Filosoﬁa
Universita` degli Studi di Parma
Parma
Italy
Abstract
According to Andronicus of Rhodi’s edition of Aristotle’s
works in the second half of the ﬁrst century BCE, the two
books of De generatione et corruptione follow De caelo and
antecede Metereologica. The three kinds of changes in
addition to motion (dealt with in Physica and De caelo)
are the main topics of De generatione as well as the attri-
bution either to the four elements (material cause) or to
the motion of the sun in the ecliptic (efﬁcient cause) of the
origin of such changes. They are: (a) generation and cor-
ruption when only the primary matter persists, while
substantial form changes; (b) alteration, when substance
persists and only qualitative properties change; (c) growth
and diminution when change is limited to quantitative
properties. Other very important physical notions such as
action and passion, mixture and the role of simple bodies
in mixed ones are as well discussed. This work reached the
Latin middle age through the two main channels through
which Aristotle’s work spread in the Latin West, the Greek,
and the Arabic. From the latter the medieval commenta-
tors borrowed a very useful instrument to get a better
acquaintance with the topics discussed in Aristotle’s
work: Averroes’ middle commentary, which contains also
some hints to Greek commentators. In thirteenth-century
Latin commentaries, the need to get to the heart of the text
prevails, while in the fourteenth century the discussions of
the more urgent philosophical topics overcome the literal
explanation.
In the Greek tradition of De generatione et corruptione only
Philoponus’ commentary has been preserved; it was
translated in Latin by Gerolamo Bagolino in the sixteenth
century and published by his son in 1540. Philoponus’
commentary (in which Alexander of Aphrodisias is often
quoted) can be considered the model of the following
commentaries: it provides precise informations about
the Aristotelian context of the topics discussed in
De generatione et corruptione (referring to De caelo,
Physica,
Metereologica,
and
Metaphysica)
and
goes
deep into some of the most relevant problems dealt with,
De generatione et corruptione, Commentaries on Aristotle’s D
251
D

paying particular attention to the arguments against
atomism.
Part of the Latin (the translation of Gerard of Cre-
mona) and the Hebrew (the translation of Zerahyah ben
Yshaq, end of the thirteenth century) tradition of
Aristotle’s De generatione et corruptione comes from the
Arabian translation from the Syriac (by H˙ unayn b. Ish:a¯q,
Baghdad, ninth century). In addition to H˙ unayn’s
son Ish:a¯q ben H˙ unayn’s translation, more Arabic trans-
lations are recorded of the lost Greek commentaries by
Alexander of Aphrodisias, Themistius, Olimpiodorus, and
John Philoponus. In the Islamic world, Avicenna dealt
with topics discussed in De generatione et corruptione in
the third part of his Shifa¯’, known in Latin as Sufﬁcientia.
The Liber tertius naturalium De generatione was translated
only in 1280 in Toledo and it was not very diffused among
the Latin scholars. It cannot be properly considered
a commentary to Aristotle’s work, even though it deals
with topics discussed in De generatione et corruptione. The
persistence of the elements in the mixed bodies is one of
the main interests in Avicenna’s text: he is convinced that
they outlast without any change in mixed bodies, the
changes interesting only the accidental forms. This was
a problem largely debated in the Latin medieval tradition
of De generatione et corruptione and was associated with
topics such as the intension and remission and plurality of
forms. Avicenna’s solution was known through Averroes’
censures in his De caelo commentary, where he attributes
to substantial forms of the elements a weaker ontology
(they are an intermediate stage between substantial and
accidental forms). The mixed body, therefore, has a special
substantial form with qualitative properties resulting from
the mixture of the elementary qualities.
Averroes’ (known in the Middle Ages also as ‘‘Com-
mentator’’) middle commentary on the De generatione et
corruptione, translated probably by Michael Scot around
1230, is by far more important for the western Latin
tradition of Aristotle’s work. Not only in the commentar-
ies of the more prominent medieval thinkers, but also in
the anonymous glosses the Commentator’s interpretation
of Aristotle’s text is very often quoted as a sure authority.
The difﬁcult and often too concise Latin translations
(both from the Arabic and Greek) ﬁnd in Averroes’
explanatory notes a clear settlement, which consents
a wider understanding of Aristotle’s arguments; also the
information about the ancient philosophical systems
(Plato, Democritus, Leucippus, Anaxagoras, and Emped-
ocles) is widely used by the medieval masters for a more
adequate acquaintance with Aristotle’s criticism.
De generatione et corruptione was available to the Latin
world in two translations: from the Arabic by Gerard of
Cremona (translatio nova) and from the Greek original by
Burgundio of Pisa (translatio vetus). The latter was more
widely diffused than the former and was used by Albert the
Great, Thomas Aquinas, and Aegidius Romanus. Aegidius
used both the old and the new translations, the former
being according to him more respectful of Aristotle’s
intention.
The content of De generatione et corruptione, as well as
of other works by Aristotle, Seneca, and Boethius, circu-
lated since the thirteenth century in a very abridged
form, namely as a list of sentences, in which the philo-
sophical topics discussed in the two books were syntheti-
cally recorded (Auctoritates Aristotelis, ed. Hamesse,
1974:167–171). This kind of summary of Aristotle’s phi-
losophy was widely used by medieval commentators; very
often quotations from De generatione et corruptione as well
as from other works follow the text of Auctoritates rather
than the original. Its favorable reception is conﬁrmed,
moreover, by the medieval tradition of comment on De
generatione et corruptione: very often, in fact, the titles of
the questions are drawn literally from Auctoritates; to
mention only the more common: the persistence of matter
in generation and corruption, the permanence of similar
qualities in generated and corrupted things, the eternity of
generation and corruption, reaction following action, the
end of motion when properties are acquired by the gen-
erated thing, the permanence of primary qualities in the
mixed, the elemental qualities, the easier transmutation
between bodies with similar properties.
The Auctoritates records some sentences, in addition
to those from Aristotle’s text, from the commentaries on
De generatione et corruptione by Averroes and Albert the
Great which are the two most important contributions to
the full appreciation of the topics therein discussed in the
Latin world. After the ﬁrst early diffusion in some of the
medical works from the School of Salerno, the fortunes of
De generatione et corruptione depend exclusively on its use
in the newly established university training.
Together with Averroes’ commentary, the paraphrasis
of Aristotle’s De generatione et corruptione by Albert the
Great can be considered the most inﬂuential contribution
to the understanding of Aristotle’s work in the Latin
medieval culture. It is exactly this form of commentary
which consents a more precise acquaintance with the not
always perspicuous Latin translation. Albert’s project, in
order to make intelligible Aristotle’s text, is to maintain
part of the Latin words and expressions in a wider context
of explanation; he reserves, moreover, a deeper analysis to
particular topics in his digressions to the textual exegesis.
Albert’s choice of the topics to be more carefully consid-
ered, has a relevant role in the medieval commentary
252 D
De generatione et corruptione, Commentaries on Aristotle’s

tradition, since part of the questions raised by the Aristo-
telian text have their origin in such digressions. According
to Albert, De generatione et corruptione is the third and last
part of the natural philosophy, having as its object motion
concerning either substantial (coming and passing away)
or accidental (alteration, augmentation, and diminution)
forms of natural bodies. The special object of this part of
natural philosophy, as well as its place in the wider domain
of physics, is after Albert’s commentary the ﬁrst problem
discussed in commenting on De generatione et corruptione.
In several digressions Albert gives a more extensive pre-
sentation of Democritus, Leucippus, and Plato’s solutions
about the composition and the action of natural bodies,
extending Aristotle’s sketchy critical outlines. Albert deals
also with the most relevant topics such as the role of
potency and matter in generation, the different functions
either of substantial forms and qualities in generation and
mixture, or of the soul in human growth (where medical
notions like the humidum radicale integrate Aristotle’s
solution), the permanence of the elements in the mixed
bodies, the efﬁcient causality of celestial bodies, in partic-
ular the motion of the sun in the ecliptic.
Thomas Aquinas’ commentary on De generatione et
corruptione was prepared in Naples and it was, according
to William of Tocco’s biography, Thomas’ last work on
philosophy. Like other commentaries on Aristotle, it was
not ﬁnished by Thomas; the lacking part of Book I (from
ch. 5) and Book II was provided by Thomas of Sutton.
Following his teacher Albert’s lead, Thomas commented
on Aristotle’s text, but his explanatory strategy was very
different from the paraphrasis of Albert the Great. The
philosophical exegesis is introduced by a very careful pre-
sentation of Aristotle’s text (divisio textus); the topics
discussed by Aristotle are reconsidered and presented in
a clear logical form, which permits a deeper acquaintance
with philosophical problems (often labeled as questions).
Albert’s and Thomas’ commentaries opened the way to
the style of widely diffused commentary in the fourteenth-
century Latin medieval tradition: the questions on Aristo-
telian works. In his commentary Thomas is particularly
determined on arguing against the materialistic views of
the atomists and of Plato, whose geometrical foundations
of natural change ignore the importance of the formal
structure of natural bodies. Generation and corruption
include both matter’s potentiality and substantial form’s
actuality. Thomas defends his conviction of the unicity of
the substantial form arguing against Avicebron, who
maintains in his Fons vitae that a plurality of hierarchically
ordered forms is required for every being.
His two commentaries, in the form of explanation and
questions respectively, bear witness to Aegidius Romanus’
high interest toward De generatione et corruptione. The
questions are limited to part of the ﬁrst book, while the
explanations are for the complete text. This latter com-
mentary is different from both those of Albert the Great
and Thomas; Aegidius limits himself programmatically to
present Aristotle’s intention and to clarify his way of
arguing, reserving for the commentary through questions
the discussion of the more important topics raised in the
text (only at the beginning we ﬁnd some topics widely
discussed in a similar fashion to the questions commen-
tary). In commenting on Book II Aegidius introduces the
wider analysis of philosophical topics as particularly rele-
vant problems (dubia), after having explained Aristotle’s
text; these dubia are evidently what would have been
reserved for the questions commentary, which Aegidius
did not write. This change in the commenting strategy is
very important: in the fourteenth century there is an
evident distinction between the two kinds of commentary:
the explanation is normally limited to an illustration of
Aristotle’s text, division of the text, and presentation of the
main arguments, while the most relevant topics are
discussed through the questions. Aegidius, like Albert
and Thomas, is particularly eager in denouncing the limits
of Democritus’ and Plato’s convictions about the primary
components of natural bodies. In order to grant the inﬁ-
nite divisibility of matter as well as the natural bodies’
possibility of action and passion Aegidius distinguishes
between two different sorts of act: actus in ﬁeri and actus in
facto esse; the inﬁnite divisibility is not consented in the
latter. Discussing on matter Aegidius upholds his theory of
the presence in matter of a certain formal element, labeled
corporeity, which gives it an indeﬁnite quantitative feature
(dimensiones interminatae). In his questions commentary
on Book I Aegidius deals with the problems raised by the
atomists, with the essential features of generation, alter-
ation, and augmentation, but also with the intension and
remission of forms as well as with the limits of continuous
motions like alteration.
Both Siger of Brabant and Boethius of Dacia, the two
Masters of Arts who in Paris adhered to the new physical
and moral doctrines drawn from Aristotle, commented on
De generatione et corruptione. Siger limited himself to
a concise explanation, while Boethius dedicated a certain
number of short questions to the main problems discussed
in Book I, privileging in the second the action of celestial
bodies on the elemental sphere. In the prologue of his
commentary Boethius states that man’s highest perfection
is in knowing the truth and in behaving rightly. In arguing
against Plato’s convictions about the origins of the world,
Boethius points out that according to Aristotle cosmos has
no beginning, contrary to what is maintained by Christian
De generatione et corruptione, Commentaries on Aristotle’s D
253
D

faith; the same topic is discussed in the last question on
Book II as well as in his De aeternitate mundi.
In the fourteenth century, Aristotle’s De generatione et
corruptione was often commented on at the University of
Paris, where John Buridan, Nicholas Oresme, Albert of
Saxony, and Marsilius of Inghen did their best to discuss in
the wider context of Aristotelian philosophy the topics
raised in the two books. Only John Buridan wrote two
commentaries, an explanation commentary (sententia)
and a questions commentary, while Nicholas Oresme,
Albert and Marsilius limited themselves to the questions
commentary; having been published in the early sixteenth
century, Albert’s and Marsilius’ commentaries were largely
diffused in Renaissance and Early Modern Aristotelian
scholastic philosophy. Among others, the English philos-
opher Walter Burley wrote an explanation commentary,
which had a much more limited circulation than his
Physics commentary, edited in 1505.
In the fourteenth century, explanation commentaries
had a minor role in comparison with those of the thir-
teenth century; their function was often reduced to the
division of the text. The questions commentaries, on the
contrary, assumed a complex and articulated structure so
much so that a question or a group of questions could
be sometimes considered a real treatise (for example,
question 11 on Book I of Oresme’s commentary on De
generatione et corruptione, dedicated to reaction). In the
central section of the questions, commentators usually
provide a useful analysis of philosophical terms as well as
different possible solutions to the problem(s) discussed;
the opening arguments introduce a solution(s) different
from that (those) introduced in the central section and the
ﬁnal arguments provide a critical view on this (these)
same solution(s). Commentaries on De generatione et
corruptione supply in this way a complete abstract of the
more debated topics on natural philosophy, including
logical and metaphysical aspects.
The French tradition from John Buridan to Marsilius
of Inghen will be considered here as a whole. The opening
questions of these commentaries enquire the possibility of
a science concerning generation and corruption. Together
with the traditional distinctions between the different
kinds of evidence in mathematics and in physics,
a particular interest is devoted to the linguistic analysis,
which permits to discriminate generation (interesting
absolute, substantial terms) from alteration and augmen-
tation (limited to connotative, accidental terms).
In canvassing the different features of generation and
alteration new physical notions are introduced: changes
which prelude and prepare generation and corruption
(alteratio
praevia)
are
continuous
motions,
while
generation is an instantaneous transformation. These
different kinds of changes occasion some very important
analyses concerning natural, artiﬁcial, and violent trans-
formations and consequently modal notions such as nec-
essary, possible, and impossible. Determinism is ruled out
by distinguishing between temporal and eternal necessity,
the latter reserved only to the never-changing God’s
perfection, while even natural events like lunar eclipses
can
be
frustrated,
notwithstanding
their
apparent
necessity.
According to Aristotle, generation is always coupled by
corruption: this connection raises problems about the role
of matter and above all about the relationship between the
forms in both generated and corrupted bodies. All the
Parisian commentators we are here considering adhere
to the unicity of substantial form theory (with the excep-
tion of Oresme, who defends double substantial principle
in human beings, which according to Marsilius of Inghen
is an open adhesion to the plurality theory).
The problem concerning the identity of natural bodies
interested in physical changes is raised in debating growth
and diminution. Man’s identity is assured by his soul,
which is the same through different changes and ages,
while in natural elemental bodies it is very hard to point
out such a principle, precisely because of the continuous
partial or total variations. Identity is a notion that can be
properly used only for permanent things, while for suc-
cessive ones (like those submitted to physical transforma-
tions) it can be used only in a larger sense.
The problem of action and passion in natural bodies
heralds the last topic of Book I of De generatione et
corruptione, namely mixture. In addition to the traditional
problems concerning the contact between agent and
patient, in these commentaries the model of the diffusion
of light (multiplicatio specierum) is assumed as a possible
way of accounting for natural action. The atomist theory
of change gives the occasion to John Buridan to deal with
the possibility of the inﬁnite division. The other commen-
tators, beginning with Nicholas Oresme, introduce new
philosophical notions such as intension and extension,
referring respectively to the degree of intensity (intensio
qualitatis) and to the spreading (quantitas qualitatis) of
the quality in the natural body. These are the basilar
notions of the De conﬁgurationibus qualitatum doctrine
to which Nicholas Oresme dedicated a special treatise,
which can be considered as one of the most innovative
tools in natural philosophy, relying also on geometry and
mathematics in order to explain physical changes. The
latitude of forms is used in the questions of Book II to
research into the ways of interacting of the elemental
qualities.
254 D
De generatione et corruptione, Commentaries on Aristotle’s

Mixture raises very important problems concerning its
natural or violent nature: all the elements, in fact, must be
involved in order for a mixed body to be produced. The
permanence of the elemental forms in the mixed body,
moreover, revive the old contraposition between Avicenna
and Averroes, the former against any possibility of change
inside substantial forms, the latter more favorable to such
a possibility for the elemental forms, exactly to let them
survive inside the mixed bodies. In addition to the tradi-
tional topics either of intension and remission of forms or
of the unicity/plurality of forms, new notions such as the
temporal limits of alteration and generation of a mixed
body
(primum/ultimum
instans;
maximum/minimum
quod sic/quod non) and reaction (the action of the patient
on the agent) are introduced in these questions, together
with the new mathematical tools to study motion (de
proportionibus). In the last question(s) on Book II of De
generatione et corruptione of the fourteenth-century
Parisian commentaries we are considering here, a very
signiﬁcant change is to be recorded: the problem of the
duration of natural bodies is analyzed relying on these new
tools (temporal limits) rather than on astrological
notions, as in the case of Albert the Great’s commentary.
With Lefe`vre d’Etaples’ Paraphrases, published in Paris
in 1501 the tradition of Aristotle’s De generatione et
corruptione enters in a new age, in which the need of a
more correct acquaintance with the text is more urgent
than that with the philosophical
topics (also the
Commentarii collegii Conimbricensis on De generatione,
where the late medieval discussions are very often
recorded, have a similar approach).
See also: ▶Albert the Great ▶Aristotelianism in the Greek,
Latin, Syriac, Arabic, and Hebrew Traditions ▶Boethius of
Dacia ▶Change and Motion ▶Gerard of Cremona ▶Ibn
Rushd, Muh˙ammad ibn Ah˙mad al-H˙ afı¯d (Averroes) ▶Ibn
Sı¯na¯,
Abu¯
ʿAlı¯
(Avicenna)
▶John
Buridan
▶John
Philoponus ▶Marsilius of Inghen ▶Natural Philosophy
▶Nicholas Oresme ▶Siger of Brabant ▶Thomas Aquinas
Bibliography
Primary Sources
(1599) Commentarii collegii Conimbricensis societatis Iesu in libros
Aristotelis De generatione et corruptione. Albinus, Mainz
Albert the Great (1980) De generatione (Opera, V, 2), ed. Hossfeld P.
Aschendorff, Mu¨nster
Albert of Saxony (1505) Quaestiones super de generatione et corruptione.
Gregorius de Gregoriis, Venice
Aquinas Thomas (1886) Aristotelis. . .De generatione et corruptione.
Typographia Polyglotta, Roma
Aristotle (1986) De generatione et corruptione (Aristoteles Latinus, IX, 1),
ed. Judycka J. Brill, Leiden
Averroes (1956) Commentarium medium in Aristotelis De generatione et
corruptione, ed. Fobes FH, Kurland S. The Medieval Academy of
America, Cambridge
Avicenna (1987) Liber tertius naturalium de generatione et corruptione, ed.
Van Riet S. E Peeters/EJ Brill, Louvain-La-Neuve/Paris
Boethius Dacus (1972) Quaestiones de generatione et corruptione, ed.
Sajo´ G.G.E.C. Gad. Hauniae
Buridan John (2010) Quaestiones super de generatione et corruptione, ed.
Streijger M. Brill, Leiden
Gilles of Orleans (1993) Quaestiones super de generatione, ed.
Kuksewicz Z. BR Gru¨ner, Amsterdam/Philadelphia
Hamesse Jacqueline (1974) Les Auctoritates Aristotelis.Un ﬂorile`ge me´di-
e´val. Publications Universitaires/Be´atrice-Nauwelaerts, Louvain/
Paris
Lefe`vre d’Etaples (1501) Totius philosophiae naturalis Paraphrasis.
Hopylius, Paris
Marsilius of Inghen (1505) Quaestiones super libros de generatione et
corruptione. Gregorius de Gregoriis,Venice
Oresme Nicole (1996) Quaestiones super de generatione et corruptione,
ed. Caroti S. Bayerische Akademie der Wissenschaften, Mu¨nchen
Romanus Aegidius (1518) Commentaria in libros De generatione et
corruptione. Lucantonius Giunta, Venice
Sigerus de Brabantia (1974) E´crits de logique, morale et physique, ed.
B. Bazan. Publications Universitaires/Be´atrice Nauwelaerts, Louvain/
Paris
Tessier Andrea (1984) La traduzione arabo-ebraica del ‘‘De generatione et
corruptione’’ di Aristotele. Accademia Nazionale dei Lincei, Roma
Secondary Sources
Bianchi L (1984) L’errore di Aristotele. La polemica contro l’eternita` del
mondo nel XIII secolo. La Nuova Italia, Firenze
Biard J (ed) (1991) Itine´raires d’Albert de Saxe. Paris-Vienne au XIVe
sie`cle. Vrin, Paris
Braakhuis HAG (1997) John Buridan and the ‘‘Parisian school’’ on the
possibility of returning as numerically the same. A note on a chapter
in the history of the relationship between faith and natural science.
In: Caroti S, Souffrin P (eds) La nouvelle physique du XIVe sie`cle. LS
Olschki, Florence, pp 111–140.
Cadden J (1971) The medieval philosophy and biology of growth.
Albertus Magnus, Thomas Aquinas, Albert of Saxony and Marsilius
of Inghen on Book I, chapter V of Aristotle’s ‘‘De generatione et
corruptione’’. PhD thesis, Indiana University
Caroti S (1998) Note sulla parafrasi del ‘‘De generatione et corruptione’’
di Alberto Magno. In: Cheneval F, Imbach R, Ricklin T (eds) Albert le
Grand et sa re´ception au moyen aˆge. Hommage a` Ze´non Kaluza.
Freiburger Zeitschrift fu¨r Philosophie und Theologie, Freiburg,
pp 6–30
Donati S (1991) Das Problem einer wissenschaftlichen Erkenntniss der
verga¨nglichen Dinge bei Aegidius Romanus. In: Zimmermann A,
Speer A (eds) Mensch und Natur in Mittelalter. Walter De Gruyter,
Berlin, II, pp 383–405
Doninelli A (2006) Dal non essere all’essere. Generazione naturale ed
eternita` del mondo nel ‘‘De generationet et corruptione’’ di
Aristotele, Rubbettino, Soveria Mannelli
Hossfeld P (1976–1977) Grundgedanken in Alberts des Grossen Schrift
U¨ ber Entstehung und Vergehen. Philosophia Naturalis. 16:191–204
Otte JK (1991) An anonymous Oxford commentary on Aristoteles’ ‘‘De
generatione et corruptione.’’ Traditio 46:326–336
Thijssen JMMH (1986) Buridan, Albert of Saxony and Oresme, and
a fourteenth-century collections of quaestiones on the physics and
on De generatione et corruptione. Vivarium 24:70–82
De generatione et corruptione, Commentaries on Aristotle’s D
255
D

Thijssen JMMH (1993) The circulation and reception of Marsilius of
Inghen’s ‘‘Quaestiones super libros De generatione et corruptione’’
in ﬁfteenth- and sixteenth-century Italy: the problem of ‘‘Reactio.’’
In: Wielgus S (ed) Marsilius of Inghen. Werk und Wirkungen.
Redakcja Wydawnictw Kul, Lublin, pp 227–244
Thijssen JMMH, Braakhuis HAG (eds) (1999) The commentary tradition
on Aristotle’s ‘‘de generatione et corruptione.’’ Ancient, medieval and
early modern. Brepols, Turnhout
Zupko J (2003) John Buridan. Portrait of a fourteenth-century art master.
University of Notre Dame Press, Notre Dame, IN
Demetrios Kydones
IVAN CHRISTOV
Faculty of Theology
University of Soﬁa
Soﬁa
Bulgaria
Abstract
Demetrios Kydones (c. 1324 Thessaloniki to c. 1398
Crete), also spelled Demetrius Cydones, is a key ﬁgure in
the intellectual and political life of Byzantium in the four-
teenth century, Demetrios’ greatest contribution is per-
haps the intellectual challenge he poses to Byzantine
conceit, as regards the cultural and spiritual achievements
of the West. His translations of Latin theological texts as
well as literary works indicate that the West was well aware
of the Greek heritage, which the Romans considered as
their prized national possession. The depth and clarity of
thought, pertaining to western theology, put to the test the
dogmas, deeply engrained in Byzantium. Thus, Demetrios
turns out to be one of those, who stimulated an intense
theological controversy, in the course of which Byzantine
thought had to contend its identity against western Scho-
lasticism. In his philosophical views he is far from original.
Just like his brother Prochoros Kydones he supports Tho-
mism, juxtaposing Christian Aristotelianism to the Neo-
platonic aspects in the teaching of Gregory Palamas.
Life
Demetrios Kydones was born in Thessaloniki into a noble
Byzantine family. He was instructed in the liberal arts by
the distinguished scholar and theologian Neilos Kabasilas
and was given spiritual guidance by the future ecumenical
patriarch Isidore Boucheiras, who also taught him classical
Greek language and literature. It is disputable whether he
was in touch with Barlaam of Calabria during his stay in
Thessaloniki (1335–1341). Following his father’s death in
1341, Demetrios had to take over the responsibility of his
family.
He
was
in
close
connection
with
John
Kantakouzenos and had to leave the town during the
Civil war (early summer of 1345). When in February
1347
Kantakouzenos’
army
entered
Constantinople,
Demetrios was appointed Master of Requests at court.
He soon became renowned as an expert in classical liter-
ature. Initially, his interest in Latin was dictated by
a pragmatic impulse, but his making himself acquainted
with Thomas Aquinas’ work helped him discover his
vocation, namely to introduce the ideas of Latin theology
in Byzantium.
In December 1354, he ﬁnished his translation of
Summa contra gentiles. Encouraged by his success and
with his brother’s help, he translated Summa theologiae
(Parts I and II) and De rationibus ﬁdei ad cantorem
Antiochenum. In Byzantium, Demetrios introduced vari-
ous other Latin patristic and Scholastic texts: excerpts
from Augustine’s Letters (ep. 28, 82, 143); from Sermons
on the Gospel of St. John; complete translations of Anselm
of Canterbury’s De processione Spiritus Sancii, De asymo et
fermentato; and Ricoldo of Monte Croce’s Refutation of the
Qurʾa¯n. The original literary work of Demetrios was
highly inﬂuenced by his Latin sources. He wrote the
moral philosophical essay De contemnenda morte, three
apologies explaining his conversion to Latin Catholicism,
and a still unpublished Defense of Thomas Aquinas Against
Neilos Kabasilas. The voluminous collection of 447 letters
and his Exhortations are a valuable source for the history of
Byzantium and its relations with the West and with the
Turks.
His detailed knowledge of Latin theology enhanced his
dissatisfaction with the Palamite doctrine and with Byz-
antine theology in general. By 1365, Demetrios had made
a profession of faith in the Latin Church. In this time of
political maneuvres this did not affect his career at court
and he was appointed prime minister from 1369 to 1383
and later from 1391 to 1396. In 1390–1391, Kydones
opened an academy of Greek culture in Venice, introduc-
ing the study of the Greek language and thought to the
Italian Renaissance. In 1396, hostility toward his Latin
Catholicism grew and he had to retire to the island of
Crete, where he died.
Thought
Demetrios Kydones’ primary reason for translating Latin
theological works was to deal with the theological contro-
versies of his age. From a Thomistic stance, Demetrios
challenged the Neoplatonic aspects of Hesychasm. He
supported the notion of God’s simplicity, turning a cold
shoulder to the distinction between essence and energies,
256 D
Demetrios Kydones

which implies a distinction between essence and existence.
On the contrary, according to Palamas there is a pre-
eternal emanation of the energies of God’s essence,
constituting the Divine Wisdom or Intellect, which is
divine but not God and on the other hand is also not
created. The philosophical sense of this debate lies in the
juxtaposition
of
Aristotelian
metaphysics,
modiﬁed
according to the Scholastic teaching of transcendentals,
to the Christian Neoplatonism of Palamas. From these
teachings, unlike Barlaam and Ankyndinos, Demetrios
inferred that it is possible to apply apodictic syllogisms
in theology. He tried to retain his adherence to this stance
from a Thomistic point of view. In Thomas’ doctrine he
saw a means of solving the problems of Hesychasm.
According to Demetrios, Thomas offered the best
method of reaching the truth. Reasoning and the use of
syllogisms lay in the very essence of man. The Creator
attributed an intermediary place to the human soul
between the intelligible and the sensible nature. This
determines a midway mode of knowledge between the
immediate intuitive knowledge and the experience of the
senses. That is why knowledge cannot be carried out
without change. Demetrios embraced the Thomistic con-
ception of two modes of discourse. The ﬁrst takes the sense
data as a starting point, proceeds to the proximate truths,
and is elevated to the prime and direct principles. The
other type of discourse follows the opposite ﬂow of
thought, coming from the absolutely simple being to the
composite things. Thus, knowledge enables the connec-
tion of the absolute and the contingent being. This is the
essence of syllogism. Therefore, the use of syllogisms is
a feature of human nature. Being the best of our faculties,
reason exerts the best act and contributes to our ﬁnal
natural end. Paradoxically, Demetrios resembles Palamas,
allowing for the application of apodictic syllogism in
theology, but from a Thomistic point of view.
The literary work of Demetrios had as its consequence
the most radical differentiation of conceptual patterns of
Eastern and Western theology.
See
also:
▶Gregory
Palamas
▶Prochoros
Kydones
▶Thomism, Byzantine
Bibliography
Primary Sources
(1901) Demetrii Cydonii De contemnenda morte, ed. Deckelmann H.
Teubner, Leipzig
(1976–2002) De¯me¯triou Kydo¯ne¯ Tho¯ma Akuinatou Soumma theologike¯,
exelle¯nistheisa,
vols
1–5.
Corpus
Philosophorum
Graecorum
Recentiorum, II.15, 16, 17ab, 18. Idryma Ereune¯s kai Ekdoseo¯n
Neoelle¯nike¯s Philosophias, Athe¯nai
(1981–1999) Demetrios Kydones: Briefe. In: Tinnefeld F (ed) Bibliothek
der Griechischer Literatur, Bd. 12, 16, 33, 50. Anton Hiersemann,
Stuttgart
Loenertz R-J (1956/1960) De´me´trius Cydone`s, Correspondance, vol I–II.
Studi e Testi 186/208. Biblioteca apostolica vaticana, Citta` del
Vaticano
Mercati G (1931/19732) Notizie di Procoro e Demetrio Cidone, Manuele
Cale´ca e Teodoro Meliteniota ed altri appunti per la storia della
teologia e della letteratura bizantina del secolo XIV. Studi e testi 56.
Biblioteca Apostolica Vaticana, Citta` del Vaticano
Secondary Sources
Beck H-G (1935) Der Kampf um den thomistischen Theologiebegriff in
Byzanz. Divus Thomas (Fr.) 13:1–22
Beck H-G (1952) Die ‘‘Apologia pro vita sua’’ des Demetrios Kydones.
Ostkirchl Stud I:208–225, 264–282
Bouvy E (1910) Saint Thomas, ses traducteurs byzantins. Rev Augustin
16:401–408
Buda C (1956) Inﬂusso del tomismo a Bisanzio nel secolo XIV. Byz
Z 49:318–331
Buda C (1957/1958) Il tomismo a Bisanzio nel secolo XIV. Una polemica
Bizantina del secolo XIV. Archivio Storico per la Calabria e la Lucania
26:291–323 (1957), 27:3–33 (1958)
Cammelli G (1927) Demetrio Cidonio al fratello Procoro. Stud Biz Neoell
2:490–555
Candal E (1962) Demetrio Cidonio y el problema trinitario palamitico.
Orient Christ Period 28:75–120
Demetracopoulos Ph (1982) Demetrius Kydones’ translation of the
Summa Theologica. Jahrb O¨ sterr Byz 32(4):311–320
Jugie M (1928) Demetrius Cydones et la the´ologie latine a` Byzance. E´chos
d’Orient 27:385–402
Kapriev G (2005) Philosophie in Byzanz. Ko¨nigshausen und Neumann,
Wu¨rzburg
Kianka F (1982) Demetrius Cydones and Thomas Aquinas. Byzantion
52:264–286
Kianka F (1995) Demetrius Cydones and Italy. Dumbarton Oaks Papers
49. In: Symposium on Byzantium and the Italians, 13th–15th centu-
ries, pp 99–110
Laurent V (1931) La correspondance de De´me´trius Cydone`s. E´chos
d’Orient 30:339–354
Laurent V (1937/1938) Manuel Pale´ologue et De´me´trius Cydone`s.
Remarques sur leur correspondance. E´chos d’Orient 36:271–287,
474–487; 37:107–124
Loenertz R-J (1970) De´me´trius Cydone`s: De la naissance a` l’anne´e 1373.
Orient Christ Period 36:47–72
Loenertz R-J (1971) De´me´trius Cydone`s: De 1373 a` 1375. Orient Christ
Period 37:5–39
Mercati G (1931) Per l’epistolario di Demetrio Cidone. Stud Biz Neoell
3:201–230
Moutsopoulos E (1982) Thomisme et Aristote´lisme a` Byzance: De´me´trius
Cydone`s. Jahrb O¨ sterr Byz 32(4):307–310
Niketas DZ (1982) E¯ parousia tou Augoustinou ste¯ Anatolike¯ ekkle¯sia.
Kleronomia 14:7–25
Papadopoulos St (1974) Thomas in Byzanz. Thomas-Rezeption und
Thomas-Kritik in Byzanz zwischen 1354 und 1435. Theol Philos
49:274–304
Podskalsky G (1977) Theologie und Philosophie in Byzanz. Der Streit um
die
theologische
Methodik
in
der
spa¨tbyzantinischen
Geistesgeschichte (14./15. Jh.), seine systematischen Grundlagen
und seine historische Entwicklung. C.H. Beck, Mu¨nchen
Demetrios Kydones D
257
D

Podskalsky G (2003) Von Photios zu Bessarion. Harrassowitz, Wiesbaden
Poljakovskaja MA (1979) Dimitrij Kidonis i zapad (60-e gg. XIV v.).
ADSV 16. pp 46–57
Rackl
M
(1923–1924)
Die
griechische
U¨ bersetzung
der
Summa
Theologiae des Hl. Thomas von Aquin. Byz Z 24:48–60
Smetanin VA (1987) Vizantijskoe obsˇcestvo XIII-XV vv. (po danniym
epistolograﬁi). Izd UrGU, Sverdlovsk
Tatakis B (1949) La philosophie byzantine. Presses universitaires de
France, Paris
Tinnefeld F (1989) Demetrios Kydones: his cultural background and
literary connections in Thessalonike. Maced Stud N.S. 3:33–43
Tinnefeld F (2000) Zur Entstehung von Briefsammlungen in der
Palaiologenzeit. In: POLUPLEUROS NOUS. Miscellanea fu¨r Peter
Schreiner zu seinem 60. Geburtstag, ed. Scholz C, Makris G.
Byzantinisches Archiv 19. K. G. Saur, Mu¨nchen/Leipzig, pp 365–381
Demonstration and the Posterior
Analytics
▶Posterior Analytics, Commentaries on Aristotle’s
Denys the Carthusian
ALESSANDRO PALAZZO
Department of Filosoﬁa, Storia e Beni Culturali
Universita` degli Studi di Trento
Trento
Italy
Abstract
After having studied philosophy at the University of
Cologne ‘‘in the way of Thomas’’ (in via Thomae), Denys
de Leeuwis (b. 1402; d. 1471) entered the Charterhouse at
Roermond, where he spent, almost uninterruptedly, the
rest of his life. To him we owe a massive literary output,
which he organized according to a three–tiered hierarchi-
cal scheme of wisdom: philosophy is the lowest level of
a hierarchy which, through scholastic theology, culmi-
nates in mystical theology. The three orders of wisdom
are analogical and isomorphic; that is, philosophy pre-
pares for and somehow foreshadows the superior modes
of supernatural knowledge. This explains Denys’ keen
interest in philosophical matters. Unlike the majority of
ﬁfteenth-century Carthusians, Denys conceived of mysti-
cal theology not as an affective act only, but as a cognitive
act complemented by love. Inﬂuenced by Pseudo-
Dionysius the Areopagite, Albert the Great, Henry of
Ghent, and ﬁfteenth-century Albertists, Denys came to
challenge, during his life, some major doctrines of his
early ‘‘patronus’’ Thomas Aquinas.
Denys de Leeuwis (b. 1402; d. 1471) was renowned during
his life and after death for his extraordinarily extensive and
versatile literary production. Born in Rijkel in the Belgian
province of Limburg, he was given his ﬁrst education in
the Abbey school of Sint-Truiden; then (1415) he attended
the famous school at Zwolle in the Netherlands, where he
had his ﬁrst contacts with Modern Devotion. Having been
denied access to the Carthusian monastery at Roermond
(Dutch Limburg) because he was too young, he went on
the advice of the Roermond prior to the University of
Cologne. There he matriculated (1421) in the Thomistic
Bursa, later called Bursa Montana. Even though he studied
‘‘in the way of Thomas,’’ at Cologne he might have come
into contact with the rival ‘‘Albertist’’ group led by
Heymerich van de Velde. After receiving his master of
arts degree (1424), he returned to the Charterhouse at
Roermond and this time was admitted (1424 or 1425).
He spent the rest of his life in the monastery, save for
a short period before his death (1465–1469), when he
was entrusted with the foundation and direction of the
Charterhouse in Vught near’s Hertogenbosch. It has long
been assumed that Denys accompanied Cardinal Nicholas
of Cusa on a Papal Legation through the Low Countries
and the Rhineland around 1451–1452, but recent research
has put into question this piece of information (Meuthen
1993). However, there were real contacts between the two
because some of Denys’ writings are either dedicated to or
associated with Cusanus (Emery 1991).
Even though Denys spent most of his life in the soli-
tude of a Carthusian monastery, he was not isolated from
the cultural life of his time. Not only did he have contacts
with Cusanus and study at Cologne in his youth – his
writings show him taking part in the doctrinal disputes
animating that academic milieu – but his person and his
writings encompassed ‘‘all of the spiritual currents of the
late Middle Ages,’’ namely ‘‘monastic theology, Scholasti-
cism, speculative mysticism, and the Modern Devotion’’
(Emery 1996). Moreover, he was often consulted by secu-
lar and ecclesiastical authorities, as well as private people,
concerning various issues and was involved in the affairs
of the world, as his pastoral, reforming, and anti-
Mohammedan writings reveal.
The astonishing list of his works – more than 150 titles
are still extant – makes him one of the most productive
writers of the Middle Ages (Emery 2000). His corpus is
impressive for the variety of the genres practiced and
the wealth of the topics discussed. He composed
258 D
Demonstration and the Posterior Analytics

commentaries on all the books of Sacred Scripture; trea-
tises on various issues related to monastic life and to the
traditions of meditation and writings based on famous
monastic works (i.e., a commentary on John Climacus’
Scala Paradisi and a ‘‘translation’’ ad stilum facillimum of
John Cassian’s Collationes); numerous ascetical, devo-
tional, pastoral, juridical, reforming, and apologetic writ-
ings; several hundreds of sermons; and a Summa de vitiis et
virtutibus.
Even more noteworthy, however, is the fact that a large
section of his literary output consists of works of scholastic
philosophy and theology: his enormous commentaries on
Peter Lombard’s Sentences (written over a lifetime and
completed around 1464) constitute a unique document
of medieval theological learning, wherein Denys, on each
topic, reported and contrasted the views of the foremost
thirteenth and early fourteenth-century theologians –
except the nominales, whom he judged to be concerned
with words and unable to grasp reality – and added his
personal comments. Furthermore, he commented upon
the whole of the writings of Pseudo-Dionysius and upon
Boethius’ De consolatione philosophiae and wrote works
closely based on Aquinas’ writings. Remarkable are
also his independent philosophical and theological trea-
tises, wherein he expounded his personal views by
collecting the remarks scattered throughout his major
commentaries.
The ﬁrst book of the De lumine christianae theoriae
(around 1452) was his ﬁrst and most extensive philosoph-
ical work: while describing the procession of all creatures
from God and their return to Him, Denys treated all the
crucial issues of the philosophical tradition, displaying
a complete mastery of the doctrines of all the major
ancient, Arabic, and Jewish philosophers.
Denys’ last word on all the philosophical questions,
however, is to be found in his Elementatio philosophica,
which, like its theological counterpart – the Elementatio
theologica – was written by him late in his career after the
completion of the Sentences commentary (1464–1465); he
organized both works in propositions followed by com-
ments, imitating the structure of Proclus’ Elementatio
theologica.
Such a huge corpus included an equally vast selection
of sources, which ranged from Sacred Scriptures to the
Fathers, from Christian mystics to canonists, from Scho-
lastic theologians to ancient and pagan philosophers, read
either ﬁrst-hand in Latin translation – for example, Plato’s
Meno and Phaedo in Aristippus’ translation and Proclus’
Elementatio theologica – or via the writings of scholastic
doctors, especially those of Albert the Great. To Denys’
mind, the most authoritative source after Scripture is
Pseudo-Dionysius, whose writings constitute a sort of
rule of thought according to which the teachings of
other sources have to be evaluated in the theological as
well as in the philosophical domain. Among scholastic
theologians, Thomas Aquinas has the preeminence not
so much for intrinsic merits of his thought or because of
Denys’ schooling in the via Thomae, as for Thomas’ sanc-
tity. Over the course of his life, however, Denys, inﬂuenced
by other authors, came to question Thomas’ authority on
several crucial issues (see below).
Central to Denys’ thought is his conception of the
hierarchical order of wisdom. Philosophic wisdom is
the lowest level of a hierarchy which, through scholastic
theology, culminates in the union of mystical theology.
Therefore, philosophy prepares the human intellect for the
superior modes of supernatural knowledge, and the highest
form of philosophy, namely metaphysical contemplation,
the objects of which are the First Cause and separate sub-
stances, adumbrates those modes at the natural level.
In contrast with the majority of his Carthusian breth-
ren, Denys contested a merely affective interpretation of
mystical
union
and
stressed
its
cognitive
nature.
According to his interpretation of Pseudo-Dionysius’
teaching – which he saw conﬁrmed in the writings of Jan
van Ruusbroec (‘‘alter Dionysius’’) – in the contemplation
of mystical theology the mind unites with God by pene-
trating, beyond all negations and afﬁrmations, the inac-
cessible
light
of
his
essence,
known
quia
est.
Simultaneously the soul unites affectively with God
because love in the will accompanies this act of cognitive
union.
As one may conjecture from the Protestatio ad
superiorem suum (1440s), a work which Denys seems to
have written in order to gain permission to resume his
writing activity, the very breadth of his intellectual enter-
prise, as well as his intellectualist conception of mystical
theology, caused him some problems, as in the 1440s he
was forbidden to write for some years and at the 1446
Carthusian General Chapter was severely criticized for
unspeciﬁed reasons, probably connected with his literary
activity (Emery 1996).
A crucial focus of Denys’ thought is constituted by the
nature and acts of the rational soul. Inﬂuenced by Pseudo-
Dionysius and Boethius, as well as Albert the Great and
Ulrich of Strasbourg, Denys developed noetic doctrines,
which implied harsh criticisms of Thomas Aquinas’ teach-
ings. Denys held that the human mind can know without
recourse to phantasms and that it can know the quiddity
of separate substances and, through their mediation, can
contemplate God quia est and thereby attain a natural
happiness in this life. Given the reciprocity between the
Denys the Carthusian D
259
D

order of being and that of knowing, Denys read Thomas’
denial of the human soul’s ability to know without
recourse to the body as an argument against the soul’s
immortality. Moreover, since knowledge without phan-
tasms was one of the key points of disagreement between
Thomists and Albertists at the University of Cologne,
Denys adopted in fact a position identical to that of the
Albertist school (Palazzo 2006).
The distinction between being and essence is another
doctrinal point where Thomas’ teaching was ﬁercely crit-
icized by Denys. Denys’ view on this question changed
radically, however, over the years, moving from an early
adherence to the Thomistic doctrine of a real distinction
between esse and essentia to the adoption of the position,
attributed to Albert, Ulrich, Henry of Ghent, that the
distinction was only intentional. Also in this case, Denys
was in fact an ally of the Albertist school. Even more, it was
the reading of the Tractatus de esse et essentia of Johannes
de Nova Domo, founder of that school, that led Denys to
interpret Albert’s and Ulrich’s position in terms of Henry
of Ghent’s doctrine of intentional distinction.
See also: ▶Albert the Great ▶Boethius ▶Essence and
Existence ▶Henry of Ghent ▶Peter Lombard ▶Pseudo-
Dionysius, the Areopagite ▶Thomas Aquinas
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Doctor Divinus Ecstaticus (1896–1935) Dionysius Cartusianus. In: Opera
omnia, cura et labore monachorum ordinis Cartusiensis, 42 vols, in 44.
Typis Cartusiae S. M. de Pratis, Montreuil/Tournai/Parkminster
Secondary Sources
Monographs
Emery K Jr (1991) Dionysii Cartusiensis opera selecta (Prolegomena).
Bibliotheca manuscripta 1A–1B: Studia bibliographica, 2 vols, Cor-
pus Christianorum continuatio mediaevalis 121–121a. Brepols,
Turnhout
Podlech S (2002) Discretio: Zur Hermeneutik der religio¨sen Erfahrung bei
Dionysius dem Karta¨user, Analecta Cartusiana 194. Institut fu¨r
Anglistik und Amerikanistik, Salzburg
Turner D (1995) The darkness of God: negativity in Christian mysticism.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp 211–225
Wassermann D (1996) Dionysius der Karta¨user: Einfu¨hrung in Werk und
Gedankenwelt, Analecta Cartusiana 133. Institut fu¨r Anglistik und
Amerikanistik, Salzburg
Collections
Emery K Jr (1996) Monastic, scholastic and mystical theologies from the
later Middle ages. Variorum collected studies. Ashgate, Aldershot
Emery K Jr (2000) A complete reception of the Latin Corpus
Dionysiacum: the commentaries of Denys the Carthusian. In:
Boiadjiev T, Kapriev G, Speer A (eds) Die Dionysius-Rezeption im
Mittelalter: Internationales Kolloquium in Soﬁa vom 8. bis 11. April
1999. Brepols, Turnhout, pp 197–247
Emery K Jr (2003) Denys the Carthusian on the cognition of divine
attributes and the principal name of God: a propos the unity of
a philosophical experience. In: Pickave´ M (ed) Die Logik des
Traszendentalen. Festschrift fu¨r Jan A. Aertsen zum 65. Geburtstag,
Miscellanea Mediaevalia 30. Gruyter, Berlin/New York, pp 454–486
Meuthen E (1993) Nikolaus von Kues und Dionysius der Karta¨user. In:
Hagemann L, Glei R (eds) EN KAI PLHYOS. Einheit und Vielheit.
Festschrift fu¨r Karl Bormann zum 65. Echter, Geburtstag/Wu¨rzburg/
Altenburg, pp 100–120
Schmitz-Perrin R (1995) Denys le Chartreux – the´ologien de la
divinisation de l’homme dans la tradition de la the´ologie latine:
pre´sentation de textes. In: Hogg J (ed) The mystical tradition and
the Carthusians, vol 3, Analecta Cartusiana 130. Institut fu¨r Anglistik
und Amerikanistik, Salzburg, pp 97–116
Trottmann Ch (2004) Trois regards chartreux sur la contemplation
au coeur du XVe sie`cle. In: Speer A, Pickave´ M (eds) Herbst des
Mittelalters? Fragen zur Bewertung des 14. und 15. Jahrhunderts,
Miscellanea Mediaevalia 31. Gruyter, Berlin/New York, pp 558–593
Journal Articles
Calma M (2007) Te´moignage sur le beau comme proprie´te´ de l’eˆtre: Jean
Gerson et Denys le Chartreux. Freiburger Zeitschrift fu¨r Philosphie
and Theologic 54:464–482
Hoenen MJFM (1994) Denys the Carthusian and Heymeric de Campo on
the pilgrimages of children to Mont-Saint-Michel (1458) with a ﬁrst
edition of Denys’s Epistola de cursu puerorum and Heymeric’s
Determinatio super peregrinatione multorum iuvenum. Archives
d’histoire doctrinale et litte´raire du moyen aˆge 61:387–418
Palazzo A (2004) Ulrich of Strasbourg and Denys the Carthusian: textual
analysis and doctrinal comments. Bulletin de Philosophie Me´die´vale
46:61–113
Palazzo A (2006) Ulrich of Strasbourg and Denys the Carthusian (II):
doctrinal inﬂuence and implicit quotations. Bulletin de Philosophie
Me´die´vale 48:163–208
Dietrich of Freiberg
BURKHARD MOJSISCH1, ORRIN FINN SUMMERELL2
1Institut fu¨r Philosophie
Ruhr-Universita¨t Bochum
Bochum
Germany
2Bureau of Public Information
UNESCO
Paris
France
Abstract
Dietrich of Freiberg (c. 1240/1250–1318/1320) was an
important representative of the Dominican order in the
Middle Ages. He focused on central philosophical prob-
lems taken up toward ﬁnding solutions applicable for
philosophy as well as theology and the natural sciences.
Methodologically, rational argumentation was key for
260 D
Dietrich of Freiberg

Dietrich, even as he aimed, in line with Augustine’s rec-
ommendation, at a concordance between authority
(auctoritas) and reason (ratio). Characteristic of his
thought are his theory of intellect, whose cognition ren-
ders it self-knowing knowledge: consciousness as self-con-
sciousness; his doctrine of what is an essentially structured
cosmos reﬂecting the comprehensible rationality of its
absolute principle, the Godhead; and his theory of the
rainbow. Dietrich was particularly inﬂuenced by Albert
the Great, while he himself inﬂuenced the Proclus com-
mentator Berthold of Moosburg.
Originally from Saxony, Dietrich of Freiberg (c. 1240/
1250–1318/1320) was a member of the Dominican order
who served as its Provincial Superior for the province of
Germany from 1293 to 1296, as well as being its Vicar
General from 1294 to 1296. In 1296/1297 in Paris, Dietrich
obtained his master’s degree in theology (magister in
theologia), teaching there for about two years. In 1310,
he was commissioned to lead the order as its Vicar Pro-
vincial. Dietrich probably died c. 1318/1320.
The bulk of his writings Dietrich devoted to speciﬁc
philosophical problems. From the start, he considered
intellect to be the central topic of philosophical investiga-
tion. In his treatise, On the Origin of Categorially Deter-
mined Reality (De origine rerum praedicamentalium),
Dietrich explores the relation between nature – after
God, the intelligences (intelligentiae: immaterial forms),
the spiritual substances and the heavenly bodies, the sub-
lunary sphere dependent on these – and intellect. While
Henry of Ghent asserted that intellect is affected by natural
objects, Dietrich took the opposite view: intellect consti-
tutes the essential being, the quiddity (‘‘whatness’’), of the
natural object and in this quiddity the very ‘‘what’’ (quid)
itself of the object. This he holds because the natural object
cannot distinguish between itself as ‘‘what’’ it is and its
‘‘whatness,’’ or essence, nor can it in turn combine these so
differentiated components. Intellect alone is able to do
this. Intellect is not passive, but rather active, since it is
intellect which through the process of deﬁnition provides
the natural object its essence. Indeed, Dietrich ascribes to
intellect the function of efﬁcient cause (causa efﬁciens): Its
very differentiation (between the components of the nat-
ural object as the object of cognition) is its efﬁcacy, for it
effects the deﬁnition and through the deﬁnition renders
the natural object cognizable as something, as ‘‘what’’ it is.
For intellect, it is only in this way that the object even
becomes an object at all – as a unity of ‘‘whatness’’ and
‘‘what,’’ both constituted by intellect. Cognition of an
object therefore means, ‘‘intellect effects its deﬁnition,’’
differentiating through the deﬁnition the ‘‘whatness’’
from the ‘‘what’’ and, at the same time, combining the
‘‘whatness’’ and the ‘‘what.’’
Nonetheless, intellect is also passive, inasmuch as the
cognizing possible intellect presupposes the activity of the
agent intellect, for the possible intellect grasps its objects
by conceiving this very activity. Indeed, the agent intellect
is also an efﬁcient cause (causa efﬁciens). In itself, in an
intuitive act, the agent intellect cognizes: its principle,
God, itself, and the universe of beings. In the possible
intellect, however, the agent intellect effects the general
contents (species intelligibiles) cognized by the possible
intellect in cognizing the agent intellect, and the possible
intellect cognizes the agent intellect only in cognizing
these general contents. Exclusively in the state of bliss (in
beata vita) is the agent intellect not merely efﬁcient cause,
but also formal cause, when it is uniﬁed as a form with the
possible intellect as a kind of matter – that is how man
essentially cognizes God, according to Dietrich in his
treatise On the Beatiﬁc Vision (De visione beatiﬁca). All
this illustrates the way in which Dietrich tends to proceed,
drawing theologically important conclusions from philo-
sophically justiﬁed presuppositions. Such presuppositions
rest
methodologically
on
rational
argumentation
concording, as much as possible, with arguments of
authority. Even so, for Dietrich, reason takes precedence
before authority.
Authority for the view that the possible intellect in its
cognizing enjoys general cognition is provided by Aristotle
with his theory of science. Thus, Dietrich concludes his
treatise On the Intellect and the Content of Cognition (De
intellectu et intelligibili) by enumerating the features that
an object must have in order to be an object of scientiﬁc
cognition. What is important is that it has being, that it
has general validity and necessity, and that the fundamen-
tal grounds for cognizing something are provided, hence
that the elements of deﬁnition are given. Cognition, inso-
far as it is knowledge, cannot change; for change trans-
forms cognition into non-cognition – on this premise
Plato, Aristotle, and Dietrich all agree.
Intellect which knows that it knows and knows what
it knows is for Dietrich ‘‘being’’ which conceives and
which in conceiving conceives its object; such intellect
is, at the same time, being which conceives itself as its
object and therein is conscious conception, conscious-
ness as self-consciousness, ens conceptionale inquantum
huiusmodi. In this view, sense perception and imagination
are
conceptional
beings
(entia
conceptionalia).
The
intellectual object alone is the same as its conception;
solely for intellect is its conception intellect itself – is
intellect itself its own object. Hence, intellect is conscious-
ness of itself.
Dietrich of Freiberg D
261
D

In his philosophy of nature, Dietrich treats such topics
as continua, contraries, and optical phenomena. One con-
tinuum is time, which for Dietrich possesses merely
intramental being, a view combining the philosophies of
time developed by Aristotle, Augustine, and Averroes.
Dietrich differs from Aristotle to the extent that he situates
contrariety only in the third kind of quality, which
includes passive qualities and affections, no longer allying
it with four categories. This reﬂects his consistent aim of
reducing the principles of nature.
Dietrich’s place in the history of science is assured by
his work On the Rainbow (De iride), with its theory
perfected only centuries later by Descartes and Newton.
While most of his predecessors compared the colors of
the rainbow to the spectrum issuing from the sun’s rays
on passing through a water ﬂask, tending to equate the
latter with a cloud or a collection of drops, Dietrich was
the ﬁrst to trace the light’s path through the individual
drop, discovering two refractions at the surface of the
drop nearer the observer and one internal reﬂection at
the surface farther away. So explaining the primary, or
lower, rainbow, Dietrich elucidated the production of the
secondary, or upper, rainbow as involving two refrac-
tions at the surface of the drop nearer the observer and
two internal reﬂections at the surface farther away – thus
accounting for the color inversion in the secondary
rainbow.
See also: ▶Albert the Great ▶Berthold of Moosburg
▶Consciousness ▶Epistemology
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Dietrich von Freiberg (1977–1985) Opera omnia, ed. Mojsisch B et al.
Corpus Philosophorum Teutonicorum Medii Aevi II 1–4. Felix
Meiner, Hamburg
Theodoric of Freiberg (1992) Treatise on the intellect and the intelligible
(Tractatus de intellectu et intelligibili), trans. Fu¨hrer ML (from Latin,
with an introduction and notes). Marquette University Press,
Milwaukee
Secondary Sources
de Libera A (1984) Introduction a` la mystique Rhe´nane. D’Albert le
Grand a` Maıˆtre Eckhart. O.E.I.L, Paris
Flasch K (ed) (1984) Von Meister Dietrich zu Meister Eckhart. Felix
Meiner, Hamburg
Flasch
K
(2007)
Dietrich
von
Freiberg.
Philosophie,
Theologie,
Naturforschung um 1300. Vittorio Klostermann, Frankfurt am Main
Imbach R (1979) Gravis iactura verae doctrinae. Prolegomena zu einer
Interpretation der Schrift De ente et essentia Dietrichs von Freiberg.
Freibg Z Philos Theol 26:369–425
Iremadze T (2004) Konzeptionen des Denkens im Neuplatonismus. Zur
Rezeption
der
Proklischen
Philosophie
im
deutschen
und
georgischen Mittelalter: Dietrich von Freiberg – Berthold von
Moosburg – Joane Petrizi. Bochumer Studien zur Philosophie 40.
B. R. Gru¨ner, Amsterdam/Philadelphia
Kandler K-H, Mojsisch B, Stammko¨tter F-B (eds) (1999) Dietrich von
Freiberg. Neue Perspektiven seiner Philosophie, Theologie und
Naturwissenschaft.
Freiberger
Symposion:
10–13.
Ma¨rz
1997.
Bochumer Studien zur Philosophie 28. B. R. Gru¨ner, Amsterdam/
Philadelphia
Maurer AA (1956) The De quidditatibus entium of Dietrich of Freiberg
and
its
criticism
of
thomistic
metaphysics.
Mediaeval
Stud
18:173–203
Mojsisch B (1977) Die Theorie des Intellekts bei Dietrich von Freiberg.
Felix Meiner, Hamburg
Mojsisch B (1986) ‘‘Dynamik der Vernunft’’ bei Dietrich von Freiberg und
Meister Eckhart. In: Ruh K (ed) Abendla¨ndische Mystik im
Mittelalter. Symposion Kloster Engelberg 1984. Metzler, Stuttgart,
pp 135–144
Sturlese L (1996) Storia della ﬁlosoﬁa tedesca nel Medioevo. Il secolo XIII,
(Accademia Toscana di Scienze e Lettere ‘‘La Colombaria’’. Studi
149). Olschki, Florence
Wallace WA (1959) The scientiﬁc methodology of Theodoric of Freiberg.
A case study of the relationship between science and philosophy.
Studia Friburgensia, New Series, 26. University Press, Fribourg
Divine Law
HOWARD KREISEL
The Goldstein-Goren Department of Jewish Thought
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev
Beer Sheva
Israel
Abstract
This article deals with the question of how the notion of
divine law was deﬁned in medieval philosophy by explor-
ing the thought of a number of prominent thinkers in the
Jewish, Islamic, and Christian philosophical traditions –
Judah Halevi, al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, Maimonides,
and Thomas
Aquinas. All these thinkers were acquainted with the Pla-
tonic–Aristotelian tradition that laid much of the basis for
medieval political philosophy and they all grappled with
this tradition in formulating their approaches. Moreover,
many played a prominent role within their religious com-
munity. For them the problem of divine law was not
simply an interesting theoretical question but a problem
that lay at the heart of their particular religious commit-
ment. They saw their task not only as deﬁning the char-
acteristics of divine law but as defending the divine nature
of their own religion. The article concludes with the sev-
enteenth century philosopher Spinoza and explores the
relation between his approach and the approaches of his
medieval predecessors.
262 D
Divine Law

Introduction
What characteristics must a law possess in order to be
considered ‘‘divine?’’ How is such a law to be distinguished
from laws legislated by human beings or from the form of
law known as ‘‘natural?’’ The question of the deﬁnition of
divine law, and the positing of the very existence of such
a law, are intricately related to one’s conception of God
and God’s relation to humanity. Or to formulate it from
a different perspective, it is related to how one views the
structure of the world and the role played by God and by
human beings in this structure. Is God cognizant of
human beings and exercises an immediate providential
role toward humanity, which assumes the expression of
laying down law among other activities. What is the pur-
pose of such a law? How is it revealed and how can one
verify that a particular law is in fact God’s command. Even
if one does not accept the view of God’s immediate rela-
tion to humanity, and, by extension, rejects the view that
God legislates particular laws, can one nevertheless accept
the notion of certain laws being ‘‘divine’’ in a meaningful
sense? What would ‘‘divine’’ mean in this context and how
would it be distinguished from laws that are considered to
be human?
Judah Halevi
The thought of the twelfth century Spanish–Jewish phi-
losopher Judah Halevi provides a good illustration of
many of the issues involved in the notion of divine law.
Halevi begins his magnum opus, the Kuzari with the
following story: An angel appears to the pagan king of
the Khazars, and informs him that his thoughts are pleas-
ing to God but not his actions. The king is faced with the
dilemma of discovering which actions are pleasing to God,
and in his quest, he turns to various sages to ascertain the
answer. In Halevi’s story, just as in the historical narrative
upon which it is loosely based, the king ultimately chooses
Judaism. Halevi takes poetic license in his retelling of the
tale by having the king turn ﬁrst to a philosopher to
discover the desirable actions. Halevi’s ‘‘philosopher’’
responds to the king’s question by ﬁrst summarizing
many of the main points of the philosophers’ credo,
which is essentially based on the thought of the tenth
century Islamic philosopher al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯: God is the source
of emanation of the world and its order, an emanation that
is without a beginning or an end. God is not cognizant of
individuals and their acts, nor is God capable of volitional
activity. The perfection of the individual lies in the per-
fection of the intellect, culminating in conjunction with
the Active Intellect and immortality. Ethical character
traits are necessary for bringing one’s intellectual potential
to fruition by creating the proper external (social) and
internal (psychological) state, which enables the individ-
ual to engage in the diligent search for truth leading to the
attainment of conjunction. Halevi’s ‘‘philosopher’’ con-
cludes (Kuzari 1:1):
"
If you attain such a state of knowledge, do not be
concerned with which religious law (shari‘a) you follow
in order to glorify God, or by what speech, language, and
actions. You may also create for yourself your own law
(dina), as well as for your family and the members of your
state if they accept it, in order to glorify and praise God
and to conduct yourself in an ethical manner. Or you may
follow a law based on the rational nomoi laid down by the
philosophers, and strive for purity of the soul. In conclu-
sion, seek purity of the heart in any manner that you are
able, after you acquire knowledge of all the sciences. Then
you will reach your goal – conjunction with the spiritual
being, that is to say, the Active Intellect. Perhaps it will
then bestow upon you prophecy and inform you hidden
matters by way of veridical dreams and truthful visions.
In this manner, the ‘‘philosopher’’ informs the king in
a not so subtle manner that his dream is not a revelatory
one at all; it is in fact a false one, the product of his own
vain imaginings. True prophecy is attained as a result of
achieving the state of conjunction with the Active Intellect.
For the Aristotelian philosopher there is no divine law in
the sense of a law whose immediate author is God. There
exists no set of ritual acts that are preferable to any other,
as long as the core of the religion is of an ethical nature and
does not interfere with the pursuit of perfection, if not
actively promote it. Halevi’s ‘‘philosopher’’ appreciates the
positive role religion plays in society. It is important that
the members of society glorify God in prayer and ritual
acts, not because God derives any beneﬁt or pleasure from
these acts or is even aware of them, but because of their
beneﬁcial affect upon their practitioners. Therefore,
Halevi’s ‘‘philosopher’’ is indifferent to the question
whether one should choose an already existent religion
or creates one’s own religion according to the principles
laid down by the philosophers.
The answers the king receives to his quest on the part
of the proponents of Christianity, Islam, and Judaism, on
the other hand, share in common the notion of a personal,
volitional creator of the world who has the ability to
communicate with humanity. The religion commanded
by God by means of revelation is the one that is pleasing to
God. The question that is raised by this approach is how to
establish the truth of revelation and hence whether
a particular religion is in fact divine. For Halevi the answer
lies in the nature of the miracles accompanying the reve-
lation. The grandeur of the miracles that defy any
Divine Law D
263
D

naturalistic explanation and the multitude of eyewitnesses
to their occurrence attest to the truth of the message and
the fact that God is the author. The most reliable sign for
Halevi is the audible speech that God created and which
conveys the divine message directly to the people. This
view emerges explicitly from Halevi’s treatment of the
revelation at Mount Sinai in which the Ten Command-
ments were given (Kuzari 1:87):
"
Fire encircled Mount Sinai and remained there for forty
days. The people saw it, and they saw Moses enter it and
emerge from it. The people heard the pure speech in the
[giving of the] Ten Commandments. . . The multitude did
not receive the Ten Commandments from solitary individ-
uals or from a prophet, but from God. However, they did
not possess Moses’ strength to behold that grand scene.
Henceforth,
the
people
believed
that
Moses
was
addressed by a speech that originated with God. It was
not preceded by any thought or suggestion in Moses’
mind. Prophecy is not, as the philosophers think, the
conjunction of the soul whose thoughts are purified with
the Active Intellect, also termed the Holy Spirit and
Gabriel, and the apprehension of it. It is possible
[according to the philosophers] that at that moment [of
conjunction] the person would imagine in a vision, either
while asleep or awake, that another person is speaking to
him. He would hear imaginary speech in his soul, not by
way of his ears. He would see this person in his imagina-
tion, and not by way of his eyes. He would then say that
God spoke to him. These notions were negated by the
great Gathering [at Sinai]. Accompanying the divine
speech was the divine writing. God engraved these Ten
Commandments on two tablets of precious stone, and
gave them to Moses. The people saw the divine writing,
just as they heard the divine speech.
The two different conceptions of God’s relation to the
world, that of the philosopher and that of the Jewish
sage (as well as the Christian and Moslem sages) lead to
two very different conceptions of divine law. Halevi is well
aware of the naturalistic explanation the philosophers
offer for understanding the nature of revelation. From
his perspective, the philosophers treat all religions essen-
tially as human-made law. He knows that the philosophers
draw a distinction between different laws by their content
and their purpose, or by their material, formal and ﬁnal
causes – namely, by whether the law is based on rational–
ethical nomoi and designed to contribute to human per-
fection or not. Moreover, they distinguish between the
efﬁcient cause of different laws in terms of the perfection
of the legislator of each. For Halevi, however, divine law is
precisely a law whose immediate efﬁcient cause is God. He
does not reject the view that divine law is distinguishable
from all other legislations also by its content and purpose.
He devotes much of his treatise to explore this issue and
highlight the distinguishing characteristics of the divine
law in these areas. Halevi’s God is a wise deity who does
nothing in vain or in an arbitrary manner, hence every-
thing commanded by God must have a purpose and is
designed to promote it in an ideal manner. Nevertheless,
what makes a law divine in his view is ﬁrst and foremost
that it is given directly by God; all the other distinctions
follow from this fundamental one. That there are rational
nomoi is not disputed by Halevi. Every society, even a band
of thieves, realizes that they must be governed by certain
ethical propositions in order to survive (Kuzari 2:48).
Passages in the Kuzari reﬂect Aristotle’s distinction
between natural and conventional/human law – namely
law that consists of those general propositions that are
binding everywhere and law that consists of particular
practices and enactments that may vary from place to
place (Nicomachean Ethics V.7, 1134b–1135a). For Halevi,
while divine law contains laws that resemble natural law
and human law, it is fundamentally different from both. In
being commanded by God, it is ideal and completely
obligatory not only in its general ethical directives but in
all its particular commandments, whether they are of
a social or ritual nature. Moreover, for him the divine
law, as opposed to human law, remains forever constant
in all its particulars just as human nature remains forever
the same. The divine law molds the soul of the individual,
and not only society at large, in a perfect manner that is
known only to God (Kuzari 1:79; 2:48–50; 3:7–11, 23;
4:19). This is the view of divine law that Halevi develops
in his rejection of the approach of the philosophers.
Al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯
Halevi’s ‘‘philosopher’’ belongs to the tradition of the
great tenth century Islamic Aristotelian philosopher,
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, whose approach to law is anchored in Plato’s
Republic, particularly in the notion of the philosopher–
king, and in Aristotle’s Ethics. In many of his writings,
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ dwells on the problem of the nature of the ideal
polity, its lawgiver, and the characteristics of the law that
he legislates. Following his Greek predecessors, al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯
thinks of law primarily in terms of its ﬁnal and formal
causes, or its purpose and the way it goes about in achiev-
ing it. He traces the differences in the purpose and content
of each body of law to the character of its legislator. In the
Book of Religion he writes:
"
Religion (milla) is opinions and actions, determined and
restricted
with
stipulations
and
prescribed
for
264 D
Divine Law

a community by their ﬁrst ruler, who seeks to obtain
through their practicing it a speciﬁc purpose with respect
to them or by means of them [. . .] If the ﬁrst ruler is
virtuous and his rulership truly virtuous, then in what he
prescribes he seeks only to obtain, for himself and for
everyone under his rulership, the ultimate happiness that
is truly happiness, and that religion will be virtuous reli-
gion (Political Writings:93).
Al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ goes on to deal with the nature of the opinions
and actions prescribed in the virtuous religion. The opin-
ions deal with God, the spiritual beings together with their
ranks and functions, the generated material beings and
how they are ordered, the nature of prophecy, and ulti-
mate reward and punishment. These true opinions,
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ clariﬁes in the continuation of his remarks, and
in more detail in his other writings, are often presented in
metaphorical or imaginative form, as beﬁtting the state of
society for which they are intended. The virtuous religion
also presents tales of ediﬁcation describing the prophets
and virtuous rulers and well as the wicked and what
became of them. The actions it prescribes are divided
into those relating to the praise of God and the righteous,
as well as condemnation of the wicked, and those
concerning the mutual dealings of individuals with each
other in society and how a person should conduct oneself.
Al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ sees the virtuous religion as similar to theoret-
ical and practical philosophy, and subordinate to these
two branches of philosophy – the ﬁrst one dealing with
the order of existence and the second with human
governance.
Al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ lives in an age in which society is governed
by revelatory religion, a fact that he can hardly ignore. Yet
it is interesting to note that he refrains from using the term
‘‘divine’’ (ila¯hı¯) in characterizing religion. He character-
izes religion either as virtuous (fad:ı¯la) or errant (though
some of the terms he uses for religion – sharı¯‘a, sunna,
milla, dı¯n – have the connotation of divine). He may have
desired to sidestep the problem of dealing directly with
Islam in developing his theoretical model, though he
certainly thought that Islam should be understood in
accordance with this model. Nevertheless, there is no
suggestion in his model of a single virtuous religion –
the contrary is true – or even of a virtuous religion that
is the seal of all virtuous religions, as Islam is formally
regarded by its adherents. This can be seen even more
clearly from al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s other political writings such as
the Political Regime and the Opinions of the People of the
Virtuous City. Al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s model is a dynamic historical
one in which one virtuous religion succeeds another, each
with the appearance of a new ideal lawgiver, and each is
framed in accordance with the changing conditions.
Al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ does not ignore the relation of virtuous religion
to revelation. He draws an integral connection between
the two, as can be seen from the following passage in the
Book of Religion:
"
Now the craft of the virtuous first ruler is kingly and joined
with revelation from God. Indeed, he determines the
actions and opinions in the virtuous religion by means of
revelation (wah:y). This occurs in one or both of two ways:
one is that they are all revealed to him as determined; the
second is that he determines them by means of the faculty
he acquires from revelation and from the Revealer, may He
be exalted, so that the stipulations with which he deter-
mines the virtuous opinions and actions are disclosed to
him by means of it. Or some come about in the ﬁrst way
and some in the second way. It has already been explained
in theoretical science how the revelation of God, may He
be exalted, to the human being receiving the revelation
comes about and how the faculty acquired from revela-
tion and from the Revealer occurs in a human being
(Political Writings:94).
Revelation for al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ is a natural phenomenon that
characterizes the reception of one who attains the state
of conjunction with the Active Intellect, as seen from his
description of the ﬁrst ruler (The Political Regime:36).
Al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ certainly does not think that God is the imme-
diate efﬁcient cause of revelation, just as God is not the
immediate efﬁcient cause of any natural phenomenon.
While al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s depiction suggests that God is in some
manner directly responsible for the law laid down by the
ﬁrst ruler, his reference to theoretical science in this con-
text indicates that he views this phenomenon along the
lines of the Greek philosophical tradition – a point that is
conﬁrmed by his other writings. The ‘‘faculty’’ the ﬁrst
ruler acquires in revelation is not a new faculty at all. It is
essentially the understanding of how to translate his per-
fect knowledge of the order of existence and of the purpose
of human beings into an ideal polity that directs its mem-
bers to the attainment of human perfection and ultimate
felicity. In his Selected Aphorisms, al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯lists all the gifts
possessed by the ﬁrst ruler that enable him to accomplish
this task – namely, perfect wisdom, prudence, rhetorical
excellence, a perfect imagination, courage, and not
possessing any physical impediments (Political Writ-
ings:37). In other words, the virtuous religion is seen as
the product of the conscious deliberations of the ruler who
possesses all these qualiﬁcations. These deliberations may
be said to be the result of ‘‘revelation,’’ which essentially is
an emanation from the Active Intellect that strengthens
the activity of the individual’s intellect and imagination,
Divine Law D
265
D

thereby enabling the individual to lay down a perfect
law. Al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s view that at times all the actions and
opinions are revealed to the ﬁrst ruler ‘‘as determined’’
should not be interpreted as indicating that God in this
instance is more directly involved in laying down the
virtuous religion. Al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ alludes to the view that in
this instance the faculties of the soul, particularly the
intellect and the imaginative faculty, ascertain the opin-
ions and actions to be laid down in the virtuous religion
while the individual is in the prophetic state – that is to say,
in the state of experiencing intellectual illumination –
rather than his laying down the particulars of the religion
on the basis of conscious deliberations while no longer in
this state.
For al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ then, the virtuous religion is a natural
phenomenon from a number of perspectives. It is the
product of revelation, which itself is a natural attainment
by the individual of perfect intellect. Furthermore, it is
designed to direct society to the natural perfection of
humanity that results in ultimate eternal felicity, which is
a natural consequence of the attainment of perfection. If
we equate al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s virtuous religion with divine religion
or law, the line between the natural and the divine is
completely blurred in his thought. Divine law not only
incorporates natural law as known by reason and which
provides the foundation for human or conventional law; it
is also the ideal expression of natural and human law.
What divine law is not, according to this conception,
is a law that God directly legislates. It is the latter
notion of divine law, as we have seen, which Halevi
seeks to defend against al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s approach. Halevi is
not in principle averse to blurring at times the distinc-
tion between the natural and the divine. All natural
phenomena, he notes, are from a certain perspective
divine in that they are created by God (Kuzari 5:21).
When it comes to understanding the divine law, however,
he insists upon maintaining the distinction between the
natural and the divine. The former reﬂects God’s
governance by way of the ﬁxed activities of His interme-
diaries while the latter is the product of God’s immediate,
personal activity.
Moses Maimonides
Al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s political philosophy left a deep impress on
subsequent Islamic thought. In a crucial sense, Avicenna,
Ibn Bajja, and Averroes were al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s disciples in this
area, as was the Jewish philosopher Maimonides. Mai-
monides not only applied al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s political thought to
his philosophic understanding of Judaism, but also to his
pioneering Jewish legal activity. When Maimonides
embarked on the project of writing the ﬁrst complete
code of Jewish law, he appears to have been strongly
inﬂuenced by al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s discussions of the characteristics
of the virtuous religion. The question that faces students
of Maimonides’ thought is the limits of this inﬂuence.
Does Maimonides understand Mosaic Law completely in
accordance with al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s model, or does he adopts this
model only in part.
For Maimonides, the divine law is distinguished from
all other legislations in that it imparts true opinions to its
adherents, thereby showing them the way to intellectual
perfection and true felicity (Guide of the Perplexed 2:40;
3:27). In Maimonides’ terms, it is directed to the ‘‘welfare
of the soul’’ and not only to the ‘‘welfare of the body,’’ or
body politic, which is the goal of non-divine legislations.
Moreover, the divine law inculcates the moral virtues that
contribute to the ‘‘welfare of the body’’ by prescribing
actions that are perfectly equibalanced, neither too
extreme nor too lax, whereas non-divine legislations fall
short in this matter (Guide 2:39). On these points Mai-
monides’ views are anchored in al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s thought. More-
over, he opens his legal code, Mishneh Torah, with
a section devoted to legally binding opinions regarding
God and the order of the world that conform to al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s
conceptual
scheme.
Maimonides
also
agrees
with
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ that only one who attains intellectual perfection
can lay down a divine law. He employs this point to argue
that one can distinguish true divine law from its imitators
by looking at the intellectual and moral characteristics of
the lawgiver (Guide 2:40). But he stops far short of
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ by maintaining that there was and will always
be only one divine law, and that is the Law of Moses. More
important, he appears to regard Moses as merely the
recipient and transmitter of the divine law, with God
being the actual author who communicates the Law to
Moses by means of a created divine voice (Guide 2:33). In
other words, Maimonides appears to be closer to his
coreligionist, Judah Halevi, than he is to al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ by
treating God as the immediate efﬁcient cause of the divine
law, with the divine voice created by God and heard by all
of Israel attesting to the truth of this point.
Maimonidean scholars have debated the problem
whether Maimonides in fact believed that God, and not
Moses, was the immediate author of the divine law as
contained in the Torah and that God created an audible
voice heard by all Israel as the Torah relates. A number
have argued that Maimonides’ esoteric view on this matter
was that Moses himself was the legislator of the law in one
or both of the two ways described by al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ in the
passage from the Book of Religion cited above. Maimonides
draws a number of parallels between the divine law and
nature. Like nature, he notes, there is nothing in the divine
266 D
Divine Law

law that is in vain. Like nature the divine law does not pay
attention to the isolated, but to what is beneﬁcial in the
majority of instances (Guide 3:25–26, 34). If we interpret
Maimonides as agreeing with al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ that the divine law
is the product of a naturally attained ability, even if Mai-
monides regards the level of perfection attained by Moses
as a unique occurrence, then the distinction between
divine law and nature breaks down even more. For Mai-
monides, as for al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, the divine law is the ideal
expression of both natural law and conventional or
human law. It was framed by one who attained ultimate
perfection and was designed to promote it in the most
effective manner possible within a polity. Based on his
perfect theoretical and practical apprehension, Moses
organized the Jewish polity in a manner that best imitates
God’s ordering of the world.
Maimonides leaves little doubt that even non-
prophetic legislators partake of a divine though natural
gift – namely, the ability to rule. While people are by
nature social animals, they are not by temperament capa-
ble of living together without destroying each other. Only
one with the ability to rule, an ability that Maimonides
traces to an emanation from the Active Intellect to those
possessing a superior imagination, can bring about the
social harmony necessary for communal existence. Yet in
lacking theoretical perfection these rulers and lawgivers
are not concerned about inculcating true opinions, nor are
they capable of organizing society with the view of
directing it to ﬁnal perfection (Guide 2:37, 40). Only one
who combines intellectual and imaginative perfection, the
prophet, is the one who receives the emanation from the
Active Intellect to both faculties and is capable of ruling
society in an optimal manner. Only the individual who
achieved the ultimate intellectual perfection, Moses, was
capable of legislating a permanent law that merits the label
‘‘divine.’’
Yet even if we accept the interpretation that Mai-
monides understands divine law completely in accor-
dance with a naturalistic model, his approach to the
issue is not framed by purely theoretical philosophical
considerations. His primary concern is to defend
Mosaic Law as the unique divine law in a manner
that is at least consistent with what he regards as
philosophic truth regarding God’s governance of the
world. The concern to uphold the validity of Mosaic
Law is all the more evident if we interpret Maimonides
as agreeing with the traditional belief that God is the
immediate author of the law given to Moses. For all his
commitment to medieval Aristotelian philosophy in
general, and the commitment to al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ in particular,
Maimonides’ ﬁrst commitment remains to Judaism.
Thomas Aquinas
The characterization of one’s loyalty belonging primarily
to one’s religious tradition rather than to philosophy per
se is certainly true also for the great thirteenth century
Christian philosopher, Thomas Aquinas. The inﬂuence
of the Aristotelian tradition and that of Maimonides
on Thomas’ political thought is striking. Yet, Thomas
makes use of the philosophic tradition only insofar as it
does not negate any of Christianity’s basic tenets. He is
closer to Halevi than Maimonides in this matter. Thomas’
God is a very personal God, as is true of any Christian who
believes in the Incarnation, a belief that ﬂies in the face of
the Aristotelian tradition.
In his Summa theologica (Q90–108) Thomas distin-
guishes between different types of law in a much sharper
and far more detailed manner than any of his predeces-
sors. He is a strong proponent of the idea of an eternal
natural law that is known by human beings by virtue of
a reason that partakes of divine reason. He regards human
law as the application of natural law to particular circum-
stances by means of practical reason. Thomas remains
ﬁrmly in the Aristotelian tradition on these points. Yet in
addition to natural and human laws, Thomas posits the
existence of divine law, which is not simply the ideal form
of natural and human laws by another name, and he goes
to great lengths to show its necessity. Law as such has as its
ﬁnal end happiness, but as Thomas’ discussion clariﬁes,
both natural law and the human law derived from it are
incapable of directing human beings to eternal happiness.
Only the divine law can lay down the ideal external and
internal acts by which to attain this happiness. For
Thomas, as in the case of Halevi, only God knows the
path by which God is to be reached, and this is made
known only by revelation. Thomas further argues that
only the divine law is concerned with humanity’s relation
to God while human laws are concerned solely with
human relations. Even in those cases that human law
devises institutions relating to divine matters, it is only
for the sake of human relations (Q99, A3). Echoes of this
view can be seen already in the thought of Halevi and
Maimonides.
Yet Thomas, as opposed to Halevi and Maimonides,
accepts the existence of two divine laws and not one – the
one contained in the Old Testament and the one contained
in the New Testament. In order to account for two divine
laws he must accept a historical model, one that posits
progress over time in which the people become prepared
for a more perfect law. The New Testament with its teach-
ing and commands is the Law that leads to divine grace
and eternal felicity by being a law that leads to perfect
virtue (Q91, A5). He assigns an intermediary role to the
Divine Law D
267
D

Old Law. It goes beyond human law that is concerned only
with earthly good by paving the way for the New Law; it
does not in itself, however, make its adherents ﬁt to attain
everlasting happiness. Thomas devotes much attention to
the divine wisdom as it is reﬂected in all aspects of the Old
Law before coming on to show how the New Law com-
pletes and perfects it by directing more of its attention to
the internal state of human beings and bringing about the
reception of divine grace.
Thomas also distinguishes the Old Law and the New
Law by their immediate agents. The New Law was trans-
mitted directly by God, while the Old Law was given to
Moses by God through the intermediary of the angels
(Q98, A3; though compare to Quaestiones disputatae 12,
14 where Moses receives intellectual vision without
angelic help) – a view that characterizes prophecy in
general in Maimonides’ thought, but not Mosaic proph-
ecy given directly by God, at least according to his
exoteric view on the matter. It should be noted that in
other writings Thomas is inﬂuenced both by Maimon-
ides’ view of the special nature of Mosaic prophecy as
well as his naturalistic theory of prophecy in general.
Nevertheless, he breaks with Maimonides by treating the
biblical prophets as attaining their prophecy by divine
grace and not because of their natural dispositions. Nor
is the particular content of their prophecy in his view
dependent upon the faculties of the prophet’s soul, or
even on the angels who serve as intermediaries, but on
God. For all of Thomas’ indebtedness to Aristotelian
thought and his acceptance of much of their view of
the natural order, in all matters pertaining to revelation
he ascribes to God a personal role.
Baruch Spinoza
The seventeenth century Dutch philosopher, Baruch
(Benedictus) Spinoza could not be more different than
Thomas on the last point. God in his view is not a personal
deity at all, and all divine activity is natural. In his
Tractatus theologico-politicus, Spinoza sets out to overturn
the project of the medieval political philosophical tradi-
tion in general, and Maimonides’ project in particular. For
what is this project if not to understand the content, and
not just the phenomenon, of biblical revelation philo-
sophically, and show how the religion that was given by
way of revelation promoted human perfection within
a polity in an ideal manner. The foundation for this
approach is the argument that revelation is only received
by one who is intellectually perfect. On this basis one
could read Scripture as containing theoretical truths,
albeit often in metaphorical form, and one could see
its commands as providing the ideal path to ultimate
felicity. This approach to Scripture is undermined by the
argument, which Spinoza goes to great lengths to make
regarding the Old Testament in his Tractatus theologico-
politicus, that the characterization Maimonides draws of
non-prophetic lawgivers – namely, individuals with
a perfect imaginative faculty but imperfect intellect,
hence they did not know where true perfection lies and
how to direct the nation to it – is true also of all the biblical
prophets including Moses. According to Spinoza, Moses
possessed a perfect imagination but far from perfect intel-
lect. He knew how to organize a nation of slaves but not
how to lead them to a perfection that he himself lacked.
What follows is that the Old Testament cannot be a source
for theoretical truths, nor does it direct one on the path to
felicity. It is a law that enabled the Jews to attain social
stability for awhile and nothing more. In other words, it
could aim no higher than earthly good. If Moses presents
the law he laid down as designed to do more than that, and
that he received this law by hearing an audible divine
voice, then he was simply deluding himself and others in
Spinoza’s view.
All the terms we have used till now take on different
meanings in the context of Spinoza’s philosophy. Laws
that are based on historical revelation, that is the product
of those with superior imagination, do not deserve the
epithet ‘‘divine.’’ Divine law is equated with natural law,
which for Spinoza is the law that is known by the light of
reason rather than by revelation. In other words, true
revelation is the knowledge attained by the great philoso-
phers and not the knowledge attained by the prophets.
Furthermore all particular legislations cannot be consid-
ered to be divine for divine/natural law, according to
Spinoza, has the following traits: (1) it is universal; (2) it
is not dependent upon historical narrative; (3) it does not
command ritual; (4) ultimate reward is integral to its
fulﬁllment, that is to say it is the natural consequence of
living according to the light of reason (TTP, chap. 4).
While it is true that Spinoza attempts to interpret the
New Testament as divine law, and this view brings him
into an afﬁnity with Thomas Aquinas, his interpretation
of the New Testament shares little with Thomas’ view. For
Spinoza, Jesus, as opposed to Moses, is the paradigm of the
true philosopher teaching the universal truths of reason,
nothing more.
In a crucial sense, Spinoza shares much in common
with al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, and with this point we come full circle. For
both al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ and Spinoza the divine and the natural are
synonymous and there is no expression of divine will
outside of the order of nature. Al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s ﬁrst ruler is
the perfect philosopher. Divine law for al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ is the
product of a perfect intellect and the ultimate expression
268 D
Divine Law

of natural law in the context of any given society. If one
rereads the speech of the philosopher at the beginning of
the Kuzari cited at the beginning of this article, one might
for a moment think that this philosopher is a proto-Spi-
nozist. Yet for all the similarities between al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ and
Spinoza there remains a great abyss between these two
thinkers. Al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ accepts the Platonic model of the phi-
losopher king and applies it to revelatory religion. He
develops a model by which the revelatory religions can
be viewed as expressions of philosophy and as directing
their adherents to true felicity. It is the tie between religion
and philosophy that Spinoza seeks to break; it is the view
that religious law leads to true felicity, and hence should be
the law of the state, that Spinoza writes his theological–
political treatise to combat. Al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ maintains the opti-
mistic Platonic view that the state can be ordered to
actively promote true human perfection. Maimonides
redeﬁnes Judaism accordingly, going so far as to dogma-
tize it in the attempt to convey the opinions, and not just
the actions, that should be accepted by all. Spinoza’s goal is
the more modest one of making society safe for philoso-
phers by not interfering with their pursuit of truth. For
him this cannot be accomplished by understanding Scrip-
ture philosophically, let alone as providing theoretical
truths closed to philosophy, but by undermining the
authority of Scripture in teaching any theoretical truths
or laying down the path society must follow. Thus, Spi-
noza sets the course for a goal alien to al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, and
certainly to most of the medieval political philosophical
tradition, namely, liberal secular society no longer bound
to the idea of revelatory religion but to human/divine
reason alone.
See also: ▶al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, Abu¯ Nas˙r ▶Judah Halevi ▶Moses
Maimonides ▶Thomas Aquinas
Bibliography
Primary Sources
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ (1972) The political regime, English trans. Najjar F. In: Lerner R,
Mahdi M (eds) Medieval political philosophy. Cornell University
Press, Ithaca
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ (1985) Al-Farabi on the perfect state, English trans. Walzer R.
Oxford University Press, Oxford
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ (2001) The political writings, English trans. Butterworth Ch.
Cornell University Press, Ithaca
Aquinas Thomas (1981) Summa theologica, English trans. Fathers of the
English Dominican Province. Christian Classics, Westminster
Halevi Judah (1964) Kuzari, English trans. Hirschfeld H. Schocken Books,
New York
Maimonides Moses (1963) The guide of the perplexed, English trans.
Pines S. Chicago University Press, Chicago
Spinoza Baruch (Benedictus) (1991) Tractatus theologico-politicus,
English trans. Shirley S. Brill, Leiden
Secondary Sources
Altmann A (1978) Maimonides and Thomas Aquinas: natural or divine
prophecy? AJS Review 3:1–19
Berman LV (1974) Maimonides, the disciple of Alfarabi. Israel Oriental
Studies 4:154–178
Galston M (1990) Politics and excellence: the political philosophy of
Alfarabi. Princeton University Press, Princeton
Kreisel H (1999) Maimonides’ political thought. SUNY, Albany
Kreisel H (2001) Prophecy: the history of an idea in medieval Jewish
philosophy. Kluwer, Dordrecht
Reines A (1969) Maimonides’ concept of mosaic prophecy. Hebrew
Union College Annual 40:325–362
Strauss L (1988) Persecution and the art of writing. University of Chicago
Press, Chicago
Strauss L (1995) Philosophy and law, trans. Adler E. SUNY Press, Albany
Divine Power
JEFFREY C. WITT
Department of Philosophy
Boston College
Chestnut Hill, MA
USA
Abstract
The explicitly scholastic Divine Power distinction devel-
oped out of the twelfth century theological discussion of
the nature of God’s power. At issue, initially, was the desire
to preserve the constancy of God’s nature and yet to
preserve his freedom from any sense of necessity. The
distinction emphasized the difference between what
God’s raw power was capable of and God’s power as
identiﬁed with what he actually wills. The understanding
of this distinction was later inﬂuenced by canonist discus-
sions of papal power, and the distinction often came to be
interpreted as two different powers that belonged to God.
The development of this later understanding is frequently
viewed as playing an important role in the emergence of
the modern period.
While the history of the question of what God can and
cannot do certainly has a long and almost untraceable
history, the distinctive approach to the question in the
Middle Ages owes much to the twelfth century debates
between Peter Abelard and Peter Lombard and the forg-
ing of the inﬂuential formulation of the problem in
Lombard’s Libri sententiarum.
Abelard, as in most things, is renowned for holding
a controversial position on the extent of God’s power. His
thinking on the subject stems from what became known as
Divine Power D
269
D

the principal opinion of the twelfth century nominalist
school, viz. once something is true, it is always true (semel
est verum, semper est verum). God’s will, like his knowledge,
never changes. Whatever has been, is, or will be are events
God has always known and events God has always willed.
For God, then, to act differently would be to deviate from
the axiom that what is true is always true. The consequence
of such thinking manifests itself in a God whose power,
from the point of view of other twelfth century thinkers,
was very limited. God’s capacity to act is limited to what he
has done, is doing, or already plans to do. While Abelard
can hold that God can do whatever he wills, he must admit
that God can only do what he wills and nothing more.
For many thinkers such a restriction on God’s capacity
was unacceptable. Because of his inﬂuence on the rest of
the Middle Ages, Lombard was the most important of
Abelard’s critics. But Lombard was more than a critic. In
distinctions 42–44, where Lombard explicitly treats the
issue of Divine Power, he adopted many of Abelard’s
formulations, including the fact that God’s knowledge
and God’s will do not change with the passing of time.
However, in distinction 43, Lombard takes a stand against
Abelard’s conclusion that God can only do what he wills.
Lombard makes a separation between God’s pure capacity
and his volition, saying, ‘‘God is able to do many things he
does not will to do, and is able not to do what he does.’’ In
short, Lombard holds that sheer power goes beyond voli-
tion. God contains within himself the raw power to do
anything that does not involve a contradiction. Whether
he wills such things is a different matter.
With the introduction of a distinction between God’s
sheer capacity and his ordained will in his Libri
sententiarum, Lombard determined the direction of all
subsequent discussions in the medieval period. By the
mid-thirteenth century, we ﬁnd in the Summa of
Alexander of Hales one of the fullest early descriptions of
the distinction. Alexander writes that God’s power, con-
sidered absolute, exceeds the divine will. But when God’s
power is considered from the standpoint of what God
actually wills, ordinate, then God’s power and will are
coextensive (Summa Halensis, pt. 1, inq. 1, tr. 4, q. 1,
m. 2, c. 2). At this point in history, the language of potentia
absoluta and potentia ordinata, found in Alexander, did
not suggest that there were two different powers in God
from which he acted, but rather expressed two ways of
looking at God’s one single power. One way of looking
at the power was absolutely or absolute, in abstraction
from all other considerations. The second way was as an
ordained power or ordinate, in connection with what God
actually wills. The idea that there were two distinct powers
in God was a later innovation.
Despite this nuanced use and sophisticated under-
standing of the Divine Power distinction developed by
several thinkers throughout the twelfth and thirteenth
centuries, the discussion of God’s power at the level of
potentia ordinata, for some, still appeared to place an
unacceptable restriction on what God can do here and
now. Thus, it appeared to carry with it a certain propensity
toward the necessitarianism of the extreme Aristotelian-
ism that many feared. This afﬁnity with a doctrine of
necessity came to be a concern for thinkers during and
after the condemnations of 1277. Consequently, some
theologians after 1277, particularly concerned with
safeguarding the freedom of God, were prone to use the
distinction in different manner than was ﬁrst intended,
namely, as a distinction between different sources of
power from which God could choose to act.
In addition to the concerns of post-1277 theologians,
there was also a notable contribution from the burgeoning
ﬁeld of canon law at the turn of the fourteenth century. In
attempts to safeguard the freedom of papal power, canon
lawyers began speaking of papal power in terms of
a distinction between power de facto and power de iure.
Behind this distinction was the belief that the Pope had
certain powers afforded him by the law (de iure), but that
he also had the power to act outside of the law and even
change the law (de facto). How canon law came to have an
inﬂuence on the theological discussions of Divine Power is
a complex story. However, the inﬂuence is unmistakable.
John Duns Scotus often uses the language of de facto and
de iure to accentuate the difference between a potentia
absoluta and a potentia ordinata (e.g., Ordinatio I, dist
44; see Courtenay 1990:101–103).
Throughout the rest of the fourteenth century, the
Divine Power distinction was employed in various and
often confused ways. Sometimes it was used only to high-
light the hypothetical possibility that God could have
acted differently, assuming of course that God’s nature
and will were other than they are. Other times, the dis-
tinction was used to emphasize the pure contingency of
the created order. Such use emphasized that even though
things typically act in a certain way, they need not neces-
sarily act that way. God could in fact act out of his absolute
power and change the current order and nature of things.
This latter view, unfairly or not, has become in posterity
closely associated with the via moderna of medieval nom-
inalism and thinkers such as William of Ockham. More-
over, this latter use of the Divine Power distinction,
emphasizing the contingency of the created order, was
not without consequences for the progress of thought.
In the ﬁeld of philosophy, the use of the distinction lies
near the heart of fourteenth century mistrust about the
270 D
Divine Power

level of certainty that natural reason could deliver. The
introduction of the idea that God could change the created
order left the once necessary relations between subject and
accident, cause and effect, open to doubt. God could, for
example, make a ﬁre without heat despite its obvious
contradiction with the current nature of things. Likewise,
no longer could one be certain that if there was a cause it
had to have an efﬁcient cause. The oft repeated phrase,
that ‘‘what God can do through secondary causes, he can
do himself’’ suggested that although the natural order
apparently requires that every event has a proper and
mediate cause, God can on occasion suspend this require-
ment. God, in fact, could intervene and create the effect
directly. In short, the use of Divine Power distinction to
accentuate two unique powers in God caused many, by the
mid to late fourteenth century, to call into question the
amount of certainty that natural knowledge could claim
for itself.
Theological discussions were also impacted by the
later use of the Divine Power distinction, particularly
regarding the issue of justiﬁcation. Since the necessity of
the created order was called into question by the activity of
God’s absolute power, it became plausible to conclude that
former assurances of salvation through the activity of the
church and causal effects of participation in the Eucharist
no longer carried as much weight. In place of the older
theology, which ﬁrmly accepted that God only acts from
his ordained power, a new theology was offered that
emphasized a covenantal relationship with God. This
newer theology asserted that there are no assurances in
the order of creation or in the ordained ministry of the
church about the procurement of salvation. Rather it is
always possible for God to act otherwise. For example, the
question of whether God could damn Peter and save Judas
was often discussed. Heiko Oberman has done much to
connect this emerging theological discussion to the
momentous events of the Reformation.
Finally, the inﬂuence of the Divine Power distinction
also had ramiﬁcations for the beginnings of modern sci-
ence. Scholars have highlighted the fact that the ability to
question the necessity of the created order made it possible
for thinkers to begin envisioning new conceptual models
of the world. Once the necessity of assumed relations was
called into question, new possibilities could be envisioned.
Pierre Duhem, at the beginning of the twentieth century,
was one of the ﬁrst historians of science to insist on the
importance of the principle of potentia absoluta for under-
standing the emergence of modern science. Since he ﬁrst
presented this thesis, a long debate has continued over its
validity. More recently, Edward Grant has renewed in
certain respects the thesis of Duhem, and Francis Oakley
has pointed to evidence of the continuing use of the
Divine Power distinction well into the modern period.
See also: ▶Alexander of Hales ▶John Duns Scotus
▶Peter Abelard ▶Peter Lombard ▶William of Ockham
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Abelard Peter (1987) Theologia ‘scholarium’. In: Opera theologica:
Corpus christianorum continuation mediaevalis, tom XIII, ed.
Buytaert EM, Mews CJ. Brepols, Turnholt
Alexander of Hales (1924) Summa Halensis, ed. Quaracchi. Collegium S.
Bonaventurae, Quaracchi, Florence
Duns Scotus John (1963) Ordinatio I. In: Opera omnia, Vol VI, ed.
Balic C. Typis Polyglottis Vaticanis, Civitas Vaticana
Duns Scotus John (1997) On the will and morality, ed. Frank W, trans.
Wolter A. Catholic University of America Press, Washington
Lombard Peter (1971–1981) Liber I sententiarum, 3rd edn, ed. Quaracchi.
Collegium S. Bonaventurae, Quaracchi, Florence
Secondary Sources
Courtenay WJ (1984) Covenant and causality in medieval thought: studies
in philosophy, theology, and economic practice. Variorum, London
Courtenay WJ (1990) Capacity and volition: a history of the distinction of
absolute and ordained power. Pierluigi Lubrina, Bergamo
Duhem P (1985) Medieval cosmology: theories of inﬁnity, place, time,
void, and the plurality of worlds, ed. Ariew R. University of Chicago
Press, Chicago
Gelber HG (2004) It could have been otherwise: contingency and neces-
sity in Dominican theology at Oxford 1300–1350. Brill, Leiden
Grant E (1971) Physical science in the Middle Ages. Cambridge University
Press, New York
Moonan L (1994) Divine power: the medieval power distinction up to its
adoption by Albert, Bonaventure, and Aquinas. Clarendon, Oxford
Oakley F (1984) Omnipotence, covenant, and order: an excursion in the
history of ideas from Abelard to Leibniz. Cornell University Press,
Ithaca
Oberman H (1963) The harvest of medieval theology: Gabriel Biel and
late medieval nominalism. Harvard University Press, Cambridge
Rudavsky T (1985) Divine omniscience and omnipotence in medieval
philosophy: Islamic, Jewish, and Christian perspectives. D. Reidel,
Dordrecht
Domingo de Soto
BENJAMIN HILL
Department of Philosophy
The University of Western Ontario
London, ON
Canada
Abstract
Domingo de Soto (1494–1560) was a sixteenth-century
Paris-trained
Spanish
theologian.
He
is
seldom
Domingo de Soto D
271
D

remembered now, but his work was instrumental in the
Thomistic revival of the sixteenth and seventeenth centu-
ries. His inﬂuence was most signiﬁcant in three areas.
First, his recognition that objects in free fall accelerate
uniformly has been shown to have inﬂuenced Galileo’s
thinking about motion. Second, his addressing the logic
of terms and propositions from within the conceptual
framework of sign theory was an important step toward
the development of semiotics and the logic of ideas, which
subsumed logic with epistemology and dominated logical
theorizing for almost the next 300 years. Third, he played
a signiﬁcant role in the development of Thomistic natural
law theory, which resulted in the systematization and
synthesis of Roman and canon law as well as in the spread
of the natural law tradition into the Netherlands and Great
Britain.
Domingo de Soto was born at Segovia in 1494. He began
his studies at Alcala´, but moved to Paris in 1517. While at
Paris (1517–1519), he studied under the inﬂuential nom-
inalist Jean Maior and perhaps attended lectures by
Francisco de Vitoria, who was to found the ‘‘School of
Salmanca’’ of which de Soto was destined to become one
of the greatest lights. He returned to Spain in 1519 and to
teach at Alcala´. He received his doctorate in theology in
1525 at Alcala´. In 1525, he also joined the Dominicans and
moved to Salamanca. He published the ﬁrst edition of his
famous Summulae during this period. He taught theology
at Salamanca from the ‘‘Chair of Vespers’’ from 1532 to
1549. His work on natural philosophy, Super VIII libros
physicorum Aristotelis commentaria dates from this period
of de Soto’s career. De Soto played a signiﬁcant role in the
ﬁrst sessions of the Council of Trent (1545–1547). He was
Charles V’s ofﬁcial theologian during the Council and
played an important role in the development of the Coun-
cil’s position regarding grace and original sin. It was dur-
ing this period that he wrote De natura et gratia, which was
to have an important inﬂuence on Molina. In 1552, he was
promoted to the ‘‘Chair of Prime’’ in theology, replacing
Melichior Cano, a position he was to retain until 1556. It
was during this period that he wrote his famous De justitia
et jure. De Soto died on 15 November 1560.
De Soto’s inﬂuence on contemporary thinkers is
greater than his current reputation among English-
speaking historians of philosophy might suggest. In natu-
ral philosophy, he is thought to have been a signiﬁcant
inﬂuence on Galileo and considered to have perhaps even
helped lay the conceptual groundwork for the modern
theory of dynamics. He also played a signiﬁcant role in
reorienting logical studies around the notion of a sign
(signum),
which
was
key
to
subsuming
logic
to
epistemology and necessary for the development of the
so-called logic of ideas. And in legal philosophy, he was
instrumental in the sixteenth-century systematization and
synthesis of Roman and canon law, which was a watershed
moment in the history of legal and political thought
(Gordley 1991).
The most noteworthy accomplishment of de Soto’s
natural philosophy seems to have been his description of
free fall. In his commentary on Aristotle’s Physics, he noted
the phenomenon of uniform acceleration in a freely falling
body through a uniform medium. This was at least 80
years before Galileo published his account of freely falling
bodies in Dialogue on Two New Sciences. Moreover, de Soto
noted that because of the uniformity of the acceleration,
the speed of the falling body could be calculated via the
mean velocity theorem, which had been developed by the
Oxford Calculators. Another point of contact between de
Soto and Galileo appears to have been in the notion of
resistentia interna, as noted by Camacho and Lucia (1994).
Duhem seems to have been the ﬁrst to have noted this
connection between de Soto and Galileo, but William
Wallace, who has devoted considerable effort to tracing
the roots of, and inﬂuences on, Galileo, has done the
most for bringing de Soto’s accomplishment in natural
philosophy into the mainstream. However, there is a fun-
damental difference between de Soto’s mere description of
this aspect of motion and Galileo’s account of it. There is
no indication that de Soto’s was anything other than an
intuition or a serendipitous observation; unlike Galileo’s,
it was apparently not based on anything that would qualify
as experimental data.
Domingo de Soto’s Summulae, his main work on logic
and logical theory, was indebted to Peter of Spain’s
Tractatus. But it is noteworthy for the emphasis it placed
on the doctrine of signs. Although not unprecedented in
that Robert Kilwardby and, more famously, Roger Bacon
in De signis had previously advocated taking the concept
of signs as conceptually basic, de Soto’s development of
this in Book 1 of the Summulae was what has proved
revolutionary. Pace John Deeley (Poinsot 1985), it was de
Soto whose work initiated the trend toward what Locke
was to soon call ‘‘semiotic’’ (Locke 1975). This trend
moved away from the formal aspects of logic and toward
the psychological ones because of the reorientation of
logic around the concept of signs and the recognition
that signs – be they natural, conventional, or customary –
principally require being conceived in order to be signif-
icative. De Soto’s reorganization of logic around signs was
what the Conimbriceans and John Poinsot picked up on
and brought to bear on the theological questions that so
animated traditional Scholastic logical studies. And it was
272 D
Domingo de Soto

through these thinkers that de Soto’s focus was transmit-
ted to the Scholastic logic of the seventeenth century, such
as
the
logic
of
Martin
Smeglecki,
Bartholomew
Keckermann, and Franco Burgersdijk. And from them, it
migrated to the early modern logical works more familiar
to us, such as Arnauld and Nicole’s Logica or the Art of
Thinking and Locke’s Essay.
Within legal philosophy, de Soto’s On Justice and the
Law has proved very inﬂuential. His political and legal
thinking was not pragmatically oriented, like that of
Machiavelli or other Renaissance humanists. His was
more theoretical and was marked by a return to Thomas
Aquinas’ natural law theory. In this, he was a member of
a signiﬁcant Iberian tradition of natural law theorists who
revived and developed Thomas’ thought. Credit for
initiating this Iberian school goes to Francisco de Vitoria,
one of de Soto’s teachers at Paris (most likely) and his
colleague at Salamanca. In addition to de Soto, this
tradition was to contain Luis de Molina and, most
importantly, Francisco Sua´rez. The signiﬁcance of this
Iberian tradition lies mainly in the inﬂuence it held for
the northern European natural law theorists, either
directly as in the case of Hugo Grotius or indirectly via
Grotius and other lesser Dutch thinkers, as in the cases of
Pfuendorf and Locke. His contributions to this tradition
are only now being explored by Spanish-speaking
historians; there is effectively no scholarship in English
except for Hamilton’s dated (1963) treatment of the
Iberian tradition as a whole.
This natural law tradition began with the belief that
there exists an order proper to creation that determines
the rightness of positive law and which we can come to
know through an analysis of the natures of created things.
How, in other words, we ought to be is distributed in the
world, determines what constitutes a proper or legitimate
civil or canon law, and by that fact of its distribution in the
world is present to the mind if only we would open our
minds to receiving it. De Soto begins On Justice and the
Law by explaining the ambiguous notion of jus or law/
rightness.
He
then
subsumes
this
notion
within
a conceptual framework that recognizes three types of
law: eternal law, which is God’s order imposed onto
things as their ﬁnal causes; natural law, which is composed
of the marks by which the mind comes to identify
God’s eternal laws; and positive law, which is composed
of states’ civil laws and the Church’s canon law. He then
addresses various issues in distributive justice (Book III)
and commutative justice (Book IV). The remaining
eight books address numerous speciﬁc topics, including
just war theory, property rights, contractual law, and
economic issues.
See also: ▶Francisco de Vitoria ▶John Mair ▶Natural
Law ▶Oxford Calculators ▶Peter of Spain ▶Robert
Kilwardby ▶Roger Bacon
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Arnauld Antoine, Nicole Pierre (1996) Logic or the art of thinking, trans.
Buroker JV. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Burgersdijk Franco (1651) Institutionum logicarum. Cambridge
Conimbricensis (1976) Commentarii Conimbricensis in dialecticam
Aristotelis. Olms, Hildesheim (Facsimile reprint of Cologne, 1607)
de Soto Domingo (1545) Super VIII libros Physicorum Aristotelis
commentaria. Salmanca
de Soto Domingo (1559) De justitia et jure. Lyon
de Soto Domingo (1965) Fratris Dominici Soto. . . ad sanctum concilium
Tridentinum De natura & gratia. J. Foucher, Paris
de Soto Domingo (1967) In Porphyrii Isagogen, Aristotelis Categorias,
librosque de demonstratione, commentaria. Minerva, Frankfurt
(Facsimile reprint of Venice, 1574?)
de Soto Domingo (1967) De justitia et jure libri decem; De la justicia y del
derecho en diez libros, trans. Carro VD. Insituto de Estudios Polit-
icos, Madrid
de Soto Domingo (1980) Summulae, ed. Risse W. Olms, Hildesheim
(Facsimile reprint of Salamanca, 1554)
Keckermann Bartholomew (1606) Gymnasium logicum. London
Locke John (1975) An essay concerning human understanding, ed.
Nidditch P. Clarendon Press, Oxford
Peter of Spain (1972) Tractatus, ed. de Rijk LM. Van Gorcum, Assen
Poinsot John (John of St. Thomas) (1985) Tractatus de signis: the semi-
otic of John Poinsot, trans. Deeley J. California University Press,
Berkeley/Los Angeles
Smiglecki Martin (1658) Logica. Oxford
Secondary Sources
Ashworth EJ (1978) Multiple quantiﬁcation and the use of special quan-
tiﬁers in early sixteenth century logic. Notre Dame J Form Logic
19:599–613
Ashworth EJ (1990) Domingo de Soto (1494–1560) and the doctrine of
signs. De ortu grammaticae: studies in medieval grammar and lin-
guistic theory in memory of Jan Pinborg, ed. Bursill-Hall GL,
Ebbesen S, Koerner K. John Benjamins, Amsterdam, pp 35–48
Ashworth EJ (1990) The doctrine of signs in some early sixteenth-century
Spanish logicians. Estudios de Historia de la Lo´gica: Actas del II
Simposio de historia de la lo´gica, ed. Angelelli I, d’Ors A. Eunate,
Pamplona, pp 13–38
Ashworth EJ (1995) Sua´rez on the analogy of being: some historical
background. Vivarium 33:50–75
Ashworth EJ (2008) Developments in the ﬁfteenth and sixteenth centu-
ries. Handbook of the history of logic: medieval and renaissance
logic, ed. Gabbay DM, Woods J. Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp 609–644
Beuchot M (1980) La doctrine Thomista Clasica sobre el Signo: Domingo
de Soto, Francisco de Araujo y Juan de Santo Tomas. Critica: Revista
Hispanoamericana de Filosoﬁa 12:39–60
Beuchot M (1984) El problema de los universales en Domingo de Soto
y Alonso de la Veracruz. Revista de Filosoﬁa 17:249–274
Beuchot M (1988) Un libro de texto para la Nueva Espana: La logica de
Domingo de Soto. Revista de Filosoﬁa 21:152–167
Camacho JJP, Lucia IS (1994) Domingo de Soto en el Origen de la ciencia
moderna. Revista de Filosoﬁa 7:455–475
Domingo de Soto D
273
D

Casado A´ M (ed) (2006) Domingo de Soto: La causa de los pobres.
Editorial San Esteban, Salamanca
Cruz JC (ed) (2007) La ley natural como fundamento moral y juridico en
Domingo de Soto. Universidad de Navarra, Pamplona
di Liso S (2000) Domingo de Soto: Dalla logica alla scienza. Bari, Levante
di Liso S (2000) La dialettica dei termini nelle Summulae di Domingo de
Soto. Studi Filosoﬁci 23:39–58
di Liso S (2006) Domingo de Soto: Ciencia y ﬁlosoﬁa de la naturaleza.
Universidad de Navarra, Pamplona
di Liso S (2007) Domingo de Soto su massimo e minimo, continuo
e inﬁnito. Rivista di Storia della Filosoﬁa 62:647–675
Duhem P (1906–1913) Les pre´curseurs parisiens de Galile´e: Dominique
Soto et la scolastique paisienne. Chapter 15 of E´tudes sur Le´onard de
Vinci. F. de Nobele, Paris (repr. A Hermann, Paris, 1955)
Duhem P (1990) Research on the history of physical theories, trans. Ariew
R. Synthese 83:189–200
Gordley J (1991) The philosophical origins of modern contract doctrine.
Oxford University Press, Oxford
Hamilton B (1963) Political thought in sixteenth-century Spain: a study
of the political ideas of Victoria, de Soto, Sua´rez, and Molina.
Clarendon Press, Oxford
Sylla ED (2008) The origin and fate of Thomas Bradwardine’s De
proportionibus velocitatum in motibus in relation to the history of
mathematics. Mechanics and natural philosophy before the scientiﬁc
revolution, ed. Laird WR, Roux S. Springer, Dordrecht, pp 67–120
Tellkamp JA (2004) Esclavitud, dominio y libertad humana segun
Domingo de Soto. Revista Espanola de Filosoﬁa Medieval 11:129–
137
Wallace W (1987) The early Jesuits and the heritage of Domingo de Soto.
Hist Technol 4:301–320
Wallace W (1990) Duhem and Koyre´ on Domingo de Soto. Synthese
83:239–260
Wallace W (1997) Domingo de Soto and the Iberian roots of Galileo’s
science. Hispanic philosophy in the age of discovery, ed. White K.
Catholic University of America Press, Washington, pp 113–129
Wallace W (2004) Domingo de Soto and the early Galileo. Ashgate,
Aldershot
Dominicus Gundissalinus
ALEXANDER FIDORA
Departament de Cie`ncies de l’Antiguitat i de l’Edat
Mitjana
ICREA – Universitat Auto`noma de Barcelona
Bellaterra (Bcn)
Spain
Abstract
Dominicus
Gundissalinus
(or
Gundisalvi),
Spanish
Domingo Gundisalvo, c. 1110–1190, Archdeacon of
Cue´llar (in the Diocese of Segovia), is the most prominent
representative of the so-called ‘‘Toledan School of Trans-
lators.’’ Not only did he translate over twenty philosoph-
ical tracts from Arabic into Latin, including works of al-
Kindı¯, al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, Avicenna, Ibn Gabirol, and al-G˙ aza¯lı¯, he
also authored ﬁve philosophical works: Tractatus de
anima, De immortalitate animae, De unitate et uno, De
processione mundi, and De divisione philosophiae. Relying
on Arabic as well as Latin sources, these works represent
original, and often pioneering, contributions to the his-
tory of psychology (as the ﬁrst instance of a Latin recep-
tion
of
Avicennian
psychology),
ontology,
and
metaphysics
(with
the
introduction
of
the
term
‘‘metaphysica’’ to the Latin West), as well as epistemology
(giving up the traditional ordo scientiarum, i.e., the scheme
of the Liberal arts, in favor of an Aristotelian division of
the sciences). In particular, his theory of knowledge and
science, which is built around important elements from
Aristotelian epistemology, was very inﬂuential in the Paris
Arts faculty during the thirteenth century, and was taken
up by, among others, Arnulfus Provincialis, Robert
Kilwardby,
and
Remigio
dei
Girolami.
Some
of
Gundissalinus’ works were translated into Hebrew.
Dominicus
Gundissalinus
(or
Gundisalvi),
Spanish
Domingo Gundisalvo, c. 1100–1190, Archdeacon of
Cue´llar (in the Diocese of Segovia), is the most prominent
representative of the so-called ‘‘Toledan School of
Translators.’’
Gundissalinus, who may have studied in France (pos-
sibly at Chartres), made his ﬁrst appearance in Toledo in
the middle of the twelfth century, translating important
philosophical texts from Arabic into Latin. Among his
more than twenty translations, which he prepared with
the collaboration of the Jewish scholar (Abraham) Ibn
Daud and others, are such important works as al-Kindı¯’s
De intellectu; al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s treatise Kita¯b ih:s:a¯’ al-‘ulu¯m,
adapted under the title De scientiis; Avicenna’s De
convenientia et differentia subiectorum as well as his Liber
de anima seu sextus de naturalibus (its translation being
dedicated to the Archbishop John of Toledo) and his Liber
de
philosophia
prima
sive
scientia
divina,
called
Metaphysica (all three from his encyclopedia Kita¯b al-
Shifa¯’); the Fons vitae by Ibn Gabirol (Avicebron); the
Summa theoricae philosophiae, i.e., the Maqa¯s:id al-fala¯sifa
by al-G˙ aza¯lı¯ and others.
Moreover, Gundissalinus is the author of ﬁve philo-
sophical works. (1) His Tractatus de anima, which marks
the beginning of the reception of Avicennian psychology
in the Latin world, and attempts to provide a purely ratio-
nal account of the soul, its nature, and powers. (2) This
topic is extended in his treatise De immortalitate animae,
which seems to have been plagiarized by William of
Auvergne. As in the former work, Gundissalinus’ declared
intention is to put forward strictly rational arguments to
274 D
Dominicus Gundissalinus

prove the immortality of the soul, claiming that his proofs
do not rely on external reasons – as the traditional proofs
of the soul’s immortality are said to do – but that, follow-
ing Aristotle, they proceed ex propriis. (3) The opuscule De
unitate et uno, which develops Gundissalinus’ metaphysics
along the lines of a discussion of the unity of the consti-
tutive principles of reality, i.e., matter and form, taking
over central issues from medieval Platonism, and Ibn
Gabirol in particular. This text, which was long attributed
to Boethius and commented upon by Conrad of Prussia,
enjoyed great popularity during the Middle Ages. (Some
of its doctrines became common maxims, e.g.: ‘‘Qudiquid
est, ideo est, quia unum est.’’) (4) The cosmological trea-
tise De processione mundi, which carries on the discussion
concerning the composition of matter and form, now with
special attention to the creatio ex nihlio. In this tract, which
was inﬂuenced not only by Ibn Gabirol, but also by Hugh
of Saint Victor, Abraham b. Daud, and Hermann of Carin-
thia, Gundissalinus demonstrates an awareness of the dis-
tinction
between
philosophical
and
theological
argumentation, contrasted explicitly by him, which is
very remarkable for his time. It is worth noting that two
of these works were translated into Hebrew, namely, the
Tractatus de anima, by an anonymous translator in thir-
teenth-century Spain, and the De unitate, by Judah
Romano in the ﬁrst half of the fourteenth century in
Rome.
Gundissalinus’ most elaborate work systematically,
however, is (5) De divisione philosophiae. Drawing on
Arabic sources (al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, Avicenna, al-G˙ aza¯lı¯, etc.) as
well as on Latin texts (Boethius and the ‘‘School of
Chartres’’), Gundissalinus displays a comprehensive the-
ory of human knowledge and science. The systematic
importance of this work is twofold: on the one hand, it
breaks up the traditional scheme of the Liberal arts in
favor of an Aristotelian division of the sciences capable
of integrating the newly ‘‘discovered’’ disciplines, i.e., the
sciences of nature (such as optics and statics) as well as
politics and metaphysics, the latter of which was ﬁrst
introduced
to
the
Latin
West
under
the
name
‘‘metaphysica’’ by Gundissalinus. Yet, Gundissalinus’
Divisio philosophiae does not limit itself to open the tradi-
tional ordo scientiarum for new ‘‘material,’’ but at the same
time its very concept of philosophy as a science distinct
from theology as well as its speciﬁc foundation of the
epistemological status of the different sciences and their
irreducible plurality lead also to a formal reassessment of
the notion of philosophy and science itself. Thus, for
Gundissalinus, as for Aristotle, to whom he refers repeat-
edly in this context, the distinctiveness and autonomy of
the particular sciences is grounded in their having
different objects and methods, while their interrelatedness
and interdependence results from their possible subordi-
nation
one
to
another
and
from
their
internal
differentiation.
Though the importance of this Toledan translator and
philosopher for the history of philosophy is nowadays well
acknowledged, his inﬂuence has still not been studied
thoroughly. When dealing with Gundissalinus’ Nachleben,
namely, that of his De divisione philosophiae, histories of
philosophy usually refer only to Michael Scot (d. before
1236) and his homonymous tract, which is preserved only
in fragments, and to Robert Kilwardby (d. 1279) and his
famous division of philosophy, De ortu scientiarum. Little
is known, however, about the 50 years between these two
testimonies to Gundissalinus’ inﬂuence. Yet it is precisely
this period that was most crucial for the epistemological
and institutional development of philosophy in the Paris
Arts faculty. Even though this development has in itself
not yet been analyzed in a conclusive manner, recent
research on the Arts faculty has shown that Gundissalinus
and his De divisione philosophiae played a central role in
the constitution of philosophy as a distinct science in the
Parisian milieu. Thus, it must be said that the so-called
philosophical introductions at the Arts faculty by Arnulfus
Provincialis, John of Dacia, and many others, as well as
that by Remigio dei Girolami, are highly dependent on
Gundissalinus in their presentation of a clear and meth-
odologically reﬂected understanding of philosophy.
See also: ▶Arabic Texts: Natural Philosophy, Latin Trans-
lations of ▶Arabic Texts: Philosophy, Latin Translations
of ▶Avicebron ▶Boethius ▶Epistemology ▶al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯,
Latin Translations of ▶Form and Matter ▶al-G˙ aza¯lı¯’s
Maqa¯s:id al-Fala¯sifa, Latin Translation of ▶Ibn Sı¯na¯ (Avi-
cenna), Latin Translations of ▶Ikhwa¯n al-S˙afa¯’, Encyclo-
pedia of ▶Isaac Israeli ▶John of La Rochelle ▶al-Kindı¯,
Latin
Translations
of
▶Knowledge
▶Liberal
Arts
▶Metaphysics ▶Michael Scot ▶Philosophical Psychol-
ogy ▶Philosophy, Jewish ▶Platonism ▶Remigio dei
Girolami ▶Robert Kilwardby ▶Schools in the Twelfth
Century ▶William of Auvergne
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Works
Gundissalinus Dominicus (1897) De immortalitate animae, ed. Bu¨low G.
In: BGPhMA II, 3. Aschendorff, Mu¨nster (English trans: William of
Auvergne (1991) The immortality of the soul, trans. Teske RR.
Marquette University Press, Milwaukee)
Gundissalinus Dominicus (1940) De anima, ed. Muckle JTh. Mediev Stud
2:23–103
Dominicus Gundissalinus D
275
D

Gundissalinus Dominicus (1999) De processione mundi, ed. and
Spanish trans. Soto Bruna MJ, Alonso del Real C. EUNSA, Pamplona
(English trans: Dominicus Gundissalinus (2002) The procession of
the world, trans. Laumakis
JA. Marquette
University Press,
Milwaukee)
Gundissalinus Dominicus (2002) De unitate et uno, ed. and German
trans. Fidora A, Niederberger A. In: Vom Einen zum Vielen – Der
neue Aufbruch der Metaphysik im 12. Jahrhundert. Klostermann,
Frankfurt am Main, pp 66–79
Gundissalinus Dominicus (2006) De scientiis, ed. and German trans.
Schneider JHJ. Herder, Freiburg i. Br.
Gundissalinus Dominicus (2007) De divisione philosophiae, ed. and
German trans. Fidora A, Werner D. Herder, Freiburg i. Br. (partial
English trans: Grant E (ed) (1974) A source book in medieval science.
Harvard University Press, Cambridge, pp 59–76)
Translations by Gundissalinus
Alexander of Aphrodisias (1926) De intellectu et intellecto, ed. The´ry G.
In: The´ry G (ed) Autour du de´cret de 1210: II. Alexandre
d’Aphrodise. Le Saulchoir, Kain, pp 68–83
Avicenna (1977–1980) Liber de philosophia prima sive scientia divina, 2
vols, ed. van Riet S. Peeters/Brill, Louvain/Leiden
Avicenna (2007) De convenientia et differentia subiectorum, ed. and
German trans. Fidora A, Werner D. In: Dominicus Gundissalinus,
De divisione philosophiae. Herder, Freiburg i. Br., pp 236–253
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ (1916) De ortu scientiarum, ed. Baeumker C. In: BGPhMA XIX,
3. Aschendorff, Mu¨nster
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ (1929) De intellectu et intellecto, ed. Gilson E´. Arch Hist Doct
Litt M-Aˆ ge 4:115–141
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ (1937–1938) Fontes quaestionum, ed. Bignami-Odier J. Arch
Hist Doct Litt M-Aˆ ge 12–13:154–155
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ (1940) Liber ex[er]citationis ad viam felicitatis, ed. Salman DH.
Rech The´ol Anc Me´die´v 12:33–48
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ (2004) Explanation of the postulates of the ﬁfth book of Euclid,
ed. Burnett Ch. In: Arnzen R, Thielmann J (eds) Words, texts and
concepts cruising the Mediterranean Sea. Studies dedicated to
Gerhard Endress. Peeters, Leuven, pp 411–436
Israeli Isaac (1937–1938) Liber de deﬁnitionibus, ed. Muckle JTh. Arch
Hist Doct Litt M-Aˆ ge 12–13:300–340
al-Kindı¯ (1897) De intellectu, ed. Nagy A. In: BGPhMA II, 5. Aschendorff,
Mu¨nster, pp 1–11
Pseudo-al-Kindı¯ (Ikhwa¯n al-S˙afa¯’) (1897) Liber introductorius in artem
logicae demonstrationis, ed. Nagy A. In: BGPhMA II, 5. Aschendorff,
Mu¨nster, pp 41–64
Translations with Gundissalinus’ Participation
Avicenna (1508a) Logica. Caecilius Fabrianesis, Venetiis (repr Minerva,
Frankfurt am Main, 1961)
Avicenna (1508b) De universalibus. Caecilius Fabrianesis, Venetiis (repr
Minerva, Frankfurt am Main, 1961)
Avicenna (1934) Prologus discipuli et capitula, ed. Birkenmajer A. Rev
Ne´oscolast Philos 36:308–320
Avicenna (1968–1972) De viribus cordis, ed. van Riet S. In: Avicenna,
Liber de anima seu sextus de naturalibus, vol II, Peeters/Brill, Lou-
vain/Leiden, pp 187–210
Avicenna (1992) Liber primus naturalium. Tractatus primus de causis et
principiis naturalium, ed. van Riet S. Peeters/Brill, Louvain/Leiden
Avicenna (2006) Liber primus naturalium. Tractatus secundus de motu et
de consimilibus, ed. van Riet S et al. Acade´mie Royale de Belgique,
Bruxelles
al-G˙ aza¯lı¯ (1933) Algazel’s Metaphysics. A medieval translation, ed.
Muckle JTh. St. Michael’s College, Toronto
al-G˙ aza¯lı¯ (1965) Logica, ed. Lohr Ch. Traditio 21:223–290
Ibn Gabirol (1892–1895) Fons vitae, ed. Baeumker C. In: BGPhMA I, 2–4.
Aschendorff, Mu¨nster
Pseudo-Avicenna (2003) Liber caeli et mundi, ed. Gutman O. Brill, Leiden
Qust:a¯ ibn Lu¯qa¯ (1985) De differentia animae et spiritus, ed. Wilcox J. PhD
thesis, The City University of New York, New York
Secondary Sources
Alonso
M
(1959)
Temas
ﬁloso´ﬁcos
medievales
(Ibn
Da¯wu¯d
y Gundisalvo). Universidad Pontiﬁcia, Comillas
Baeumker
C
(1897)
Les
e´crits
philosophiques
de
Dominicus
Gundissalinus. Rev Thomiste 5:723–745
Burnett Ch (2004) The blend of Latin and Arabic sources in the Meta-
physics of Adelard of Bath, Hermann of Carinthia, and Gundisalvus.
In: Lutz-Bachmann M et al (eds) Metaphysics in the twelfth century –
on the relationship among philosophy, science and theology. Brepols,
Turnhout, pp 41–65
Fidora A (2003) Die Wissenschaftstheorie des Dominicus Gundissalinus.
Voraussetzungen und Konsequenzen des zweiten Anfangs der
aristotelischen Philosophie im 12. Jahrhundert. Akademie, Berlin
Fidora
A,
Soto
Bruna
MJ
(2001)
‘Gundisalvus
ou
Dominicus
Gundisalvi?’ – Algunas observaciones sobre un reciente artı´culo de
Adeline Rucquoi. Estud Ecles 76:467–473
Hugonnard-Roche
H
(1984)
La
classiﬁcation
des
sciences
de
Gundissalinus et l’inﬂuence d’Avicenne. In: Jolivet J, Rashed
R (eds) E´tudes sur Avicenne. Les Belles Lettres, Paris, pp 41–75
Martı´nez Ga´zquez J (2007) La ignorancia y negligencia de los latinos ante
la riqueza de los estudios a´rabes. Real Academia de Buenas Letras de
Barcelona, Barcelona
Sezgin F (ed) (2000) Dominicus Gundissalinus (12th c.) and the trans-
mission of Arabic philosophical thought to the West. Texts and
studies selected and reprinted by Sezgin F. Institute for the History
of Arabic-Islamic Science, Frankfurt am Main
Soto Bruna MJ (2003) La lux intelligentiae agentis en el pensamiento de
Domingo Gundisalvo. Rev Esp Filos Mediev 10:335–343
Vegas S (2005) Signiﬁcado histo´rico y signiﬁcacio´n ﬁloso´ﬁca en la revisio´n
de los planteamientos concernientes a la Escuela de traductores de
Toledo. Rev Esp Filos Mediev 13:109–134
Doxographies, Graeco-Arabic
GOTTHARD STROHMAIER
Freie Universita¨t Berlin
Berlin
Germany
Abstract
Due to the predominance of Aristotle in Arabic philoso-
phy, there was a limited interest in his predecessors and the
other philosophical schools of antiquity. Among the Greek
doxographies available in translation were the Placita
philosophorum ascribed to a certain Aetius, Hippolytus’
Refutatio omnium haeresium, and a History of the Philoso-
phers ascribed to Porphyry of Tyrus, known only in
276 D
Doxographies, Graeco-Arabic

quotations, but very inﬂuential on similar Arabic compo-
sitions as the Chest of Wisdom, ascribed to Abu¯ Sulayma¯n
al-Sijista¯nı¯, al-Mubashshir ibn Fa¯tik’s Choicest Maxims
and Best Sayings, al-Shahrasta¯nı¯’s Book of Religions and
Sects and al-Shahrazu¯rı¯’s Promenade of the Souls and the
Garden of Rejoicing in the History of Philosophy. Some
Muslims with a positive attitude towards the Greek heri-
tage tried to ﬁnd their belief in the creation of the world
and the hereafter already represented by the ancient Greek
thinkers, what resulted in outright falsiﬁcations, which
became in their turn mingled with the information
found in the translations from the Greek. The standard
of the Arabic doxographies was also impaired by the
inclusion of material from the so-called gnomologies,
where the ascription of anecdotes and wise sayings to the
various philosophers was even more confused than in the
Greek tradition.
The Greek heritage in Islam was dominated by a syllabus
established in the late Alexandrian school, that is, Aristotle
in Neoplatonic interpretation, and in close connection
with the medical teachings of Galen of Pergamon (129–
216 CE), whose philosophical ambitions largely coincided
with the Stagirite, for example, in the rejection of atom-
ism, which later proved to be so stimulating in Europe
since the Renaissance. Aristotle used to develop his ideas
in a kind of dialogue with his predecessors, who became
thus known through his works. But as he was, among
Muslim philosophers, regarded as the summit of human
thought which only rarely might be superseded, the inter-
est in his forerunners as well as in other philosophical
schools was limited. Avicenna (980 or earlier–1037) lists,
in his encyclopedic Kita¯b al-Shifa¯᾽(The Book of Healing),
the various doctrines of the Presocratics without quoting
them by name. In a polemical correspondence with al-
Bı¯ru¯nı¯ (973–1048), he rejects the latter’s idea that the
sphere of ﬁre below the moon might be not one of the
four elements but only a transformation of heated air due
to the speed of the heavenly spheres. He blames al-Bı¯ru¯nı¯
for falling back onto the monism of the Presocratics,
among whom he mentions Thales, Heraclitus, Diogenes,
and Anaximander, here erroneously substituted for
Anaximenes. The Jewish thinker Moses Maimonides
(d. 1204), who was fully dependent on Arabic philosophy,
gives, in a letter to Samuel ibn Tibbon, his translator into
Hebrew, the advice not to waste time with ‘‘old philoso-
phy’’ and names in this respect Empedocles, Pythagoras,
Hermes, and Porphyry.
On the other hand, Muslims showed a great interest in
world history, also seeking answers to questions such who
were the inventors of philosophy, when they lived or
whether they had any relations with the prophets of the
Old Testament seen as forerunners of Muh:ammad. Thales
and the Seven Sages were as popular as in antiquity, and
they appear even in the Persian epic of Ganja¯wı¯ Niz˙a¯mı¯
(1141–1209), who lets Aristotle, Thales, Apollonius of
Tyana, Socrates, Porphyry, Hermes, and Plato pronounce
before Alexander the Great various speculations about
how the world came into being, partly by the will of the
creator, partly in an automatic process. These ideas have
almost nothing to do with their actual teachings.
Serious information was available in the Placita
philosophorum translated in Baghdad by Qust:a¯ ibn Lu¯qa¯
(820–912), who ascribed them like others to Plutarch,
whereas the real author is now assumed to be a certain
Aetius (Daiber 2008). Their opinions are arranged
according to subject matters, beginning with ‘‘nature,’’
‘‘principles,’’ ‘‘the world,’’ ‘‘God,’’ ‘‘demons,’’ and so on.
Diogenes Laertius, with his classiﬁcation according to
schools and biographies, remained unknown. There
existed, however, a similar work ascribed to Porphyry of
Tyrus (Cottrell 2008), translated from a Syriac intermedi-
ary version and now lost in its entirety, but quoted rather
often (see the entry on Porphyry, Arabic in this volume).
Via the Syrian Christian tradition, Muslim authors
became acquainted with the Refutatio omnium haeresium
of the Roman presbyter Hippolytus (third century CE),
who tried to show the inconsistencies of the various pagan
doctrines. This tract was also used by the author of the
Turba philosophorum for his quasi-philosophical intro-
duction into his alchemical compilation (Rudolph 2005).
The most important Arabic doxography was the S˙iwa¯n
al-h:ikma (The Chest of Wisdom), hitherto ascribed to Abu¯
Sulayma¯n al-Sijista¯nı¯ al-Mant:iqı¯ (d. 987), which exists
now only in two large extracts, one of them available in
print. It contains entries on 170 men, most of them
Greeks, among them Thales, Anaximenes, Anaxagoras,
Pythagoras, Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, Alexander the
Great, Diogenes
the Cynic, Theophrastus,
Hermes,
Solon, Homer, Democritus, Euclid, Hippocrates, Ptolemy,
Apollonius of Tyana, Galen, and John Philoponus,
followed by Arab authorities like the famous translator
H˙ unayn b. Ish:a¯q. The Egyptian scholar al-Mubashshir ibn
Fa¯tik composed in the years 1048 and 1049 his Mukhta¯r
al-h:ikam wa-mah:a¯sin al-kalim (Choicest Maxims and Best
Sayings), which enjoyed great popularity. Besides sages
of the Egyptian Hermetic tradition, the legendary Luqma¯n
of pre-Islamic Arabia (cf. sura 31) and the Church Fathers
Basilius and Gregorius, the latter probably Gregorius of
Nazianz, it has entries devoted to Homer, Solon, Zeno of
Elea, Hippocrates, Pythagoras, Diogenes the Cynic, Soc-
rates, Plato, Aristotle, and Alexander the Great. One of the
Doxographies, Graeco-Arabic D
277
D

number of existing manuscripts, preserved in Istanbul in
the Topkapı Saray Museum (Ahmet III, 3206), is enriched
with excellent miniatures exhibiting the Greek sages in
Oriental garb. The work was about 1250 translated into
Castilian under the title Bocados d’oro, followed by ver-
sions in Latin, French, Provenc¸al, and English. The latter is
believed to have been the ﬁrst English book that appeared
in print. Al-Shahrasta¯nı¯’s Kita¯b al-milal wa-l-nih:al (Book
of Religions and Sects), written in 1127, classiﬁes the vari-
ous Muslim and Christian denominations and pagan
beliefs according to their relative nearness to the Islamic
dogma. The Greek philosophers, who are followed by
a lengthy chapter on Avicenna, are relegated to the end
of the book because of their being most far away from the
prophetic
revelations
(Janssens).
Al-Shahrazu¯rı¯’s
(d. between 1287 and 1304) Nuzhat al-arwa¯h: wa-rawd˙at
al-afra¯h: fı¯ ta᾽rı¯kh al-h:ukama¯᾽(Promenade of the Souls and
the Garden of Rejoicing in the History of Philosophy) relies
heavily on his predecessors and is, therefore, of value for
the establishment of their texts and the identiﬁcation of
doubtful readings of Greek names (Cottrell 2004–2005).
These doxographies share with Diogenes Laertius the
peculiarity that anecdotical material from the so-called
gnomologies was inserted to enrich the tales of the philos-
ophers’ lives and teachings. It corresponds only rarely with
historical reality, as for example, when Socrates is asked
why sea water is salty whereupon he urged the questioner
to tell him ﬁrst what kind of proﬁt he would have from
knowing it. This corresponds with the change from natural
philosophy to ethics, what was well known to Muslim
authors (Strohmaier 2003). Muslim doxographers were
not aware of the fact that the gnomologies were plagued
by great disorder regarding the ascription of the wise
sayings and anecdotes to the various authorities. This
went even so far that Socrates did ﬁnd in the end his
accommodation in the barrel of Diogenes. He was depicted
as a great ascetic who despised the pleasures of this world
and attacked idolatry, what caused the king of his time to
kill him by poison. This was repeated even by the late
Ayatollah Khomeini (1902–1989) who would, therefore,
praise him as ‘‘a great theologian’’ (Strohmaier 1997).
In certain pious and mystic circles that were uneasy
about Aristotelian rationalism, the pre-Aristotelian phi-
losophers earned the reputation as bearers of an older and
therefore more trustworthy wisdom. In consequence,
a most radical tendency to assimilate the early Greek
thinkers to Muslim beliefs led to outright falsiﬁcations.
In the Pseudo-Ammonius’ A¯ra¯᾽al-fala¯sifa (The Opinions
of the Philosophers), probably written already in the ninth
century CE, the Presocratics, together with Plutarch, the
Stoa, Epicurus, Pyrrhon, and Proclus, present creationist
and Neoplatonic speculations, relying, though, partly on
Hippolytus (Rudolph 1989). Later authors took this
pseudo-epigraphy as seriously as the more reliable infor-
mation gained from the translations from Greek.
This line was not followed by Ibn al-Qift:ı¯ (1172–1248)
in his Ta᾽rı¯kh al-h:ukama¯᾽(History of the Philosophers),
where he describes Thales as the ﬁrst materialist who denied
the existence of a creator and believed instead in the eternity
of the world and also of the human race. Others sought to
balance the contradicting reports by recurring to the idea
that the ancient thinkers had undergone in their minds
a development from an original truth to heresy. Al-῾A¯mirı¯
(d. 992) in his Kita¯b al-amad ῾ala¯ l-abad (Book of the Final
End in the Eternity) kept to the idea, already cherished by
the Church Fathers, that some of them had got their knowl-
edge in Egypt and the Orient. Empedocles, who lived at the
time of the prophet David, would have kept company with
Luqma¯n, the Arabian sage, and learned from his wisdom.
But after his return to Greece, he followed his own imagi-
nation, what seemed to contradict the belief in the hereafter
(Rowson 1988). Mulla¯ S˙adra¯ Shı¯ra¯zı¯ (1571–1640), the lead-
ing representative of late Persian Shı¯ʿite Neoplatonism,
maintains that all of the old Greek philosophers believed
in the creation of our world at a certain time, and that the
doctrine of its eternity only appeared when their followers
did not understand any longer their wisdom.
See also: ▶Abu¯ Sulayma¯n al-Sijista¯nı¯ al-Mant:iqı¯ ▶Alex-
andrian Tradition into Arabic: Philosophy ▶al-ʿA¯mirı¯,
Abu¯ l-H˙ asan ▶Atomism ▶Church Fathers ▶Mathemat-
ics and Philosophy in the Arab World ▶Moses Maimon-
ides ▶al-Mubashshir ibn Fa¯tik ▶Philosophy, Arabic
▶Porphyry, Arabic ▶Presocratics in the Arab World
▶al-Shahrasta¯nı¯, Muh:ammad ibn ʿAbd al-Karı¯m ▶al-
Shahrazu¯rı¯, Muh:ammad ibn Mah:mu¯d Shams al-Dı¯n
▶Theology Versus Philosophy in the Arab World
▶Translations from Greek into Arabic
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Aetius Arabus (1980) Die Vorsokratiker in arabischer U¨ berlieferung, ed.
Daiber H. Steiner, Wiesbaden
Ibn al-Qift˙ı¯ (1903) Ta᾽rı¯kh al-h˙ukama¯᾽. Dieterich, Leipzig
Al-Mubashshir ibn Fa¯tik (1958) Mukhta¯r al-h˙ikam wa-mah˙a¯sin al-kalim,
ed. Badawı¯ ῾A. Instituto Egipcio de Estudios Isla´micos, Madrid; to be
used with: Rosenthal F (1960–1961) Al-Mubashshir ibn Fa¯tik. Pro-
legomena to an abortive edition. Oriens 13–14:132–158
Niz˙a¯mı¯ (1991) Das Alexanderbuch. Iskandarname, trans. Bu¨rgel JCh.
Manesse, Zurich
Porphyrii (1993) Porphyrii Philosophi Fragmenta. Fragmenta Arabica
David Wasserstein interpretante, ed. Smith A. Teubner, Stuttgart/
Leipzig
278 D
Doxographies, Graeco-Arabic

Rowson EK (1988) A Muslim philosopher on the soul and its fate: al-
῾A¯mirı¯’s Kita¯b al-Amad ῾ala¯ l-abad, ed. Rowson EK. American Ori-
ental Society, New Haven
Rudolph U (1989) Die Doxographie des Pseudo-Ammonios, ed. Rudolph
U. Steiner, Stuttgart
Shahrasta¯nı¯ (1986/1993) Livre des religions et des sectes, 2 vols, ed.
Gimaret D et al. Peeters, Leuven
al-Sijista¯nı¯, Abu¯ Sulayma¯n (1979) Muntakhab s˙iwa¯n al-h˙ikma, ed. Dun-
lop DM. Mouton, The Hague/Paris/New York
Secondary Sources
Cottrell E (2004–2005) Sˇams al-Dı¯n al-Sˇahrazu¯rı¯ et les manuscrits de La
promenade des aˆmes et jardin des re´jouissances: Histoire des philo-
sophes (Nuzhat al-arwa¯h˙ wa-rawd˙at al-afra¯h˙ fı¯ ta᾽rı¯h˘ al-h˙ukama¯᾽).
Bulletin d’E´tudes Orientales 56:225–259
Cottrell E (2008) Notes sur quelques-uns des te´moignages me´die´vaux
relatifs a`
l’Histoire Philosophique (῾Z φιλόσοφος ʿiστορία) de
Porphyre. In: Akasoy A, Raven W (eds) Islamic thought in the
Middle Ages. Studies in text, transmission and translation, in honour
of Hans Daiber. Brill, Leiden/Boston, pp 523–555
Daiber
H
(1994)
Hellenistisch-kaiserzeitliche
Doxographie
und
philosophischer Synkretismus in islamischer Zeit. In: Haase W,
Temporini H (eds) Aufstieg und Niedergang der Ro¨mischen Welt
(ANRW) II 36,7. De Gruyter, Berlin/New York, pp 4974–4992
Daiber H (2008) Aetius. In: Kra¨mer G et al (eds) The Encyclopaedia of
Islam, 3rd edn. Brill, Leiden/Boston, p 80
De Smet D (1998) Empedocles Arabus. Une lecture ne´oplatonicienne
tardive. Paleis der Academie¨n, Brussels
Gutas D (1994) Pre-Plotinian Philosophy in Arabic (other than Platonism
and Aristotelianism): a review of the sources. In: Haase W, Temporini
H (eds) Aufstieg und Niedergang der Ro¨mischen Welt (ANRW) II
36,7. De Gruyter, Berlin/New York, pp 4939–4973
Janssens J (1993) Le livre des religions et des sectes d’al-Shahrastaˆnıˆ: une
conception particulie`re de l’historiographie de la pense´e. Bull Philos
Me´die´v 35:104–112
Rudolph U (2005) La connaissance des pre´socratiques a` l’aube de la
philosophie et de l’alchimie islamique. In: Viano C (ed) L’alchimie
et ses racines philosophiques – La tradition grecque et la tradition
arabe. Vrin, Paris, pp 155–170
Strohmaier G (1997) Das Bild des Sokrates in der arabischen Literatur des
Mittelalters. In: Kessler H (ed) Sokrates. Bruchstu¨cke zu einem
Portra¨t. Sokrates-Studien III. Die Graue Edition, Kusterdingen, pp
105–124 (repr Strohmaier G (2003) Hellas im Islam. Interdis-
ziplina¨re Studien zur Ikonographie, Wissenschaft und Religions-
geschichte. Harrassowitz, Wiesbaden, pp 50–58)
Strohmaier
G
(2003)
Die
Weisheit
des
kleinen
Mannes.
Das
Gnomologium – eine ausgestorbene, aber dennoch amu¨sante
Literaturgattung. In: Piccione RM, Perkams M (eds) Selecta colligere,
I: Akten des Kolloquiums Sammeln, Neuordnen, Neues Schaffen.
Methoden der U¨ berlieferung von Texten in der Spa¨tantike und in
Byzanz, Jena, 21–23. November 2002. Edizioni dell’Orso, Alessan-
dria, pp 3–16
Dumbleton, John
▶John Dumbleton
Duns Scotus, John
▶John Duns Scotus
Durand of St. Pourc¸ain
ISABEL IRIBARREN
Department of Catholic Theology
Strasbourg University
Strasbourg
France
Abstract
Durand of St. Pourc¸ain (c. 1275–1334) was a Dominican
theologian best known for his deviation from Thomas
Aquinas’ teaching at a time when his order was involved
in the promotion of Thomism. The ﬁrst recension of his
commentary on the Sentences (1307) was badly received by
the order’s authorities who, despite the appearance of
a second, more compliant version (1311), censured
Durand’s work in 1314 and again in 1317. In 1313, Durand
was nevertheless appointed as lector at the papal curia in
Avignon. In 1325, he was promoted as bishop of Meaux,
an ofﬁce which he held until his death in 1334. Between
1318 and 1325, Durand produced a ﬁnal revision of his
commentary. His work also includes ﬁve Quodlibets
(1312–1316) and a treatise on the origin of political
power (1329). He intervened in the major controversies
of his time regarding apostolic poverty and the beatiﬁc
vision. Durand’s thought reﬂects the intellectual climate
following the 1277 Paris condemnation, especially in its
open departure from Aristotle, a stance which best
explains his critical attitude toward Thomism. Durand
draws a clear distinction between reason and authority
that leads him to reject the notion of theology as
a science. Theology rests on faith alone and its object is
not to produce knowledge about God but to direct us
toward salvation. Pivotal to Durand’s thought is the
notion of relation, which acts as an explicative principle
notably in epistemology and in divine causality. Guided by
a nominalist understanding of universals, Durand rejects
the notion of intelligible species and explains cognition as
a direct relation between the intellect and a singular object
present to it. Likewise, he denies all causal power to divine
ideas in order to underline the relation of dependence of
creatures on God’s free action. A forerunner to Ockham’s
Durand of St. Pourc¸ain D
279
D

nominalism, Durand seeks to eliminate unnecessary
instances in favor of an afﬁrmation of God’s absolute
power and inﬁnity.
Corpus of the Article
Durand of St. Pourc¸ain (c. 1275–1334) was a Dominican
theologian whose independent outlook set him against his
order’s authorities at a time when it was actively involved
in the promotion of Thomas Aquinas’ doctrine. Born in
Auvergne around 1275, Durand joined the Dominican
convent in Clermont and was later sent to Paris to con-
tinue his studies at St Jacques. In 1307, he produced a ﬁrst
recension of his commentary on the Sentences, probably
a preliminary work prepared in some Dominican studium.
In its open departure from fundamental Thomist theses in
spite of recent Dominican legislation, this early commen-
tary was badly received by the order’s authorities. As
a result, Durand was compelled to write a more compliant
recension of his commentary, a work which corresponded
in all probability to his ﬁrst reading of the Sentences at the
University of Paris, between 1310 and 1312.
During his short regency at Paris, Durand produced
two Quodlibets and a couple of treatises, De habitibus and
De libero arbitrio. In early 1313, Clement Vappointed him
as lector at the papal curia in Avignon, a post ratiﬁed in
1316 by the succeeding pope John XXII. During his time
in Avignon, Durand determined in three quodlibetal
disputations.
Wanting to set a precedent of Durand’s case, in 1314
Dominicans issued a censure containing problematic the-
ses extracted from both versions of his commentary. This
censure was followed by another one three years later, this
time aiming speciﬁcally at Durand’s deviation from
Aquinas’ doctrine. Both censures were led by the provin-
cial of France, Hervaeus Natalis, an advocate of Thomism
and Durand’s most determined opponent.
In 1317, Durand was appointed bishop of Limoux, an
ofﬁce which freed him from Dominican jurisdiction. In
1318, he was transferred to the bishopric of Le Puy, which
he left in 1325 owing to a conﬂict with his canons. He
regained Avignon, where he acted as theological advisor to
the pope on several occasions: in 1318, in the case of the
rebel fraticelli; again in 1322, during the poverty contro-
versy with the Franciscans; ﬁnally in 1326, regarding the
inquiry into William of Ockham’s orthodoxy.
Between 1318 and 1325, Durand produced a ﬁnal
recension of his commentary, reafﬁrming his previous
position, while mitigating its most problematic aspects.
This version is alone acknowledged by the author as an
authentic expression of his thought. It was widely diffused
in the sixteenth century in a number of printed editions.
This new redaction probably motivated a ﬁnal tract
against Durandus, Evidentiae contra Durandum, produced
in 1325 by a Dominican author known as Durandellus.
In 1326, Durand was appointed as bishop of Meaux.
To this period belongs his political treatise on the origin of
power, De origine potestatum et iurisdictionum quobus
populus regitur (1329). Between 1331 and his death in
1334, Durand was involved in the beatiﬁc vision contro-
versy, which saw the Paris theological establishment set
against pope John XXII’s opinion. Durand gave his expert
opinion on the subject in De visione Dei quam habent
animae sanctorum ante iudicium generale (1332), a work
which earned the pope’s hostility but whose view was
posthumously vindicated by the succeeding pope, Bene-
dict XII. Despite a life punctuated by controversy, Durand
was highly respected in the later Middle Ages.
The character of Durand’s thought is well illustrated
by his double sobriquet of doctor modernus and doctor
resolutissimus: an independent spirit prepared to espouse
the most original views, while refusing to capitulate to
recent magisterial trends. Drawing a clear distinction
between reason and authority, Durand claims that when
the issue does not directly concern an article of faith, ‘‘we
should rely on reason rather than on the authority of some
doctor, however famous’’ (Sent., Prol.). On matters of
faith, however, theology does not proceed demonstratively
but derives its knowledge from revelation and rests on
authority alone. Durand thus rejects the Thomist notion
of theology as a speculative ‘‘science.’’ The object of theol-
ogy is not God’s nature but the meritorious acts that lead
to salvation.
Revealing of the intellectual climate following the 1277
Paris condemnation, Durand is very critical of Aristotelian
philosophy and its relevance to theology. It is this stance
that probably best explains his departure from Thomism.
Three themes are particularly illustrative of Durand’s
thought and its polemical nature: the notion of ‘‘relation,’’
the theory of cognition, and divine causality.
On the basis of a modal doctrine indebted in principle
to Henry of Ghent, Durand deﬁnes relation as a mode of
being really distinct from its foundation. As a mode, rela-
tion is both distinct from substances in that it is incapable
of subsisting by itself, and irreducible to absolute accidents
(like quality and quantity) in that it does not effect com-
position. Durand thus challenges the traditional interpre-
tation of Aristotelian categories as a division between
substances and accidents in order to introduce an alterna-
tive ontological division based on ‘‘absolute’’ and ‘‘rela-
tive’’ beings. The modal conception of relation presented
obvious advantages for answering a number of questions.
In Trinitarian theology, Durand rejects Duns Scotus’
280 D
Durand of St. Pourc¸ain

notion of ‘‘formal distinction’’ between the essence and
the divine persons in favor of a ‘‘real’’ distinction based on
the notion of relation as a diminished being. As he saw it,
a real distinction of this kind facilitates an explanation of
personal distinction in God without jeopardizing the
unity of the essence. On the question of the soul and its
faculties, intellect and will constitute one and the same
reality in the soul: they are distinct only according to their
relation to the different acts of cognizing and willing
respectively.
In epistemology, Durand denies the existence of an
intelligible species as a necessary principle of cognition.
Cognition consists in the direct relation between the intel-
lect and an object present to it. There is no need to posit an
additional reality that would move the intellect to its
object and make it intelligible. Durand’s reason for
rejecting Aristotelian epistemology is closely connected
to his commitment to nominalism: the primary object of
knowledge is not a universal concept but a singular object
outside the mind. A universal is only the end product of
a process of intellection that starts with the perception of
a singular object.
Durands’ criticism of intelligible species forms part
of a wider intellectual project, which reacts against the
positing of intermediary principles purporting to build
a foolproof causal system between God and His creation.
This forerunner to Ockham’s principle of economy con-
stitutes an attempt to safeguard God’s absolute power and
the voluntary character of His creation. One expression of
this is Durand’s denial of all causal power to divine ideas.
God pre-contains creatures not formally, according to
a pattern of imitability, but ‘‘virtually,’’ according to the
way in which an efﬁcient cause pre-contains its effects. The
relation between God and creatures is then not formal but
strictly causal. Likewise, against the Thomist theory of
sacramental causality based on some superadded virtue
infused in the sacrament, Durand claims that the sacra-
ment
becomes
efﬁcacious
rather
on
the
basis
of
a voluntary pact established between man and God.
Finally, Durand denies the necessity of an infused habit
of grace in order to attain salvation. On the basis of His
absolute power, God could effect the salvation of a man
who has died without grace.
Durand’s readiness to depart from Aristotelian philos-
ophy bears as much afﬁnity to the approach of Franciscans
such as Bonaventure and Peter John Olivi, as it heralds
Ockham’s ‘‘nominalism’’ in both its epistemological and
theological dimensions. This could explain why Durand
became the chosen target of Dominican censure, over
other non-Thomist Dominicans like James of Metz or
Dietrich of Freiberg. To question Aquinas on avowedly
un-Aristotelian grounds was like revisiting the 1277 Paris
condemnation.
See also: ▶Aristotelianism in the Greek, Latin, Syriac,
Arabic, and Hebrew Traditions ▶Bonaventure ▶Dietrich
of Freiberg ▶Henry of Ghent ▶Hervaeus Natalis ▶James
of Metz ▶John Duns Scotus ▶Parisian Condemnation of
1277 ▶Peter John Olivi ▶Thomas Aquinas ▶Thomism
▶Universals ▶William of Ockham
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Durand of St Pourc¸ain (1579) In Petri Lombardi sententias theologicas
commentarium libri IIII, 2 vols. Venice. (Repr. The Gregg Press,
New Jersey, 1964)
Durand of St Pourc¸ain (1965) Quodlibeta Avenionensia tria, ed. Stella PT.
Textus et studia in historiam scholasticae, Cura pontiﬁcii Athenaei
Salesiani. Pas-Verlag, Zu¨rich
Durand of St Pourc¸ain (1968) Durandi de S. Porciano O.P. Quol. Paris.
I (Q. I–Q.IV), ed. Takada T. Series of hitherto unedited texts of
medieval thinkers, 4. Kyoto
Durand
of
St.
Pourc¸ain
(1981)
Circa
originem
potestatem
et
iurisdictionum quibus populus regitur, ed. Vanderjagt AJ. Laurens
Pignon, O.P.: Confessor of Philip the Good. Idea on jurisdiction and
the states, The Netherlands, pp 57–132
Durandellus (2003) Nicolai Medensis (Durandelli) Evidentiae contra
Durandum, 2 vols, ed. Stella PT. Corpus philosophorum medii
aevi: Opera philosophica mediae aetatis selecta, 3 (completed by
Lanczkowski M, Imbach R). A. Francke, Tu¨bingen/Basle
Koch Joseph (ed) (1973a) Articuli nonaginta tres extracti ex Durandi de
S. Porciano O.P. primo scripto super sententias et examinati per
magistros et baccalarios ordinis. Kleine Schriften 2, Rome, pp 53–72
Koch Joseph (ed) (1973b) Articuli in quibus magister Durandus deviat
a doctrina venerabilis doctoris nostri fratris Thomae. Kleine
Schriften 2, Rome, pp 72–118.
Natalis Hervaeus (1965) Correctiones Hervei Natalis supra dicta Durandi
de Sancto Porciano in primo quolibet, ed. Stella PT. Magistri
Durandi a Sancto Porciano O.P. Quodlibeta Avenionensia tria,
Textus et Studia in Historiam Scholasticae. Pontiﬁcii Athenaei
Salesiani, Zu¨rich, pp 293–326
Stella PT (ed) (1962) Le quaestiones de libero arbitrio di Durando da S.
Porciano. Salesianum 24:450–524
Takada T (ed) (1974) Die gegen Durandus gerichtete Streitschrift des
Hervaeus Natalis De articulis pertinentibus ad primum librum
Sententiarum Durandi. In: Ko¨hler TW (ed) Sapientiae procerum
amore: Me´langes me´die´vistes offerts a` Dom Jean-Pierre Mu¨ller O.S.
B. a` l’occasion de son 70e`me anniversaire, Studia Anselmiana, 63,
Rome, pp 439–455.
Secondary Sources
Emery G (1999) Dieu, la foi et la the´ologie chez Durand de Saint-
Pourc¸ain. RT 99(4):659–699
Fournier P (1938) Durand de Saint-Pourc¸ain, the´ologien. Hist litte´raire
France (Paris) 37:1–38
Fumagalli Beonio-Brocchieri M (1969) Durando di S. Porciano. Elementi
ﬁlosoﬁci della terza redazione del Commento alle Sentenze, Facolta´
di Lettere e Filosoﬁa dell’Universita´ de Milano, 53. La Nuova Italia,
Florence
Durand of St. Pourc¸ain D
281
D

Godet P (1910) Durand de Saint-Pourc¸ain. In: Dictionaire de The´ologie
Catholique, 4. Letouzey et Ane´, Paris
Iribarren I (2005) Durandus of St Pourc¸ain. A Dominican theologian in
the shadow of Aquinas. Oxford University Press, Oxford
Koch J (1927) Durandus de S. Porciano O.P. Forschungen zum Streit um
Thomas von Aquin zu Beginn des 14. Jahrhunderts, Beitra¨ge zur
Geschichte der Philosophie des Mittelalters, 26. Aschendorff,
Mu¨nster
Schabel C, Balkoyiannopoulou I, Friedman RL (2001) Peter of Palude and
the Parisian reaction to Durand of St Pourc¸ain on foreknowledge and
future contingents. AFP 71:183–300
282 D
Durand of St. Pourc¸ain

