Introduction
God saw everything that he had made, and indeed, it was very good. 
And there was evening and there was morning, the sixth day. 
—Genesis 1:31 (NRSV)
“So correct opinion is the kind of thing we are looking for, between 
understanding and ignorance.”
“What can Eros be, then? A mortal?”
“Far from it.”
“What, then?”
“As in the other examples, something between a mortal and an 
immortal . . .”
“What power does such a spirit possess?”
“He acts as an interpreter and means of communication between gods 
and men . . . Occupying this middle position he plays a vital role hold-
ing the world together.”
—Plato1
The True is the whole.
—Hegel2
Untimely—that is to say, acting counter to our time and thereby act-
ing on our time and, let us hope, for the benefit of a time to come.
Untimely men: their home is not in this age but elsewhere, and it is 
elsewhere too that their explanation and justification is to be found.
—Nietzsche3
William Desmond was born and grew up in Cork city in southern Ireland. 
As a young man, he was briefly a Dominican novice. While he developed 
an early interest in the poetry of the English romantics, Desmond eventually 
xiii
© 2012 State University of New York Press, Albany

xiv
INTRODUCTION
committed to the study of philosophy at University College Cork. He then 
earned his doctorate at Penn State where he studied with Carl Vaught and 
Paul Weiss. Afterward, he taught at Loyola College in Baltimore for twelve 
years. (While at Loyola, Desmond came to know Weiss as a friend and fellow 
metaphysician.) Since 1994 he has been a professor of philosophy at the 
Higher Institute of Philosophy at Katholieke Universiteit Leuven. In this 
time he has held several honorary and visiting chairs including the David 
Cook Visiting Chair at Villanova University (since 2005).
In numerous essays and in a dozen books—from his sustained medita-
tions upon and engagement with Hegel to his original and magisterial trilogy 
(Being and the Between, Ethics and the Between, and God and the Between)—
William Desmond has been a consistently untimely thinker, addressing the 
times from a position of a certain outside. Sensitized to the other, Desmond 
calls attention to a “between,” a community, a relation to the other. Des-
mond addresses the question of relation after the moment of difference—see-
ing that relation without otherness negates relation, collapses into oneness 
(what relation?) and that otherness without relation is a negated, absent 
other (what other?). In doing so, Desmond returns to classical and yet 
persistent, undying questions of being, of the good, of God—a different, 
affirmative saying of and returning to traditional themes (untimely if not 
unwelcome for the pathologically novel modern) after the ascetic severity 
of the turning-from and not-saying of difference in the present age.
To such an end, Desmond’s work evinces an attentive reading of key 
figures in the Western philosophical tradition. We note the three most 
prominent. From Plato, Desmond gleans the eros of thought, of our being 
self-transcending toward ultimacy, an immanent orientation and exigency 
directing and propelling us toward the transcendent; the metaxu of being, 
of our between-being, between being and nothing, between the self-same 
and the other; the plurivocity of philosophy, the fruitful if less-than-fully-
determinate excess of a poetic philosophy speaking in many voices. From 
Hegel he gleans the dynamic resources of dialectic, the unfolding play of 
determinacy and indeterminacy; the persistent attentiveness to the question 
of intelligibility in the progression of thought; the sense of a complex whole 
even opening beyond dialectic. From Nietzsche he gleans the recognition of 
becoming and the equivocal; the yea-saying, affirmative, Dionysian celebra-
tion of the finite and the earth; the critique of rational reductionisms, the 
nihilism of our merely human valuations; the poetic mode of philosophy 
(like Plato).
In regard to a reliance on the resources of a broadly Christian theol-
ogy, Desmond can be seen as a thinker between theology and philosophy, 
between Jerusalem and Athens, not merely a philosopher who has religious 
insights, who has philosophical ways of thinking about God, but as a part 
© 2012 State University of New York Press, Albany

xv
INTRODUCTION
of the great tradition of Christian philosophical theologians drawing on 
the philosophical font of Neoplatonism extending from Pseudo-Dionysius 
and Augustine to Bonaventure and Aquinas and beyond. Desmond, as with 
these earlier figures, thinks that philosophy and theology can relate to each 
other intimately, constructively—complementing and completing each oth-
er—that indeed theology and philosophy are better off for their interrelation. 
Desmond can be seen as taking up this tradition (in spirit if not in the 
letter) that went into recess with the rise of modernity.4
Desmond’s philosophy is both metaphysical and continental. In this 
he has been on the vanguard of metaphysics’ surprising return around the 
turn of the century under the influence of figures such as Gilles Deleuze, 
Alain Badiou, Slavoj Žižek, and John Milbank. In the 1980s and 1990s, 
however, Desmond spoke of metaphysics (and God) when it was decid-
edly not fashionable to do so—in the midst of a “postmodern” continental 
philosophy committed to the critique of ontotheology and the overcoming 
of metaphysics. Instead of seeing metaphysics as an imperial and misguided 
option that should be avoided, inoculated against, its influence extracted, 
Desmond sees metaphysics as, at once, unavoidable and unending (without 
closure). Metaphysics arises from an urgent need to be mindful of, to inter-
pret, to grasp the “plenitude” of the “intimate strangeness” of the enigmatic 
happening of being in the world around us.5 This task is an infinite one—
with no completion or realization or consummation or end of metaphysics 
that brings it to a close and to an end.
Likewise, Desmond’s work was and is untimely in his speaking explic-
itly of God—not just human religiosity or transcendence generally (though 
he does certainly address these), but God—in a milieu in which atheism is 
de rigueur. Desmond characterizes the modern ethos up into the present as 
displaying a certain “allergy to transcendence”—an indifference about the 
question of God, if not an irritation or hostility toward the question.6 Our 
once “porous” ways to God have become “clogged.”7 The modern picture 
of the world that is still very much with us is a godless one—a world of 
inherently worthless, neutral being where humanity’s valueless valuations 
are little more than fictive whistlings in the dark. In this milieu, God has 
become problematic, needing to be justified on secular terms, in terms of 
an immanent already deracinated ethos. In this context, Desmond’s work 
calls our attention to the hyperbolic and excessive givens within finitude 
that call, carry, “throw” us, beyond the immanent frame toward the tran-
scendent. Even after the modern death of God we are always already with 
God—bearing a porosity that is a primal and intimate being-open-to and 
being-with God; we are always already unto God—bearing an urgency of 
ultimacy in which we are oriented, driven, propelled in our own exceeding 
of ourselves beyond ourselves, toward God.
© 2012 State University of New York Press, Albany

xvi
INTRODUCTION
The aim of this reader is to provide a needed way into William Des-
mond’s important and yet often difficult body of work—to enable one to 
gain an understanding of Desmond’s philosophy in his own words in a single 
relatively brief volume. This book consists of selections from Desmond’s 
works, carefully chosen to best represent and to clearly introduce the key 
ideas, perspectives, and contributions of his philosophy as a whole. The 
selections are intentionally laid out so that one can gain an understanding 
of Desmond’s thought in his own words—with later selections often build-
ing on earlier ones. Indeed, many of Desmond’s key ideas are introduced in 
the first part on metaphysics. On the rare occasion that an unfamiliar term 
is used that is not more or less immediately explained, the reader should 
refer to the index. The readings are organized into four parts representing 
the major topoi of Desmond’s work: metaphysics, ethics, religion, and art. 
Following the readings is an original essay by Desmond reflecting on these 
topoi in his thought. The volume concludes with an interview with Des-
mond conducted by Richard Kearney.8
Notes
  1.  Plato, Symposium in Symposium and Phaedrus, tr. Tom Griffith (Everyman’s 
Library, 2001), 202a, 202d–e.
  2.  G. W. F. Hegel, Phenomenology of Spirit, tr. A. V. Miller (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 1977), 11.
  3.  Friedrich Nietzsche, Untimely Meditations, tr. R. J. Hollingdale, ed. Daniel 
Breazeale (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997), 60, 198.
  4.  Further, in his work as a post-Hegelian, protopostmodern, yet meta-
physical, theist (indeed, robustly Christian) thinker—sometimes poetic, sometimes 
systematic—Desmond stands in striking proximity to Kierkegaard. For more on this 
resonance, see my The Truth Is the Way: Kierkegaard’s Theologia Viatorum (London: 
SCM Press, 2010).
  5.  William Desmond, “Neither Deconstruction nor Reconstruction,” Inter-
national Philosophical Quarterly 40, no. 1 (March 2000): 157; Being and the Between 
(New York: State University of New York Press, 1995), xiii. A revised version of this 
essay will be included in Desmond’s forthcoming The Intimate Strangeness of Being: 
Metaphysics after Dialectic (Washington, DC: Catholic University of America Press).
  6.  William Desmond, Hegel’s God (Aldershot: Ashgate, 2003), 4.
  7.  William Desmond, God and the Between (Oxford: Blackwell, 2008), 25–27.
  8.  For a secondary work that gives a systematic introduction to Desmond’s 
thought, see my Religion, Metaphysics, and the Postmodern: William Desmond and John 
D. Caputo (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2009). For a collection of essays 
on aspects of Desmond’s thought in dialogue with other thinkers and disciplines, see 
Thomas A. F. Kelly, ed., Between System and Poetics: William Desmond and Philosophy 
after Dialectic (Aldershot: Ashgate, 2007).
© 2012 State University of New York Press, Albany

