chapter 1
Concerted Cultivation 
and the Accomplishment 
of Natural Growth
1
Laughing and yelling, a white fourth-grader named Garrett Tallinger
splashes around in the swimming pool in the backyard of his four-
bedroom home in the suburbs on a late spring afternoon. As on most
evenings, after a quick dinner his father drives him to soccer practice.
This is only one of Garrett’s many activities. His brother has a baseball
game at a different location. There are evenings when the boys’ parents
relax, sipping a glass of wine. Tonight is not one of them. As they rush to
change out of their work clothes and get the children ready for practice,
Mr. and Mrs. Tallinger are harried.
Only ten minutes away, a Black fourth-grader, Alexander Williams, is
riding home from a school open house.1 His mother is driving their beige,
leather-upholstered Lexus. It is 9:00 p.m. on a Wednesday evening. Ms.
Williams is tired from work and has a long Thursday ahead of her. She
will get up at 4:45 a.m. to go out of town on business and will not return
before 9:00 p.m. On Saturday morning, she will chauffeur Alexander to
a private piano lesson at 8:15 a.m., which will be followed by a choir
rehearsal and then a soccer game. As they ride in the dark, Alexander’s
mother, in a quiet voice, talks with her son, asking him questions and
eliciting his opinions.
Discussions between parents and children are a hallmark of middle-
class child rearing. Like many middle-class parents, Ms. Williams and her
husband see themselves as “developing” Alexander to cultivate his tal-
ents in a concerted fashion. Organized activities, established and con-

trolled by mothers and fathers, dominate the lives of middle-class chil-
dren such as Garrett and Alexander. By making certain their children
have these and other experiences, middle-class parents engage in a
process of concerted cultivation. From this, a robust sense of entitlement
takes root in the children. This sense of entitlement plays an especially
important role in institutional settings, where middle-class children learn
to question adults and address them as relative equals.
Only twenty minutes away, in blue-collar neighborhoods, and slightly
farther away, in public housing projects, childhood looks different. Mr.
Yanelli, a white working-class father, picks up his son Little Billy, a
fourth-grader, from an after-school program. They come home and Mr.
Yanelli drinks a beer while Little Billy first watches television, then rides
his bike and plays in the street. Other nights, he and his Dad sit on the
sidewalk outside their house and play cards. At about 5:30 p.m. Billy’s
mother gets home from her job as a house cleaner. She fixes dinner and
the entire family sits down to eat together. Extended family are a promi-
nent part of their lives. Ms. Yanelli touches base with her “entire family
every day” by phone. Many nights Little Billy’s uncle stops by, sometimes
bringing Little Billy’s youngest cousin. In the spring, Little Billy plays
baseball on a local team. Unlike for Garrett and Alexander, who have at
least four activities a week, for Little Billy, baseball is his only organized
activity outside of school during the entire year. Down the road, a white
working-class girl, Wendy Driver, also spends the evening with her girl
cousins, as they watch a video and eat popcorn, crowded together on the
living room floor.
Farther away, a Black fourth-grade boy, Harold McAllister, plays out-
side on a summer evening in the public housing project in which he lives.
His two male cousins are there that night, as they often are. After an
afternoon spent unsuccessfully searching for a ball so they could play
basketball, the boys had resorted to watching sports on television. Now
they head outdoors for a twilight water balloon fight. Harold tries to get
his neighbor, Miss Latifa, wet. People sit in white plastic lawn chairs out-
side the row of apartments. Music and television sounds waft through
the open windows and doors.
The adults in the lives of Billy, Wendy, and Harold want the best for
them. Formidable economic constraints make it a major life task for
these parents to put food on the table, arrange for housing, negotiate
unsafe neighborhoods, take children to the doctor (often waiting for city
buses that do not come), clean children’s clothes, and get children to bed
and have them ready for school the next morning. But unlike middle-
2
Concerted Cultivation and Natural Growth

class parents, these adults do not consider the concerted development of
children, particularly through organized leisure activities, an essential
aspect of good parenting. Unlike the Tallingers and Williamses, these
mothers and fathers do not focus on concerted cultivation. For them, the
crucial responsibilities of parenthood do not lie in eliciting their chil-
dren’s feelings, opinions, and thoughts. Rather, they see a clear boundary
between adults and children. Parents tend to use directives: they tell their
children what to do rather than persuading them with reasoning. Unlike
their middle-class counterparts, who have a steady diet of adult organ-
ized activities, the working-class and poor children have more control
over the character of their leisure activities. Most children are free to go
out and play with friends and relatives who typically live close by. Their
parents and guardians facilitate the accomplishment of natural growth.2
Yet these children and their parents interact with central institutions in
the society, such as schools, which firmly and decisively promote strate-
gies of concerted cultivation in child rearing. For working-class and poor
families, the cultural logic of child rearing at home is out of synch with
the standards of institutions. As a result, while children whose parents
adopt strategies of concerted cultivation appear to gain a sense of
entitlement, children such as Billy Yanelli, Wendy Driver, and Harold
McAllister appear to gain an emerging sense of distance, distrust, and
constraint in their institutional experiences.
America may be the land of opportunity, but it is also a land of in-
equality. This book identifies the largely invisible but powerful ways that
parents’ social class impacts children’s life experiences. It shows, using in-
depth observations and interviews with middle-class (including members
of the upper-middle-class), working-class, and poor families, that
inequality permeates the fabric of the culture. In the chapters that lie
ahead, I report the results of intensive observational research for a total
of twelve families when their children were nine and ten years old. I
argue that key elements of family life cohere to form a cultural logic of
child rearing.3 In other words, the differences among families seem to
cluster together in meaningful patterns. In this historical moment,
middle-class parents tend to adopt a cultural logic of child rearing that
stresses the concerted cultivation of children. Working-class and poor
parents, by contrast, tend to undertake the accomplishment of natural
growth. In the accomplishment of natural growth, children experience
long stretches of leisure time, child-initiated play, clear boundaries
between adults and children, and daily interactions with kin. Working-
class and poor children, despite tremendous economic strain, often have
Concerted Cultivation and Natural Growth
3

more “childlike” lives, with autonomy from adults and control over their
extended leisure time. Although middle-class children miss out on kin
relationships and leisure time, they appear to (at least potentially) gain
important institutional advantages. From the experience of concerted
cultivation, they acquire skills that could be valuable in the future when
they enter the world of work. Middle-class white and Black children in
my study did exhibit some key differences; yet the biggest gaps were not
within social classes but, as I show, across them. It is these class differ-
ences and how they are enacted in family life and child rearing that shape
the ways children view themselves in relation to the rest of the world.
Cultural Repertoires
Professionals who work with children, such as teachers, doctors, and
counselors, generally agree about how children should be raised. Of
course, from time to time they may disagree on the ways standards
should be enacted for an individual child or family. For example, teach-
ers may disagree about whether or not parents should stop and correct a
child who mispronounces a word while reading. Counselors may dis-
agree over whether a mother is being too protective of her child. Still,
there is little dispute among professionals on the broad principles for
promoting educational development in children through proper parent-
ing.4 These standards include the importance of talking with children,
developing their educational interests, and playing an active role in their
schooling. Similarly, parenting guidelines typically stress the importance
of reasoning with children and teaching them to solve problems through
negotiation rather than with physical force. Because these guidelines are
so generally accepted, and because they focus on a set of practices con-
cerning how parents should raise children, they form a dominant set of
cultural repertoires about how children should be raised. This wide-
spread agreement among professionals about the broad principles for
child rearing permeates our society. A small number of experts thus
potentially shape the behavior of a large number of parents.
Professionals’ advice regarding the best way to raise children has
changed regularly over the last two centuries. From strong opinions
about the merits of bottle feeding, being stern with children, and utilizing
physical punishment (with dire warnings of problematic outcomes should
parents indulge children), there have been shifts to equally strongly
worded recommendations about the benefits of breast feeding, displaying
emotional warmth toward children, and using reasoning and negotiation
4
Concerted Cultivation and Natural Growth

Concerted Cultivation and Natural Growth
5
as mechanisms of parental control. Middle-class parents appear to shift
their behaviors in a variety of spheres more rapidly and more thoroughly
than do working-class or poor parents.5 As professionals have shifted
their recommendations from bottle feeding to breast feeding, from stern
approaches to warmth and empathy, and from spanking to time-outs, it is
middle-class parents who have responded most promptly.6 Moreover, in
recent decades, middle-class children in the United States have had to face
the prospect of “declining fortunes.”7 Worried about how their children
will get ahead, middle-class parents are increasingly determined to make
sure that their children are not excluded from any opportunity that might
eventually contribute to their advancement.
Middle-class parents who comply with current professional standards
and engage in a pattern of concerted cultivation deliberately try to stim-
ulate their children’s development and foster their cognitive and social
skills. The commitment among working-class and poor families to pro-
vide comfort, food, shelter, and other basic support requires ongoing
effort, given economic challenges and the formidable demands of child
rearing. But it stops short of the deliberate cultivation of children and
their leisure activities that occurs in middle-class families. For working-
class and poor families, sustaining children’s natural growth is viewed as
an accomplishment.8
What is the outcome of these different philosophies and approaches to
child rearing? Quite simply, they appear to lead to the transmission of
differential advantages to children. In this study, there was quite a bit
more talking in middle-class homes than in working-class and poor
homes, leading to the development of greater verbal agility, larger vocab-
ularies, more comfort with authority figures, and more familiarity with
abstract concepts. Importantly, children also developed skill differences
in interacting with authority figures in institutions and at home. Middle-
class children such as Garrett Tallinger and Alexander Williams learn, as
young boys, to shake the hands of adults and look them in the eye. In
studies of job interviews, investigators have found that potential employ-
ees have less than one minute to make a good impression. Researchers
stress the importance of eye contact, firm handshakes, and displaying
comfort with bosses during the interview. In poor families like Harold
McAllister’s, however, family members usually do not look each other in
the eye when conversing. In addition, as Elijah Anderson points out,
they live in neighborhoods where it can be dangerous to look people in
the eye too long.9 The types of social competence transmitted in the
McAllister family are valuable, but they are potentially less valuable (in

employment interviews, for example) than those learned by Garrett
Tallinger and Alexander Williams.
The white and Black middle-class children in this study also exhibited
an emergent version of the sense of entitlement characteristic of the
middle-class. They acted as though they had a right to pursue their own
individual preferences and to actively manage interactions in institutional
settings. They appeared comfortable in these settings; they were open to
sharing information and asking for attention. Although some children
were more outgoing than others, it was common practice among middle-
class children to shift interactions to suit their preferences. Alexander
Williams knew how to get the doctor to listen to his concerns (about the
bumps under his arm from his new deodorant). His mother explicitly
trained and encouraged him to speak up with the doctor. Similarly, a
Black middle-class girl, Stacey Marshall, was taught by her mother to
expect the gymnastics teacher to accommodate her individual learning
style. Thus, middle-class children were trained in “the rules of the game”
that govern interactions with institutional representatives. They were not
conversant in other important social skills, however, such as organizing
their time for hours on end during weekends and summers, spending
long periods of time away from adults, or hanging out with adults in a
nonobtrusive, subordinate fashion. Middle-class children also learned
(by imitation and by direct training) how to make the rules work in their
favor. Here, the enormous stress on reasoning and negotiation in the
home also has a potential advantage for future institutional negotiations.
Additionally, those in authority responded positively to such interac-
tions. Even in fourth grade, middle-class children appeared to be acting
on their own behalf to gain advantages. They made special requests of
teachers and doctors to adjust procedures to accommodate their desires.
The working-class and poor children, by contrast, showed an emerg-
ing sense of constraint in their interactions in institutional settings. They
were less likely to try to customize interactions to suit their own prefer-
ences. Like their parents, the children accepted the actions of persons in
authority (although at times they also covertly resisted them). Working-
class and poor parents sometimes were not as aware of their children’s
school situation (as when their children were not doing homework).
Other times, they dismissed the school rules as unreasonable. For exam-
ple, Wendy Driver’s mother told her to “punch” a boy who was pestering
her in class; Billy Yanelli’s parents were proud of him when he “beat up”
another boy on the playground, even though Billy was then suspended
from school. Parents also had trouble getting “the school” to respond to
6
Concerted Cultivation and Natural Growth

their concerns. When Ms. Yanelli complained that she “hates” the
school, she gave her son a lesson in powerlessness and frustration in the
face of an important institution. Middle-class children such as Stacey
Marshall learned to make demands on professionals, and when they suc-
ceeded in making the rules work in their favor they augmented their
“cultural capital” (i.e., skills individuals inherit that can then be trans-
lated into different forms of value as they move through various institu-
tions) for the future.10 When working-class and poor children confronted
institutions, however, they generally were unable to make the rules work
in their favor nor did they obtain capital for adulthood. Because of these
patterns of legitimization, children raised according to the logic of con-
certed cultivation can gain advantages, in the form of an emerging sense
of entitlement, while children raised according to the logic of natural
growth tend to develop an emerging sense of constraint.11
Social Stratification and Individualism
Public discourse in America typically presents the life accomplishments
of a person as the result of her or his individual qualities. Songs like “I
Did It My Way,” memoirs, television shows, and magazine articles, cele-
brate the individual. Typically, individual outcomes are connected to
individual effort and talent, such as being a “type A” personality, being a
hard worker, or showing leadership. These cultural beliefs provide a
framework for Americans’ views of inequality.
Indeed, Americans are much more comfortable recognizing the power
of individual initiative than recognizing the power of social class. Studies
show that Americans generally believe that responsibility for their
accomplishments rests on their individual efforts. Less than one-fifth see
“race, gender, religion, or class as very important for ‘getting ahead in
life.’”12 Compared to Europeans, individuals in the United States are
much more likely to believe they can improve their standard of living. Put
differently, Americans believe in the American dream: “The American
dream that we were all raised on is a simple but powerful one—if you
work hard and play by the rules, you should be given a chance to go as
far as your God-given ability will take you.”13 This American ideology
that each individual is responsible for his or her life outcomes is the
expressed belief of the vast majority of Americans, rich and poor.
Yet there is no question that society is stratified. As I show in the next
chapter, highly valued resources such as the possession of wealth; having
an interesting, well-paying, and complex job; having a good education;
Concerted Cultivation and Natural Growth
7

and owning a home, are not evenly distributed throughout the society.
Moreover, these resources are transferred across generations: One of the
best predictors of whether a child will one day graduate from college is
whether his or her parents are college graduates. Of course, relations of
this sort are not absolute: Perhaps two-thirds of the members of society
ultimately reproduce their parents’ level of educational attainment, while
about one-third take a different path. Still, there is no question that we
live in a society characterized by considerable gaps in resources or, put
differently, by substantial inequality. As I explain in the next chapter,
however, reasonable people have disagreed about how best to conceptu-
alize such patterns. They also have disagreed about whether families in
different economic positions “share distinct, life-defining experiences.”14
Many insist that there is not a clear, coherent, and sustained experiential
pattern. In this book, I demonstrate the existence of a cultural logic of
child rearing that tends to differ according to families’ social class posi-
tions. I see these interweaving practices as coming together in a messy but
still recognizable way. In contrast to many, I suggest that social class does
have a powerful impact in shaping the daily rhythms of family life.
The Study
It is a lot of work to get young children through the day, especially for
their parents. When I embarked on this study, I was interested in under-
standing that labor process. In choosing to look at families, rather than
just at children or parents, I hoped to capture some of the reciprocal
effects of children and parents on each other. My approach also meant
moving beyond the walls of the home to understand how parents and
children negotiate with other adults in children’s lives.
This book is based on intensive “naturalistic” observations of twelve
families (six white, five Black, and one interracial) with children nine and
ten years old. The twelve families are part of a larger study of eighty-
eight children from the middle-class, working-class, and poor.15 (For
details of how the study was done, see Appendix A, Methodology.) I met
most of these children when I visited their third-grade classrooms in an
urban school, Lower Richmond, and a suburban school, Swan (both of
which are described in the next chapter). With the help of white and
Black research assistants, I carried out interviews first with the mothers
and then with many of the fathers of these children. To better understand
the expectations that professionals had of parents, I also interviewed the
children’s classroom teachers and other school personnel.
8
Concerted Cultivation and Natural Growth

From this pool of children the research assistants and I selected twelve
families for intensive observations.16 We generally visited each family
about twenty times in and around their home, usually in the space of one
month. We followed children and parents as they went through their
daily routines, as they took part in school activities, church services and
events, organized play, kin visits, and medical appointments. Most visits
lasted about three hours; sometimes, depending on the event (e.g., an
out-of-town funeral, a special extended family event, or a long shopping
trip), we stayed much longer. In most cases, we also arranged one
overnight visit in each family’s home. Often, especially after the families
got used to us, we carried tape recorders.
When we introduced ourselves to each family, we said that, following
a famous study, we wanted to be treated like “the family dog.”17 We
wanted parents to step over and ignore us, but allow us to hang out with
them. In reality, our presence had a more active character. Still, after
some initial chatter, we often slipped into the background, letting the
children and their parents set the pace. In the house, we sat on the floor
with children and, as a rule, insisted on sitting in the backseat of cars
when we rode along on family outings. Outside, we played ball with chil-
dren or hung around while they played with their friends. Middle-class
children, especially, spent quite a bit of time waiting for adults. We
waited, too. As I explain in Appendix A, the rule of thumb was not to
criticize and not to intervene unless a child was in imminent danger. We
encouraged families not to worry about entertaining us, we told children
to feel free to curse in front of us if they would do so normally, and we
asked that other normal “guest” rules be dissolved.
Unquestionably, our presence changed the dynamics as we were sitting
in living rooms watching television, riding along in the backseat of the
car to a soccer game, watching children get into their pajamas, or sitting
in church with them. Over time, however, we saw signs of adjustment
(e.g., as families got used to us, yelling and cursing increased). Many
families reported that, especially after the initial adjustment, their behav-
ior changed only in modest ways, if at all.
The children found participating in the project enjoyable. They
reported it made them feel “special.” They were demonstrably happy to
see the field-workers arrive and, at times, were reluctant to let them
leave. Some parents also, at times, said they “had fun.” Delight in the
study was clearly stronger in the working-class and poor families, possi-
bly because it was rare for these children to meet adults outside of their
extended family, neighbors, and teachers. In middle-class families, chil-
Concerted Cultivation and Natural Growth
9

dren routinely interacted with nonfamilial adults outside of the home
environment or school.
Enduring Dilemmas
In a seminar I attended recently, a Black anthropologist rebuffed another
scholar’s statement with the words, “Yes, but that is a white perspec-
tive.” In this line of thought, membership in a particular racial or ethnic
group crucially shapes a person’s intellectual trajectory. Accordingly,
there are those who believe that as a white woman, I should not have
studied Black families. Conversely, they might object to having a Black
research assistant visit a white middle-class family. They assert that it is
more desirable, or even necessary, for gays to study gays or women to
study women. Some worry that outsiders may get it wrong. Others
assert that having white researchers in Black families is not a legitimate
undertaking.
There are no easy answers to these contentious debates. In this study,
the design grew out of the local context (see Appendix A for details). But
more generally, I have a philosophical difference with the young woman
in the seminar that evening. I question whether something called “a
white perspective” exists.18 To follow out the logic of her critique means
that members of (dominant) racial and ethnic groups ought to refrain
from studying social questions involving dominated groups. This does
not strike me as the best approach for understanding complex social
problems. (It also has the invidious effect of relegating every Black social
scientist to studying Black Americans rather than whatever suits his or
her fancy.) Moreover, the “groups” at hand are always diverse. What
about members of the same ethnic group who are of a different gender:
Are the walls blocking understanding equally high? In a series of ever-
reflecting mirrors, does this tension mean that the only person you can
truly “cross the divide” to study is yourself? This book takes the position
that it is possible for outsiders of a group to study across boundaries. It
reports findings from a study that used ethnographic methods to try to
understand children in a wide variety of social locations: boys and girls,
middle-class, working-class and poor families, and white and Black fam-
ilies. In addition, the research teams were racially and ethnically diverse
(as well as diverse by social class background), which, as I show in
Appendix A, influenced what we learned in our visits.
Some reviewers worried that given the contested character of race
relations in the United States, the behavior patterns described in this
10
Concerted Cultivation and Natural Growth

book might reinforce negative stereotypes of certain groups. The results
could be taken out of context and exploited by others, particularly polit-
ical conservatives. Some early readers encouraged me not to report
results that might be used to reinforce negative images of, for example,
poor Black families. The fact that the manuscript includes portraits of
poor white families as well as Black families did not completely assuage
these concerns. A key problem is that most readers will be middle class
or, as college students, on the road to becoming middle class, even if they
had working-class or poor origins. As readers, they will have their own
childhoods and their own lives as parents or future parents as a base for
what they consider appropriate. This cultural and historical frame can
become the basis for interpreting the discussion. Indeed, some (middle-
class) readers of earlier drafts felt that a child’s life that consists of watch-
ing television all day would be “boring” or “bad” for the child. This
interpretation, though, is rooted in a particular vision of childhood—one
involving development and concerted cultivation. The historical and cul-
tural character of readers’ beliefs often are thrown into relief only
through sharp cross-cultural or historical comparisons.19
In sum, the fear is that some readers will project their own cultural
beliefs on the material. This pattern of projection makes it difficult to
“see” alternative conceptions of child rearing as legitimate. As a result,
although I make an assiduous effort to report the complexity of family
life, at times I spend more time pointing out drawbacks of middle-class
child rearing than I do drawbacks of working-class and poor families’
approach. Still, it is in fact possible that the results of this study could be
distorted or used to promote political positions that I find repugnant. But
squelching results due to fears about how they could be interpreted (par-
ticularly worries that the examples could reinforce “deficit” theories of
social life) seems wrong. Thus, although urged to do so, I have not omit-
ted data on this criterion.
Organization of This book
The next chapter describes the schools that most of the children in the
study attended and where we visited during the year. It also briefly dis-
cusses different approaches to understanding why inequality exists. The
book then proceeds by devoting a chapter per family to highlight three
ways in which social class makes a difference in children’s lives and fam-
ily life: the organization of daily life, language use, and interactions
between families and institutions. In Part I, I show that middle-class chil-
Concerted Cultivation and Natural Growth
11

dren had a hectic schedule of organized activities by looking at the
white middle-class family of Garrett Tallinger (Chapter 3). Although the
Tallinger family was wealthier than many, the same patterns appeared
over and over again in other middle-class families. By contrast, children
such as Tyrec Taylor (a Black working-class boy) spent time playing out-
side with friends (Chapter 4). Even then, as the case of a white poor girl,
Katie Brindle, shows, mothers engaged in enormous labor to get children
through the day (Chapter 5). Unlike children in the Tallinger family, both
Tyrec Taylor and Katie Brindle played in a sphere separate from that of
adults.
In Part II, I show how these differences in the organization of daily life
are also interwoven with language use, with an emphasis on reasoning in
middle-class families and directives in the working-class and poor fami-
lies. I illustrate this with the case of Alexander Williams (Chapter 6), a
boy from a Black middle-class home, and Harold McAllister (Chapter 7),
a Black boy living in poverty.20
Part III demonstrates how parents differ in the ways they monitor and
intervene in their children’s schooling. The case of Stacey Marshall, a
Black middle-class girl whose mother constantly scrutinized and inter-
ceded in her life outside the home, is the subject of Chapter 8. Another
example of this behavior, albeit one where the behavior is much less
effective, is found in the case of Melanie Handlon, a white middle-class
girl (Chapter 9) whose mother’s frequent interventions, particularly
around homework, created unhappiness and conflict. In contrast to their
middle-class counterparts, working-class and poor parents depended on
the leadership of professionals. At times, since the educators expected
parents to follow strategies of concerted cultivation, the results could be
difficult, as with Wendy Driver, who was not reading in fourth grade
(Chapter 10). Other times, working-class parents found themselves pow-
erless and frustrated, as standards of behavior they felt were appropriate
(such as self-defense on the playground or hitting a child for purposes of
discipline) were denigrated and, indeed, seen as possible signs of child
abuse. The case of Billy Yanelli (Chapter 11) shows these tensions.
In the conclusion, Chapter 12, I revisit the general question of the
influence of social class on daily life. I point to important ways that
social class did not appear to matter in shaping daily life in such areas as
neatness, order, and sense of humor. Overall, however, I identify impor-
tant ways that class shapes the logic of child rearing in the home and the
value these strategies are accorded as children move into the rest of the
12
Concerted Cultivation and Natural Growth

world. Appendix A provides an “insider” tale of the questions and dilem-
mas that emerged during the study.
In sum, I see it as a mistake to accept, carte blanche, the views of offi-
cials in dominant institutions (e.g., schools or social service agencies)
regarding how children should be raised. Indeed, outside of institutional
settings there are benefits and costs to both of these logics of child rear-
ing. For example, concerted cultivation places intense labor demands on
busy parents, exhausts children, and emphasizes the development of indi-
vidualism, at times at the expense of the development of the notion of the
family group. Middle-class children argue with their parents, complain
about their parents’ incompetence, and disparage parents’ decisions. In
other historical moments, a ten-year-old child who gave orders to a doc-
tor would have been chastised for engaging in disrespectful and inappro-
priate behavior. Nor are the actions of children who display an emerging
sense of entitlement intrinsically more valuable or desirable than those of
children who display an emerging sense of constraint. In a society less
dominated by individualism than the United States, with more of an
emphasis on the group, the sense of constraint displayed by working-
class and poor children might be interpreted as healthy and appropriate.
But in this society, the strategies of the working-class and poor families
are generally denigrated and seen as unhelpful or even harmful to chil-
dren’s life chances. The benefits that accrue to middle-class children can
be significant, but they are often invisible to them and to others. In pop-
ular language, middle-class children can be said to have been “born on
third base but believe they hit a triple.” This book makes the invisible vis-
ible through a study of pleasures, opportunities, challenges, and con-
flicts in the daily lives of children and their families.
Concerted Cultivation and Natural Growth
13

