
A Bayesian Theory of Games

A Bayesian Theory of Games
Iterative conjectures and determination of
equilibrium
JIMMY TENG

Chartridge Books Oxford Hexagon House
Avenue 4

Station Lane

Witney
Oxford OX28 4BN, UK
Tel: +44 (0) 1865 598888
Email: editorial@chartridgebooksoxford.com
Website: www.chartridgebooksoxford.com
Published in 2014 by Chartridge Books Oxford ISBN print: 978-1-90928776-1
ISBN digital (pdf): 978-1-909287-77-8
ISBN digital book (epub): 978-1-909287-78-5
ISBN digital book (mobi): 978-1-909287-79-2
© J. Teng 2014
The right of J. Teng to be identified as author of this work has been asserted in accordance with sections 77
and 78 of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data: a catalogue record for this book is available from the
British Library.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in or introduced into a retrieval
system, or transmitted, in any form, or by any means (electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or
otherwise) without the prior written permission of the publishers. This publication may not be lent, resold,
hired out or otherwise disposed of by way of trade in any form of binding or cover other than that in which
it is published without the prior consent of the publishers. Any person who does any unauthorised act in
relation to this publication may be liable to criminal prosecution and civil claims for damages. Permissions
may be sought directly from the publishers, at the above address.
Chartridge Books Oxford is an imprint of Biohealthcare Publishing (Oxford) Ltd.
The use in this publication of trade names, trademarks service marks, and similar terms, even if they are not
identified as such, is not to be taken as an expression of opinion as to whether or not they are subject to
proprietary rights. The publishers are not associated with any product or vendor mentioned in this
publication. The authors, editors, contributors and publishers have attempted to trace the copyright holders
of all material reproduced in this publication and apologise to any copyright holders if permission to publish
in this form has not been obtained. If any copyright material has not been acknowledged, please write and
let us know so we may rectify in any future reprint. Any screenshots in this publication are the copyright of
the website owner(s), unless indicated otherwise.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty The publishers, author(s), editor(s) and contributor(s) make no
representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this publication
and specifically disclaim all warranties, including without limitation warranties of fitness for a particular
purpose. No warranty may be created or extended by sales or promotional materials. The advice and
strategies contained herein may not be suitable for every situation. This publication is sold with the
understanding that the publishers are not rendering legal, accounting or other professional services. If
professional assistance is required, the services of a competent professional person should be sought. No
responsibility is assumed by the publishers, author(s), editor(s) or contributor(s) for any loss of profit or any
other commercial damages, injury and/or damage to persons or property as a matter of products liability,
negligence or otherwise, or from any use or operation of any methods, products, instructions or ideas
contained in the material herein. The fact that an organisation or website is referred to in this publication as
a citation and/or potential source of further information does not mean that the publishers nor the author(s),
editor(s) and contributor(s) endorses the information the organisation or website may provide or
recommendations it may make. Further, readers should be aware that internet websites listed in this work

may have changed or disappeared between when this publication was written and when it is read.
Typeset by Domex, India Printed in the UK and USA

Contents
Preface
Acknowledgments
About the author
1    Introduction
2    Sequential games with incomplete information and noisy inaccurate
observation
2.1.  Introduction
2.2.  An inflationary game
2.3.  Bayesian iterative conjecture algorithm as a Bayes decision rule
2.4.  Conclusions
Notes
3    Sequential games with perfect and imperfect information
3.1.  Introduction
3.2.  The Bayesian iterative conjecture algorithm, sub-game perfect
equilibrium and perfect Bayesian equilibrium
3.3.  Solving sequential games of incomplete and perfect information
3.4.  Multiple-sided incomplete information sequential games with perfect
information
3.5.  Conclusions
Notes
4    Simultaneous games
4.1.  Introduction
4.2.  Complete information simultaneous games
4.3.  BEIC and refinements of Nash equilibrium
4.4.  Simultaneous games with incomplete information
4.5.  Conclusions
Notes

5    Conclusions
References
Index

Preface
This book introduces a new games theory equilibrium concept and solution
algorithm that provide a unified treatment for broad categories of games that are
presently solved using the different equilibrium concepts of Nash equilibrium,
sub-game perfect equilibrium, Bayesian Nash equilibrium and perfect Bayesian
equilibrium.
The new method achieves consistency in equilibrium results that current
games theory at times fails to, such as those between Perfect Bayesian
Equilibrium and backward induction (sub-game Perfect Equilibrium). The new
equilibrium concept is Bayesian equilibrium by iterative conjectures (BEIC) and
its associated algorithm is the Bayesian iterative conjecture algorithm. BEIC
requires players to make predictions on the strategies of other players using the
Bayesian iterative conjecture algorithm. The Bayesian iterative conjectures
algorithm makes predictions starting from first order uninformative predictive
distribution functions (or conjectures) and keeps updating with the Bayesian
statistical decision theoretic and game theoretic reasoning until a convergence of
conjectures is achieved. Information known by the players such as the reaction
functions are thereby incorporated into the higher order conjectures and help to
determine the convergent conjectures and the associated equilibrium.
In a BEIC, conjectures are consistent with the equilibrium or equilibriums
they support and so rationality is achieved for actions, strategies and conjectures
and (statistical) decision rule.
The BEIC approach is capable of analyzing a larger set of games than current
games theory, including games with noisy inaccurate observations and games
with multiple-sided incomplete information games. On the other hand, for the set
of games analyzed by the current games theory, it generates smaller numbers of
equilibriums and normally achieves uniqueness in equilibrium. It treats games
with complete and perfect information as special cases of games with incomplete
information and noisy observations, whereby the variance of the prior
distribution function on type and the variance of the observation noise term tend
to zero. Consequently, there is the issue of indeterminacy in statistical inference
and decision-making in these games as the equilibrium solution depends on
which variance tends to zero first. It therefore identifies equilibriums in these
games that have so far eluded current treatments.

Acknowledgments
I thank D. Banks, J. Bono, P. Carolyn, M. Clyde, J. Duan, I. Horstmann, P.Y.
Lai, M. Lavine, J. Mintz, R. Nau, M. Osborne, J. Roberts, D. Schoch, R.
Winkler, R. Wolpert, F.Y. Chiou, and G. Xia for their comments.
I thank the students of my 2005, 2008 and 2009 games theory classes (at the
Department and Graduate Institute of Political Science in the National Taiwan
University in Taipei, Taiwan) for their enthusiasm in learning, and interesting
questions raised in class.
I thank the participants of my three-day games theory workshop (at the
Graduate Institute of Political Science in the National Sun Yat Sen University in
Kaohsiung, Taiwan) for their questions.
I thank the students of my 2011, 2012 and 2013 microeconomic theory and
advanced microeconomics classes (at the School of Economics in the University
of Nottingham Malaysia Campus) for their questions.

About the author
Jimmy Teng currently teaches at the School of Economics of the University of
Nottingham (Malaysia Campus). He previously held research and teaching
positions in Academia Sinica (Taiwan), National Taiwan University and
Nanyang Technological University (Singapore). He was the recipient of Lee
Foundation Scholarship (1991–1996) at the University of Toronto where he
received his PhD in Economics. He also earned a PhD in Political Science and a
MS in statistics from Duke University, besides an LLM from the University of
London. He is the author of many articles and two books. He is researching to
give games theory a firm Bayesian statistical decision theoretic foundation.

Introduction
‘If a man will begin with certainties, he shall end in doubts; but if he will
content to begin with doubts, he shall end in certainties.’
Francis Bacon (1561–1626).
There is a lot of criticism against Nash equilibrium (and its myriad refinements).
There are many alternative equilibrium concepts being proposed. Yet, despite
the criticism and the alternative equilibrium concepts, Nash equilibrium is still
the dominant equilibrium concept. In terms of popularity of usage, no alternative
equilibrium concept comes close. The most important reason is that Nash
equilibrium is relatively easy to compute, while many of the alternative
equilibrium concepts are algorithmically difficult to compute.
This book proposes a new equilibrium concept that overcomes many of the
shortcomings of Nash equilibrium. The proposed new equilibrium concept also
has the nice algorithmic property of easy computation. Consequently, not only
could it solve games that the current approach based on Nash equilibrium could
solve, it could also solve games that the current approach based on Nash
equilibrium is unable to solve. The new equilibrium concept is Bayesian
equilibrium by iterative conjectures.
Current Nash equilibrium-based games theory solves a game by asking which
combinations of strategies constitute equilibriums. The implicit assumption is
that agents know the strategies adopted by the other agents and which
equilibrium they are in, for otherwise they will not be able to react specifically to
the optimal strategies of other agents but must react to the strategies of the other
agents they predicted or expected or conjectured.1 This implicit assumption
reduces the uncertainty facing the agents and simplifies computation and gives
Nash equilibrium its strong appeal. Further refinements such as sub-game
perfect equilibrium, Bayesian Nash equilibrium and Perfect Bayesian (Nash)
equilibrium, though adding further requirements, do not change this implicit
assumption.2
Bayesian equilibrium by the iterative conjectures (BEIC) approach, in

contrast, solves a game by assuming that the agents do not know the strategies
adopted or will be adopted by other agents, and have no idea which equilibrium
they are in or will be in. Therefore, to select a strategy they need to form
predictions or expectations or conjectures about the strategies adopted or will be
adopted by other agents and the equilibrium they are in or will be in, as well as
conjectures about such conjectures, ad infinitum. They do so by starting with
first order uninformative predictive probability distribution functions (or
expectations or conjectures) on the strategies of the other agents. The agents then
keep updating their conjectures with game theoretic and Bayesian statistical
decision theoretic reasoning until a convergence of conjectures is achieved.3 In
BEIC, the convergent conjectures are consistent with the equilibrium they
support. BEIC therefore rules out equilibriums that are based on conjectures that
are inconsistent with the equilibriums they support, as well as equilibriums
supported by convergent conjectures that do not start with first order
uninformative conjectures.
This difference in solution approach is related to an ongoing argument in
games theory about the relative validity of the two conflicting notions of
rationality; Bayesian statistical decision theoretic rationality, and strategic
rationality (as embodied by the game theoretic concepts of Nash equilibrium and
its many refinements). Currently, games theorists think that the two concepts of
rationality are incompatible.4 While most games theorists are steadfast to the
concept of strategic rationality, this book undertakes the task of reconstructing
the whole basic framework of non-cooperative games using the notion of
Bayesian rationality. The specification of the process of conjecture formation in
BEIC strengthens the concept of rationality used in games. The consequence is a
new kind of game theoretic rationality that is based upon Bayesian rationality.
This new game theoretic rationality includes rationality in actions and strategies,
rationality in prior and posterior beliefs and, rationality in statistical decision
rule.
The resulting Bayesian strand of games theory has a statistical decision
theoretic foundation. It analyzes a larger set of games than the existing Nash
equilibrium-based games theory given the same game theoretic structure. It also
acts as an equilibrium selection criterion for the subset of games that the existing
Nash equilibrium-based games theory analyzes. BEIC normally decreases the
number of equilibriums to one, and selects the equilibrium that is most
compelling. The BEIC approach therefore increases the analytical power of
games theory in current applications. It also allows games theory to be applied to
new areas, such as games of multiple-sided incomplete information.5

To comprehend the need for a new theory of non-cooperative games with
Bayesian statistical decision theory as its foundation, one has to go back to the
history of non-cooperative games theory and Bayesian statistical decision theory.
Non-cooperative games theory started with the works of John Nash in the 1950s.
Bayesian statistics resurgence started in the 1970s and 1980s. Consequently,
non-cooperative games theory developed largely independently of Bayesian
statistical decision theory and had not started with a firm statistical decision
theoretic foundation.
The works of Harsanyi (1967, 1968a, 1968b) came after the contributions of
Nash (1950, 1951). Harsanyi’s (1967, 1968a, 1968b) works allow games of
incomplete information to be analyzed. When Harsanyi first proposed his
transformation of games of incomplete information, Kadane and Larkey (1982a,
1982b) criticized that the Harsanyi Bayesian games were not really Bayesian as
they involved just the use of Bayes rule, but without the use of subjective
probability and Bayesian decision theory in the decision-making process of the
players.
This book will use subjective probability and Bayesian statistical decision
theory to reconstruct non-cooperative games theory. Subjective probability is
fundamental to BEIC. In the BEIC approach, the process of iterative
conjecturing starts with first order uninformative conjectures. These first order
uninformative conjectures are of course subjective, as are subsequent higher
order conjectures.
What is the rationale to start with first order uninformative conjectures? Other
than the assumption that the agents have no idea about the strategies adopted by
other agents and the equilibrium they are in at the beginning of the conjecturing
process, there are two further compelling reasons for starting with uninformative
conjectures. First is the motive to let the game solve itself and select its own
equilibrium strategies and convergent conjectures. The equilibrium so achieved
is therefore not imposed or affected by informative conjectures arbitrarily
chosen, but by the underlying structure and elements of the game, including the
payoffs of the agents and the information they have. Second is to ensure that all
pathways and information sets have equal probabilities of being reached at the
initial round of reasoning. That is to say, the conjecturing process explores every
pathway and information set (either on or off equilibrium).
Harsanyi and Selten (1988) and Harsanyi (1995) propose a tracing procedure
to select the most compelling equilibrium among multiple Nash equilibriums.
Their tracing procedure starts with first order uninformative conjectures on the
multiple Nash equilibriums. The solution of simultaneous games by Bayesian
equilibrium by iterative conjectures (BEIC) is very similar to the tracing

procedure of Harsanyi and Selten (1988). However, the BEIC approach does not
start its tracing with only Nash equilibriums. It starts with all possible strategies
of the players. This is ensured through the enforced use of first order
uninformative conjectures on all possible actions or strategies.
The Bayesian iterative conjecture algorithm approach is especially suited to
analyze sequential games with noisy inaccurate observations. An inaccurate
observation is an observation with a noise term. This is the typical data that one
encounters when doing statistical analysis. It is a generalization of perfect and
imperfect information. The general case in noisy observation incomplete
information sequential games is where both prior belief on action and the
likelihood function from sample data play a role in the formation of posterior
belief on action. The two special limiting cases are, first when the prior belief
plays no role at all (as when the variance of the noise term becomes zero), and
second when the likelihood function plays no role at all (as when the variance of
the noise term reaches its maximum and therefore observation contains no
information value). In other words, a noisy observation incomplete information
sequential game is a general framework in which the perfect information and
incomplete information sequential game and imperfect information and
incomplete information sequential game are special limiting cases.
The Bayesian iterative conjecture approach solution of simultaneous games is
closely related to the focal point or Schelling point concept: it is about
conjectures on the other agents’ actions and strategies, and conjectures on these
conjectures, and the convergence of such conjectures. A process of conjecture
starts with first order uninformative conjectures, and they are constantly being
updated with game theoretic reasoning, but with no updating from likelihood
functions since there are no observations on the actions of the other players.
When all the processes of conjecturing in a game converge onto the same set of
invariant distribution functions, there is a unique equilibrium.
Chapter Two presents the BEIC solution of sequential games with incomplete
information and noisy inaccurate observation. It also proves that the Bayesian
iterative conjecture algorithm is a Bayes decision rule (that is, an undominated
decision rule) in a game theoretic context. Chapter Three presents the BEIC
approach to sequential games of perfect and imperfect information. Chapter Four
presents the BEIC approach to simultaneous games. Chapter Five concludes the
book.
Notes

1.  Refer to Nash (1950, 1951).
2.  Refer to Harsanyi (1967, 1968a, 1968b).
3.  Refer to Teng (2012a).
4.  Refer to Mariotti (1995) and Tan and Werlang (1988).
5.  Refer to Teng (2012b).

Sequential games with incomplete information and
noisy inaccurate observation 2.1.  Introduction
In current modeling of incomplete information games, there is normally either
perfect or imperfect information. That is to say, either the action of the first
mover is accurately observed by the later movers, or it is not observed at all. For
instance, in a signaling game the action of the first moving player whose type is
unknown is accurately observed by the second moving player. After observing
the action of the first mover, the second mover uses game theoretic reasoning
and the Bayes theorem to update his prior belief about the type of the first
mover. He then chooses his optimal strategy given his posterior belief about the
type of the first mover. The equilibrium so obtained is termed perfect Bayesian
equilibrium. On the other hand, in an incomplete and imperfect information
sequential game or an incomplete information simultaneous game, the action of
the player whose type is unknown is not observed by the other player at all. The
other player chooses his strategy given his prior belief about the type of the
player with an unknown type. The equilibrium so obtained is termed Bayesian
Nash equilibrium.
The assumption that the action of the first mover is either accurately observed
or not observed at all is too restrictive. Given this assumption, there is no
statistical inference and decision involved concerning the action of the first
mover whose type is unknown. This is despite the use of Bayes theorem in
updating beliefs about the possible types of the first moving player.
Sequential games with incomplete information and noisy inaccurate
observation generalize the current sequential games framework in which there is
either perfect information or imperfect information. Here the other player
observes inaccurately the action of the player with an unknown type. Inaccurate
observation means that the other player observes the action of the player with an
unknown type with a noise term and there is a positive probability that he will
make an observational error due to the noise term.

Since 1995, there have been many studies of games with noisy inaccurate
observation. One of the focuses is the value of commitment by the first mover1
There are also efforts to analyze games with incomplete information and noisy
inaccurate observation.2 So far, however, noone has investigated the optimality
of the statistical decision rules used in these games. This chapter will fill in this
gap.
This chapter uses Bayesian equilibrium by iterative conjectures to analyze an
inflation expectation game of incomplete information and noisy inaccurate
observation. The Bayesian iterative conjecture algorithm allows beliefs to be
endogenized in game theoretic context. This chapter also illustrates and proves
that the Bayesian iterative conjecture algorithm decision rule is a Bayes
(undominated) decision rule in game theoretic context, that is, the Bayesian
iterative conjecture algorithm attains the supremum of the expected objective
function (or the infimum of the expected loss function) of the agent making the
inference.
In a sequential game with incomplete information and noisy inaccurate
observations, the second mover must make statistical inferences on the actions of
the first moving player with an unknown type. He does so based upon two
sources of information. One source of information is the inaccurate observations
on the actions of the first mover. This is the sample data. The other source of
information is the evidence which concerns the motive of the first mover
constructed through game theoretic reasoning, based upon knowledge such as
the prior distribution function on the type of the first mover and the structure of
the game. This source of information gives a belief about the probability of
possible actions taken by the first mover. This belief is the prior predictive
distribution function or conjecture on the actions of the first mover.
Given the need for statistical inferences and decisions, the player has to decide
which statistical decision rule to use. Since in games theory the basic assumption
is that the player is rational, that is, he optimizes, the decision rule has to be a
Bayes decision rule. A decision rule is a Bayes decision rule if it attains the
infimum of the expected loss function or the supremum of the expected utility
function.3 Furthermore, given the knowledge a player has about the game, he
will form a prior predictive distribution function on the possible actions of the
other player. There are many ways to construct a prior distribution function.
Therefore, in an incomplete information game with noisy inaccurate
observations, there could be a large number of equilibriums given that there are
many statistical decision rules and many different prior beliefs. The Bayesian
iterative conjecture algorithm narrows down the number of equilibriums in such

games normally to one through the use of first order uninformative conjectures.
2.2.  An inflationary game
This section presents an inflationary expectation game with noisy inaccurate
observations.4 There are two players: the government and the representative
economic agent. The government moves first by setting the monetary growth
rate, which determines the rate of inflation in the economy. The economic agent
observes inaccurately the inflation rate due to a confounding noise term. Then
the economic agent infers about the inflation rate using the Bayesian iterative
conjecture algorithm. The structure of the game is common knowledge. Nature
chooses the type of government from a predetermined prior distribution function
which is common knowledge. Once chosen, the type of government is private
knowledge, revealed to the government but not to the agent. The type of
economic agent is common knowledge. Therefore, the economic agent has to
make inferences on both the type and actions of the government. The
distribution function of the noise term that confounds the observation of the
economic agent of the actual inflation rate is common knowledge.
π, the rate of inflation, is the action of the government. ∏, the inferred rate of
inflation, is the action of the economic agent.
The payoff function of the economic agent is:
The payoff function of the agent is common knowledge.
The utility function of government is:
a measures the preference of the government for the employment of the
stimulating effect of inflationary surprises. a decides the type of government.
The government knows the value of a but the economic agent does not know the
value of a. a has a normal distribution which is common knowledge: 
a determines the willingness of the government to accept a tradeoff between
higher inflation and a higher employment level. a > 0 means that the government

has a preference for an inflation-generated increase in employment and output. a
< 0 means that the government has a preference for deflation.
The action of the government is inaccurately observed by the economic agent
with a noise term: 
X is the observation of the economic agent and e is the noise term. e has a
normal 
distribution 
which 
is 
common 
knowledge: 
e could be the change in real relative prices that confounds the observation on
the inflation rate. The above leads to the following sampling distribution on X: 
Using the Bayesian iterative conjecture algorithm, the economic agent starts
with a first order uninformative prior on the distribution of π. With an
uninformative prior, Bayesian approach yields results that are the same as that of
the maximum likelihood approach. So, with the first order uninformative prior,
the economic agent solves: 
where f(π | X) is the likelihood function: 
The first order condition is:
The optimal solution is:
The stochastic reaction function is:
The government, being the first mover in the game, anticipates the inference and
reaction 
of 
the 
economic 
agent 
and 
solves: 
The optimal solution is:
The second order prior held by the agent is:

This is a constant. Such being the case, the economic agent sets: 
Given Π = 0, the government solves:
The optimal action for the government is:
The third order prior held by the economic agents is:
Combining the prior and likelihood functions leads to the posterior distribution
function of the economic agent on π: 
where
and
and
In determining the optimal response to inflation, the economic agent solves: 
The first order condition is:

The optimal solution is:
and the stochastic reaction function is:
The government, being the first mover in this inflationary belief game,
anticipates the reaction of the economic agent. In determining the optimal
inflation 
rate, 
the 
government 
solves: 
The optimal solution is:
The fourth order prior density function of the economic agent on the inflation
rate is: 
with mean
and variance
Combining the prior and likelihood functions leads to the following posterior
distribution 
function 
of 
the 
economic 
agent 
on 
π: 
where
and

and
In determining the optimal response to inflation, the economic agent solves: 
The first order condition is:
The optimal solution is:
and the stochastic reaction function is:
The government, being the first mover in this inflationary belief game,
anticipates the reaction of the economic agent. In determining the optimal
inflation 
rate, 
the 
government 
solves: 
The optimal solution is:
The fifth order prior is therefore:

with mean
and variance
Note that the fifth order prior is identical to the fourth order prior. The
conjectures converge at this point.
Now let the process of iterative conjecturing start from the other first order
uninformative conjecture, the one which is held by the government about the
action of the economic agent: 
In the above equation, ∏* is a constant and
Given the first order uninformative conjecture, the government solves: 
Since Π* is a constant, the optimal action for the government is: 
From here on, this process of conjectures is identical to the previous process of
conjectures starting with the third order conjectures onward, and the two
processes have the same convergent conjectures and equilibrium. This is not
surprising given that in a noisy observation incomplete information game, the
focus of conjecturing is on the prior distribution function of the action of the first
mover.
At Bayesian equilibrium by iterative conjectures, the two equations that
simultaneously determine ψ and α are: 
and
For analytical convenience, they are rewritten as:
G:

H:
Using the implicit function theorem, the following results are derived: 

Greater uncertainty about the type of the government increases the prior
uncertainty about the action of the government. This leads to a greater reliance
on the data and lesser reliance on the prior.
Greater variations in the noise term that clouds the observation lead to a lesser
reliance on the data and a greater reliance on the prior. That leads to a greater
variation in the inflation rate given the variation in the type of government, as
the government takes advantage of the greater inaccuracy of inflationary
observations by the economic agent. The economic agent anticipates this and
adjusts his conjecture accordingly.
Figure 2.1 illustrates the relationship between the relative sizes of variance of
the convergent prior distribution function on action and the variance of the
distribution function of the noise term and the equilibrium of the game.
The forty-degree straight line through the origin is the reaction function of the
agent when he bases his inference totally on the inaccurate observation and not
at all on his prior distribution function on the action of the government. In this
case: 
. The line is at a tangent to the in difference curve of the
government at the point of origin. The equilibrium is π = ∏ = 0.

Figure 2.1
Relative uncertainty in type and action and equilibrium
The horizontal straight line at ∏ = a is the reaction function of the agent when
he bases his inference totally on the prior distribution function on the action of
the government and not at all on his observations. In this case: 
. The
line is at a tangent to the indifference curve of the government at the point (π =
a, ∏ = a). The equilibrium is π = ∏ = a.
The straight line α =  is the reaction function of the agent when he bases his
inference equally on his inaccurate observations and the prior distribution
function on the actions of the government. In this case: 
. The line is
at a tangent to the indifference curve of the government at the point 
. The equilibrium is 
.
Indeterminacy of complete and perfect information
sequential games
This sub-section takes a new look at sequential games of complete and perfect
information. It shows that the current understanding of sequential games of
complete and perfect information as embodied in the solution method of
backward induction is incomplete. It is just one of many possibilities.
To start with, what does it mean to have complete and perfect information? It
means that the variance of the prior on type and the variance of the prior on
action are both zero or are approaching zero. But then that raises the statistical
decision theoretic question; which variance is smaller? Or to put it another way,
which piece of information should the agent have greater confidence in; the prior
on type or the prior on action? The inflationary expectation game example
presented previously provides an illustration.
By letting the noise term variance (τ) tend to zero and the type prior
distribution function variance (γ) tend to zero, the variance of the convergent
prior distribution function on action (ψ) tends to zero as well. The noisy
observation becomes a complete information game with perfect information. The
equilibrium π and Π depend upon the value of 
.
If 
, then Π = π = 0. This is the current backward induction solution

of a sequential game of complete and perfect information. Note that in a
sequential game of complete and perfect information, the agent solves: 
and sets
The government solves:
and sets
The solution is therefore Π = π = 0.
If 
 = 0, then Π = π = a. This is the current solution of a sequential
game of complete and imperfect information or a simultaneous game. Note that
in a sequential game of complete and imperfect information (and simultaneous
game as well), the agent solves: 
and sets
The government solves:
and sets
The solution is therefore Π = π = a.
However, 
 could take on any value from 0 to 1. For instance, it could
be that 
 = 0.5. In this case, 
. Figure 2.1 illustrates the three cases
of 
 equal to 0, 0.5 and 1.
The relative sizes of the variance of the convergent equilibrium prior
distribution function on the action of player 1 and the variance of the distribution
function of the noise term decide the value of a. It therefore also decides whether

the equilibrium of the noisy inaccurate observation sequential game will be
closer to the perfect information game or the imperfect information game. This
is true even when both variances approach zero in absolute size.
The example illustrates that the incomplete information and noisy inaccurate
observation sequential game generalizes the two distinct frameworks of
incomplete information sequential games with imperfect information or
incomplete information simultaneous games (with Bayesian Nash equilibrium as
the dominant solution concept), and incomplete information sequential games
with perfect information (with perfect Bayesian equilibrium as the dominant
solution concept).
The value of 
 could be any point in [0,1]. This gives rise to
indeterminacy in the equilibrium of the game. The root cause is that the relative
weight to be assigned to conjectures or observations in the Bayesian statistical
decision process of this game has not been specified. Viewing complete and
perfect information as a limiting case of incomplete information and noisy
inaccurate observation enables one to discern the issue of statistical decision
theoretic indeterminacy in games of complete and perfect information.
Efficiency of decision rule
This sub-section gives an illustration of the efficiency of the Bayesian iterative
conjecture algorithm as a decision rule. It compares the expected payoff of an
agent using the Bayesian iterative conjecture algorithm to that of an agent using
the maximum likelihood approach, under the assumption that the decision rule of
the agent making the inference is common knowledge. It shows that the agent
using the Bayesian iterative conjecture approach attains a higher expected payoff
than the agent using the maximum likelihood approach.
The expected utility of the economic agent in the Bayesian equilibrium by
iterative conjectures is: 
If instead of the Bayesian iterative conjecture algorithm, the second mover
makes inferences and decisions using the maximum likelihood estimation
approach, and this is common knowledge, what is his expected utility? The
economic 
agent 
makes 
use 
of 
the 
likelihood 
function: 

and sets
The government, being the first mover in the game, anticipates the inference and
reaction 
of 
the 
economic 
agent 
and 
solves: 
The optimal solution is:
The expected payoff of the economic agent is:
Note that
since
and therefore
The economic agent who uses the Bayesian iterative conjecture decision rule
attains a higher payoff than the economic agent who uses the maximum
likelihood approach.
2.3.  Bayesian iterative conjecture algorithm as a
Bayes decision rule This section formally proves that
the Bayesian equilibrium iterative conjecture
approach is a Bayes (undominated) decision rule for

sequential games with incomplete information and
noisy inaccurate observations under the assumption
that the decision rule of the player making the
inference is common knowledge. A statistical decision
rule is a Bayes decision rule if it attains the infimum
of the expected loss function or the supremum of the
expected utility function and therefore there is no
other decision rule that attains a lower expected loss
or higher expected utility.
Proposition 1:
The Bayesian iterative conjecture algorithm is a Bayes (undominated) statistical
decision rule when the statistical decision rule of the player making the
inference is common knowledge.
Proof:
Let A1 be the action space of the first mover, A2 be the action space of the
second mover, ε be the noise term that confounds the first mover’s action when
observed by the second mover, T1 be the type space of the first mover, u1 be the
payoff function of the first mover, u2 be the payoff function of the second
mover, and f(ε) be the distribution function of the noise term, which is common
knowledge though the realization of the noise term is known by none. The type
of the first mover t1 is privately known by the first mover. The second mover’s
belief on the type of the first mover p2(t1) describes his uncertainty about the
first mover’s possible type. The likelihood function l2(a1 + ε|a1) describes the
second mover’s uncertainty about the action of the first mover given the noisy
observation on the action of the first mover.
In Bayesian equilibrium by iterative conjectures, the convergent prior
distribution function best predicts the strategy of the first mover given his type.
That is, 
where 
 is the optimal course of action for the first mover given his type.
The second mover updates his prior belief using the Bayes’ rule. That is: 

if the action space is discrete and:
if the action space is continuous.
Since the first mover knows the decision rule of the second mover, in
Bayesian 
equilibrium 
by 
iterative 
conjectures, 
 
solves: 
if the action space and noise space are discrete or:
if the action space and noise space are continuous.
In Bayesian equilibrium by iterative conjectures, 
 solves: 
where
if the action space is discrete or:
where
if the action space is continuous.
Therefore, the expected utility of the second mover using the Bayesian

equilibrium 
by 
iterative 
conjectures 
decision 
rule 
is: 
if the action space is discrete or:
if the action space is continuous.
Q.E.D.
Proposition 1 ensures the player who needs to make statistical inferences and
decisions has no incentive to choose other approaches over Bayesian equilibrium
by the iterative conjecture approach.
2.4.  Conclusions
Bayesian equilibrium by iterative conjectures achieves rationality not only in
action/strategy and beliefs, both prior and posterior. It also attains rationality in
(statistical) decision rule. It narrows down the number of equilibriums, normally
to one, by eliminating equilibriums that are inconsistent with their associated
beliefs, as well as equilibrium consistent beliefs that do not start with first order
uninformative conjectures. Consequently, as shown in the inflationary
expectation game example, it allows insightful and interesting comparative static
exercises to be performed for both beliefs and strategies.
Bayesian equilibrium by iterative conjectures approach is a Bayes decision
rule, that is, it is not dominated by any other decision rule. Therefore, players
making statistical inferences and decisions have no incentive to prefer other
decision rules to them. That is to say, Bayesian equilibrium by iterative
conjectures is firmly grounded on the foundation of Bayesian statistical decision
theory. That firm statistical decision theoretic foundation also allows Bayesian
equilibrium by the iterative conjecture approach to discern the indeterminacy of
a complete and perfect information game hitherto not noticed by games theory

researchers and practitioners.
Notes
1.  Refer to Bagwell (1995), Vardy (2003), Bhaskar (2009).
2.  Refer to Maggi (1999) and de Huan, Offerman and Sloof (2011).
3.  Other criteria for selecting decision rule include the minimax rule and admissibility. Refer to Berger
(1980).
4.  Refer to Dotsey and King (1987), Sargent (1986) for the theory of rational expectations of inflation.

Sequential games with perfect and imperfect
information
3.1.  Introduction
This chapter uses the Bayesian iterative conjecture algorithm to solve sequential
games with perfect information, and sequential games with imperfect
information. It also discusses the relationships between Bayesian equilibrium by
iterative conjectures and sub-game perfect equilibrium and perfect Bayesian
equilibrium. The focus of the chapter is on the solution of sequential games with
incomplete and perfect information by the Bayesian iterative conjecture
approach. The chapter illustrates the power of the Bayesian iterative conjecture
algorithm by solving a two-sided incomplete and perfect information sequential
game, a daunting task to the current perfect Bayesian equilibrium-based
approach.
In the current Nash equilibrium-based games theory, the solution algorithm of
sequential games with incomplete and perfect information solves a game by
checking if a combination of strategies and (posterior) beliefs (on types) of
players constitutes an equilibrium. Implicit in this algorithm is the assumption
that the players know which equilibrium they are in and know the equilibrium
strategies and beliefs of the other players. The assumption that players know the
equilibrium of the game and strategies and beliefs of the other players removes
much of the inherent uncertainty about the strategies of the other players in
games of incomplete information. This makes computation easy and gives the
method its popular appeal. However, the assumption that the players know the
equilibrium that they are in does not make sense when there are multiple
equilibriums. And yet, by the perfect Bayesian equilibrium approach, sequential
games with incomplete and perfect information typically have multiple
equilibriums.

There is another problem with the current Nash equilibrium-based approach in
the solution of sequential games with incomplete and perfect information. In a
sequential game of incomplete and perfect information, there is uncertainty
about the type of some of the players. Therefore, despite the fact that the player
observes the actions of a player of an unknown type perfectly, he must still infer
about the strategy of each type through game theoretic reasoning. Also, the
player of an unknown type must also conjecture about the strategy and
conjectures of the other players when selecting his strategy. Consequently,
unlike a sequential game of complete and perfect information, the player cannot
condition his strategy upon the other players’ strategy: the player of a known
type cannot do so as the other players have more than one type, and the player
with a known type observes the other players’ actions but not their strategy, and
the player of an unknown type cannot do so as he has to infer about the
conjectures or beliefs (which he does not observe) and strategies (which depends
upon the conjectures) of the other players.
The Bayesian iterative conjecture algorithm approach, in contrast, investigates
and models how the conjectures of players about the strategies of the other
players and their conjectures converge. The solution algorithm for sequential
games with incomplete and perfect information is exactly the same as that for
the previous chapter’s incomplete information and noisy inaccurate observation
sequential games. However, for sequential games with incomplete but perfect
information, since the players make perfect observations of the action (perfect
information), there is no need to make a Bayesian statistical inference on it.
Although, there is still the need to make Bayesian statistical inferences and
decisions on the strategies and types of other players.
In solving sequential games with incomplete and perfect information, the
Bayesian iterative conjecture algorithm approach starts with first order
uninformative conjectures, assuming that players do not know the other players’
strategy or the equilibrium of the game, though they observe perfectly the
actions of the other players. Conjectures are updated using game theoretic and
Bayesian statistical decision theoretic reasoning until a convergence emerges
which then defines the BEIC.
Another important difference between the BEIC approach and the perfect
Bayesian equilibrium-based approach is that when having pooling equilibrium,
current games theory needs to specify probability beliefs on off equilibrium
paths. When Harsanyi (1967, 1968a, b) first introduced his transformation of
incomplete information games and called them Bayesian games, Kadane and
Larkey (1982a, b) raised the objection that these games are not really Bayesian
as there is no subject probability. Harsanyi (1982a, b) replied that he was an

objective Bayesian who believed that only an objective prior should be used.
Yet, this issue soon resurfaced. Subject probability was resurrected in the
Harsanyi incomplete information games in the form of off equilibrium beliefs.
In contrast to perfect Bayesian equilibrium and its many refinements, the
BEIC approach uses a hierarchy of conjectures; first order uninformative prior
conjectures and higher order conjectures, the highest order conjectures being the
set of convergent conjectures (if it exists). The enforced use of first order
uninformative conjectures ensures that all possible pathways are considered and
no pathway is left unexplored. Consequently, the convergent conjectures and
their corresponding equilibrium, either separating or pooling equilibrium, are
supported by lower level conjectures, and there is no need to specifically
determine off equilibrium path beliefs as they are already given within the
hierarchy of conjectures.
3.2.  The Bayesian iterative conjecture algorithm, sub-
game perfect equilibrium and perfect Bayesian
equilibrium Sequential games with perfect
information are typically solved through backward
induction. This section illustrates that the Bayesian
iterative conjecture algorithm could handle the task
equally well. This section shows that the Bayesian
iterative conjecture algorithm eliminates equilibriums
based upon non-credible threats, and achieves the
objective of sub-game perfect equilibrium refinement.
The section also shows that the Bayesian iterative
conjecture algorithm is a stronger selection criterion
than sub-game perfect equilibrium.
Consider the following example:

Figure 3.1
A sequential game
Table 3.1
Normal form of the game in Figure 3.1
Player 2
Player 1
L (y)
R (1-y)
U (x)
3, 5
3, 5
D (1-x)
5, 4
1, 2
The two pure strategy Nash equilibriums are (D, L) and (U, R). Yet, (U, R) is
based upon a non-credible threat.
The BEIC solution:
Table 3.2
BEIC for the game in Figure 3.1
O d
f C
j
t
P
b bilit X
P
b bilit Y

Order of Conjectures
Probability X
Probability Y
1
0.5
0.5
2
0.5
1
3
0
1
4
0
1
Figure 3.2
An imperfect information game
The BEIC approach rules out the Nash equilibrium based on a non-credible
threat. The Bayesian iterative conjecture algorithm achieves the objective of the
refinement of sub-game perfect equilibrium.
Consider the following game:
There are two (pure strategy) Nash equilibriums, (U, R) and (D, L). Both are
sub-game perfect equilibriums as there is no sub-game. However, R is a weakly
dominated strategy. The BEIC approach eliminates (U, R) and is a stronger
selection criterion than sub-game perfect equilibrium.
Table 3.3
Normal form of the game in Figure 3.2
Player 2
Player 1
L (y)
R (1-y)

U (x)
5, 5
3, 5
D (1-x)
8, 1
2, 0
Table 3.4
BEIC for the game in Figure 3.2
Order of Conjectures
Probability X
Probability Y
1
0.5
0.5
2
0
1
3
0
1
Bayesian equilibrium by iterative conjectures is a refinement of perfect
Bayesian equilibrium.
Definition 1:
In a sequential game of incomplete information with N players, and each player
with Nk types, there are 
 possible types of players. As each type of each
player has Tl strategies, there are 
 sets of strategies, Ai, where i =
1,2,3,...,S. The player k chooses action ai ∈ Ai. There are T utility functions, Ul
(a1, a2,...,aS).
A set of priors or conjectures in this game specifies the probability distribution
of each ai ∈ Ai by pi, where ∑ pi = 1 if the strategy space is discrete and ∫ pi = 1
if the strategy space is continuous.
The Bayesian equilibrium by iterative conjectures of such a game has S first
order uninformative priors or conjectures, denoted as 
, where the superscript
identifies the order of conjectures. An uninformative prior or conjecture in this
game assigns to each ai ∈ Ai equal probability.
Given, 
, if an Āi exists and āi ∈ Āi ∈ Ai and 
where âi ∉ Āi, then 
 is updated such that probability one is assigned to Āi and

equal probability is assigned to individual āi ∈ Āi. In the case where the set Āi
has only one element which is āi, and 
 
, then 
 is updated such that probability one is
assigned to ai. In the case where the set of Ai equals the set of Ai, then there is no
updating and 
 = 
.
The updating of higher order conjectures from 
 to 
 and onwards, follows
the same procedure. A BEIC is achieved when there is a convergence in the
conjectures, that is, 
.
Recall that in a perfect Bayesian equilibrium, players must have beliefs about
the strategies of the other players, and the players’ strategies must be optimal
given the players’ beliefs and the other players’ subsequent strategies; on the
equilibrium path, beliefs are determined by the players’ equilibrium strategies
and off the equilibrium path, beliefs are determined by the players’ equilibrium
strategies where possible.1
Proposition 2:
BEIC is a refinement of perfect Bayesian equilibrium.
Proof:
As the set of inequalities Ul a1, a2,…, āi,…, as; p1, p2,…, ps  > Ul a1, a2,…,
âi,…, as; p1, p2,…, ps  holds for all i given the set of pi which specifies the
probability distribution of ai, and 
 in a Bayesian
equilibrium by iterative conjectures, the beliefs are consistent with the
equilibrium and the associated strategies. A Bayesian equilibrium by iterative
conjectures is therefore a perfect Bayesian equilibrium.
Furthermore, the restriction that the conjectures starting with first order
uninformative conjectures narrows down the set of equilibriums of BEIC to a
sub-set of perfect Bayesian equilibrium. BEIC is therefore a refinement of
perfect Bayesian equilibrium.
Q. E. D.
To illustrate the above point, consider the game in Figure 3.3: 

Figure 3.3
A sequential game with imperfect information 12
Table 3.5
Normal form representation of the game in Figure 3.3
Player 2
Player 1
L’ (z)
R’ (1-z)
L (x)
2, 1
0, 0
M (y)
0, 2
0, 1
R (1-x-y)
1, 3
1, 3
The BEIC solution specifies the strategies and beliefs of the players at
equilibrium.
As another illustration, consider the game in Figure 3.4.
Let the probability that player 1 plays D be x and the probability that he plays
A be 1-x, the probability that player 2 plays L be y and the probability that he
plays R be 1-y and, the probability that player 3 plays L’ be z and the probability
that he plays R’ be 1-z.
Table 3.6
BEIC solution of the game in Figure 3.3
Order of Conjectures
Pr (x)
Pr (y)
Pr (z)

1
1/3
1/3
1/2
2
1/2
0
1
3
1
0
1
1 4
1
0
1
Figure 3.4
A sequential game with imperfect information 23
Table 3.7
Normal form representation of the game in Figure 3.4 when
player 1 plays D
Player 3
Player 2
L’ (z)
R’ (1-z)
L (y)
1, 2, 1
3, 3, 3
R (1-y)
0, 1, 2
0, 1, 1
Normal form representation of the game in Figure 3.4 when

Table 3.8
player 1 plays A
Player 3
Player 2
L’ (z)
R’ (1-z)
L (y)
2, 0, 0
2, 0, 0
R (1-y)
2, 0, 0
2, 0, 0
Table 3.9
BEIC solution of the game in Figure 3.4
Order of Conjectures
Pr (x)
Pr (y)
Pr (z)
1
1/2
1/2
1/2
2
1
1
0
3
0
1
0
4
0
1
0
The BEIC solution specifies the strategies and beliefs of the players at
equilibrium: Consider the game in Figure 3.5. There are two pure strategy Nash
equilibriums: (L1, R2, R3) and (R1, R2, L3). (R1, R2, L3) is a perfect Bayesian
equilibrium and sequential equilibrium, while (L1, R2, R3) is not. (L1, R2, R3)
prescribes a non-optimal strategy R2 for player 2.4
Let the probability that player 1 plays L1 be x, the probability that player 2
plays L2 be y and the probability that player 3 plays L3 be z. The BEIC
approach selects the perfect Bayesian equilibrium among Nash equilibriums.

Figure 3.5
A sequential game with imperfect information 3.
Table 3.10
BEIC solution of the game in Figure 3.5
Order of Conjectures
Pr (x)
Pr (y)
Pr (z)
1
1/2
1/2
1/2
2
1/2
1
0
3
0
1
0
4
0
1
1
5
0
0
1
6
0
0
1
3.3  Solving sequential games of incomplete and
perfect information This section compares the
solutions achieved under the BEIC approach and the
perfect Bayesian equilibrium approach (including its

two popular refinements, sequential equilibrium and
the intuitive criterion). The BEIC approach has at
least three advantages over the perfect Bayesian
equilibrium approach: it normally generates only an
intuitively compelling unique equilibrium; it does not
involve the ad hoc specification of off-equilibrium
beliefs; and it resolves inconsistencies in equilibrium
results between sub-game perfect equilibrium (by
backward induction) and perfect Bayesian
equilibrium (and sequential equilibrium and intuitive
criterion).
Perfect Bayesian equilibrium solves a sequential game of incomplete
information by asking if a certain combination of strategies and beliefs of the
players constitute an equilibrium. The process of how the players form their
beliefs is not specified, except the requirements that they be consistent with the
equilibrium strategies of the players and abide by the Bayes’ theorem in
updating.5 A set of strategies and beliefs constitute a perfect Bayesian
equilibrium, no matter how the beliefs came into being. Consequently, typically
there exist multiple equilibriums and many refinements are resorted to for
narrowing down the set of equilibriums.
The BEIC approach, in contrast, solves a sequential game with incomplete
and perfect information by starting from the assumption that players neither
know the other players’ strategy nor the equilibrium of the game through the use
of first order uninformative conjectures. An uninformative conjecture assigns
equal probabilities to all possible courses of actions or strategies. Conjectures are
then updated using game theoretic and Bayesian statistical decision theoretic
reasoning (including but not confined to the use of Bayes’ theorem) until a
convergence of conjectures emerges which then defines a BEIC. The BEIC
approach therefore produces a hierarchy of conjectures: first order uninformative
prior conjectures and higher order conjectures, with the highest order conjectures
being the set of convergent conjectures (if it exists).6
There are two compelling reasons to start with first order uninformative
conjectures. One is to let the game solve itself and selects its own equilibrium

strategies and convergent conjectures, rather than having the equilibriums being
dictated by the informative first order conjectures of the agents. The natural
emergence of a set of convergent informative conjectures and its associated
equilibrium strategies from the uninformative first order conjectures is the
quintessence of the Bayesian equilibrium by the iterative conjecture approach.
The second reason for using the first order uninformative conjectures is to
ensure that every information set and pathway is reached with equal probability
for the initial rounds of conjectural reasoning, so that the process of Bayesian
iterative conjecture reasoning explores every possible path. This inherent built-in
mechanism of the BEIC approach contrasts sharply with the handling of off
equilibrium path beliefs in the perfect Bayesian equilibrium approach, which
either leaves the off equilibrium path beliefs undefined, or refines them by
myriads of ad hoc refinement criteria. That is to say, the specification of off
equilibrium path beliefs is a major problem for the perfect Bayesian equilibrium
approach. In contrast, in Bayesian equilibrium by iterative conjectures, the
convergent conjectures are supported by lower level conjectures, the lowest level
conjectures being the uninformative first order conjectures, which cover all
possible strategies and pathways, and therefore off equilibrium paths beliefs are
automatically generated in the process and there is no need for ad hoc
specification of off equilibrium beliefs.
Very often there are too many perfect Bayesian equilibriums. Consequently,
games theorists have invented many refinements. Sequential equilibrium is
probably the most popular refinement of perfect Bayesian equilibrium.7 Yet even
sequential equilibrium is still at times too weak for equilibrium selection.
Among the many refinements of sequential equilibrium, the intuitive criterion
stood out for its compelling reasoning and widespread applications, especially in
signaling games.8 The following examples contrast the two approaches, the
Bayesian equilibrium by iterative conjectures and the perfect Bayesian
equilibrium (and sequential equilibrium) approach as refined by the intuitive
criterion.
Coordination game
Consider the signaling game as depicted in Figure 3.6.
The probability of player 1 being type 1 and type 2 is r and 1-r. There are four
perfect Bayesian equilibriums: i.   (L, R; u(L), d(R)). This equilibrium is socially
sub-optimal.

ii.  (R, L; d(L), u(R)). This equilibrium is socially optimal.
Figure 3.6
A coordination signaling game
iii. Pooling equilibrium (R, R; u(L), u(R); r>1/6, p>5/6).
iv. Pooling equilibrium (L, L; d(L), d(R); r<5/6, q<1/6).
The two pooling equilibriums are ruled out by the intuitive criterion. The
separating equilibriums do not change as r changes.
Solving by the BEIC approach: let the probability that the receiver plays U
when L is observed be a and the probability that the receiver plays U when R is
observed be b. Let the probability that the type 1 sender plays L be x and the
probability that the type 2 sender plays L be y.
The reaction functions are:
Type 1 sender plays L if 2a + (1 – a) > 5b or  +  > b. Type 1 sender is
indifferent between playing L or playing R if 2a + (1 – a) = 5b or  +  = b.
Type 1 sender plays R if 2a + (1 – a) < 5b or  +  <b.
Type 2 sender plays L if 5(1 – a) > b + 2(1 – b) or  +  > a. Type 2 sender is

indifferent between playing L or playing R if 5(1 – a) = b + 2(1 – b) or  +  =
a. Type 2 sender plays R if 5(1 – a) < b + 2(1 – b) or  +  < a.
When L is observed, the receiver plays U if 2xr > xr + 5y (1 – r) or xr > 5y(1 –
r). The receiver is indifferent between playing U or D if 2xr = xr + 5y(1 – r) or
xr = 5y(1 – r). The receiver plays D if 2xr < xr + 5y(1 – r) or xr > 5y(1 – r).
When R is observed, the receiver plays U if 5(1 – x) r + (1 – y)(1 – r) > 2(1 –
y)(1 – r) or 5(1 – x) r > (1 – y)(1 – r). When R is observed, the receiver is
indifferent between playing U or playing D if 5(1 – x) r + (1 – y)(1 – r) = 2(1 –
y) (1 – r) or if 5(1 – x) r = (1 – y)(1 – r). When R is observed, the receiver plays
D if 5(1 – x) r + (1 – y)(1 – r) < 2(1 – y) (1 – r) or if 5(1 – x) r < (1 – y)(1 – r).
The Bayesian iterative conjecture approach solutions are:
When r<1/6, given the first order conjectures that x=1/2 and y=1/2, the
receiver plays D when L is observed and D when R is observed. Anticipating
that, type 1 sender plays L and type 2 sender plays L. The receiver updates his
conjectures to x=1 and y=1 and plays D(L). Anticipating that, type 1 sender
plays L and type 2 sender plays L. The conjectures converge here. The BEIC is
(L, L; D(L), D(R)).
When r=1/6, given the first order conjectures that x=1/2 and y=1/2, the
receiver plays D when L is observed and is indifferent between U and D when R
is observed. Anticipating that, type 1 sender plays R and type 2 sender plays L.
The receiver updates his conjectures to x=0 and y=1 and plays D(L) and U(R).
Anticipating that, type 1 sender plays R and type 2 sender plays L. At this point
the conjectures converge. The BEIC is (R, L; D(L), U(R)).
When 1/6<r<5/6, given the first order conjectures that x=1/2 and y=1/2, the
receiver plays D when L is observed and U when R is observed. Anticipating
that, type 1 sender plays R and type 2 sender plays L. The receiver updates his
conjectures to x=0 and y=1 and plays D(L) and U(R). Anticipating that, type 1
sender plays R and type 2 sender plays L. The conjectures converge here. The
BEIC is (R, L; D(L), U(R)).
When r=5/6, given the first order conjectures that x=1/2 and y=1/2, the
receiver is indifferent between U and D when L is observed and plays U when R
is observed. Anticipating that, type 1 sender plays R and type 2 sender plays L.
The receiver updates his conjectures to x=0 and y=1 and plays D(L) and U(R).
Anticipating that, type 1 sender plays R and type 2 sender plays L. The
conjectures converge at this point. The BEIC is (R, L; D(L), U(R)).
When r>5/6, given the first order conjectures that x=1/2 and y=1/2, the
receiver plays U when L is observed and U when R is observed. Anticipating

that, type 1 sender plays R and type 2 sender plays R. The receiver updates his
conjectures to x=0 and y=0 and plays U(R). The conjectures converge here. The
BEIC is (R, R; D(L), U(R)).
By the BEIC approach, the selection of equilibriums depends on the value of
r. In contrast, the PBE approach has separating equilibriums that have nothing to
do with r. The two extreme cases of r approaching one and r approaching zero
help to shed light on this distinction between the two approaches. When r
approaches one, the BEIC is (R, R; U(L), U(R)). It is equilibrium iii of the PBE
approach, which is ruled out by the intuitive criterion. Note that the BEIC for
this limiting case agrees with the equilibrium for the sequential complete and
perfect information game, which is represented by figure 3.7. The equilibrium is
(R; u(L), u(R)) which is derived through backward induction.
Figure 3.7
The game in Figure 3.6 when r equals 1
When r approaches zero, the BEIC is (L, L; D(L), D(R)). It is equilibrium iv
of the PBE approach, which is ruled out by the intuitive criterion. Note that the
BEIC for this limiting case agrees with the equilibrium for the sequential
complete and perfect information game, which is represented by Figure 3.8.
The equilibrium is (L; d(L), d(R)) which is derived through backward
induction.
The above example illustrates the BEIC approach to solving a game of
incomplete and perfect information. It also illuminates the relationship between
incomplete and perfect information sequential games and complete and perfect

information sequential games. When the variance of type tends to zero, a
sequential game with incomplete and perfect information becomes a sequential
game with complete and perfect information. The equilibrium of the former
should be equal to the equilibrium of the latter in the limiting case. The BEIC
approach satisfies this requirement.
Figure 3.8
The game in Figure 3.6 when r equals 0
For further illustration, the following analysis focuses on the previous game
where 0 ≤ r < 
.9 The following two Figures show the calculation of the
expected values of x and y.

Figure 3.9
Expected value of x

Figure 3.10
Expected value of y
The process of conjectures is:
Table 3.11
BEIC of the coordination signaling game in Figure 3.6
So the BEIC is (L, L; D(L), D(R)).10
3.4.  Multiple-sided incomplete information sequential
games with perfect information The Bayesian iterative
conjecture algorithm is powerful. It could analyze
multiple-sided incomplete information sequential
games quite easily. The analysis of these games is a
formidable, if not impossible, task for the perfect
Bayesian equilibrium-based approach. Consider the
two-sided incomplete information Beer-Quiche game
in Figure 3.11.
The game in Figure 3.11 is an extension of the famous Beer-Quiche game.
The left hand side of the game is the original Beer-Quiche game. In the game
there are two types of senders, wimpy and surly, and two types of receivers,
bully and patrolman. The probability of wimpy is 0.1 and the probability of surly
is 0.9. The bully type enjoys picking on the wimpy type. The patrolman type, on
the other hand, has the duty of challenging the surly type when surly orders beer

and only if surly orders beer. However, if patrolman challenges wimpy, then
patrolman is humiliated. The probability of bully is 0.1 and the probability of
patrolman is 0.9.
Figure 3.11
Two-sided incomplete information Beer-Quiche game
The perfect Bayesian equilibriums of the above game are:
1.  Quiche (wimpy), quiche (surly); no (quiche), no (beer), q1<=1/2; no (quiche),
duel (beer), q2<=1/2.
2.  Quiche (wimpy), quiche (surly), no (quiche), duel (beer), q1>=1/2; no
(quiche), duel (beer) q2<1/2.
The Bayesian iterative conjectures approach solution is presented below: Let the
probability that bully duels when beer is observed to be u, the probability that
bully duels when quiche is observed to be v, the probability that patrolman duels
when beer is observed to be s and the probability that patrolman duels when
quiche is observed to be t. Please note that when quiche is observed, patrolman
has the dominant strategy of choosing no duel and therefore t=0. Let the
probability that surly chooses beer be x and the probability that the wimpy
chooses beer be y.
Given u, v, s and t, surly chooses beer if

is indifferent if
and chooses quiche if
Given u, v, s and t, wimpy chooses beer if
is indifferent if
and chooses quiche if
When observing beer, bully does not duel if
is indifferent if
and duels if

When observing quiche bully does not duel if
is indifferent if
and duels if
When observing beer patrolman does not duel if
is indifferent if
and duels if
The process therefore converges with u=0, v=0, s=1, t=0, x=0 and y=0. Given
the high probability of meeting patrolman, surly chooses quiche. Consequently,
wimpy chooses quiche both for impersonating surly to avoid being challenged
by bully, and for his intrinsic preference for quiche. Bully chooses not to duel
when quiche is observed since the probability of meeting surly is high (0.9).
Now let the probability of bully be 0.9 and the probability of patrolman be
0.1.
The perfect Bayesian equilibriums are:

1.  Quiche (wimpy), quiche (surly); no (quiche), duel (beer), q1>=1/2; no
(quiche), duel (beer), q2<=1/2.
Table 3.12
BEIC solution of the extended Beer-Quiche game
This equilibrium is ruled out by the intuitive criterion.
2.  Quiche (wimpy), quiche (surly); no (quiche), duel (beer), q1>=1/2; no
(quiche), no (beer), q2>=1/2.
This equilibrium is ruled out by the intuitive criterion.
3.  Beer (wimpy), beer (surly); no (beer), duel (quiche), p1>=1/2), no (quiche),
duel (beer).
The solution by the Bayesian iterative conjecture approach is:
Given u, v, s and t, surly chooses beer if
is indifferent if
and chooses quiche if

Given u, v, s and t, wimpy chooses beer if
is indifferent if
and chooses quiche if
The reaction functions for bully and patrolman remain the same and are omitted
for the sake of brevity.
The process therefore converges with u=0, v=1, s=1, t=0, x=1 and y=1. Given
the high probability of meeting bully, surly chooses beer to signal his toughness.
Consequently, wimpy chooses beer to impersonate surly to avoid being
challenged by bully. Bully chooses not to duel when observing beer since the
probability of meeting surly is high (0.9). Needless to say, as the probability of
bully increases beyond 0.9 and approaches 1, the same equilibrium holds. That is
to say, in the limiting case when the probability of meeting patrolman vanishes,
the BEIC solution to the two-sided incomplete information extended Beer-
Quiche game agrees with the original Beer-Quiche game. The BEIC solution
sounds intuitive and compelling indeed.
As shown in the above example, the Bayesian iterative conjecture approach
allows two-sided incomplete information games to be analyzed in a general way
that avoids the generation of multiple equilibriums. The example has a unique
equilibrium and the solution is compellingly insightful and intuitive.
Table 3.13
BEIC solution of the extended Beer-Quiche game
(comparative statics variation)

3.5.  Conclusions
Is the current concept of rationality in games theory complete without defining
rationality in the processing of information and forming of conjectures?11 The
Bayesian iterative conjecture algorithm approach answers no, and attempts to fill
in the gap. Bayesian equilibrium by iterative conjectures specifies how rational
players in game theoretic situations form and update their conjectures.
Rationality in strategies and beliefs is achieved in Bayesian equilibrium by
iterative conjectures in a methodical way. It is therefore a useful refinement for
sequential games of incomplete information where the beliefs of players need to
be specified.
The BEIC approach is good in equilibrium selection. It rules out equilibrium
depending upon non-credible threats. In sequential games of incomplete
information, it normally narrows down the equilibriums to one and also picks the
most compelling equilibrium. Furthermore, the BEIC approach achieves
consistency in equilibrium results among different categories of games. When
the variance of type tends to zero, a sequential game with incomplete and perfect
information becomes a sequential game with complete and perfect information.
The equilibrium of the latter must be equal to the equilibrium of the former in
the limiting case. The BEIC approach passes this test while the PBE approach
fails to. This further confirms the superiority of the Bayesian iterative conjecture
algorithm approach.
Notes
1.    Refer to Fudenberg and Tirole (1990), Okada (2010) and Gibbons (1992).
2.    The example is from Gibbons (1992), p. 176.
3.    The example is in Gibbons (1992), p. 181.
4.    Refer to Okada (2010), p. 3.
5.    Refer to Fudenberg and Tirole (1990), Okada (2010).
6.    Refer to Teng (2012a, 2013).

7.    Refer to Kreps and Wilson (1982) and Okada (2010).
8.    Refer to Teng (2012a) for a full treatment of the game.
9.    Refer to Teng (2012a) for a full treatment of the game.
10.  Refer to Cho and Kreps (1987).
11.  Refer to Aumann and Dreze (2008).

Simultaneous games
4.1.  Introduction
The way the Nash equilibrium approach solves a complete information
simultaneous move game is to get the interaction points of the reaction
functions. Implicit in this solution algorithm is that there is perfect information
and the moves are sequential. That is what a reaction function means: the
reaction of one player to the action of another player. That implies perfect
information, as you have to observe the actions of the other party before you can
react to his actions. If there is simultaneity in moves and the players do not
observe the moves of the other players, then they cannot react to the actions of
the other players. In this situation, a player decides on his actions according to
his conjectures of the actions of the other players. It is clear that conjecture plays
a central role here. The reaction functions of a simultaneous game are therefore
not really reaction functions as those of a perfect information sequential game,
and are best named as virtual reaction functions for differentiation from the real
reaction functions of a perfect information sequential game.
In a simultaneous move game, none of the players observe what the other
players are doing and they all make their decisions without knowledge of the
moves of the other players and all these are common knowledge. By the very
definition of simultaneous move, even if one of players plays a particular
equilibrium strategy prescribed by the concept of Nash equilibrium, either a pure
strategy or mixed strategy, the other players still do not observe the actions of
that player. They therefore have to conjecture about the move. Since what the
players think or conjecture will affect their decisions, it therefore follows that the
players have to conjecture about the other players’ conjectures in their attempts
to predict what the other players are doing or will be doing.
The BEIC approach could be used to analyze both simultaneous move games
and sequential games. However, there is one important difference between these
two applications. In sequential games, Bayesian statistical inferences are

conditioned upon the observation of the other players’ moves, however
inaccurate those observations are. In simultaneous games there is no observation,
however inaccurate, to base the inferences or conjectures about the moves of the
other players on. The player must proceed to infer or conjecture about the moves
of the other players without any observation. The game has a solution if such
conjectures converge.
By the BEIC approach, a player forms conjectures or expectations of the
actions of the other players, starting with first order uninformative conjectures
and updating the conjectures using game theoretic and statistical decision
theoretic reasoning. The Bayesian equilibrium by iterative conjectures, if it
exists, is the point of convergence of these conjectures. Therefore, in a
simultaneous game, a BEIC is a focal point or Schelling point.
Since by the Nash equilibrium approach the players in a simultaneous game
make no conjectures or predictions on the other players’ strategies, the Nash
equilibrium or equilibriums could be reached only by chance. This is so because
in a simultaneous game a player cannot condition his or her strategy or moves on
his or her opponent’s strategy or moves. Alternatively, it has to assume that the
players have the default belief that all the other players are playing the particular
Nash equilibrium strategy and this is common knowledge. This argument of
course is quite problematic for games with multiple Nash equilibriums.
The examples in this chapter illustrate the BEIC solution of complete and
incomplete information simultaneous games.
4.2.  Complete information simultaneous games
Investment entry game
Consider Table 4.1, which is the matrix form representation of an investment
entry game.
There are three Nash equilibriums: (w=0, y=1), (w=1, y=0) and (w=1/2,
y=1/5). The reaction functions are: w=1 for y<1/5, w∈ [0,1] for y=1/5 and w=0
for y>1/5; y=1 for w<1/2, y∈ [0,1] for w=1/2, y=0 for w>1/2.
Table 4.1
Investment entry game

Firm 2
Firm 1
Enter (y)
Refrain (1-y)
Modern (w)
0, -2
7, 0
Antique (1-w)
4, 2
6, 0
For the investment entry game, the table of conjectures is:
Table 4.2
BEIC for the investment entry game in Table 4.1
Order of Conjectures
Probability X
Probability Y
1
U[0, 1]
U[0, 1]
2
1/5
1/2
3
0
1
4
0
1
5
0
1
Since the BEIC is a point where conjectures converge, the BEIC approach
therefore selects compelling stable equilibrium and eliminates unstable
equilibrium (as conjectures will not converge to an unstable equilibrium). As
mixed strategy equilibriums are in general unstable, they are generally
eliminated in the selection of BEIC.1
Conventional/symmetrical matching pennies game
There is no pure strategy Nash equilibrium but only a mixed strategy Nash
equilibrium (x=1/2, y=1/.2). The reaction functions are x=0 if y>1/2, x∈[1,1] if
y=1/2, x=1 if y<1/2 and y=1 if x>1/2, y∈[0,1] if x=1/2, y=0 if x<1/2.
Table 4.3
Conventional/symmetrical matching pennies game

Player 2
Player 1
Head (y)
Tail (1-y)
Head (x)
−1, 1
1, −1
Tail (1-x)
1, −1
−1, 1
Starting with x∈[0,1], then E(y)=1/2, and x∈[0,1] and E(x)=1/2 and y∈[0,1]
and E(y)=1/2 and x∈[0,1] and E(x)=1/2 and so on. Starting with y∈[0,1], then
E(x)=1/2, and y∈[0,1] and E(y)=1/2 and x∈[0,1] and E(x)=1/2 and y∈[0,1] and
E(y)=1/2 and so on. Therefore, the conjectures do not converge and stay at the
uninformative first order conjectures of x∈[0,1] and E(x)=1/2 and y∈[0,1] and
E(y)=1/2. This is not surprising, given that it is a zero sum (or pure conflict)
game and so there could not be any focus point.
Please note that in this BEIC solution, the players do not intentionally
randomize. They are just indifferent between going either way given their
conjectures about the other players’ moves. In contrast, the interpretation of the
mixed strategy Nash equilibrium of this game is the players randomizing on
purpose to keep the other players indifferent between either action.
Unconventional/asymmetrical matching pennies game
The following table presents an unconventional/asymmetrical matching pennies
game: There is no pure strategy Nash equilibrium but only mixed strategy Nash
equilibrium (x=1/2, y=2/.5). The reaction functions are x=0 if y>2/5, x∈[0,1] if
y=2/5, x=1 if y<2/5 and y=1 if x>1/2, y∈[0,1] if x=1/2, y=0 if x<1/2.
Table 4.4
Unconventional/asymmetrical matching pennies game
Player 2
Player 1
Head (y)
Tail (1-y)
Head (x)
−2, 1
1, −1
Tail (1-x)
1, −1
−1, 1

Starting with x∈[0,1], then E(y)=1/2, and x=0 and y=0 and x=1 and y=1 and
x=0 and y=0 and so on. Starting with y∈[0,1], then E(x)=2/5, and y=0 and x=1
and y=1 and x=0 and y=0 and x=1 and so on. The conjectures do not converge
and there is no Bayesian equilibrium by iterative conjectures.
The capability of the Bayesian iterative conjecture algorithm to narrow down
the number of equilibriums normally to one applies to games with continuous
action space as well.
Dividing cake game (zero sum game)
There is a delicious cake to be divided between player 1 and player 2. Player 1
and player 2 name their shares x and y simultaneously without observing the
action of the other player or communicating with each other. The payoffs are x
and y respectively if x+y<=1 and 0 and 0 if x+y>1.
The reaction function for player 1 is x=1-y and the reaction function for player
2 is y=1-x. The following figure depicts the reaction functions.
Figure 4.1
Reaction functions of the dividing cake game
The reaction functions superimpose on each other and therefore all points on
the bold line are Nash equilibriums. There are uncountable Nash equilibriums.
The Bayesian iterative conjecture algorithm solution is presented below:
Player 1 solves:

With a first order non-informative conjecture on y, the above problem becomes: 
The first order condition is:
The second order condition is satisfied:
So the second order conjecture is that x = . Player 2 anticipates this and sets y =
. Player 1 anticipates the conjectures of player 2 and sets x =  and the process
converges here.
Solving the problem with the other starting point gives the same answer: Player
2 solves:
With a first order non-informative conjecture on x, the above problem becomes: 
The first order condition is:
The second order condition is satisfied:
So the second order conjecture is that y = . Player 1 anticipates this and sets x =
. Player 2 anticipates the conjectures of player 1 and sets y =  and the process
converges here.
Both the processes of the conjectures converge at the same point, which is the
unique BEIC,  x = , y = 
.

Cournot competition
In a product market there are two firms engaging in a Cournot competition, firm
1 and firm 2. Their respective production cost functions are C(q1) = 10q1 and
C(q2) = 10q2. The inverse market demand function is p = 210 −  (q1 + q2). The
profit functions of firm 1 and firm 2 are π1 =  210 − q1 −  q2 − 10  q1 and π2 =
 210 −  q2 − q1 − 10  q2.
The first order conditions of the profit maximization exercises of firm 1 and firm
2 are: 
The second order derivatives are:
The equilibrium is (locally) strategically stable:
The reaction functions are q1 (q2) = 200 − q2 and q2 (q1) = 200 −  q1 with
q1(0) = 200, q1(400) = 0, q2(0) = 200 and q2(400) = 0. The (interior solution)
Nash equilibrium is 
.
The Bayesian iterative conjecture algorithm approach solution is presented
below: Starting with the first order uninformative conjecture that 
,
then 
 
, then 
, then 
 
, and so on, until the process converges at q1 = q2 
.
Given the symmetry of the game, the other conjecture process has the same point

of convergence. The BEIC is in this case the same as the unique Nash
equilibrium.
Figure 4.2
Cournot competition with stable interior solution Nash
equilibrium
4.3  BEIC and refinements of Nash equilibrium
This section compares the BEIC approach with the refining criteria of payoff-
dominance, risk-dominance and iterated admissibility. The outstanding result
from the comparisons is that the BEIC approach is able to pick the natural focal
point of a game when the iterated admissibility criterion fails to.
To begin, consider a game with (weakly) dominated strategies.
Table 4.5
Game with (weakly) dominated strategies
Player 2
Player 1
Left (y)
Right (1-y)
Up (x)
0, 1
1, 1
Down (1-x)
1 1
1 0

Down (1 x)
1, 1
1, 0
Table 4.6
BEIC for a game with (weakly) dominated strategies
Order of Conjectures
Probability w
Probability y
1
0.5
0.5
2
0
1
3
0
1
There are two Nash equilibriums: (D, L) and (U, R). However, strategy U and
R are (weakly dominated) strategies for players 1 and 2.
The BEIC solution proceeds as follows: given the first order uninformative
conjecture that x = 0.5, the second order conjecture is y = 1 and the third order
conjecture is x = 0 and the process converges here. Given the first order
uninformative conjecture that y = 0.5, the second order conjecture is x = 0 and
the third order conjecture is y = 1 and the process converges here. The unique
BEIC is (x=0, y=1) and it agrees with the result from iterative elimination of
(weakly) dominated strategies.
Payoff-dominance and risk dominance
Consider the following stag hunt game:
Table 4.7
The stag hunt game
Player 2
Player 1
Stag (y)
Hare (1-y)
Stag (x)
a, a
0, b
Hare (1-x)
b, 0
b, b

a>b>0
Figure 4.3
Reaction functions of the stag hunt game
There are three Nash equilibriums: (S, S), (H, H) and (x=b/a, y=b/a). Besides
the problem of too many Nash equilibriums, the mixed strategy Nash
equilibrium is also implausible: as the payoff from playing S increases relative to
that of playing H, both players play S with a smaller probability. By the payoff
dominance criterion, both players should play S. By the risk dominance
criterion, both players should play H.
The Bayesian iterative conjecture algorithm solution is presented below: For
a>2b (and therefore 
), the BEIC solution is:
Table 4.8
BEIC for stag hunt game A
Order of Conjectures
Probability X
Probability Y
1
U[0,1]
U[0,1]
2
3
1
1

4
1
1
For a=2b (and therefore 
), the BEIC solution is:
Table 4.9
BEIC for stag hunt game B
Order of Conjectures
Probability X
Probability Y
1
U[0,1]
U[0,1]
2
3
0.5
0.5
4
0.5
0.5
For a<2b (and therefore 
), the BEIC solution is:
Table 4.10
BEIC for stag hunt game C
Order of Conjectures
Probability X
Probability Y
1
U[0,1]
U[0,1]
2
3
0
0
4
0
0
By the BEIC approach, when cooperation has more (less) than twice the
returns of defect, the players choose cooperation (defect).
A comparison with the payoff-dominance and risk-dominance refinements
proposed by Harsanyi and Selten (1988) and Harsanyi (1995) reveals that for the
stag hung game, the BEIC approach picks the payoff-dominance equilibrium if

the difference between the return from the payoff-dominance equilibrium and
the return from the risk-dominance equilibrium is large. If the difference
between the returns is small, then the BEIC approach chooses the risk-
dominance equilibrium.
Iterated admissibility
Iterated admissibility requires that players play only strategies that survive the
iterated elimination of (weakly) dominated strategies. The following are two
examples that show that the BEIC approach does better than the iterated
admissibility criterion.
In the game of Table 4.11, there are two pure strategy Nash equilibriums, (U,
L) and (M, C). By the repeated iterative elimination of (weakly) dominated
strategies, there is only an equilibrium (U, L).
The BEIC solution:
Table 4.11
A 3-by-3 game
Table 4.12
BEIC for the game in Table 4.11
BEIC gives the same answer as the criterion of iterated admissibility.
In the next example, which is essentially a coordination game, the solutions of
the two approaches differ: The three pure strategy NEs are (A, a) and (B, b) and

(C, c). However, (A, a) survives iterated admissibility while (B, b) and (C, c) do
not. Furthermore, (B, b) Pareto dominates (A, a) and (C, c) and, (C, c) Pareto
dominates (A, a). Therefore, (B, b) is a natural focal point of the game.
The BEIC solution:
Table 4.13
A 3-by-3 game
Table 4.14
BEIC for the game in Table 4.13
The BEIC approach picks (B, b) as the equilibrium.
4.4  Simultaneous games with incomplete information
The solution of incomplete information simultaneous games proceeds in a
likewise manner. Consider the following investment entry game where firm 1,
the incumbent, has two types, high investment costs (with probability a) or low
investment costs (with probability 1-a).
When the high investment cost firm 1 encounters firm 2 they have the
following payoff matrix: (The complete information simultaneous game with the
above payoff matrix has two pure strategy Nash equilibriums and a mixed
strategy Nash equilibrium, (w=0, y=1), (w=1, y=0) and (w=1/2, y=1/5). The
BEIC is (w=0, y=1).) When low investment cost firm 1 encounters firm 2 they
have the following payoff matrix: (The complete information simultaneous game

with the above payoff matrix has two pure strategy Nash equilibriums and a
mixed strategy Nash equilibrium, (w=0, y=1), (w=1, y=0) and (w=1/2, y=1/2).
The BEIC is (w∈[0,1], (y∈[0,1]). The conjectures fail to converge and remain as
uninformative conjectures with uniform distribution.)
Table 4.15
Investment entry game A
Firm 2
Firm 1 (High Cost)
Enter (y)
Refrain (1-y)
Modern (w)
0, −2
7, 0
Antique (1-w)
4, 2
6, 0
Table 4.16
Investment entry game B
Firm 2
Firm 1 (Low Cost)
Enter (y)
Refrain (1-y)
Modern (x)
3, −2
7, 0
Antique (1-x)
4, 2
6, 0
The Bayesian Nash equilibriums are: (w = 
, x = 1, y = , a > ), (w = 0,
x = 1, y ∈ 
, a = ), (w = 0, x = 
, y = , a < ), (w = 1, x = 1, y = 0, a
∈ [0,1]), (w = 0, x = 0, y = 1, a ∈ [0,1]).
Besides multiple equilibriums, the set of Bayesian Nash equilibriums also has
the following implausible features: 1.  When it is more likely to have a high cost
firm 1, that is, a>1/2, firm 2 enters with a lower probability, that is, y=1/5, and
when it is more likely to have a low cost firm 1, that is, a<1/2, firm 2 enters with
a higher probability, that is, y=1/2; 2.  
 for a<1/2 and x=1 for a ≥

, that is, as the probability of having a high cost firm 1 becomes greater, the
low cost firm 1 plays modern with higher probability.
3.  w=0 for a ≤  and 
 for a>1/2, that is, as 2 da 2a the probability of
having a high cost firm 1 becomes greater, the high cost firm 1 plays modern
with higher probability.
The BEIC solution is as follow
Table 4.17
BEIC for the investment entry game
Order of Conjectures
Pr (w)
Pr (x)
Pr (y)
1
U[0,1]
U[0,1]
U[0,1]
2
0.2
0.5
0.5
3
0
0.5
1
4
0
0
1
5
0
0
1
For whatever value of a, the BEIC is that both types of firm 1 choose antique
and firm 2 always enters.
The reason is as follows: should firm 2 encounter a high cost firm 1 in a game
with complete information, the BEIC is that the high cost firm 1 chooses
antique, and firm 2 enters. On the other hand, when firm 2 encounters a low cost
firm 1 in a game with complete information, the BEIC is that both firms are
indifferent between their two possible courses of actions. The BEIC of the first
complete information game therefore exercises a dominant influence on the
solution of the incomplete information game. Consequently, in the incomplete
information game, whatever the type of firm 1, firm 2 always enters and firm 1
always chooses antique, and the BEIC does not depend on the probability of firm
1 being high cost or low cost type.
Given its ability to narrow down the number of equilibrium normally to one,
the BEIC approach is useful for solving games with multiple-sided incomplete
information, multiple heterogeneous players and multiple decision variables.

Solving such games using the current prevailing games theory based upon Nash
equilibrium could be a daunting task. There are typically multiple equilibriums.
Generally, the game has to be simplified to make analysis possible. For instance,
there is very little game theoretic research with two-sided incomplete
information and none with three or more-sided incomplete information.2
However, real life situations involving strategic interactions with two-sided or
multiple-sided incomplete information are very common. Hence, there is a
strong need for an approach that could solve such games generally, and generate
lesser or even a unique equilibrium. It is to this task that the next sub-section
devotes itself. The next section uses the BEIC approach to solve a two-sided
incomplete information game. The approach could easily be generalized to three
or more-sided incomplete information.
Two-sided incomplete information investment entry
game
Consider the following investment entry game. Firm 1 is the incumbent and firm
2 is the potential entrant. Both firm 1 and firm 2 have two types, high investment
costs or low investment costs. The probability that firm 1 is of the high cost type
is 3/4 and the probability that firm 2 is the high cost type is 1/10. These
probabilities are independent of each other and are common knowledge.
When the high investment cost firm 1 faces the low investment cost firm 2
they have the following payoff matrix:
Table 4.18
High cost firm 1 vs low cost firm 2
Firm 2 (low cost)
Firm 1 (high cost)
Enter (y)
Refrain (1-y)
Modern (x)
0, −2
7, 0
Antique (1-x)
4, 2
6, 0
When the high cost firm 1 faces the high cost firm 2 they have the following
payoff matrix:

Table 4.19
High cost firm 1 vs high cost firm 2
Firm 2 (high cost)
Firm 1 (high cost)
Enter (y)
Refrain (1-y)
Modern (w)
0, −5
7, 0
Antique (1-w)
4, 1
6, 0
If the low investment cost firm 1 encounters the low cost firm 2, then they
have the following payoff matrix:
Table 4.20
Low cost firm 1 vs low cost firm 2
Firm 2 (low cost)
Firm 1 (low cost)
Enter (y)
Refrain (1-y)
Modern (w)
3, −2
7, 0
Antique (1-w)
4, 2
6, 0
If the low investment cost firm 1 encounters the high investment cost firm 2,
then they have the following payoff matrix:
Table 4.21
Low cost firm 1 vs high cost firm 2
Firm 2 (high cost)
Firm 1 (low cost)
Enter (y)
Refrain (1-y)
Modern (w)
3, −5
7, 0
Antique (1-w)
4, 1
6, 0

The reaction functions of the respective types of firm 1 and firm 2 are:
I.
w(y, z) = 1 if 1 >  y +  z, w(y, z) ∈[0,1] if 1 =  y +  z, w(y, z) = 0, if 1 <
 y +  z
II. x(y, z) = 1 if 1 >  y +  z, x(y, z) ∈[0,1] if 1 =  y +  z, x(y, z) = 0, if 1 < 
y +  z
III. y(w, x) = 1 if 1 >  w +  x, y(w, x) ∈[0,1] if 1 =  w +  x, y(w, x) = 0, if 1
<  w +  x
IV. z(w, x) = 1 if 1 >  w +  x, z(w, x) ∈[0,1] if 1 =  w +  x, z(w, z) = 0, if 1
<  w +  x
The solution by the Bayesian iterative conjecture algorithm is presented below:
Table 4.22
BEIC solution of two-sided incomplete information
investment entry game A

Figure 4.4
E(w)
Figure 4.5
E(x)

Figure 4.6
E(y)
Figure 4.7
E(z)
So the Bayesian equilibrium by iterative conjectures is w=0, x=0, y=1, z=1.
As the chance of meeting the low cost firm 2 is very high, both types of firm 1
choose antique. As the chances of meeting the high cost firm 1 is quite high,
both types of firm 2 choose enter.
Comparative statics
The comparative statics exercise below illustrates that the BEIC approach
generates results that are intuitive and compelling. Now let the probability of
firm 1 being the low cost type be 3/4 and the probability of firm 1 being the high
cost type be 1/4 and, the probability of firm 2 being the low cost type be 1/0 and
the probability of firm 2 being the high cost type be 9/10.
The reaction functions are:

I.
w(y, z) = 1 if 1 >  y +  z, w(y, z) ∈[0,1] if 1 =  y +  z, w(y, z) = 0, if 1 <
 y +  z
II. x(y, z) = 1 if 1 >  y +  z, x(y, z) ∈[0,1] if 1 =  y +  z, x(y, z) = 0, if 1 < 
y +  z
III. y(w, x) = 1 if 1 >  w +  x, y(w, x) ∈[0,1] if 1 =  w +  x, y(w, x) = 0, if 1
<  w +  x
IV. z(w, x) = 1 if 1 >  w +  x, z(w, x) ∈[0,1] if 1 =  w +  x, z(w, z) = 0, if 1
<  w +  x
Table 4.23
BEIC solution of two-sided incomplete information
investment entry game B
So the Bayesian equilibrium by iterative conjectures is w=1, x=1, y=0, z=0.
As the chances of meeting the low cost firm 2 is very low now, both types of
firm 1 choose modern. As the chances of meeting the low cost firm 1 is quite
high now, both types of firm 2 choose refrain.
4.5.  Conclusions
There are many refinements of Nash equilibrium and many alternative
equilibrium concepts.3 One line of research focuses on modeling how players in
a game conjecture about the strategic choices of other players. Bayesian
methodologies are typically involved in this line of research.4 The examples in
this chapter show that the BEIC approach has the merit of narrowing down the

equilibriums generally to one. The BEIC selects the most compelling
equilibrium.
In general, when there is a unique stable pure strategy Nash equilibrium, that
Nash equilibrium is also the BEIC solution. When there are multiple Nash
equilibriums (which could be stable or unstable or mixed), or an unstable Nash
equilibrium (as in the case of a 2-by-2 matrix game with only mixed strategy
equilibrium), then the solutions of the two approaches differ. The BEIC
approach typically picks a unique equilibrium that is stable and rules out
unstable equilibriums.
Notes
1.  Refer to Aumann (1985) for criticisms of mixed strategy equilibrium.
2.  For examples, see Chatterjee and Samuelson (1987), Cramton (1984), Powell (1988), Schweizer (1989),
Watson (1995).
3.  Refer to Govindan and Wilson (2008).
4.  For examples, see Mertens and Zamir (1985), Aumann (1987), Harsanyi and Selten (1988), Tan and
Werlang (1988), Blume, Brandenburger and Dekel (1991), Brandenburger (1992), Harsanyi (1995),
Aumann and Dreze (2008).

Conclusions
To conclude, the major differences between the BEIC approach and the current
Nash equilibrium-based approach are:
1. A unified solution algorithm
The current Nash equilibrium-based games theory has different equilibrium
concepts or refinements, and their associated solution algorithms for different
types of games are: Nash equilibrium for complete information simultaneous
games, sub-game perfect equilibrium for complete information sequential
games, Bayesian Nash equilibrium for incomplete information simultaneous
games, perfect Bayesian equilibrium for incomplete information sequential
games, and many more.1 Consequently, there are inconsistencies in solutions
from using different equilibrium concepts and solution algorithms when one uses
the current Nash equilibrium-based games theory. This is not the case for the
Bayesian iterative conjecture approach. It is a unified approach: the same
equilibrium concept (Bayesian equilibrium by iterative conjectures) and solution
algorithm (Bayesian iterative conjecture algorithm) applies to all the
aforementioned types of games and more.
2. Use of reaction functions
The current Nash equilibrium-based games theory solves for equilibriums by
constructing reaction functions and looks for their intersections. The BEIC
approach constructs reaction functions as well. However, it uses first order
uninformative conjectures and reaction functions to derive higher and higher
orders of conjectures until a convergence of conjectures is achieved.
3. Definition of rationality

The Nash equilibrium-based approach does not have rationality in the processing
of information and forming of conjectures or predictions, that is, rationality in
(statistical) decision rule. It deals with the issue of processing information and
forming predictions in an ad hoc manner through perfect Bayesian equilibrium
and its many refinements. In contrast, rationality in the processing of
information and forming of predictions is the very foundation of the BEIC.
4. Equilibrium in strategic space versus equilibrium in subjective
probability space
The Nash equilibrium approach defines equilibrium in the strategic/actions
space. The incorporation of beliefs in incomplete information games does not
change that basic feature. In contrast, the BEIC approach defines equilibrium in
subjective probability space through the convergence of conjectures. Of course,
for conjectures to converge, they must also be consistent with the equilibrium
they support, and so the BEIC’s equilibrium in subjective probability space
includes equilibrium in strategic/action space as well.
5. Objective versus subjective probability distribution function
The BEIC is based on the Bayesian view of subjective probability. This allows
the tracing of the updating of conjectures from first order uninformative
conjectures to higher and higher orders of conjectures until convergence. The
Nash equilibrium-based approach largely sticks to the classical or frequentist
view of probability.2 However, it makes an exception in sequential games of
incomplete information with pooling equilibriums by resorting to subjective
probability in the specification of off equilibrium beliefs.
Notes
1.  Refer to Fudenberg and Tirole (1991), Osborne and Rubinstein (1994), Myerson (1997), Vega-Redondo
(2003), Rasmusen (2006) and Gintis (2009).
2.  Refer to Harsanyi (1982a, 1982b), Kadane (1982a, 1982b) for an intellectual exchange between these
two views of probability and games theory.

References
Aumann, R.J. (1985) ‘What is game theory trying to accomplish?’ in Arrow, K. and Honkapohja, S. (eds),
Frontiers of Economics, (Oxford: Basil Blackwell).
Aumann, R.J. (1987) ‘Correlated Equilibrium as an Expression of Bayesian Rationality’. Econometrica 55
(1): 1–18.
Aumann, R.J. and Dreze, J.H. (2008) ‘Rational Expectations in Games’. American Economic Review 98 (1):
72–86.
Bagwell, K. (1995) ‘Commitment and Observability in Games’. Games and Economic Behavior 8: 271–
280.
Berger, J.O. (1980) Statistical Decision Theory and Bayesian Analysis. 2nd edn, (New York: Springer-
Verlag).
Bhaskar, V. (2009) ‘Commitment and Observability in a Contracting Environment’. Games and Economic
Behavior 66: 708–720.
Blume, L., Brandenburger, A. and Dekel, E. (1991) ‘Lexicographic Probabilities and Equilibrium
Refinements’. Econometrica 59 (1): 81–98.
Brandenburger, A. (1992) ‘Knowledge and Equilibrium in Games’. Journal of Economic Perspectives 6
(4): 83–101.
Cho, I.K. and Kreps, D.M. (1987) ‘Signaling Games and Stable Equilibria’. Quarterly Journal of
Economics 102: 179–222.
Chatterjee, K. and Samuelson, L. (1987) ‘Bargaining under Two-Sided Incomplete Information: The
Unrestricted Offers Case’. Operations Research 36 (4): 605–618.
Cramton, P.C. (1984) ‘Bargaining with Incomplete Information: An Infinite-Horizon Model with Two-
Sided Uncertainty’. Review of Economic Studies 51: 579–593.
Dotsey, M. and King, R. (1987) ‘Rational Expectations and the Business Cycle’. Eatwell, J., Milgate, M.
and Newman, P. (eds), The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economic Theory and Doctrine (London:
Macmillan Press).
Fudenberg, D. and Tirole, J. (1990) ‘Perfect Bayesian Equilibrim and Sequential Equilibrium’. Journal of
Economic Theory 53: 236–260.
Fudenberg, D. and Tirole, J. (1991) Game Theory. The MIT Press.
Gibbons, R. (1992) Game Theory for Applied Economists. Princeton University Press.
Gintis, R. (2009) Game Theory Evolving: A Problem-Centered Introduction to Modeling Strategic
Interaction. 2nd edn Princeton University Press.
Govindan, S. and Wilson, R. (2008) ‘Refinements of Nash Equilibria’. The New Palgrave Dictionary of
Economics Palgrave.
de Haan, T., Offerman, T. and Sloof, R. (2011) ‘Noisy Signaling: Theory and Experiment’. Games and
Economic Behavior 73: 402–428.
Harsanyi, J.C. (1967) ‘Games with Incomplete Information by “Bayesian” Players, I-III. Part I. The Basic
Model’. Management Science 14 (3): 159–182.
Harsanyi, J.C. (1968a) ‘Games with Incomplete Information by “Bayesian” Players, I-III. Part II. Bayesian
Equilibrium Points’. Management Science 14 (5): 320–334.
Harsanyi, J.C. (1968b) ‘Games with Incomplete Information by Bayesian Players, I-III. Part III. The Basic
Probability Distribution of the Game’. Management Science 14 (7): 486–502.
Harsanyi, J.C. (1982a) ‘Subjective probability and the theory of games: comments on Kadane and Larkey’s

paper’. Management Science 28 (2): 120–124.
Harsanyi, J.C. (1982b) ‘Rejoinder to professor Kadane and Larkey’. Management Science 28 (2): 124–125.
Harsanyi, J.C. (1995) A New Theory of Equilibrium Selection for Games with Incomplete Information.
Games and Economic Behavior 10: 318–332.
Harsanyi, J.C. and Selten, R. (1988) ‘A General Theory of Equilibrium Selection in Games’. (Cambridge,
Massachusetts: MIT Press).
Kadane, J.B. and Larkey, P. (1982a) ‘Subjective probability and the theory of games’. Management Science
28 (2): 113–120.
Kadane, J.B. and Larkey, P. (1982b) ‘Reply to Professor Harsanyi’. Management Science 28 (2): 124.
Kreps, D.M. and Wilson, R. (1982) ‘Sequential Equilibria’. Econometrica 50 (4): 863–894.
Maggi, G. (1999) ‘The Value of Commitment with Imperfect Observability and Private Information’. The
Rand Journal of Economics 30: 555–574.
Mertens, J.F. and Zamir, S. (1985) ‘Formulation of Bayesian Analysis for Games with Incomplete
Information’. International Journal of Game Theory 14 (1): 1–29.
Myerson, R.B. (1997) Game Theory: Analysis of Conflict. Harvard University Press.
Nash, J.F. (1950) ‘Equilibrium points in n-person games’. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
36: 48–49.
Nash, J.F. (1951) ‘Non-Cooperative Games’. Annals of Mathematics 54 (2): 286–295.
Okada, A. (2010) ‘Perfect Bayesian Equilibrium and Sequential Equilibrium’. Wiley Encyclopedia of
Operations Research and Management Science, p. 1–7.
Osborne, M.J. and Rubinstein, A. (1994) A Course in Game Theory. MIT Press.
Powell, R. (1988) ‘Nuclear Brinkmanship with Two-Sided Incomplete Information’. American Political
Science Review 82 (1): 155–178.
Rasmusen, E. (2006) Games and Information: An Introduction to Game Theory. 4th edn, Wiley-Blackwell.
Sargent, T.J. (1986) Rational Expectations and Inflation. (New York: Harper and Row).
Schweizer, U. (1989) ‘Litigation and Settlement under Two-Sided Incomplete Information’. Review of
Economic Studies 56 (2): 163–177.
Tan, T.C.C. and Werlang, S.R.D.C. (1988) ‘The Bayesian Foundations of Solution Concepts of Games’.
Journal of Economic Theory 45: 370–391.
Teng, J. (2012a) ‘A Bayesian Theory of Games: An Analysis of Strategic Interactions with Statistical
Decision Theoretic Foundation’. Journal of Mathematics and System Science 2: 145–155.
Teng, J. (2012b) ‘Solving Two Sided Incomplete Information Games with Bayesian Iterative Conjectures
Approach’. 8th International Symposium on Management, Engineering and Informatics, Orlando, USA,
17–20 July.
Teng, J. (2013) ‘Analyzing Two-Sided Incomplete Information Simultaneous and Sequential Games with
Bayesian Equilibrium by Iterative Conjectures Approach’. Journal of Communication and Computer,
10 (1): 90–96.
Vardy, F. (2003) ‘The Value of Commitment in Stackelberg Games with Observation Costs’. Games and
Economic Behavior 49: 374–400.
Vega-Redondo, F. (2003) Economics and the Theory of Games. Cambridge University Press.
Watson, J. (1995) ‘Alternating-Offer Bargaining with Two-Sided Incomplete Information’. Review of
Economic Studies 65, 573–594.

Index
Backward induction, 20–1, 32, 41, 47
Bayesian equilibrium by iterative conjectures, 1, 5, 8, 17, 23, 26–9, 35–7, 42–3, 56, 60, 64, 81, 83, 85
BEIC, 2–6, 31, 33–42, 44–9, 53, 55–6, 60–3, 66–77, 79, 81–3, 85–6
Decision rule, 3, 6, 8–9, 23–8, 86
Focal point, 6, 60, 68, 73
Harsanyi, 4–6, 31, 72, 84, 87
Inaccurate observation, 5–10, 19–20, 22–3, 25, 31
Indeterminacy, 20, 22–3, 28
Infimum, 8–9, 25
Intuitive criterion, 40–1, 43–4, 46–7, 54
Iterated admissibility, 68, 72–3
Kadane and Larkey, 4, 31, 87
Mixed strategy, 60, 62–3, 70, 74, 83
Nash equilibrium, 1–3, 5, 7, 22, 29–30, 33–4, 39, 59–63, 65, 67–70, 72, 74–6, 83, 85–7
Non credible, 32–4, 56
Off equilibrium belief, 31, 41–2, 87
Pareto, 73
Payoff dominance, 68–70, 72, Perfect Bayesian equilibrium, 7, 22, 29–32, 35–7, 39–43, 50–1, 53, 85–6
Pooling equilibrium, 31–2, 44, 87
Risk dominance, 68–70
Schelling point, 6, 60
Separating equilibrium, 44, 46
Sequential equilibrium, 39–43
Sub-game perfect equilibrium, 2, 29, 32, 34, 41, 85
Subjective probability, 4, 86–7
Supremum, 8–9, 25
Uninformative, 2, 4–6, 9, 11, 16, 28, 31–2, 35, 37, 41–2, 60, 63, 67, 69, 75, 86–7


